Hepatic iron accumulation and toxicity is a frequent finding in chronic liver diseases such as hereditary hemochromatosis (HH), metabolic associated fatty liver disease (MASLD), alcoholic liver disease (ALD) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, however, it’s contribution to disease pathology is not fully understood. Here, using HepG2 cells we show that iron induced hepatocyte damage triggers the release of extracellular RNAs (eRNAs), which bind to the toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3), resulting in the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. Furthermore, the inhibition of eRNA activity by RNase1 and TLR3 inhibitor significantly improved cell viability as well as NLRP3 and NF-kB-mediated inflammatory signalling. Therefore, eRNA antagonism could represent a novel therapeutic approach to reduce iron-induced inflammation in chronic liver diseases.

Hepatic iron accumulation is common in chronic liver disease.

Elevated iron levels promote liver disease progression via inflammation.

Iron-induced damage releases eRNAs as damage-associated molecular patterns.

eRNA-mediated paracrine signaling contributes to hepatic inflammation and toxicity.

RNase1 and TLR3 inhibitors may reduce iron-induced inflammation in liver diseases.

The liver plays a central role in maintaining iron homeostasis. Iron accumulation is increasingly reported in patients with metabolic disorders[1], and impaired iron homeostasis has been implicated in the pathophysiology of liver diseases, such as alcoholic liver disease (ALD), viral hepatitis, and metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD). Among these, MASLD is particularly associated with disrupted iron homeostasis, with nearly one-third of affected patients showing elevated serum ferritin levels and mild to normal transferrin saturation[2],[3]. Histologically, MASLD patients often present with mild iron deposition in the liver, which has been characterized as dysmetabolic iron overload syndrome (DIOS)[4]. Higher hepatic iron concentrations have been linked to a greater risk of liver fibrosis in MASLD patients[5]. Excessive iron in liver contributes to cellular damage and tissue injury via ferroptosis, a form of regulated cell death caused by reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation via Fenton’s reaction[6]. Iron not only induces cellular damage but also activates inflammatory pathways, triggering the release of cytokines and chemokines that further propagate the inflammatory response[7]. Despite significant advances in understanding the effects of iron overload, the molecular mechanisms that connect iron-induced hepatocyte damage to the activation of inflammatory cascade remains poorly understood.

Recent studies on cellular stress have revealed the role of extracellular RNA (eRNA) species, including microRNA (miRNA), transfer RNA (tRNA), and long noncoding RNA (lncRNA), as damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) that contribute to inflammation[8],[9],[10]. These eRNAs are released during cellular injury and can activate immune responses via receptors such as Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3), as previously reported in models of ischemia-reperfusion (IR) injury in cardiomyocytes or sepsis, via toll like receptor 3 (TLR3)[10]. However, it remains unclear whether eRNA released during iron-induced hepatocyte damage plays a role in the inflammatory processes observed in liver disease.

In this study, we investigate whether iron-induced cellular injury triggers the release of eRNA contributing to inflammatory signalling in hepatic cells, to clarify the role of eRNA in the pathogenesis of iron-related liver diseases and provide new insights into potential therapeutic targets.

HepG2 cells were purchased from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA) and grown in DMEM culture media with 10 % fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1 % antibiotic (penicillin/streptomycin). The cells were maintained at 37◦C in a 5 % CO2 humidified atmosphere. Cells were treated with 0.6 mM FeCl3 (#236489, Sigma Aldrich, Germany) for 24 h to study effect of iron toxicityin vitro. For RNase 1 (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA, #12091021) treatment, cells were pre-incubated with 2.8 U/mL of RNase 1 for one hour prior to the addition of FeCl3, as previously outlined[30]for 24 h.

We assessed the total levels of eRNA in the conditioned media of the HepG2 cells that were treated with 0.6 mM FeCl3 and those treated with FeCl3 and RNase1. Untreated cells were used as control. This estimation was performed using a commercially available kit (QuantiFluor® RNA System, #Cat No: E3310, Promega, Madison, WI, USA).

HepG2 cells (1 × 104), were grown in 96-well plates. Cell viability was assessed in untreated, 0.6 mM FeCl3-treated, FeCl3 + RNase 1 treated and FeCl3 +TLR3/dsRNA inhibitor (10 μM; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany, #614310) treated hepatic cells (HepG2). Following treatment, MTT reagent was added to the culture medium (5 mg/mL) for 4 h at 37◦C. Later, to dissolve the purple formazan crystals, DMSO (100 μL) was added and plate was shaken on a plate shaker for ten min. Reading was taken at 570 nm using ELISA reader.

Cellular ROS levels in hepatic cells (HepG2) were measured using the Abcam ROS detection kit (Cellular ROS Assay Kit (Cat #ab113851), Schnelldorf, Germany), following the manufacturer’s guidelines. HepG2 cells were cultured in 96-well with black bottoms. Cells were exposed to 0.6Mm FeCl3 for 24 h, both with and without RNase1.

Following treatment, cells were washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and incubated with DCFHDA (10 µM) for 30 min, at 37 °C. Fluorescence was recorded with fluorimeter Ex488 nm and an Emof 525 nm to estimate ROS generation within the cells The DCF fluorescence intensity was proportional to intracellular ROS generation. ROS generation was also evaluated in HepG2 cells treated with FeCl3, with or without TLR3/dsRNA inhibitor (10 μM; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany, #614310).

Glutathione reductase (GR) activity was assessed by measuring the rate of NADPH oxidation using the Glutathione Reductase Assay Kit (Cayman, #703202, Ann Arbor, USA) according to the manufacturer's instruction. In brief, HepG2 cells (1 × 10^4 cells per well) were cultured in 96-well plates with clear bottoms. Subsequently, cells were treated with 0.6 mM FeCl3 in the presence or absence of RNase1 and a TLR3/dsRNA inhibitor (10 μM; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany, #614310) for 24 h. The cells were then collected using a rubber policeman and homogenized in cold buffer (50 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA). The supernatant (cell lysate) was used to assess GR activity. To initiate the reaction, 9.5 mM GSSG and NADPH was added to each well and the absorbance was measured Synergy HTX multimode microplate reader, BioTek. A high GSH/GSSG ratio indicated protection against oxidative stress. The oxidation of NADPH to NADP was accompanied by a decrease in absorbance at 340 nm and was directly proportional to GR activity in the sample.

Caspase-1 activity was measured in HepG2 cells treated with 0.6 mM FeCl3, with and without RNase1 for 24 h, using the Caspase-Glo 1 inflammasome assay from Promega (Cat #G9951, Promega Inc., Madison, WI, USA), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Additionally, Caspase 1 activity was evaluated in HepG2 cells treated with FeCl3 with or without TLR3/dsRNA inhibitor (10 μM; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany, #614310).

RNA was isolated from control (untreated), FeCl3-treated, and FeCl3 +RNase 1-treated HepG2 cells using Trizol reagent (Invitrogen (Cat No. # 15596026), Carlsbad, CA, USA). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using SYBR green mix (Applied biosystems (Cat No.#A46109), Vilnius, Lithuania). GAPDH gene served as a housekeeping control to normalize gene expression levels. Primers were obtained from KiCqStart SYBR Green (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Primer IDs: Human TNF-alpha (H_Tnf_1), Human IL-6 (H_IL6_1), and human GAPDH (H_Gapdh_1).

Radioimmunoprecipitation lysis and extraction buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, (Cat No. # 89900), Rockford, IL, USA) was employed to lyse HepG2 cells from control (untreated), 0.6 mM FeCl3-treated, and FeCl3 + RNase 1-treated groups. Cell lysate containing 50 μg of protein was subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). After separation by gel electrophoresis, proteins were electro-blotted onto a nitrocellulose membrane following the manufacturer’s protocol (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA). Images were captured using a ChemiDoc system (Syngene: -G: BOX CHEMIXRQ). ImageJ software was employed to perform densitometry of the blots. Anti-beta actin (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA, # 3700), anti-Phospho-p-38MAPK (Cell Signaling Technology, #4511), anti-phospho c-JUN (Cell Signaling Technology, #3270), anti-p-38MAPK (Cell Signaling Technology, #8690), and anti-P62 (Cell Signaling Technology, #39749); anti-hemeoxygenase1 (HO1) (Cell Signaling Technology, #43966); anti-NQO1 (Cell Signaling Technology, #62262); anti-phospho NF kappa beta (Cell Signaling Technology, #4810); anti-NF kappa beta (Cell Signaling Technology, #8242) antibodies were used for protein expression analysis.

JC-1 staining was utilized to assess mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP). HepG2 cells were cultured in 96-well plates with black bottoms and exposed to 0.6 mM FeCl3 with and without RNase1 for 24 h, following previously described protocol[30]. After treatment, cells were incubated in JC-1 stain (2 µM; Invitrogen (Catalog number #T3168), Oregon, USA) for 30 min, at 37◦C, following a wash with PBS. Fluorescence was detected using a fluorimeter Ex488 nm and Em530 nm (monomeric form) and 590 nm (J-aggregates). The ratio of fluorescence emission at 590 nm to 530 nm was calculated to estimate the changes in MMP indicative of mitochondrial health and function.

Changes in cellular ATP levels were quantified in HepG2 cells (1 × 10^4 cells) treated with 0.6 mM FeCl3 in the presence or absence of RNase1. A mitochondrial ATP detection assay kit (Promega (Cat #G8001), Madison, WI, USA) was used to detect ATP as per manufacturer’s protocol. ATP was measured by adding an ATP Detection Reagent consisting of an optimized formulation for ATP detection containing luciferin, ATPase inhibitors and thermostable Ultra-Glo™ luciferase. ATP levels were assessed by the generation of a luminescent signal, which was proportional to the amount of ATP present.

Different experimental groups were compared using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc test. Graph-Pad Prism software, version 5.0 was used for statistical analysis. * p < 0.05, * * p < 0.01, and * ** p < 0.001 indicate statistically significant differences.

Iron overload is a well-established cause of hepatic toxicity, resulting in apoptosis and cellular stress that closely mimic hepatocyte damage in NASH[11]. To model iron overload, we used FeCl3 to induce excess iron accumulation in hepatic cells, as shown previously[12]. To investigate whether FeCl3-induced toxicity triggers eRNA release as a consequence of hepatocyte injury, we measured the eRNA abundance in the conditioned media obtained from hepatic cells exposed to FeCl3 (0.6 mM, 24 h). Notably, we observed a significant increase in eRNA levels (Fig. 1A). Importantly, co-treatment with RNase 1 significantly reduced the eRNA levels in FeCl3-stimulated hepatic cells compared to cells treated with FeCl3 alone (Fig. 1A). To ensure that these effects were specifically due to exogenous RNase1 treatment, we used additional RNase1 only controls. This could eliminate any potential off-target effects of RNase 1 that might result from any trace amounts present in 10 % FBS used for cell-culture. The host endogenous cellular mRNA released by damaged cells is recognized via toll-like-receptor 3 (TLR3)[13]. Therefore, we used both RNase1 treatment as well as TLR3/dsRNA complex inhibitor to assess cell viability in HepG2 cells upon iron toxicity. Our results demonstrated that both RNase1 and TLR3/dsRNA complex inhibitor treatment significantly rescued cell viability in hepatic cells exposed to iron-induced toxicity(Fig. 1B, C). Previous literature also suggests that TLR3 receptor induces ROS dependent inflammation in immune cells[14]. To test if TLR3 induced ROS plays a role in FeCl3 induced inflammatory signalling we assessed cellular ROS content. Intriguingly, FeCl3 induced ROS levels in hepatic cells were significantly abrogated by both RNase 1 and TLR3 inhibitor administration(Fig. 1D). This also highlights the existence of a Fenton’s reaction independent source of iron induced ROS, which is linked to eRNA/TLR3 signalling. Concurrently, eRNA induced increase in oxidative stress was supported by elevated expression levels of antioxidant response marker proteins heme oxygenase-1 (HO1) and NAD(P)H quinone dehydrogenase 1 (NQO1) as well as increased activity of glutathione reductase enzyme in FeCl3-treated HepG2 cells. However, these adaptive responses were reversed back to basal levels by treatment with RNase 1 and a TLR3 inhibitor(Fig. 1E-G).

Iron overload induced eRNA release and downstream signalling (A) Relative abundance of eRNA in different experimental groups. Values are mean ± SEM, n = 5, * *p < 0.01. Comparisons are between control and FeCl3 (Iron), FeCl3 vs FeCl3 +RNase 1(B)% Cell viability shown through MTT assay among the three experimental groups. Data presented as mean ± SEM, n = 5, * **p < 0.001 and * *p < 0.01. Comparisons are between Control and FeCl3, FeCl3 vs FeCl3 +RNase 1 and FeCl3 vs FeCl3 +TLR3 inhibitor.(C)Cellular ROS production in different experimental groups. Values are mean ± SEM, n = 5 * **p < .001. Comparisons are between Control and FeCl3, FeCl3 vs FeCl3 +RNase 1, and FeCl3 vs FeCl3 +TLR3 inhibitor.(D, E)Representative immunoblots and densitometric analysis showing protein levels of HO1 and NQO1 in different experimental groups. Values are mean ± SEM, n = 5, *p < 0.05. Comparisons are between Control and FeCl3, FeCl3 vs FeCl3 +RNase 1.(F)Glutathione reductase (GR) activity shown through Glutathione Reductase Assay in different experimental groups Values are mean ± SEM, n = 5 * **p < .001. Comparisons are between Control and FeCl3, FeCl3 vs FeCl3 +RNase 1 and FeCl3 vs FeCl3 +TLR3 inhibitor.

Oxidative stress has been closely linked to mitochondrial dysfunction[15],[16]]. The increase in cellular ROS level is directly responsible for mitochondrial damage and activation of inflammasome complex in liver cells[17]. The interplay between ROS-induced mitochondrial dysfunction and the activation of inflammasome complex may involve direct activation of Janus kinase (JNK)/P38MAPK signalling[18],[19]as well as autophagy inhibition by ROS which results in loss of mitochondrial quality control[20]. In line with this, we next assessed the effect of iron induction on mitochondrial quality control in hepatic cells. Concurrently, FeCl3 treatment (0.6 mM/24 h) stimulated the activation of stress-activated protein kinases JNK and P38MAPKsignalling in HepG2 cells. However, this activation was rescued by RNase 1, as evident by a change in protein levels of phospho-c JUN (a downstream target of JNK) and phospho-P38 upon RNase1 administration(Fig. 2A-C). Autophagy is another crucial mechanism of cellular stress adaptation. So, we further observed the effect of iron overload on hepatic autophagy. Iron overload induced by FeCl3 impaired autophagy in HepG2 cells as evident by the accumulation of sequestosome (SQSTM1/p62) protein indicating a block in autophagic flux(Fig. 2D, E). Interestingly, RNase1 treatment also rescued the iron-induced autophagy block in these cells(Fig. 2D, E).

Iron overload induces stress kinase activation and autophagy inhibition in HepG2 cells (A-C) Representative immunoblots and densitometric analysis showing protein levels of p-c-JUN and pp38MAPK in different experimental groups. Values are mean ± SEM, n = 5, *p < 0.05. Comparisons are between Control and Fecl3, Fecl3 vs Fecl3 +RNase 1(D, E)Representative immunoblots and densitometric analysis showing protein levels of P62 in different experimental groups. Values are mean ± SEM, n = 5, *p < 0.05 compares Control and FeCl3 while * **p < .001 compares FeCl3 to FeCl3 +RNase 1.

Consistent with the activation of JNK/P38MAPK and autophagy inhibition by FeCl3 treatment (0.6 mM/24 h), we further obtained evidence for mitochondrial defects in these cells. FeCl3 administration caused a loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and decreased ATP production in HepG2 cells(Fig. 3A, B). However, these effects were restored upon inhibition of eRNA signalling by RNase1(Fig. 3A, B).The NLRP3 inflammasome has gained considerable attention to induce mitochondrial dysfunction via activation of Caspase 1 in hepatocytes[21]. The assembly of the NLRP3 inflammasome complex results in the conversion of procaspase-1 into catalytically active caspase-1, which cleaves pro-IL1-β to potent pro-inflammatory mature IL-1β[22]. Therefore, based on our results obtained so far, we next assessed if iron induces inflammasome activation in hepatic cells. Our results showed that FeCl3 treatment enhanced Caspase-1 activity and IL-1β activation in HepG2 cells, however, it was significantly reduced by both RNase 1 and TLR3/dsRNA complex inhibitor co-administration(Fig. 3C-E).

eRNA inhibition mitigate mitochondrial dysfunction and inflammasome activation in FeCl3 treated cells (A) JC-1 staining showing % MMP among the three experimental groups. Data presented as mean ± SEM, n = 5 * *p < 0.01 compares Control to FeCl3 and FeCl3 to FeCl3 +RNase 1.(B)Mitochondrial Tox Glo ™ Assay showing mitochondrial ATP production in different experimental groups. Values are mean ± SEM, n = 5, * **p < 0.001 compares Control to FeCl3 and * *p < .01 compares FeCl3 to FeCl3 +RNase1.(C)Caspase1 activity in different experimental groups shown through Caspase-Glo1 Inflammasome Assay. Values are mean ± SEM, n = 5 *p < .05 compares Control to FeCl3 and FeCl3 to FeCl3 +RNase 1 and FeCl3 +TLR3 inhibitor.(D-E)Representative immunoblots and densitometric analysis showing protein levels of cleaved IL-1β in different experimental groups. Values are mean ± SEM, n = 5, *p < 0.05, comparisons are made between Control and FeCl3 and FeCl3 and FeCl3 +RNase 1.

The activation of NF-κB signalling plays a crucial role in mediating the inflammatory response. TLR3 is known to activate NF-κB-mediated cytokine transcription through involving tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 3 (TRAF3) mediated mechanisms or ROS generation-[7],[10]. To investigate the impact of iron overload on the NF-κB signalling, we treated hepatic cells with FeCl3 (0.6 mM/24 h) with or without RNase 1, and assessed NF-κB activation and expression of the pro-inflammatory cytokines. Our results demonstrate that iron treatment significantly activated NF-κB signalling in hepatic cells. However, RNase 1 co-administration effectively inhibited this iron-induced activation of NF-κB(Fig. 4A, B). Additionally, RNase 1 suppressed the iron-induced upregulation of IL-6 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), the key transcriptional targets of NF-κB(Fig. 4C). Collectively, our findings provide initial evidence that eRNA signalling acts as a direct paracrine mediator of iron-induced inflammation and toxicity within hepatic cells. Iron overload leads to hepatocyte damage, promoting the release of eRNA, as DAMPs. This, in turn, activates TLR3, initiating oxidative stress and inflammasome activation, which drives NF-κB mediated pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion. Ultimately, this contributes to the pro-inflammatory milieu and cellular damage(Fig. 4D). Importantly, the proinflammatory signalling cascade induced by eRNA can be abrogated through eRNA antagonistic strategies, such as the use of RNase 1 or TLR3/dsRNA inhibitors(Fig. 4D),offering potential therapeutic approaches to mitigate iron overload-induced inflammation and cellular damage.

eRNA inhibition mitigates NFκB signalling in FeCl3 treated cells (A, B) Representative immunoblots and densitometric analysis showing protein levels of p-NFκB in different experimental groups. Values are mean ± SEM, n = 5, *p < 0.05. Comparisons are between Control and FeCl3, FeCl3 vs FeCl3 +RNase 1.(C)Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis showing expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-αandIL6) in Control, FeCl3 and FeCl3 +RNase1 treated Hepg2 cells. Values are mean ± SEM, n = 5, *p < .05 and * *p < .001. Comparisons are between Control and FeCl3 and FeCl3 vs FeCl3 +RNase 1.(D)A schematic model of iron overload induced inflammation in hepatocytes showing release of eRNA from dying and injured hepatocytes upon iron overload induced toxicity, that bind to adjoining hepatocytes via TLR3 receptors. The binding of eRNA to TLR3 on the plasma membrane of neighboring hepatocytesviaparacrine signalling induces ROS generation which trigger mitochondrial defect, autophagy inhibition, MAPK activation and inflammasome activation through caspase-1 and NF-kB drivenTNFαandIL6transcription thereby aggravating cellular inflammation in hepatic cells. This pathogenic paracrine signalling by eRNA can be inhibited by RNase1 driven eRNA degradation or TLR3 inhibitors to mitigate iron induced cellular damage and inflammation.

Iron, a vital element for many cellular processes such as electron and oxygen transport, DNA synthesis, as well as mitochondrial function, becomes a double-edged sword when iron homeostasis is dysregulated. Iron levels must be tightly regulated to perform essential nutrient functions while protecting against excess levels that generate ROS, which may lead to cellular damage and cell death. A plethora of clinical evidence demonstrate disease susceptibility in response to elevated iron levels. Iron status remarkably influences inflammatory chronic diseases. In the liver, iron overload is a critical facet in hepatic inflammatory response that underlie several hepatic disorders. In diabetes, obesity, and metabolic syndrome, the markers of chronic inflammation were found to correlate with elevated iron levels[23],[24],[25]. Elevated iron levels have also been implicated in MASLD progression, particularly through the induction of inflammation[2],[4],[26],[27],[28],[29],[30],[31],[32],[33], however, despite growing evidence linking iron overload to hepatic inflammation, its precise mechanism remains elusive. In this study, we provide new insights into the molecular events that link iron-induced hepatocyte damage to activation of inflammatory cascade. Using HepG2 cells as a model, we demonstrate a mechanism by which iron-induced hepatocyte damage triggers the release of eRNAs and promotes inflammation in hepatocytes. Our findings underscore data from previous reports that suggest eRNA as mediators of inflammatory response[34]. Iron induced hepatocyte damage triggers the release of eRNAs, which activate TLR3, a well-characterized pattern recognition receptor (PRR), initiating oxidative stress and inflammasome activation, resulting in NF-κB mediated pro-inflammatory cytokine production. The eRNA released by damaged cells is a crucial event in the activation of immune responses, particularly via triggering the release of pro-inflammatory cytokines[35]. The pathophysiological functions of eRNA have previously been implicated in ischemia/reperfusion (IR) injury, arterial and venous thrombosis, atherosclerosis, and tumor growth by several studies[36],[37],[38],[39],[40]. The eRNAs released from injured hepatocytes act as signalling molecules, initiating a cascade of events that includes the activation of TLRs, inflammasome activation, and subsequent pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion. Therefore, eRNAs play a key role in initiating and amplifying inflammatory responses. Furthermore, the inhibition of eRNA activity by RNase1 and TLR3 inhibitor significantly improved cell viability as well as NLRP3 and NF-kB-mediated inflammatory signalling. In this context, exogenously administered RNase 1 may serve as a novel therapeutic agent owing to its anti-inflammatory properties in various pathological conditions[10]. Although eRNA signalling has been recently implicated in MASLD progression from benign steatosis to metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH)[41], its involvement in iron induced hepatic inflammation and as a contributory factor in DIOS associated MASLD remains unclear. For the first time, this study shows that eRNA mediated paracrine pro-inflammatory signalling directly contributes to iron induced toxicity and inflammation in hepatic cells. Our results are corroborated by previous study which showed the potential involvement of TLR3 signalling in human MASH[42], strengthening our proposition of eRNA signalling acting as a mediator of inflammation in MASH. Further studies are, however, warranted for eRNA profiling across MASLD subjects to design targeted therapies. The use of RNase1 and a TLR3 inhibitor demonstrated a significant improvement in cell viability and a reduction in NF-kB-mediated cytokine production in HepG2 cells. This suggests that interventions aimed at inhibiting eRNA activity may serve as a novel therapeutic strategy to mitigate iron-induced inflammation and, consequently, decelerate liver damage(Fig. 4D). The identification of RNase1 and TLR3 inhibitors as potential candidates for intervention opens avenues for the development of pharmacological strategies to address MASLD/MASH, which lack therapeutic targets. In this context, Onconase® is the first RNase that has been approved by the US FDA as a therapeutic agent for unresectable malignant mesothelioma[43]. Additionally, based on our in vitro findings, particular TLR3 inhibitors may be evaluated in preclinical models of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).

This study advances our understanding of the intricate interplay between iron toxicity, eRNA release, and inflammatory processes in hepatocytes. The proposed therapeutic strategy targeting eRNAs represents a promising avenue for future therapeutics for DIOS with potential clinical applications.

Rajak Sangam:Methodology, Investigation.Tewari Archana:Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Methodology, Investigation.Raza Sana:Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Validation, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.Sinha Rohit A.:Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.Gupta Pratima:Methodology, Investigation.

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.

This work was supported by the SERB [CRG/2022/002149], Wellcome Trust/DBT India Alliance Fellowship [IA/I/16/2/502691] awarded to Sinha RA, ICMR-SRF (2021–10209/CMB-BMS) awarded to AT and DHR Young Scientist Grant (YSS/2020/000009/PRCYSS) awarded to Raza S.