The Kunlun hydrothermal system near the Mussau Trench in the western Pacific consists of 20 large round/oval craters of hundreds of meters in diameter. The total area is 11.1 square kilometers, i.e., over a hundred times larger than the Lost City. Four of the larger craters were prospected using the human occupied vehicle Fendouzhe and have steep walls similar to those of kimberlite pipes, with depths of up to 130 meters. Ecosystems have been observed in smaller pits on the bottom of these pipes. Hydrogen concentrations of ~5.9 to 6.8 millimoles per kilogram in hydrothermal fluids have been obtained using in situ Raman spectra. The estimated total hydrogen flux of Kunlun is 4.8 × 1011moles per year, which is >5% of the estimated global submarine abiotic hydrogen flux. Hydrogen-rich, alkaline fluids generated by serpentinization have formed large-scale carbonate rocks within the pipes below the carbonate compensation depth, and both dolomite and calcite have been identified.

A hydrogen-rich hydrothermal system in the western Pacific reveals potential for hydrogen resources and early life.

Hydrothermal vents commonly have chemolithoautotrophic ecosystem biotas and are taken as a key for understanding the origin of life (1–7). Black smokers are a signature feature of these vents and are formed when the metal-rich high-temperature solutions meet cold seawater. These vents are typically associated with circulation of seawater heated through magma release near mid-ocean ridges.

However, another type of vent system is attracting increased scrutiny (5–7). Low-temperature vents associated with release of hydrogen appear to be driven by serpentinization reactions. Hydrogen reserves associated with these systems could potentially become a substantial source of clean energy (8,9). Most of the hydrogen-release hydrothermal systems have been identified near spreading ridges (5–7), with several small vents in the Mariana Trench. However, no large hydrogen-rich hydrothermal system has previously been reported in regions far from mid-ocean ridges. In recent deep-sea surveys, we found a hydrogen hydrothermal pipe swarm located in the eastern Caroline Plate (10), ~80 km west of the Mussau Trench (movie S1). The remnant hydrogen flux far exceeds any previously reported occurrence. Furthermore, large pipes in the pipe swarm indicate explosive eruptions (11).

A comprehensive research cruise (NORC2023-583) was conducted recently by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) in the Mussau Trench region (10). Direct underwater observations revealed a series of seafloor depressions resembling “pockmarks” within the east Caroline Plate, located ~80 km west of the Mussau fossil trench (12–14) (Fig. 1, A and B, and fig. S1). High-resolution mapping was performed with a Kongsberg EM122 multibeam echo sounder, which provided a detailed view of the ridges, trenches, seamounts, and tectonic deformations associated with the subduction plate. All the identified pockmarks are roughly circular or elliptical in surface aspect, with diameters ranging from ~450 to 1800 m and depths ranging from ~30 to 130 m (fig. S2) (10). Each pockmark features a rim that is a few meters higher than the surrounding ocean floor (Fig. 1, B and C). The multibeam survey encompassed a broad area of ~92 km in the north-south direction and 141 km in the east-west direction. Within this region, a total of 20 pockmarks were identified. These are not evenly distributed but rather spatially clustered within a smaller zone of ~80 km (north-south) by 50 km (east-west), herein referred to as the Kunlun pipe swarm (Fig. 1B). These pockmarks are situated atop a structural high that stands ~300 m above the surrounding seafloor. Considering the distance from the “platform” to the Trench, it is more or less similar to the outer rise in a mature subducting plate system (11,15,16). The pipe swarm is located in a young Cenozoic oceanic crust, which does not exhibit typical conditions for the formation of traditional pockmarks, such as those related to natural gas hydrates or oil and gas deposits (17). In addition, the pockmarks closely resemble kimberlite pipes (18,19), characterized by steep walls of ~30 to 130 m deep and relatively flat bottom.

(A) Locations of hydrothermal pipe swarm (yellow box). (B) Twenty hydrothermal pipes have been identified on a “highland” within 50 to 80 km from the Mussau Trench (white circles). These pipes range in diameter from 450 to 1800 m and in depth from 30 to 130 m. Four of the pipes (white boxes) named Laoshan, Zhushan, Luhuitou, and Wenhai have been investigated using submersibles. Detailed dimensions and names of all 20 pipes are listed in table S1 of Liet al.(10).(C) Map of Laoshan pipe. It is an oval-shaped pipe measuring 1000 m in length and 600 m in width. (D) There are abundant small pipes/pits of different sizes (up to 20 m in diameter) at the bottom of large pipes. The image shows a pit of 3 m in diameter. (E) Abundant authigenic carbonate has been observed in Wenhai pipe, with hydrothermal flows from cracks in large carbonate cumulates. (F) Strong hydrothermal flows have been observed in the Laoshan pipe, which hosts various organisms such as alvinocarid shrimp, squat lobster, and sea anemones. CREDIT: [(D) and (F)] L. LI/LAOSHAN LABORATORYand (E) X. ZHANG/LAOSHAN LABORATORY.

The Mussau Trench appears as an incipient subduction zone located at the eastern boundary of the Caroline Plate, northeast of Papua New Guinea (fig. S1). It marks the interface between the young, Cenozoic Caroline Plate and the old, Mesozoic Pacific Plate. Seismic imaging and petrological evidence suggest that the trench developed within the Caroline Plate rather than directly along the transform boundary (13). The trench exhibits south-to-north variations in deformation, with clear signs of underthrusting and accretionary wedge formation in the southern segment, while the northern end remains largely inactive (14). This spatial asymmetry is interpreted to reflect a northward propagation of subduction initiation driven by the counterclockwise rotation of the Caroline Plate, likely induced by regional plate interactions and collisional dynamics (13,20). The Lyra Trough to the east, although once hypothesized as a subduction zone, shows extensional features and is not part of the active trench system (13). These characteristics make the Mussau Trench a valuable natural laboratory for investigating the mechanisms and early evolution of induced subduction.

A comprehensive survey was conducted using the full-depth human occupied vehicle (HOV) Fendouzhe (Fig. 2, A to C), which was outfitted with Raman insertion probe (RiP)—a system developed from the deep-ocean Raman in situ spectrometer, retaining its key hardware components and spectral characteristics (21–23). This investigation focused on four prominent and deep pipes: Laoshan, Zhushan, Luhuitou, and Wenhai (Fig. 1B). At the bottom of these four large pipes, a substantial amount of explosive breccia and overturned pieces of carbonate caprock were found (figs. S3 and S4), indicating that the formation of these pipes may have resulted from massive explosions (11). In addition, the bottoms exhibit a slightly elevated central region with lower edges. Large-scale hydrothermal activities were observed mostly along these edges (fig. S5 and movie S2). The hydrothermal systems within each pipe are independent, separated by steep walls, suggesting that the hydrothermal activity may be related to minor subsequent eruptions following the initial large explosions. Each hydrothermal area also contains groups of smaller pipes or pits, ranging from meters to tens of meters in size (Fig. 1D, fig. S6, and movie S2). Hydrothermal fluids spray out as diffused flows mostly from piles of breccia and/or cracks on the walls of small pipes/pits. Small vent tubes of centimeters to subcentimeters in diameter at the base or on the walls of each pipe have also been observed (fig. S7 and movie S3).

(A) Overview of the RiP system mounted on the HOV Fendouzhe, which was used for the in situ Raman spectroscopy measurements in the Kunlun hydrothermal system. (B) The main chamber of the RiP system is installed at the stern of Fendouzhe. (C) Close-up of the RiP system’s probe, placed on the front tray of Fendouzhe and controlled via the manipulator arm for precise positioning. (D) Raman spectra of the Kunlun hydrothermal fluid, with notable peaks corresponding to SO42−at ~984 cm−1, OH bending band at ~1650 cm−1, and dissolved H2at ~4132 cm−1, indicating hydrogen concentrations in the fluid. Modified from Liet al.(10). a.u., arbitrary units. (E) Quantitative analysis model for dissolved H2established from laboratory high-temperature and high-pressure simulations, illustrating the relationship between H2concentration and area ratio at various temperatures. Modified from Liet al.(24). (F) Comparison of hydrogen concentration in Kunlun hydrothermal fluid with those from Icelandic geothermal systems and Mid-Atlantic Ridge (MAR) hydrothermal fields. The estimated hydrogen flux from Kunlun is also compared with the global submarine abiotic hydrogen flux and the flux attributed to submarine serpentinization. CREDIT: [(A) to (C)] L. LI/LAOSHAN LABORATORY.

In situ laser Raman spectra of hydrothermal fluids in the Laoshan pipe reveal hydrogen peaks at 4132 cm−1, indicating a high concentration of dissolved molecular hydrogen in these fluids (24) (Fig. 2D), similar to Lost City. However, the form of hydrothermal system described here is entirely different from that of Lost City, which is located next to a transform fault near the mid-Atlantic Ocean ridge. Instead of white carbonate chimneys (5–7), at Kunlun, there are massive authigenic carbonate deposits, with exposed sections reaching up to 4 m above the seafloor, and hydrothermal overflow is also present within fractures in the carbonate rock (Fig. 1, E and F, and movie S4). On-site in situ laser Raman analyses detected characteristic peaks at 281, 713, and 1084 cm−1, which are typical Raman peaks associated with calcite (25–27) (fig. S8). Dark-yellow rocks are commonly found at locations of intense fluid ejection in the Kunlun hydrothermal field (fig. S9). Characteristic peaks at 177, 297, 724, and 1094 cm−1typical of dolomite were identified through onsite laser Raman spectroscopy (28,29) (fig. S8). Subsequent x-ray diffraction analysis of the white authigenic carbonate from the Wenhai pipe shows 83.1% calcite and 12.9% Ca-rich dolomite, while the dark-yellow rocks from the Laoshan pipe are 60.5% ankerite and 39.5% Fe-rich ankerite (fig. S10). Major and trace element data for the carbonate samples are provided in tables S1 and S2.

Fluid temperatures across multiple hydrothermal areas were determined with SBE 49 integrated CTD (conductivity-temperature-depth) sensor. The highest temperature of the Kunlun hydrothermal fluid is 18.2°C, which is much higher than the ambient temperatures of ~1.5°C (fig. S11 and movie S5) but much lower than temperatures associated with black smokers. The SBE 49 CTD has a relatively large and fragile sensor, making it challenging to insert deep into breccia fractures. Therefore, the determined temperatures are likely minimum readings for the hydrothermal fluids. It remains unclear how dolomite forms in the modern ocean, but dolomite formation around these vents provides further information about the fluid temperature. Previous studies have suggested that dolomite forms under minimum temperatures of 80°C (30). Later studies indicate that it could form at temperatures between 40° and 80°C (31). The presence of dolomite at the spout of hydrothermal vents suggests that the fluid temperature must be higher than 40°C and similar to that of the Lost City. Carbon and oxygen isotope measurements of authigenic carbonates collected from multiple pipes were conducted. The carbon isotope compositions [δ13C, relative to the Vienna Pee Dee belemnite (VPDB) standard] ranged from −0.90 to 3.72 per mil (‰), indicating that the carbon source is derived from dissolved inorganic carbon in seawater, distinct from methane-driven anaerobic oxidation processes typically associated with authigenic carbonates. The oxygen isotope compositions (δ18O, also relative to the VPDB standard) ranged from 1.42 to 6.80‰, with dolomite showing δ18O values between 1.42 and 1.76‰. A positive correlation between carbon and oxygen isotopes suggests that they share the same material source and the variations in isotopic composition are controlled by fluid temperature (fig. S12).

On the basis of multiple manned submersible dives conducted in the Kunlun hydrothermal field, we identified a considerable number of alvinocarid shrimp near high-temperature vents within the hydrothermal areas of the Laoshan and Zhushan pipes (32) (fig. S13 and movie S6). In surrounding regions with lower temperatures, squat lobster and extensive fields of sea anemones were observed (33,34). Small tubeworms were found in the sediments at the edge of the hydrothermal overflow area in Zhushan pipe (fig. S13A). In addition, scorpionfish, such as zoarcid fish, were widely distributed across the hydrothermal areas (fig. S13D). These findings indicate that the hydrothermal activity developed within the Kunlun pipe swarm supports an active and vibrant hydrothermal ecosystem (35).

On-site analysis of Kunlun hydrothermal fluids was conducted using Raman spectroscopy (movie S7). A Raman peak for dissolved hydrogen at 4132 cm−1was detected, with concentrations of 5.9 to 6.8 mmol/kg (10) (Fig. 2D). In addition, the sulfate (984 cm−1) concentration in the hydrothermal fluids was 21.6 mmol/kg (10), which is about 25% lower than that of seawater (28.6 mmol/kg), suggesting that the hydrogen concentration in unmixed hydrothermal fluids could be much higher (Table 1). No Raman signals for methane or carbon dioxide were detected, indicating that their concentrations are below the limit of detection (LOD) of the RiP system (36,37) (LODs of CH4and CO2are 0.83 and 0.90 mmol/kg, respectively) (Table 1). Most fluids in the Kunlun hydrothermal field are discharged beneath the breccia, hindering our ability to capture primary hydrothermal fluids unaffected by seawater mixing. Using the sulfate end-member concentration from the Lost City hydrothermal field as a reference (6,38,39), we estimated the hydrogen end-member concentrations in Kunlun hydrothermal fluids to be 13.2 to 22.1 mmol/kg. The directly observed concentrations of dissolved hydrogen in the Kunlun hydrothermal fluids (5.9 to 6.8 mmol/kg) are not higher than the maximum values reported for Icelandic geothermal systems (0.022 to 20.5 mmol/kg) (40,41) and Mid-Atlantic Ridge (MAR) hydrothermal fields (0.07 to 26.5 mmol/kg) (5–7,38,39,42–47). However, the extensive diffuse flow area in Kunlun results in a large total hydrogen flux (Fig. 2F).

*The detection limit for methane of the in situ Raman spectroscopy system is 0.83 mmol/kg.

†The detection limit for carbon dioxide of the in situ Raman spectroscopy system is 0.90 mmol/kg.

To estimate the total hydrogen flux from the Kunlun pipe swarm, we analyzed video footage collected during multiple dives, integrating ultrashort-baseline high-precision positioning data to map the hydrothermal discharge areas and their extents across the Laoshan, Zhushan, Luhuitou, and Wenhai pipes (figs. S14 to S17, table S3, and Supplementary Text). Using video image analyses and particle tracking velocimetry techniques (48–50), the estimated velocities of hydrothermal fluid discharge in the Kunlun hydrothermal area range between ~10 and ~25 cm/s. Not all identified hydrothermal zones exhibited active fluid discharge. On the basis of close-up observations captured by HOV and statistical analyses of video data, we estimated that active discharge zones account for ~3 to 5% of the total identified hydrothermal area. Using the minimum observed hydrogen concentration in hydrothermal fluids (5.9 mmol/kg), the lowest fluid velocity (10 cm/s), and the lowest proportion of active discharge zones (3%), a lower-bound estimate for the hydrogen flux from hydrothermal activity within the Laoshan, Zhushan, Luhuitou, and Wenhai pipes is estimated to be 1.6 × 1011mol/year (Supplementary Text). Scaling this to the total discharge area of the Kunlun pipe swarm, the overall lower-bound estimate of hydrogen flux for the entire region is 4.8 × 1011mol/year (Table 1). In comparison, a previously estimated global annual flux of abiotic hydrogen from submarine geological sources is 6 × 1012to 10 × 1012mol/year, with a contribution of 1 × 1012to 2 × 1012mol/year from serpentinization (51,52). These results indicate that the hydrogen flux from the Kunlun hydrothermal area represents ~5 to 8% of the global submarine abiotic hydrogen flux and 24 to 48% of the flux attributed to submarine serpentinization processes (51,52). This estimate does not account for potential contributions from pipes in the southern part to the west of the Mussau Trench, which were not explored in this study. The Kunlun pipe swarm spans ~4000 km2, and its substantial hydrogen flux indicates a unique potential for hydrogen generation in this region, providing valuable insights for exploring potential hydrogen reservoirs in oceanic environments (53).

The presence of hydrogen and absence of sulfide indicate that the Kunlun hydrothermal field is associated with serpentinization fluids (5–7). This may be attributed to subduction initiation along the fossil Mussau Trench. Briefly, the oceanic plate is bent severely during the subduction initiation, resulting in large and deep faults (15,16). Seawater penetrates through fractures into the lithospheric mantle, allowing reaction with the olivine-bearing rocks forming serpentinites and thereby releasing hydrogen (11). Seismic reflection data across the Mussau Trench reveal prominent normal faulting and upward displacement of the Mussau Ridge during plate bending (13), providing direct structural evidence that supports fault generation at the leading edge of the subducting Caroline Plate. Although serpentinization is generally constrained by the thermal structure of the oceanic lithosphere, with young plates (<10 to 15 Myr) typically considered too hot to permit hydration of the upper mantle (54,55), plate age alone does not determine the extent of serpentinization. In the present study area, the Caroline Plate is relatively young, yet serpentinization has occurred—likely facilitated by a combination of moderate mantle temperatures, pervasive bending-related faulting, and seawater ingress through permeable pathways (54,55). A comparable example is found in the Central America subduction zone, where 14- to 22-Myr-old lithosphere exhibits clear evidence of serpentinization along outer-rise faults (56). These observations collectively suggest that serpentinization can occur in relatively young oceanic plates, provided that fault geometry, permeability structure, and thermal conditions are favorable.

Serpentinized peridotites have also been reported in the Mussau Trench region by Zhanget al.(20), where the sampled rocks were interpreted to represent foliated lithospheric mantle from the overriding Caroline Plate. These peridotites show strong foliation and abundant amphibole aligned within the serpentinized matrix, indicating formation during syntectonic deformation related to subduction initiation. Amphibole crystals, ranging from tremolite to edenite and pargasite in composition, yield pressure-temperature estimates up to 7.3 kbar and 688°C, based on empirical amphibole thermobarometer. It suggests that serpentinization is abundant in this region (20).

Structures known as “fairy circles” have been widely documented on land and are increasingly interpreted as surface expressions of hydrogen leakage from the subsurface (57–62). Morphologically, both the Kunlun hydrothermal pipes and terrestrial fairy circles appear as circular or elliptical depressions, with comparable lateral dimensions. However, a key distinguishing feature lies in their depth. In the Kunlun, depressions associated with active hydrothermal discharge can exceed 100 m in depth, while even the shallower ones are typically deeper than 30 m (fig. S2). Their depth-to-diameter ratios often surpass 0.1. In contrast, most fairy circles are only a few meters or even decimeters deep, with depth-to-diameter ratios generally below 0.01 (fig. S2 and table S4). This morphological difference reflects fundamentally different formation mechanisms: Kunlun pipes are formed through explosive hydrogen release, whereas fairy circles are thought to result from slow subsurface gas seepage and gradual surface subsidence (10,11,57–62). A comparative summary of the morphometric parameters of Kunlun hydrothermal pipes and terrestrial fairy circles is presented in table S4.

On the basis of the multibeam survey and on-site inspection using HOV Fendouzhe, we propose a four-stage model for the Kunlun pipe swarm. In stage 1, major explosions that formed pipes occurred because of the accumulation of hydrogen (Fig. 3A). This is supported by the observations of a wide distribution of breccias of different size ranges on the bottom of the pipe swarm (Fig. 3Band figs. S3 and S4). In stage 2, after the explosion, numerous fractures formed along the edges and bottom of the pipes, and the breccia deposits developed large gaps, creating conditions favorable for intensive eruptions of hydrogen-rich hydrothermal fluids. The dense fossil hydrothermal tubes on the wall of the pipe swarm were likely formed during this stage (Fig. 3, C and D, and fig. S7). In stage 3, fluid channels are gradually blocked by authigenic carbonates. Once the hydrothermal vents are totally sealed by authigenic carbonate, hydrogen starts to accumulate again, which may result in explosions or exhalations of smaller scales. There are groups of round hydrothermal pipes/pits of 1 to 20 m in diameter that appear in all the four pipes inspected (Fig. 3, E and F, and fig. S6). In stage 4, the hydrothermal field decays when no fresh mantle peridotite remains or when no water is supplied to regions below 700°C in the lithospheric mantle, i.e., serpentinization ceases and hydrothermal activity dies out (63,64). Subsequently, the hydrothermal pipes/pits are covered by sediments (Fig. 3, G and H). On the basis of the detailed investigation of these four pipes, the Laoshan, Zhushan, and Wenhai pipes are all in stage 3, while the Luhuitou pipe is in the transitional phase from the end of stage 3 to stage 4.

On the basis of the observations in this study, the Kunlun pipe swarm hydrothermal system experienced four stages. (A) Stage 1: Major explosion. A hydrogen explosion formed the large pipes due to serpentinization. (B) Widely distributed breccias in the Laoshan pipe, indicating explosions during stage 1. (C) Stage 2: Intense eruption. Authigenic dolomite (Fig. 2B) suggests that the temperature of the hydrothermal fluids was likely in the range of 40° to 80°C, which changed to calcite at lower temperatures. (D) Strong hydrothermal eruptions are indicated by dense hydrothermal tubes in the Laoshan pipe, suggesting strong hydrothermal activity during stage 2. (E) Stage 3: Diffusive eruption. The fluid channel becomes smaller and smaller because of authigenic carbonates and may even be sealed. Consequently, the accumulation of hydrogen caused smaller explosions, which was then followed by diffusive hydrothermal flows. (F) A hydrothermal pit with a diameter of 5 m, showing diffusive hydrothermal flows at the bottom. Two scorpionfish are found near a hydrothermal vent. This kind of hydrothermal pipes/pits of 1 to 20 m in diameter appears in groups in all the four pipes prospected in this study. (G) Stage 4: Extinction phase. Hydrothermal pipes/pits are covered by sediments. No flow is observed because of ceased serpentinization underneath. (H) An example of extinct pits in the Zhushan pipe, which is also observed in other pipes. CREDIT: [(B), (D), and (F)] L. LI/LAOSHAN LABORATORYand (H) W. SUN/INSTITUTE OF OCEANOLOGY, CHINESE ACADEMY OF SCIENCES.

Two types of hydrothermal systems are evident on ocean floors. One is associated with hydrothermal fluids released from volcanoes in mid-ocean ridges and back-arc spreading centers, e.g., black smokers. They usually form sulfide chimneys from hot (up to 400°C) sulfide-rich fluids (65–67). The other is usually sulfide free with temperatures below 90°C. This kind of hydrothermal system is powered by serpentinization, which is best represented by the Lost City on the Atlantis Massif in the Atlantic Ocean, which is taken as one of the best candidates for siting for the origin of life (5–7). The total area of the Kunlun pipe swarm scanned in this study is 11.1 km2, representing a spatial extent more than two orders of magnitude larger than that of the Lost City. The Kunlun system demonstrates that offshore serpentinization and associated hydrogen leakage can occur within the oceanic plate, beyond ridge environments.

Seawater sinks into the lithosphere through deep faults on the bending parts of the subducting Caroline Plate to the west of the Mussau Trench, where it reacts with hot rocks, forming serpentinite and hydrogen. The alkaline fluids, rich in hydrogen, magnesium, and iron, generated by serpentinization, ascend along fractures and continuously dissolve calcium from the surrounding rocks, leading to calcium enrichment in the hydrothermal fluids. After ascending, these fluids mix with the shallow circulation of seawater and are released at the seafloor in the form of hydrothermal discharge. Near the vent, under high temperatures, calcium and magnesium ions in the hydrothermal fluids combine with carbon dioxide from seawater to form dolomite. At greater distances from the vent, due to cooling from seawater, authigenic carbonate rocks primarily composed of calcite are formed under normal seabed temperature conditions. These hydrogen-rich hydrothermal fluids accumulate hydrogen within the pipe after being released at the pipe bottom, fostering a chemolithoautotrophic ecosystem.

The continuous release of hydrothermal fluids originating from serpentinite-hosted systems in the Kunlun pipe swarm leads to successive hydrogen-rich alkaline “hot soups,” similar to the conditions where life on Earth might have first begun (Fig. 4). Compared to the carbonate towers formed in the Lost City, these pipes/pits provide a more sustained and stable evolutionary time frame, offering a potentially more suitable environment for the evolution of early life (5–7). Serpentinization reactions occurring extensively and deep in the oceanic lithosphere mantle have high hydrogen-generating potential. However, the reactive and highly mobile nature of hydrogen has so far prevented the discovery of large-scale hydrogen storage structures under the seafloor. The Kunlun pipe swarm, with its extremely high hydrogen flux, not only serves as an ideal target for studying and developing subsea hydrogen resources but also provides valuable insights for identifying potential submarine hydrogen reservoirs in the future.

In this study, bathymetric data were collected using the Kongsberg Simrad EM122 multibeam echosounder system, widely used for high-resolution underwater mapping. The EM122 system operates at a frequency of 12 kHz and is capable of generating 432 beams per side, providing detailed coverage of the seafloor. The system’s maximum emission cone angle is 150°, and the beam width is 1° by 1°, allowing for precise measurement of underwater topography. During the survey, the system was deployed in an equidistant mode with a 55° swath angle per side, ensuring complete coverage of the target area. The survey was conducted in waters up to 4500 m deep, with single-side coverage extending up to 6000 m. The data acquisition was designed to ensure a high degree of overlap, with each side of the measurement area having more than 30% coverage overlap to improve data accuracy and reduce uncertainty. The raw multibeam data were processed using the Caris software suite, a well-established set of tools for hydrographic data processing. Caris software (Caris Inc., Fredericton, Canada) is capable of performing a wide range of tasks, from data import and calibration to final mapping product generation. In this case, the raw data were corrected and processed through a series of parameter adjustments, ultimately producing bathymetric grids with a resolution of 50 m. For specific areas such as localized pothole regions, where multiple passes of the survey were conducted, the data were processed at a finer resolution of 20 m. Last, all processed bathymetric maps were generated using Surfer software (Golden Software LLC, Golden, CO, USA), which is widely used for geospatial data visualization and analysis.

The in situ Raman spectra of hydrothermal fluids were recorded using the RiP system, which was deployed on the HOV Fendouzhe (Fig. 2). This system included a custom-built N-RXNE-532-RA-SP spectrometer and a frequency-doubled Nd laser (532 nm) with an output power of 150 mW, both from Kaiser Optical Systems Inc. (USA). A charge-coupled device camera, DU-440A-BV-136 from Andor Technology (UK), was installed to capture the Raman spectra. This camera features 2048 pixel–by–512 pixel resolution and a 27.6 mm–by–6.9 mm image area. The Raman spectral range (100 to 4325 cm−1) was split into two segments (100 to 2100 cm−1and 2100 to 4325 cm−1), with a spectral resolution of ~1 cm−1. Before each deployment, the RiP system underwent calibration using neon and halogen lamps to adjust for wave number and intensity. The HoloGRAMS software (Kaiser Optical Systems Inc., Ann Arbor, USA) was used to acquire Raman spectra in HOV Fendouzhe, with each spectrum obtained over 5 cycles, each with a 4-s exposure. All Raman spectra were processed using GRAM/AI software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, USA) to subtract the baseline and determine the peak areas for the targeted compounds such as hydrogen (H2) and sulfate ions (SO42−).

Here, η andFrepresent instrumental efficiency and the Raman quantification factor for peak area, respectively. Water (H2O) serves as an ideal internal standard for quantifying solute concentrations. The concentrations of H2and SO42−can thus be determined through peak area ratios ofA(H2)/A(H2O), andA(SO42−)/A(H2O). The peak area ratios ofA(H2)/A(H2O) andA(SO42−)/A(H2O) were determined from the spectral data of hydrothermal fluids obtained using the RiP system. Using previously established Raman spectroscopy quantitative calibration models for hydrogen and sulfate applicable to the RiP system, the concentrations of hydrogen and sulfate in the Kunlun hydrothermal fluids were determined to be 5.9 to 6.8 and 21.6 mmol/kg, respectively.

Although quantitative calibration models derived from Raman spectra provide insights into the concentrations of dissolved H2and SO42−, these values alone do not account for seawater entrainment during in situ measurements. Magnesium (Mg) is widely recognized as a stable and conserved element in seawater, and it has been used as a calibration marker for end-member concentrations of hydrothermal fluid components (71,72). However, Raman spectroscopy does not directly detect Mg concentrations in seawater or hydrothermal fluids. Sulfate ions (SO42−) were used as a proxy to assess seawater entrainment in hydrothermal fluids, a common occurrence in deep-sea hydrothermal environments. By analyzing the Raman spectra of ambient seawater collected at the study site using the RiP system, we determined the average concentration of SO42−in seawater to be 28.6 mmol/kg. This served as a baseline for determining the mixing ratio between hydrothermal fluids and seawater during in situ measurements. Given that the sulfate ion concentration in the Kunlun hydrothermal fluids was relatively low, it was hypothesized that the end-member concentration of sulfate ions might not be zero. To refine this estimation, the sulfate concentration in the Lost City hydrothermal fluids was used as a reference. By comparing the sulfate ion concentrations in the Kunlun fluids with those in seawater and Lost City hydrothermal fluids, we calculated the mixing ratio between hydrothermal fluids and seawater. This enabled us to estimate the end-member concentration of hydrogen (H2) in the Kunlun hydrothermal fluids.

Because of the absence of a dedicated temperature probe for measuring hydrothermal fluid temperatures during this expedition, a mechanical arm of the manned submersible was used to hold an SBE 49 FastCAT CTD for temperature measurements. The SBE 49 CTD, with a temperature range of −5° to 35°C, has an initial accuracy of ±0.002°C and a resolution of 0.0001°C and operates at a sampling frequency of 16 Hz. As a highly sensitive, but relatively fragile instrument, the SBE 49 CTD is equipped with a metal protective cap at the inlet to prevent damage. The temperature probe is mounted within this cap, with a gap of ~3 cm between the probe and the front of the inlet. In addition, the protective cap, along with a white water outlet fixed to it, results in the front width of the CTD being 8.3 cm (fig. S11D). This design made it difficult to insert the device directly into the vent openings of the Kunlun hydrothermal area, which is characterized by large-scale breccia coverage (fig. S9). The hydrothermal fluids in this area are released through the breccia fractures. Therefore, it is likely that the measured fluid temperature during this expedition is significantly lower than the true temperature of the hydrothermal fluid in the Kunlun area. The highest temperatures recorded in the Laoshan, Wenhai, and Zhushan pipes were 18.2°, 16.3°, and 16.5°C, respectively (fig. S11, A to C). In addition to the CTD held by the mechanical arm, the HOV Fendouzhe submersible is equipped with a CTD at the rear, ~1.8 m above the seafloor. This CTD continuously records the temperature of the surrounding seawater environment. During observations of the Laoshan pipe, the submersible’s CTD recorded a maximum temperature of 7.0°C. The normal seafloor temperature in this region is 1.5°C, indicating that the surrounding water has been heated by hydrothermal activity. This suggests that the temperature of the hydrothermal fluid within the Laoshan pipe is likely higher than the measured value.

In this study, we used particle tracking to estimate the flow velocities of hydrothermal fluids in the Laoshan, Zhushan, Luhuitou, and Wenhai pipes, based on video footage obtained by the HOV Fendouzhe. Instead of injecting artificial tracer particles, we tracked naturally occurring small particles within the hydrothermal fluid. These particles, which were already present in the fluid, were selected for their visibility and ease of tracking within the video frames. We recorded the positions of these particles over time and calculated their displacement between frames. The velocity of the fluid was then estimated by analyzing the movement of these particles within the flow. Through this method, the flow velocities of hydrothermal fluids in the four pipes were estimated to be in the range of 10 to 25 cm/s.

We acknowledge the constructive comments from the reviewers and editor. We thank the entire crew of Tansuoyihao and the team of pilots from the HOV Fendouzhe for invaluable support in data and sample collection during the TS43-1 cruise. We thank T. Zhang, K. Wang, S. Yuan, and others for assistance during the cruise. We thank the NSFC and Laoshan Laboratory for funding and support for this cruise.

Funding:This work was supported by the NSFC (no. 92258303 to W.S.), NSFC (no. 42327805 to X.Z.), NSFC (no. 92358301 to L.L.), and NSFC Shiptime Sharing Project (no. 42249583 to W.S.).

Competing interests:The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Data and materials availability:All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. Measurement data and observation videos are also provided via Figshare athttps://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.29095904.