Light-mediated manipulation of hydrogel physicochemical properties is attractive for numerous applications, yet the processing of such hydrogels via vat photopolymerization [e.g., digital light processing (DLP)] is challenging as photoresponsive chemistries may be consumed during printing. Here, we report a facile strategy to DLP print hydrogels that combines short light exposures to set the shape of a printed object and complementary dark polymerization to continue the reaction of macromers without disturbing photoresponsive groups. Postprinting, hydrogels are then programmed using single- or multiphoton light and photoinitiator-free reactions: tetrazole-alkene click reaction (for photofunctionalization), dithiolane ring-opening polymerization (for photostiffening), ando-nitrobenzyl cleavage (for photosoftening). We demonstrate the versatility of this approach through applications that include the patterning of ligands to direct cell-material interactions, four-dimensional shape morphing, and bottom-up construction of multiscale models, including microscale perfusable channels. This approach provides access to highly tunable 3D-printed photoresponsive hydrogels for a range of soft matter applications.

A generalizable strategy to 3D print and program photoresponsive hydrogels with light is introduced.

Hydrogels are water-swollen polymer networks with tunable properties that have been widely used as soft devices in tissue engineering, as cell culture platforms for the study of mechanobiology, and as drug delivery vehicles (1–3). Hydrogels are most often fabricated via molding into simple, uniform shapes that fail to mimic the complex architectures of native tissues; however, additive manufacturing is advancing at a rapid pace to process hydrogels into physiologically relevant shapes. Particularly, vat photopolymerization methods [e.g., digital light processing (DLP)] have emerged as promising technologies that rely on the cross-linking of photoreactive monomers and macromers into three-dimensional (3D) objects via patterned illumination (4). When compared to other additive manufacturing modalities, vat photopolymerizations allow for higher resolutions and faster printing speeds (5); however, the library of available hydrogel resins remains limited (6). These resins unfortunately fail to recapitulate many of the dynamic properties of native tissues, including their behavior under mechanical loading or during disease progression and morphogenesis.

To expand the versatility of hydrogels, various stimulus-responsive groups have been used. For example, light has been used as a stimulus to spatiotemporally control hydrogels, particularly as it (i) is deliverable to discrete regions in both 2D and 3D at a user-defined time, (ii) provides noninvasive and remote manipulation of properties without the need for additional reagents, and (iii) permits functional control over the reaction extent by tuning the administered dose (intensity and irradiation time) and wavelength of light (7–9). Specifically, light is leveraged to facilitate functionalization or to alter hydrogel moduli through the formation of secondary bonds (i.e., stiffening) or reduction in cross-linking density (i.e., softening) (10,11).

There are only a few examples where light is used for hydrogel formation via one reaction and material properties are then subsequently tuned via a separate photochemistry (table S1) (12–22). These methods often rely on complementary wavelengths that allow orthogonal control of multiple reaction pathways; however, such approaches may be restricted by the synthetic complexity of fully wavelength-orthogonal chemistries, their limited solubility in water, and the need for high photon fluxes and additives (e.g., pH regulators) to trigger and confine cross-linking with a specific wavelength (23). Ideally, photoresponsive groups would be designed to absorb minimally at the wavelength of light source used for hydrogel formation (24), but in reality, these often have overlapping absorption spectra (25) and commercial light sources emit broad spectral bandwidths (fig. S1). Therefore, judicious selection of chromophores and optimized photoinitiators becomes key to designing wavelength-selective photoresponsive hydrogels. As a result, implementation of such methods with light-based 3D printing (e.g., DLP) has been limited.

There exists a fundamental photocrosslinking-photoresponse trade-off in additive manufacturing, wherein light is critical to form an object with vat photopolymerization, but at the same time, prolonged light exposure causes premature consumption of intrinsically photoresponsive groups [e.g., tetrazole (TZ) (13), dithiolane (26), oro-nitrobenzyl (oNB) (27)] during the printing process. Balancing these processes with low light irradiance is achieved at the cost of ineffective network formation, low overall macromer conversion, and poor mechanical properties of the printed object. Hence, there is a need for a more versatile method to process photoresponsive hydrogels with high conversion of reactive groups while retaining the activity of separate photoresponsive groups for postprint tuning without the need for additives.

To fulfill this need, we leverage a generalizable one-step process, continuous curing after light exposure aided by redox initiation (CLEAR), for light-based 3D printing. CLEAR printing is a dual-initiating approach that uses brief light (405 nm) exposure to first cross-link and set the shape of an object and then complementary dark polymerization (via redox initiation) to complete the conversion of the unreacted macromer within the printed object without the need for additional stimuli (e.g., light and heat) (28). Thus, this approach allows photoresponsive groups to be retained within the hydrogel that can be subsequently activated by single (λ = 365 nm) or multiphoton light (λ = 730 nm) (Fig. 1A). CLEAR has previously been implemented for chain growth polymerizations [e.g., acrylate (Ac) and acrylamide] (28), and here, we extend the utility of CLEAR to step-growth polymerizations using macromers of varying functionality [i.e., two-, four-, or eight-arm poly(ethylene glycol)s (PEGs)] and reactive groups [i.e., norbornenes (NBs) and thiols (SHs)]. Redox initiators [i.e., ammonium persulfate (APS) andN,N,N′,N′-tetramethylethylenediamine (TEMED)] are implemented for dark polymerization as part of CLEAR. The decomposition of APS catalyzed by the base (TEMED) results in the formation of radicals that can initiate polymerization of any unreacted macromer without the need for additional light, where the rate of reaction is influenced by the concentration of redox initiators. As a proof of concept, we use eight-arm PEG-NB and eight-arm PEG-SH dissolved in water as our base resin with the addition of photoresponsive groups that allow subsequent patterning of biochemical ligands or control over mechanical properties (i.e., modulus) within 3D-printed hydrogels. Specifically, we leverage multiple photoinitiator-free reactions: TZ-alkene ligation (for photofunctionalization without changes in mechanical properties), dithiolane ring-opening polymerization (for photostiffening), and oNB cleavage (for photosoftening) (Fig. 1B). Although the photoresponsive macromers [i.e., four-arm PEG-TZ-NB, eight-arm PEG-lipoic acid (LA), or NB-PEG-oNB-NB] used in this study predominantly absorb light at 365 nm, considerable absorption is also observed at the wavelength (405 ± 25 nm) that is used for DLP printing (Fig. 1, C to E, and fig. S1), which motivates our strategy to minimize light exposure during printing. High absorption also contributes to considerable light attenuation (fig. S2), making conventional postprocessing (e.g., flood cure) potentially challenging, which is avoided with dark polymerization via a secondary redox initiation (as part of CLEAR). Thus, our synergistic light and dark polymerization approach provides access to spatiotemporally responsive and 3D-printed hydrogels via vat photopolymerization.

(A) Schematic rendering of bottom-up DLP wherein liquid resin is cross-linked into a solid hydrogel via 405-nm light exposure. Postprinting, various properties of the 3D hydrogel are programmed via secondary single-photon UV (λ = 365 nm) or multiphoton (λ = 730 nm) irradiation. (B) Schemes for photochemical reactions to allow (i) functionalization, (ii) stiffening, or (iii) softening of 3D-printed hydrogels in the presence of light (e.g., 365 nm) and without the need for photoinitiators.hν, light exposure. Molar extinction coefficient (ε, M−1cm−1) across the wavelength (λ, nm) spectra for photoreactive species: (C) four-arm PEG-TZ-NB, (D) eight-arm PEG-LA, and (E) NB-PEG-oNB-NB.

Step-growth reactions were chosen for hydrogel formation in this study over chain-growth reactions to (i) enable control over available groups for functionalization after initial cross-linking, (ii) avoid interdependence of functionalization and mechanical properties, and (iii) produce well-defined network architectures at the molecular level. Specifically, SH-NB step growth reactions have gained popularity as these proceed rapidly under mild conditions and are oxygen insensitive (29). Swelling can influence mechanical properties and network topology of hydrogels. In the present study, all hydrogels were swollen to equilibrium before mechanical testing. DLP alone and CLEAR were used to form PEG hydrogels at 10 wt % initial (i.e., before equilibrium swelling) macromer content with a 1:1 stoichiometric ratio of NBs to SHs and the length of the PEG arm fixed at 2.5 kDa, with variations in the macromer functionality (Fig. 2A). The DLP resin contains a mixture of macromer, photoinitiator, photoabsorber, and water (solvent), while the CLEAR resin comprises the same components with the addition of redox initiators before 3D printing. According to the Flory-Stockmayer equation for statistical gelation of step-growth networks, the critical conversion required to reach gelation depends on the stoichiometric ratio of reactants and the degree of functionality of the macromers (30). We evaluated two different formulations with varying macromer functionalities, hereafter denoted as “4 + 2” for four-arm PEG-NB with two-arm PEG-SH and “8 + 8” indicating eight-arm PEG-NB with eight-arm PEG-SH. Considering the 1:1 stoichiometry of NBs to SHs, the theoretical minimum conversion values required to reach gelation for 4 + 2 and 8 + 8 are 57.7 and 14.3%, respectively, as determined by the Flory-Stockmayer equation.

(A) Schematic rendering of DLP and CLEAR printing methods. Reaction scheme for (4 + 2) four-arm PEG-NB with two-arm PEG-SH and (8 + 8) eight-arm PEG-NB with eight-arm PEG-SH. CLEAR involves the addition of redox initiators into the resin to allow additional conversion of the unreacted macromer within the 3D-printed object. RT, room temperature (ambient conditions); Δt, over time. Storage (G′, Pa) and loss (G″, Pa) moduli over time for (B) 4 + 2 and (D) 8 + 8 resins after light exposure to match DLP and CLEAR processes (purple-shaded area indicates light irradiation oft= 10 s to mimic the exposure energy per layer during DLP). Compressive moduli (EC, kPa) of hydrogels fabricated with (C) 4 + 2 or (E) 8 + 8 resins via traditional casting or 3D printed with DLP or CLEAR. Data are reported as the means ± SD;n≥ 4 hydrogels. **P< 0.01; ***P< 0.001; ****P< 0.0001, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. ns, not significant. (F) Photographs of octet truss and knotted structures and images of macroporous lattice CLEAR printed with 8 + 8 resin. Scale bars, 2 mm. (G) Images of confined channels CLEAR printed with the 8 + 8 resin to guide cell alignment. F-actin, magenta; nuclei, cyan. Scale bars, 2 mm and 500 μm. Quantification of degree of cell alignment (θ, °) on hydrogels without (−) or with (+) channels. Data are reported as the means ± SD;n≥ 4 hydrogels. ***P< 0.001, unpaired Student’sttest.

Light exposure of resins (to match the energy of 0.2 J cm−2delivered to a single layer during printing) results in the critical conversion required to reach gelation marked by the crossover ofG′ (storage modulus) andG″ (loss modulus). The redox reaction (dark polymerization as part of CLEAR) further increases the functional group conversion as marked by an increase inG′ over time compared to DLP alone, whereinG′ remains unchanged after irradiation (Fig. 2, B and D). As observed with bases in thiol-ene reactions previously (31), it is important to note that the presence of a base (i.e., redox initiators) within the CLEAR resin also slows down the SH-NB photoclick reaction, as evidenced by the longer time to reach gelation, but does not affect the final storage moduli as measured through in situ photorheology (fig. S3). DLP and CLEAR hydrogel resins were 3D printed into solid objects, and the mechanical properties were measured under compression. In the case of 4 + 2 hydrogels, the compressive modulus (EC) with CLEAR (~20.2 kPa) is similar to that with DLP alone (~19.8 kPa), likely due to the already high conversion (57.7%) during traditional DLP that is needed to reach gelation (Fig. 2C). The lower mechanical properties of 3D-printed (DLP alone or CLEAR) hydrogels compared to cast hydrogels are attributed to interfaces and other heterogeneities introduced by pixel-based illumination during printing. In contrast, 8 + 8 hydrogels printed with CLEAR (~204 kPa) exhibit a nearly 1.6-fold increase in moduli over those printed with DLP alone (~126 kPa), and the hydrogels are not statistically different from those obtained with traditional casting (~220 kPa) (Fig. 2E). These findings are similar to our previous results demonstrating that CLEAR is beneficial specifically for hydrogels that reach low conversion during printing (28). Collectively, these results highlight the importance of the role of macromer architecture and initiation conditions in the resulting network properties when printing with DLP.

Because the 8 + 8 system minimizes light exposure during printing and maximizes dark polymerization to preserve photoresponsive chemical groups, we next investigated the use of CLEAR for the processing of 8 + 8 hydrogels into constructs with varied topologies (e.g., octet truss, knotted geometries, and macroporous lattices) (Fig. 2F). Furthermore, 8 + 8 resins containing thiolated cell-adhesive peptides (i.e., GCGYGRGDSP) were 3D printed via CLEAR. These hydrogels support cell adhesion (fig. S4) and can be processed into shapes (e.g., confined channels) to direct collective cell alignment when compared to cells seeded on isotropic hydrogel substrates (Fig. 2G). This approach may be useful for one-step fabrication of molds that could be used to guide the formation and maturation of cell-dense (e.g., skeletal and cardiac) tissues. Together, step-growth hydrogels were processed into complex geometries at macroscopic (approximately centimeter) scales, albeit with physicochemical properties that were fixed postprinting. Next, we sought to develop 3D-printed and photoprogrammable hydrogels that can undergo selective functionalization, stiffening, or softening upon optical stimulation [ultraviolet (UV) (λ = 365 nm) or two-photon near-infrared (NIR) (λ = 730 nm)] without the need for photoinitiators.

Spatiotemporal functionalization of hydrogels enables precise control over biochemical presentation, allowing the dynamic modulation of cell-material interactions in 3D cell culture and tissue engineering (32–34). Photochemically tethering peptides or growth factors within hydrogels can regulate cell adhesion and differentiation with high spatial resolution. However, commonly used photofunctionalization reactions, such as acrylate chain growth or thiol-ene step growth, are often mediated by radicals, so care must be taken to use conditions that minimize any unintended effects on cells or proteins (35). In addition, these reactions may be coupled to hydrogel cross-linking, meaning that conjugation may also affect mechanical properties (36). As one potential solution, we incorporated a four-arm PEG-TZ-NB (2 wt %, 20 kDa, two arms bearing each functional group) macromer into networks formed with eight-arm PEG-NB (5 wt %, 20 kDa) and eight-arm PEG-SH (20 kDa, 1:1 NB-to-SH ratio). This formulation allows for user-controlled, initiator-free photofunctionalization of hydrogels through a TZ-alkene reaction (Fig. 3A).

(A) Schematic representation of photoinitiator-free TZ-alkene photoclick adduct formation upon light irradiation (hν, 365 nm) postprinting. (B) Compressive moduli (EC, kPa) of hydrogels fabricated with DLP alone, DLP followed by light flood cure, or CLEAR. Data are reported as the means ± SD;n≥ 6 hydrogels. ***P< 0.001; ****P< 0.0001, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. (C) Fluorescence images (λex= 405 nm) demonstrating photofunctionalization (aperiodic monotile patterns) of hydrogels 3D printed with DLP followed by conventional postcure or CLEAR. The dashed line indicates before and after two-photon patterning (690 nm, 100% laser power, one scan, 100.85-μs pixel dwell). Scale bars, 100 μm. (D) Photographs of CLEAR-printed macroporous lattices without (−) or with (+) TZ postfunctionalization after UV (365 nm, 5 min, 20 mW cm−2) irradiation demonstrating autofluorescence from the TZ-alkene adduct. Scale bar, 5 mm. (E) Fluorescence images of microscale (two-photon) and (F) macroscale (photomasks with UV, 365 nm, 5 min, 20 mW cm−2irradiation) functionalization of CLEAR-printed hydrogels. Scale bars, 100 μm and 5 mm. (G) Spatial functionalization (green) of structures (i.e., CLEAR-printed pattern knot, magenta) with masked UV (365 nm, 10 min, 20 mW cm−2) irradiation. Scale bar, 5 mm. (H) Postprint functionalization (365 nm, 5 min, 20 mW cm−2) of acrylate (Ac)-RGD on hydrogels to pattern cell-adhesive and nonadhesive regions. F-actin, magenta. Scale bar, 200 μm. (I) Response and patterning of CLEAR-printed hydrogels based on two-photon wavelength (λ), including wavelength-based grayscale patterning of TZ to create a gradient in functionalization. Average normalized fluorescence intensity over distance (d, μm). Scale bars, 100 μm.

Resins containing four-arm PEG-TZ-NB were 3D printed with DLP alone, with DLP followed by postcuring with conventional flood illumination, or with CLEAR. 3D-printed hydrogels that were postcured or formed via CLEAR likely exhibit higher macromer conversions and, as a result, result in 1.4- to 1.7-fold higher compressive moduli than those printed with DLP alone (~82 kPa) (Fig. 3B). In addition, the lower modulus of postcured (~115 kPa) compared to CLEAR (~140 kPa) hydrogels is attributed to gradients in light intensity during postcuring because of the high absorption of TZs and resulting pyrazoline photoadduct at 365 nm (13). Moreover, the improvements in mechanics with postcuring are realized at the cost of the premature reaction of TZs throughout the hydrogel during postprocessing. As a result, postcured hydrogels lose their ability to be functionalized, as evidenced by inadequate pattern transfer upon two-photon stimulation (Fig. 3C). In contrast, the TZ-alkene reaction does not occur in the presence of redox initiators, and therefore, TZs are retained in the hydrogel during dark polymerization as part of CLEAR (fig. S5). Thus, complex geometric patterns (e.g., aperiodic monotile) were successfully imprinted onto CLEAR-printed hydrogels as visualized by the fluorogenic photoadduct, i.e., pyrazoline formation upon two-photon irradiation (Fig. 3C). Beyond defined geometric patterns, we further demonstrate that CLEAR-printed macroporous lattices containing TZ can be functionalized in bulk, marked by the emergent fluorescence when irradiated with UV light, whereas no fluorescence is observed even after UV illumination for lattices without the four-arm PEG-TZ-NB macromer (Fig. 3D).

The extent of functionalization of CLEAR-printed hydrogels was controlled by regulating the light dose, which can be carried out across length scales. We leverage both two-photon NIR (λ = 730 nm) light (Fig. 3Eand fig. S6) to obtain high-resolution patterns with single-micrometer resolution and UV irradiation through photomasks to create mesoscale hexagonal patterns (Fig. 3F). The functionality of photomediated patterning can be extended to intricate 3D geometries (e.g., knotted lattice) to enhance the complexity of printed objects (Fig. 3G). In addition to fluorescence labeling of printed hydrogels through photomasks, biomolecules or peptides, such as acrylate-PEG-arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD), were also spatially functionalized onto the hydrogels using the same tetrazole-ene reaction without the need for a photoinitiator or other additives (Fig. 3H). Cells attach and spread on regions functionalized with acrylated RGD, whereas cells display a typical rounded morphology on regions where RGD is absent. These results illustrate a method to pattern adhesive ligands on 3D-printed hydrogels and study regional differences in patterning of cell behavior via locally conjugated biochemical cues. The functionalization of RGD using this technique results in marginal increases (<10%) in the hydrogel modulus and provides independent control over physicochemical properties (fig. S7). Beyond functionalization with discrete cues, we also demonstrate the formation of gradients in ligands, as graded presentation of signals can be important in many cellular responses, such as chemotaxis (37). The reactivity of TZs is wavelength-dependent in correspondence with their absorbance profile, as evidenced by strong fluorescence corresponding to a higher TZ conversion at lower wavelengths (i.e., 690 nm), whereas no fluorescence is observed at excitation wavelengths greater than 770 nm (Fig. 3I). This absorbance profile was leveraged to create phototethered biochemical gradients by tuning the wavelength of the two-photon light source to activate the tetrazole-ene reaction, in contrast to traditional grayscale modulation of laser intensity.

Photoinduced stiffening of hydrogels provides a powerful approach to increase cross-linking density with precise spatial and temporal control, enabling on-demand alteration of related material properties such as rigidity and diffusivity. Moreover, patterned cross-link density in hydrogels has proven useful to the mechanobiology field to study stiffness-responsive cell processes, such as durotaxis or myofibroblast activation (38,39). While common photostiffening methods frequently rely on the introduction of additional chemical cross-linkers and photoinitiators, using latent chromophores in 3D-printed networks allows for additive-free localized stiffening without altering the overall network composition. Of particular interest, dithiolanes (e.g., LA) undergo photoinitiator-free photoinduced ring-opening polymerization in the presence of UV light (26). Here, we incorporated an eight-arm PEG-LA (10 wt %, 20 kDa) macromer to facilitate user-controlled photostiffening of hydrogels formed with an aqueous solution of eight-arm PEG-NB (5 wt %, 20 kDa) and eight-arm PEG-SH (20 kDa, 1:1 NB-to-SH ratio) (Fig. 4A). To implement CLEAR with LA, we first investigated whether LA interferes with or reacts during the dark polymerization step or remains unreacted. To investigate this, we used1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) to track the presence of the dithiolane moiety with a monofunctional PEG-LA (Fig. 4Band fig. S8). Although LA is consumed upon UV irradiation, as evidenced by the disappearance of a1H NMR peak corresponding to a proton on the dithiolane ring, it remains unaffected by the redox reaction alone. This behavior is further supported by rheological measurements that reveal no gelation of eight-arm PEG-LA macromers with redox initiators at the concentrations used in this study (fig. S9). Furthermore, in the presence of redox initiators, LA reacts with SH, albeit much slower than the redox-mediated reaction of NB with SH. As a result, we anticipate minimal LA reaction with SH, owing to the kinetic differences in reactions. In addition, incorporation of eight-arm PEG-LA to the resin containing eight-arm PEG-NB and eight-arm PEG-SH prolongs the resin gelation, likely due to the ability of dithiolanes to act as radical scavengers. It is important to note that in the case of the redox reaction (as part of CLEAR), the time to gel point can vary from minutes to hours and is dependent on the concentration of the redox initiators as well as the macromers.

(A) Schematic representation of photoinitiator-free LA cross-linking upon light irradiation (hν, 365 nm) postprinting. (B)1H NMR of monofunctional PEG-LA as control (unreacted) or treated with redox initiators or UV light; peaks equally scaled with reference to the PEG peak. ppm, parts per million. (C) Compressive moduli (EC, kPa) of hydrogels fabricated with DLP alone, DLP followed by light flood cure, or CLEAR;n≥ 5 hydrogels. (D) NormalizedECof 3D-printed hydrogels before (−) and after (+) UV light (365 nm, 5 min, 20 mW cm−2) exposure;n≥ 5 hydrogels. Unpaired Student’sttest. (E) Fluorescence images of microscale patterning (visualized through incorporation of FITC-PEG-LA) of CLEAR-printed hydrogels without (−) or with (+) two-photon exposure (100% laser power, one scan, 100.85-μs pixel dwell). Scale bars, 500 μm. (F) Spatial characterization of the diffusion coefficient (D, μm2s−1) of a tracer (FITC-labeled PEG, 10 kDa) within a CLEAR-printed hydrogel patterned without (−) or with (+) UV (365 nm, 10 min, 20 mW cm−2).n= 3 regions. (G) Photographs of programmable bending of CLEAR-printed hydrogels enabled by patterned stiffness. Regions stiffened parallel or perpendicular to the long axis of the hydrogel via masked UV (365 nm, 10 min, 20 mW cm−2) irradiation. Scale bars, 10 mm. (H) Buckling under compression of the nonstiffened (without light exposure) or midstiffened (masked exposure of the midsubstance) macroporous lattice. The dashed box indicates stiffened middle rows. Heatmap of deflection (θ, °). Analysis of deflection within each row as a function of compressive strain. Scale bars, 5 mm. All data are reported as the means ± SD; *P< 0.05; **P< 0.01; ***P< 0.001; ****P< 0.0001, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test unless noted otherwise.

Resins incorporating LA were 3D printed with DLP alone, with DLP followed by postcuring with conventional flood illumination, or with CLEAR (Fig. 4C). In their as-printed state, hydrogels that were postcured (~169 kPa) or fabricated via CLEAR (~135 kPa) had higher compressive moduli than those printed with DLP alone (~65 kPa). This difference is attributed to the increase in macromer conversion by postprocessing (flood cure or CLEAR) when compared to DLP alone. To enable stiffening postprinting, 3D-printed hydrogels were swollen to equilibrium and exposed to UV (λ = 365 nm) irradiation under mild conditions (20 mW cm−2, 5 min) at a user-desired time (Fig. 4D). DLP-printed hydrogels display an increase in moduli from ~48 to 73 kPa, whereas CLEAR-printed hydrogels exhibit an increase in moduli from 109 kPa to nearly 200 kPa (approximately twofold the initial value) upon UV irradiation. Similar (~2.2-fold) increases in storage moduli were observed when CLEAR-printed hydrogels were subjected to UV exposure (fig. S7). In contrast, postcured hydrogels display a minimal increase (<10%) in moduli upon UV irradiation. The limited stiffening arises from the premature consumption of LA during the postprocessing (i.e., flood cure) step after DLP. Next, we evaluated the effect of relative molar concentration of LA on the mechanical properties of 3D-printed hydrogels poststiffening. CLEAR-printed hydrogels with LA:NB:SH ratios of 2:1:1 (excess), 1:1:1 (stoichiometric), and 0.5:1:1 (limiting) exhibit nearly 1.8-, 1.6-, and 1.3-fold increases in moduli, respectively, upon UV irradiation (fig. S10). This suggests that the degree of stiffening can be controlled by tuning the ratio of LA relative to the SHs and NBs with marked increases in mechanics observed with the use of excess LA. We note that the LA-NB chain growth side reaction is possible upon light exposure and cannot be excluded.

The activation of LA using two-photon NIR (λ = 730 nm) light was leveraged for high-resolution patterning of stiffness at the micrometer scale (Fig. 4E). To that end, spatial changes in stiffness were characterized through local variations in diffusivity, which also depend on changes in the cross-linking density, via fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP), as a proxy for stiffness. An increase in hydrogel modulus is associated with a decrease in the network mesh size and reduction in the diffusion coefficient of a tracer molecule [e.g., fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)–labeled PEG, 10 kDa] (40). UV (λ = 365 nm) light projection through a photomask confines the photochemical reaction to specified locations within CLEAR-printed hydrogels, as observed from the transfer of a line pattern through the depth of the sample and regional variations in diffusion (Fig. 4F). Slower diffusion in regions exposed to UV light, compared to faster diffusion in regions without light exposure, suggests successful patterned modulation of the hydrogel stiffness. This mesoscale 2.5D stiffness gradation can also be leveraged to introduce swelling-induced temporal responsiveness within 3D-printed hydrogels. The degree of bending of CLEAR-printed hydrogels was programmed from 1.9 to 1.5 cm−1(curvature) by simply changing the orientation of photomasks (i.e., parallel or perpendicular to the long axis) (Fig. 4G). To confirm that this shape morphing is due to local stiffness variations in thexyplane and not graded light penetration in thezdirection, printed hydrogels subjected to uniform UV irradiation showed limited bending (fig. S11). Last, stiffness variability was introduced within complicated 3D objects, including as macroporous lattices to control their buckling under compressive loading. As a proof of concept, the middle two rows of CLEAR-printed macroporous lattices were selectively stiffened via masked UV irradiation (Fig. 4H). When compared to a control lattice (not exposed to UV light), stiffened lattices exhibit differential buckling with a lower degree of deflection of the stiffened rows. Further analysis of the degree of deflection as a function of compressive strain reveals that the middle rows exhibit trends different than the nonstiffened rows, validating the notion that CLEAR processing enables photoresponsive stiffening in complex 3D-printed objects.

Photoinduced degradation of hydrogels affords control over network disassembly, making it a valuable tool for applications such as top-down guidance of cell migration (41), programmed material erosion (e.g., subtractive manufacturing) (42), patterning of mechanical properties (43), and triggered cargo release (7). Unlike hydrolysis or enzyme-dependent degradation, photocleavage offers user-directed, spatial control over the breakdown of cross-links without requiring external biochemical cues. Upon stimulation with UV (λ = 365 nm) or two-photon NIR (λ = 730 nm) light, oNB groups undergo irreversible cleavage, triggering the breakdown of an otherwise hydrolytically stable cross-link (27). When compared to photoablation, photodegradation requires lower light intensities and provides precise control over gel cross-linking density and, therefore, local stiffness. Here, we specifically design an oNB-NB cross-linker to take advantage of the molecular architecture of the macromer and the absorption efficiency of the oNB moiety to achieve selective photodegradation (Fig. 5A). Moreover, step-growth network topologies facilitate rapid degradation compared to chain-growth networks prepared from comparable macromolecular precursors (44). Of note, a linear oNB cross-linker is particularly beneficial because of its ability to undergo rapid reverse gelation upon UV irradiation compared to higher-functionality oNB cross-linkers (fig. S12). We next evaluated the kinetics of photocrosslinking and photodegradation for hydrogel formulations with varying chemical compositions (functionality and concentration). As anticipated, increasing macromer concentration (with fixed macromer functionality) results in hydrogels with higher storage moduli (G′). For a fixed macromer concentration, increasing the macromer functionality results in rapid cross-linking as demonstrated by a reduced time to gel point measured through in situ photorheology (fig. S13). However, when these same hydrogels are exposed to UV irradiation to induce degradation, hydrogels containing a higher macromer concentration or functionality require longer exposure times to reach reverse gelation because of the higher connectivity in the network (fig. S14). Also, higher concentrations of PEG-oNB-NB macromer lead to UV light attenuation, often limiting photodegradation to the surface of the hydrogel.

(A) Schematic representation of photoinitiator-free oNB photolysis upon light irradiation (hν, 365 nm) postprinting. (B) Compressive moduli (EC, kPa) of hydrogels fabricated with DLP alone, DLP followed by light flood cure, or CLEAR. Data are reported as the means ± SD;n≥ 5 hydrogels. ****P< 0.0001, one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. (C) Normalized storage moduli (G′) as a function of UV (365 nm) exposure time (t, min) with varying light intensity (I, mW cm−2) for hydrogels formed without (−) or with (+) the oNB cross-linker. (D) Transmitted light images demonstrating the photosoftening (aperiodic monotile patterns) of CLEAR-printed hydrogels formed without (−) or with (+) the oNB cross-linker. The dashed line indicates before and after two-photon patterning. Scale bars, 100 μm. (E) (i) Fluorescence images of microscale (two-photon, 730 nm, 100% laser power, one scan, 12.61-μs pixel dwell) and (ii) macroscale (photomasks with UV, 365 nm, 30 s, 100 mW cm−2irradiation) patterns by softening of CLEAR-printed hydrogels. (iii) Transmitted light images of sequential photosoftening and degradation of hydrogels. Scale bars, 500 μm, 5 mm, and 100 μm. (F) Fluorescence images of an array of circular discs (i) before and (ii) after customized photopatterning. Scale bars, 1 mm. (G) Photographs of CLEAR-printed hydrogels processed into a gyroid. Scale bars, 5 mm. (H) Fluorescence images of CLEAR-printed knotted lattice and time-lapse images (top: maximum intensity projection; bottom: 3D reconstruction) of photodegradation upon UV irradiation (365 nm, 25 mW cm−2). The total light exposure time during the entire duration of imaging was 10 min. Scale bars, 5 mm and 1 mm. h, hour.

Selecting a formulation for rapid gelation and optimal photodegradation, we leveraged the cross-linking of NB-PEG-oNB-NB (3.5 kDa) macromers with eight-arm PEG-SH (20 kDa, 1:1 NB-to-SH ratio) to print photolabile hydrogels. Resins comprising two-arm PEG-oNB-NB and eight-arm PEG-SH were 3D printed with DLP alone, with DLP followed by postcuring with conventional flood illumination, or with CLEAR (Fig. 5B). Hydrogels printed with CLEAR (~65 kPa) exhibit much higher moduli than those fabricated with DLP alone (~4.5 kPa) or DLP followed by postcure (~5.9 kPa). This marked difference (nearly 10-fold) in moduli between postcuring and CLEAR can be attributed to the photocrosslinking-photodegradation trade-off that results in the photolysis of the oNB group during postprocessing, as well as challenges related to optical penetration depths resulting in gradients in conversion and cross-linking density. Next, we characterized changes in the storage moduli of hydrogels upon exposure to UV (λ = 365 nm) light (Fig. 5C). As a control, hydrogels fabricated with nondegradable cross-linkers (two-arm PEG-NB) undergo minimal (<10%) degradation as observed from marginal changes in storage moduli over time upon UV irradiation with varying light intensity from 1 to 100 mW cm−2. In contrast, the incorporation of the oNB cross-linker (two-arm PEG-oNB-NB) led to marked decreases in storage moduli over time that were dependent on the UV light intensity, demonstrating tunable degradation. In all cases, exposure to UV light resulted in the rapid degradation of hydrogels as evidenced by a decrease in the storage modulus of the hydrogel over time. For instance, CLEAR-printed hydrogels softened to roughly 45% (1 mW cm−2) or 10% (100 mW cm−2) of the original moduli upon UV light exposure for 10 min (Fig. 5Cand fig. S7). Complete disassembly of the network was observed after sufficient photocleavage of the cross-links but required longer light exposure (~30 min), provided that the hydrogel thickness was within the light penetration depth at 365 nm (fig. S14).

In addition to 365-nm light, two-photon NIR (λ = 730 nm) light was used for patterned softening of CLEAR-printed hydrogels to generate complicated, auxetic structures (e.g., aperiodic monotile) (Fig. 5D). Similar to UV irradiation, oNB groups are selectively activated with two-photon NIR light, whereas hydrogels with nondegradable cross-linkers are stable, even when exposed to the same two-photon laser power settings. The degradation efficiency was tailored using different laser scans (number of times the laser scans the same line) to identify laser settings for photosoftening (fig. S15). While lower numbers of scans were suboptimal to induce changes in the network cross-linking density, increasing the number of scans not only prolonged the total processing time but also adversely affected the resolution because of overheating of the scanned volume. To demonstrate the ease of softening across length scales, we used two-photon NIR (λ = 730 nm) light to pattern high-resolution, micrometer-scale features and one-photon UV irradiation via photomasks to create mesoscale gradient patterns (Fig. 5E). The extent of photodegradation was directly related to the total light dose delivered by altering the laser power settings. To that end, we illustrate stepwise photodegradation to generate regions of variable stiffness, where a hexagonal pattern is first imprinted and then circular holes are eroded within the patterns at a later time point (Fig. 5E).

Light-based additive manufacturing provides many advantages such as the rapid fabrication of arbitrary geometries, including the high-throughput production of material arrays. As an example, we fabricated (on the order of seconds) an array of circular discs that can be customized with different user-defined patterns using two-photon irradiation (on the order of minutes) (Fig. 5F). Furthermore, we leveraged CLEAR to process photoresponsive hydrogels in complex geometries (e.g., gyroid and knotted lattice) (Fig. 5G). Upon 365-nm irradiation, these 3D-printed lattices undergo degradation as evidenced by swelling and disintegration over time, demonstrating the ability to dynamically manipulate large (millimeter to centimeter scale) and intricate geometries (Fig. 5H). It is important to note that mass loss primarily occurs through surface degradation because of limited light penetration depth, highlighting that CLEAR uniquely enables photopolymerization of optically dense materials at length scales that would otherwise be unattainable.

Beyond softening, photodegradation was used to erode regions from within 3D-printed hydrogel objects. For example, a hollow cube model was eroded within a CLEAR-printed hydrogel to demonstrate complex photodegradation in 3D with arbitrary shapes and fine features (Fig. 6A). Multiscale printing that combines additive and subtractive manufacturing is an emerging method, especially to fabricate microfluidic constructs that are centimeters in size with micrometer-scale channels (22,45). This resolution range is limited with DLP by the pixel resolution (in this case, 35 μm) and thez-layer slicing thickness, thereby currently restricting the channels to >200 μm and motivating the need for photodegradation. Using the optimized conditions, we first tested the resolution of photodegradation using a region of interest with decreasing size, from 50 to 1 μm (Fig. 6B). The smallest achievable channel was found to be roughly 1 μm (xy) and 10 μm (z) (fig. S16). To further assess complete degradation, the hydrogels were incubated in a solution of tracer (e.g., tetramethyl rhodamine isothiocyanate–labeled dextran, 0.5 MDa) and perfusion was confirmed by infiltration of the tracer within the ablated regions. Next, CLEAR printing of hydrogels (to create mesoscale microfluidic devices) was combined with two-photon–mediated degradation (to generate microscale channels) to fabricate multiscale perfusable branched capillary networks (Fig. 6C). The precise fabrication of highly complex models with physiologically relevant native-tissue dimensions opens avenues for on-chip biomedical applications. We further leveraged the spatiotemporal control of photodegradation to fabricate channels within cell-seeded hydrogels on demand. As an example, we CLEAR printed hydrogel templates with circular voids separated by ~350 μm and seeded them with human mesenchymal stromal cells (hMSCs). Cells adhered to the surface but were unable to migrate within the hydrogel because of the lack of cell-degradable cross-links, confining the cells within circular voids (fig. S17). An 85-μm channel was then photodegraded via two-photon NIR (λ = 730 nm) light, which facilitated collective migration of cells between the circular voids over time (Fig. 6D). This approach may prove useful to study cell migration under confinement, wherein the size and location of the channel can be altered in a user-defined manner. In addition, our softening approach is compatible with live cells, as evidenced from the high cell viability on the CLEAR-printed hydrogels before and after the two-photon lithography of geometric patterns (e.g., aperiodic monotile) (fig. S18).

(A) Fluorescence images at various heights and 3D reconstruction (gray, inverted color) of photodegraded hollow cube. Scale bars, 200 μm. (B) Region of interest and perfusion of a fluorescent tracer (dextran, 0.5 MDa, magenta) into channels with a stepwise decrease in size. Scale bars, 100 μm. (C) Fluorescence images of a macroscale device and 3D rendering of a perfused microscale capillary network generated via two-photon degradation. Scale bar, 500 μm. (D) Photodegradation of channels within devices seeded with cells. Fluorescence images of cell migration (day 7) in hydrogels (gray) without (nohν) and with (hν, 2P) channels. Scale bars, 500 μm. (E) Diffusion coefficient (D, μm2s−1) of the tracer (PEG, 10 kDa) within the hydrogel patterned without (−) or with (+) UV (365 nm);n= 3 regions. One-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post hoc test. (F) Normalized storage moduli (G′) as a function of UV (365 nm, 100 mW cm−2) exposure time (t, min) for hydrogels formed with varying ratios of oNB and Nor cross-linkers. (G) Patterned softening of hydrogels (oNB:Nor ratio of 4:1). Fluorescence images and quantification of cell aspect ratio on regions without (−) or with (+) UV (365 nm, 45 s, 100 mW cm−2) exposure. Scale bars, 1 mm and 500 μm. (H) Patterned photodegradation (365 nm, 60 s, 500 mW cm−2) of hydrogels (without GCGYGRGDSPG) to create microscale voids. Fluorescence images of hydrogel with holes (gray) and spheroids at day 3 after seeding. Quantification of spheroid diameter over time (days 1 and 3). Scale bars, 5 mm and 100 μm. F-actin, magenta; nuclei, cyan. CLEAR-printed hydrogels were used for all studies. All data are reported as the means ± SD. *P< 0.05; **P< 0.01; ****P< 0.0001; unpaired Student’sttest, unless noted otherwise.

Beyond two-photon patterning, CLEAR-printed hydrogels can be softened via UV (λ = 365 nm) irradiation through photomasks with spatial variations in stiffness characterized through changes in tracer diffusion (i.e., FITC-labeled PEG, 10 kDa). Faster diffusion in regions exposed to UV light compared to significantly slower diffusion in regions without light exposure revealed patterned cross-linking variations within the same hydrogel (Fig. 6E). An increase in the diffusion coefficient in the regions exposed to UV light was associated with an increase in the mesh size as a result of photolysis of cross-links and a subsequent decrease in moduli of the hydrogels. Furthermore, we illustrated the concept of selective softening of hydrogels prepared with different ratios of photodegradable (oNB) and nondegradable (Nor) cross-linkers and investigate the changes in their moduli upon UV light illumination postprinting (Fig. 6F). Light exposure softens the hydrogels to a defined modulus predetermined by the relative ratio of degradable and nondegradable cross-links. Critically, this platform allows the hydrogel mechanical properties to be fine-tuned after fabrication. Dynamic manipulation of stiffness in a well-defined and spatiotemporally controlled manner also offers a powerful tool for studying cell-material interactions as stiffness plays a critical role in cell behavior (i.e., adhesion and spreading) (11). To demonstrate the applicability of our phototunable hydrogels for controlling cell-material interactions, cells were seeded on patterned composite hydrogels containing oNB and nondegradable cross-linkers (4:1 molar ratio) (Fig. 6G). After 24 hours on regions exposed to UV light, cells remain rounded (low cell aspect ratio), whereas cells become more elongated with higher spread area (high cell aspect ratio) on regions without light exposure. This provides a proof-of-concept validation of the ability to selectively soften regions on a CLEAR-printed hydrogel, as evidenced from the differential cell response. In addition to the planar surface used here, more sophisticated and nonmoldable geometries can easily be printed with this technique. Moreover, spatiotemporal softening or cleavage of peptide ligands can be used to prepare more complex 3D-printed geometries in the future to provide selective or combined structural, mechanical, or biochemical cues. Higher doses of UV light (relative to selective softening) facilitate complete disintegration of hydrogels, leaving behind voids within 3D-printed photodegradable hydrogels that are spatially exposed to light (Fig. 6H). In the absence of cell-adhesive ligands (i.e., RGD peptide), cells seeded within these voids self-assemble to form spheroids such that the diameter of cell aggregates increases over time from 175 μm (at day 1) to nearly 266 μm (at day 3). Beyond the fabrication of voids to form cell spheroids, complete degradation of the hydrogel can be leveraged to selectively detach cells. As an example, an hMSC monolayer seeded on the surface of a complex CLEAR-printed hydrogel cohesively dissociated from the underlying substrate upon photodegradation (fig. S19).

Our approach draws inspiration from biological systems, which undergo dynamic changes in biochemical composition, mechanical properties, and topography over time. By integrating photoresponsive functionalities into 3D-printed hydrogels, the present study demonstrates the potential to create highly tunable, cytocompatible hydrogels with controlled structures (via DLP printing) that enable precise spatiotemporal programming of physicochemical properties (via light), with relevance for applications ranging from tissue engineering and adaptive biomaterials to controlled release and soft robotics (46). Commonly reported photoresponsive hydrogels use nonphotochemical routes for hydrogel fabrication, making them incompatible with vat photopolymerization methods (8,47). This motivated our use of dark polymerizations in combination with vat photopolymerization (via CLEAR printing) to protect photoresponsive groups while allowing for the high-throughput, multiscale fabrication of complex hydrogel architectures. Furthermore, numerous emerging technologies for both light-based printing and patterning, including layerless printing methods (e.g., tomographic projection) (48,49) and grayscale lithography (50), can be easily synergized with the CLEAR processing of photoresponsive hydrogels, furthering the utility of this approach.

Recently, orthogonal wavelengths have been used for single-vat, multicolor printing (51–54). While these methods are useful for the fabrication of multimaterial objects with gradients in mechanical properties, they are limited with respect to the 3D printing of hydrogels that can be programmed at a later time, as presented in this study. In addition, our incorporation of latent photoinitiator-free chemistries eliminates the need to swell hydrogels with photoinitiators or other reactive macromers, simplifying the overall processing steps and minimizing unwanted side reactions, concerns with the cytocompatibility of small molecules, and diffusion-related heterogeneity within samples. Specifically, our approach allows fully cured 3D-printed hydrogels to remain in a stable, unreactive state until user-directed activation, enabling precise, on-demand modifications without the constraints of preloading reagents. By decoupling hydrogel synthesis from functionalization and mechanical tuning, photoinitiator-free systems also improve reproducibility, streamline fabrication workflows, and offer greater flexibility for applications requiring long-term material storage, complex multistep processing, or compatibility with biological environments.

In addition to the multiple complementary methods to construct and pattern hydrogels with light shown in this study, CLEAR processing is a flexible platform to incorporate photoresponsive moieties beyond those used in the present study. Incorporating additional functional groups, including light-driven molecular motors and isomerizable units, could be used to prepare printed structures capable of reversible actuation. Although these chemistries are often capable of reversion to their initial state using thermal energy, chemical triggers, or secondary light exposure, CLEAR processing (i.e., dark polymerization) limits challenges associated with the optical density of these chromophores, which preclude conventional postprocessing by flood illumination. Other postprocessing approaches, such as the introduction of longer-wavelength or thermal initiators, may offer semiorthogonal routes to reach high conversions in printed networks. However, these steps involve either re-equilibrating the printed object in its green state (which may result in undesired mass loss from or deformation of the loosely cross-linked network) or exposure to high temperatures that are fundamentally challenging with water-swollen hydrogels. While the approach demonstrated in the present study is compatible with alternative cross-linking chemistries (e.g., red-shifted systems responsive to longer wavelengths of light), we sought to demonstrate CLEAR processing for relatively common chemistries (i.e., step-growth PEG hydrogels) using commercially available printers (i.e., DLP with a 405-nm light source).

The CLEAR processing of photoresponsive hydrogels is not without limitations. Although there are kinetically driven differences between light and dark polymerizations, the latter proceeds continuously under ambient conditions, which limits the pot life of CLEAR resins once the redox initiators are added. This limited pot life can be partially addressed by tuning the initiator concentration to extend working times while maintaining efficient postprinting curing. Furthermore, the redox initiators used in the present study are not directly compatible with encapsulated cells, but this could be mitigated with the implementation of redox initiators with improved cytocompatibility (55). Further improvements in our system could be made by expanding on the chemical versatility. For example, the reactive nitrile imine intermediate generated by TZ photolysis is short-lived and can be quenched by nucleophiles (56), but a suite of other initiator-free light-driven reactions could be used in its place for selective labeling, such as photocaged SHs or dienes, which also offer the benefit of forming stable intermediates capable of conjugation long after light exposure. Similarly, LA has overlapping reactivity with both SHs and alkenes, but alternative macromer designs could allow for the incorporation of more orthogonal photostiffening functionalities (e.g., dimerizable molecules including anthracenes, cinnamates, coumarins, chalcones, or styrylpyrenes) (57). Last, oNB could be replaced by or combined with other photocleavable units (e.g., bimane and coumarin) or photosensitizers to improve the efficiency of photocleavage or confer additional wavelength-selective softening responses (58–61). In addition, the selected photoresponsive chemistries must not introduce competing reactions that interfere with photocrosslinking or dark polymerization.

This study establishes a generalizable, scalable method to incorporate and preserve photoresponsive groups within photopolymerizable hydrogels. By decoupling curing from photoresponsiveness through the CLEAR platform, this approach overcomes challenges in the postprocessing of programmable hydrogels. As a proof of concept, the complexity of 3D-printed hydrogels is enhanced via photoinitiator-free functionalization, stiffening, and softening. Independent control over both the physical and chemical properties of hydrogels in 3D space and time establishes a programmable platform for a wide variety of applications in tissue regeneration, disease models, and the study of soft matter. Notably, this approach can universally be applied to materials that are both photopolymerizable and have high absorbance, allowing for the construction of arbitrary and nonmoldable geometries in a manner where layer-by-layer manufacturing limits local attenuation during printing and dark curing facilitates optimal material properties without requiring additional processing steps. Future efforts will expand on this foundation by integrating advanced chemistries, improving cytocompatibility of the initial resin, and implementing cutting-edge photochemical manufacturing technologies. In summary, this work introduces a simple yet transformative tool for engineering complex soft materials with user-directed and spatiotemporal dynamic responses.

whereris the stoichiometry ratio of the reactants (i.e., NBs to SHs), andfNBandfSHare the functionality of the PEG NB and SH macromers, respectively.

whereAis the absorbance of the macromer formulation at a given wavelength as measured on a NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher Scientific), andbis the path length through which the absorbance was measured.

Eight-arm PEG-NB (5 wt %, MW = 20 kDa) and eight-arm PEG-SH (5 wt %, MW = 20 kDa), lithium phenyl-2,4,6-trimethylbenzoylphosphinate (LAP), tartrazine, and deionized water were used as macromers, photoinitiator, photoabsorber, and solvent, respectively, to form the DLP resin. The CLEAR resin was formulated with the same components as above, with the addition of redox initiators APS (0.05 wt %, Sigma-Aldrich) and TEMED (0.1 wt %, Sigma-Aldrich) added right before printing, as described previously (28). 3D printing was conducted on a Lumen Alpha DLP printer (35-μmxypixel resolution, Volumetric Inc., US), as described previously (64,65). Briefly, the resin was dispensed into the poly(dimethyl siloxane) vat, and the layers were cross-linked sequentially with 405-nm light exposure (20 mW cm−2, 100-μm layer thickness). In the case of CLEAR, 3D-printed hydrogels were removed from the build platform, rinsed or wiped to remove excess resin from the printed object, and stored in a nitrogen-purged sealed container for 1 hour at room temperature (21° to 25°C) to allow the conversion of any unreacted macromer (dark polymerization). In the case of traditional postprocessing, DLP-printed hydrogels were subjected to light flood cure (5 min, 20 mW cm−2, Exfo Omnicure lamp). To enable printing of tall structures (>4-mmzheight), the redox initiator concentrations were adjusted [APS (0.03 wt %) and TEMED (0.06 wt %)] to prevent spontaneous gelation of the resin in the vat. Tartrazine concentrations were adjusted for the printing of 3D objects with negative features to avoid inadvertent overpolymerization of voids in thezandxydirections. For two-photon patterning, hydrogels were 3D printed on thiolated glass coverslips [22-mm diameter, treated with (3-mercaptopropyl)trimethoxysilane, Millipore Sigma] to prevent floating or delamination of gels during postfunctionalization.

For photofunctionalization studies, the resin was composed of four-arm PEG-TZ-NB (2 wt %, MW = 20 kDa), eight-arm PEG-NB (5 wt %, MW = 20 kDa), eight-arm PEG-SH (5 wt %, MW = 20 kDa), LAP (0.2 wt %), and tartrazine (1 mM) and cross-linked on the DLP with 2.5-s light exposure per layer. For photostiffening studies, the resin was composed of eight-arm PEG-LA (10 wt %, MW = 20 kDa), eight-arm PEG-NB (5 wt %, MW = 20 kDa), eight-arm PEG-SH (5 wt %, MW = 20 kDa), LAP (0.2 wt %), and tartrazine (0.5 mM) and cross-linked with 405-nm light exposure (5 s per layer) on the DLP. For photosoftening studies, the resin was composed of NB-PEG-oNB-NB (3 wt %, MW = 3.5 kDa), eight-arm PEG-SH (4.1 wt %, MW = 20 kDa), LAP (1 wt %), and tartrazine (0.25 mM) and crosslinked with 405-nm light exposure (7.5 s per layer) on the DLP.

Custom vinyl photomasks were prepared using a Cricut cutter for all mesoscale photopatterning. Briefly, 3D-printed hydrogels (DLP, postcured, or CLEAR) were swollen to equilibrium and subjected to masked UV irradiation (λ = 365 nm, Exfo Omnicure lamp) with exposure conditions optimized for photofunctionalization (5 min, 20 mW cm−2), photostiffening (10 min, 20 mW cm−2), photosoftening (30 s, 100 mW cm−2), and complete photodegradation (60 s, 500 mW cm−2). The samples were kept hydrated during patterning and were washed several times with deionized water before imaging. For photofunctionalization of hydrogels with cell-adhesive ligands, CLEAR-printed hydrogels were immersed in acrylated-PEG-RGD (2 mM, Biopharma PEG) for 90 min on a shaker to facilitate the diffusion of RGD into the hydrogel, followed by UV irradiation (5 min, 20 mW cm−2) through a photomask with evenly spaced line patterns. For patterned softening of hydrogels to direct cell morphology, CLEAR-printed composite hydrogels containing a 4:1 molar ratio of degradable (NB-PEG-oNB-NB) to nondegradable (two-arm PEG-NB) cross-linker were subjected to UV irradiation (45 s, 100 mW cm−2) through a photomask with evenly spaced line patterns.

For all microscale patterns, two-photon patterning was performed on hydrated samples using a Zeiss LSM 710 confocal microscope equipped with a multiphoton laser (Chameleon Ti:Sapphire, Coherent, nominal laser power of 3 W). Geometric patterns as input for two-photon lithography were generated using custom .ovl files prepared in MATLAB, as described previously (66). All two-photon patterning was performed using a 10× water immersion objective with a pixel size of 0.42 μm, a laser power of 100%, and a wavelength of 730 nm, unless otherwise noted. The pixel dwell time was optimized for each individual hydrogel formulation, and the total per-layer patterning time (i.e., the time required to pattern a single plane) was typically on the order of tens of seconds. Hydrogel formulations for photofunctionalization and photostiffening were patterned with a pixel dwell of 100.85 μs in a single plane, while photosoftening gels were patterned with a pixel dwell of 12.61 μs inz-stacks of at least 10 μm with a 2-μm step size.

Photorheological measurements were recorded on a Discovery HR20 rheometer (TA Instruments) (equipped with 20-mm-diameter parallel plate geometry, 100-μm gap, 25°C, 10 rad s−1, 0.1% strain) to obtain the gelation profile through oscillatory shear time sweeps (time to gel point defined as the crossover between storage modulusG′ and loss modulusG″) in the presence of visible light (20 mW cm−2, Exfo Omnicure lamp with 400- to 500-nm bandpass filter). Rheological characterization of photofunctionalization, photostiffening, or photosoftening was performed on fully swollen 3D-printed hydrogels using sand-blasted parallel plate geometry (diameter, 8 mm) via oscillatory measurements (10 rad s−1, 0.1% strain) upon UV irradiation (20 mW cm−2, Exfo Omnicure lamp with 365-nm bandpass filter) over time. Hydrogels were biopsy punched into 8-mm discs, secured with an axial force (~0.15 N), and circumferentially covered with mineral oil to prevent drying during the rheological tests. In addition to rheology, unconfined compression testing (Q800 DMA, TA Instruments; force ramp, 0.5 N min−1) was performed on 3D-printed hydrogels. Briefly, hydrogels of varying macromer formulations were 3D printed (as described earlier) into cylindrical discs (diameter, 5 mm; height, 1 mm) and swollen to equilibrium. Compressive moduli were determined from the linear elastic region (10 to 20% strain) of the stress-strain curves.

CAD models for solid shapes or complex geometries used in the study were either designed in Fusion 360 (Autodesk, US) or downloaded from online repositories (NIH 3D print exchange and MakerBot Thingiverse). Printed hydrogels were soaked in tartrazine (20 mM, for photographs) to enhance color contrast with the background. To enable visualization through fluorescence microscopy, hydrogels were functionalized with thiolated FITC or rhodamine-labeled peptide (GCDDD-fluorophore, 100 μM, Genscript). For visualization of tracer perfusion within eroded channels, printed hydrogels were immersed in a solution of rhodamine B isothiocyanate–labeled dextran (0.5 wt %, MW = 0.5 MDa) on a shaker for 24 hours to enable infiltration of dye into the channel.z-Stack fluorescence images were acquired on a confocal microscope (Nikon Eclipse Ti2 with AXR scanner) using a 2×, 10×, or 20× objective lens.z-Intensity corrections were performed during image acquisition (when necessary). Images were analyzed using ImageJ (NIH), and brightness/contrast was linearly adjusted across the entire image. 3D reconstructions of acquiredz-stack images (e.g., degraded channels or hollow cube) were performed using NIS-Elements AR Software. For the enhancement of resolution, photographs were upscaled using an online tool.

whereτD≡w2D;wis the radius of the bleach area, andDis the diffusion coefficient.INindicates modified Bessel functions of the first kind, andmis a free parameter to account for the steady-state offset. Normalized recovery data were fit using the lsqnonlin function in MATLAB.

Macroporous lattices comprising six rows by six columns were CLEAR printed using the resin formulation containing eight-arm PEG-LA, as described earlier. Postprinting, the midsubstance (middle two rows) of the water-swollen lattices was either exposed to UV light (5 min, 20 mW cm−2) to induce stiffening (referred to as midstiffened) or left without UV exposure to avoid stiffening (referred to as nonstiffened). Videos of compressive loading (0.05 mm s−1, RSA-G2, TA Instruments) of nonstiffened and midstiffened lattices were acquired, and the nodes of each cell were manually tracked using the MTrackJ plug-in in ImageJ. These data were analyzed using a custom Python script, which measured the internal angles of each four-sided polygon representing the 36 cells comprising the lattice. The absolute value of the difference of each angle from 90° was tabulated and summed per cell; a perfectly square cell would have a value of 0°, while a fully collapsed cell would have a value of 360°. Cells were color coded according to these deflection values, and deflection values per row were calculated by averaging across each set of six cells.

hMSCs (PromoCell) were used for all in vitro experiments. The culture media were composed of high-glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (Gibco) and 1% (v/v) penicillin-streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 3D-printed hydrogels were fabricated with or without thiolated cell-adhesive peptide (GCGYGRGDSPG, Genscript, 2 mM). Postfabrication, hydrogels were sterilized with 70% ethanol for 10 min, followed by rinsing with sterile Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline, and incubated in media. Cells (density: 7500 cells cm−2) were seeded on 3D-printed hydrogels for experiments to evaluate the morphology, whereas a higher cell density (50,000 cells cm−2) was used for studies involving the formation of cell aggregates or spheroids. To assess viability, cells were incubated with calcein AM (2 mM), ethidium homodimer-1 (4 mM), and Hoechst 33342 (1:1000) at 37°C for 30 min following the manufacturer’s protocol (Live/Dead Cytotoxicity Kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cell viability was assessed qualitatively as the relative number of live cells compared to dead cells. To visualize cell morphology, samples were fixed at relevant time points with 10% (v/v) neutral buffered formalin, permeabilized with 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100 for 20 min, and blocked with 5% (w/v) bovine serum albumin for 1 hour. After blocking, samples were stained with Alexa Fluor 647 or rhodamine-conjugated phalloidin (1:500; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Hoechst 33342 (1:500; Thermo Fisher Scientific) to visualize F-actin and the nucleus, respectively.

All data are reported as the means ± SD withn≥ 3. All statistics were conducted using Prism 10 (GraphPad Inc., US). Comparisons between two experimental groups were performed using unpaired Student’sttests (α = 0.05, significance determined atP< 0.05), and comparisons between more than two groups were performed using a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with post hoc Tukey’s multiple comparisons test.

We acknowledge A. Joseph for assistance with 3D renderings and A. Caldwell and T. Brown for the synthesis of tetrafunctional PEG-oNB-NB. We are grateful to T. Kolibaba and J. Killgore for assistance with the measurement of spectral properties and advice, as well as M. Davidson, N. Di Caprio, and A. Favela for helpful discussions.

Funding:This work was supported by the following: National Institutes of Health (R01AR077362 and R01HL160616 to J.A.B., R01DE016523 and R01DK120921 to K.S.A., T32AR080630 to H.M.Z., and T32EB034215 to A.M.), National Science Foundation through the Center for Engineering Mechanobiology STC (CMMI: 15-48571), Schmidt Science Fellowship in partnership with the Rhodes Trust and Schmidt Sciences (to H.M.Z.), and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation, Project 551186431, to M.G.-S.).

Competing interests:A.P.D. and J.A.B. are inventors on a provisional patent application (63/537,268) submitted by the University of Colorado and the University of Pennsylvania that covers the 3D printing of gels with combined light and dark polymerization. The other authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Data and materials availability:All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.