To describe the development and the methodology for validation of a new scale for postpartum anxiety for mothers of preterm infants, and a ‘Velcro’ sub‐scale of the Postpartum Specific Anxiety Scale for use with mothers who have had infants admitted to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit.

We undertook three forms of iterative psychometric development: (1) Patient and public involvement and engagement discussions with key clinical, academic, and lay stakeholders to understand the needs for modifying the Postpartum Specific Anxiety Scale—Research Short Form for use in this population; (2) Expert panel ratings with clinical and academic stakeholders; and (3) Cognitive interviews with mothers to ensure items were relevant, comprehensive, and understandable. Planned studies must ensure the psychometric properties of these two new scales.

Patient and Public Involvement and Engagement discussions identified clear avenues for modification of the PSAS‐RSF, but the need for an additional NICU‐specific scale was clear. Experts rated the new items highly on their relevance. Cognitive interviews further ensured that items were well understood and that meaning was being interpreted in the intended manner. Only minor changes to the scales were implemented after each change.

This is the first study to describe the process of developing and the subsequent proposed validation of postpartum‐specific tools for use with mothers of preterm infants and those with infants in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit. Clear avenues have been identified for the validation and implementation of both measures.

Effective and accurate measurement of perinatal mental health conditions are vital to enable appropriate intervention. Estimates suggest up to 40% of women go on to develop postpartum anxiety (Field2017), with lifetime costs reaching over £30,000 per woman, and the majority of this impact is on children (Bauer et al.2016). Much of the research exploring anxiety in the period after birth has been limited by the use of generalised measures originally validated for use in general adult populations, such as the State Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI; Spielberger1983) and GAD‐7 (Spitzer et al.2006), which have been extrapolated for use in a perinatal population. This is problematic for several reasons. Firstly, they were not validated for use during the postpartum period which means scores may be inaccurate. For example, the STAI features items such as‘I feel rested’,but sleeping difficulties are common in the context of new parenthood (Baglioni et al.2022), irrespective of anxiety. Additionally, they do not address domains specific to a childbearing context, such as concerns over infant care, feeding, and the adjustment to motherhood, which are known to be significant sources of anxiety (Christl et al.2013; Fallon et al.2016; Hoff et al.2019). This may lead to an underestimation of anxiety diagnoses in this population.

In response to the lack of appropriate measurement tools, the Postpartum Specific Anxiety Scale (PSAS; Fallon et al.2016) was created. The 51‐item tool measures concern about attachment to the infant, routine care, health and accidental harm to the infant, and changes to relationships and finances after the baby's birth. Since then, a 12‐item Research Short Form for use during crises (PSAS‐RSF‐C; Silverio et al.2021), and a 16‐item Research Short Form (PSAS‐RSF; Davies et al.2021) have been developed and validated. The PSAS and its derivatives have well‐evidenced validity and reliability, and have shown to be better predictors of maternal and infant outcomes (Fallon et al.2018) compared to generalised measures.

Further global work has been conducted to produce validated translations of the PSAS and its derivatives in French (PSAS‐FR; Infante‐Gil et al.2022), Italian (PSAS‐IT; Ionio et al.2023), Spanish (PSAS‐ES; Costas‐Ramón et al.2023), Brazilian Portuguese (PSAS‐BR; Souza Torres de Araújo et al.2024), Persian (PSAS‐IR; Hasanzadeh et al.2021; PSAS‐IR‐RSF; Mashayekh‐Amiri, Jafarabadi, Davies, et al.2023; PSAS‐IR‐RSF‐C, Mashayekh‐Amiri, Jafarabadi, Montazeri, et al.2023), Chinese (PSAS‐CN; Xu et al.2021), and Jordanian Arabic (PSAS‐JO‐RSF; Hijazi et al.2024). Ongoing translations are currently being undertaken in Germany, The Netherlands, Portugal, Greece, Slovakia, Croatia, Sweden, Myanmar, India, Egypt, Czechia, and Türkiye, as well as being used in approximately 40 countries as part of research and clinical practice.

Preterm birth and the experiences of mothers with babies in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit [NICU] remains under‐researched. Estimates suggest approximately 8% of infants in the UK are born prematurely (< 37 weeks' gestation; ONS2024). Whilst in some cases the birth is medically indicated because it is either safer for the baby or the mother, in most cases preterm birth is spontaneous in women with no known risk factors (Vogel et al.2018). This creates a problem for clinicians because despite increasing research into the correlates and predictors of preterm birth (Carter et al.2020; Reicher et al.2021), the causes are relatively unknown (Goldenberg et al.2008), whilst rates are not decreasing (Ohuma et al.2023). As such, research into the psychological impact of either risk of or actual preterm birth is particularly important (Ionio et al.2016; Worrall et al.2024), given the long‐term adverse consequences to both mother and infant (Luu et al.2017).

Women who have a preterm birth or who babies are admitted to NICU are therefore a population who require specific attention. It is well‐established that mothers of preterm infants experience anxiety to a higher degree comparative to mothers of term infants (Worrall et al.2023). This may be in part exacerbated if the infant spends a period of time in the NICU (Garg et al.2023). The NICU itself acts as a unique psychological stressor (Miles et al.1993; Van Wyk et al.2024), the effect of which can persist well into the first year after birth (Lean et al.2018). In light of the increasing recognition of the value of postpartum‐specific tools (Meades and Ayers2011), the PSAS (Fallon et al.2016) and the PSAS‐RSF (Davies et al.2021) have to date been used in two studies exploring anxiety in mothers of preterm infants (Worrall et al.2023,2024b). However, recent research has demonstrated that mothers of premature infants respond differently to items on the PSAS‐RSF than mothers of term infants (Worrall et al.2024a), and so it requires modification for use in this specific population. Moreover, none of the items reflect the unique circumstances surrounding preterm birth, which may include infant NICU admission.

To adapt the existing PSAS‐RSF for use in mothers of premature infants (PSAS‐PTB).

To develop a scale for use with mothers of infants in the NICU (PSAS‐NICU) which could be used as a standalone scale for measuring anxiety and also as a ‘Velcro’ sub‐scale to be used in conjunction with any or all of the PSAS, PSAS‐RSF, PSAS‐RSF‐C, or the PSAS‐PTB.

To outline the process for validation of both the PSAS‐PTB and the PSAS‐NICU.

The development of the PSAS‐PTB and PSAS‐NICU comprises of four main study stages, three of which concern the development of the scales (Stage 1: Patient and Public Involvement and Engagement Focus Groups; Stage 2: Expert Panel Survey; Stage 3: Cognitive Interviews), and one of which concerns the scale validation (Stage 4: Large‐scale On‐line Survey). Each of these will be discussed in turn, as they comprise of different analyses and methodologies. The development of the scales was iterative, meaning that each stage of the development informed the next stage of research.

The research team comprises multidisciplinary researchers, who for this specific development and validation, represent disciplinary backgrounds in psychology [S.W., P.C., S.A.S., V.F.], psychometric statistics [P.C.], implementation sciences [S.A.S., A.K.], obstetrics [A.K.], and women's health researchers [S.A.S., S.W., V.F., A.K.]. This collaborative approach to study design, data collection, and data analysis allowed for a holistic perspective to the scale development and cross‐disciplinary insight meant the final scale was comprehensive and grounded in the psychological and clinical evidence‐base.

The initial stage of development comprised three Patient and Public Involvement and Engagement [PPIE] focus group discussions with stakeholders. At this stage, the research only intended to adapt the existing PSAS‐RSF (Davies et al.2021) for use in mothers of premature infants to devise the PSAS‐PTB.

Participants for this stage were required to be over the age of 18 with a good understanding of the English language. These included professionals working in neonatal care or with mothers or premature infants, academics researching in the field, and parents of premature infants now aged between 0 and 12 months corrected age. Participants were recruited via volunteer sampling through posts on social media and/or via e‐mail through pre‐existing relationships within the research team. A total of 14 participants participated in one of three focus groups. They consisted of academics (n= 4), neonatal nurses (n= 2), mothers of premature infants (n= 3)—of which one mother had given birth to twins, clinical psychologists (n= 2), obstetricians (n= 2), a midwife (n= 1), and an obstetric physician (n= 1); however, some participants held dual roles. Two parents were removed as participants from the final analysis as they did not provide information beyond a brief background introduction about themselves, thus yielding a final sample of twelve participants.

Focus group discussions were held on‐line. Participants were shown a video detailing the work of the PSAS Global Collaborative to date (PSAS Global Collaborative2023). Participants were then shown the PSAS‐RSF items by sub‐scale, and were asked to comment on the relevance and appropriateness of items for the specific population of mothers of premature infants. They were also invited to comment on the measure as a whole, including the length and scoring of the measure. Participants received a £20 voucher as reimbursement for their time. The focus groups lasted between 47 and 57 min (MTime= 53 min). One of the research team led the focus groups [S.W.], which were facilitated by another member of the team [S.A.S.]. The focus groups were recorded and transcribed verbatim by one researcher [S.W.].

We analysed the transcripts of the focus group discussions using a summative content analysis (Hsieh and Shannon2005), whereby data reflected the PSAS‐RSF sub‐scales and were discussed according to relevance of each item's ability to measure anxiety for mothers of premature infants, and the potential for the addition of new items. Changes to the potential items were based on the volume of responses. See Table1for a summary of the quotations.

Whilst participants vocalised the value of a perinatal‐specific tool, clear avenues for the adaptation of the PSAS‐RSF were prevalent. Most notably, stakeholders agreed one overarching preterm‐specific tool would not capture the unique experience of having an infant admitted to the NICU in the absence of prematurity, and that restricting the scope of the psychometric development to just one preterm‐specific tool would limit the scope, usability, and implementation of any such tool. It was therefore agreed with the wider research team that the remaining stages of development would focus on both a preterm‐specific (PSAS‐PTB) and a NICU‐specific (PSAS‐NICU) adaptation of the PSAS. Items for the initial versions of the PSAS‐PTB and the PSAS‐NICU were based upon the analysis of the PPIE groups, review of the literature base, and consultation with the wider research team [S.W., V.F., P.C., A.K., S.A.S.]; and these were then implemented into Study Stage 2.

Following the PPIE focus group discussions and the initial development of items for both scales, these items were subsequently rated by a group of experts in the field via an on‐line survey to establish the comprehensibility and understanding of the scales as a whole and the individual items.

Participants were again required to be over the age of 18 with a good understanding of the English language and had to have expertise in either psychometric scale development, perinatal psychology, maternal anxiety, or preterm birth. Participants were recruited via e‐mails from the research team to their extended collaborative networks and also to those who took part in the PPIE focus groups, as part of consented re‐contact. A total of 16 participants participated in the on‐line survey. They consisted of psychologists (n= 6), clinical psychologists (n= 2), psychiatrists (n= 1), midwives (n= 3), nurses (n= 1), obstetricians (n= 1), and researchers (n= 7); however, some participants held dual roles.

Participants responded to the survey which was hosted on Qualtrics and were presented with the PSAS‐RSF and the proposed PSAS‐PTB and PSAS‐NICU items. Participants were presented with each item in‐turn and were asked to rate the relevance of the item in measuring postpartum anxiety in mothers of premature infants on a scale from 1 to 4 (1 = Not at all relevant, 2 = Somewhat relevant, 3 = Quite relevant, 4 = Highly relevant), before being invited to provide any additional feedback in relation to the items. For each scale, they were asked to identify which items they would definitely retain, definitely remove, or modify (with reasons for modification), before being asked to suggest any additional items (if any). Finally, they were also asked general questions about the scales including ideal length, consideration of functioning as well as frequency of anxiety, time periods in which to use such a tool, and scoring of the scales. The survey took approximately 15 min to complete.

Quantitative data were analysed descriptively. Qualitative data via open textboxes were brief, functional, and informative and so were not subjected to a specific analytical methodology. Decisions on retention, removal, and modification of items as suggested by the expert panel, were then discussed with the research team [S.W., P.C., A.K., S.A.S., V.F.].

Generally, proposed items for the PSAS‐PTB and PSAS‐NICU were rated highly in terms of their relevance, and comments on the items were positive. Relevance of items across the proposed PSAS‐PTB and PSAS‐NICU can be found in Tables2and3, respectively; whilst details of which items were identified for retention, removal, or modification, with associated comments can be found in Supporting InformationS1: Tables 1–2. As it was intended that the PSAS‐NICU was to be used as both a standalone scale and as an additional ‘Velcro’ to the other derivatives of the PSAS, it was important that items did not overlap with those already addressed in the PSAS‐PTB. Therefore, items on both the proposed PSAS‐PTB and PSAS‐NICU were scrutinized by the research team [S.W., S.A.S., V.F., A.K., P.C.] and items were moved between the two scales in accordance with where they were most appropriate and pertinent. Additionally, for the PSAS‐NICU, there was a need to ensure the items could be asked both whilst on the NICU and when infants had been discharged from the NICU. As such,‘When my baby was in NICU, I am/have felt…’was added before the items on the PSAS‐NICU only.

PSAS‐PTB relevance for use in mothers of premature infants (rated from 1 = not at all relevant, 4 = highly relevant), with comments (N= 16).

PSAS‐NICU relevance for use in mothers with infants admitted to NICU (rated from 1 = not at all relevant, 4 = highly relevant), with comments (N= 16).

Participants also provided general comments including ideal length, consideration of functioning as well as frequency of anxiety, time periods in which to use such a tool, and scoring of the scales for both the PSAS generally (Supporting InformationS1: Table 3). Whilst some items on the PSAS‐RSF were rated highly for relevance and were commented upon with respect to potential items to include (see Supporting InformationS1: Tables 4 and 5) only the proposed new items for the PSAS‐PTB and PSAS‐NICU were rated in Study Stage 3—Cognitive Interviews.

Following the results of the expert panel survey, the final stage of development consisted of cognitive interviews, which is a qualitative research approach which aims to assess and improve the validity of surveys (Scott et al.2021). Cognitive interviews enable the researcher to understand how participants are interpreting the meaning of questions, including understanding of terminology, errors in the wording of questions, or potential issues with response options.

Both newly proposed scales were subjected to cognitive interviews with mothers of preterm infants (n= 1), mothers whose infants had been admitted to NICU (n= 2), and/or mothers who had experienced both preterm birth and their infants had been admitted to NICU (n= 2). Mothers were either academic researchers (n= 4) or entrepreneurs (n= 1), with a mean age of 36 years (SD = 1.41), and had given birth at an average of 36+1‐2weeks' gestation. Their infants' mean age at time of interview was 19 months (SD = 10.05) and the average NICU stay for those who had an infant admitted (n= 4) was 14.00 days (SD = 6.98). One mother had given birth to twins. Participants were recruited in the same manner as the PPIE groups and those who made contact were e‐mailed an information sheet and consent form; which once completed, led to an invitation to the interview. Participants were required to be over the age of 18, and have a good understanding of the English language. Participants had to have had a live infant either born prematurely (< 37 weeks') aged between birth and 5 years corrected age with or without NICU admission; or had a live infant born at term aged between birth and 5 years who had been admitted to the NICU, in the absence of prematurity. Participants received a £20 voucher as reimbursement for their time.

Cognitive interviews are typically conducted with small numbers of participants (Willis2005). As such, five cognitive interviews were conducted by one researcher who had received formal training in the methodology [S.W.]. Cognitive interviews lasted between 47 and 121 min (MTime= 73.53), and were conducted, recorded, and auto‐transcribed on Microsoft Teams. During the interview, participants were trained in the think‐aloud technique, asked some demographic questions, given an overview of the scales, before being shown either the PSAS‐PTB, or PSAS‐NICU, or both, dependent upon their circumstances. Participants were told to be as honest as possible in their interpretation of the questions, and that the interviewer would not be upset or offended by any of their answers, as outlined in guidance for cognitive interviews (Willis2005). Using the think‐aloud technique, allowed participants to be asked to provide an account of what they were thinking whilst responding to the item, and probing techniques consisting of pointed questions about participant's thinking to target key areas which may be problematic (e.g., surrounding comprehension, hesitation). Common probes included: ‘What are you thinking when you see X term?’;‘ Do the response options allow you to adequately respond to the question?’.Probes were asked concurrently, after the participant had reviewed each individual item. Participants responded to each item in turn, before being asked some general questions about the scale such as relevance, length, and scoring.

Interviews transcripts were checked for accuracy of recording [S.W.], and upon completion of the cognitive interviews, the whole research team [S.W., P.C., A.K., S.A.S., V.F.] met and discussed participants responses to each item, to identify both dominant issues (i.e., particular items with repeated issues) and discoveries (i.e., an issue only emerging in a single interview, but may still affect item responses) in‐line with current and contemporary guidance on cognitive interviews (Balza et al.2022; Willis2015). Adaptations to items were decided upon and agreed by the group, iteratively and by consensus.

Participant responses to items and how they changed can be seen in Tables4and5. Response options and the 7‐day recall period were largely deemed appropriate for both scales.

Iterations of the PSAS‐PTB following the cognitive interviews, with participant responses.

Iterations of the PSAS‐NICU following the cognitive interviews, with participant responses.

Concerning the PSAS‐PTB, the only change to the scale was to the item‘I have worried that I will do further harm to my infant if I interact with them because of their prematurity’was changed to‘I have worried that I will harm my baby if I interact with them because of their prematurity’because participants were inferring that the question implied they had purposely harmed their infant.

With regard to the PSAS‐NICU, whilst most participants did consider the‘When my baby was in NICU, I am/have felt…’preamble when responding, most were only considering when they were in the NICU. As such, it was agreed to remove this preamble and change items to be in the past tense, considering the 7‐day recall period that was already orienting participants. During the interviews, participants agreed the items could be answered whilst in NICU and upon discharge. In terms of individual item changes:‘Concerned about them needing support from medical equipment’, was changed to‘I have felt concerned about my baby needing continuous support from medical equipment’to ensure the item was applicable to both the NICU and discharge home. Furthermore,‘Worried I am not bonding with my baby’was amended to‘I have worried that I have not bonded with my baby in the way that I want to.’Although one participant expressed this was similar to another question, they were the only participant to express this interpretation and others distinguished between them, so this was retained. Finally, in the question about appearance, the word‘infant’was changed to‘baby’to be consistent with the remainder of the questionnaire, and because participants were mistakenly thinking of longer time frames for this question.

The final step in the development of any psychometric scale is to ensure comprehensive validity and reliability testing. This will be implemented with both proposed scales—for which the final items at this stage, can be found in Tables6and7—before widespread implementation in future research. It is important to note that these items must be subjected to psychometric evaluation and so may differ from the final resultant items of each scale.

Iterations of the PSAS‐PTB after each stage of the study.

Note: N/B.The items in each column represent the final versions after each stage which were then progressed to the next study stage.

Iterations of the PSAS‐NICU after each stage of the study.

Note: N/B.The items in each column represent the final versions after each stage which were then progressed to the next study stage.

Eligible participants will be required to be over the age of 18 with a good understanding of the English language, who either have a live infant born prematurely (< 37 weeks' gestation) now aged between 0 and 12 months corrected age who has/has not previously spent time in the NICU, or a live infant born at term now aged between 0 and 12 months who has previously spent time in the NICU, but was not born prematurely. Women with a severe mental health disorder or learning disability will not be eligible to participate in the study due to an abundance of caution surrounding capacity to consent and to signpost and/or support if required, in an anonymous, on‐line format, which the study will adopt. Participants fulfilling eligibility criteria will be recruited via social media (e.g., X [formerly Twitter], Facebook, Reddit, Instagram, etc.). Participants will complete the PSAS‐RSF (16 items) in addition to the PSAS‐PTB (10 items) and/or the PSAS‐NICU (16 items). We aim to recruit approximately 200 participants for both the EFA and CFA as a minimum (Bryant and Yarnold1995; Hair et al.1998). This is because we expect there to be high factor loadings and high communalities between items. These sample sizes will also be adequate for the assessment of internal reliability Participants will access the study on‐line, hosted via Qualtrics. After reading the information sheet and filling in a consent form participants will firstly be asked some initial screening questions to ensure they meet the eligibility criteria. Participants will then complete demographic questions (e.g., age, ethnicity, occupation, gestational age, and length of stay in NICU, if applicable). They will then complete the PSAS‐PTB (if applicable), the PSAS‐NICU (if applicable), and the PSAS‐RSF (Davies et al.2021). A battery of other measures will then be completed, including items from the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS; Cox et al.1987), the Postpartum Bonding Scale (PBQ; Brockington et al.2001), the Revised Infant Temperament Questionnaire (RITQ; Carey and McDevitt1978), the Perceived Maternal Parenting Self‐Efficacy Scale (PMPSES; Barnes and Adamson‐Macedo2007). For those who have indicated their infant has spent a period of time in the neonatal intensive care unit, the Parental Stressor Scale: Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (PSS:NICU; Miles et al.1993). Participants will then be shown a debrief sheet with an opportunity to enter a prize draw for a £25 voucher.

Additionally, participants will be asked if they would like to take part in a follow‐up study 2 weeks later, to establish test‐retest reliability. Participants who complete the secondary survey 2 weeks later will re‐complete the PSAS‐PTB (if applicable), PSAS‐NICU (if applicable), the PSAS‐RSF, the RITQ, and the PBQ, again.

Due to responses being 4‐level ordinal, the EFA will be conducted on the polychoric correlation matrix, and the CFA will use a diagonally weighted least squares estimator, or maximum likelihood with robust standard errors, as appropriate. Internal reliability will be assessed using McDonald's Omega total (for subscales) and Omega hierarchical to assess reliable variance in the total scale score. Test re‐test reliability will be calculated using intraclass correlations. Convergent and divergent validity of the scales will be tested using correlations.

The development of the PSAS‐PTB and PSAS‐NICU has consisted of a comprehensive, multi‐stage process with many strengths. To our knowledge, this is the first postpartum‐specific measure of anxiety which has been adapted specifically for use in mothers of preterm infants and those who have had infants admitted to the NICU. The development had input from a range of stakeholders, include clinicians, psychologists, and experts by lived experience—across a multi‐stage development—which has not previously been documented for a perinatal mental health psychometric scale. Efforts will be made to recruit participants from diverse backgrounds during the validation study for which the above protocol outlines, as we are cognisant the development has received input from mothers from higher socio‐economic backgrounds than the national average, particularly in the cognitive interview study. This programme of work describes the process for the development of, and the planned methodology for the validation of the PSAS‐PTB and the PSAS‐NICU. Items on the newly proposed scales have had input from a range of stakeholders, contributing to a range of comprehensive testing which has ensured their relevance and understanding in these specific populations. Future research must now validate both scales before they are used in research, whilst further validation will be required for use in clinical settings, including analyses with the gold standard clinical interview. The ability of the PSAS‐NICU to be used as a ‘Velcro’ subscale, either alone or in conjunction with other derivatives of the PSAS, will further enhance its application. Further comprehensive translation will be required for use in different countries and cultural settings.