This study aimed to explore and describe the cohesion challenges that the multicultural nursing team of a cardiac centre in a designated hospital in Saudi Arabia experienced.

The World Health Organization predicts a huge global shortage of nurses by 2030. Healthcare services will have to recruit nurses from other countries. Internationally recruited nurses’ poor understanding of their colleagues’ and patients’ cultural backgrounds may lead to cohesive challenges in teams to the detriment of quality patient care.

A descriptive qualitative design was applied. Face‐to‐face interviews were done with 15 participants (five nurse managers and ten nurses), their ages ranging between 30 and 50 years. They were from different countries and cultural backgrounds. One open‐ended question was used ‘What cohesion challenges does the multicultural nursing team of the cardiac centre experience, and what support should they get from management to overcome these challenges?’ A thematic data analysis was done.

Cohesion challenges were experienced due to poor communication, the exclusion of members in decision making, a lack of meaningful team‐building events and limited introduction of newly appointed members. The diversity of the team led to the alienation of some members, and the internationally recruited nurses felt that they were expected to conform to the expectations of the Saudi members.

The participants did not appreciate the benefits of multicultural teams and only focussed on the challenges that they experienced to function as a cohesive unit. The participants wanted to be respected, acknowledged and valued as team members.

Managers should invest in cultural competence training, the enhancement of communication practices and the encouragement of trust among members to ultimately improve team cohesion.

As the World Health Organization predicts a global shortage of 5.7 million nurses by 2030 (World Health Organisation2020), healthcare services will recruit nurses from other countries (Kamau et al.2023), resulting in multicultural teams with challenges to develop cohesion (Shahzad et al.2021). Internationally recruited nurses may not understand their colleagues’ and patients’ cultural backgrounds (Balante et al.2021) and may find it challenging to communicate with them to the detriment of quality patient care (Hari et al.2021). Without understanding each other, team members cannot effectively deliver patient care (Oakley et al.2020).

Language differences in nursing teams may contribute to misunderstandings and negatively impact team cohesion (Crawford et al.2017), leading to mistrust between members, resulting in poor cooperation (Weston2022). Team members are expected to understand one another in order to cooperatively plan and implement patient care (Oakley et al.2020).

Collaboration challenges in multicultural nursing teams are not only caused by language differences. Nursing teams are often expected to communicate in English (Tie et al.2019), and even when both the country's and the internationally recruited nurses are fluent in English, their different accents and pronunciation of words may lead to misunderstanding between members (Peasgood et al.2023).

In multicultural nursing teams, both host and migrant nurses experience challenges to collaborate as they portray a diversity of culturally driven value‐based beliefs about quality patient care (Brunton and Cook2018). The teams should manage their own cultural differences and also acknowledge that patients’ healthcare needs are determined by unique cultural beliefs (Shepherd et al.2019). Multicultural nursing teams have to meet hospital managers’ expectations that their cumulative knowledge, skills and clinical experience are used to deliver safe, culturally appropriate patient care (Tie et al.2019). The teams are also obliged to care for diverse patient populations (Sjöberg et al.2023).

Migrant nurses are not familiar with the systems and processes in their new workplace (Crowder et al.2022) and are dependent on the support of the host nurses and nursing management to adjust to the unfamiliar clinical environment (Weston2022). It is primarily the nurse managers’ responsibility to create working environments that enable culturally and linguistically diverse teams to overcome adjustment challenges and to deliver quality patient care (Loveday et al.2021). Visionary leadership of the managers is required to enhance the cohesion of multicultural nursing teams (Van der Voet and Steijn2021). Cohesion is a crucial requirement for team innovation, as a psychologically safe environment enables members to exchange innovative ideas (Marmarosh and Sproul2021).

As the Saudi Arabian health system is mainly staffed by non‐Saudi nurses who are recruited from all over the world (Saudi Health Council2019), the aim of the study was to explore and describe the cohesion challenges the multicultural nursing team of a cardiac centre in a designated hospital in Saudi Arabia experienced.

A descriptive qualitative study was done to describe (a) the challenges that the multicultural cardiac centre nurses experienced and (b) the challenges that the managers experienced to support them to function as a cohesive unit.

The setting was the cardiac centre of the designated hospital, staffed at the time of the study with one director, 17 nurse managers, 17 clinical resource nurses (professional nurses responsible for continuous professional development and research) and approximately 280 professional nurses. The team was multicultural, consisting of local nurses and nurses from South Africa, the Philippines, India, Singapore and Malaysia. The study population consisted of all the nurses and nurse managers, and purposive sampling was applied. Fifteen participants (five nurse managers and ten nurses) were included in the research. Their ages ranged between 30 and 55 years, and all were from different countries and cultural backgrounds. Data saturation was reached at the 13th participant, but two more interviews were conducted to ensure no new information emerged. Saturation of data refers to the collection of qualitative data to the point where a sense of closure is attained because new data yield redundant information (Polit and Beck2022).

Individual face‐to‐face interviews were conducted by the first author in a private venue in the cardiac centre that the participants preferred. Before each interview, she ensured that the participants had given informed consent to take part in the research and that the interviews could be audio recorded. Only one question was asked to all participants: ‘What cohesion challenges does the multicultural nursing team of the cardiac centre experience, and what support should they get from management to overcome these challenges?’Probing questions were used to ensure that rich data were collected. Some nurse participants were emotional when they recalled painful experiences, but appreciated the opportunity to share them without any fear that these could be used against them in the work environment. The nurse managers were thankful that they could share their concerns about the multicultural team's cohesion. The participants in general hoped that the study would lead to greater awareness of the cohesion challenges that multicultural nursing teams experience. Field notes were compiled to reflect data that could not be captured through audio recording. Data were collected in May 2024.

Familiarization began with the first author familiarizing herself with the data collected, which helped her determine the types of themes that emerged from the data.

Coding allowed the first author to read and re‐read all transcripts and field notes to identify similar words and to attach codes to similar sets of words.

Searching for themes began with the list of codes that emerged from the previous step to discover patterns and relationships across the data set.

Reviewing themes helped the first author group themes so that they would be presented systematically.

Defining and naming themes allowed the first author to refine them further by identifying their essence and determining what aspect of the data each theme captures.

Involving a co‐coder to ensure the trustworthiness of the themes. The first author involved one of her research supervisors (the second author) as a co‐coder.

In this research, the Lincoln and Guba (1985) Strategies to ensure the trustworthiness of the findings were employed (Stahl and King2020). To enhance the credibility of the study, interviews were conducted until saturation of data occurred, involving both nurse and nurse manager participants and using both interviews and field notes in data collection. As to the confirmability of the findings, the first author, as a member of the multicultural team, bracketed her perceptions of the team's cohesion challenges. She kept a reflexive journal to keep track of her own perceptions and a record of the ways in which she managed multicultural issues to avoid becoming too involved in order to prevent bias. An audit trail was kept to ensure dependability of the findings, and regarding the confirmability of the findings, a co‐coder was used to ensure that the themes and subthemes reflected the participants’ description of the challenges that they experienced. The participants’ demographic information and the context of the study were thoroughly described to ensure the transferability of the findings.

Approval of the proposal was obtained from the Research Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Health Sciences of the University of Pretoria (reference number 710 of 2023) and the management gave written permission for the research to be conducted in the designated cardiac centre. The first author was open about her managerial position in the centre and ensured that her position did not coerce participants to partake in the study. The participants signed an informed consent letter before interview commencement. They could withdraw from the research at any time without negative consequences. Participants’ personal information was kept confidential, and codes replaced their names in reports.

The sample comprised 15 participants; of them, five were nurse managers and 10 were nurses. Fourteen of them were females, and only one male participated. The sample was multicultural and included nurses from South Africa, Saudi Arabia, Malaysia, the Philippines, India and Singapore. Their age ranged between 30 and 55 (Table1).

Five themes—‘language barriers cause exclusion’, ‘diversity led to alienation’, ‘advantages of multi‐national teams rejected’, ‘internationally recruited nurses obliged to conform’ and ‘unified teamwork jeopardized’—and 14 subthemes emerged (Table2).

Saudi Arabia relies on a predominantly internationally recruited nursing workforce (Felemban et al.2014), causing possible cohesion challenges in multicultural teams to the detriment of quality patient care (Morley and Cunningham2021). Internationally recruited nurses want to be acknowledged for their expertise and contribution to solve staff shortages (Tie et al.2019), and local nurses often feel that their internationally recruited colleagues may threaten their career progression (Kamau et al.2023). Cohesion challenges in multicultural nursing teams may be prevented by involving all members in the planning and execution of patient care (Oakley et al.2020). Unfortunately, members’ involvement is often dependent on effective communication in the team and optimal support from the managers of the team. According to the participants of the study, language challenges were often experienced, and they could not rely on support from management to help them to function as a cohesive team. Language challenges are often, according to Fiset et al. (2024), considered a major contributor to misunderstandings at work to the detriment of employees’ performance.

The participants mentioned that the nationality grouping of team members challenged team cohesion. Nurses who speak the same language and share the same cultural background tend to prefer to work the same shifts. They not only favour arrangements to collaborate with similar colleagues but also exclude others from nursing teams, leading to team fragmentation (Uman et al.2020; Zeng et al.2022). Exclusion undermines team cohesion by reducing open communication, limiting collaboration, and increasing demotivation of members to the extent that the marginalized members resign, causing staff shortages and poor patient care (Baek et al.2023).

A prerequisite for open communication and collaboration among team members is respect for others (Tingvold and Munkejord2021). Mutual respect encourages team members to listen to each other, understand different perspectives, and be open to feedback from others. By fostering an environment of respect, nurse managers can promote open dialogue, reduce conflict and encourage teamwork, ultimately creating a cohesive and high‐performance team (Markey et al.2021). Open communication plays an important role in promoting cohesion as it enables the understanding of others and bridges gaps created by misunderstanding between team members. Nurses who are culturally competent and therefore appreciate the benefits of diverse nursing teams show more respect to colleagues and are usually prepared to learn how to communicate with nurses from diverse cultural backgrounds (Constantinou et al.2022).

The participants expected managers’ support to form cohesive teams. The contribution of nurse managers in preventing discrimination of team members could prevent conflict among them, contribute to group cohesion and ultimately to quality patient care (Watts et al.2017). Nurse managers have a duty to promote team members’ sense of belonging and to create a harmonious work environment. The participants recommended that nurse managers should be sensitive towards nurses’ needs to work in an environment where all team members are respected and enabled to experience a sense of belonging. When nurse managers are not sensitive to the needs of their staff, it can lead to a variety of problems such as nurses’ increased stress levels and decreased job satisfaction, limiting team cohesion. Poor sensitivity to the needs of nurses can also contribute to a lack of collaboration in teams to the detriment of patient care (Turkson‐Ocran et al.2022). The participants were convinced that when nurse managers showed a lack of concern for nurses’ personal lives and associated challenges, they did not promote trusting relationships between them and their teams which hindered cohesion. Addressing the belonging needs of nurses may, on the other hand, create an environment where mutual respect is experienced (Berhanu et al.2024). Nurses tend to appreciate managers who create supportive work environments that enhance nurses’ well‐being, productivity and retention.

Managers should uphold recruitment promises, such as prioritizing newly appointed internationally recruited nurses’ leave to visit their families. The first months in a new work environment are stressful. Nurses who are foreign to a country experience heightened stress when they are not allowed to return to their families within a reasonable time after their appointment. It is managers’ responsibility to ensure fairness with planning leave schedules for staff to accommodate the needs of all team members while ensuring adequate coverage for quality patient care (Tingvold and Munkejord2021).

Regularly reviewed and contextually applicable orientation programmes are required to support multicultural nurses to adjust to unfamiliar work environments and to become valued members of nursing teams (Lalithabai et al.2021). According to the participants, comprehensive hospital and unit orientation programmes should be complemented with ongoing team‐building opportunities. Team‐building is essential in fostering cohesion among members. It can strengthen trusting team member relationships and improve communication within teams (Ozigbo et al.2020). In essence, team‐building lays the foundation for a cohesive work environment where members feel connected, communicate effectively and work together seamlessly to achieve common goals (Uman et al.2020). During team‐building the members could be introduced to the benefits of multicultural teams. According to Musheke and Phiri (2021), multicultural teams offer a wide range of benefits to organizations, patients and nurses themselves. Diverse teams better understand patients’ cultural differences, which improves communication and contributes to the delivery of culturally appropriate care.

Cultural competence training of multicultural teams may equip members with skills and knowledge to collaborate effectively across cultural boundaries to the benefit of team dynamics and understanding of fellow nurses and patients (Aboshaiqah et al.2023). Such education should be initiated during the orientation of newly appointed nurses, and reinforced regularly to ensure that team members respect and appreciate colleagues’ and patients’ cultural beliefs (Falatah et al.2022). Organizations could empower multicultural nursing teams to effectively collaborate to deliver culturally congruent patient care (Alharbi et al.2021).

According to the participants, internationally recruited nurses leave home countries to serve other populations and therefore deserve to be respected for their contribution to patient care. At the same time, local nurses may feel threatened when internationally recruited nurses display knowledge and skills required for senior positions. Only when local nurses perceive their internationally recruited fellow nurses as being co‐responsible for patient care and not as threats to their own future careers can they cooperate in the delivery of quality cultural congruent patient care (Kamau et al.2023).

Salary differences between nurses can cause major tension and discrimination within teams. It can potentially disrupt cohesion as lower‐paid members may experience feelings of resentment towards colleagues who receive higher salaries (Kakemam et al.2021). The participants complained that due to differences in currencies, disparities in salaries existed that caused much conflict in the teams. Nurses who perceive that they are paid less than their peers for the same responsibilities may feel undervalued and therefore may experience frustration and resentment (World Health Organization2020).

The study was limited to nurse managers and nurses of a designated cardiac centre at a hospital in Saudi Arabia. The researchers acknowledge that a sample of more nurses than nurse managers could be considered as a limitation of the study. Male nurses were also under‐represented. Internationally recruited nurses and local nurses were interviewed, and data collection continued until saturation of data was observed. The findings might have differed if it had been done in another country.

The participants highlighted a need to be respected, acknowledged and valued as members of the team. The study findings also highlighted a need for cultural competence training, effective communication practices and salary reviews that may encourage trust, understanding and acceptance of each other and ultimately lead to improved team cohesion.

Multicultural team managers should invest in the enhancement of communication practices and the encouragement of trust among members. Team‐building events should be arranged to enable members to get to know each other, and the contribution that internationally recruited nurses make to solve staff shortages should be acknowledged. Managers should appreciate the input that host and internationally recruited nurses make to the team's delivery of quality patient care. Equal opportunities for promotion and remuneration of members may contribute to team cohesion.

Institutions employing internationally recruited nurses are obliged to develop appropriate integration strategies to enable team cohesion for quality patient care. Onboarding programmes for newly appointed nurses may help them to adjust to unfamiliar patient care practices. Leadership development of nurse managers to facilitate internationally recruited nurses’ adjustment to the cultural practices of the local community is highly recommended.

The designated cardiac centre in Saudi Arabia is dependent on internationally recruited nurses to render quality care to its patients. The management of the centre should not only acknowledge but also celebrate their contributions and enable them to adjust easily to the unfamiliar work environment. The nurses should be supported to obtain registration with the Saudi Arabia Nursing Council with the assistance of staff appointed by the centre management. Counselling services to help internationally recruited nurses to manage concerns about family members in home countries should be available.