This research project explored nurse‐led health goal setting activities in residents living in low‐income and other residential senior housing communities.

As part of home visit clinical experiences, student nurses met with residents 3+ times to establish health goals, discuss goal progress and identify goal types, goal‐achieving rewards and barriers/facilitators to goal attainment.

Themes emerged from identified goals:Getting Around, Maintaining and Regaining Health,Living as an Independent AdultandRelationships and Purpose. Rewards for achieving goals yielded themes:Feel Better About Myself;Sense of Accomplishment;I am in ControlandRemain Independent.Barriers and facilitators to meeting goals were identified.

Findings from this study support prior findings of concerns facing older adults as identified by the Age Friendly Health Systems initiative, co‐developed by The John A. Hartford Foundation, the Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI), the American Hospital Association (AHA) and the Catholic Health Association of the United States (CHA).

Although existing studies have explored patient‐led goal setting (Gardner et al.2016; Lynch et al.2023) and mutual goal setting in older adults (Cheng2018), research examining the influence of nursing interventions such as personalised goal setting for older adults is needed. We focus on goal setting nursing activities because they signify an important opportunity for nurses to educate and empower older adults to become greater advocates for their own health. By examining nurse‐led older adult goal setting, this research may offer a better understanding of the nature of these goals and factors that help or hinder health goal attainment for older adults.

In 2017, the National Academy of Medicine convened a panel of experts to identify important strategic directions for the US healthcare system to inform policymakers and health leaders (Dzau et al.2017). The guiding vision for thisVital Directionsinitiative was to create a health system ‘that performs optimally in promoting, protecting, and restoring the health of individuals and populations, and helps each person reach their full potential for health and well‐being’ (Dzau et al.2017, 10). The Vital Directions Framework identified a key infrastructure need to measure what was it that mattered most to older adults. The initial report also identified the need to improve capacity and develop new healthcare delivery models to promote health and provide health care for an ageing population (Dzau et al.2017). Beginning in 2017, the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) began a large‐scale randomised control study to examine whether the integration of a Wellness Nurse along with traditional supportive service coordination can improve outcomes for individuals living in federally subsidised communities for individuals over the age of 62 (HUD, 2015). The study titledSupportive Services Demonstration for Elderly Households in HUD‐Assisted Multifamily Housing, also known as IWISH, among other programming incorporates the development of an Individual Healthy Aging Plan for residents to identify measurable goals and strategies to support their personal health goals (Turnham et al.2020). In April 2021, the IWISH study released its second preliminary report indicating staff interviews of programs in the intervention group felt the presence of the Wellness Nurse position was one of the most important activities (Giardino et al.2021).

The current study includes a qualitative examination of older adults' self‐identified health goals discussed during student‐led home visits with older adults living in federally subsidised and other independent housing communities. The student‐led home visit programme also provides a valuable learning experience for future nurses to meet community‐based needs of the ageing population and enhance students' understanding of social determinants that impact health. Our study's overarching research question explored the impact of nursing interventions, such as goal‐setting activities informed by the use of action planning/goal‐setting techniques, to support older adults' abilities to meet personal health goals. In this paper, we examined goals identified by residents of these communities to explore what mattered most to residents. We identified thematic representations of goal categories, the nature of rewards sought in meeting these goals, barriers that impeded residents' abilities to meet goals and facilitating factors that promoted goal progress and/or attainment.

The Student Nurse Home Visit Program works with community Service Coordinators to identify residents who might benefit from student nurse visits in their homes or in community areas. Home visits were made to senior housing communities as part of the nursing students' community and mental health practicum. Students completed an Evidence‐Based Practice and Introduction to Research Methods nursing course before starting the community and mental health practicum. Thirty‐five (35) undergraduate accelerated BSN program students participated as research assistants conducting the visits and collecting data for the study. These home visits were part of their community/mental health course practicum experiences. Three faculty members oversaw the student home visits, with one faculty member on site while visits were conducted by the students. All but one of these residential communities were federally subsidised housing communities for low‐income seniors.

Residents across six independent senior residential communities participated in the study. Teams of two student nurses met with residents on at least three separate occasions, generally 1 week apart, to establish goals at the first meeting and discuss goal progress during subsequent visits. Each visit took approximately 1 h to complete. During these visits, students worked with residents to develop client‐directed health goals incorporating action plans and coping strategies. Residents were asked to identify three health goals, verbalise what meeting these goals would look like and predict what might get in the way of meeting these goals using goal‐setting worksheets (Figure1). On subsequent visits, student nurses updated a Personal Health Goal form to indicate whether progress had been made towards a goal or if goals had been met. Student nurses collected data and gave copies of the goal setting worksheets to residents as reminders during the weekly home visits between student nurses and residents.

At the conclusion of the clinical day, students entered data into a Qualtrics survey to capture data on client goals, client‐identified barrier strategies for overcoming challenges, and client‐identified facilitators that helped to meet goals and anticipated rewards of meeting goals. No personally identifiable data on the residents was collected for analysis. Data were extracted from the Qualtrics surveys for content analysis, which was conducted by faculty researchers.

Data extracted from the Qualtrics surveys were coded to examine goals, rewards, barriers and facilitators using content analysis methods established by Sandelowski (2002) for accurate descriptions of experiences, needs and desires through data content comparisons among researchers. Data entry was reviewed for consistency and correctness. A team of three researchers conducted the data coding to encourage diverse perspectives. Each coder conducted an initial independent review of the data to create a list of coding terms from participant statements. The research team met multiple times to review codes using constant comparison and develop a standardised coding list. Each researcher then recoded the data using the defined code list, with subsequent member checking to validate interpretation accuracy. The research team met on a weekly basis to review and discuss initial findings, cross‐checking codes and frequently sharing early impressions of key thematic ideas. All team members reviewed and compared thematic ideas. Themes were developed and refined until generating a consensus of findings on which this study's conclusions are based.

Participants in this study included residents of five low‐income senior housing communities (n= 130). Some of the communities met requirements of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) guidelines for older adult housing subsidies, including age and income requirements. One of the communities included the independent living section of a continuing care retirement community (CCRC). Both male and female residents were included in the study sample. While we did not collect specific demographic data on the residents participating in the study, most residents living in these communities were over the age of 65 and were predominantly white, which is consistent with the population demographic in the area. Many of the residents had both chronic and acute health conditions with functionality ranging from being completely independent to requiring some in‐home health care assistance. Nursing students made 346 visits to low‐income senior residents during the study's timeframe. A prior analysis of the goals and progress towards goals identified that 55% of residents reported meeting their goals (Livsey et al.2018). More than 75% of residents reported using their personalised goal plans to overcome identified potential barriers to meeting goals. More than 92% of residents reported making substantial progress towards their goals. During the study period, students in the Student Nurse Home Visit Programme made multiple visits to approximately 20% of the low‐income senior residents living in the five different low‐income senior housing communities.

Study participants were asked to develop up to three self‐directed health goals. Content analysis of the data resulted in the identification of four themes surrounding identified goals:Getting Around, Maintaining and Regaining Health,Living as an Independent AdultandRelationships and Purpose(Table1).

Improve balance by doing 5 sets of squats 2 times per day.

A second theme ofMaintaining and Regaining Healthor health‐related abilities also emerged from the analysis, with both relating to functionality. Maintaining health involved preserving both one's physical and mental faculties through health awareness of ongoing health conditions, medication management, weight management and maintaining healthy routines and habits, including regularly attending wellness check‐ups. Other goals included a desire to retain mental and physical faculties and to avoid excessive use of medications.

Two respondents indicated a desire to maintain health by avoiding pain and suffering.

The desire to regain prior levels of health and/or functional abilities was evident in goals that involved control or a lack of control. Many participants set personal health goals focused on gaining control of their chronic health conditions including hypertension, diabetes, COPD, depression and glaucoma, in addition to unhealthy behaviours such as smoking. Goals focused on the development of healthy routines and habits were frequently identified and included a desire to attend regular healthcare appointments and engage in other behavioural changes such as improving eating habits and increasing fluid intake.

Participants reported a desire to regain prior functionality which was directly related to health conditions that impaired important and meaningful abilities such as cooking. One resident's goal included a goal of recovering from a concussion after a fall.

Similar to the theme ofGetting Around, many goals focused on the ability to maintain independence.Living as an Independent Adultemerged as a theme related to functionality and freedom. Functionality included the impact of mobility on independence and represented the ability to do basic chores and to pursue personal interests. For some participants, living independently was framed as freedom to assert one's predilections in doing what they want to do within their own timeframes. One participant stated ‘I want to live every day to the fullest doing what I please when I please’.

The final theme identified in examining the goals set by these older adults focused on the desire to purposefully socialise and retain closer relationships and bonds with loved ones. Participant data showed residents longing for increased engagement with family and friends with moderate frequency in the data.

In addition to identification of goals to be achieved, participants were asked to identify what they felt would be rewards for reaching their goals (Table2), which is part of the action planning and coping planning strategy used to support behaviour change. Based on analysis of data related to perceived rewards identified by the participants, four themes emerged which aligned closely with some of the identified goal themes. These includedFeeling Better About Myself;A Sense of Accomplishment; I am in Control; andRemain Independent.

The desire to “‘feel better’ and ‘be happy’” was frequently reported by participants as rewards associated with goal achievement, with feeling better being associated with having less fear, less stress, and an increase in energy. Some older adults expressed rewards in terms of reduced suffering and a greater sense of peace.

Other rewards focused on gaining aSense of Accomplishment. Examples of these types of rewards ranged from spiritual satisfaction, pride and well‐being to the ability to increase mobility.

Along with a desire to achieve a sense of accomplishment, other rewards noted by participants were related to a desire to maintain or be in control of their life. The theme ofI'm in Controlencompasses the ideas of self‐confidence, self‐worth, control and strength. Participants expressed value in increased self‐confidence as rewards for adhering to goals that they helped formulate with nursing students. Residents vocalised control as the ability to gain command over one's physical being as a reward, while gaining physical strength related to assisting the individual in obtaining control of chronic conditions.

The ability to remain independent was seen as a reward for many of the participants. This theme encompassed elements of freedom, socialisation, staying healthy and not causing additional stress and responsibilities for family members.One participant's identified reward was to‘remain independent and not become a burden to my family. I'd like to go to sleep and pass peacefully and just be gone’.

For many participants, remaining independent through healthy habits and behaviours was a reward that engendered other rewards, such as the freedom to do what one wants to do and to enjoy friendship and comradery with others.

Another element of the action planning/coping planning process is to help individuals identify potential barriers that might impede their ability to meet their goals and to identify specific coping strategies to overcome these barriers. Table3outlines identified barriers that participants felt might impede their abilities to meet their personalised goals. Five themes emerged from the analysis of data on identified barriers:Physical factors,Psychological factors,Environmental factors,Social Determinants of HealthandBusyness.

Many participants identified barriers related toPhysical Factors, issues and conditions, including memory issues, tiredness, sleep concerns, pain, injuries, general health decline and mobility limitations and challenges. For example, the inability to remember names or words was identified as a barrier to social engagement. Other physical challenges, such as loss of eyesight, balance and activity intolerance, were other examples of perceived barriers to goal achievement.

In addition to physical factors,Psychological Factorswere also identified as barriers to goal attainment and included a lack of motivation and commitment, fear and psychological symptoms of depression.

Some residents felt thatEnvironmental Factorsinfluenced their ability to attain set goals, with stimuli primarily related to negative peer pressure or long‐established unhealthy food preparation and/or eating habits. One participant noted, ‘I still have the habit to eat bread and desserts’.

Many participants cited a lack of resources as a barrier to reaching goals. These unmet resources included transportation issues, financial constraints and a lack of sufficient health insurance to cover costs of medical care. Together, these inadequate resources describe some of theSocial Determinants of Health(SDOH) or conditions in the environment that can impact health outcomes (US Department of Health and Human Services [HHS]2023).

Individual and family challenges of being too busy, orBusyness, prevented some residents from reaching their established goals. In some instances, the resident was too busy with other obligations to stay on track with goals. In other situations, family members were living too far away from residents or were too busy with their own obligations to assist the residents in meeting their goals. Examples included ‘over‐scheduling and trying to do too much and not accomplishing anything’.

In the process of developing SMART goals (Doran et al.1981) that are Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant and Time‐bound, student nurses examined what factors supported residents reaching their goals. Various activities and ideas were shared by participants presenting an array of perceived facilitators that worked to help meet individual goals. Content analysis resulted in the identification of six themes related to facilitators:Developing a Routine,Engaging in Healthy Behaviours,Adherence to Medical Recommendations,Being Mindful and Aware,AccountabilityandConnecting and Engaging with Others(see Table4).

Some facilitators identified by the participants included doing something (or actively engaging in an activity or task) to help meet their goal byDeveloping a Routine. Examples of routine building included walking, exercising and checking blood sugar on a scheduled basis.

Participants also stated that they startedEngaging in Healthy Behaviourssuch as monitoring their diet, drinking more water and getting more exercise.

Participants noted thatAdherence to Medical Recommendationsand therapies as strategies to help them reach their goals. Examples that residents shared included continuing with physical therapy, taking their pain‐relieving medication as prescribed and increasing fluid intake by getting bottled water if tap water is unpleasant to drink. Other examples included putting medications in an ‘easy to see place’ to remind them to take them.

Being Mindful and Awarewere also identified as facilitators in helping participants meet their goals. One resident expressed that maintaining an awareness of stressful triggers in their immediate environment supported their ability to meet their personalised goal. Sharing mindful activities was also seen as beneficial. Another resident noted that opening up to their therapist was helpful.

As many residents anticipated the student nurse would be returning and assessing their progress,Accountabilityhelped some of the participants to meet their goals. Residents noted that knowing the student nurse would return for reassessment, student nurse assistance with personalised client health focus and helping with resident perception of set goals were reported by residents. This evidence supports the importance of the nursing role as an accountability partner in supporting progress and achievement of goals. One participant noted ‘Having the meetings with the student nurse has helped… become more mindful of health’.

Some of the residents discussed how becoming more social and assertive and engaging with others was helpful for them as they worked to achieve their goals. Enhanced socialisation also supported motivation and a sense of connectedness with family and other residents.

Although significant work has recognised the importance of goal setting for older adults (Javadi et al.2018; Rietkerk et al.2019; Tinetti et al.2021), less research has considered the impact of this type of nursing intervention with older adults. This work adds to the existing literature by exploring nurse‐led personalised goal setting with older residents.

We found compelling evidence to support that older residents living in independent congregate community settings have strong desires to maintain safe mobility for functional day‐to‐day needs and for pleasure, such as socialising and enjoyment. Living as an independent adult as a goal has been described frequently in the existing literature (National Institute on Aging2020) and was a prominent theme in this study as a proxy to remain a functioning and contributing individual. It is interesting to note that older residents reported independence as both a goal and a reward. Socialisation through purposeful relationships as a theme recognised residents' intent to continue interacting with others and represents a similar finding in the literature (Beeber2021).

Older adults detailed both anticipated and actualised rewards for reaching personalised goals. Participants frequently described rewards as feeling better and happier about oneself due to gaining something (e.g., peace) or losing something (e.g., pain). These types of rewards may be associated with gaining control of either a situation or a chronic illness (Saajanaho et al.2016). Confirming previous research by Musich et al. (2018), rewards associated with a sense of purpose and accomplishment were important to participants in this study.

Like previous research on older adult goal setting (Bethancourt et al.2014), barriers to goal attainment for some older adults in this study organised into themes of physical, psychological and environmental factors and included being tired, injured and not wanting to overexert oneself. Complex care patients include populations such as frail older adults and individuals with multiple chronic conditions (Blumenthal et al.2016). Guaranteeing that older adults will receive adequate care and support requires understanding medical, social and long‐term needs, in addition to a sufficiently skilled health care delivery workforce (Fulmer et al.2021). Nurses are well situated to help individuals assess personalised goals, helping older adults to modify and continually reevaluate feasible options for goal attainment.

Individuals with chronic illness often experience uncoordinated care, resulting in lower quality care, poorer health outcomes, and higher healthcare costs (Black and Nugent2018; Frandsen et al.2015). Some residents in this study reported limited resources associated with the SDOH (HHS, 2023), such as limited financial means, having no health insurance or being under‐insured, and lacking reliable transportation. These barriers can contribute to uncoordinated care and worse health outcomes. Additionally, some residents reported limited social support, with children and friends described as too busy to assist the older residents. Nurses can work directly with older residents in goal setting, reassessing and evaluating outcomes to help address unmet needs with Service Coordinators to connect to available resources with regular reassessment. Nursing expertise as part of the care team is critical, as other non‐clinically trained care team members (such as community health workers or service coordinators) may not be able to address client questions related to disease processes or medications.

We identified themes for goal attainment facilitators that concurred with existing literature on health in adult populations for engaging in healthy behaviours and routines (Cheng2018), adhering to medical recommendations (Tinetti et al.2021) and connecting or engaging with others (Livsey et al.2018). Studies examining interventions involving team‐based models that include Registered Nurse (RN) interventions for older adults in the United States have been found to be cost‐effective. Szanton et al. (2016) examined improvements in activities of daily living (ADLs) among low‐income older adults who had trouble with at least one ADL. Their described intervention programme (CAPABLE) expanded an existing programme by adding an RN to the interdisciplinary team to address pain, medication and depressive symptom management, with notable ADL improvements reported (Szanton et al.2016). Our study's findings support the RN's ability to make a meaningful impact on older adult health through goal setting within community settings. The theme ofAccountabilityis novel in that accountability was not only applied to the resident but due in great part to the resident knowing that someone (the student nurse) would be returning and inquiring about goal progress. Accountability with the presence of the nurse in goal setting may be an optimal inclusion point to facilitating goal achievement for older adults.

Our work highlights the potential for nurse‐led goal setting activities for older adults as a vital opportunity empowering older adults to advocate for and maintain their health and independence. The Institute for Healthcare Improvement, in partnership with the John A. Hartford Foundation, American Hospital Association (AHA) and the Catholic Health Association of the United States (CHA) has developed the Age Friendly Health Systems initiative, currently used in the United States, which addresses key aims ofdoing no harm, aligning what matters to older adultsandusing evidence‐based interventions(John A. Hartford Foundation2023). The Age Friendly Health system acknowledges four key concepts that have been identified as important to older adults: What matters, medication, mentation and mobility. Thematic findings of client directed goals in this study validate the themes identified in the Age Friendly Health Systems initiative.

While final data on the impact of nursing interventions in the IWISH trial has not been reported, preliminary findings indicate challenges in finding RNs to fulfil these roles (Giardino et al.2021). Thus, it is important for nursing programmes to expose learners to community‐focused interventions to support person‐centred healthy ageing and build a nursing workforce with strong skills to support aging populations in community settings. Implementation of nurse‐led goal setting activities with nursing students overseen by RNs is novel in its approach, but feasible to reproduce in schools of nursing. Nursing students represent a large group of individuals who need clinical practice opportunities. Clinical practice options are frequently limited in some other healthcare settings. This situation is mutually beneficial for both residents and nursing students. Nursing students are generally eager, have recently received their education based on current recommendations from the evidence and have the time during clinical course designated times to devote to older residents. Emphasis of facilitators to goal‐setting and addressing barriers to goal attainment are well within educational, preparatory and practice boundaries of nursing students. We also expand on the existing literature in identifying themes, such asAccountabilityas integral to some older adults achieving their health goals.

While this study has many strengths, it is not without its limitations. Recruitment occurred at six sites in one Southern United States state, and while the qualitative data obtained would not be expected to be generalisable, it must be recognised that some unique traits of the six communities may exist and therefore limit some transferability of results. A second limitation is the potential for error in the data collection. The data collection occurred with many student nurses who were overseen by only a few RN instructors. Given the innovative nature of the recruitment and data collection methodology, and while researchers continuously questioned and checked data integrity, the considerable number of students did not allow for RN instructors to be present at every data collection interview. The nursing students who collected data were nursing degree‐seeking individuals who already had at least one Baccalaureate degree in another field prior to entering the nursing programmes. Students still needed ongoing development in helping clients to set SMART goals, which should be reinforced in the nursing curriculum. Despite these limitations, this research highlights the importance of nurse‐led activities for older adult health goal achievement. This study offers improved understanding of goal types set by older adults, rewards desired upon accomplishing goals and factors that assist or deter health goal success for older adults which may, in turn, improve the overall health and well‐being of older residents.