The restriction of the use of antibiotics in animal production as a growth promoter due to pathogens resistance and residues in poultry products leads to the use of phytogenics as feed additives, an alternative that is attracting increasing interest nowadays. This study was carried out to investigate the effect of milled orange seeds supplemented into a broiler diet on the gut microbiota and the response of the immune system. A total of 720‐day‐old broiler chicks were divided into six treatment groups of six replicates, each containing 20 chicks. The dietary treatments were as follows: (1) Basal diet (Con‐1or negative control), (2) Basal diet + 0.01% of neomycin (Con‐2or positive control), (3) Basal diet + 0.5% of the orange seeds (0.5% CSS),(4) Basal diet + 1% orange seeds (1% CSS), (5) Basal diet + 2% orange seeds (2% CSS), (6) Basal diet + 4% orange seeds (4% CSS). The results showed that the supplementation ofCitrus sinensisseeds at 0.5% significantly decrease coliforms population in the ceca compare to the positive group. There was a decrease (p< 0.05) in the population of caecal lactobacilli in the positive control group (antibiotic) compared to the negative control group and the groups ofC. sinensisseeds. The birds in the 4% CSS group had higher (p< 0.05) IgG concentrations than the positive control and 0.5% CSS groups. The response of the immune system was not affected by orange seed supplementation. It was concluded that the supplementation of 0.5% of orange seeds in the diet of broilers optimize the population of bacteria in the ceca.

Citrus sinensisseed powder at 0.5% in broiler diets optimized caecal bacterial populations, while 4% supplementation increased IgG levels compared to antibiotic use. These findings suggest potential benefits of orange seeds as a phytogenic feed additive, despite the need for further studies on their bioactive compounds and mechanisms.

The poultry industry and poultry veterinarians use antibiotics to improve growth, feed efficiency and reduce disease. Although these uses are beneficial to all involved, research has unfortunately shown that the use of antibiotics promotes the selection and proliferation of resistant bacteria, resulting in the contamination of meat and poultry and hence, diseases that are difficult to treat in humans (Chen et al.2019). Antibiotics pollute the environment and seriously affect human health (Alipour et al.2015). Residues of these drugs, especially antibiotics, may end up in food products (meat, milk, eggs) from food‐producing animals such as; cattle, pigs, poultry and fish. As a result, there is growing interest in research on plant‐derived food additives, mainly from herbs and spices because their supplements are natural, have multiple beneficial functions and have minimal side effects and no resistance or residue (Kumar et al.2017). On the other hand, these plant‐derived food additives like agro‐industrial by‐products, which are not intended for human consumption, can serve as substitutes for traditional animal feed ingredients in animal nutrition (Readh et al.2023). This can result in the production of animal products without causing competition for land or exacerbating the food versus feed dilemma, ultimately promoting environmental and economic sustainability (Readh et al.2023). The incorporation of agro‐industrial by‐products into animal feed presents a promising strategy to reduce feeding costs while simultaneously improving productivity, product quality, animal welfare and the environmental sustainability of livestock systems (Makkar2016). Numerous studies have indicated that fruits and vegetables are considered significant sources of bioactive compounds (Russo et al.2015; Readh et al.2023). The intensification of industrial food processing generates substantial volumes of fruit and vegetable by‐products, which, if not appropriately managed, pose significant ecological challenges (Galanakis2012). This scenario underscores the urgent need for innovative valorization strategies that transform these waste materials into high‐value functional products. Notably, several studies have reported that such by‐products often retain, or even exceed, the antioxidant potential of the original raw materials (Zhou et al.2023). These secondary products are known to contain a diverse array of bioactive molecules with potential nutraceutical properties, and they may play a beneficial role in poultry nutrition by supporting health, enhancing immune function and promoting overall performance (Surai et al.2017). This is the case for by‐products derived from the juice extraction of oranges (Citrus sinensis), which represent a rich source of bioactive compounds and have demonstrated considerable potential for valorization in animal nutrition (Bampidis and Robinson2006).

Among the family of Rutaceae, theCitrusgenus includes several fruits of great economic importance such as mandarins, oranges, limes, lemons and grapefruit (Appelhans et al.2021).C. sinensis L. is one of the oldest plants whose fruits have been used by humans.Citrusseeds are important waste products of citrus processing by the orange juice industry (Chavan et al.2018). A phytochemical study and the antioxidant activity of orange seeds showed that they contain lipids, fatty acid, tocopherol, carotenoid, phenolic compounds, oxidation stability and radical scavenging activity (Malacrida et al.2012; Assefa et al.2017). The essential oils of these seeds have antioxidant and antibacterial activities (Oikeh et al.2020).Citrusseeds contain also limonoid glucosides, such as limonin and nomiline (Herman et al.1992) which have shown a range of biological activities such as antibacterial, antifungal, antimalarial, anticancer, antiviral and several other pharmacological activities in humans (Roy and Saraf2006). Orange seeds could therefore be a valid alternative to the use of antibiotics as growth promoters in poultry feed. It is hypothesized that the addition of orange seeds to the diet of broiler chickens can improve feed utilization and reduce pathogenic bacteria in the gut. This study was conducted to examine the effect of different percentages of orange seeds on the caecal microbiota and immune system response in broiler chickens.

A total of 720 day‐old chicks (Arbor Acres) obtained from a local hatchery (Dabao Breeding Technology Co., Ltd., Taian, China), were randomly allotted into 6 groups of 120 chicks each; each group was further subdivided into 6 replicates (20 chicks per replicate) in a completely randomized design. The experiment lasted for 6 weeks. The treatment groups comprised a negative control (standard diet with no supplementation), positive control (standard diet with 0.01% of neomycin according to the dosage of the manufacturer) andC. sinensisseeds (CSS) groups, fed a standard diet with 0.5%, 1%, 2% and 4% CSS supplementation. The CSS was purchased from Jiangxi Corne Market Agricultural Products Co., Ltd., processed (dried and milled) and subsequently subjected to proximate analysis before being mixed with the standard diet. The starter diet of the birds contained a crude protein of 21.17% and a metabolizable energy of 2938.82 kcal/kg while the grower diet had 18.05% crude protein and 3067.38 kcal/kg metabolizable energy. Feed and water were provided ad libitum. During brooding, the chicks were housed in a clean well‐ventilated room equipped with battery cages and had an automated faeces removal system. The room was provided with electric heaters to adjust the environmental temperature according to the age of the birds (between 28°C and 32°C). Feeding was done in the morning and evening. The chicks were vaccinated on Day 14 against avian influenza (AI). Before transferring the chicks to the poultry house, the chicks were weighed individually to determine their initial body weight. Body weight was recorded weekly and feed intake (FI) was recorded daily during the experimental period. At 21 and 42 days, 2 birds per replicate (12 per treatment) were weighed, slaughtered and then dissected. After dressing, the spleen and bursa of Fabricius were collected and weighed. The ceca were isolated and the contents were aseptically collected in containers that had seals. Before slaughtering, blood samples were collected from the wing web of the birds into heparinized tubes and then centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 20 min to obtain plasma.

Fresh CSS were purchased from Jiangxi Corne Market Agricultural Product Co., Ltd Company and dried (24°C) under air cooling for 2 weeks at room temperature and ground into a fine powder using an electric mill then subjected to proximate composition analysis (Table1) before being mixed with the standard diet. The proximate composition was determined by standard methods.

Each bird was weighed separately once a week for the replicates, and FI was recorded. Both the starter (0–21 days) and growth (22–42 days) phases' average daily gain (ADG) and feed conversion ratio (FCR) were computed after correcting for mortality. Following the approach of Chen et al. (2017) with a little modification, the immune organs, such as the bursa and spleen, were also carefully extracted and then weighed to estimate the relative weight of the immune organs.

To assess the microbial population, the solid medium count method was used (R. U. Khan, Naz, et al.2012). On Day 42, five chicks from each pen were slaughtered and caecal contents were extracted. The caecal contents of each bird were pooled for serial dilution. Microbial populations were determined by serial dilutions (10−4–10−6) of caecal samples in anaerobic diluent before inoculating Petri dishes containing sterile agar. Lactobacillus bacteria were grown on Rogosa SL agar,E. colion eosin methylene blue agar and coliforms on MacConkey agar (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany).Escherichia coliand coliform bacteria were cultured aerobically at 37°C. Plates were counted between 24 and 48 h after inoculation. Colony‐forming units were defined as individual colonies with a diameter of at least 1 mm. Bacteria count was presented as a log to the base 10 of the colony‐forming units per gram.

Blood samples (serum) collected on Days 21 and 42 were used to evaluate the efficacy of the AI vaccine. The haemagglutination inhibition test was used to determine avian influenza vaccine titres. On Days 21 and 35, the chickens of each replicate were injected 0.1 mL per kg of body weight with 0.5% of sheep red blood cells (SRBC) in the breast (Boa‐Amponsem et al.2006). On Days 28 and 42, blood samples were taken and analysed by haemagglutination test. Immunoglobulins G and M (IgG and IgM) antibody titres were obtained using Enzyme‐Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) Kits.

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated from fresh blood using the peripheral lymphocyte Separation‐fluid according to the instructions of the flow cytometry method (Azizi et al.2021). The PBMCs were treated with PE‐anti‐CD4 and FITC‐anti‐CD8 antibodies at 4°C. After 20 min of incubation in the dark, the number of CD4+ and CD8+ cells were analysed by flow cytometry (BD LSR Fortessa).

The data from this study were recorded in Excel, and then all the values were expressed as the means ± standard error (SEM). All statistical analyses were performed by one‐way ANOVA using SAS statistical software (SAS version 8e, SAS Institute, Cary, NC) and following the model:yij=μ+τj+εij, whereμ= general mean,τ= treatment effect andε= random error. Means separation was done using the Tukey test at a 5% significance level. The linear, quadratic and cubic treatment effects were determined using orthogonal polynomial contrasts in R (version 4.3).

The proximate composition data of CSS samples are presented in Table1. Crude fibre represented the major component (9.107%) in the CSS powder followed by crude protein (5.405%) and fat (1.996).

At Day 21, no significant difference in FI and FCR was observed between the groups while the daily gain of chickens was reduced by 2% CSS compared to the negative and positive control groups (p= 0.03). Likewise, there were linear effects on daily weight gain and FCR, respectively (p= 0.007;p= 0.05). On the 42nd day, the positive control group had a better daily gain (p= 0.04) and FCR (p= 0.04) than the 0.5% CSS and 2% CSS groups. Feed consumption was not affected (p> 0.05) (Table2).

Feed intake, feed conversion ratio (FCR) and the average daily weight gain of chickens.

Note: The averages of the same row followed by different letters differ significantly at the 5% threshold.

Abbreviations: ±SEM: standard error of means; Con 1: negative control; Con 2: positive control; CSS:Citrus sinensisseeds; p value: probability.

Table3shows the effect of the antibiotic and the different percentages of orange seeds on the populations of coliforms,Escherichia coliand lactobacilli in the ceca of broilers at Day 42. The incorporation ofC. sinensisdid not significantly affect the coliform population compared to the negative control group (p> 0.05). The results showed a significant difference between the 0.5% CSS group compared to the group that received the antibiotics (p= 0.04). The caecalE. colipopulation was not significantly affected by the supplementation of orange seeds across all the treatment groups (p> 0.05). There was a decrease in the population of caecal lactobacilli in the positive control (antibiotic) group compared to the negative control group (p= 0.02).

Effect ofCitrus sinensisseeds and Neomycin on the bacterial population (log10 CFU/g).

Note: The averages of the same row followed by different letters differ significantly at the 5% threshold.

Abbreviations: ±SEM: standard error of means; Con 1: negative control; Con 2: positive control; CSS:Citrus sinensisseeds; p value: probability.

The antibody titre against SRBC was not significantly affected by the CSS groups compared to control groups at Day 21 42 (p> 0.05) (Table4). However, there was a significant increase (p= 0.02) in the level of IgG for the 4% CSS group compared to the positive and 0.5% CSS groups. The results show no significant difference in the avian influenza vaccine titre at Day 21 of the orange seed‐treated groups compared to the positive and negative control groups (p> 0.05). However, there was a quadratic effect on the avian influenza vaccine titre (p= 0.02). At Day 42, the antibody titres appeared to be dose‐dependent but showed no significant difference (p> 0.05) however, there were linear effects on SRBC and avian influenza, respectively (p= 0.0002;p= 0.02).

Immune response of IgM (log10), IgG (log10) and antibodies against sheep red blood cells.

Note: The averages of the same row followed by different letters differ significantly at the 5% threshold.

Abbreviations: ±SEM: standard error of means; Con 1: negative control; Con 2: positive control; CSS:Citrus sinensisseeds; p value: probability.

The relative weight of the bursa Fabricius at the body weight of chickens receiving 1% orange seed was significantly decreased compared to the negative control group at the end of the starter phase (p= 0.03) (Table5). This difference was no longer observed at the end of the rearing phase. The results of the relative weight of the spleen to the body weight of the chickens on Day 21 show no significant difference whereas on Day 42 (p> 0.05) this weight of the 4% CSS group was significantly decreased (p= 0.012) compared to the negative control group.

Relative weight of bursa Fabricius and spleen at body weight of chickens.

Note: The averages of the same row followed by different letters differ significantly at the 5% threshold.

Abbreviations: CSS:Citrus sinensisseeds; Con 1: negative control. Con 2: positive control; ±SEM: standard error of means; p value: probability.

Table6shows the proportion of peripheral blood T cells (CD4 +, CD8 +). The proportion of CD4+ and CD8+ cells was not affected by the supplementation of orange seeds in the diet of chickens at Day 21 and at the end of the rearing period (Day 42) (p> 0.05).

Proportion of peripheral blood T cells: CD4+, CD8+ (% of the white line).

Abbreviations: ±SEM: standard error of means; Con 1: negative control; Con 2: positive control; CSS:Citrus sinensisseeds; p value: probability.

The results of the proximate composition of CSS revealed 1.99% fat content. This value is lower than the value (54.2%) reported for CSS flour by Akpata and Akubor (1999). Orange seeds can thus be an important source of fat in animal diets which can improve the absorption of fat‐soluble vitamins (Goncalves et al.2015). Crude fibre represented the major component (9.107%). This makes orange seeds a good source of dietary fibre. Akpata and Akubor (1999) on the proximate composition of orange seed flour obtained 7% of crude fibre. In this present study, the crude protein content ofC. sinensiswas 5.405% which is higher than the 3% reported by Akpata and Akubor (1999).

The results of this study showed that the supplementation of orange seeds had no significant effect on growth performance. While orange seeds contain fat and proteins, they also have anti‐nutritional factors such as tannins, phytic acid or saponins, which can interfere with nutrient absorption or enzyme activity (Egbuonu et al.2016). If present in significant amounts, these compounds may negate the potential positive effects of the seeds on growth (Choi et al.2022). Some authors have reported a positive and significant effect of phytogenic additives on broiler performance (Cross et al.2007). Some studies have reported positive effects of citrus byproducts (peels, pulp) on broiler performance, primarily due to improved gut health and modulation of gut microflora (Readh et al.2023; Parobali et al.2024). Other tests using different phytogenic additives and essential oils had no effect on chicken growth performance (Ocak et al.2008). It has been suggested that these differences may have been a result of the difference in the composition of the phytogenic, the methods used to extract the essential oils from herbs and the level of application of the additive in the diet (Cross et al.2007). Antibiotics at low doses in the animal diet have a preventive effect on certain bacterial infections and modify the composition of the intestinal microflora leading to better assimilation of food by animals. These effects protectors lead to a growth effect in the form of an increase in the growth rate. The results obtained in this study reveal that the bacteria appear to have some resistance to the use of neomycin. According to Inouye and Abe (2007), the effectiveness of antibiotics depends on the dose and the contact time.

Regarding the ceca bacterial population, the supplementation of CSS did not significantly alter the caecal coliform orE. colipopulations compared to the negative control group, suggesting a limited antimicrobial effect of the orange seed components at the tested inclusion levels. Interestingly, a significant reduction in the population of caecal lactobacilli was observed in the antibiotic group compared to the negative control. This aligns with well‐documented collateral effects of broad‐spectrum antibiotics, which suppress not only pathogenic but also beneficial gut bacteria such asLactobacillusspp. (Dibner and Richards2005). In contrast, CSS supplementation did not significantly reduce lactobacilli, indicating that orange seeds may preserve beneficial bacterial populations, a key advantage over antibiotics. Preserving commensal microbiota is crucial for maintaining gut barrier integrity, competitive exclusion of pathogens and promoting mucosal immunity (Pan and Yu2014). The action of orange seeds can be attributed to the bioactive molecules they contain, such as flavonoids, limonoids as well as their fermentable fibre (Jing et al.2014; Russo et al.2015; Alnaimy et al.2017). CSS contain high concentration of flavonoids. Flavonoids and their microbiota‐derived metabolites show antimicrobial potential and have the ability to suppress pathogenic microbes (M. F. Iqbal and Zhu2009; Y. Iqbal et al.2020). The antimicrobial properties of pure phenolic compounds and polyphenols of different wines against pathogens investigated by Vaquero et al. (2007) showed that bacterial species exhibited different sensitivities towards the different concentrations of phenolic compounds.E. coliwas the most sensitive bacterium andFlavobacteriumsp. was resistant against all phenolic compounds tested. All wine samples showed antimicrobial properties and the inhibition increased when the polyphenols concentration of wines increased (Vaquero et al.2007).

The immune system response of broilers on Days 21 and 42 in this present study showed no significant effect with the supplementation of CSS. This may be due to the limited concentration or bioavailability of immunomodulatory compounds within the seeds, or possibly to the duration and dosage of supplementation not being sufficient to elicit a measurable immunological effect under the conditions of the present study. The findings of this present study are close to those of Hajati et al. (2022) who evaluated the effect of different levels ofPortulaca oleraceaseed on immune parameters. The weight of the bursa of Fabricius was not affected in all the groups on Day 42. Using different levels ofPortulaca oleraceaseed in experimental diets had no significant effect on antibody titre against SRBC. Alqhtani et al. (2022) also obtained similar results usingRumex nervosusleaves as natural growth promoters on the immune responsiveness of broilers. However, the results of this present study contradict those obtained by Pourhossein et al. (2015) who assessed the effect of different levels of dietary sweet orange (C. sinensis) peel extract (SOPE) on humoural immune system responses in broiler chickens and observed that chicks given supplemental SOPE tended to express higher immune response for SRBC, Newcastle disease and avian influenza than those in the control group. On the other hand, the IgG and IgM titres also increased significantly with SOPE supplementation (Pourhossein et al.2015). Several reports are available advocating the strong immune potentiating effects of natural feed additives (Jaafar Abed and Abdul‐Lateef Ali2022; S. H. Khan, Ansari, et al.2012).

Although this study does not fully elucidate the phytochemical profile and underlying mechanisms of action of the bioactive compounds present in orange seed powder, the results nonetheless provide valuable insights with potentially significant implications. The results of this study show that the supplementation of orange seeds in broiler feed at a rate of 0.5% optimize the bacterial population in the ceca. IgG was higher at 4% supplementation of the orange seeds than the antibiotic‐supplemented group on Day 21.