To assess the effect of computed tomography angiography (CTA) and three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction on laparoscopic colectomy in patients with colon cancer.

Patients with colon cancer who were treated at Zhejiang Cancer Hospital between August 2020 and December 2022 were included in this pilot, randomized controlled trial. The participants were randomly assigned to either the CTA group, in which patients underwent preoperative CTA and 3D reconstruction, or the control group, in which patients underwent preoperative enhanced abdominal and pelvic CT examinations. The primary outcome was the duration of the operation. The secondary outcomes included intraoperative blood loss, length of hospital stay, number of lymph node dissections, fasting duration, duration of tube drainage, overall survival (OS), and progression-free survival (PFS). To minimize statistical bias, patients were stratified into subgroups on the basis of tumor location (left colon or right colon). Additionally, variations in the middle colonic artery (MCA), inferior mesenteric artery (IMA), and colonic branches of superior mesenteric artery (cbSMA) classifications were documented.

A total of 82 patients (41 in each group) were included in the analysis. The CTA group had significantly shorter operation durations (123.68 ± 26.09 vs. 154.12 ± 33.15 min,P< 0.001) and fasting durations (median 4.00 vs. 5.00 days,P< 0.001) as well as reduced intraoperative blood loss (median 50.00 vs. 100.00 mL,P= 0.001) compared to the control group; these differences were observed in the overall colon cancer cohort and in the left and right colon subgroups. However, no significant differences were observed between the two groups in terms of lymph node dissection, tube drainage duration, hospitalization duration, OS or PFS. In the CTA group, the proportions of patients with different IMA types were as follows: Type A (60.97%), Type B (9.76%), Type C (17.07%), and Type D (12.20%); the proportions of patients with different MCA types were as follows: Type A (78.05%), Type B (12.20%), Type C (7.31%), and Type D (2.44%); and the proportions of patients with different cbSMA types were as follows: Type A (65.85%), Type B (7.32%), Type C (17.07%), and Type D (9.76%). Patients with a tumor size ≥ 5 cm, preoperative intestinal obstruction, postoperative pathological serosal invasion, lymph node metastasis, and stage III disease had significantly worse OS and PFS than those with a tumor size < 5 cm (P= 0.007,P= 0.026), no preoperative intestinal obstruction (P= 0.015,P= 0.019), no serosal invasion (P= 0.001,P= 0.001), no lymph node metastasis (P= 0.016,P= 0.001), and stage I–II disease (P= 0.013,P= 0.001). However, no significant differences in OS or PFS were observed between patients who underwent preoperative CTA examination and the control group (P= 0.551,P= 0.591), between male and female patients (P= 0.402,P= 0.361), or between patients with and without postoperative complications (P= 0.561,P= 0.520). Finally, multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression analysis revealed that serosal invasion (P= 0.013;P= 0.009), lymph node metastasis (P= 0.029;P= 0.043), and tumor stage (P= 0.002;P= 0.001) were independent prognostic factors that affected the OS and PFS of patients with colon cancer.

Preoperative CTA and 3D reconstruction provide essential information for laparoscopic surgery, facilitate the optimization of surgical procedures, and support improved postoperative recovery for patients with colon cancer, suggesting promising clinical applications.

Colon cancer is one of the most common types of malignant tumors worldwide, and the annual incidence of colon cancer is greater than one million new cases [1]. Owing to advances in surgical techniques and their widespread application, laparoscopic radical resection has become the preferred minimally invasive treatment for patients with colon cancer. Laparoscopic resection results in patient outcomes that are comparable to those of open surgery and allows superior postoperative recovery [2]. However, additional methods are still needed to further improve the effectiveness of laparoscopic colon cancer treatment.

In the use of laparoscopic radical resection to treat colon cancer, complete mesocolon resection and mesocolon lymph node dissection, as well as high ligation of colic vessels and D3 lymphadenectomy to treat advanced right and left colon cancers, must be performed strictly according to protocol to meet the requirements of radical resection [3]. Thus, surgeons and radiologists are committed to identifying preoperative imaging assessment tools that can ensure the accuracy and specificity of complete mesocolic excision and lymph node dissection [2,4]. Notably, imaging tools, including CT angiography (CTA) and three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction, can provide visualized 3D images of arterial distribution. Using CTA with multiplanar reconstructions allows the generation of a detailed preoperative map of the vascular anatomy, and this approach can be helpful for accurately distinguishing the branches and variations of the colonic artery before surgery [5]. CTA combined with 3D reconstruction is highly valuable for accurately identifying mesenteric vessels, facilitating adequate lymph node dissection, and ensuring appropriate blood supply to the intestinal segment within the operative field [6]. Although some studies have suggested that combining CTA and 3D reconstruction in laparoscopic colectomy may reduce postoperative complications and potentially improve patient survival rates, randomized controlled trials and long-term survival data analysis are lacking [7,8]. A randomized study in which 80 patients with right colon cancer were included revealed no significant differences in complication occurrence or hospital stay duration between the image fusion group, whose original images were reconstructed via CTA and CT colonography, and the conventional CT group [9]. Therefore, the clinical value of preoperative CTA combined with 3D reconstruction in the laparoscopic treatment of colon cancer and long-term survival of patients remains controversial and requires further investigation.

The aim of this study was to explore the effects of preoperative CTA and 3D reconstruction on laparoscopic radical colon cancer surgery and subsequent postoperative recovery.

Patients with colon cancer who underwent laparoscopic resection at Zhejiang Cancer Hospital between August 2020 and December 2022 were enrolled in this pilot, randomized control study. The inclusion criteria were as follows: patients diagnosed with stage I‒III colon cancer who were eligible for radical laparoscopic colon cancer surgery following evaluation by preoperative colonoscopy, enhanced CT scans of the abdomen and chest, and tumor marker detection. The exclusion criteria included (1) patients with rectal cancer, (2) minors, (3) pregnant women, (4) patients with disabilities, (5) patients with other diseases in the end stages, and (6) patients with a history of drug allergy or allergic reactions in previous CT examinations. The study was registered on the ChiCTR website (Trial registration: ChiCTR2000034378), and informed consent was obtained from all the patients. This study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of Zhejiang Cancer Hospital (Ethics Approval Number: IRB-2020–54).

All the patients were randomly assigned to either the CTA group or the control group using a random number table. A total of 85 patients were numbered from 1 to 85 according to their order of admission. Then, any starting number was selected from a random number table, and 85 random numbers in the same sequence were generated. Next, these random numbers were divided by the number of groups, and the remainder was calculated. The patients were then assigned to either the CTA group or the control group on the basis of whether the remainder was 0 or 1. When each patient was enrolled, the investigator or his designated personnel informed the random code custodian of the center of the subject code, and the random code custodian determined whether the patient was assigned to the CTA group or control group according to the random code table. Only the subjects were blinded to their group allocation.

The patients in the CTA group underwent preoperative CTA examination, followed by 3D reconstruction of the colonic artery. This reconstruction facilitated the diagnosis of the distribution and variation of the colonic arteries by a team of radiologists. Moreover, the patients in the control group underwent routine preoperative enhanced abdominal and pelvic CT examinations without CTA detection and 3D reconstruction by the same team of radiologists.

Siemens 64-row dual-source CT (Somatom Definition Flash CT) and automatic exposure dose adjustment technology were used to perform routine CT scans of the abdomen and pelvis in the control group, and dual-energy enhanced CT scans of mesenteric arteries in the arterial stage were performed in the CTA group. For routine scans, a single tube with a voltage of 120 kV and a reference tube current of 300 mAs was used. The slice thickness and slice spacing were both 1 mm, with a pitch of 0.7 and collimation of 128 × 0.6 mm. For dual-energy enhanced scans, Tube A had a voltage of 80 kV and a reference tube current of 461 mAs; Tube B had an additional tin plate filtered voltage of 140 kV and a reference tube current of 178 mAs. The fusion ratio between Tube A and Tube B was set to 0.5; the collimation was set to 64 × 0.6 mm; the pitch was set to 0.75; the scan field was set to 332 mm × 332 mm; and the slice thickness and slice spacing were both set to 1 mm. The tube rotation speed (RT) was set to 0.33 s/circle, with the scanning direction from the head to the foot. Patients fasted for 4 h before the examination, and they consumed 800–1200 mL of warm water 15 min before the examination. For enhanced scanning, 85 mL of iopromide (370 mg/mL) was administered via intravenous injection through the elbow, and scanning ranged from the upper edge of the liver to the pubic symphysis. Following the completion of image acquisition for all patients undergoing CTA examination on the Siemens Definition Flash CT scanner, radiologists performed 3D reconstruction using the integrated post-processing workstation, Syngo.Via, provided by Siemens. 3D imaging and visualization analysis were conducted using VR (Volume Rendering) technology. Artificial intelligence (AI) was not employed for the 3D image reconstruction process. 3D image reconstruction was performed by radiologists, and the classification of the middle colonic artery (MCA), inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) and colonic branches of the superior mesenteric artery (cbSMA) was jointly determined by clinical doctors and radiologists.

The MCA is an artery that originates from the right side of the superior mesenteric artery, and it is divided into a left branch and right branch [10]. The left branch of the MCA extends to the left side of the transverse colon and the splenic flexure of the colon, connecting with the marginal arch of the left colic artery. The right branch of the MCA extends to the right side of the transverse colon and the hepatic flexure of the colon, connecting with the right colic artery. According to previous reports [11,12], MCA bifurcation can be classified into four types. Type A, which is the most common type, is characterized by one right branch and one left branch from the common trunk of the MCA. In Type B, one right branch and one left branch of the MCA separate from the SMA. In Type C, one right branch and one left branch of the MCA originate from the SMA. Type D includes only one MCA without a branch from the SMA (Fig.1).

The IMA is an artery that originates from the aorta and ends when a branch of the artery occurs (the superior rectal artery, the sigmoid artery, or the left colic artery). The left colic artery (LCA) originates from the IMA and extends to the descending colon and splenic flexure of the colon. We evaluated the classifications reported by Yada et al. and Murono et al. [12] using 3D images, and we defined four types of IMA classifications. In Type A, the LCA arose independently from IMA. In Type B, the LCA and SA branch from a common trunk of the IMA. In Type C, the LCA, SA, and SRA branch from the same point. In Type D, the SA and SRA branch from the IMA without the LCA (Fig.2).

The SMA is an artery that originates from the abdominal aorta and branches to the small intestine, right colon, transverse colon, and other related organs. On the basis of variations in the right colonic artery (RCA), four types of colonic branches of the SMA (cbSMA) can be classified. In Type A, the RCA arises independently from the SMA. In Type B, the RCA branches from the MCA. In Type C, the RCA branches from the ileocolic artery (ICA). In Type D, the RCA is absent (Fig.3).

All the patients underwent laparoscopic radical surgery to treat colon cancer, and the surgery was performed by a consistent surgical team using the STORZ laparoscopic-assisted system. A laparoscopic Johnson’s linear stapler was used for bowel closure and disconnection, whereas Johnson’s circular stapler was used for bowel anastomosis. The CTA group underwent the same preoperative examinations, surgical procedures, and postoperative management as the control group, with no additional interventions. If the patient’s intestinal function recovers after the operation, the oral feeding can be consumed and recorded. All the patients received routine postoperative follow-up examinations to evaluate tumor recurrence, metastasis, and mortality due to various causes. Data on patient overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival (PFS) were collected and recorded, and survival-related statistical analyses were conducted on the basis of baseline and clinical characteristics.

The primary outcome was the duration of the operation. The secondary outcomes were intraoperative blood loss, duration of hospitalization, number of lymph node dissections, duration of fasting, duration of tube drainage, OS and PFS. Basic characteristics, including age, body mass index (BMI), gender, and surgical history, as well as clinical characteristics, including tumor site, tumor size, lymph node metastasis, invasion of the serosa, intestinal obstruction, tumor stage, and postoperative complications, were recorded.

Analyses were conducted in a modified intention-to-treat (mITT) population, which included all the participants who underwent laparoscopic surgery after randomization. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 20.0 (IBM, USA) software. The chi-square test was used to analyze categorical data. For continuous data, the normality of their distribution was initially determined. Continuous data that conformed to a normal distribution are presented as the means ± standard deviations (SDs) and were compared with t tests. Continuous data that conformed to a skewed distribution are presented as medians and quartiles and were compared with the rank-sum test. We performed survival analysis for OS and PFS using the Kaplan–Meier method, constructed a Cox proportional hazards model through Cox regression analysis, conducted log-rank tests for differences between two groups, and plotted corresponding survival curves. A two-tailedP< 0.05 indicated a statistically significant difference.

Eighty-five patients, including 42 in the CTA group and 43 in the control group, were initially included for randomization. Among these patients, one patient in the CTA group was found to have liver metastasis, and two patients in the control group were found to have unresectable tumors with liver metastasis after examination. Consequently, these three patients received systemic palliative chemotherapy and were unable to undergo laparoscopic surgery. Following the principle of mITT analysis, the final analysis included 82 patients who underwent surgery (Fig.4). Additionally, two patients in the CTA group and one patient in the control group had a history of laparoscopic surgery. The CTA group and the control group were comparable in terms of age (61.63 ± 12.41 years vs. 59.27 ± 10.39 years,P= 0.352), BMI (22.70 ± 2.48 vs.23.34 ± 2.44,P= 0.241), gender (male/female, 27/14 vs. 23/18,P= 0.365), tumor site (left/right, 27/14 vs. 22/19,P= 0.260), tumor size (> 5 cm/≤ 5 cm, 16/25 vs. 11/30,P= 0.240), invasion of the serosa (yes/no, 19/22 vs. 13/28,P= 0.174), lymph node metastasis (yes/no, 24/17 vs. 25/16,P= 0.822), surgical history (yes/no, 2/39 vs. 1/41,P= 0.556), and pathological stage (I/II/III, 4/18/19 vs. 1/26/14,P= 0.135, Table1).

The duration of the operation in the CTA group was significantly shorter, with an average of 123.68 ± 26.09 min, whereas that in the control group was 154.12 ± 33.15 min (P< 0.001, Table1). The amount of intraoperative blood loss in the CTA group was also significantly lower than that in the control group (median 50.00 [50, 100] vs. 100.00 [50, 100],P= 0.001, Table1). Compared with that in the control group, the number of lymph node dissections during surgery in the CTA group was slightly greater, but the difference was not significant (24.12 ± 13.12 vs. 22.07 ± 7.76,P= 0.392, Table1). The duration of fasting in the CTA group was significantly shorter than that in the control group (median 4.00 [4.00, 5.00] vs. 5.00 [4.00, 6.00],P< 0.001, Table1). There were no significant differences in the duration of tube drainage between the CTA group and the control group (6.00 [5.00, 6.00] vs. 6.00 [5.00, 7.50],P= 0.051, Table1). Finally, the duration of hospitalization was significantly shorter in the CTA group (median 15.00 [14.00, 15.50] vs.16.00 [14.00, 18.00],P= 0.023, Table1).

On the basis of the different surgical procedures that were used to treat left colon cancer and right colon cancer, we divided the colon cancer patients into two subgroups: the left colon cancer subgroup (49 patients) and the right colon cancer subgroup (33 patients). Statistical analysis of the data from the CTA and control groups in the left colon cancer and right colon cancer subgroups revealed the following. In the right colon subgroup, the duration of operation in the CTA group was significantly shorter, with an average of 126.64 ± 22.99 min, than the duration of 159.42 ± 38.74 min in the control group (P< 0.001, Table2). The amount of intraoperative blood loss in the CTA group was also significantly lower than that in the control group (median 50.00 mL vs. 100.00 mL,P= 0.022, Table2). The duration of fasting in the CTA group was significantly shorter than that in the control group (median: 4.00 days [4.00, 5.00] vs. 5.00 days [4.00, 6.00],P< 0.021, Table2). However, no significant differences in the other variables were found between the CTA group and the control group.

In the left colon subgroup, the CTA group had a significantly shorter duration of operation, with an average of 122.15 ± 27.86 min, than the control group (149.55 ± 27.55 min) (P< 0.001, Table3). The amount of intraoperative blood loss in the CTA group was also significantly lower than that in the control group (median 50.00 mL vs. 100.00 ml,P= 0.014, Table3). The duration of fasting in the CTA group was significantly shorter than that in the control group (median: 4.00 days [4.00, 5.00] vs. 5.00 days [4.00, 6.00],P< 0.021, Table3). However, no significant differences in the other variables were found between the CTA group and the control group .

Therefore, on the basis of the statistical analysis of the three groups, the CTA group had a significantly shorter duration of operation, less intraoperative blood loss, and a shorter duration of fasting than the control group. However, there were no significant differences between the CTA group and the control group in terms of the number of lymph node dissections during the operation, duration of tube drainage, or duration of hospitalization (Table2, Table3).

Survival analysis using the Kaplan–Meier method revealed that patients with a tumor size ≥ 5 cm, preoperative intestinal obstruction, postoperative pathological serosal invasion, lymph node metastasis, and stage III disease had significantly worse OS than patients with a tumor size < 5 cm (P= 0.007), no preoperative intestinal obstruction (P= 0.015), no serosal invasion (P= 0.001), no lymph node metastasis (P= 0.016), and stage I–II disease (P= 0.013) (Fig.5A–E). However, no significant difference in OS was observed between patients who underwent preoperative CTA examination and the control group (P= 0.551, Fig.5F), between male and female patients (P= 0.402), or between patients with and without postoperative complications (P= 0.561).

Similarly, patients with a tumor size ≥ 5 cm, preoperative intestinal obstruction, postoperative pathological serosal invasion, lymph node metastasis, and stage III disease had significantly worse PFS than those with a tumor size < 5 cm (P= 0.026), no preoperative intestinal obstruction (P= 0.019), no serosal invasion (P= 0.001), no lymph node metastasis (P= 0.001), and stage I-II disease (P= 0.001) (Fig.6A–E). No significant differences in PFS were observed between patients who underwent preoperative CTA examination and those in the control group (P= 0.591, Fig.6F), between male and female patients (P= 0.361), or between patients with and without postoperative complications (P= 0.520).

Cox regression analysis was performed on variables withP< 0.05 and clinical significance. The results indicated that colon cancer patients with serosal invasion, lymph node metastasis, and stage III disease had a greater risk of mortality than those without serosal invasion (HR = 13.427, 95% CI: 1.712–31.886), those without lymph node metastasis (HR = 0.029, 95% CI: 0.003–0.722), and those with stage I–II disease (HR = 0.011, 95% CI: 0.001–0.203). Serosal invasion (P= 0.013), lymph node metastasis (P= 0.029), and disease stage (P= 0.002) were identified as independent prognostic factors that affect OS among colon cancer patients.

Colon cancer patients with serosal invasion, lymph node metastasis, and stage III disease also had a greater risk of tumor progression than those without serosal invasion (HR = 7.399, 95% CI: 1.632–33.537), those without lymph node metastasis (HR = 0.080, 95% CI: 0.007–0.924), and those with stage I–II disease (HR = 0.014, 95% CI: 0.001–0.188). Serosal invasion (P = 0.009), lymph node metastasis (P= 0.043), and disease stage (P= 0.001) were confirmed to be independent factors that affect PFS among colon cancer patients.

The results for OS and PFS in right/left colon cancer subgroup analysis were described in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2. No significant differences in OS and PFS were observed between patients who underwent preoperative CTA examination and those in the control group (Table4).

Postoperatively, one case of pulmonary infection (Clavien–Dindo Grade IIa) and one case of paralytic ileus (Clavien–Dindo Grade IIa) were observed in the control group, whereas no postoperative complications were observed in the CTA group (Supplementary Table S3).

Preoperative CTA examination and 3D reconstruction of the colonic arteries facilitated precise visualization of tumor location and mesenteric artery distribution among 41 patients who were diagnosed with colon cancer and underwent CTA examination. Notably, one patient in the CTA group exhibited a Riolan arch. Representative 3D reconstruction images of a patient with left-sided colon cancer featuring a Riolan arch (Fig.7A) and another patient with right-sided colon cancer (Fig.7B) are shown.

In the CTA group, according to the MCA classification, 32 patients (78.05%) were categorized as having Type A, 5 patients (12.20%) as having Type B, 3 patients (7.31%) as having Type C, and 1 patient (2.44%) as having Type D. For the IMA classification, 25 patients (60.97%) were classified as having Type A, 4 patients (9.76%) as having Type B, 7 patients (17.07%) as having Type C, and 5 patients (12.20%) as having Type D. Finally, on the basis of the cbSMA classification, 27 patients (65.85%) were categorized as having Type A, 3 patients (7.32%) as having Type B, 7 patients (17.07%) as having Type C, and 4 patients (9.76%) as having Type D (see Fig.8and Table5for details).

Our study demonstrated that, compared with the control group, the CTA group exhibited significantly shorter operation durations and less intraoperative blood loss. To minimize statistical bias, we stratified the colon cancer patients into left colon and right colon subgroups on the basis of tumor location. The findings revealed that in both subgroups, the CTA group had significantly shorter durations of operation and less intraoperative blood loss than the control group. The duration of the operation and amount of intraoperative blood loss serve as critical indicators for assessing the quality of laparoscopic surgery. Preoperative CTA and 3D reconstruction techniques enable surgeons to identify colonic artery variations, thereby reducing intraoperative bleeding, improving surgical procedures, and enhancing the efficiency and safety of laparoscopic surgery. Additionally, two postoperative complications, including one case of pulmonary infection and one case of paralytic ileus, were documented in the control group. Notably, no postoperative complications were observed in the CTA group. As our study only included 82 patients, the absence of reported anastomotic leakage cases is acceptable. However, increasing the number of study patients may result in reported cases of anastomotic leakage. Therefore, preoperative CTA and 3D reconstruction play pivotal roles in optimizing the laparoscopic colon surgery process while improving surgical precision and safety.

Laparoscopic surgery is the standard surgical treatment for early- to mid-stage colon cancer [13]. Standardized dissection along embryological planes, high ligation of colonic arteries, and complete mesocolic excision are essential for evaluating laparoscopic surgery quality [14]. Bleeding from any vascular injury obscures the mesenteric plane, hinders precise dissection of the colonic mesentery and clearance of mesenteric lymph nodes, and prolongs the operation time and surgical process [15]. Our study revealed that operation duration and intraoperative blood loss volume were significantly lower in the CTA group than in the control group, which is consistent with the findings of previous studies. Kawashima et al. [6] reported that colon cancer patients who underwent preoperative CTA and 3D reconstruction had shorter durations of operation and lower volumes of blood loss during laparoscopic complete mesocolic excision for colon cancer, indicating that preoperative CTA and 3D reconstruction help surgeons identify mesenteric vessel distribution and variation and prevent intraoperative bleeding.

Statistical analysis of the extent of lymph node dissection in surgical specimens from both groups revealed no significant difference, which differed from the findings of other studies. For example, Bian et al. [9] found that for patients with right colon cancer who underwent complete mesocolic excision, preoperative CTA resulted in more lymph node dissection. This difference can be attributed to the fact that all patients in this study underwent standard laparoscopic radical resection, which included meticulous lymph node dissection [16]. The mean number of dissected lymph nodes in both groups exceeded the minimum requirement of 14 per the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines. Although there was no statistically significant difference, more lymph nodes were dissected in the CTA group, suggesting that CTA may facilitate meticulous mesentery separation and accurate colonic vessel ligation, leading to increased lymph node retrieval. This is crucial for precise pathological staging and provides a foundation for postoperative adjuvant therapy [17].

In the statistical analysis of postoperative recovery in the colon cancer and left/right colon cancer subgroups, preoperative CTA examination significantly reduced the duration of postoperative fasting, whereas there were no significant differences in drainage tube duration or length of hospital stay. These metrics have not been extensively examined in previous studies, and one study revealed no difference in hospital stay; however, the CTA group had a shorter operative time, less intraoperative bleeding, and greater extent of lymph node dissection than the control group [9], which aligns with our findings. Moreover, our study demonstrated that preoperative CTA and 3D reconstruction can shorten the postoperative fasting time, thus facilitating rapid postoperative recovery. As preoperative CTA provides crucial information about variations in colonic arteries, it reduces intraoperative blood loss, shortens the operative time, and effectively leverages the advantages of laparoscopic surgery [18]. The successful implementation of laparoscopic radical resection for treating colon cancer contributes to the rapid postoperative recovery of patients. Although no significant differences were detected in this study, the CTA group had a shorter drainage tube duration and hospital stay than the control group. Increasing the number of patients who are enrolled in future studies will yield more accurate statistical results, providing valuable evidence for the correlation between CTA detection and postoperative recovery.

The incidence of mesenteric artery variation is greater in the colon than in the rectum and small intestine. Consequently, identifying colonic artery variation during surgery is critical for preventing arterial injury [19]. Reports in the literature indicate that the rates of variation in the MCA, IMA, and cbSMA are significantly greater than those of other colonic arteries [20,21]. On the basis of previous studies, Type A is defined as the common type of IMA, IMA, and cbSMA bifurcation, and all other classifications are considered variants [22]. Among the 41 patients with colon cancer who underwent CTA, the variation rate was 22% for the MCA, 39% for the IMA, and 34% for the cbSMA. These rates are consistent with those reported by Zhan and Murono [12,23], further emphasizing the high prevalence of variations in the MCA, IMA, and cbSMA. The degree of intraoperative blood loss in the CTA group was significantly lower than that in the control group (P= 0.001), indicating that the use of preoperative CTA examination to determine the classification and variations in colonic arteries is crucial for preventing major vascular injuries and minimizing intraoperative blood loss.

One rare variation between the IMA, MCA, and cbSMA is the Riolan arch [24], which is an important collateral artery that connects the LCA to the MCA [25,26]. Among the 41 patients in the CTA group, one patient (approximately 2.44%) exhibited a Riolan arch, which is consistent with reported incidence rates ranging from 7.5%–17.8% in the literature [27]. The presence of the Riolan arch is clinically significant because of the poor blood supply at Griffiths point within the splenic flexure of the colon. Identifying the LCA bifurcation and safeguarding the Riolan arch during dissection and ligation procedures involving the IMA can ensure adequate blood supply to the proximal intestinal tube located in the descending colon region, minimize the risk of colonic artery injury during surgery, optimize the blood supply to the proximal colon during anastomosis, and facilitate successful laparoscopic radical resection of colon cancer (Supplementary Fig. S3).

Among the clinical features, only tumor size, intestinal obstruction, lymph node metastasis, postoperative pathological serosal invasion, and stage were significantly associated with the OS and PFS of patients. Patients with colon cancer who exhibited postoperative pathological serosal invasion, lymph node metastasis, and stage III disease had higher risks of death (OS) and tumor progression (PFS) than patients without serosal invasion, lymph node metastasis, and stage I–II disease. These results are consistent with previous reports in the literature [28]. Although preoperative CTA examination and 3D reconstruction can improve surgical procedures and promote postoperative recovery, they do not significantly improve survival or prognosis because of the lack of correlation with tumor-related indicators.

There are several limitations to this study. This single-center study involved a limited number of patients, which may introduce potential bias and reduce the generalizability of the conclusions. The randomization of the study design was relatively simple, and blinding was challenging owing to differences in examinations. Additionally, although long-term follow-up and survival analyses were conducted, no significant correlation was found between CTA and patient OS or PFS. Further multicenter studies with larger sample sizes and longer follow-up periods are recommended to validate the results of this study.

There are several limitations to this study. This single-center study involved a limited number of patients, which may introduce potential bias and reduce the generalizability of the conclusions. The randomization of the study design was relatively simple, and blinding was challenging owing to differences in examinations. Due to the limited sample size of the current study, as well as the inherent complexity and variability in the classification of colonic veins, we were unable to perform 3D reconstruction and detailed classification of the colonic venous system, which constitutes a notable limitation of this research. In future work, we plan to expand the sample size and integrate CT imaging with 3D reconstruction to better visualize and classify colonic veins, thereby enhancing the validity and reliability of our findings. Additionally, although long-term follow-up and survival analyses were conducted, no significant correlation was found between CTA and patient OS or PFS. Further multicenter studies with larger sample sizes and longer follow-up periods are recommended to validate the results of this study.

In conclusion, preoperative CTA and 3D reconstruction provide crucial information to support the use of laparoscopic surgery in colon cancer patients. Although no significant correlation was found between CTA and patient OS or PFS, these techniques can improve surgical outcomes, reduce intraoperative blood loss, and facilitate rapid postoperative recovery. Therefore, preoperative CTA and 3D reconstruction, which are important imaging tools in the perioperative management of laparoscopic colon cancer surgery, have great potential to increase the success rate of laparoscopic surgery and promote postoperative recovery in patients.

We would like to thank the surgeons, nurses, radiologists, anesthesiologist and pathologists, and patients who participated in our study. We also thank the Bethune Ethicon Excellent Surgery Foundation and Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province to fund our study.