Household food insecurity (HFI), stemming from inadequate income, negatively affects health—disproportionately so among expecting/new parents and children. Nordic‐style redistribution structures are expected to mitigate HFI, but it is currently unclear whether this holds true, especially among ethnic minority families who are facing both structural discrimination in access to state resources and interpersonal discrimination and barriers. To explore whether Nordic‐style redistributive infrastructure ameliorates pregnancy HFI and to assess attitudes about HFI, in this qualitative‐quantitative study, we ran and thematically analysed focus group discussions (FGDs) and interviews about HFI and health with ethnic minority birthing parents who live in marginalised neighbourhoods (n= 5), with their social/health care providers (n= 8) and with ethnic minority women straddling the roles of birthing parents and social/health care providers (n= 11). We contextualised these FGD/interview data with ethnographic notes and with frequency statistics on HFI among birthing parents (n= 267; 54 from marginalised, ethnic minority majority neighbourhoods). We found that HFI affects families from marginalised Danish neighbourhoods. Positionalities influence views on two overarching themes on HFI experiences—resources and health knowledge—with professionals emphasising health knowledge and parents emphasising resources. Nordic political economies may reduce but not eliminate HFI for young families, particularly in marginalised neighbourhoods, calling for further monitoring and intervention.

In the wake of multiple socioeconomic and geopolitical crises reshaping the distribution of power and resources from 2008 through the early 2020s, household food insecurity (HFI) has become a growing public health challenge in many high‐income countries (HICs; Himmelgreen et al.2022; Lee et al.2012; Pollard and Booth2019). HFI occurs when a household lacks the economic means to acquire—reliably and without worry—safe, appropriate, nutritious and socially acceptable food for all household members (Carter et al.2014). HFI is associated with increased risks of undernutrition, micronutrient deficiencies and numerous noncommunicable diseases including diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, depression and anxiety (Himmelgreen et al.2022; Lee et al.2012; Moradi et al.2019). In terms of underlying causes, HFI is largely a product of the uneven distribution of resources and power within and across societies (Drydakis2024; Reynolds2021). These fundamental inequities follow social gradients, manifested in various structures (e.g., laws, governance bodies), institutions (e.g., schools), relationships (e.g., families) and individual characteristics (e.g., gender; Braveman and Gottlieb2014). These social determinants of health (SDH) intersect with one another, such that some individuals and groups are systematically excluded from access to resources and power for multiple reasons, such as lacking enough family money to afford higher education plus preclusion from certain lines of work due to, for example, ethnic or racial stereotyping and discrimination (Crenshaw2015; Lewis2023). Attending to intersecting, multilevel SDHes is core to understanding and seeking to disrupt HFI in HICs (e.g., Drydakis2024).

Epidemiological studies of HFI in HICs indicate that people living with poverty, people who are racialised and/or of ethnic minorities and reproductive‐aged women and other menstruators (hereafter ‘girls and women’ or ‘mothers’), pregnant women and other pregnant people (‘pregnant people’), and infants and children under age five (‘young children’) are more vulnerable than others to experiencing both HFI and its negative health consequences. Given that HFI is definitionally related to lack of economic resources, it disproportionately affects people who lack sufficient income and who experience poverty and economic stress (Bastian et al.2022). For historical reasons linked to colonialism, slavery and forced migration/asylum‐seeking, Indigenous people, Black people and people of colour living in HICs are at higher risk of household and neighbourhood poverty and face more barriers to accessing fresh food supplies within their neighbourhoods and thereby are at higher HFI risk (Bowen et al.2021; Skinner et al.2016). These parts of the population are also confronted with forms of psychosocial stress (e.g., systemic discrimination, neighbourhood stigma), which can precipitate somatic stress responses (Pascoe and Smart2009), placing them at higher background risk of multiple diseases in which HFI is implicated (Drydakis2024).

Regarding girls and women, pregnant people, and young children, there are social and physiological factors that account for increased health risks associated with their experiences of HFI (Bastian et al.2022; Ivers and Cullen2011; Laraia2013; Lee et al.2012). Socially, these subpopulations are relatively likely to be excluded from power and from control of material resources and, in the case of women, to deprioritise their own needs (Bell et al.2022; Ivers and Cullen2011). Physiologically, young children incur high energetic and nutrient costs to grow new somatic and neurological tissues: if food resources are inadequate to support growth, this results in under‐investment in tissues and behaviours central to preventing disease and promoting health (Lee et al.2012; Moradi et al.2019). Likewise, reproductive‐aged women face energetic and nutrient costs associated with supporting ovulation, pregnancy, lactation and menstruation: inability to cover these costs with reliable intake of healthy foods can result in under‐investment in somatic maintenance leading to increased disease risks (Ivers and Cullen2011; Laraia2013; Lee et al.2012). Notably, pregnant women experiencing HFI experience higher rates of stress and worry and are at higher risk of developing common metabolic and nutritional complications of pregnancy (Augusto et al.2020; Bell et al.2024), negatively impacting the health of both mothers and children in the short and longer terms (Arabin and Baschat2017; McKerracher et al.2019).

Deepening understandings of the health consequences of HFI during sensitive periods in the lifecourse (like pregnancy and infancy), combined with the 2010–2020s increases in the prevalence of HFI in HICs (Mendly‐Zambo and Raphael2019; Pollard and Booth2019; but see Gatton and Gallegos2023), have pushed the issue upwards on research and policy agendas over the last decade, particularly in Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States. To date, however, efforts toaddressHFI in these countries have overwhelmingly consisted of emergency, stopgap interventions with food assistance programmes and/or food banks, have not tackled the issue at national policy levels and have not sought to address the multiple root causes of HFI, namely, poverty, unemployment, and individual and neighbourhood social inequities (e.g., Dachner and Tarasuk2018; Drydakis2024; Godrich et al.2021; Loopstra2018; McKay et al.2019).

One strategy to develop cross‐sector, root‐cause‐oriented solutions involves taking inspiration from social democratic welfare states with aggressive taxation and redistribution systems and with cultural and political values that emphasise equality, social trust and mutual aid (Pollard and Booth2019; Richards et al.2016)—such as Denmark. All adult residents of Denmark pay significant income taxes, and these resources are then redistributed among families/households through a combination of services, subsidies and direct monetary transfers (Prasad2008). Moreover, Danish residents trust their institutions to be fair and equitable, and they trust each other (Sønderskov and Dinesen2016). Indeed, in the only rigorous national studies on HFI in Denmark to date, Lund, Holm and colleagues (2018, 2020) showed that, in 2015, only about 6% of Danish households experienced any (even marginal level) HFI; 2.4% experienced severe HFI. More recent, albeit less in‐depth, analyses suggest that moderate to severe HFI in Denmark has increased to nearly 7% in the aftermath of early 2020s disruptions to supply chains and resulting food price and cost of living increases in 2023 (Wusheng and Godsk2024). Both these mid‐2010s and early 2020s numbers are low compared to figures for Canada (12.7% any HFI, 3% severe HFI in 2017–2018; Tarasuk and Mitchell2020; 22.9% any HFI, 16.9% moderate to severe in 2023; (PROOF Team2024)), the United Kingdom (∼10% of households experienced moderate or severe HFI in 2015; McGuinness et al.2016; ∼17% any HFI and ∼10% moderate to severe in 2022–2023; (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 2024)) and the United States (12.3% any HFI, ∼5% severe HFI in 2015; M. Rabbitt et al.2017; 12.8% any HFI, 5.1% severe HFI; (M. P. Rabbitt et al.2023)). Moreover, a cross‐national 2024 analysis of 2019 HFI prevalence data from 19 HICs indicates that politico‐economic systems similar to the Danish one may be somewhat protective against HFI (Berkowitz et al.2024). Therefore, these comparisons suggest that, in broad strokes, the Danish political economy and value systems foster an environment with relatively little poverty and HFI compared to other HICs.

That said, HFI may be a major problem forsomemarginalised groups living in Denmark. The same studies that reported low overall prevalence rates of HFI in 2015 also showed that residents of Denmark with low income, with welfare‐/disability‐based income and/or single‐parent status were at risk, with between 3.4% and 15.6% of those living in poverty reporting moderate‐to‐severe HFI (T. Lund et al.2018; Holm et al.2020). Moreover, as Lund and colleagues also emphasise, HFI is under‐researched and largely goes unmonitored and undiscussed in Denmark and in other countries with similar political economies (T. Lund et al.2018, Holm et al.2020; also see the studies by Pollard and Booth2019, Borch and Kjærnes2016). Therefore, we have little or no information about the extent to which factors such as immigration history and colonialism, racial/ethnic/linguistic minoritisation and neighbourhood affect HFI risk in Denmark or other Nordic states; nothing is known about how HFI, ethnic minoritisation and pregnancy/birth intersect in Denmark. And no data are yet available on how people living and/or working in HFI‐affected places in Denmark perceive or experience food insecurity and its potential health impacts.

With a view both towards gleaning insights from the Danish political and policy context that might inform the development of root‐cause strategies for mitigating HFI in other HICs (particularly among pregnant people, mothers and young children) and towards getting a deeper understanding of perinatal HFI as a public health challenge in the Danish context, this study has three aims: 1) to explore whether HFI represents a problem in some segments of the Danish population who were missed in the previous national‐level survey by Lund et al. (i.e., people with intersecting vulnerabilities including pregnancy, early parenthood, ethnic minoritisation, lower socioeconomic position and neighbourhood maringalisation and stigmatisation); 2) to begin to explore how HFI is experienced in relation to health and various other social and emotional challenges for people living in neighbourhoods expected to have relatively high rates of HFI during the perinatal periods; and 3) to explore and compare perspectives on HFI in Denmark as an SDH, considering intersectional perspectives across roles in the welfare state and its institutions. After reflecting on our findings related to these three aims, we briefly discuss policy and practice implications, both for the Danish context and for other HICs struggling with HFI among pregnant people/mothers and families with young children.

This is a qualitative‐quantitative study, combining in‐depth qualitative data from transcribed focus group discussions (FGDs) and interviews—supplemented by ethnographic notes and reflections by the senior author (who lived/worked in one of the study's focal neighbourhoods for 2 years) and by one of the student co‐authors involved in the initial fieldwork—and by a subset of data from a respondent‐driven, pregnancy/postpartum food security survey. The survey data are included here largely because we suffered a catastrophic loss of transcript data from one‐on‐one interviews with birthing parents, so we saw a need to supplement the empirical case from the maternal perspective.

The interviews, FGDs and ethnographic observations were carried out between September 1, 2021, and January 31, 2023, in Aarhus, Denmark. All interviews, discussions and observations focused on people who, at the time of participation, were expecting and/or new parents of young children living in one of Aarhus' ‘Parallel Societies/Transformation Neighbourhoods’ (defined below), or on health/social care providers who work to support expecting and/or new parents of young children who live in such a neighbourhood, or on people who straddled these roles (i.e., were both mothers and health/social care providers). We note that these qualitative data, then, encompass multiple perspectives from people and groups with different positions in society on HFI, pregnancy/postpartum health and neighbourhood well‐being.

Survey eligibility extended to legal adults (18+ years) capable of comprehending a letter of information about the study in English or Danish, who lived anywhere in Denmark and who were expecting parents and/or parents of children under three years at the time of the survey response. We restricted our present survey‐based analyses to responses from mothers/birthing parents who lived in Aarhus and/or in a Parallel Society/Transformation Neighbourhood.

Aarhus is Denmark's second largest city, with a bustling, commercial and cultural centre, a sociodemographically diverse profile and a census population as of the beginning of the study (mid‐2021) of ∼350,000. The majority of immigrant and ethnic minority families with young children in Aarhus live in suburban neighbourhoods on the outskirts of the city. This is a typical pattern for Denmark, in which historical housing and immigration policy incentivised new immigrants to move to city outskirts, often concentrated in neighbourhoods with large numbers of nonprofit housing units (Risager2023). These patterns have produced a number of neighbourhoods around Denmark, including in Aarhus, where most residents are immigrants, predominantly from Middle Eastern and northern/northeast African countries. Numerous barriers mean that many of these immigrants live with low or no incomes, with poverty and with poverty's accompanying challenges (R. Lund et al.2019; Lundsteen2023).

The national political response to the development of ethnic minority majority neighbourhoods has been to create and maintain a list that monitors neighbourhood statistics related to countries of origin, educational attainment, employment status, incomes and non‐White collar crime rates (Lundsteen2023; Risager2023). Neighbourhoods with more than 1000 residents, of which 50+% are from ‘non‐Western countries of origin’ and which fulfil at least two of four threshold criteria regarding education, employment, income or crime, are designated as ‘Parallel Societies’. Failure by a neighbourhood to remove itself from the government's Parallel Societies list (e.g., by selling nonprofit housing stock and leveraging assets for neighbourhood development) for 4+ consecutive years requires, by law, ‘omdannelse’ (transformation) through government intervention. A deep dive into these policies is beyond the scope of this article, but, briefly, strategies for redeveloping Transformation Neighbourhoods available to the state include forced eviction from and demolition of nonprofit housing stock, citizenship‐based restrictions on movement to these neighbourhoods, higher penalties for narcotic and violent crimes committed in them and mandatory daycare/preschool attendance for children of residents (R. Lund et al.2019; Lundsteen2023; Risager2023; Økonomi og Indenrigsministeriet2018).

We approach this study from a social determinants of health (SDH) perspective, articulated with a biopsychosocial perspective. As introduced above, SDHes comprise ‘non‐medical factors that influence health outcomes… the conditions in which people are born, grow, work, live and age, and the wider set of forces and systems shaping the conditions of daily life’ (WHO and Director‐General2021). Here, we draw on the SDHes to think through the intersectional factors operating at multiple levels to shape HFI, namely, participants' socioeconomic positions in society, discrimination and barriers related to pregnancy/motherhood, discrimination and barriers related to ethnic minoritisation and racialisation, and neighbourhood composition. We use this intersectional lens to understand perceptions of what shapes pregnancy health and nutrition in Denmark in general and HFI, in particular, in the context of Aarhus' Transformation Neighbourhoods.

The biopsychosocial model of health conceives health and disease outcomes as the result of complex interacting factors between the biological realm (e.g., genome, microbiome), the psychological realm (e.g., emotions, beliefs) and the social realm (e.g., relationships with family; interactions with social institutions such as schools; Engel1977). When applied to a public health challenge such as HFI during pregnancy/postpartum, thinking biopsychosocially means not only attending to people as parts of populations with varying risk factors for disease depending on the SDHes in their environments, but also as individuals with their own sets of experiences, perceptions, feelings, beliefs and agency, which interact with SDHes to produce health outcomes. This joint biopsychosocial and SDH framework allows for linking individual perspectives, roles, behaviours and actions with social dynamics and social environments as shapers of population health (Ross and Toner2004).

Participants for FGDs and interviews were recruited through two rounds of snowball sampling, one from August to December 2021 and a second from Sept 2022 to Jan 2023. This was accomplished through informal/network connections with the following: a local NGO/social organisation that does cultural brokering and social support outreach in the two neighbourhoods, another NGO that serves as a platform for community engagement, local branches of municipal organs for early childhood education and public health, and a midwifery clinic.

We began by running one (nonrecorded, get‐to‐know‐the‐community and its priorities) 1‐h stakeholder meeting with ∼25 participants from the cultural brokering NGO plus six mothers plus two other health/social care workers. This meeting informed the development of our semi‐structured FGD/interview guides, which we used to facilitate: two 90‐min FGDs with 11 of the cultural brokering workers, all of whom also were mothers who lived and worked in one of the Transformation Neighbourhoods (we hereafter call them ‘participants who straddled motherhood and health/social care professional roles’ or ‘straddlers’); one 60‐min FGD with three midwives who work with marginalised pregnant women in Aarhus; one 90‐min FGD with four mothers/pregnant women who lived in a Transformation Neighbourhood; nine 45‐min one‐on‐one interviews with additional mothers/pregnant people who lived in a Transformation Neighbourhood; and five targeted, rapid (10–20 min) one‐on‐one interviews with social/health care providers who work in a Transformation Neighbourhood (hereafter ‘rapid expert interviews’). All FGDs and meetings were facilitated by the senior author with the support of one student co‐author; one‐on‐one interviews were conducted mainly by student co‐authors. All participants were legal adults who consented to be interviewed and recorded. Except for the rapid expert interviewees and the midwives, participants were compensated for their time with grocery gift cards (100 DKK/hour). All interviews were recorded and transcribed in full (but see below regarding data loss of seven one‐on‐one interview transcripts).

Surveys were advertised nationally across Transformation and non‐Transformation Neighbourhoods through word of mouth and social media channels as well as in Aarhus via door knocking, and flyering in daycare institutions, clinics, the hospital and community centres.

The survey questions, the interview guide and an anonymised version of the survey dataset are archived on OSF (https://osf.io/e7f3t/). Briefly, the interview guides asked participants to tell about who they were; their views on their neighbourhood and their thoughts about health, nutrition and well‐being during pregnancy and early childhood; in the stakeholder meeting and the expert interviews, we also defined and then asked specifically about experiences, observations and attitudes about HFI in Denmark.

The survey used the Danish‐adapted version of the 6‐item short form United States Department of Agriculture food security survey module to measure HFI (cf. T. Lund et al.2018), with scores of 0 (responses of ‘never’ to all items) indicating probable food security, scores of 1 (responses of ‘sometimes’ to one item and ‘never’ to all others) representing marginal HFI, scores of 2–4 (responses of ‘sometimes’ or ‘often’ to at least two items) representing low food security/moderate HFI and scores of 5+ indicating very low food security/severe HFI (USDA Economic Research Service2012). The survey also measured overall health on a five‐point scale; respondent's status as pregnant, postpartum or partner; age; self‐reported race/ethnicity (used to derive an inferred experience of racialisation score); multiple indicators of socioeconomic position (self‐reported economic stress on a 0 to 10 scale wherein a score over five indicates struggling to make ends meet; highest completed educational level in six brackets from had not attended secondary school to had completed an advanced university degree; main sources of household income as different forms of government transfers and/or wages/salaries); and respondents' postal code and Transformation Neighbourhood residence.

Audio recordings of the FGDs and the interviews were transcribed, merged and uploaded to NVivo v. 12.0 (QSR International/ Lumivero2017). Unfortunately, the aforementioned data loss incident meant that, before merging, seven of the nine transcripts of one‐on‐one interviews with mothers were unavailable for formal coding, and one of the two remaining transcripts was actually from a follow‐up after participation in an FGD. We drew modestly on field notes, quotes and notes recorded in a student paper, and memories of these interviews to gut‐check the tone and core themes emerging from the other qualitative data at the centre of the analyses, that is, the data from the two FGDs with the 11 straddlers, the FGD with four birthing parents, the two interviews with birthing parents, the FGD with midwives and the five one‐on‐one rapid expert interviews. We note that straddler quotes were coded with the professionals when they discussed their work and with those of birthing parents when they discussed their own lives, experiences and private social lives.

A set of codes with operational definitions was created by four members of the team. These codes were used to label, categorise and hierarchically organise all substantive passages in the transcripts. This was done taking a semi‐inductive, critical public health approach (Pillen2023) and using thematic network analysis (Nowell et al.2017), wherein words, phrases or concepts within the data were labelled under one or more codes/subcodes. Uploaded transcripts were coded by two student coders, and coding discrepancies not resolvable by a brief discussion between the coders were resolved by the senior author. These codes/subcodes correspond to the most basic tier of a three‐tier theme structure, comprising ‘basic themes’, ‘organising themes’ and ‘global themes’. The global themes provide a holistic view of the data and reveal overall patterns and connections. Multiple representations and visualisations of connections among passages, codes and all levels of themes, combined with reflection on ethnographic observations, underpinned in‐depth discussion among all co‐authors. Three of the authors also engaged in several conversations during data collection and analyses about our positionalities as highly educated, multilingual, first‐ or second‐generation Black immigrant women with pro‐redistribution‐oriented politics. These positionalities were likely central in engaging participants from our targeted population in FGDs and in the stakeholder meeting and likely influenced the kinds of worries and challenges these participants were willing to disclose; our positions, particularly regarding our political orientations, shaped the level of attention we placed on particular themes during analysis, especially regarding economic resources and structural racism. Recognising these factors, we explicitly aimed to grant fair attentional weight to emergent themesnotrelated to economic resources or racism. The research team's discussions, including the reflexivity‐focused ones, yielded the core findings we report here.

To contextualise core findings (recognising that we only formally analysed three transcripts from FGDs and interviews with participants who identified exclusively via their roles as mothers/pregnant people), we also report descriptive statistics from survey responses from mothers/pregnant people from Transformation Neighbourhoods (n= 54) and from all other mother/birthing parent respondents who reported Aarhus postal codes (n= 213). Transformation Neighbourhood respondents were compared to other respondents using Χ2tests,t‐tests or Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon tests (depending on the type and distribution of the variables) with respect to their HFI status and several sociodemographic dimensions. All statistical tests were carried out in R (R Core Team2018).

The sociodemographic characteristics of the participants in the interviews and FGDs, aside from their gender, are reported in Table1. Regarding gender, one health/social care professional participant was a man; all others were women. Participants who participated as mothers or as straddlers were younger and, with two exceptions, had countries of origin outside Denmark (i.e., were ethnic minorities). Participants who participated primarily as health/social care professionals were, on average, slightly older, and all were of Danish origin.

Descriptive statistics for interview and FGD participants.

In cases of birthing parents and straddlers, inferred likeliness of experiencing racialisation was derived from mentions in transcripts of participants' race and/or ethnicity. In cases of health/social care professionals, researchers made assumptions based on their assessments of participants' surnames and phenotypic cues (e.g., dress, skin colour).

Missing record of number of years' experience for one health professional and for one social care professional, so these ranges are based on the figures provided for the 6 participants for which we have data.

The sociodemographic characteristics of the subsample of survey respondents are reported in Table2. Table2also reports comparisons of central tendencies or frequencies of HFI and sociodemographic characteristics between respondents from Transformation Neighbourhoods and respondents from other neighbourhoods. These analyses suggest that overall HFI scores are low in the sample, with mean total HFI scores being 1.48 (i.e., marginally food insecure) and 0.44 (i.e., food secure) from transformation and comparator neighbourhoods, respectively. Marginal HFI was common, affecting 57% of the respondents from Transformation Neighbourhoods. Both marginal and moderate‐to‐severe HFI were encountered more frequently in Transformation Neighbourhoods (p< 0.002 andp< 0.000, respectively). Self‐evaluated economic stress was also statistically significantly higher in Ttransformation Neighbourhoods (p< 0.000).

Sociodemographic profiles of subset of survey respondents (n= 267; 54 from Transformation Neighbourhoods around Denmark, 213 from non‐Transformation Neighbourhoods with Aarhus postal codes).

Respondents who identified as ‘Danish’, ‘White’, ‘European’ or ‘Caucasian’ were inferred to be unlikely to experience racialisation (0), and those who reported any other ethnicities and/or races were inferred to be more likely to experience racialisation (1).

The thematic network analysis yielded five global themes from discussions covering the topics of neighbourhood well‐being, pregnancy, motherhood, health and HFI. These five themes were as follows: ‘challenges’, ‘opportunities’, ‘resources’, ‘knowledge’ and ‘mental health’.

The extent to which participants emphasised each of these global themes depended on whether they were engaging in the discussion primarily as mothers/pregnant people or as health/social care professionals or were straddlers of both positions (see Figure1a,b). Mothers emphasised thechallengesthey were facing, especially structural barriers related to employment, education, entitlements and stigmatisation/lack of respect when interacting with the health and social care systems (as women, as people of colour and as people of non‐Danish national origin). Additionally, mothers emphasised theirmental health, frequently describing their experiences of their neighbourhood and of motherhood as coloured by a combination of nostalgic memories and mixed feelings of grief, guilt, worry and pride and joy in their children; they also noted repeatedly that support from family, friends and community was essential to overcoming mental health and structural challenges. Health/social care professionals, in contrast, emphasised the role ofknowledge—especially food and nutrition literacy—in mitigating HFI. Beyondknowledge, participants who were professionals underscored theopportunitiesavailable to them and to families in the neighbourhoods—spanning programmes, personnel, trainings and subsidies. For participants of all roles, especially for the straddlers,resourcesconstituted a moderately important thread in many of the discussions but were not discussed as extensively as the other global themes. That said, we suggest that the four other global themes can be conceptualised as resources or lack thereof, and we have therefore retainedresourcesas a central theme in our analyses. Our interpretation of the relationships between the global themes, the differing perspectives on those themes and what those relationships and perspectives might mean for understanding HFI are summarised in Figure2. We expand briefly on the theme ofresourcesas well as the theme ofknowledgeand how these interact with perspectives and roles when approaching HFI in Denmark below.

(a) Relative discursive dominance of basic and organising themes within five global themes (challenges,opportunities,resources,knowledge,mental health) from the perspectives of health/social care participants. In the professional sphere, knowledge was the dominant global theme and, within that, food literacy. (b) Relative discursive dominance of basic and organising themes within five global themes (challenges,opportunities,resources,knowledge,mental health) from the perspectives of birthing parent participants. In the maternal sphere, challenges were the largest theme, and many of these challenges were related to material resources, structural barriers and discrimination and/or mental health resources.

Summary of the relationships among the discursively dominant global themes ofresourcesand(health) knowledgein relation to participants' position in society as a health/social care professional, a birthing parent or a participant who explicitly straddled motherhood and health/social care professional roles.

Resources—including those related to finances and income, position in society and mental health—contributed fundamentally to the experience of HFI among the mothers with whom we spoke. Five participants, three who were straddlers and two who participated as mothers/pregnant people, suggested that lacking money and structural support led directly to making nutritional and health compromises for them and/or their children. In one case, that meant consciously choosing poorer‐quality foods so no one in the family would go hungry by the end of the month; in the four others, it meant sometimes literally being unable to buy and therefore forgoing nutrient‐rich staple foods such as dairy products, meat or fresh vegetables. Two of these participants painted pictures not only of HFI and poverty as stressors in their own lives but also as key stressors for many other mothers and families in their neighbourhood. Our ethnographic observations in this Transformation Neighbourhood further support the idea that HFI looms large: we frequently observed dozens of mothers jostling for and worrying about access to weekly food handouts at a local NGO; on three occasions, the senior author observed young children hanging around a local grocery store bakery complaining of hunger and asking for free ‘child buns’. A less extreme perspective on financial barriers to maternal/pregnancy/young child nutrition came from three midwives, all of whom noted that they were aware of clients who rationed or forewent recommended prenatal vitamin/mineral supplements because they were unaffordable.

That said, our data suggest that some of the participating mothers had not necessarily experienced running out of money for nutritious food for the household. These mothers who hadnotexperienced severe HFI explained that having limited financial resources and living in a neighbourhood with various social challenges and with a risk of forced eviction contributed to their psychosocial loads and interfered with theirmental health. These socioeconomic and neighbourhood factors raised worries about whether, when and from whom to ask for help when resources were stretched thin, particularly when low language proficiency added extra challenges to navigating bureaucratic channels for support. Some participants noted that navigating lack of financial resources was particularly challenging in the Transformation Neighbourhood context, wherein the risk of stigmatisation and even family separation by social services is perceived to be high. Participants worried that prioritising the ‘wrong’ things within their limited financial means and with their limited social capital could result in them being evaluated by Danish care workers or administrators as poor or unfit parents. We heard this worry articulated clearly in an FGD with mothers, but the senior author also heard variations on this story from numerous parents while living in the neighbourhood.

Illustrative quotes from participants concerning HFI in relation to lack of socioeconomic resources, strains on mental well‐being and other social resource‐related challenges are presented in Table3, as are illustrative quotes from participants regarding HFI in relation to various forms of knowledge.

Quotes from FGDs and interviews with pregnant people, mothers and health/social care professionals illustrating differing perspectives on how resources and knowledge relate to HFI in Transformation Neighbourhoods.

Knowledgewas the single largest global theme among health/social care professionals. Almost all care professionals agreed that HFI may play a role in shaping the nutrition, health and well‐being of the women/families they work with. However, with few exceptions, these participants indicated that socioeconomic or financial barriers were less important determinants of health and nutrition for the people they work with than what they perceived as parents' lack of knowledge about how to do the following things: eat and live healthfully on a limited budget; leverage the many opportunities and supports available in the neighbourhoods; navigate cultural and linguistic barriers and misunderstandings; or cultivate mental bandwidth sufficient to prioritise healthy foods and health behaviours. We note that these claims were universally couched in care and were often explicitly framed as nonjudgemental or nonaccusatory. Rather, health/social care participants regarded parental lack of knowledge as possible opportunities for intervening and promoting health, suggesting that more and better knowledge translation would help reduce health challenges and inequities for both parents and children. In particular, we heard midwives and childcare institution managers suggest repeatedly that maternal obesity, iron deficiency anaemia, gestational diabetes and delayed motor development in babies and young children could be tackled by improving parents' food, nutritional and financial literacies.

From the maternal perspective, discussions of pregnancy and maternal health knowledge mainly pertained to body awareness. That is, women told us that they generally knew factually what was healthy but that needing to keep their own and their families' lives together—while also dealing with various forms of marginalisation and stigma—meant ignoring their own health needs and their own bodies. Mothers further suggested that care professionals sometimes focused on knowledge gaps or neighbourhood‐ or ethnicity‐related health statistics, thereby ignoring the mothers' bodies and experiences—their biopsychosocial health.

This qualitative‐quantitative study investigated experiences and perceptions of HFI during pregnancy, infancy and early childhood in socioeconomically marginalised neighbourhoods (‘Transformation Neighbourhoods’) in Denmark. Our analyses showed that, even in the Transformation Neighbourhoods, moderate‐to‐severe HFI is relatively uncommon for mothers/pregnant people, hinting that the Danish socioeconomic redistribution model partly mitigates severe HFI. However, our analyses also showed that many survey respondents and discussion participants from the Transformation Neighbourhoods experienced some marginal‐to‐moderate levels of HFI and that these experiences were linked with significant mental health burdens and some possible nutritional and somatic health consequences. Our most striking finding (vis‐à‐vis previous studies in non‐Nordic HICs; e.g., Dickson et al.2023; Douglas et al.2018; McKerracher et al.2020; Moffat et al.2021) was that Danish health/social care providers working with pregnant people and mothersdid notperceive HFI as a main threat to health and well‐being in the neighbourhoods, focusing instead on lack of knowledge and cultural barriers as the most important obstacles.

The possibilities for comparison of our results with others from similar contexts are limited because there are few previous studies on HFI in Nordic countries and none focused on HFI at the intersection of structural racism and pregnancy/peripartum health. Nevertheless, our findings align broadly with those of previous studies on related topics. Specifically, like the single previous national survey‐based analysis of HFI in Denmark and a survey of asylum seekers in Norway, our analyses show unequivocally that HFIisa feature of life for some marginalised segments of Nordic populations and that there are intersecting national policy, neighbourhood and individual SDH dimensions to this; they further suggest that HFI is linked with health experiences such as poorer mental health, lack of psychosocial resources for body awareness and nutrient‐insufficient diets (Borch and Kjærnes2016; Henjum et al.2019; Holm et al.2020; T. Lund et al.2018). Furthermore, other studies in Nordic contexts have suggested that HFI and poverty are under‐researched and under‐monitored in these countries (Borch and Kjærnes2016; Holm et al.2020; T. Lund et al.2018), so our finding that HFI was not recognised by health/social care professionals as a top‐line SDH of pregnancy well‐being and nutrition may be unsurprising.

Although this study's thematic network analysis approach highlights overarching themes from multiple perspectives on neighbourhood HFI and health during pregnancy and through early childhood, this approach does not foreground the range of experiences, emotional texture or strength of the participants' voices that characterised the stakeholder meeting, the FGDs and the interviews. Furthermore, in the limited space allotted, we focused on unpacking two global themes (resourcesandknowledge) because we saw these as having implications for policy and/or practice. We did not provide examples or in‐depth analyses of quotes pertaining to many of thechallenges,mental healthimplications oropportunitiesthat participants identified. We are elaborating these global themes when reporting findings to stakeholders, and we may explore situated experiences of HFI phenomenologically in future academic communications.

Additionally, this study only represents a small number of voices, and the only maternal perspectives included were those of women from Aarhus Transformation Neighbourhoods and who are first‐ or second‐generation immigrants from ‘non‐Western countries’ to Denmark and who were relatively proficient in Danish (although Danish proficiency was not an eligibility requirement). We saw these perspectives as worth foregrounding because they have previously been left out of Nordic HFI research, but our survey data suggest that other parts of the pregnant/peripartum Danish population are also dealing with marginal HFI, and we, as yet, know nothing of how mothers of Danish origin experience HFI or of how they view HFI in relation to their own or to the population's biopsychosocial health. Simultaneously, we recognise that we were likely unable to engage the most marginalised parts of the population because they likely would have lacked the digital and health literacies to opt in to this study.

Future work should investigate what HFI feels like and how it shapes the health of both parents who have longer historical relationships with Denmark across its regions and cities and those who are the hardest to reach given literacy, language and related social barriers.

The findings reported here have implications for policy and practice, both in Denmark and in other HICs. First, this study shows that the 2020s incarnation of the Nordic social democratic welfare state does not provide sufficient, equitably accessible income supports to protectallresidents from HFI and its negative impacts on diet, nutrition and mental health. Crucially, we show that some of the residents falling through the cracks are those who should be prioritised from a public health standpoint (i.e., pregnant people and birthing parents/mothers), given that maternal health and well‐being affect population health and well‐being not only now but for the next generations (Arabin and Baschat2017; Maindal and Aargaard‐Hansen2020; McKerracher et al.2019). This finding, particularly when combined with the results of the cross‐national analysis on the relationship between HFI prevalence and politico‐economic redistribution models across 19 HICs by Berkowitz et al. (2024), suggests that although strengthening broad‐based income supports in other HICs would protect many families in these countries from HFI, the Nordic‐style model leaves some people behind. As such, a Nordic‐style model should be extended to reach those people who face the greatest legal and social barriers to income entitlements. In the Danish case, many of the people facing the highest barriers are racialised immigrants from ‘non‐Western countries’ living in Transformation Neighbourhoods (R. Lund et al.2019; Lundsteen2023; Risager2023); in other countries, the politics and policy around entitlements that can mitigate HFI should be tailored to local intersecting SDHes.

Secondly, our work calls further attention to the lack of HFI monitoring and research in Denmark, especially in the pregnant/new parent and new immigrant segments of the Danish population (T. Lund et al.2018; Borch and Kjærnes2016). HFI, which appears to contribute to the mental health burdens and the poor nutrition of mothers in Transformation Neighbourhoods, remains under the radars of the health/social care providers working in these neighbourhoods. Danes' high level of trust in their institutions and in their state's ability to redistribute income and services may introduce barriers to perceiving and understanding poverty in Denmark. Inability to recognise the existence of tight socioeconomic constraints may lead health/care professionals to infer that the main problem is lack of knowledge or literacy about healthy food and healthy household finances. One strategy for overcoming barriers to poverty perception might be to integrate assessing HFI and economic stress into the standard national and regional population health surveys and/or into regular health screenings for mothers and young children. Adding a brief food security screening module to a main population health monitoring tool (e.g., Friis et al.2022) would be an obvious first step. Building on that, minor adjustments to clinical practice and community public health could reduce HFI in pregnant people/mothers once their health/social care professionals have been trained to look for it. For example, vouchers for prenatal vitamins and/or grocery gift cards given during first midwifery consultations might help relieve pressure on expecting parents who are struggling over how to prioritise limited resources.

On a final note, the mothers we spoke with were clear that their lived and observed experiences of HFI and poverty affected their mental health, which interacted with their feelings around how both their bodies and their neighbourhoods were perceived and stigmatised. This, fundamentally an issue of reproductive justice (i.e., the ability to exercise decisions on if, when, where and how to become a parent and to be able to parent in full psychosocial health and dignity), echoes the findings of numerous other qualitative or mixed‐methods studies on HFI during pregnancy/peripartum in other settings, as well as theoretical work on food equity and stigma (Earnshaw and Karpyn2020). There is no straightforward, one‐size‐fits‐all recommendation for clinical or social practice that is likely to address this cluster of issues regarding HFI and reproductive justice. Nevertheless, we gently remind care professionals and the policymakers responsible for imagining the Transformation Neighbourhoods, that neighbourhoods are, fundamentally, people, families and communities. Building a healthy neighbourhood and a healthy next generation requires recognising the many and complex biopsychosocial experiences and needs of the people who constitute them.