Limited infiltration of immune cells within tumors restricts the therapeutic efficiency of immune checkpoint blockades. Herein, we discover that sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) is down-regulated in patients with lung cancer who do not respond to PD-1/PD-L1 therapy. Our findings indicate that S1P gradient enhances the migration and viability of immune cells and promotes the polarization of macrophages toward the M1 phenotype primarily through mitochondrial reactive oxygen species–activated nuclear factor κB and Janus kinase–signal transducers and activators of transcription signaling pathways. To capitalize on these findings, we used a biodegradable sodium alginate hydrogel as a delivery system for the sustained and sequential release of S1P and anti–PD-L1 (αPDL1). In vivo studies demonstrated that S1P-αPDL1@Gel effectively inhibited tumor growth and reduced the recurrence of local tumors after surgery. Additionally, the hydrogel significantly enhanced the infiltration of dendritic cells, M1 macrophages, CD4+T cells, and CD8+T cells. S1P-αPDL1@Gel holds a promising therapeutic strategy for remodeling the immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment.

Hydrogel containing sphingosine-1-phosphate improves lung cancer immunotherapy for patients resistant to PD-1/PD-L1 therapy.

Lung cancer ranks as the second most common cancer and the primary cause of cancer-related deaths around the world (1). This highly aggressive disease accounted for ~2.2 million diagnosed cases and resulted in 1.8 million deaths in 2020 worldwide (2). Lung cancer can be classified into small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and non-SCLC (NSCLC). Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) represents the primary subtype of NSCLC, comprising roughly 60% of all NSCLC cases (3). While chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)–targeted therapy have enhanced patient outcomes, these treatments, along with surgery, still face substantial challenges (4). Surgical resection remains the most effective treatment for early stage and selected cases of stage IIIA NSCLC (5). However, it cannot guarantee the complete eradication of tumor cells, and a significant proportion of patients experiences tumor recurrence. Postoperative radiotherapy and chemotherapy are commonly used as adjuvant therapies or as palliative options for patients with advanced stages of tumors (6). However, these treatments are plagued by severe systemic toxicity, limited efficacy, and development of acquired drug resistance, all of which remain unresolved issues (7). Molecularly targeted therapies, such as EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor, have shown improved survival outcomes compared to conventional chemoradiotherapy (8). However, only a small subset of patients harbors EGFR gene mutations, limiting the broader applicability of these therapies.

Immunotherapies, especially immune checkpoint inhibitors, have been widely used in clinical practice, offering significant promise for patients with advanced lung cancer (9). However, only a small subset of people exhibits durable responses to these treatments, which is primarily due to the complex tumor immune status (10). The immune status of tumors plays a pivotal role in determining the effectiveness of immunotherapy and can be categorized into three distinct phenotypes: inflamed, immune excluded, and immune desert (11,12). The last two phenotypes are also called “cold” phenotype. Patients with cold tumors, characterized by a weak immune response to tumors, are less likely to benefit from immunotherapy (13). The “immune-excluded” phenotype refers to tumors with a significant presence of T cells within the tumor stroma. However, these T cells are unable to penetrate the stroma and infiltrate the tumor due to a highly suppressive microenvironment (14). In contrast, “desert-type” tumors are characterized by a complete lack of infiltrated immune cells even in the stroma, creating a true “immune desert” where immune activity is virtually absent (15). The lack of immune cells infiltration in desert-type tumors can be related to various mechanisms, such as impaired T cell priming, defects in antigen presentation, low expression levels of major histocompatibility complex I antigens on the surface of cancer cells, and the presence of immune inhibitory molecules like B7-H4 (16,17). These factors collectively contribute to the immune evasion strategies of the tumor, making it challenging to achieve immunotherapeutic responses. The development of immunotherapy based on biomaterials may represent a significant breakthrough in addressing the current challenges (18,19).

Sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P) is a bioactive lipid that serves as the final product of sphingolipid metabolism (20). It is predominantly found in blood and lymph, where it is produced and secreted by red blood cells (RBCs), endothelial cells, and platelets into the extracellular environment. S1P is generated through the action of sphingosine kinases, primarily sphingosine kinase 1 (SPHK1), from its precursor, ceramide (21). While S1P is present at very low concentrations intracellularly, this is due to the action of the endoplasmic reticulum–resident S1P lysate. Specific tissue-specific transporters, such as spinster homolog 2 (SPNS2), are responsible for exporting S1P into the extracellular space (22). The concentration gradients of S1P across various biological compartments are essential for regulating the fidelity and specificity of several biological processes, including cell survival, innate immunity, and antitumor immune responses (23). S1P exerts its biological effects by binding to its specific receptors, S1P receptors (S1PRs), which are expressed on immune and endothelial cells (24).

Recent evidence has highlighted the crucial role of S1P in the regulation of innate immunity (21). The concentration of S1P in blood is significantly higher than lymphoid tissues. During immune response, S1P acts as a lipid chemoattractant, guiding T lymphocytes from low-S1P lymphoid tissues to the high-S1P circulation system (25). T cells primarily respond to S1P signaling through the S1PR1. Previous studies have shown that S1PR1-knockout T cells failed to exit the thymus and egress into lymph in fetal liver chimeric models (26). Moreover, S1P is essential not only for the circulation of naïve T cell but also for their survival, maturation, and differentiation. Knockdown of S1PR1 expression in T cells results in a 40% decrease in both total and functional mitochondria (27). Moreover, S1P gradients are involved in orchestrating the localization and interferon-γ (IFN-γ) response of natural killer cells (28). Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an autoimmune disorder characterized by demyelination and the excessive activation of immune cells, notably T cells and macrophages. Fingolimod, an S1PR-targeted drug, is used to treat MS by functionally antagonizing S1PR1 (29). While many of the existing studies have focused on inflammatory diseases, the role of S1P signaling in the tumor microenvironment (TME) remains poorly understood (30). A study by Chongsathidkietet al. (31) demonstrated that glioblastoma tumors exhibit relatively low expression of S1PR1 compared to paired normal tissues. This reduced expression of S1PR1 leads to the sequestration of naïve T cells in the bone marrow, thereby suppressing antitumor immune responses. However, the role of S1P and its receptor S1PR1 in lung cancer remains largely unexplored.

Given the therapeutic effects of fingolimod in MS, we hypothesized that S1P might enhance antitumor immunity by activating immune cells in lung cancer. To investigate this, we conducted the study to investigate the role of S1P signaling in lung cancer and develop an innovative immunotherapeutic strategy. Our results revealed that both S1P levels and its receptor, S1PR1, were notably decreased in individuals with lung cancer compared to those in healthy controls. Notably, patients with higher S1P levels exhibited better response rates to immunotherapy. These clinical data suggest that S1P may serve as a critical signaling molecule in modulating immune response in lung cancer. In vitro experiments further confirmed that S1P could enhance dendritic cell (DC) maturation, promote M1 tumor-associated macrophage (TAM) polarization, and facilitate T cell migration. Mechanistically, we found that S1P increased mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mtROS) production and mitochondrial biogenesis, activating inflammatory pathways including the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain (NOD)–like receptor (NLR) family pyrin domain–containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome, nuclear factor κB (NF-κB), and Janus kinase–signal transducers and activators of transcription (JAK-STAT). To address the challenge of delivering S1P and establishing a concentration gradient between the tumor and bloodstream, we developed an innovative S1P-containing sodium alginate hydrogel (S1P-αPDL1@Gel) for sustained and sequential release of S1P and anti–programmed death-ligand 1 (αPDL1) within tumors (Fig. 1). This formulation retained S1P for up to 4 days and αPDL1 for up to 8 days, doubling the release duration compared to free drugs. The initially released S1P enhanced immune cell infiltration, while the delayed release of αPDL1 restored T cell and macrophage function. In vivo, S1P-αPDL1@Gel significantly inhibited tumor growth and recurrence, with average tumor volume in treated mice only a quarter of that in the phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) control group. Moreover, three of the six mice treated with S1P-αPDL1@Gel exhibited significantly reduced tumor recurrence (tumor volume < 200 cm3). As expected, tumors treated with S1P-αPDL1@Gel exhibited increased apoptosis, reduced cell proliferation, and promoted infiltration of mature DCs, M1 TAMs, and CD4+T, CD8+T, and IFN-γ+T cells. Therefore, the S1P-αPDL1@Gel could effectively remodel the TME through a “two-step” strategy, immune infiltration followed by activation, making it a promising approach for treating cold tumors and as an adjuvant therapy postsurgery.

Clinical findings indicated that elevated plasma S1P levels correlated with a higher immune response to anti–PD-L1 (αPDL1)/PD-1 blockade, suggesting S1P as a unique immunoadjuvant for lung cancer immunotherapy. Inspired by these findings, we developed an in situ–formed immunotherapeutic hydrogel, which realized sustained and sequential release of S1P and αPDL1 within the tumor. The initial release of S1P establishes a concentration gradient between the tumor and bloodstream, enhancing immune cell infiltration via mitochondrial ROS production, mitochondrial biogenesis, and activation of inflammatory pathways, including the NLRP3 inflammasome, NF-κB, and JAK-STAT. Subsequently, the released αPDL1 dismantles the tumor’s immune evasion mechanisms, restoring the function of T cells and macrophages.

Given that S1PR1 and SPNS2 are crucial for the reception and transport of S1P signals (32), we explored their expression using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Program dataset. Our analysis revealed that both the S1PR1 and SPNS2 were significantly down-regulated in tumor tissues compared to those in matched normal tissues (Fig. 2A). Moreover, SPHK1, a kinase responsible for S1P production (33), also exhibited lower expression levels in LUAD tissues compared to those in matched normal tissues (fig. S1). Survival analysis using Kaplan-Meier plotter, a platform providing the survival data from TCGA (34), indicated that the mRNA expressions of S1PR1 and SPNS2 were significantly associated with the survival of patients with lung cancer, with hazard ratio (95% confidence interval) of 0.74 (0.66 to 0.84) and 0.78 (0.67 to 0.9), respectively (Fig. 2B). These findings suggest that low expression levels of S1PR1 and SPNS2 are associated with worse prognosis in the patients with lung cancer. Given the critical role of S1P signaling in modulating immune responses, we further explored the immunological implications of these genes. Using Timer 2.0 dataset, which integrates tumor immune infiltration data (35), we found a positive correlation between the level of S1PR1 and the activation of several immune cell types, including CD8+T cells, CD4+T cells, macrophages, and myeloid DCs, but a negative correlation between S1PR1 and myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) in both LUAD and lung squamous cell carcinoma (Fig. 2Cand fig. S2). Similarly, a corresponding analysis for SPNS2 revealed comparable correlations with immune cell activation and MDSC infiltration (figs. S3 and S4).

(A) The expression levels of S1PR1 and SPNS2 in tumor tissues and matched normal tissues from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) data are presented. (B) The prognostic significance of S1PR1 and SPNS2 in NSCLC based on TCGA data. (C) S1PR1 expression is positively correlated with the activation of CD8+T cells, CD4+T cells, macrophages, and myeloid dendritic cells (DCs), but negatively correlated with myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) according to Timer 2.0 dataset in LUAD. A positive value of Spearman’s Rho (Rho) denotes a positive correlation, while a negative value signifies a negative correlation. (D) Scheme showing the process of the clinical experiments. (EandF) Representative immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of S1PR1 in tissue microarray comprising 97 lung cancer and paired normal tissues. (G) The IHC scores for S1PR1 in our tissue microarray. (H) Representative IHC staining of lung cancer samples with high and low expression of S1PR1, CD8, and CD80. Scale bars, 50 μm. (I) Representative chest computed tomography (CT) images of responders and nonresponders before and after two or four circles of immunotherapies. (J) The plasma concentrations of S1P in 15 noncancer patients (NC patients) and 28 patients with lung cancer (LC patients). (K) The plasma concentrations of S1P in 11 responders and 17 nonresponders to immunotherapy. (L) The characteristics of the 28 patients with lung cancer who received PD-1/PD-L1 targeted therapies. Statistical significance was calculated via Student’sttest (***P< 0.001; ****P< 0.0001).T, tumor specimens;N, paired normal specimens;B, benign disease specimens; TPM, transcripts per million; HR, hazard ratio; LUSC, lung squamous cell carcinoma.

To further validate the clinical value of S1P, we conducted both a retrospective study involving 97 patients with lung cancer and a prospective study involving 28 patients with lung cancer and 15 patients with benign diseases (Fig. 2D). Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining on a tissue microarray comprising 97 paired lung cancer samples confirmed that S1PR1 expression was significantly lower in lung cancer tissues compared to that in paired normal tissues, supporting our previous findings from the TCGA dataset (Fig. 2, E to G, and fig. S5). Moreover, CD80- and CD8-positive cells had higher levels of S1PR1 in the tissues of lung cancer compared to CD80- and CD8-negative cells (Fig. 2H), suggesting that S1PR1 promoted the tumor infiltration of M1 macrophages and CD8+T cells. In the prospective study, we aimed to evaluate the correlation between plasma S1P levels and immunotherapy responses. Plasma S1P levels were measured in 28 patients with lung cancer before initiating programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1)/PD-L1 targeted therapies. The results were compared with plasma S1P levels from 15 noncancer patients with benign diseases including lung bullae and bronchiectasis. After two or four cycles of immunotherapies, clinicians assessed the patients’ response rates. Representative chest computed tomography (CT) images of responders and nonresponders before and after immunotherapy were shown inFig. 2I. The clinical characteristics of the 28 patients with lung cancer and 15 noncancer patients were listed inFig. 2Land table S1. We found that patients with lung cancer had significantly lower plasma levels of S1P compared to noncancer controls (average level, 355.48 versus 670.73 nM) (Fig. 2J). Patients with higher plasma levels of S1P exhibited better response rates to immunotherapy than those with lower levels (Fig. 2K). Specifically, the average S1P level in responders was 439.15 nM, while, in nonresponders, it was 226.18 nM. Collectively, these findings provide robust evidence that key genes involved in S1P signaling, including SPHK1, SPNS2, and S1PR1, are down-regulated in lung cancer. Moreover, the expression of SPNS2 and S1PR1 appears to be prognostic, with lower levels associated with worse survival outcomes. Elevated plasma S1P levels are correlated with improved responses to αPDL1/PD-1 immunotherapy, underscoring the potential of S1P as a unique immunoadjuvant in the treatment of lung cancer.

Given the critical role of S1P in activating immune cells through intricate mechanisms, we then investigated its impact on bone marrow–derived macrophages (BMDMs). Cytotoxicity of S1P to BMDMs was initially evaluated using cell counting kit–8 (CCK-8) assay. It was found that low concentrations of S1P (under 2.5 μM) exhibited negligible impact on BMDMs, whereas higher concentrations induced cytotoxicity (fig. S6A), indicating that S1P exerts beneficial effects on immune cell viability only at low concentrations. Moreover, low concentration of S1P (under 2.5 μM) did not affect the proliferation of Lewis lung carcinoma (LLC) cells (fig. S6B). On the basis of these observations, we selected 0.5 and 1.0 μM S1P for subsequent treatments of immune cells. Bone marrow–derived DCs (BMDCs) were incubated with 0.5 and 1.0 μM S1P for 24 hours, and their maturation was assessed by flow cytometry. It was found that the maturation of BMDCs (CD80+CD86+CD11c+) was significantly improved after S1P treatment (Fig. 3, A and B). To investigate the biological effects of S1P-treated BMDCs on T cells, carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE)–labeled OT-I T cells were cocultured with S1P-treated or PBS-treated BMDCs in the presence of OVA257-264peptide for another 72 hours. As expected, flow cytometry revealed a higher level of T cells proliferation in cultures with S1P-treated BMDCs (Fig. 3Cand fig. S7), indicating that S1P significantly enhances the biological function of BMDCs.

(AandB) Representative flow cytometric plots (A) and quantitative analysis (B) of mature DCs (CD80+CD86+) gating on CD11c+cells after treated with different concentrations of S1P. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). (C) Representative flow cytometry diagram showing the proliferation of CFSE-staining OT-I T cells after incubation with BMDCs with different pretreatments (n= 3). (DandE) Representative flow cytometric plots (D) and quantitative analysis (E) of M1-polarized BMDMs (CD80+) gating on F4/80+CD11b+cells after treatment with different concentrations of S1P. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). (F) The levels of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) after coculture of S1P-treated BMDMs and LLC cells at radios of 10:1 or 15:1 for 24 hours. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). (G) Relative mRNA expression of M1 macrophages marker genes (iNOS, IL-6, IL-1β, and TNF-α) in S1P-treated BMDMs. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). (HandI) The levels of IL-6 (H) and TNF-α (I) in S1P-treated BMDMs were detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). (JandK) Representative images (J) and the quantification (K) of migratory Raw264.7 cells stained with crystal violet at 18 hours after incubation with S1P. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). (L) The quantification of T cells in the lower chamber migrated from the upper chamber at 4 hours after incubation with S1P. Scale bars, 100 μm. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). Statistical significance was calculated via Student’sttest (n.s., not significant; *P< 0.05; **P< 0.01; ***P< 0.001; ****P< 0.0001).

Next, we evaluated the effects of S1P on the polarization of BMDMs, which were cultured in macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF; 40 ng/ml) for 5 to 7 days to generate M0 macrophages. These macrophages were then treated with 0.5 or 1.0 μM S1P for 24 hours. Flow cytometry analysis revealed that S1P treatment increased the proportion of M1 macrophages (CD80+F4/80+CD11b+) (Fig. 3, D and E). We also performed a lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) assay by coculturing BMDMs with LLC cells. After 24 hours pretreatments with PBS or S1P, BMDMs were cocultured with LLC cells at radios of 10:1 or 15:1 for another 24 hours. The LDH release assay showed that LLC cells exhibited higher LDH level after coculturing with S1P-treated BMDCs (Fig. 3F), suggesting that S1P obviously enhances the cytotoxic effects of BMDCs on tumors. Moreover, real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis indicated that S1P treatment significantly up-regulated M1 macrophage markers including inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), interleukin-1β (IL-1β), IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor–α (TNF-α) (Fig. 3G). Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) confirmed that S1P-treated BMDMs produced higher levels of IL-6 and TNF-α, highlighting S1P’s role in enhancing macrophages’ antitumor activity (Fig. 3, H and I). To investigate the gradient-driven effect of S1P, we placed different concentrations of S1P on the bottom of a Transwell chamber, with T lymphocytes and Raw264.7 cells in the upper chamber in serum-free medium. After 18 hours, Raw264.7 cells that had migrated to the underside of the Transwell membrane were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and, subsequently, stained with crystal violet (Fig. 3, J and K). The number of T cells that migrated from the upper chamber to the lower chamber was quantified using a cell counting device after a 4-hour incubation (Fig. 3L). The Transwell assay demonstrated that S1P remarkedly promoted the migration of T lymphocytes cells and Raw264.7 cells, with higher concentrations exhibiting a more pronounced effect. Together, our results confirmed that S1P not only promoted the maturation of DCs but also enhanced the polarization of M1 macrophages. S1P induces the migration of both T lymphocytes and macrophages, highlighting its potential as a key mediator in immune response regulation.

To investigate the signaling pathways responsible for the immune regulation mediated by S1P, we performed RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) on BMDMs treated with 1.0 μM S1P for 24 hours. The analysis identified 210 up-regulated and 57 down-regulated genes (fig. S10). The heatmap demonstrated a marked up-regulation of various immune-related genes in the S1P-treated group (Fig. 4A). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis identified a significant up-regulation of inflammation-related signaling pathways, including cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, TNF signaling, NLR signaling and IL-17 signaling (Fig. 4, B and C). Concurrently, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) confirmed the enrichment of pathways including NF-κB, JAK-STAT, TNF signaling, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, and the positive regulation of cytokine production (fig. S11). Key genes involved in these signaling pathways, including IL-1α, NOD1, C-C motif chemokine ligand 5 (CCL5), TNF receptor superfamily member 8 (TNFRSF8), Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), and colony stimulating factor 1 (CSF1), were further validated by real-time PCR (Fig. 4D).

(A) The heatmap of RNA-seq showing various genes concerning immune response up-regulated in S1P-treated BMDMs. (B) Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways analysis of differentially expressed genes between PBS and S1P groups. (C) Enriched chord diagram of the KEGG pathways and the related genes. (D) Relative mRNA expression of immune related genes in S1P or PBS-treated BMDMs. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). (E) The levels of p-STAT1, p-p65, and p-IκBα expressed in BMDMs after treated with 1 μM S1P for 15, 30, or 120 min. (F) The levels of NLRP3 expressed in BMDMs after treated with 1 μM S1P for 4 or 8 hours. h, hours. (G) The levels of NLRP3 in BMDMs after treated with Mdivi-1 (10 μM). (H) The levels of p-STAT1, p-p65, and p-IκBα expressed in BMDMs after Mdivi-1 (10 μM) and S1P (1 μM) treatment. (I) Mitochondrial ROS in Raw264.7 were detected by MitoSOX Red staining and analyzed by confocal microscopy after S1P (1 μM) and Mdivi-1 (10 μM) treatment. Scale bars, 10 μm. (J) Mitochondria in Raw264.7 were detected by TMRM and analyzed by confocal microscopy after S1P (1 μM) and Mdivi-1 (10 μM) treatment. Scale bars, 10 μm. (K) Illustration of the immunomodulatory effect of S1P, which enhances NLRP3 inflammasome, NF-κB, and JAK-STAT signaling pathways, through increased mitochondrial ROS production and mitochondrial biogenesis. Statistical significance was calculated via Student’sttest (n.s., not significant; *P< 0.05; ***P< 0.001).

To investigate the mechanism by which S1P promotes the polarization of M1 macrophages, BMDMs were incubated with different time of S1P (1.0 μM), and the activation of key transcription factors, STAT1 and NF-κB, which play central roles in immune cell activation and cytokine production (36,37), was assessed by Western blotting. As exhibited inFig. 4E, treatment with 1 μM S1P led to a significant increase in phosphorylated STAT1 (p-STAT1) levels at 15, 30, or 120 min. Moreover, markers of NF-κB activation, such as phosphorylated p65 (p-p65) and phosphorylated inhibitor of nuclear factor κB (p-IκBα), were notably elevated. Notably, both the STAT1 and NF-κB signaling pathways peaked in activation around 30-min mark, after which they either remained elevated or gradually diminished.

In addition to STAT1 and NF-κB, we further investigated the expression of NLRP3 inflammasome, a key component of the innate immune system’s inflammasome complex (38). Western blotting further confirmed that treatment with 1 μM S1P for 4 or 8 hours remarkedly up-regulated the expression of NLRP3 (Fig. 4F). Previous studies have suggested that active mitochondrial biogenesis and the resultant mtROS can activate key signaling pathways including NF-κB, JAK/STAT signaling, and the NLRP3 inflammasome, through epigenetic reprogramming (39–41). Mitochondrial division inhibitor 1 (Mdivi-1), a selective inhibitor of dynamin-related protein 1 (Drp-1), has been reported to prevent excessive mitochondrial fission by inhibiting the phosphorylation of Drp-1 at Ser616(42). To explore whether the function of S1P depends on active mitochondrial biogenesis, BMDMs were pretreated with Mdivi-1 (10 μM) for 24 hours before S1P administration. As expected, Mdivi-1 could reverse the activation of NF-κB, JAK/STAT signaling, and NLRP3 inflammasome induced by S1P (Fig. 4, G and H).

Moreover, macrophages treated with S1P exhibited significantly higher levels of mtROS, as indicated by MitoSOX Red, a fluorescent indicator that selectively labels mitochondrial superoxide (43), compared to PBS-treated group (Fig. 4Iand fig. S12). To further assess S1P-mediated mitochondrial biogenesis, we used tetra-methyl-rhodamine methyl ester (TMRM), a cell-permeant dye that specifically labels mitochondria (44). Confocal images revealed that S1P treatment induced significant mitochondrial fragmentation, transforming the typically elongated tubular networks into shorter, punctate structures (Fig. 4Jand fig. S13). In addition, pretreatment with Mdivi-1 (10 μM for 24 hours) before S1P administration effectively counteracted the activation of mitochondrial biogenesis and mtROS production, indicating that the biological effects of S1P are dependent on mitochondrial dynamics (Fig. 4, I and J, and figs. S12 and S13). Collectively, our results indicate that S1P promotes mitochondrial biogenesis and mtROS production, which, in turn, leads to consistent activation of NLRP3 inflammasome, NF-κB, and JAK-STAT pathway, exhibiting the potential to remodel the TME from an immune suppressive to an immune-activated state, as illustrated inFig. 4K.

The above clinical data and in vitro experiments demonstrated that S1P signaling could effectively activate the antitumor immune response in lung cancer. S1P may enhance immune cell infiltration and remodel the immunologically cold TME of lung cancer. Given S1P’s complex biological role in body systems, precise modulation is crucial to maximize therapeutic benefits while minimizing adverse effects. However, delivering S1P as a therapeutic agent presents several challenges. First, as a small molecule, the precise and controlled release of S1P is difficult due to their rapid diffusion and potential instability. The pharmacological efficacy of S1P relies on establishing a concentration gradient between the tumor and the bloodstream, but the conventional systemic administration lacks tissue or organ specificity. To overcome these hurdles, sodium alginate (ALG) hydrogel (45,46) was chosen as an ideal delivery platform for the sustained and sequential release of S1P and αPDL1, due to the smaller molecular size of S1P compared to αPDL1. The initially released S1P may enhance the immune cell infiltration and convert the cold tumor to an inflamed one. Subsequently, the released αPDL1 can further reveal the identity of tumor cells and restore the function of immune cells, thereby revoking the tumor’s immune evasion mechanism.

For synthesizing the S1P-αPDL1@Gel, S1P and αPDL1 were gradually added to the ALG solution with stirring to ensure homogenous distribution. Calcium chloride (CaCl2) was then introduced to induce cross-linking and stabilize the hydrogel’s three-dimensional network structure (Fig. 5, A and B). Through optimization, we identified a combination of 4 wt % ALG and 1 wt % CaCl2in a ratio of 2:1, forming a relatively stiff hydrogel with a moderate gelation rate (Fig. 5C). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis of the freeze-dried hydrogel scaffolds revealed a highly porous structure (Fig. 5D). Rheological testing confirmed that the storage modulus (G′) of the S1P-αPDL1@Gel was greater than the loss modulus (G″), and theG′ andG″ of the hydrogel remained stable at ~3 and 1 kPa for 5 min, respectively, indicating favorable gel stability (Fig. 5, E and F). Furthermore, when the stress exceeded 23%, the curve of theG′ andG″ underwent a crossover, indicating that the threshold for its stress was 23% (Fig. 5G). Within the frequency of 10 Hz, theG′ andG″ of the hydrogel remained stable (Fig. 5H). Furthermore, we investigated the in vivo gelation and degradation behavior of the hydrogel. C57BL/6 mice were subcutaneously injected with solutions containing S1P, αPDL1, ALG, and CaCl2. Upon injection, the solutions rapidly formed a solid hydrogel in situ. We monitored the degradation process over time, and a quantitative assessment of the S1P-αPDL1@Gel degradation behavior in vivo indicated that ~75% of the hydrogel remained 8 days postinjection. The slow degradation kinetics of S1P-αPDL1@Gel highlight its remarkable stability and potential suitability for controlled drug release applications (Fig. 5, I and J).

(A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of S1P-αPDL1@Gel. (B) Morphology transitions of ALG hydrogel from a fluid to a solid state upon the addition of CaCl2. (C) Photographs of hydrogel with different concentrations of sodium ALG and calcium chloride. (D) Representative SEM image of freeze-dried ALG hydrogel. Scale bar, 4 μm. (E) Changes inG′ andG″ of ALG hydrogel over time. (F) Scheme showing the process of rheological testing of ALG hydrogel. (G) Changes inG′ andG″ of ALG hydrogel with varying strain. (H) Changes inG′ andG″ of ALG hydrogel with varying frequency. (I) Representative ex vivo images of S1P-αPDL1@Gel after subcutaneous injection into mice captured at different time points. (J) Quantitative evaluation of S1P-αPDL1@Gel degradation behavior in vivo over time. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). (K) Scheme showing the in vitro release assay of S1P-IgG hydrogel using a Transwell chamber. (L) Release curve of S1P and IgG from S1P-IgG@Gel over time. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). (M) Fluorescence images of mice treated with free Cy5.5-labeled IgG or Cy5.5-labeled IgG@Gel at different time points. (N) Statistic analysis of total radiant efficiency of the in vivo release of IgG. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). (O) Statistic analysis of total radiant efficiency of the in vivo release assay of S1P. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). (P) Fluorescence images of mice treated with free Cy7-labeled S1P or Cy7-labeled S1P@Gel at different time points. Statistical significance was calculated via Student’sttest (n.s., not significant; *P< 0.05; **P< 0.01; ***P< 0.001).

Additionally, we investigated the release profiles of S1P and αPDL1 from the hydrogel scaffold. Due to its affordability and similar properties, immunoglobulin G (IgG) was used to replace αPDL1 in the release assay. Cyanine 7 (Cy7)–N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) and Cy5.5-NHS were used to label S1P and IgG, respectively. The hydrogel scaffold containing S1P and IgG was placed in the upper chamber of a Transwell plate, and the release of both molecules was monitored at different time points (Fig. 5K). Most S1P was released within one day, whereas IgG sustained release for 7 days (Fig. 5L). To evaluate the in vivo release behavior of S1P and αPDL1, hydrogel or PBS containing S1P and IgG was intratumorally injected into LLC tumors. Consistent with in vitro results, in vivo fluorescence imaging demonstrated that S1P and IgG delivered by hydrogel exhibited a sustained release profile. S1P-αPDL1@Gel retained S1P for up to 4 days and αPDL1 for up to 8 days, doubling the release duration compared to free drugs (Fig. 5, M to P). These results suggest that ALG hydrogel is a reliable platform for the sustained and sequential release of S1P and αPDL1, which may facilitate the immune cell infiltration and restore their ability to recognize and kill tumor cells.

To evaluate the in vivo therapeutic efficacy of S1P-αPDL1@gel against lung cancer, we subcutaneously implanted 5 × 104LLC cells into C57BL/6 mice. After 7 days, the tumor-bearing mice received intratumorally injections of PBS (50 μl), αPDL1@Gel (50 μl; 50 μg of αPDL1 per mouse), S1P@Gel (50 μl; 5 μg of S1P per mouse), free S1P-αPDL1 (50 μl; 5 μg of S1P and 50 μg of αPDL1 per mouse), or S1P-αPDL1@Gel (50 μl; 5 μg of S1P and 50 μg of αPDL1 per mouse) as shown inFig. 6A. Tumor sizes and body weights of mice in different groups were measured every other day. Compared to the PBS group, both S1P@Gel and αPDL1@Gel exhibited mild tumor suppression. In contrast, due to the synergistic effects of S1P and αPDL1, mice treated with either free S1P-αPDL1 or S1P-αPDL1@Gel exhibited enhanced antitumor effects. Notably, mice receiving S1P-αPDL1@Gel showed obviously smaller tumor volume compared to those treated with free S1P-αPDL1 (Fig. 6, B and D), suggesting that the sequential release of S1P and αPDL1 from the hydrogel contributed to the enhanced therapeutic efficacy. After 14 days, the mice were euthanized, and the tumor volumes among different groups were evaluated. The average tumor volume in the S1P-αPDL1@Gel group was only one-quarter of that in the PBS group (fig. S14). Survival was monitored over time, with median survival times of 16.5 days for PBS-treated mice, 20 days for αPDL1@Gel, 20.5 days for S1P@Gel, 28 days for free S1P-αPDL1, and 33.5 days for S1P-αPDL1@Gel (Fig. 6C). Meanwhile, nearly no difference in body weight was observed among different groups (Fig. 6E), indicating that locally applied S1P-αPDL1@Gel caused negligible side effects.

(A) Schematic representation of the tumor inoculation and treatment procedure on subcutaneous tumor model. (B) The tumor growth curves of mice in different groups. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 6). (C) Survival curves of subcutaneous tumor model (n= 6). (D) Individual tumor growth curves of mice receiving different treatments. (E) Body weights of mice in different groups. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 6). (F) Schematic representation of treatment procedure on tumor recurrence model. (G) The tumor growth curves of mice in different groups. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 6). (H) Survival curves of postsurgical recurrence model (n= 6). (I) Individual tumor growth curves of mice receiving different treatments. (J) Body weights of mice in different groups. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 6). (K) Representative hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining images of residual tumors after different treatments. Scale bars, (top) 5 mm and (bottom) 100 μm. (L) Representative TUNEL and Ki-67 staining of excised tumors in mice with different treatments. Scale bars, 100 μm. (M) Relative quantification of the mean fluorescence intensity (MFI) of TUNEL staining images. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). (N) Relative quantification of MFI of Ki-67 staining images. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). (O) S1P levels in tumor tissues detected by ELISA. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 6). (P) Serum levels of S1P after different treatments. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 6). G1, PBS; G2, αPDL1@Gel; G3, S1P@Gel; G4, free S1P-αPDL1; G5, S1P-αPDL1@Gel. Statistical significance was calculated via one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with a Tukey post hoc test or log-rank test (n.s., not significant; *P< 0.05; **P< 0.01; ***P< 0.001; ****P< 0.0001).

In addition to the primary tumors, residual tumors after surgery of advanced lung tumors often lead to tumor recurrence and metastasis, significantly affecting long-term survival. To assess whether local administration of S1P-αPDL1@Gel could prevent tumor recurrence, we performed experiments using an LLC incomplete tumor resection model. As illustrated inFig. 6F, most tumors were surgically removed, leaving ~5% of the original tumor volume when the tumors reached 150 cm3. Following resection, different formulations as above were injected directly into the resection cavity. After 14 days, all six mice in the PBS group showed notable recurrence. Consistent with above findings, mice treated with S1P-αPDL1@Gel exhibited the most effective therapeutic effect in controlling tumor recurrence (Fig. 6, G and I), with three of the six mice showing significant reduced recurrence (tumor volume < 200 cm3). Mice receiving nonencapsulated S1P-αPDL1 exhibited less tumor suppression. Furthermore, after tumor resection, the median survival times for mice receiving PBS, αPDL1@Gel, S1P@Gel, and free S1P-αPDL1 were 17.5, 22.5, 22.5, and 26 days, respectively (Fig. 6H). Impressively, four mice treated with S1P-αPDL1@Gel survived beyond 40 days, and two others lived for 32 and 35 days, respectively, indicating a significant survival advantage. Similarly, body weights remained stable across all treatment groups, indicating the favorable biocompatibility and biosafety of the S1P-αPDL1 hydrogel (Fig. 6J).

The potential utility of S1P-αPDL1@Gel was further confirmed by histological analysis. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining, along with immunofluorescence staining of the residual tumors, were used to assessed cell apoptosis and proliferation via terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate (dUTP) nick end labeling (TUNEL) and Ki-67 staining, respectively (Fig. 6, K to N). TUNEL and Ki-67 staining confirmed that the treatments with αPDL1@Gel, S1P@Gel, free S1P-αPDL1, and S1P-αPDL1@Gel significantly reduced cell proliferation and promoted tumor apoptosis compared to the PBS group. Among the treatments, S1P-αPDL1@Gel showed the greatest efficacy, achieving the most pronounced reduction in Ki-67 expression (80.7%) and the highest apoptosis induction (6.5-fold increase). To further investigate the role of S1P, we measured the levels of S1P in both residual tumor and serum by ELISA. As expected, mice treated with S1P-containing hydrogel exhibited higher S1P levels in the residual tumor compared to the other groups, with no significant differences in serum SIP levels across all groups (Fig. 6, O and P). These findings suggest that the S1P gradient between tumors and bloodstream might enhance immune cell infiltration and viability, contributing to tumor suppression. To investigate the biosafety of the S1P-αPDL1 hydrogel, healthy mice were administered a subcutaneous injection of S1P-αPDL1@Gel (5 μg of S1P and 50 μg of αPDL1 per mouse) in the dorsal region. A comprehensive evaluation was conducted through complete blood count (CBC) and biochemical tests, including alkaline phosphatase, alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, and serum urea levels, on days 1 and 7 after treatment. Compared to healthy controls, mice treated with S1P-αPDL1@Gel exhibited nearly no adverse alterations in CBC or biochemical parameters. Moreover, 1-month posttreatment, major organs including the heart, liver, spleen, lungs, and kidneys were harvested for H&E staining. It was found that S1P-αPDL1@Gel induced negligible toxicity to these major organs, suggesting that S1P-αPDL1@Gel induced nearly no hepatotoxicity, nephrotoxicity, or hematopoietic toxicity (fig. S15).

On the basis of the above results, we hypothesized that S1P-αPDL1@Gel may remodel the local TME by establishing an S1P gradient between the bloodstream and tumor tissues. To further elucidate the underlying mechanisms responsible for antitumor effects, we harvested subcutaneous tumors 6 days after treatment with different hydrogel formulations. Flow cytometry was performed to evaluate the presence and polarization of various immune cells, including DCs, TAMs, and lymphocytes, within the tumor. Our findings revealed a significant increase in the population of mature DCs (CD80+CD86+CD11c+) following treatment with αPDL1@Gel, S1P@Gel, free S1P-αPDL1, or S1P-αPDL1@Gel, compared to the PBS controls. Notably, mature DCs increased from 12.6% in the PBS group to 25.3% in the S1P-αPDL1@Gel group (P< 0.0001) (Fig. 7, A and B). A similar trend was observed for M1-polarized TAMs (CD80+F4/80+CD11b+), with S1P-αPDL1@Gel treatment resulting in the most significant increase (~44.9%,P< 0.0001) among all treatments (Fig. 7, C and D). Immunofluorescence staining further confirmed an increase in intratumoral CD80+M1 TAMs following treatment with S1P@Gel (P< 0.05), S1P-αPDL1 (P< 0.01), or S1P-αPDL1@Gel (P< 0.001) compared to PBS controls (Fig. 7, I and L). These results indicate that both S1P and αPDL1, whether administered alone or in combination, enhance the infiltration of mature DCs and M1 TAMs, with the combination therapy in the hydromel formulation demonstrating the highest efficacy.

(AandB) Representative flow cytometric plots (A) and quantitative analysis (B) of the mature DCs (CD80+CD86+) gating on CD11c+CD45+cells. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 5). (CandD) Representative flow cytometric plots (C) and quantitative analysis (D) of the infiltrated M1-polarized TAMs (CD80+) gating on F4/80+CD11b+cells. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 5). (E) Representative flow cytometric analysis of T cell infiltration gating on CD3+cells within the tumor. (FandH) Relative quantification of CD4+(F) and CD8+T (H) cells within the tumor. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 5). (GandJ) Representative flow cytometric plots (G) and quantitative analysis (J) of IFN-γ+T cells gating on CD3+CD8+cells within the tumor. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 5). (I) Representative immunofluorescent staining of CD80 (green) in paraffin sections of excised tumors. Scale bars, 100 μm. (K) Representative immunofluorescent staining of CD4 (green) and CD8 (red) in paraffin sections of excised tumors. Scale bars, 100 μm. (L) Relative quantification of MFI of CD80+cells after different treatments. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). (MandN) Relative quantification of MFI of CD4+(M) and CD8+(N) T cells after different treatments. Data are presented as means ± SEM (n= 3). (OtoQ) Expression levels of immunostimulatory cytokines including IL-6 (O), TNF-α (P), and IFN-γ (Q) in tumor tissues after different treatments. G1, PBS; G2, αPDL1@Gel; G3, S1P@Gel; G4, free S1P-αPDL1; G5, S1P-αPDL1@Gel. Statistical significance was calculated via one-way ANOVA with a Tukey post hoc test (*P< 0.05; **P< 0.01; ***P< 0.001; ****P< 0.0001).

Following treatment with either S1P-αPDL1 or S1P-αPDL1@Gel, there was also a notable increase in the absolute number of tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (CD3+) (fig. S19). Specifically, an increase in both CD8+T cells (CD3+CD8+) and CD4+T cells (CD3+CD4+) was observed in the TME after S1P-αPDL1@Gel treatment, but not with αPDL1@Gel, S1P@Gel or free S1P-αPDL1 treatment (Fig. 7, E, F, and H), suggesting that monotherapy with S1P or αPDL1 alone is insufficient to promote cytotoxic T cell infiltration, whereas the hydrogel-mediated two-step therapy could effectively activate this process. The percentage of effector CD8+T cells, defined as IFN-γ–positive CD8+T cells (CD3+CD8+IFN-γ+), was markedly increased in mice treated with S1P-αPDL1@Gel (~11.9%) compared to that of the PBS controls (~2.0%) (Fig. 7, G and J). Immunofluorescence staining of the residual tumors further verified that S1P-αPDL1@Gel enhanced the infiltration of both CD4+T (P< 0.001) and CD8+T (P< 0.001) cells (Fig. 7, K, M, and N). Furthermore, cytokines including IL-6, TNF-α, and IFN-γ within tumor tissues were investigated. ELISAs showed that both free S1P-αPDL1 and S1P-αPDL1@Gel treatments increased the secretion of IL-6 and TNF-α (Fig. 7, O and P) (P< 0.01), but only S1P-αPDL1@Gel treatment significantly promoted the secretion of IFN-γ (Fig. 7Q) (P< 0.001). The enhanced secretion of cytokines further confirms the critical role of S1P-αPDL1@Gel in immune regulation. These results indicate a notable enrichment of mature DCs, M1 TAMs, CD8+T cells, and CD4+T cells, concomitant with up-regulated levels of IL-6, TNF-α, and IFN-γ within tumors.

Immunotherapy has achieved remarkable clinical efficiency in the treatment of lung cancer in recent years, bringing new therapeutic options for patients resistant to targeted therapy and chemoradiotherapy. However, patients with immune-excluded or immune-desert TME often fail to respond to immunotherapy. In this work, we identified that plasma S1P levels were significantly down-regulated in patients with lung cancer who did not respond to anti–PD-1/PD-L1 therapy. The average plasma S1P level in responders was 439.15 nM, while, in nonresponders, it was 226.18 nM. In addition, a tissue microarray comprising 97 paired lung cancer samples revealed that the primary S1PR, S1PR1, was also down-regulated in tumor tissues. Notably, patients with low S1PR1 expression were associated with worse survival outcomes. Although the immunomodulatory role of S1P is well-documented, its function within the TME remains poorly understood. A recent study by Lucaet al. (47) suggested that SPHK1 deficiency could lead to significant accumulation of M2-polarized macrophages and suppression of tumor growth in animal models of Kirsten Rat Sarcoma Viral Oncogene Homolog (KRAS)–mutated LUAD. SPHK1 is the key enzyme responsible for catalyzing the sphingosine phosphorylation to generate S1P. We hypothesized that the decreased S1P levels caused by SPHK1 deficiency may contribute to the dysregulated TME. Regarding its mechanism of action, S1P enhances immune cell migration and viability through the promotion of mitochondrial biogenesis and mtROS production, which, in turn, activates inflammatory signaling pathways, including NLRP3 inflammasome, NF-κB, and JAK-STAT. To our knowledge, this mechanism has not been previously reported in the context of lung cancer. These clinical and biological findings underscore the potential of S1P as an innovative immunoadjuvant for treating tumors with immune-excluded or immune-desert phenotype tumors.

Inspired by these findings, we developed the innovative S1P-αPDL1@Gel, designed for the sustained and sequential release of S1P and αPDL1 within the tumor. According to the release behaviors of S1P and αPDL1, it was found that S1P-αPDL1@Gel retained S1P in the tumor for up to 4 days and αPDL1 for up to 8 days, significantly extending the release duration. The initially released S1P establishes a concentration gradient between tumor and bloodstream, promoting the infiltration of immune cells. The artificially engineered trafficking pathway of immune cells ensures the reconfiguration of the TME in cold tumors. Subsequently, the released αPDL1 abrogates the tumor immune evasion potential and restores the functionality of T cells and macrophages. Residual tumors following surgeries for advanced lung cancer frequently result in tumor recurrence and metastasis. Local administration of S1P-αPDL1@Gel may effectively drive the infiltration and antitumor effects of immune cells without nonspecific damage to normal tissues. The straightforward and well-tolerated treatment approach fills the therapeutic gap for residual tumors. This breakthrough underscores the potential of S1P-αPDL1@Gel in remodeling the TME of cold tumors and suppressing tumor recurrence. Recently, several studies have used hydrogels as drug delivery platforms to modulate TME. For example, an in situ–formed immunotherapeutic hydrogel, incorporating antiCD47 antibody-loaded CaCO3nanoparticles, effectively revised the immunosuppressive TME and induced systemic immunological responses (48). Our present work distinguishes itself from previous studies on immunomodulatory hydrogels through several key innovations. First, the hydrogel is fabricated from biodegradable materials using a simple preparation process, enhancing its potential for rapid clinical translation. Notably, S1P-αPDL1@Gel delivers S1P, a unique immunomodulatory molecule that we have identified as capable of recruiting immune cells into tumor tissues. Synergistic therapy combining S1P and PD-L1 blockade significantly suppresses tumor growth and reduces postoperative recurrence. The immunoregulatory role of S1P is robustly supported by both clinical evidences, validated in vivo, and underscored by rigorous mechanism elucidation, providing a comprehensive rationale for its therapeutic efficacy. Prospectively, S1P-incorporated hydrogel could potentially synergize with the sustained release of tumor antigens at the administration site, thereby creating an innovative tumor vaccine strategy. Moreover, the antitumor immunity of S1P-αPDL1@Gel may be further enhanced by integrating it with conventional adjuvant therapies, such as radiotherapy or chemotherapy.

S1P (HY-108496) was purchased from MedChemExpress, Cy7-NHS (D10018) and Cy5.5-NHS (D10020) were purchased from Duofluor Inc., and pharmaceutical-grade ALG was obtained from J&K Scientific. CCK-8 (RM02823) was purchased from ABclonal Technology (WuHan, China). All other chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The LLC mouse cell line was acquired from the National Collection of Authenticated Cell Cultures. LLC cells were cultured in high-glucose Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (Gibco BRL, Gaitherburg, MD, USA), enriched with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco) and 1% penicillin- streptomycin antibiotic mix (Gibco). The serum-free cell cryopreservation solution (FL10020L) and trypsin-EDTA digestion solution (FL20011) were purchased from Bioland Biotechnology Co. Ltd. (Hangzhou, China). The cells were maintained in an incubator with a 5% CO2environment at a temperature of 37°C. C57BL/6 mice, aged 5 to 6 weeks, were purchased from the Shanghai Model Organisms Center Inc. BMDCs and BMDMs were isolated from the femurs and tibias of 7-week-old C57BL/6 mice. Both BMDCs and BMDMs were cultured in RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco BRL, Gaitherburg, MD, USA). All animal experiments conducted adhered to pertinent regulations and received authorization from the Animal Ethics Committee of Soochow University (no. ECSU-2019000198).

The study analyzed 97 tissue specimens and 28 plasma samples from patients with histologically confirmed NSCLC, as diagnosed by senior lung pathologists. Plasma samples were collected before treatment with two or four cycles of PD-L1/PD-1 inhibitors. Tumor regression in response to immunotherapy was assessed through chest CT imaging by clinicians. According to the CT evaluations postimmunotherapy, patients with ≥30% reduction in the total diameter of target lesions were classified as responders, while those with <30% reduction were deemed nonresponders. Additionally, 15 plasma samples of noncancer patients with begin conditions, such as lung bullae and bronchiectasis, were included for comparison. All patients were recruited from February 2024 to May 2024, and all individuals provided their written consent after being fully informed. The study was approved by the Ethical Committee of Shanghai General Hospital (2024KS525).

For the synthesis of S1P-αPDL1@Gel, we use a 50-μl volume of hydrogel as an example to illustrate the process. S1P (5 μg) and αPD-L1 (50 μg) were first mixed in PBS buffer to a total volume of 12 μl. Then, the mixture was stirred with 22 μl of ALG (60 mg/ml) at 4°C for 1 hour. The 34 μl of ALG (40 mg/ml) containing 5 μg of S1P and 50 μg of αPD-L1 was then mixed with 16 μl of calcium chloride (10 mg/ml) solution to form a relatively stiff hydrogel with a moderate gelation rate.

To investigate the release kinetics of S1P-αPDL1 hydrogel in vitro, Cy7-NHS (Duofluor Inc., China) and Cy5.5-NHS (Duofluor Inc., China) were used to label S1P and IgG, respectively. The hydrogel scaffold (100 μl) containing 10 μg of S1P and 100 μg of IgG was placed in the upper chamber of a Transwell plate (pore size of 8 μm), and 600 μl of PBS was added into the lower chamber. At various intervals, 100 μl of PBS was harvested, and an equivalent volume of fresh PBS was replenished. The amount of released S1P and IgG were evaluated according to the fluorescence signal from Cy7 and Cy5.5.

To determine the release behavior of the S1P-αPDL1 hydrogel (50 μl of hydrogel containing 5 μg of S1P and 50 μg of IgG) in vivo, sodium ALG mixed with 5 μg of S1P and 50 μg of IgG, along with calcium chloride solution, were injected through the dual syringes. The remaining S1P and IgG in tumor at different time were determined using in vivo fluorescence imaging.

Total RNA was isolated using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) and subsequently converted to cDNA using a cDNA synthesis kit (ABclonal Technology, WuHan, China, RK20429). Quantitative real-time PCR was used to assess gene expression levels using SYBR Green Fast qPCR Mix (ABclonal Technology, WuHan, China, RK21203). The specific primers used in the experiment were as follows: iNOS [forward (F): 5′-gcttgcccctggaagtttct-3′; reverse (R): 5′-cctcacatactgtggacggg-3′], IL-6 (F: 5′-cggccttccctacttcacaa-3′; R: 5′-ttctgcaagtgcatcatcgt-3′), TNF-α (F: 5′-tgagcacagaaagcatgatcc-3′; R: 5′-gccatttgggaacttctcatc-3′), IL-1β (F: 5′-cgtggaccttccaggatgag-3′; R: 5′-catctcggagcctgtagtgc-3′), CSF1 (F: 5′-ccttcttcgacatggctggg-3′; R: 5′-actgtcgatcaactgctgca-3′), IL1-α (F: 5′-gagagccgggtgacagtatc-3′; R: 5′-aaggtgctgatctgggttgg-3′), NOD1 (F: 5′-tcgtcctgcatcacttccac-3′; R: 5′-ggtgatctggttgacgctga-3′), CCL5 (F: 5′-accatcatcctcactgcagc-3′; R: 5′-gggagaggtaggcaaagcag-3′), TNFRSF8 (F: 5′-cccacctctccattgtccac-3′; R: 5′-aacacaggagaaaggagccg-3′), and TLR4 (F: 5′-gggaacaaacagcctgagaca-3′; R: 5′-ctgaaaatccaggtgctgcag-3′).

Cells were lysed with cell lysis buffer (Yeasen Biotech) enriched with a protease inhibitor cocktail (Yeasen Biotech) and phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (Yeasen Biotech). Protein concentrations were quantified by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Thermo Scientific). Protein extracts were separated by SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis according to the standard protocols. Corresponding primary and secondary antibodies were adopted to detect the expression of indicated proteins. Antibodies used in this study were as follows: P65 (10745-1-AP, 1:1000), NLRP3 (68102-1-Ig, 1:1000), IκBα (10268-1-AP, 1:1000), p-IκBα (82349-1-RR, 1:1000), horseradish peroxidase (HRP)–conjugated goat anti-rabbit (SA00001-2, 1:5000), HRP-conjugated goat anti-mouse (SA00001-1, 1:5000), and β-actin (66009-1-Ig, 1:3000) were purchased from Proteintech (Rosemont, IL, USA); p-STAT1 (9167S, 1:1000) and p-P65 (3033S, 1:1000) were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA, USA); and STAT1 (A19563, 1:1000) was purchased from ABclonal Technology (WuHan, China).

T lymphocytes were extracted from the spleen of C57BL/6 mice and seeded into the upper chamber of a Transwell plate (pore size of 8 μm, Corning, NY, USA) with 100 μl of serum-free medium. In the lower chamber, 600 μl of serum-containing medium was added. After 4-hour incubation, the quantity of T cells that traversed from the upper chamber to the lower chamber was analyzed. As T lymphocytes are suspended, they are unable to adhere to the underside of the membrane. We enumerate the cells in lower chamber migrated from the upper chamber using a cell counting device. Three independent experiments were carried out.

For the Transwell assay of Raw264.7 cells, 8 × 104cells were seeded into the upper chamber of a Transwell plate (pore size of 8 μm, Corning, NY, USA) with 100 μl of serum-free medium. After 18 hours, cells that had migrated to the underside of the Transwell membrane were immobilized with 4% paraformaldehyde and, subsequently, stained with crystal violet. Three independent experiments were carried out.

To establish the subcutaneous tumor model, LLC cells (50× 105cells, 50 μl) were inoculated into the right flank of C57BL/6 mice. When the tumors reached 70 cm3, the mice were categorized into five distinct groups and administered various treatment protocols: PBS, S1P@Gel, αPDL1@Gel, free S1P-αPDL1, and S1P-αPDL1@Gel (S1P, 5 μg per mouse; αPDL1, 50 μg per mouse; gel, 50 μl). To establish the tumor recurrence model, most of tumors were surgically removed, leaving about 5% of original tumor masses when the tumors reached 150 cm3. Then, the mice were randomly divided into five groups and treated with above treatments. Tumor size was measured every other day with vernier caliper in three dimensions, and body weight was recorded every other day following tumor establishment. Six days after the treatments, the mice were euthanized for different analysis. In this study, tumor burden exceeding 2000 mm3or 10% of body weight was considered a mortality endpoint, in accordance with the China’s guideline for humane endpoints in animal experiments (RB/T 173-2018).

BMDMs were collected from the femurs and tibias of about 7-week-old C57BL/6 mice and then were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium enriched with 10% FBS and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Pricella Life Science & Technology Co. Ltd.,PB180120), in the presence of M-CSF (40 ng/ml; Dalian Meilun Biotech Co. Ltd., MA0608) for 7 days. Then, the cells were treated with 1 μM S1P or PBS for 24 hours. Total RNA from BMDMs was extracted using TRIzol (Takara) following the manufacturer’s procedure. RNA samples were sent to Tsingke Biotech for library construction and sequencing. The samples were analyzed by RNA-seq on the MGISEQ-T7 platform.

Tumor tissues harvested from mice were cut into small pieces and kept in cold PBS. The tissues were then mechanically processed to obtain a single-cell suspension. These suspensions were treated with RBC lysis buffer (ZUNYAN, Nanjing, China, ZYFB006) to eliminate RBC. To minimize nonspecific binding of antibodies, the cells were incubated with FcR blocking reagent (human, Miltenyi, 130-059-901) for 10 min. Then, the cells that were stained with cell membrane markers were stained with different antibodies for 0.5 hours. To detect the intracellular marks, cells were fixed with formalin and permeabilized with Triton X-100 and then stained with antibodies. The antibodies used in flow cytometry analysis were purchased from BioLegend. The antibodies used for labeling T lymph cells: fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)–CD3 (BioLegend, 100204), peridinin-chlorophyll-protein complex (PerCP)–CD45 (BioLegend, 103130), allophycocyanin (APC)–Cy7-CD8 (BioLegend, 100714), PE-Cy7-CD4 (BioLegend, 100422), and APC–IFN-γ (BioLegend, 505810); macrophages: FITC-F4/80 (BioLegend, 123107), PE-CD11b (BioLegend, 101208), and APC-CD80 (BioLegend, 375404); and DCs: APC-Cy7-CD45 (BioLegend, 103116), FITC-CD11C (BioLegend, 117306), PE-CD80 (BioLegend, 104708), and PerCP-CD86 (BioLegend, 105026).

Twenty-eight plasma samples of patients with NSCLC and 15 plasma samples of noncancer patients obtained from Shanghai General Hospital were analyzed. The plasma levels of S1P isolated from the 43 patients were detected by an S1P ELISA kit (Shanghai Enzyme-linked Biotechnology, catalog no. ml038623). The serum levels of S1P isolated from mice at 6 days after different treatments were detected by an S1P ELISA kit (Shanghai Enzyme-linked Biotechnology, catalog no. ml062988). To measure the level of cytokines in tumors, the collected tumors were cracked and centrifuged (1500 rpm, 3 min) to obtain the supernatant. The levels of IL-6, TNF-α, and IFN-γ were measured by ELISA kits according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

For cell samples, cells were seeded onto confocal dishes and received different treatments. After 24 hours, the cells were fixed by 4% paraformaldehyde for 15 min, followed by permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 for 15 min. The cells were then blocked with 5% bovine serum albumin for 30 min. Separate primary and secondary antibodies were adopted to detect the expression of indicated proteins. 4′,6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI; Yeasen Biotech, 40728ES03) was used to stain cellular nucleus. The staining was examined by confocal microscopy. Antibodies used in this study were as follows: CD4 (Abcam plc, ab288724), CD8 (Abcam plc, ab316778), CD80 (Abclonal Biotechnology, A16039), and Ki-67 (Abcam plc, ab15580).

The paraffin section was dewaxed and hydrated through a gradient of ethanol solutions to make the cells permeable. The samples were incubated with proteinase K at 37°C for 20 min for cell permeabilization. To label the fragmented DNA chains, the samples were treated with fluorescein-12-dUTP in a humid and dark chamber at 37°C for 60 min. Then, the labeled dUTP was bound with HRP-labeled streptavidin to terminate the reaction. The staining was examined by confocal microscopy.

BMDMs were treated with either PBS or 1.0 μM S1P for 24 hours. Then, BMDMs were cocultured with LLC cells at radios of 10:1 or 15:1 for another 24 hours. LDH release in supernatants was quantified using a commercial kit (Beyotime, no. C0018S), with controls set for spontaneous release (untreated cells) and maximum release (LLC cells treated with LDH release reagent). The LDH detection reagent was added to the supernatant and incubated for 15 min, followed by absorbance measurement at 450 nm.

A total of 97 lung cancer samples obtained from Shanghai General Hospital were collected and constructed into a tissue microarray. The tissue microarray was deparaffinized with xylene and subjected to antigen retrieval using citrate buffer. Goat serum was used to block nonspecific antibody binding. The samples were incubated with S1PR1 antibody (Proteintech, 55133-1-AP; 1:200) overnight, followed by a secondary antibody conjugated with HRP (Proteintech, PR30009; 1:1000) for 2 hours at room temperature. 3,3′-Diaminobenzidine (100 μl) (Proteintech, PR30010) working solution was added and incubated at room temperature for 5 to 10 min. The samples were rinsed with distilled water and counterstained with hematoxylin for 2 to 3 min. The staining intensity, ranging from 0 (negative) to 3 (strong), and the percentage of positive cells, spanning from 0% (0) to 100% (4), with increments at 25, 50, and 75%, were assessed and scored accordingly. The staining score was determined by combining the intensity and the percentage of positive cells.

Raw264.7 cells were treated with S1P with or without 10 μM Mdivi-1 (Beyotime Biotechnology, SC8028) for 24 hours. After treatment, the cells were stained with 5 μM MitoSOX dye (Beyotime Biotechnology, S0061M) at 37°C for 15 min, followed by wash with PBS. Afterward, the cells were fixed and stained with DAPI (Biotechnology, C1002) and imaged by confocal microscope. For the detection of mitochondria, cells were stained with TMRM (Thermo Fisher Scientific,I34361), a cell-permeant dye that specifically labels mitochondria, at a concentration that is one-thousandth (1/1000) of its original for 15 min. Then, the cells were washed three times with PBS and imaged by confocal microscope.

BMDCs were collected from the femurs and tibias of about 7-week-old C57BL/6 mice and cultured with granulocyte M-CSF (20 ng/ml; Novoprotein, Shanghai, China, CK02) for 5 days and then treated with 0.5 or 1.0 μM S1P or PBS for additional 24 hours. T lymphocytes were isolated from the spleen of OT-I mice and labeled with the CFSE Cell Proliferation Kit (Invitrogen) for 15 min. Then, the CFSE-labeled T lymphocytes were washed with RPMI-1640 medium and then cocultured with the CFSE-labeled T lymphocytes at a ratio of 1:3 for another 72 hours. The proliferation of T cells was detected by flow cytometry.

All data were presented as means ± SEM and were plotted using GraphPad Prism 9.0. For multiple comparisons, Tukey post hoc tests following one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) were used, whereas Student’sttest was used for comparisons between two groups. Log-rank (Mantel-Cox) testing was used for survival analysis. The threshold for statistical significance was *P< 0.05, **P< 0.01, ***P< 0.001, and ****P< 0.0001.

Funding:This article was partially supported by the National Research Programs of China (2022YFF0710004 and 2022YFA1206500), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52450010), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20240040), the postdoctoral Fellowship Program (Grade C) of China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (GZC20231651), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Funded Project (2024 M762059), the Suzhou Key Laboratory of Nanotechnology and Biomedicine, the Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, and the 111 Program from the Ministry of Education of China.

Competing interests:The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Data and materials availability:All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.