Faith and faith communities play a critical role in post‐disaster recovery for at least three reasons. First, faith is a socially shared frame through which individuals understand a disaster and evaluate potential means of recovery. Second, faith is a driver or motivator of post‐disaster recovery, providing inspiration, encouragement, and solace. Third, faith communities foster social capital, aiding the re‐establishment and rebuilding of devastated areas. We examine the role of faith and faith communities in the recovery of The Bahamas after Hurricane Dorian struck in 2019—the most powerful and costliest storm to hit this Caribbean country. Relying on qualitative evidence from interviews with survivors and faith leaders, we explore how faith helped affected individuals discover opportunities for engaging in recovery and fostered an optimistic attitude about the ability to recover. Additionally, members of faith‐based communities leveraged their social connections to obtain the goods and services they needed to recover from the disaster.

A growing body of literature explores the complexities of post‐disaster recovery, particularly how the recovery process is fraught with collective action problems—that is, situations in which individuals would benefit from cooperation, yet each person has an incentive to rely on others to act rather than contributing themselves. Communities that fail to develop mechanisms to overcome this ‘free‐rider’ problem and coordinate their efforts are less likely to recover successfully (Olson,1965; Storr, Haeffele‐Balch, and Grube,2015). The literature suggests that overcoming collective action problems requires mental frameworks, institutional mechanisms, and social networks to incentivise participation and reduce uncertainty. Faith and faith communities often have these characteristics. In this paper, we synthesise insights from the disaster recovery literature to argue that faith and faith communities can play a critical part in overcoming collective action problems, and we use the case of Hurricane Dorian in The Bahamas to illustrate that assertion.

The disaster studies literature has emphasised the roles of social capital and entrepreneurs in overcoming collective action problems. Social capital, as social ties, is a source of financial aid and non‐financial support (Bolin and Stanford,1998; Pelling,1998; Shaw and Goda,2004; Pelling and High,2005; Paton,2007; Chamlee‐Wright and Storr,2009,2011a; Chamlee‐Wright,2010; Aldrich,2011). This includes gifts, loans, and direct assistance for repairing, rebuilding, and replacing damaged property, as well as food, shelter, and emotional support. Social capital helps to overcome collective action problems because community members forge mutual trust and practise reciprocity, which leads to norms of cooperation that are needed to overcome free riding. Furthermore, after a disaster, commercial and social entrepreneurs can provide needed goods and services, helping to reconstitute disrupted social networks and drive recovery efforts (Storr, Haeffele‐Balch, and Grube,2015). Commercial and social entrepreneurs play a crucial role in reducing uncertainty and mobilising resources, helping disaster victims to coordinate with one another in the recovery process.

Social capital and entrepreneurship are critical components of post‐disaster recovery, and they are often intertwined with religious beliefs and religious communities. Drawing on insights from the literatures on political economy, economic sociology, and disaster recovery, we contend that faith and faith communities can play a critical role in post‐disaster recovery for at least three reasons. First, faith is a socially shared worldview or ‘frame’ through which individuals understand a disaster and evaluate potential means of engaging in recovery (Geertz,1973; Tausch et al.,2011; Stephens et al.,2013; Grube and Storr,2015; Storr, Haeffele‐Balch, and Grube,2015; Schipper,2015). Second, faith serves as a ‘driver’ of action, meaning that it provides a source of inspiration, encouragement, and solace, which are necessary for engaging in the difficult processes of post‐disaster recovery (Chamlee‐Wright and Storr,2009,2011a; Chamlee‐Wright,2010; Chan, Rhodes, and Pérez,2012; Storr, Haeffele‐Balch, and Grube,2015; Sun, Deng, and Qi,2018). Third, faith‐based communities foster many forms of social capital, facilitating the giving of aid and other forms of support (spiritual, emotional, and psychological, inter alia) (Duval‐Diop, Curtis, and Clark,2010; Ager and Ager,2011; Storr and Haeffele‐Balch,2012; Cheema et al.,2014; Grube and Storr,2014; Storr, Haeffele‐Balch, and Grube,2015; Storr, Grube, and Haeffele‐Balch,2017; Gibb,2022).

Faith and faith communities have received some attention in the disaster studies literature, and in this growing field, there are opportunities for further theoretical framing and empirical examples.1This paper helps to clarify this literature's insights by theoretically outlining the role of faith and faith communities in disaster recovery. It also adds to the surprisingly small literature on hurricane response and recovery in The Bahamas by explaining the role that faith and faith communities played after Hurricane Dorian struck the Caribbean country in 2019. The Bahamas is unfortunately a particularly fertile site for studying disaster preparedness, response, and recovery because of its hurricane‐prone geography. It has experienced many disastrous storms, including Hurricanes Betsy in 1965, Matthew in 2016, and Irma in 2017.

Hurricane Dorian, which struck The Bahamas on 1 September 2019, was especially devastating. It was a Category 5 storm that centred on the Abaco Islands and Grand Bahama Island. It was remarkable for its maximum sustained winds of 185 miles per hour (295 kilometres per hour), as well as its slow movement, allowing the wind and storm surge to cause large‐scale damage. The United Nations Development Programme calculated that the combination of COVID‐19 (coronavirus disease 2019) and Hurricane Dorian, which occurred within a few months of each other, inflicted a combined loss of USD 7.5 billion on The Bahamas—amounting to roughly 60 per cent of the country's economic output (Hartnell,2022). Dorian officially caused 74 deaths in The Bahamas, but poor recordkeeping has created uncertainty regarding the actual number (Charles,2020).

After Dorian, Bahamians relied on their faith and on faith communities to provide the necessary mental frames, motivational drives, and social capital networks to coordinate with one another for successful post‐disaster recovery. Utilising qualitative evidence from interviews with disaster survivors and faith leaders, we found that faith helped individuals to discover opportunities for engaging in recovery and to keep an optimistic attitude about the ability to recover from a disaster. Additionally, subjects suggested that faith‐based communities helped them leverage their social connections to obtain the goods and services they needed to cope with the disaster and recover from the destruction.

This paper proceeds as follows. In section two, we summarise the existing literature on the role of faith and faith‐based communities in disaster recovery, and we build our theoretical framework of faith as frame, driver, and community. In section three, we examine qualitative data from Hurricane Dorian in The Bahamas to analyse how faith shaped mental frames, motivational drives, and social capital networks, yielding successful post‐disaster recovery. In section four, we conclude by setting out the implications of this research for scholarship and policy.

The disaster studies literatures have explored the role of religious beliefs, faith‐based organisations, and faith communities in disaster recovery.2Critically, they stress that: (i) a faith is a type of culture (that is, a socially shared frame or worldview); (ii) faith is an important driver (that is, motivator) of action; and (iii) faith‐based communities foster social capital that can be useful in coordinating post‐disaster recovery. The examples in this section refer to several faiths and faith communities, including a variety of Christian denominations, as well as Buddhist, Bahá'í, and Muslim groups. Any faith and faith community can share the three characteristics mentioned above, but the precise form of disaster recovery will depend on the details of a particular faith or faith community. Additionally, it is important to note that we use the term ‘post‐disaster recovery’ liberally, while acknowledging that it is interconnected with pre‐disaster preparedness and the immediate post‐disaster response. Readers should also be aware that faith and faith communities serve critical functions before, during, and after a crisis.

A system of religious beliefs is a cultural frame through which disaster survivors make sense of the disaster and decide between different strategies for responding.

Religion is a type of culture through which disaster survivors understand an event and evaluate potential means of engaging in recovery. Anthropologist Clifford Geertz (1973) argues that religion is a complex system of symbols, rituals, and texts that convey and reinforce beliefs and values. Faith, as a type of culture, allows people to see things about the world that others who do not share that faith cannot see and facilitates their ability to communicate their knowledge and attitudes about potential opportunities and courses of action (Tausch et al.,2011; Stephens et al.,2013; Schipper,2015; Wilkinson,2020). Since faith is a framework for interpreting the world, it shapes and directs the opportunities to which individuals are alert. People with different faith backgrounds will be alert to and seize different kinds of opportunities for post‐disaster recovery (Lavoie,2015; Storr and John,2015).

Within the post‐disaster recovery literature, scholars have indicated that faith is an important frame for understanding the meaning of a disaster and interpreting the opportunities for recovery. For instance, Davis et al. (2019) conducted a longitudinal qualitative study to explore the impact of natural disasters on religious attachment, focusing on a population affected by Hurricane Katrina in 2005 and the Louisiana flood of 2016. They found that ‘in the acute and intermediate wake of a catastrophic natural disaster, it is common for theistic survivors to view and relate with God as a stronger and wiser figure who helps them navigate their disaster recovery process’ (Davis et al.,2019, p. 584). A belief in God's omnipotence and omniscience allowed these survivors to find meaning in their suffering and devise ways to move forward. Faith, thus, framed the way that these people interpreted their experiences.

Similarly, McGeehan and Baker (2017) engaged in a qualitative study of the roles and functions of faith narratives in Bahá'í, Buddhist, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter‐day Saints (LDS), and Methodist communities to see how each set of beliefs shaped disaster response strategies. Bahá'í participants emphasise collective responsibility and community‐wide support rather than individual preparedness. Their belief system downplays stockpiling resources but prioritises sharing and serving others. They focus on learning from disasters to improve the future, reflecting a faith‐driven call for action and community service. Buddhism's framing is slightly different, underscoring impermanence and acceptance, which often leads to a passive approach to preparedness. Adherents generally view suffering and disasters as natural parts of life. Some Buddhist leaders, though, express the need for a shift towards more proactive disaster education, aligning karma with active engagement in community preparedness. The LDS community, however, is structured around preparedness, with a spotlight on long‐term food storage, financial reserves, and comprehensive disaster plans. Theologically, it views disasters as a test of faith, aligning preparedness with their religious duty to care for both members and non‐members. Its belief system leads to a highly organised and action‐oriented response to disasters. Similarly, Methodists underline faith, action, and perseverance as they interpret disasters through Biblical narratives like Noah and Job. They concentrate on reaching vulnerable community members, showing an openness to community‐wide disaster response strategies. Overall, McGeehan and Baker's (2017) research suggests that faith‐based narratives shape and guide whether a community takes a passive or active approach to preparedness, what kinds of moral duties people have to one another, and which forms of collective support are acceptable.

Relatedly, Sun and Qi (2023) examined the 2010 Yushu earthquake in Tibet and found that Tibetan Buddhist beliefs shaped how people framed the disaster and engaged in disaster response behaviours. Owing to local people's belief in the Buddhist conceptions of karma, impermanence, and interdependence, they constructed narratives to understand the disaster and recovery responses. Joakim and White (2015) highlight similar outcomes in their study of recovery after the 2006 earthquake in Yogyakarta, Indonesia. They concluded that religious beliefs and organisations were important in recovery efforts, but they found mixed outcomes for the role of faith, leadership, and institutional networks. In many cases, but not all, religion provided ‘spiritual and psychological strength as well as organizational capacity for implementing relief and recovery’ (Joakim and White,2015, p. 205).

Some scholars have called for greater integration of faith‐based beliefs and narratives in analyses of disaster preparedness and recovery (Gregersen,2016). Chester (2005) highlights a growing consensus that successful disaster responses must include an awareness of local culture, including an understanding of a local religious group's theodicy (that is, an explanation of how God's goodness and justice can coexist with evil and suffering in the world). He concludes that dismissing religious beliefs as ignorant, superstitious, or backward neglects the important ways in which people interpret and comprehend disasters. And, using the case of Typhoon Haiyan (2013) in the Philippines, Wilkinson (2018) discusses how a secular approach to disaster response, one that is not attuned to faith, can hamper efforts in communities where religion matters.

Where faith is a frame, survivors will invoke their faith when coming to terms with and describing how they survived and responded to a disaster. As we discuss below, many of the Dorian survivors we interviewed held the belief that God was the author of all and so frequently referenced God when describing what happened during the disaster, how they were able to survive, and the recovery strategies they chose to pursue.

Faith can be a source of inspiration, encouragement, and solace after a disaster and, as such, faith can motivate disaster survivors to act.

Faith serves as a driver of post‐disaster recovery by providing a belief in an afterlife, a sense of cosmic justice, or an emphasis on hope as a virtue. Based on that belief structure and the associated practices, members of a faith community can develop a drive to act to improve their own situation despite difficulties, as well as a sense of solidarity and collective identity that can spur them to help others. Faith may also give individuals optimism and a sense of purpose (Chan, Rhodes, and Pérez,2012). In other words, faith‐based motivation can serve as a selective incentive to engage in collective action.

Sun, Deng, and Qi's (2018, p. 588) review of the disaster literature indicates that ‘[f]irst, religious belief impacts how religious persons interpret natural hazards and perceive risks (disaster awareness) while also governing their behaviours and affecting public emotions in a disaster situation. Second, religious belief and religious identity link individual believers with God(s) and create bonds among different adherents, which can become important resources (religious support) for survivors when coping with physical and emotional wounds’. They acknowledge that shared belief systems and related practices tend to generate social capital and network‐linked advantages, providing a means to procure necessary resources to respond to disasters.

Relatedly, Father Vien Nguyen of the Mary Queen of Vietnam (MQVN) Catholic Church in New Orleans, Louisiana, served as a social and ideological entrepreneur during the process of recovery of his community after Hurricane Katrina. He ‘encourage[d] a collective sense among his parishioners that the MQVN community was a “second homeland”’ and ‘made his parishioners believe that the community would rebound after Katrina’ (Storr, Haeffele‐Balch, and Grube,2015, p. 107). Father Vien's leadership provided the drive to cooperate to rebuild the community, especially through the MQVN Community Development Corporation that delivered food, supplies, and support after the storm (Storr, Haeffele‐Balch, and Grube,2015, p. 108). Thus, ‘virtually every member of the MQVN community … reported that the local church leadership was important to the community's rebuilding success. They pointed to both their religious authority and the distinct signaling role they played in getting residents to return. Father Vien's leadership skills were noted outside of the community as well’ (Storr, Haeffele‐Balch, and Grube,2015, p. 110). Because parishioners believed that they should defer to religious authority, they were predisposed to listen to and follow church leadership, helping them act collectively.

In some cases, religious beliefs and the trust in church leadership may result in a stronger drive for recovery as compared to secular organisations. Wilkinson's (2018) qualitative research in the Philippines after Typhoon Haiyan (2013) highlights some interesting tensions between religious communities and secular organisations in post‐disaster recovery. The staff of secular non‐governmental organisations (NGOs) perceived their own work as efficient and impartial, but the affected communities in the Philippines—which are often highly religious—often viewed these actors as disconnected from the social and emotional needs of survivors. The affected communities had a widespread perception that faith‐based organisations are better at providing more holistic support, especially necessary spiritual aid. Thus, Wilkinson's work shows how secular NGOs may underestimate the importance of cultural and religious dimensions, and without embracing the religious views of the affected communities, NGOs are likely to be limited in their ability to accomplish their goal.

Chamlee‐Wright and Storr (2009,2010) report several cases of Katrina survivors directly invoking God to explain their post‐disaster activities. After the hurricane, trauma nurse Alice Craft‐Kerney established the Lower Ninth Ward Health Clinic because she believed she was called by God to do so. She concluded that unless basic services like healthcare were available in the poorest communities in New Orleans, they would never recover. Craft‐Kerney convinced a friend to donate their home for use as the clinic and persuaded others to give either money or their labour to help with construction and equipment.

Disasters can be overwhelming and can compromise mental health. Religion can be a source of solace, hope, and purpose, helping people cope with mental trauma (Gingrich and Gingrich,2017). Zhang et al. (2021) found that ‘spiritual fortitude’—the ability to draw on transcendent, spiritual resources to deal with negative emotions when facing severe stressors—is a crucial resource for dealing with adversity. During the 2016 Baton Rouge (Louisiana) flood and the COVID‐19 pandemic from 2020, survivors who exhibited spiritual fortitude experienced fewer symptoms of anxiety, depression, and post‐traumatic stress disorder. Relatedly, Hirono and Blake (2017) examine the role of clergy in providing essential emotional and spiritual support to disaster survivors. They found that American Christian clergy prioritised active intervention, emphasising hope and reducing pain, whereas Japanese Buddhist clergy focused on listening and prayer. Despite the differences, both types served as vital intermediaries between survivors and mental health professionals.

Where faith is a driver, disaster survivors will rely on it as they figure out how to survive and respond to a disaster in ways that improve their lives and the lives of others. As we highlight below, many of the Dorian survivors we interviewed were driven by their faith to help themselves and others.

Faith communities can be a source of disaster aid and social capital for both members and non‐members.

Faith communities play a key role in post‐disaster recovery because social capital—networks and social bonds—allows members to coordinate the giving of aid and other forms of support (spiritual, emotional, and psychological, inter alia). The socially shared beliefs of a faith structure will bond people together, lowering the costs of cooperation in difficult circumstances.

Faith communities are usually characterised by strong internal social bonds and looser bonds connecting them to other groups. The strong social bonds within a faith community, as bonding social capital, are important for several reasons. Tight social bonds rooted in a similar belief structure are likely to increase trust among individuals, which is critical during the uncertainty and dynamism of a post‐disaster situation. A high level of trust means the costs of cooperation are lower, allowing people to deal more effectively with problems after a disaster. Strong social bonds also keep the members of a community accountable, providing reliable selective incentives to engage in collective action (Chamlee‐Wright,2010; Duval‐Diop, Curtis, and Clark,2010; Ager and Ager,2011; Aldrich,2011; Cheema et al.,2014; Meyer,2018; Gibb,2022).

Additionally, looser social bonds to other groups, as bridging social capital, connect one faith community with other communities, organisations, and associations. Through these looser linkages, a particular faith community can access a wider network of information, resources, knowledge, and skills. This broader access allows for more innovative solutions and adaptability, which would not have been the case if these looser ties did not exist (Granovetter,1973; Storr and Haeffele‐Balch,2012).

The disaster‐recovery literature has discussed the role of social capital in faith communities. For instance, before Katrina, the MQVN Catholic Church in New Orleans was at the centre of a closely‐knit immigrant community whose members relied on various forms of mutual assistance. Describing the position of MQVN within the Vietnamese‐American community in pre‐Katrina New Orleans, Father Luke Nguyen emphasised that ‘[t]he church is the center. The church is the anchor. The church is the center stage of communication. The church is where people find comfort needs and everything’ (Grube and Storr,2014, p. 311). Because of the centrality of the church in the lives of the community, MQVN helped members to build thick forms of bonding social capital with their fellow parishioners, but it also was connected by bridging social capital to the broader Roman Catholic community in the area (Grube and Storr,2014, pp. 309–310).

The MQVN community was one of the hardest‐hit neighbourhoods in New Orleans during Katrina, but despite the obstacles, it was also one of the most resilient. This fact is more astonishing considering that the MQVN community was not wealthier or more politically connected before the hurricane. As Chamlee‐Wright and Storr (2009, p. 431) have argued, the ‘MQVN church provided a unique bundle of club goods that fostered social cooperation and community rebound in the wake of disaster. Utilizing this bundle of club goods, residents in the New Orleans East Vietnamese American community (a) rebuilt their distinct ethnic–religious–language community, (b) overcame the social coordination difficulties created by Katrina, and (c) engaged in successful political action to protect their community’.

Another example is the Orthodox Jewish community in the Rockaway Peninsula in New York City after Hurricane Sandy. Before Sandy struck in 2012, the Rockaway Peninsula Orthodox Jewish community was close‐knit and thriving. Afterwards, the dense social capital structure facilitated the provision of goods and services—food assistance, cash transfers, community centres, private schools, an ambulance service, and a civilian patrol—allowing the community to bounce back relatively quickly. In particular, the local synagogues became critical facilities for childcare and elder care while community members cleaned up and rebuilt the area (Storr, Grube, and Haeffele‐Balch,2017, p. 885). Rabbis Kruger, Bender, and Achiezer acted as social entrepreneurs who leveraged their social capital for community‐wide recovery. These communities already had synagogue‐based mutual aid societies, such as the Bayswater Neighbors Fund, which was designed to provide short‐term support to community members in need. Following Sandy, these rabbis used their local knowledge, social capital, and institutional experiences to create the Community Assistance Fund, which collected various goods as donations and orchestrated their allocation, and gathered information from trusted community members on people in need. Thus, the combination of local knowledge, social capital, and entrepreneurship allowed the Orthodox Jewish community in the area to rebound relatively swiftly and successfully (Storr, Haeffele‐Balch, and Grube,2015, pp. 97–100).

Other examples exist of faith‐based social capital networks aiding the process of post‐disaster recovery. For instance, after the 2011 flood in Minot, North Dakota, faith‐based and non‐profit organisations played a critical role in the city's recovery by fostering collaboration and mobilising resources. Local government agencies were overwhelmed by the scale of the disaster, and religious institutions stepped in to fill the gap (Atkinson,2014). Also, Nurdin (2024), among others, explores how faith‐based organisations can help repair disrupted social networks and develop new social capital in the wake of disaster.

Similarly, after the 2018 earthquakes in Lombok, Indonesia, faith‐based organisations, such as Nahdlatul Wathan, utilised traditional knowledge and spiritual beliefs in disaster preparedness and response (Koopman,2023). They played a critical role by leveraging traditional Sasak knowledge systems, such assubawe—a belief in spiritual signals from nature—to anticipate and mitigate the effects of the earthquakes (Koopman,2023). As Koopman (2023) argues, the collaboration between religious leaders, local communities, and faith‐based networks fostered social cohesion and facilitated trauma healing through communal practices in Lombok.

Furthermore, in Auckland, New Zealand, Cambodian and Thai Buddhist temples play a central part in supporting their members during crises by providing shelter, food, and spiritual guidance, while also communicating important information to people in their native language (Ngin et al.,2020). The social capital fostered by these faith‐based institutions has led to the creation of networks for coping with disasters (Ngin et al.,2020). Likewise, the Jordan/Syria/Lebanon (JSL) Forum is a large international network of churches and church‐related organisations in Jordan, operating under the umbrella of the ACT Alliance, a global Christian membership‐led body. The subregional JSL has coordinated the provision of humanitarian aid by international donors and local faith‐based communities to Muslim Syrian refugees in Jordan and Lebanon (Kraft and Smith,2019).

Faith‐based organisations also act as intermediaries through which international donors can support local aid initiatives. Kraft and Smith (2019), for instance, describe how local faith‐based‐organisations rely largely on local staff who share a cultural proximity to aid recipients. The physical and cultural closeness helps them to develop more effective distribution mechanisms than international humanitarian organisations that lack local, context‐dependent knowledge. Similarly, De Cordier (2009) explores the partnerships between two Muslim faith‐based aid organisations headquartered in the United Kingdom and local faith‐based aid organisations in Central Asia, Iraq, and Pakistan.

As noted, social capital can be useful for post‐disaster recovery, but there is no guarantee that it willalwaysbe socially beneficial. It has been called a ‘double‐edged sword’, meaning that it has advantages and disadvantages (Aldrich and Crook,2008). In other words, social capital can sometimes have a ‘downside’ or ‘dark side’, in that it leads to socially unproductive or destructive behaviour (Portes,1998,2014; Chamlee‐Wright and Storr,2011b; Villalonga‐Olives and Kawachi,2017).

Where faith communities act as a source of support, disaster survivors will rely on them for needed resources, including food and shelter, as well as to help coordinate community recovery efforts. As we highlight below, many of the Hurricane Dorian survivors we interviewed pointed to the aid they received from faith communities from across The Bahamas and internationally. The faith leaders we interviewed underlined their responsibility for helping their communities heal after the storm.

Using qualitative data collected over the five years following Hurricane Dorian, this paper explores the role of faith and faith communities in The Bahamas' recovery. The interviews are part of an ongoing investigation of community responses and redevelopment efforts after the storm. The interviews included several with religious and non‐profit leaders whose organisations assisted in recovery efforts. Although we do not probe interviewees specifically about their faith, multiple participants brought up faith or their faith communities when discussing their experiences before, during, and following the disaster.

To conduct field interviews, the research team (comprised of scholars based at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University in the United States) partnered with The Heritage Partners (THP), a professional services firm focused on documenting community heritage. THP carried out interviews in Grand Bahama in February 2023 and in Great Abaco and the surrounding cays in April 2023. Grand Bahama and Great Abaco were the two islands impacted most by Dorian. Recruitment relied on a flexible, network‐based approach which involved reaching out to individuals within THP's contacts and requesting referrals from them. THP also engaged with potential respondents in various public and private settings, such as dining establishments, office complexes, work sites, and private residences. At the time of the interviews, both Grand Bahama and Great Abaco were sparsely populated, making the network‐based approach appropriate for finding respondents. Each interviewee was briefed on the study's purpose and asked for informed consent, including permission to record the conversation and use responses for research, with attribution when appropriate. To date, the research team has held more than 57 interviews in Grand Bahama and Great Abaco. The authors also conducted eight additional interviews over Zoom with civic, religious, and non‐profit leaders of organisations that had been active in post‐Dorian recovery efforts. All of the interviews were transcribed and systematically coded for patterns within and across transcripts. The interview data have been augmented by newspaper and other media accounts in the following passages.

One of the most prominent themes that emerged from the interviews and the media sources was the critical role of social capital in shaping recovery outcomes. In particular, these sources consistently spoke about the importance of faith and faith communities in the recovery process. These findings are not surprising because religion is central to Bahamian identity (Turner,2020). Ninety per cent of the population identifies as Christian, but no particular sect dominates. The Church of England, Roman Catholic, Baptist, Methodist, Seventh‐day Adventist, and Church of God of Prophecy are some of the more popular denominations across the islands. All participants in the interviews identify as Christian and include both religious leaders and lay individuals. The interviews, of course, do not allow us to determine that faith is more important than other factors in driving recovery, nor does our methodological approach allow us to determine whether faith communities were more influential than other social enterprises. Our strategy, however, does permit us to demonstrate that faith and faith communities mattered for recovery.

Above all we must remember the words in Psalms 46:1–3 ‘God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore, will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea; Though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof.’ These words must be our motto at a time like this. The God who has brought us this far is the God we must trust to carry us further…through this aftermath, to accomplish restored lives and communities.

The Right Reverend Laish Zane Boyd, Sr., Anglican Bishop of the Diocese of The Bahamas and The Turks and Caicos Islands (Anglican Alliance,2019).

Qualitative evidence suggests that Bahamians' faith allowed them to give meaning to the disaster, the losses they experienced, and their own ‘good fortune’ in surviving the hurricane. When asked how they survived or how they stayed strong or hopeful during the storm, multiple interviewees mentioned God.

Indeed, God as a refuge, protector, and deliverer are themes that came up multiple times during the interviews. As one interviewee described: ‘We prayed together during the storm. It was just me, him, and the dog, praying for the water to stop’. Another said: ‘All I could do was pray and trust that God would take care of us during that nightmare’. And a third remarked: ‘I trusted in God to protect me and keep me. And He definitely did’. It was clear in their voices that ‘thanking God’ was not just a figure of speech. Faith was a critical source of support as they managed what was for many the worst days of their lives.

A 33‐year‐old resident of Freeport, Grand Bahama, for instance, pointed out what kept her going after the series of challenges associated with Hurricane Dorian: ‘My faith. I believe that all things work together for good to those that love the Lord. So, he never promised that we wouldn't die physically in the flesh and so I know that even though tragedy is a bad thing, I have to look at it from an eternal perspective. And so the only thing I can do is pray … if something like this were to happen again’. She believed the storm and the destruction it caused were clearly acts of God, but it was not without a purpose; some good would come out of the tragedy and suffering.

Many religious leaders and laypersons used their faith to frame how to respond and engage in recovery. Motivated by their faith, church leaders felt that they were responsible for helping their flock with their material, emotional, and especially spiritual needs. As we discuss below, the Anglican Church's efforts were critical during and following Dorian. Similarly, Pastor Eddie Victor of Living Water Assembly of God and President of the National Pastors Alliance, said: ‘In the book of Acts, the Bible tells us that it's better to give than to receive. As a God‐fearing people, Dorian has really given us all the opportunity to prove that piece of scripture true…. This is not just an opportunity for the Church to play an active role in the rebuilding of our community but to once again create a safe space for all Grand Bahamians’ (Gibson,2019). The disaster was seen by some as an opportunity for the faithful to practise their faith.

I want to say it was a trying time. It really tested your faith….So you have to stay the course, you know, ’cause the church is supposed to be the leaders in getting through this faithfully. So, there's a good time to practise what you preach and put it into action. But I think what it did do was just that and brought people closer to God…it allowed us to come alive and to be what the Word says and to represent God the way that we, at least for the church to look like the church.

Below we report on what faith communities did before, during, and following Hurricane Dorian and, specifically, the importance of such actions for preparedness, shelter, and community recovery. But, here, it is important to stress that faith shaped how people saw the disaster, their understanding of how they survived it, and what they saw as their role during the recovery process.

Yet, even in the face of such overwhelming devastation, the spirit of the community remained unbroken. The concept of rebuilding, while daunting, also became a source of hope and a call to action for the parish members. To ‘rebuild’ is more than just constructing again; it is about restoring and fortifying what once was, both physically and spiritually….I acknowledge the steep hill that remains ahead. Yet, with God's guidance, I am confident that we will overcome the obstacles and shine brightly as a community of faith.

The Reverend Kristopher Higgs, Rector of St. Peter and St. Anne Parish of the Anglican Diocese of The Bahamas and The Turks and Caicos Islands (Higgs,n.d.).

Qualitative evidence indicates that Bahamians were motivated and driven by their faith to engage in post‐disaster recovery after Hurricane Dorian. Their faith proved to be a source of hope and resilience and inspired them to work towards recovery and to care for their neighbours. Rt Rev Boyd, for instance, said in a statement: ‘Let us rebuild stronger and better. Let us become better people because of this. Full recovery will take time but, it is on the way. God already has us in His hands’ (Episcopal Relief & Development,2019).

Multiple interviewees reported that they were able to go on because of their faith. As one Abaco resident put it, ‘knowing God, you can go, nothing is impossible’, even when confronted with tremendous hardship. Furthermore, ‘it spoke about these things in the Bible. We all face these things. We face hurricanes, but other places have volcanoes, earthquakes, and they have to pick up the pieces. Hurricane Katrina, the people were just like us, they had to pick up the pieces. Once you put your trust in God, anything is possible’. Another Abaco resident echoed these sentiments: ‘I think what keeps me going is that I trust God and I'm a believer and I always put Him first in everything that I do.’Cause everything that I do … I see you getting ready. I truly am a believer in His word. And I stay committed as best as I can’. When asked how they were able to navigate the post‐disaster challenges, a third Abaco resident replied: ‘I don't know, just praying’. Many disaster survivors relied on their faith to keep them going during the most difficult times.

No one can live in Abaco any more the way it is, and it may take anywhere from six months to a year before the government can arrange for even a subdivision to be built that can house persons held up at the hurricane shelters around New Providence….People in shelters have a new normal, and need special and focused help. We want people to pull themselves up by the bootstraps, but this is clearly not realistic at this time, and this is an extraordinary circumstance that calls for us to help people more intensively than we have before(Kemp,2019).

Below we describe what faith communities like the NPCC did in responding to the disaster and leading community recovery. Here, though, it is important to stress that faith is what was behind those efforts.

Commit to reaching out to those in the affected areas: call, WhatsApp, email, tweet, and message them. Stay in touch and let them know that you care. Send supplies, if you can. Commit to this for at least one year or more. Recovery will take many years.

Please make no mistake: the situation is dire, the stories are heartbreaking, the suffering is great, and we are faced with something we have NEVER met before. However, we have to take every opportunity to look on the bright side, count our blessings, celebrate what did not go wrong, and encourage others to do so.

People of faith felt called to help those in need and were encouraged by their religious leaders to offer their support to Dorian survivors however they could. This was conceived of as not only an act of charity, but also an act of faith.

I've been very impressed with how people around our own country have been doing their part. They really stepped up to the plate and I felt like the Bahamas was coming back to this whole spirit of being who we are: one another's keeper. I felt a strong spirit of brotherhood and helping your neighbour. Simultaneously to that, the way people outside of our country stepped up to the plate has been nothing short of incredible. The way faith‐based organisations and other charitable organisations led the way with recovery efforts is something to take note of when it comes to the body of Christ. I believe that it has to do with how they see our country. Yes, we have our problems, we have our issues, but people abroad and the international church community still sees the Bahamas and the Bahamian people as a Christian nation and I think they felt a sense of obligation to come to the aid of their brothers and sisters.

Bishop Neil Ellis, Senior Pastor of Mount Tabor Church (Thompson,2020).

In The Bahamas, the social capital developed in church allowed survivors to coordinate aid, as well as spiritual, emotional, and psychological support. Through their shared experiences and beliefs, followers bonded together and cooperated to address the many collective action problems they faced. Dr Janice Proud, the Anglican Alliance's Disaster Response and Resilience Manager, acknowledges that the church is an important part of the community and has played a vital role in the wake of Hurricane Dorian. She explained: ‘From the first Sunday, Anglican services were held, even if the church was damaged, to allow people to come together and worship, as they would normally’ (Farmer,2019).

The Anglican Church's response to Dorian was particularly impressive. There are eight Anglican churches and two priests living on the Abaco Islands, and seven Anglican churches on Grand Bahama. During and after Dorian, the Anglican Church played a pivotal role in connecting and supporting communities affected by the devastation, offering both physical aid and spiritual guidance. Churches became critical gathering points for those in need, as described by Archdeacon Earl Hepburn, who oversaw the Anglican diocese's relief efforts: ‘churches are gathering points’ and places where ‘people could run to for refuge’. Indeed, several churches became designated hurricane shelters. This highlights the church's role as a sanctuary during crises, providing both shelter and a sense of community amidst the chaos.

Archdeacon Hepburn highlighted how his church acted as a shelter during the storm and was a site for distributing aid in its wake: ‘The parish hall held about 400 to 500 persons in it. They came from all over because all the other shelters were full to capacity…. Our membership was basically to help as many persons as possible through the trauma, supply them with the pastoral assistance and need that we could give during that time in those adverse circumstances’. After Dorian, the Church of The Ascension sheltered displaced individuals and served 400 meals a day. On Grand Bahama, in addition to Ascension, the congregations at St. Jude's and St. Stephen's Anglican Churches, the Pro‐Cathedral of Christ the King, and the Church of the Good Shepherd, for instance, provided several meals to hundreds of local community members daily (Episcopal Relief & Development,2019). Indeed, the social capital fostered by the Anglican Church in The Bahamas allowed these interconnected communities to offer shelter and feeding programmes after Dorian. For example, the Pro‐Cathedral of Christ the King church in Freeport was feeding 1,000 people per day, even though it was flooded, and St. Jude's Anglican Church was feeding 500 people per day.

In addition to its function as a place of refuge, the church also served as a hub for relief efforts. ‘Given our network of churches and personnel’, Archdeacon Keith Cartwright remarked, ‘the only entity more widespread than the Anglican (Episcopal) Church is the respective governments of The Bahamas and The Turks and Caicos Islands’. Stated another way, the institutional reach of the Anglican Church within the affected area was rivalled only by the Government of The Bahamas. The Anglican diocese in The Bahamas thus became a natural intermediary for the broad network of Anglican/Episcopal churches and agencies around the globe. The Primate's World Relief and Development Fund, the Anglican Church of Canada's relief agency, sent USD 20,000 in aid. The US‐based Episcopal Relief & Development provided support to Dorian survivors through the Bahamian diocese. Working in partnership with several Anglican dioceses and organisations in the US, including the Anglican Alliance, Episcopal Relief & Development worked with the Bahamian diocese to provide food, water, clothing, and shelter to Dorian survivors. Additionally, The Anglican Relief and Development Fund partnered with Water Mission, a Christian engineering body whose mission is ‘to honor God by developing, implementing, and sharing best‐in‐class safe water solutions that transform as many lives as possible as quickly as possible’.3Water Mission responded to needs in Green Turtle Cay, Marsh Harbour, and Elbow Cay (Anglican Church in North America,2019).

The Bahamian Anglican diocese leveraged its social capital to help coordinate the relief and recovery efforts of those in the Anglican Communion outside of The Bahamas. Moreover, the church's pastoral mission extended beyond just immediate disaster response. Again, the church aimed to address the holistic needs of the community, as Rt Rev Boyd explained: ‘We are pastoral and pastoral isn't just problems. But pastoral is … when there's grief or when there's a need, the church tries to meet it’. This mission included spiritual support as well as addressing emotional and mental health concerns that arose from the trauma owing to loss and devastation. The leaders emphasised that the church was integral to providing a space for people to grieve and rebuild their lives, underlining the role of faith and community resilience in the recovery process.

Lastly, the interviews underscored the long‐term commitment of the Anglican Church to rebuilding the social fabric of the affected regions. Church leaders reflected on the transformative nature of the hurricane and the profound impact it had on both their ministries and the people they serve. They noted that Dorian ‘was totally different’ in terms of its scale of destruction, requiring a concerted effort not only in relation to physical reconstruction, but also to spiritual healing and support for mental health.

The Anglican churches' post‐Dorian efforts proved essential in helping Bahamians survive the ramifications of the storm. Even parishioners noticed the effectiveness of religious communities in helping the recovery effort. Kristoff Ayala‐Strachan (n.d.), a young Anglican who lives in Grand Bahama, wrote: ‘The Church has played an interesting role in The Bahamas as it relates to hurricane preparation and relief efforts. Throughout each island, the overwhelming majority of designated hurricane shelters are churches, irrespective of denomination fulfilling its purpose of not only being a place of spiritual refuge and salvation, but also physical’.

The Anglican diocese and broader Anglican Communion were certainly not the only faith‐based organisations that helped The Bahamas to recover. Churches provided emergency shelters for the thousands of people who had to evacuate from Dorian's path. On New Providence, the most populous island in The Bahamas, thousands of people stayed in shelters run by churches, in addition to those run by the government and other organisations. For instance, the Calvary Haitian Baptist Church, Salvation Army, Pilgrim Baptist Temple, and Grants Town Seventh‐day Adventist Church all opened their doors to people seeking emergency shelter (Russell,2019). One particular example is the NPCC, which gathered donations to provide food and housing assistance to survivors of Dorian for more than 14 months, supporting 1,500 individuals per week. After the hurricane, the NPCC's work expanded to supporting families affected by COVID‐19 (Van Wynen,2023).

The social capital of local churches proved even more effective when it was paired with other non‐profit and charitable organisations. For instance, the Grand Bahama Disaster Relief Foundation (GBDRF) was formed by the directors of the Grand Bahama Port Authority (GBPA) to focus solely on restoring and rebuilding the island they manage. The GBDRF partnered with local clergy on Grand Bahama to assist people impacted by Dorian. Leaders of the GBDRF said they could not have accomplished their goals without the assistance of more than 50 churches, including the Abundant Life Assembly of God, Blessed Hope Seventh‐day Adventist Church, Freeport Bible Church, and numerous others. Henry St George, co‐Chief Executive Officer at the GBDRF and Vice‐President of the GBPA, said: ‘Thousands of families have already been impacted by the relief supplies from the Grand Bahama Disaster Relief Foundation…. Working with a network of pastors from throughout Grand Bahama, from West End, Holmes Rock, Eight Mile Rock Freeport, Freetown, High Rock, Pelican Point, McClean's Town to Sweetings’ Cay, these pastors are serving the people in all communities and are committed to working toward helping all those who were affected by Hurricane Dorian’ (Gibson,2019).

Like the Bahamian Anglican diocese, local churches served as intermediaries, helping foreign charities and faith organisations to direct aid to those in need. In the interviews, Pastor Freddie Laing, Jr. of St. Matthew's Baptist Church and Pastor Russell of Calvary Temple, for instance, respectively described the broad networks of assistance from interrelated religious communities as follows: ‘Our main contributors were Southern Baptist of the United States from, I thought in particular, Louisiana and Mississippi Baptist Convention, Southern Baptist Convention. They helped us out a great deal; and ‘Every NGO you could name. I just remember seeing people helping and then being here at the church, people came, they came especially the church, the faith‐based NGOs, they came to the church asking how can they help’.

Despite significant challenges, such as damaged infrastructure and overwhelming needs, churches supported victims, addressing both immediate and ongoing recovery needs. They helped to manage the influx of assistance from NGOs, navigating bureaucratic challenges to ensure that aid reached those in need.

Hurricane Dorian was one of the most destructive storms ever to hit The Bahamas, but its communities proved resilient. A key aspect of recovery in this case—and in many other instances of post‐disaster recovery—was the role of faith and faith communities. We have argued that faith serves as a worldview or frame through which individuals understand and respond to disaster, and is also a powerful driver of resilience, offering spiritual motivation and collective encouragement. Faith‐based communities use their social connections to coordinate aid and rebuild devastated areas. Religious leaders can act as ideological entrepreneurs by shaping the way that people view the world. They can function as social entrepreneurs by creating and directing organisations and movements that promote resilience and recovery.

The evidence presented here reveals how post‐Dorian Bahamian churches and faith‐based organisations supplied both immediate and long‐term relief. These entities not only provided material support, but they also gave spiritual guidance, which fostered a sense of hope and strengthened community ties. Bahamian faith leaders and their congregations distributed resources and ensured that help reached those most in need.

This paper thus contributes to three strands of literature beyond that on faith and disaster recovery. First, it adds to the literature on the role of local knowledge and entrepreneurs in post‐disaster recovery. As our case study indicates, on‐the‐ground entrepreneurs have local, tacit, and inarticulable knowledge derived from faith and faith communities (Sobel and Leeson,2007; Chamlee‐Wright and Storr,2011a; Storr and Haeffele‐Balch,2012; Joakim and White,2015; Kraft and Smith,2019). Second, it contributes to the growing body of literature on social capital, which is critical for post‐disaster recovery. Faith‐based communities often have the bonding and bridging social capital necessary for effective collective action (Chamlee‐Wright,2010; Aldrich,2011). Third, it contributes to the broader literature on political economy that examines complex collective action problems. A shared faith and faith community can help to overcome the free‐rider problem by providing selective incentives that promote pro‐social behaviour (Olson,1965; North,1990; Ostrom,1990,2005).

These findings have at least two implications. First, policymakers must avoid hindering the ability of faith‐motivated entrepreneurs to discover and seize new opportunities. Religious leaders and parishioners have local, context‐dependent knowledge that affords them valuable insights that they can use to address entrepreneurially their dilemmas. If public policies serve as barriers to entrepreneurship (including faith‐motivated entrepreneurship), community rebound will be slowed because of increased uncertainty. Second, successful post‐disaster recovery may be enhanced through faith and faith communities. With a foundation of faith, post‐disaster survivors can better access frames or worldviews that help them to evaluate potential means of recovery. Faith is likely to give individuals stronger motivations to engage in post‐disaster recovery because they may have more places from which to draw inspiration, encouragement, and solace. If faith communities are stronger, individuals are more likely to foster social capital, such as connections and collective narratives, meaning that they can rebuild devastated areas more successfully and effectively.

In addition to faith and faith communities, future research should examine how alternatives to religion can provide meaning to people's lives and help them to build social capital. Non‐religious charities or non‐profit or grassroots organisations may substitute for religious groups to some degree, but it is unclear how well they do so in real‐world contexts. Disasters are inevitable, making the study of faith and faith communities—or the lack thereof—critically important.

We would like to thank the Templeton World Charity Foundation for financially supporting this project.

Faith and faith communities have received attention in the literature. See, for instance, Chester,2005; Chamlee‐Wright and Storr,2011a; Muller et al.,2014; Joakim and White,2015; Storr, Haeffele‐Balch, and Grube,2015; Gregersen,2016; McGeehan and Baker,2017; Meyer,2018; Sun, Deng, and Qi,2018; Wilkinson,2018; Davis et al.,2019; Ngin et al.,2020; Ferguson,2023; Koopman,2023; Sun and Qi,2023.

There is also a religious studies literature on how religious beliefs, religious leadership, and religious organisations promote resilience, help individuals navigate the post‐disaster environment, and shape responses in the wake of disaster (see, for example, Joakim and White,2015).

For more information, seehttps://watermission.org/nextsteps(last accessed on 22 July 2025).