An 8‐year‐old castrated male Miniature Poodle was referred due to polyuria, polydipsia and urinary incontinence, following 12 days of prednisolone administration (0.25 mg/kg q12h) for otitis externa. Upon physical examination, an abnormal heart rhythm was detected on cardiac auscultation without any associated clinical signs. Owing to suspected conduction abnormalities, electrocardiography (ECG) was performed, which revealed a Mobitz Type II second‐degree atrioventricular (AV) block. Blood analysis revealed hyperglycaemia (> 500 mg/dL; reference interval [RI] = 65–118 mg/dL), elevated fructosamine (361 µmol/L; RI = 177–314 µmol/L) and β‐hydroxybutyric acid concentrations (5.4 mmol/L; RI ≤ 2.5 mmol/L), leading to a diagnosis of diabetic ketosis. To manage the diabetic ketosis, porcine lente insulin (Caninsulin, MSD) was administered at a dose of 0.33 U/kg q12h. Three days after initiating insulin therapy, the clinical signs improved, a stable blood glucose curve with a nadir of 150 mg/dL was observed, and the β‐hydroxybutyric acid concentration decreased to 1.4 mmol/L. Follow‐up ECG confirmed resolution of the AV block. Subsequently, the diabetes mellitus (DM) was well managed, and the AV block did not recur. A strong association between DM and AV block is reported in humans. However, studies investigating the relationship between DM and AV block in veterinary medicine are limited. This case report describes the potential for acute‐onset DM to induce cardiac conduction disturbances in dogs.

Atrioventricular (AV) block is a cardiac conduction abnormality caused by delayed or blocked electrical signals through the AV node (Santilli et al.2019). Its severity ranges from first‐degree, where conduction is delayed, to third‐degree, where atrial impulses do not reach the ventricles. A second‐degree AV block occurs when conduction through the AV node is intermittently blocked, leading to the occasional absence of ventricular depolarisation, which sometimes results in clinical signs. On electrocardiography (ECG), a second‐degree AV block is observed as P‐waves not followed by QRS complexes (Foster et al.2021). Second‐degree AV block can be further classified into Mobitz Types I and II. Mobitz type I is characterised by gradual lengthening of the PR interval before a dropped QRS complex, whereas Mobitz Type II shows sudden dropped QRS complexes without prior PR prolongation (Wright et al.2024).

An AV block can result from various causes, including structural abnormalities near the AV node, myocardial ischaemia and endocarditis (Machida et al.2023; Romito et al.2024; Wright et al.2024). Functional disruptions, such as increased vagal tone, metabolic imbalances, and drug effects also contribute to its occurrence (Pavone et al.2021; Wright et al.2024). The clinical signs of second‐degree AV block vary depending on the severity and underlying causes, ranging from asymptomatic cases to syncope or sudden cardiac death (Schrope et al.2006). In some cases, the AV block may regress or even reverse (Santilli et al.2016).

Studies have revealed a strong association between diabetes mellitus (DM) and AV block in humans, although the precise mechanism has not been elucidated (Movahed et al.2023; Haxha et al.2023). DM can lead to various complications, such as diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and myocardial ischaemia, which may contribute to the development of conduction abnormalities (Forrat et al.1993; Feldman et al.2015). However, studies investigating the relationship between DM and AV block in veterinary medicine are limited.

This case report describes the resolution of a Mobitz Type II second‐degree AV block following insulin therapy in a dog with acute‐onset DM likely caused by glucocorticoid administration.

An 8‐year‐old, castrated male Miniature Poodle presented with polyuria, polydipsia and urinary incontinence. The dog was previously diagnosed with otitis externa at a local hospital and received treatment with prednisolone at a dosage of 0.25 mg/kg q12h for 12 days, approximately 1 month before the onset of clinical signs. Physical examination revealed a body weight of 2.95 kg with a body condition score of 4/9, approximately 1 kg of weight loss over the past month, and poor coat quality. An estimated 5%–6% dehydration was noted based on decreased skin turgor and tacky mucous membranes.

The initial systolic blood pressure was 130 mmHg as measured using a Doppler blood pressure monitor (Model 811‐B, Parks Medical Electronics Inc., USA) on the right forelimb. The cuff width was approximately 40% of the limb circumference, following the guidelines of the American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine consensus statement (Acierno et al.2018). Cardiac auscultation revealed a regularly irregular rhythm characterised by intermittent dropped beats, without any associated clinical signs.

Ophthalmic examination revealed bilaterally increased lens opacity, consistent with rapidly progressive diabetic cataracts. Menace responses were absent in both eyes, while dazzle reflexes were present, suggesting that the vision loss was more likely due to the cataract‐related opacities, rather than optic nerve or retinal dysfunction. This was confirmed by an ophthalmologist at our hospital.

Serum biochemistry revealed increased liver enzyme levels, including alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (121 IU/L; reference interval [RI] = 21‒102 IU/L), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) (2335 IU/L; RI = 21‒97 IU/L) and gamma‐glutamyl transferase (GGT) (18 IU/L; RI = 1‒10 IU/L). Hypertriglyceridaemia (174 mg/dL; RI = 21‒116 mg/dL) and hyperglycaemia (> 500 mg/dL; RI = 65‒118 mg/dL) were observed, along with elevated levels of fructosamine (361 µmol/L; RI = 177‒314 µmol/L) and β‐hydroxybutyric acid (5.4 mmol/L; RI ≤ 0.015 mmol/L [Duarte et al.2002]). Complete blood count (CBC) and electrolytes showed no significant abnormalities. Urinalysis revealed a pH of 6.5 (RI = 6.0‒7.0), glucosuria > 500 mg/dL, and ketonuria > 50 mg/dL. The urine specific gravity was 1.035 (RI = 1.015‒1.045), indicating preserved urine concentrating ability despite polyuria. The urine protein‐to‐creatinine (UPC) ratio was 0.30 (RI = 0‒0.5), suggesting borderline proteinuria (Marynissen et al.2017). No additional abnormalities were observed. Based on these findings, diabetic ketosis was diagnosed.

Due to the abnormal heart rhythm observed on auscultation, an ECG was performed to assess for possible conduction abnormalities. A six‐lead ECG was performed with the dog in right lateral recumbency (Pagewriter TC70; Philips Healthcare, the Netherlands); the average heart rate was 108 beats/min. In lead II, the PR interval remained consistent; however, an intermittent absence of QRS complexes following P‐waves was observed, indicating a Mobitz Type II second‐degree AV block (Figure1). The N‐terminal pro B‐type natriuretic peptide (NT‐proBNP) measurement was 250 pmol/L (RI = 0‒820 pmol/L; Oyama et al.2008) and cardiac troponin I (cTnI) was < 0.2 ng/mL (RI < 0.2 ng/mL; Oyama and Sisson2004).

Electrocardiographic tracing (Lead II) from a dog diagnosed with diabetes mellitus. The heart rate is 108 beats per minute. P waves (arrowheads) are not consistently followed by QRS complexes, indicating a Mobitz Type II second‐degree atrioventricular block. Paper speed: 25 mm/s; 20 mm = 1 mV.

To manage diabetic ketosis, porcine lente insulin (Caninsulin, MSD Animal Health, USA) was administered at 0.33 U/kg SQ q12h. Hospitalisation for rehydration was recommended due to mild dehydration, but the owner declined. Instead, the patient was carefully monitored to evaluate the response to insulin therapy and prevent potential hypoglycaemic events. A total of 3 days after initiating insulin therapy, the dog was returned to our hospital for a pre‐operative evaluation prior to diabetic cataract surgery. At this follow‐up, the clinical signs had improved, polydipsia had decreased by approximately one‐third and hydration status returned to normal. The systolic blood pressure was 170 mmHg. Repeat blood analysis showed a decrease in β‐hydroxybutyric acid concentrations to 1.4 mmol/L (RI ≤ 2.5 mmol/L), and serial blood glucose monitoring demonstrated a stable blood glucose curve with a nadir of 150 mg/dL. The NT‐proBNP level was 393 pmol/L (RI = 0‒820 pmol/L), and the cTnI level remained < 0.2 ng/mL (RI < 0.2 ng/mL). The previously observed abnormal heart rhythm was no longer detected on cardiac auscultation. Follow‐up ECG confirmed the resolution of the Mobitz Type II second‐degree AV block in Lead II, with an average heart rate of 150 beats per minute (Figure2). During the subsequent follow‐up evaluation, DM was well managed, and the second‐degree AV block did not recur. Heart rate and systolic blood pressure remained consistently elevated during these follow‐ups.

Electrocardiographic tracing (Lead II) after insulin therapy. The heart rate is 150 beats per minute. All P waves are followed by QRS complexes, indicating the resolution of Mobitz Type II second‐degree atrioventricular block. Paper speed: 50 mm/s; 20 mm = 1 mV.

In this report, we present the case of a Miniature Poodle with steroid‐induced DM that developed a second‐degree AV block. The arrhythmia in this dog was likely due to DM caused by prednisolone administration, which resolved after initiating insulin therapy. Prednisolone is a synthetic glucocorticoid widely used in dogs for its anti‐inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects (Ekstrand et al.2021). However, glucocorticoids contribute to insulin resistance and decrease insulin secretion by pancreatic beta cells (Andrews et al.1999; Linssen et al.2011). Dogs with DM were four times more likely to have received glucocorticoids within 6 weeks prior to diagnosis compared to non‐diabetic control (Heeley et al.2023). In this case, prednisolone was prescribed at a dosage of 0.25 mg/kg q12h for 12 days before the diagnosis of DM. No clinical signs suggestive of DM were observed before the initiation of steroid treatment, suggesting that the acute onset of DM was likely caused by prednisolone administration.

The canine heart can utilise various energy substrates such as fatty acids, glucose, lactate and ketone bodies (Glatz et al.2020). Studies in humans with DM have shown that decreased myocardial glucose usage is compensated for by increased fatty acid utilisation and ketone body production due to enhanced fatty acid oxidation (Herrero et al.2006). Fatty acid oxidation requires approximately 11% more oxygen than glucose oxidation to produce the same amount of adenosine triphosphate, and increasing fatty acid utilisation in the hearts of dogs with DM raises myocardial oxygen demand, possibly leading to acute myocardial hypoxia (Stanley et al.2002). This metabolic alteration reduces cardiac efficiency and contributes to myocardial dysfunction (Heather et al.2011). In the present case, DM was diagnosed based on laboratory findings consistent with those of DM such as hyperglycaemia, glucosuria, elevated serum fructosamine levels and ketonaemia (Reusch et al.1993; Niessen et al.2022). Therefore, prednisolone administration likely reduced glucose utilisation, leading to a compensatory increase in fatty acid utilisation. This metabolic shift likely resulted in myocardial hypoxia, contributing to the development of the AV block observed on ECG, as has been shown in human patients with DM (Rawshani et al.2023).

Following the initiation of insulin therapy, the dog showed an improvement in clinical signs, stabilisation of the blood glucose curve and a reduction in blood ketone levels. Insulin administration likely restored glucose utilisation and reduced excessive fatty acid oxidation, leading to a decrease in myocardial oxygen demand. This reduction in oxygen demand may have relieved myocardial hypoxia and improved cardiac efficiency, leading to the resolution of the second‐degree AV block. Myocardial injury can be diagnosed using various methods, including echocardiography and ECG, along with the use of biomarkers such as NT‐proBNP and cTnI (Romito et al.2024). NT‐proBNP reflects the severity of myocardial stretching associated with volume overload, whereas cTnI is a highly specific marker of myocardial injury (Oyama et al.2004; Hori et al.2010). When the heart does not receive sufficient oxygen to meet its metabolic demands, the myocardial workload increases due to impaired cardiac function, which leads to increased stress and stretching of cardiomyocytes (Li et al.2002). This process can result in cellular damage and the subsequent release of NT‐proBNP and cTnI (Oyama et al.2004; Hori et al.2012). However, both biomarkers remained within the reference range in this case, indicating the absence of significant myocardial injury or substantial cardiac overload. This suggests that the second‐degree AV block observed in this case may have been caused by functional abnormalities rather than by structural damage to the myocardium.

Metabolic acidosis could be considered a potential cause of the second‐degree AV block in this case. Acidosis can slow electrical conduction through the AV node, potentially resulting in partial or complete AV block by delaying impulse transmission (Nisbet et al.2014). In this case, serum β‐hydroxybutyric acid was initially measured at 5.4 mmol/L, with concurrent ketonuria exceeding 50 mg/dL. A serum β‐hydroxybutyric acid cut‐off value of 4.3 mmol/L has been established for diagnosing DKA with a specificity of 100%, strongly suggesting the presence of DKA in this dog (Di Tommaso et al.2009). Following insulin therapy, serum β‐hydroxybutyric acid levels decreased to 1.4 mmol/L. A serum β‐hydroxybutyric acid level < 2.3 mmol/L can effectively rule out DKA with a sensitivity of 100%, suggesting recovery of DKA in this dog (Di Tommaso et al.2009). This normalisation of the serum β‐hydroxybutyric acid level, along with the resolution of the AV block, supports the hypothesis that metabolic acidosis played a role in the conduction abnormalities observed in this case.

Increased vagal tone is another potential mechanism underlying second‐degree AV block in this case. Studies in humans with Type 1 DM have demonstrated increased vagal activity, which may be linked to early metabolic disturbances and impaired insulin secretion (Ziegler et al.2018). In dogs, hypoxia is also known to activate carotid body chemoreceptors, further enhancing the vagal tone and leading to bradycardia (Potter et al.1986; Joyce et al.2022). This increase in the vagal tone can disrupt cardiac conduction and contribute to the development of a second‐degree AV block (Hamlin et al.1968; Alboni et al.2013). In the present case, the metabolic disturbances associated with DM may have contributed to the increased vagal tone, which was supported by the significant increase in heart rate and blood pressure observed after insulin therapy.

Systemic hypertension is a common comorbidity in dogs with DM (Struble et al.1998). It may occur at an early stage of the disease, regardless of its duration or the degree of glycaemic control (Herring et al.2014). In humans with type 1 DM, diabetic nephropathy is considered the primary cause of hypertension. Other mechanisms may include enhanced sodium retention, activation of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system and vascular endothelial dysfunction (Van Buren and Toto.2011). In the present case, hypertension may have developed through similar mechanisms. In addition, resolution of increased vagal tone may have contributed to the elevation in blood pressure. During follow‐up, systolic blood pressure remained stable around 150 mmHg, and antihypertensive therapy was not initiated. However, in similar cases with persistent hypertension, therapeutic options such as angiotensin‐converting enzyme inhibitors or calcium channel blockers may be considered (Acierno et al.2018).

This report has several limitations. Firstly, a blood gas analysis was not performed because the dog did not show any systemic signs of DKA. A blood gas analysis could provide further insights into the underlying mechanisms of second‐degree AV block. Secondly, echocardiographic and histopathological evaluation of the myocardium were not performed. However, normal cTnI levels suggest the absence of significant myocardial damage, making myocardial injury unlikely. Considering that cTnI is more sensitive than echocardiography in detecting myocardial injury, we suspect echocardiographic evaluation would not have revealed any significant abnormalities in this case (Romito et al.2024). Instead, a point‐of‐care ultrasound (POCUS) focussing on the heart, kidneys, thorax and caudal vena cava could have been considered to provide broader assessment of the patient's condition, including volume status and potential pulmonary or renal involvement. Furthermore, myocardial biopsy is highly invasive and was not indicated considering that the serum cTnI concentration was normal and the dog was showing no clinical signs related to heart disease.

This case highlights the fact that acute‐onset DM, likely triggered by glucocorticoid administration, can result in cardiac conduction abnormalities, particularly second‐degree AV block. The resolution of second‐degree AV block following insulin therapy demonstrates the importance of metabolic control in managing such cases.