Fungal infections often co-occur with antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections, posing clinical treatment challenges. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) are considered promising therapeutic alternatives due to their low potential for inducing drug resistance. This study aimed to enhance the antibacterial potency of an existing antifungal peptide through optimization, developing a dual-function peptide targeting both fungal and bacterial pathogens.

We designed peptides F1-F4 from the symmetrical amino acid-paired antifungal peptide P19 through threonine (T) substitution and hydrophobic moment (µHrel) adjustment. Then, we assessed their antifungal and antibacterial activities against reference and clinically isolated strains by minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs), evaluated their toxicity to human red blood cells, and explored the membrane-associated mechanisms.

Peptide F4 was the most promising candidate due to its potent antifungal and antibacterial activities, lack of inhibitory effect on beneficial lactobacilli at concentrations effective against pathogens, and low hemolytic activity. F4 also exhibited strong binding affinity to lipopolysaccharides (LPS) and induced bacterial membrane depolarization and permeabilization.

Our findings demonstrated that T substitution and hydrophobic moment adjustment effectively enhanced antibacterial activity of the antifungal peptide P19, making peptide F4 a strong candidate for both fungal and bacterial infections.

Although treating infectious diseases has progressed significantly with the advancement of medical technology, current antifungal treatment options are limited to polyenes, azoles, and echinocandins, and moreover, resistance in fungi likeCandidahas further reduced their efficacy, especially in systemic and invasive infections [1]. Antifungal-resistant infections have high mortality rates (50−71%), notably in immunocompromised individuals, such as those with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), cancer patients, and organ transplant recipients, with fungemia being a leading cause of hospital-acquired (HA) infections [2]. Additionally, the use of agricultural fungicides similar to medical antifungals has accelerated the resistance development [3–5]. Meanwhile, polymicrobial infections of bacteria and fungi are getting common in clinical settings, further complicating clinical management. Due to the biological differences between bacteria and fungi, developing drugs that target both types of pathogens remains challenging [6–9]. This situation highlights the urgent need for alternative antimicrobial strategies to combat resistance in both bacteria and fungi. Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs), as a potential alternative, have gained increasing attention due to their unique membrane-disruption mechanisms and potential for broad-spectrum activity against both bacteria and fungi [7,10–13]. Currently available peptide-derived antimicrobial agents exhibit clinically validated efficacy but remain constrained by pathogen specificity. For example, antibacterial lipopeptides, like daptomycin, target Gram-positive bacteria, including methicillin-resistantStaphylococcus aureus(MRSA) through membrane disruption mechanisms [14–16], while antifungal echinocandin derivatives, e.g., caspofungin and micafungin, inhibit the growth of fungi [17–19]. Both classes have received regulatory approval for monomicrobial infections [17,20–23]. In contrast, emerging peptide derivatives like LL-37, melittin, and their derivatives demonstrate broad-spectrum activity against phylogenetically distinct pathogens, including clinically relevant bacteriaEscherichia coli,Staphylococcus aureus,Acinetobacter baumannii,Pseudomonas aeruginosa[24–26] and opportunistic fungi (Candida albicans) [27–29], suggesting conserved membrane-associated mechanisms across microbial kingdoms. Despite these promising findings, no clinically approved peptide-based agents have shown validated dual antibacterial and antifungal activity. This persistent gap highlights the need for developing novel AMPs capable of addressing polymicrobial infections.

Our previous study identified peptide P19 (RRFSFWFSFRR-NH2) as a potent antifungal agent with selective activity againstCandidawhile preserving probiotic viability [30]. This positions P19 as a promising scaffold for developing dual-targeting AMPs effective against polymicrobial bacterial-fungal infections. The symmetrical architecture of P19 confers enhanced structural stability and membrane selectivity, improving antifungal resistance profiles [30]. Meanwhile, its symmetric amino acid pairing structure could further provide enhanced environmental resilience (e.g., pH, temperature fluctuations) and host cell biocompatibility, ensuring sustained efficacy and reducing mammalian cytotoxicity [31]. Moreover, a recent study indicated that the introduction of hydrophilic residue threonine (T) or serine (S) significantly improved the bacterial selectivity but reduced mammalian toxicity, with T being more effective than S [32]. The underlying reasons were unclear but may correlate to an additional methyl group (-CH3) in T, which moderately increases hydrophobicity. This finding suggested that T substitution may enhance antibacterial activity, making it a promising strategy for modifying antifungal AMP like P19. Additionally, strategic modulation of hydrophobic moment (µHrel) through site-directed hydrophobic residue substitution represents a key optimization strategy for balancing antimicrobial activity, toxicity, and selectivity [33–36]. The µHrel quantifies directional hydrophobicity distribution, influencing the interactions between peptides and membranes. However, excessive µHrel elevation may raise the peptide’s toxicity to host cells. The underlying mechanisms may involve the spatial organization of hydrophobic residues influencing membrane penetration efficiency [33], while lipid bilayer affinity scales with hydrophobic residue composition and topology [34]. Collectively, these principles enable rational redesign of P19’s hydrophobic domains to expand its antibacterial spectrum while maintaining selectivity.

Therefore, this study aimed to explore novel AMPs with broad-spectrum antibacterial and antifungal activities. By T substitution and µHrel adjustments, four peptides (F1-F4) were derived from antifungal peptide P19. We hypothesized that these modifications would allow us to identify an AMP with both antibacterial and antifungal activities and with low toxicity against human cells.

The peptides tested in this study were synthesized by GL Biochem Ltd (Shanghai, China) using the solid-phase synthesis method with Fmoc protection. Each peptide’s molecular weight was confirmed using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS; Linear Scientific Inc. USA). Peptide purity was critically assessed to ensure consistency in our experiments (> = 95%), using reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with a Shimadzu Inertsil ODS-SP column (4.6 × 250 mm, 214 nm, 20 µL). A non-linear gradient of water and acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid was employed at a flow rate of 1.0 mL/min. The general schematic and three-dimensional (3D) structures of the peptides were modeled using online tools (https://www.allpeptide.com/andhttps://www.rcsb.org/).

The tested fungal strains includedC. albicansCGMCC 2.2086 andC. parapsilosisCGMCC 2.3989. The tested bacterial strains includedEscherichia coli25,922,E. coliUB1005,Pseudomonas aeruginosa27,853,Staphylococcus epidermidis12,228,Staphylococcus aureus29,213, and MRSA 43,300. The tested probiotic strains includedLacticaseibacillus rhamnosus1.0385 andLactiplantibacillus plantarum7469. The tested clinical drug-resistant fungal and bacterial strains includedC. albicansSP3902,C. albicansSP3903,C. albicansSP3937,C. albicans56,214,C. albicansisolated from alveolar fluid,E. coli.1,E. coli.2,S. aureus1,and S. aureus2. The above strains were collected in the School of Medicine, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University.

The antimicrobial activity of the peptides was assessed by the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) assay using a modified version of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute guidelines. After microbial cultivation on agar plates, bacterial and fungal colonies were inoculated in Mueller-Hinton Broth (MHB) and Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium buffered with morpholinepropanesulfonic (MOPS) acid to logarithmic phase, respectively. Bacterial concentration was measured using an ultraviolet spectrophotometer, while fungal concentration was determined by McFarland’s turbidimetric method. A suspension of 0.5 − 1 × 104CFU/mL for either bacterial or fungal cells was prepared, and 50 µL of this suspension was added to each well of a sterile 96-well plate containing 50 µL of AMPs in bovine serum albumin (BSA) with final peptide concentrations ranging from 0.5 to 128 µM. Growth inhibition was assessed by incubating the plates at 37 °C for 24 h for bacteria and for 48 h for fungi. The lowest peptide concentration that completely inhibited microbial growth, as determined by visual inspection, was recorded. Controls included broth with microbial cells for positive control and an uninoculated broth for negative control. Melittin and P19 were also included for comparison. All experiments were conducted in triplicate to ensure reproducibility.

To determine the biocompatibility of the synthesized peptides for potential clinical applications, the hemolytic assay was conducted to assess their toxicity against normal human cells, specifically red blood cells (RBCs). Healthy human RBCs (donated by Dongyu Gao) were washed three times and resuspended in PBS. Peptides F1, F2, F3, and F4 at final concentrations ranging from 2 to 128 µM were then added to the RBC suspension. The mixtures of RBCs and peptides were incubated at 37 °C for 1 h to allow interaction. Then the samples were centrifuged at 1000 × g for 10 min, and the supernatant was collected. Hemolysis was quantified by measuring the absorbance of hemoglobin released into the supernatant at 540 nm using a spectrophotometer. The percentage of hemolysis was calculated relative to a positive control (complete hemolysis induced by 1% Triton X-100). Negative control consisted of RBCs in PBS without any peptides to measure the baseline absorbance.

Circular dichroism (CD) spectra of the peptides were recorded to assess their secondary structure under various environments, including 10 mM PBS (representing an aqueous environment), 50% TFE (mimicking a hydrophobic microbial membrane environment), and 30 mM SDS micelles (simulating a negatively charged prokaryotic membrane). Measurements were performed using a J-820 spectropolarimeter (Jasco, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with a quartz cuvette having a 1.0-mm path length. A peptide concentration of 150 µM was used for the assays. Spectra were collected in the wavelength range of 195–250 nm at a scanning speed of 10 nm/min. Each spectrum was an average of three scans to ensure accuracy and reproducibility. The observed ellipticity, corrected for the buffer baseline at each wavelength, was converted to mean residue ellipticity (MRE).

Where Fobsis the observed fluorescence intensity at a given peptide concentration, F0is the fluorescence value of the LPS-BC mixture with only Tris, and F100is the fluorescence value of the LPS-BC mixture co-cultured with polymyxin B (10 µg/mL).

To assess the depolarizing effect of peptide F4 onE. colicell membranes, a fluorescence-based assay was conducted using the voltage-sensitive dye DiSC₃−5.E. coliwere cultivated to logarithmic phase, diluted to 1 × 104cells/mL, and then incubated with various concentrations of peptide F4 (2 µM, 4 µM, 8 µM, and 16 µM) at room temperature for 1 h. After treatment,E. coliwas harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in 1 mL of PBS (pH 7.4). Cytoplasmic membrane potential changes were monitored using 0.4 µM DiSC₃−5 dye (Sigma Chemical Co., USA). Fluorescence intensities were measured using a Spectrofluorophotometer (Infinite 200 Pro, Tecan, China). The fluorescence changes were monitored over a period from 0 to 1300 s to capture the kinetics of depolarization. Measurements were taken at an excitation wavelength of 580 nm and an emission wavelength of 600 nm.

whereFibsis the fluorescence intensity measured after peptide treatment,Fiis the fluorescence intensity of the control bacterial suspension with NPN but without peptide, andFi100is the fluorescence after treatment with 10 µg/mL polymyxin. The experiment was independently repeated three times to ensure the reliability and reproducibility of the results.

All data were analyzed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) to identify any significant differences (Figs.7,8and9). Post hoc comparisons between group means were performed using Tukey’s test (Figs.7and9). Quantitative results are expressed as mean ± standard error (SE) (Figs.7and9). The trend of fluorescence intensity changes is described using curve fitting (Fig.8). All statistical analyses and graphical representations were conducted using GraphPad Prism version 5.0 (Figs.5,6,7,8and9).

Through T substitution and adjustment of the µHrel, we obtained peptides F1-F4 with symmetrical amino acid pair structures (Table1). Their helical wheel structures and molecular structures were shown in Figs.1and2, respectively. Their MALDI-TOF MS and Reverse-Phase High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (RP-HPLC) results suggested that all the peptides were successfully synthesized, with their measured molecular weights being close to the theoretical molecular weights (Table1) and the purities of the peptides were more than 95% (Figs.3and4).

We evaluated the inhibitory effects of the four peptides F1-F4 against bacteria, beneficial lactobacilli, and fungi, using the MIC assay. The results indicated various antimicrobial efficacies among the four peptides. First, F1-F4 showed stronger inhibitory effect againstE. colithan P19 did, and the effects of F2 and F4 were similar to those of melittin (Table2). For the tested pathogenic bacteria, the MIC values (2–4 µM) of F2 and F4 were lower than those (8–128 µM) of F1 and F3, and for the two tested beneficial lactobacilli strains, the MIC values of F2 and F4 were both greater than or equal to 32 µM (Table2). For the tested fungi, except for F2, the inhibitory effects of the other peptides were comparable to those of P19 and melittin, with their MIC values ranging from 2 to 4 µM (Table3).

To assess their potential clinical biocompatibility, the peptides’ cytotoxicity was evaluated by measuring their hemolytic activity on human RBCs (Fig.5). All the four peptides at concentrations less than 32 µM induced less than 10% hemolysis in fresh and healthy human RBCs.

Based on the results of MIC and hemolytic activity assays, only F4 retained antifungal efficacy while expanding antibacterial capabilities with low and acceptable hemolytic activity at its MIC value. Thus, F4 was ultimately selected for further investigations. Subsequently, we tested its antimicrobial activity against clinical bacterial and fungal strains (Tables4and5).

Peptide F4 with MIC values ranging from 8 to 16 µM remarkably inhibited the growth of bacteriaE. coliandS. aureusthan fluconazole and amphotericin B did (Table4). Meanwhile, F4 exhibited antifungal activity against the tested clinical isolates ofC. albicans, with MIC values ranging from 2 to 4 µM, which were lower than those of fluconazole against 4 out of 5 strains and only slightly higher than those of amphotericin B against all the fungal strains (Table5). Therefore, peptide F4 held potential as a therapeutic agent in antibacterial and antifungal treatment, particularly for combating fluconazole-resistantC. albicansinfections.

CD spectroscopy was employed to determine the secondary structures of the F4 peptides. F4 exhibited an alpha-helical structure in SDS and TFE, with two negative peaks in its CD spectrum around 206 nm and 220 nm, respectively (Fig.6A). In PBS, however, it showed a disordered structure, with a negative peak in its CD spectrum at approximately 196 nm.

Also, as shown in Fig.6B, the 3D structure of F4 was predicted as an alpha-helical structure, which was generated via an online toolhttps://www.rcsb.org/.

To investigate the binding affinity of peptide F4 to bacterial cell membranes, the fluorescent dye BC (Sigma-Aldrich, China) was utilized to label LPS fromE. coli. As shown in Fig.7, the binding affinity of F4 to LPS increased with rising concentrations of F4, which in turn led to greater disruption of bacterial cell membrane structures, ultimately achieving its antimicrobial effect.

The depolarization effect of peptide F4 on the cytoplasmic membrane ofE. coliwas measured using the cationic fluorescent dye DiSC₃−5. As shown in Fig.8, the relative fluorescence intensity (RFU) over time for different concentrations of peptide F4 (2–16 µM) revealed that the membrane-disrupting ability of peptide F4 was concentration-dependent and exhibited a time-effect relationship. At all tested concentrations, the fluorescence intensity rapidly increased within the first 100 s and then plateaued.

The effect of different concentrations of peptide F4 on the permeability of the bacterial outer membrane was assessed using the NPN permeability assay. As shown in Fig.9, the permeability of the bacterial membrane increased obviously as the peptide concentration increased from 1 µM to 16 µM. This indicated that higher concentrations of the peptide F4 may result in stronger disruption of the bacterial outer membrane, allowing more NPN dyes to penetrate. Specifically, at the concentration of 2 µM, the impact on membrane permeability was clearly observable. At 16 µM, the membrane permeability exceeded 80%, indicating that F4 almost completely disrupted the bacterial outer membrane’s barrier function under the tested conditions.

To obtain peptides with broad-spectrum antibacterial and antifungal activity that do not affect probiotics, we underwent two rounds of rational adjustments, resulting in a series of peptides F1-F4. Through evaluations of antimicrobial activity, hemolytic activity, structure, and mechanistic explorations, F4 was identified as the most promising candidate peptide for both fungal and bacterial infections.

Our first round of rational modification, substituting serine with threonine to obtain peptide F1, enhanced antibacterial activity without compromising antifungal efficacy. However, this improvement was restricted to a subset of bacterial strains, and unexpectedly, F1 exhibited increased inhibitory activity against the beneficial probioticL. rhamnosus. These effects could be attributed to the elevated hydrophobicity (Table1), which likely enhanced F1’s ability to bind and penetrate certain bacterial membranes, especially those of Gram-positive bacteria. Notably, this result contrasted with findings by Wu et al. [37], who reported broad-spectrum activity in both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria after replacing threonine with serine at position 15th of Thanatin, yielding S-Thanatin (GSKKPVPIIYCNRRSGKCQRM). This discrepancy may result from structural differences between the peptides that Thanatin possessed longer chain length and inherent asymmetry potentially enable broader membrane interactions absent in F1. Given that F1’s modified profile failed to achieve broad-spectrum antibacterial while preserving probiotics, further optimization remained necessary.

We further adjusted the µHrel of peptide F1 and obtained three additional peptides (F2-F4). F2 and F4 exhibited strong broad-spectrum activity against all tested Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria at concentrations (< 4 µM), while they showed no detectable inhibitory effect on the tested probiotics at these concentrations. This selective efficacy may stem from their enrichment in tryptophan (W) and leucine (L) residues. The indole ring of W enhances amphipathic character and membrane penetration [38,39], while L’s extended aliphatic side chain promotes peptide’s affinity for bacterial membranes [40]. Both residues synergistically enhance membrane disruption. Notably, F1 and F3 with middle level of µHrel and hydrophobicity showed reduced antimicrobial potency, probably due to structural constrains that phenylalanine (F) introduced conformation rigidity via its planar aromatic ring, while isoleucine’s (I) shorter side chain imposed steric hindrance, potentially reducing its interaction ability with bacterial membranes. Given F4’s retained antifungal activity, potent broad-spectrum antibacterial efficacy, minimal hemolysis, and probiotic compatibility, we identified it as the optimal lead peptide for further explorations.

Peptide F4 demonstrated effective inhibitory activity against clinical drug-resistant isolates, includingC. albicans,E. coli, andS. aureus. Particularly, this inhibitory activity was found against fluconazole-resistantC. albicans56,214 with a low MIC of 4 µM. F4’s broad-spectrum antibacterial activity against resistant pathogens is comparable to the membrane-active peptide of melittin, which targets both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria [24,41]. Crucially, F4 achieved this with lower hemolytic activity, suggesting that F4 owned potential clinical advantages in terms of safety. F4 also presented advantages over established antimicrobials facing resistance or toxicity issues. Unlike daptomycin, which used to be effective against Gram-positive bacteria like MRSA but faces emerging resistance [16,42], F4 retains activity against MRSA. Although the antibacterial peptide Bacitracin has been approved for clinical use, it only exhibits activity against Gram-positive cocci-related infections and cannot be nephrotoxicity [43,44]. In contrast, F4 showed a broader antibacterial spectrum and antifungal activity. Furthermore, although amphotericin B exhibited the strongest antifungal activity in this study, its high nephrotoxicity limits its widespread clinical use [45,46]. Collectively, F4 offers a potential alternative with broad spectrum activity and with a high level safety profile.

Mechanism exploration revealed that F4 may exert its antimicrobial effect through LPS binding, membrane depolarization, and increasing membrane permeability. Peptide F4 possessed a strong and concentration-dependent affinity for LPS, which may lead to disruptions of outer membrane’s integrity. Also, F4 rapidly depolarized theE. colicytoplasmic membrane. Such membrane depolarization impairs ATP synthesis and metabolic functions, contributing to bactericidal activity [47,48]. Furthermore, F4, at 16 µM, induced nearly 100% membrane permeability, facilitating leakage of vital intracellular substances. This pore forming or disruptive mechanism aligns with the action of AMPs like thanatin and VF16 [48–50].

Our study still has some limitations. First, the antibacterial activity assessment was confined to a selected panel of reference strains and a limited number of clinical isolates. The efficacy of F4 against a broader spectrum of bacteria, including beneficial probiotics, warrants further investigation. Secondly, while we demonstrated membrane disruption as a primary mode of action, the molecular-level characterization of peptide F4-membrane interactions lacks for future clinical practice. Finally, all our evaluations were conducted in vitro. Therefore, it is essential to assess F4’s in vivo efficacy, stability in biological fluids, and potential toxicity in relevant animal models of infection to fully realized its future translational potential.

In conclusion, our findings demonstrated that T substitution and µHrel adjustment effectively allowed us to identify peptide F4 with enhanced antibacterial activity and being a strong candidate for fungal and bacterial infections.

L. L., Q. J., and S. C. put forward the conceptualization. D. G., S. L., J. H., X. G. and Z. S.were responsible for the methodology. L. L., S. C. and Q. J. were responsible for the validation.Q. J., X. ZH., X. G. and S. C. did the formal analysis. X. ZH., T. Z. and J. L. did the investigation.L. L. provided resources.D. G. worte the original draft preparation.L. L., Q. J., S. C., X. Z., and D. G. reviewed and edited the manuscript.D. G. and X. Z. did the visualization.L. L. did the supervision. L. L. and X. Z. did the project administration.L. L. was responsible for the funding acquisition.

This research was funded by Shenzhen Key Laboratory for Systems Medicine in Inflammatory Diseases (ZDSYS20220606100803007), Shenzhen Science and Technology Plan Project (JCYJ20220818102017035) and Shenzhen Key Medical Discipline Construction Fund.