Circadian rhythmicity plays a crucial role in regulating sleep timing and continuity, but it may be altered in people with insomnia. This study tested whether dim‐light melatonin onset (DLMO) timing is associated with sleep difficulties in insomnia. In total, 128 people diagnosed with insomnia disorder were recruited. Participants completed daily sleep diaries and wore an actigraph for up to 14 days before the laboratory visit to estimate mean sleep continuity (e.g., sleep latency, sleep duration) and sleep timing (sleep onset time and wake time from diaries, bedtime from diaries and actigraphy). After a sleep study, participants underwent salivary melatonin collection to estimate DLMO on the following night. Regressions and analyses of variances on tertile groups tested associations between DLMO (clock times and phase angle differences between DLMO and sleep timing) and sleep continuity and timing. There were associations between DLMO and sleep timing,r(s)= 0.27–0.37, but not with sleep continuity. The phase angle between sleep onset time and DLMO was associated with sleep latency, sleep duration, and sleep efficiency,r(s)= −0.32 to 0.41. Participants with a longer phase angle between DLMO and sleep onset time (> 3 h; i.e., greater delays) had longer sleep latencies (Mean diff= 43.21 min,SE= 12.99,p= 0.004) and shorter sleep durations (Mean diff= −65.66 min,SE= 20.75,p= 0.006) than participants with a shorter phase angle (< 2 h). Other phase angles (DLMO and mid‐sleep, wake time) were not consistently associated with sleep continuity. Melatonin onset timing is associated with sleep timing in insomnia disorder. Larger phase angle differences between sleep onset and DLMO are linked to poorer sleep continuity. These findings highlight the importance of considering circadian alignment and its impact on sleep in understanding the pathophysiology of insomnia and in developing targeted treatment interventions.

Insomnia impairs the quality of life and daytime functioning of around 805 million people globally [1]. This chronic sleep disorder is characterized by difficulties in initiating or maintaining sleep, or waking too early from sleep occurring at least three times per week for at least 3 months, accompanied by daytime impairments [2]. The etiology of insomnia is complex, with a myriad of factors potentially contributing to insomnia onset and maintenance; many of which may be targeted for effective treatment. Past studies have highlighted the influence of biological (e.g., hyperarousal, genetic predisposition [3,4,5]), psychological (e.g., stress, sleep reactivity [6]), and social factors (e.g., caregiving responsibilities, work‐sleep schedules [7,8]) that contribute, in varying degrees, to the precipitation and perpetuation of insomnia.

The circadian system regulates both the timing and quality of sleep [9], and may also play a role in the pathophysiology of insomnia. Melatonin secretion and core body temperature both show circadian rhythmicity and help regulate the propensity for sleep and alertness across the day and night [10]. Circadian rhythms that are mistimed relative to the desired timing of the sleep opportunity may contribute to insomnia symptoms [11]. For example, difficulties with sleep onset may be due to delayed circadian rhythms, whilst difficulties waking too early may be due to advanced circadian rhythms.

Past studies in mostly small samples (10–79 participants) found that sleep onset insomnia was associated with delayed circadian timing [12,13,14,15] and early morning awakening insomnia was associated with advanced circadian timing [16,17]. Flynn‐Evans et al. (2017) explored circadian timing, measured by dim light melatonin onset timing, in relation to sleep timing in 79 participants with insomnia. They found that 10%–20% of people with insomnia attempted to initiate sleep at an earlier circadian phase (before melatonin onset) than good sleeper participants. However, the insomnia sample included people with unusually delayed sleep (bedtimes as late as 03:00) and did not screen out for circadian rhythm sleep‐wake disorders, biasing these estimates. Moreover, pilot trials have successfully treated delayed [18] and advanced [19,20] circadian rhythms in insomnia using bright light therapy to difficulties with sleep initiation and waking too early, respectively. This growing body of evidence suggests that circadian rhythm timing may contribute to insomnia and effective interventions to target these factors helps to resolve the insomnia symptoms.

Circadian rhythms are not considered a critical factor in most etiological models of insomnia. In the three‐factor (or “3P”) model of insomnia [21], insomnia is caused by existing vulnerabilities (predisposing) interacting with a stressor (precipitating) to produce acute sleeping difficulties. Maladaptive coping behaviors (perpetuating) cause these difficulties to become chronic. Extending time in bed may perpetuate insomnia and cause circadian misalignment (discrepancy between ideal biological time for sleep and the sleep‐wake schedule), which in turn perpetuates the sleeping difficulty. Alternatively, people with circadian delays/advances relative to societal norms may be predisposed to developing insomnia, particularly when their routine becomes incompatible with their circadian timing. Contrastingly, the psychobiological inhibition model posits that insomnia is due to the failure to ‘de‐arouse’ due to the shifting of attention from an initial stressor that causes sleep difficulties towards the sleep itself [22,23]. The inability to de‐arouse overrides the normal regulation of sleep in the acute phase. This shift of attention coupled with increased intentions and efforts to sleep causes the disorder to persist ad infinitum. Here, circadian rhythms are not necessarily perturbed; but their influence on sleep regulation is lessened by the presence of other psychological factors. These etiological models differ in their consideration of circadian rhythms and have differing implications for treatment.

As the largest study to date, the aim of this study was to investigate the relationships between circadian phase (measured by dim‐light melatonin onset [DLMO]) and sleep timing and continuity (assessed by sleep diaries and actigraphy) in a well characterized clinical sample of individuals with insomnia. Importantly, all participants (1) met the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fifth Edition) [24] diagnostic criteria for insomnia disorder, (2) had sleep timing within a normative range (bedtime no later than 00:00) to minimize confounding by comorbid circadian rhythm sleep‐wake disorders, and (3) were studied in a controlled laboratory setting to minimize confounding factors.

This was a sub‐study from a larger study [25,26] which was prospectively registered on the Australian New Zealand Clinical Trial Registry (ACTRN12615000751572). In this analysis, associations will be investigated between sleep diary‐reported and actigraphy‐derived sleep parameters (collected during a 2‐week baseline) with in‐laboratory DLMO timing (collected on the second night of a two‐night laboratory protocol). Ethical approval was provided by the Royal Prince Alfred Hospital Ethics Review Committee, Sydney, Australia (Protocol No X11‐0392 and HREC/11/RPAH/620). Participants provided written informed consent before participation.

Potential participants were recruited via online and social media platforms, posters on community noticeboards, word of mouth, and the sleep clinic registries at the Woolcock Institute of Medical Research in Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, and the Adelaide Institute of Sleep Health at Flinders University in Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. After expression of interest, potential participants with an Insomnia Severity Index (ISI) score ≥ 10 were invited to attend the sleep clinic for a comprehensive sleep diagnostic session with a sleep physician or sleep psychologist who diagnosed Insomnia Disorder according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, fifth edition (DSM‐5) [24]. Additional inclusion criteria were: aged > 18 years; fluent in English. Exclusion criteria were: undergoing active treatment for a sleep disorder; self‐reported illicit substance usage or excessive consumption of alcohol or caffeine; had a major or unstable psychiatric disorder or cognitive impairment (sleep physician/psychologist evaluated); were a shift‐worker; had trans‐meridian travel in the past 2 months (two or more time zones traversed); were pregnant or lactating.

Philips Actiwatch Spectrum devices were used to objectively measure sleep timing and continuity at home. Worn on the nondominant wrist, these devices contain a tri‐axis accelerometer to assess acceleration. Data were recorded at 24 Hz, averaged into 30 s epoch values, and scored into sleep (little/no acceleration) and wake (greater acceleration) using the default software algorithm in the Philips Actiware software (Philips Respironics, United States). Device estimates of average sleep latency (duration between estimated bedtime and first epoch of sleep, in minutes), wake after sleep onset (duration of wake epochs during estimated sleep opportunity, in minutes), sleep duration (duration of sleep epochs, in minutes), and sleep efficiency (sleep duration/sleep opportunity, as a percentage) during the home sleep monitoring were analyzed in the current study to evaluate sleep continuity. Bedtime (estimated start of sleep opportunity) and wake up time (estimated end of sleep opportunity) were averaged to evaluate sleep timing. Sleep onset and offset times were not examined in this study, as devices estimates of these times are often inaccurate for people with sleep disorders. This device has typically shown to underestimate sleep latency by 14 min and wake after sleep onset by 45 min in people with insomnia [27].

Self‐report sleep diaries were used to subjectively measure sleep timing and continuity at home. Based on the Consensus Sleep Diary [28], participants answered 17 questions shortly after waking each morning about their sleep (e.g., “At what time did you switch off the light intending to go to sleep?” and “About how long did you sleep altogether (hours/mins)?”) and daytime functioning the previous day. Sleep latency, wake after sleep onset, sleep duration, and sleep efficiency estimates were averaged across the home sleep monitoring period and analyzed in the current study to evaluate sleep continuity. Bedtime, attempt sleep time and wake up time were also averaged to evaluate sleep timing. Daily sleep diaries are the clinical gold‐standard measure of sleep in people with insomnia [29], and this particular sleep diary is valid and reliable in this clinical population [30].

Salivary melatonin was collected to measure DLMO, which is a reliable marker of circadian timing [31]. DLMO was calculated from saliva samples, which participants collected hourly using standard procedures from 5 h before to 2 h after habitual bedtime based on actigraphy data [25]. Salivary melatonin concentrations were determined by a radioimmunoassay method (Buhlmann Laboratories; Allschwil, Switzerland). These assays have a limit of detection of 1 pg/mL with an inter‐assay coefficient of variation of 7.4% at 4.41 pg/mL and 10.7% at 48.14 pg/mL. DLMO time was calculated as the estimated time using linear interpolation at which salivary melatonin concentration reached/exceeded a threshold of 3 pg/mL for a minimum of 2 samples (1 h).

Following screening and consent, participants completed up to 2 weeks of home sleep monitoring via sleep diaries and the actigraphy device. Participants then attended a sleep laboratory, either at Flinders University in Adelaide or the Woolcock Institute of Medical Research in Sydney, over two consecutive nights. On night one, participants underwent overnight polysomnography (PSG) sleep recording from habitual bedtime to habitual wake time. Participants were permitted to leave the laboratory in the morning, before returning the following evening. On night two, participants undertook salivary melatonin collection under dim‐light conditions (< 10 lux). Participants were then allowed to sleep until their wake time and then left the laboratory. During all laboratory visits, participants abstained from caffeine intake and consumed standard meals (dinner and breakfast).

Associations were tested between sleep variables (measured from sleep diaries and actigraphy) and circadian timing (DLMO time). DLMO timing was also split into tertiles (early, middle, late DLMO) with differences between DLMO timing subgroup on each sleep variable examined using analyses of variance (ANOVAs). Additionally, phase angle differences were calculated as the difference between the sleep period timing (sleep onset time, mid‐sleep, and wake up time via sleep diaries and actigraphy) and DLMO timing, with higher discrepancies indicating greater delays between sleep timing and circadian timing. Associations were subsequently tested between phase angle differences and sleep. Phase angle difference was also split into tertiles with differences between phase angle difference subgroups on each sleep variable examined using analyses of variance (ANOVAs). Model assumptions were examined for homoscedasticity, outliers, and normality, and appropriate distributions were used where needed in the models.p< 0.05 were considered statistically significant. All statistical analyses were conducted in IBM SPSS (version 29).

Participant characteristics are presented in Table1. On average, participants were predominantly female, middle‐aged, and reported experiencing insomnia for over a decade.

Participant characteristics across the total sample and separately by DLMO timing subgroup.

Abbreviations: N, sample size; SD, standard deviation; y, years.

The mean DLMO time was 21:11 (±1.31) hours. When assessing sleep continuity with sleep diaries, there were no significant associations between DLMO timing and sleep continuity, including sleep latency,r(s)= −0.14,p= 0.16, wake after sleep onset,r(s)= −0.09,p= 0.39, sleep duration,r(s)= 0.14,p= 0.14, or sleep efficiency,r(s)= 0.18,p= 0.07 (see FigureS1). Likewise, in the subgroup analyses, there were no significant differences between DLMO timing subgroups on sleep diary‐reported sleep latency, wake after sleep onset, sleep duration, or sleep efficiency (see Table2).

When assessing sleep continuity with actigraphy, there were no significant associations between DLMO timing and sleep latency,r(s)= 0.15,p= 0.21, wake after sleep onset,r(s)= −0.08,p= 0.51, sleep duration,r(s)= −0.14,p= 0.23, or sleep efficiency,r(s)= 0.03,p= 0.78 (see FigureS2). As shown in Table2, there were also no significant differences between DLMO timing subgroups on actigraphy‐derived sleep latency, wake after sleep onset, sleep duration, or sleep efficiency.

In relation to sleep timing, there were significant associations between DLMO timing and self‐reported bedtime,r(s)= 0.37,p< 0.001, attempt sleep time,r(s)= 0.33,p< 0.001, sleep onset time,r(s)= 0.23,p= 0.02, and wake time,r(s)= 0.27,p= 0.005 (see Figure1). As shown in Table2, there were also significant differences between DLMO timing subgroups, such that the early DLMO timing subgroup had significantly earlier bedtimes (Mean diff (hh:mm)= 00:41,SE= 00:13,p= 0.006), attempt to sleep times (Mean diff= 00:43,SE= 00:14,p= 0.009), and wake up times (Mean diff= 00:53,SE= 00:20,p= 0.03) than the late DLMO timing subgroup. There was no significant difference between DLMO timing subgroups on sleep onset time.

Scatterplots of associations between DLMO timing as a continuous variable with sleep diary‐reported bedtime (top‐left) and attempt sleep time (top‐right), sleep onset time (bottom‐left), and wake up time (bottom‐right). DLMO timing subgroups are indicated by datapoint (early = blue square, middle = red circle, late = green triangle).

When assessing sleep timing with actigraphy, there was a significant association between DLMO timing and bedtime,r(s)= 0.27,p= 0.02, but not with rise time,r(s)= 0.22,p= 0.07. In the subgroup analyses, there were no significant differences between DLMO timing subgroups on actigraphy‐derived bedtime or rise time (see Table2).

The mean phase angles between DLMO and self‐reported sleep timing were: 01:36 h (±01:28) relative to bedtime, 01:56 h (±01:32) relative to attempt sleep time, 02:40 h (±01:53) relative to sleep onset time, 05:27 h (±01:31) relative to midsleep time, and 09:17 h (±01:50) relative to wake up time. Eleven participants (~10% of total sample) had a negative phase angle relative to self‐reported attempt sleep time (i.e., attempted sleep earlier than DLMO time).

When assessing sleep via sleep diaries, there were significant associations between DLMO/sleep onset time phase angle difference and sleep latency, sleep duration, and sleep efficiency, but not wake after sleep onset (see Figures2and3). Phase angle differences for DLMO/mid sleep time and DLMO/wake time were not significantly associated with sleep diary‐derived sleep variables (p> 0.05). In the subgroup analyses, there were significant differences between DLMO/sleep onset time phase angle difference subgroups, such that the > 3 h phase angle difference subgroup had significantly longer sleep latencies (Mean diff (mins)= 43.21,SE= 12.99,p= 0.004) and shorter sleep duration (Mean diff= 65.66,SE= 20.75,p= 0.006) than the < 2 h phase angle difference subgroup (see Table3). There were no differences between DLMO/sleep onset timing phase angle difference subgroups on wake after sleep onset or sleep efficiency. For the DLMO/mid sleep time and DLMO/wake up time phase angle difference subgroups, there were significant differences on actigraphy‐derived wake after sleep onset but no differences on any other outcome (see TablesS1andS2).

Correlation matrix of sleep diary‐reported sleep outcomes and phase angle differences. Blue:p< 0.001; Yellow:p< 0.01, Red:p< 0.05. PAD = phase angle difference, WASO = wake after sleep onset.

Scatterplots of associations between sleep onset phase angle difference (PAD) as a continuous variable with sleep diary‐reported sleep latency (top‐left) wake after sleep onset (top‐right), sleep duration (bottom‐left), and sleep efficiency (bottom‐right). PAD subgroups are indicated by datapoint (short = blue square, middle = red circle, long = green triangle).

Sleep variables by sleep onset phase angle difference (PAD) subgroups.

The mean phase angle between salivary DLMO and actigraphy‐derived sleep timing was 01:19 h (±01:35) relative to bedtime and 09:50 h (±01:37) relative to wake up time. Sixteen participants (~23% of total actigraphy sample) had a negative phase angle relative to actigraphy‐derived bedtime (i.e., went to bed earlier than DLMO time).

When estimating sleep via actigraphy, there were no significant associations between DLMO/bedtime or DLMO/rise time phase angle differences with any sleep variable from sleep diaries or actigraphy,p> 0.09. In the subgroup analyses, few significant but small differences were found between DLMO/bedtime or DLMO/rise time phase angle difference subgroups and sleep variables derived from sleep diaries or actigraphy (see TablesS3andS4).

This study investigated the relationship between circadian rhythm timing with sleep timing and continuity in insomnia disorder. Overall, there were significant associations between DLMO timing and the timing of sleep (i.e., bedtime, attempt sleep time, wake time), measured via sleep diaries and actigraphy, but not with sleep continuity. The early DLMO subgroup had significantly earlier self‐reported bedtimes, attempts at sleep, and wake up times than the late DLMO subgroup. However, this was not corroborated by actigraphy data. Further, the DLMO/sleep onset time phase angle difference was associated with sleep latency, sleep duration, and sleep efficiency, but not wake after sleep onset. Participants with a larger phase angle difference (> 3 h; more delayed) had longer sleep latencies and shorter sleep duration than participants with a shorter phase angle difference (< 2 h). This suggests that greater misalignment between circadian rhythms and the sleep period results in poorer sleep quality. However, the phase angle differences calculated from the other sleep diary or actigraphy timing variables were not consistently associated with differences in sleep continuity. Taken together, melatonin onset timing influences sleep timing in people with insomnia, but only the DLMO/sleep onset time phase angle difference influenced sleep continuity in this sample.

The findings of the current study are not entirely consistent with other studies of circadian rhythms and insomnia [12,13,14,15]. In particular, Flynn‐Evans et al [15] found that 10% of people with insomnia attempted sleep before melatonin onset (i.e., had a negative phase angle). This is consistent with our study where 10% of participants had a negative phase angle relative to self‐report bedtime and ~23% had a negative phase angle relative to actigraphy‐derived bedtime. However, there were differences in findings between Flynn‐Evans et al and our study. The average phase angle in our study was 01:36 h (±01:28) relative to bedtime, compared to much later times of 02:55 h (±01:04) for people with insomnia and 03:20 h (±00:56) for good sleepers in Flynn‐Evans et al. [15]. These differences may be due to differences in insomnia diagnostic criteria between studies and that only patients with normal sleep timing (latest bedtime, 00:00) were recruited in this study. This latter eligibility criterion prevented impacts of comorbid circadian rhythm disturbances. The current findings thus reflect the circadian timings of people with insomnia who attempt to maintain more ‘normally timed’ sleep‐wake schedules. Future studies examining circadian rhythms in people with insomnia should carefully consider the potential impacts of circadian rhythm disturbances, given comorbidity rates in this clinical population.

Additional explanations for differences in findings across studies include how some past studies assessed circadian timing using core body temperature and not melatonin [12]. Core body temperature rhythm may be de‐synchronous with the melatonin rhythm for people with insomnia and estimates of the timing of the circadian system may be different between these biological rhythms. Participants with insomnia tend to show heightened core body temperature around the sleep opportunity than healthy control participants, suggestive of an inability to cool down to initiate sleep [32,33,34]. Hyperarousal may explain this finding [35]. If people with insomnia have altered core body temperature due to thermoregulatory factors [34], then possibly this biases circadian phase estimation using this signal. Further, the self‐reported average duration of insomnia symptoms was 12.5 years in the current study, while the insomnia durations were typically not reported in past studies. Circadian rhythms may be less influential in more chronic cases of insomnia, when the psychobiological pathways may underlie and exacerbate the disorder more strongly compared in the acute phase. In short‐term cases, circadian regulation of sleep timing may be more important due to its influence on fluctuations in physiological activation (i.e., fight‐or‐flight response), that produces acute sleep symptoms. Whether circadian rhythms are influential of sleeping difficulties in people with acute insomnia is worthy of exploration.

The psychobiological inhibition model of insomnia [22,23] proposes the circadian regulation of sleep is understated compared to other influencers for people with insomnia. According to this model, the increased focus on, and (often misguided) efforts towards minimizing the sleeping difficulties plays a more influential role in perpetuating these difficulties than the major biological regulators of sleep, homeostatic sleep drive and circadian rhythms. Given that circadian rhythm timing based on melatonin timing did not consistently influence sleep continuity in the current study, this component of the model seems plausible. However, melatonin onset timing still influenced sleep timing in our study, supporting how circadian rhythm timing impacts sleep timing, even in this clinical insomnia group.

Given the heterogeneity and complexity of insomnia neurobiological underpinnings and given the multitude of different theoretical pathways to the perpetuation of chronic insomnia, circadian rhythms may still be influential for some insomnia phenotypes. Some phenotypes may be characterized by circadian phase delays/advances relative to the chosen sleep schedule, and/or circadian tau and amplitude alterations that contribute to the sleep difficulties. The hypothesis that circadian rhythms are implicated in certain insomnia phenotypes, first constructed decades ago, has received little attention in the insomnia research area compared to other potential phenotypes [11]. If true, then this could explain the inconsistencies between the current study findings and past findings, which may have been derived from insomnia phenotypes more influenced by circadian factors compared to this study. Circadian amplitude may play a crucial role, with sleep maintenance insomnia associated with blunted circadian amplitudes (i.e., reduced “signal strength”) [32]. Large‐scale studies with daily monitoring of circadian rhythms, particularly core temperature rhythms allowing mesor, amplitude, and phase coupled with daily sleep tracking would elucidate the impact of circadian rhythms for some insomnia phenotypes. Additionally, manipulating circadian rhythms, either directly via light therapy [19,20] or indirectly via sleep restriction therapy [36] and other psychological treatments, will still be useful for the treatment of insomnia for these phenotypes. This said, this study's findings suggest that circadian misalignment is likely only an issue for a subset of the insomnia clinical population, which explain why circadian interventions (e.g., melatonin administration) are only sometimes beneficial with insomnia [37]. The major challenge for this field is to identify for whom circadian interventions will be most beneficial.

Despite the large sample size and assessment of melatonin under carefully controlled conditions, there are study limitations. Circadian timing was assessed once and so we lack the repeated measures needed to better characterize direct relationships between circadian timing and sleep difficulty. Additionally, given that the melatonin collection protocol was designed to accurately identify DLMO, other circadian markers such as amplitude and tau were unavailable for analysis. Another limitation is the mismatched recording periods of circadian phase and sleep (i.e., sleep and circadian data were collected on different days). This may have introduced variability into the associations between circadian phase and sleep outcomes.

In addition to daily monitoring of circadian rhythms and sleep symptom tracking in the home, studies to help examine various insomnia phenotypes to determine the potential contribution of circadian rhythms to each phenotype would be insightful. Further research is also warranted to investigate the synchrony between melatonin and core body temperature rhythms, given the potential altered thermoregulatory control for people with insomnia, which may help determine (1) which marker(s) of circadian system timing are best for studying this population and (2) whether de‐synchrony between circadian rhythms impacts the disorder. Considering the findings of the current and past studies together, the role of circadian rhythms in the sleep difficulties experienced by people with insomnia is nuanced and is an important factor to consider in clinical management.