Defects in transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are pivotal in modulating their electronic, optical, and catalytic properties. Investigating these defects is essential for advancing both fundamental knowledge and practical applications. In this study, we examine the individual defects in a monolayer of MoTe2supported on graphene grown on an Ir(111) substrate by means of scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). Charging rings appear at distinct bias voltages, revealing ionization levels of doping centers located either below or above the Fermi level. Although direct STM visualization of point defects was not achieved, the combination of scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) and density functional theory (DFT) calculations enabled the identification of the structural origins of the charge states. Our results demonstrate a powerful tool for uncovering the electronic and structural characteristics of atomic-scale defects in MoTe2, contributing to the understanding of defect-driven electronic properties in transition metal dichalcogenides.

Defects in transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) are pivotal in modulating their electronic, optical, and catalytic properties.

Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) has proven to be an invaluable tool for identifying these atomic-scale defects,4,11and it has also been demonstrated that the charge state of individual donors can be dynamically manipulated with high precision using an STM tip,12enabling detailed studies of defect behavior at the atomic level. Notably, defects have been observed to adopt negative charge states through tip-induced gating effects in WSe2grown on BLG/SiC(0001),13PdSe2,14,15or MoS216crystals.

While considerable research has focused on transition metal disulfides and selenides, transition metal tellurides have received comparatively less attention. Here, we use an STM to study the charging of single defects in a monolayer of MoTe2supported on a graphene monolayer grown on the Ir(111) surface. Differential conductance spectroscopy (dI/dV) reveals charging rings at various bias voltages. The ionization levels of the doping centers, located either below or above the Fermi level, respond differently to applied bias voltages. Although direct visualization of the point defects by STM has not been achieved, the combination of scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) measurements and density functional theory (DFT) calculations allows us to deduce the structural origins of the observed charge states.

After the gr/Ir(111) preparation, MoTe2was grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). Elemental Mo (99.9+% purity) is evaporated from an e-beam evaporator while elemental Te (99.999% purity) is evaporated using a resistive heating evaporator. MoTe2islands were grown by exposing the hot gr/Ir(111) sample during 20 min to a Te : Mo ratio of the order of 12 : 1. Depending on the sample temperature during the growth, we have shown that two different phases can be obtained.18Once the growth was complete, the sample underwent a long annealing step at the same temperature for about one hour.

The differential conductance (dI/dV) was determined using lock-in detection of the AC tunneling current, achieved by modulating the sample bias (763 Hz) measuring in constant height mode with the feedback loop open. All measurements were carried out at 1.2 K. STM images were analyzed using WxSM19and Gwyddion20software.

The minimal (1 × 1) unit cell of 1H-MoTe2contains one Mo atom, which is located at the center of a triangular right prism, whose vertices are occupied by Te atoms; in this way, a total of 2 Te atoms are contained in the (1 × 1) unit cell. For the defect calculations, a convergence study has been carried out over the lateral size of the supercell. We carried out calculations for (3 × 3), (5 × 5), (7 × 7), (9 × 9), and (11 × 11) supercells, constructed starting from the nominal optimized (1 × 1) unit. Once the given defect was created, for the supercell size up to (7 × 7), we have optimized the coordinates of all the atoms within a (5 × 5) cell surrounding the defect. The (9 × 9), and (11 × 11) results are obtained from single-point DFT calculation using the coordinates of the (7 × 7) supercell and adding the additional atoms in their nominal optimized positions. Finally, we also took into account the effect of the supporting substrate. The gr–Ir surface was modeled constructing a (10 × 10) graphene layer over a (9 × 9) three-layer-thick Ir(111) slab, optimizing the coordinates of all C atoms, and of the topmost Ir layer. The nominal lateral size of the unit cell for this system, dictated by the (9 × 9) Ir(111) substrate, isLgr–Ir= 24.629 Å, which entails a negligible stress on the graphene layer. We observe that the (7 × 7) MoTe2supercell has a nominal lateral size ofL(7×7)MoTe2= 24.710 Å, which differs by less than 0.3% from the one of gr–Ir. Hence we placed a (7 × 7) MoTe2monolayer (with and without defect) on one side of the gr–Ir system, using theL(7×7)MoTe2and re-optimized the Mo, Te and C atoms coordinates. All the geometry optimizations have been carried out until the residual force on the active atoms was lower than 0.01 eV Å−1. In all calculations, we included at least a 20 Å vacuum region in the out-of-plane direction. Depending on the lateral size of the supercell, differentk-point meshes have been adopted to sample the Brillouin Zone, characterized by Δk≤ 0.1 Å−1.

where the experimental value28ΔHMoTe2= 0.936 eV is used as the formation enthalpy of bulk MoTe2in the 2H phase.

As illustrated inFig. 1, MTBs of varying lengths are observed, with shorter boundaries being more prevalent. The high density of these MTBs hampers the precise atomic identification of the underlying 1H-MoTe2lattice. However, within some of the domains delineated by these MTBs (Fig. 1(a)), it is possible to obtain atomically resolved STM images, as shown also in Fig. S1 in the SI. In these regions, the measured lattice constant is 3.45 ± 0.09 Å, corresponding to the expected atomic spacing of the 1H-MoTe2structure.

Additionally, in several 1H-MoTe2islands, peculiar features, at specific bias voltages, are observed in the STS.Fig. 2(a)shows an island in which a grid spectroscopy measurement was performed. InFig. 2(b), the dI/dVspectra acquired at the locations marked by the blue and red circles inFig. 2(a)are reported. These spectra, in addition to the MTB-related in-gap states, exhibit very intense and narrow peaks at −255 mV and 262 mV. We attribute these peaks to charged states, which are also detected in the surrounding areas as bright rings that emerge at particular bias voltages, as observed in dI/dVimages at 308 mV and −290 mV shown inFig. 2(c and d), respectively. Note that, due to the growth procedure, the vast majority of 1H regions in our sample are MTB-rich18,29and, hence, the STS data we use to study the charging rings comes from them. However, based on the similarities with the MoS2system,16we expect a similar behavior in pristine 1H.

Interestingly, the diameter of the rings changes with the bias voltage, increasing as the STM tip moves farther from the center of the ring at a given tip-sample distance. A very direct way to visualize this effect is by taking a line profile across both rings (yellow arrows inFig. 2(c and d)) and represent every dI/dVcurve along the line in a 2D plot as that shown inFig. 2(e). They-axis indicates the distance from the beginning of the line profile while thex-axis denotes the bias voltage, thus being the intensity of the dI/dVsignal represented by the color scale (brighter means higher intensity). The positions of the peaks exhibit a parabolic trend in this representation, indicating a shift in energy as the tip moves farther away from the center.

This kind of feature has already been observed in STM experiments for a wide variety of systems due to the presence of impurities or defects such as metallic adatoms on topological insulators36,37or graphene,38organic molecules on hexagonal boron nitride,39,40vacancies on the surface of several TMD crystals2,14–16,41or individual point-defect states buried in the bilayer WSe2.13They are usually attributed to states lying inside the semiconducting bandgap of the material. These defects change their charge state due to the electric field produced by the applied bias voltage between the STM tip and the sample. Specifically, the electric field created by the tip produces a bending of the electronic bands of the material known as tip induced band bending (TIBB).39This bending also affects the state of the defect, which changes its charge nature when the respective band crosses the Fermi level39as sketched inFig. 3. This crossing gives rise to sudden changes in the tunneling current and, therefore, to narrow peaks in the STS signal, as seen inFig. 2(b). As the intensity of the electric field depends on the tip-defect distance, the strength of such bending will also depend on the tip location, being maximum when the tip is right on top of the defect (seeFig. 3(a and b)).

When the tip is located at a certain lateral distance from the defect, the effect on the electronic state associated to the defect (ED) is weaker: a stronger field (higher bias voltage) is needed to induce the crossing of the Fermi level. Therefore, for a given sufficiently high bias, there exists a certain tip-defect distance at which the latter gets charged, giving rise to the charging rings as the one sketched inFig. 3(c).

The diagrams inFig. 3further suggest that TIBB and the appearance of the charging peaks is a threshold phenomenon. This implies the existence of a threshold voltage at which the defect state crosses the Fermi level, thereby altering its charge state. This can be clearly visualized in the series of dI/dVimages given inFig. 4(a–d). InFig. 4(a), acquired at a bias voltage of 240 mV, the white circle highlights the position of a defect in its natural state. As the applied bias voltage is increased,EDcrosses the Fermi level, giving rise to the charge peak, which appears as a bright spot inFig. 4(b). If the bias is increased further the charging of the defects still takes place and the specific bright peak associated toEDcrossing the Fermi level happens for a given tip-defect lateral distance, which inFig. 4(c and d)appears as a bright ring centered at the defect location and characterized by a bias dependent diameter.

Fig. 4(e)presents the evolution of the ring diameter for seven different charge states as encountered inFig. 2(a)and in other images acquired under similar conditions as Fig. S3. Although several MTBs are present and they are metallic, the net charge associated with them does not appear to be sufficient to induce band bending, and the charge rings are not perturbed by their local electrostatic environment. From the plot, it is clear that the defects are in different initial states, since they appear at opposite polarities (4 at positive and 3 at negative biases). The three defects observed at negative biases appear to be of the same nature, as they appear at the same bias ∼−0.26 V. Two of these defects exhibit nearly identical bias-dependent slopes, indicating comparable interactions with the local electrostatic environment. However, the third defect displays a lower slope. This discrepancy likely arises from differences in the tip shape. A blunter tip distributes the electric field more evenly over a larger area, reducing the strength of TIBB and consequently, leading to a more gradual expansion of the charge rings with bias. In contrast, a sharper tip generates a more localized and intense electric field, leading to stronger TIBB. As a result, the charge rings might show a steeper slope in diametervs.bias. Similarly, on the positive side of the graph, there is a pair of charge states originating from the same type of defect, changing their charge status at (Vb∼ 0.26 V) and another pair that appears to be more sensitive to TIBB, as they become charged at a lower voltage (Vb∼ 0.1 V), while having a comparable slope to that of the other charge states. Notably, when more than one charge ring appears at unoccupied states, they overlap and interact, forming a common wavefront. Fig. S3 illustrates a 1H-MoTe2island with multiple defects where a current imaging tunneling spectroscopy (CITS) measurement was conducted. The corresponding dI/dVmaps reveal the overlapping of distinct charge rings associated with different defects, suggesting that the defects belong to the same layer. This contrasts with the case of PdSe2,14,15where charge rings do not interact because they are produced by defects located in different layers.

Ineqn (3)EDefandENomare, respectively, the total energies of the system with and without the defect; these two quantities are directly obtained through DFT calculations.niis a positive (negative) integer, corresponding to the number of added (removed) atoms of theith species upon the formation of the defect. These atoms are characterized by the chemical potentialμi, which can be estimated through DFT, as indicated in the Methods section. Finally,EintDef–Defis the interaction energy between defects.EintDef–Defis not known in principle and depends on the typical distance between neighboring defects. In our case theEintDef–Defcontribution to the formation energy can be reduced by increasing the size of the unit cell, inherent to the periodic approach used in this work. Here, we setEintDef–Def= 0 ineqn (3)and perform a convergence study on the lateral size of the supercell. Converged results are obtained when FEDefdoes not change as the size of the supercell is increased. It is important to point out that, given the definition ineqn (3), FEDefrepresents the energy absorbed by the system upon the formation of the defect and it is, in general, a positive quantity. Defects with low FEDefare energetically more probable.

In this work, we analyzed five types of defects: (i) a Mo vacancy; (ii) a Te vacancy; (iii) a Mo–Te substitution, where a Mo atom is replaced by a Te atom; (iv) a Te–Mo substitution, where a Te atom is replaced by a Mo atom; these exhaust all the possibilities of point defects made of only one atom and involving Mo and Te elements; (v) a Mo–Te inversion (where the initial positions of a Mo–Te pair are swapped). Additionally, we have considered the possibility of having (vi) Mo and (vii) Te adatoms either on top of the MoTe2surface or trapped between MoTe2and graphene. The presence of trapped charges has led to charge rings due to the electrostatic interaction between doping centers and, for instance, a monolayer of C60molecules supported on a thin Al2O3film on NiAl(110).43Table 1presents the formation energies of these defects and adatoms, calculated using DFT with varying lateral supercell sizes for a freestanding MoTe2monolayer. The final geometries for the (7 × 7) supercell in a region close to the defect location and the adatoms absorption sites are shown in Fig. S4 and S5 on the SI, respectively. The final column inTable 1also provides DFT calculated formation energies for defects and adatoms in a MoTe2monolayer supported by a gr/Ir(111) surface. When applicable, we examine both cases: when the defect is directly in contact with the gr/Ir(111) surface and when it faces the vacuum.

The calculated FEDefshows that, for a (7 × 7) supercell, theEintDef–Definteraction energy is negligible. Indeed, no significant differences are observed in formation energies across the (5 × 5), (7 × 7), (9 × 9), and (11 × 11) supercells. Among the defects, the Te adatoms on top of MoTe2is the most stable followed by the Te vacancy, with a formation energy of ∼0.9 and ∼2.5 eV, respectively. The Mo vacancy and Mo–Te substitution have similar formation energies, roughly 1 eV higher than that of the Te vacancy. For comparison, the formation energy of a single vacancy in silicon is ∼4 eV.44A higher formation energy (∼5 eV) was found for the Mo–Te substitution. Finally, the Mo–Te inversion has the highest FEDef, among the defects analyzed in this work. The gr/Ir(111) supporting substrate slightly affects the formation energies, but it does not change the overall energetic scenario in the case of the point defect and when the adatoms are placed on top of the MoTe2layer. The gr/Ir(111) substrate, on the other hand, has a much stronger impact on the FEDefin the adatom case when the adatom is trapped between the MoTe2and graphene layer. For the Te adatom, the FEDefincreases up to ∼3.6 eV. Interestingly, for the Mo adatom, the defect energy is reduced by the substrate to ∼3.6 eV.

However, as shown in Fig. S7 of the SI, the presence of the substrate does not change significantly the qualitative appearance of the MoTe2derived DOS. Apart from an overall smoothing of the DOS features, we point out three main results. First, regardless of the position of the Te vacancy, this system still has a clear empty state derived from the defect. Second, for the Te–Mo substitution defect, charge transfer from the substrate partially fills one of the in-gap states. Third, the Mo adatom trapped has a DOS characterized by a filled mid gap peak.

MoTe2exhibits a high density of MTBs due to its ability to incorporate excess Mo and the low formation energy of these defects;29however, this does not preclude the presence of point defects, which can still form and coexist with the MTBs. From the experimental results collected inFig. 2and4, we can conclude that there are at least two types of defects in our sample of 1H-MoTe2: one that accepts electrons and another that loses them. Although multiple high-resolution STM images have been taken in areas with charge states, the strong contributions from the metallic MTBs make identifying the structural nature of these charge states challenging. By only looking at the formation energy, the Te adatom is the energetically favored defect, but, since it does not have in-gap states, it cannot be linked to the observed charging rings.

Based on the theoretical defect energy calculations, one can imagine that Te vacancies are also very likely. Additionally, experiments have also shown that chalcogen vacancies can be created in various TMDs by annealing, which is a necessary process during the growth of MoTe2. We further observe that the Te vacancy defect is characterized by an empty in-gap state, which can be filled by TIBB at positive biases. Assuming that the charge defects observed at positive biases are of the same nature, the variation in the TIBB suggests that the defects are located at different vertical distances from the STM tip. The defects that change the charge state at lower bias are likely located in upper layers, while those that change at higher bias are buried deeper, requiring a higher voltage to compensate for the greater tip-to-defect distance in order to feel the same electric field. This requirement is also met by the Te vacancy defect. For these reasons, we can assign the observed defect with charging peaks at positive biases to Te vacancies.

The charging states at negative biases could tentatively be assigned to the Te–Mo substitution.

Although both the Mo vacancy defect and the Te–Mo substitution defect have relatively low formation energies, the DFT calculated DOS for the Mo vacancy defect shows in-gap states that are both filled and empty. It is important to stress that such a defect would, in principle, exhibit charging states at both positive and negative biases—a behavior that has not been observed experimentally. However, the Te–Mo substitution defect displays a state at negative bias and another slightly above the Fermi level. As observed in the STS data ofFig. 1, contrary to freestanding 1H-MoTe2, the system exhibits n-type doping, likely due to charge transfer resulting from the presence of multiple metallic MTBs. This charge transfer could, in principle, cause in-gap states computed to be slightly above the Fermi level (seeFig. 5), actually be just below it. Consequently, Te–Mo substitution defects would display only a filled in-gap state, leading to TIBB charging peaks at negative biases. We observe that Mo adatoms trapped between MoTe2and graphene are also characterized by a filled in-gap state and have a comparable FEDefto the Mo–Te substitution defect. In principle, this type of defect is a good candidate for the TIBB charging peaks at negative bias. However, this system is unlikely to occur experimentally when growing the samples by MBE. This is because during the deposition of Mo, the sample is heated, which promotes the diffusion of atoms in the weakly interacting graphene layer,46favoring their incorporation into the MoTe2layer and reducing the chances of such trapping occurring in the interface. Therefore, the charge states detected at negative biases are most likely linked to Te–Mo substitution.

The growth process of 1H-MoTe2allows for the incorporation of an excess of Mo atoms, leading to the formation of MTB-loops. These loops exhibit charge modulation that complicates atomic identification through STM. However, STS reveals several point defects through the appearance of sharp and intense conductance peaks at both positive and negative bias polarities. The evolution of these peaks with the bias voltage can be correlated to a tip gating effect. While direct visualization of these defectsviaSTM has proven challenging, the combination of STS measurements and DFT calculations provides critical insight into their structural origins. Specifically, the identified defects are associated with Te–Mo substitution and Te vacancies in the upper or lower chalcogen layers of 1H-MoTe2. The nature of these defects can be inferred from their manifestation in the form of rings in the dI/dVat negative or positive bias. Our research presents a method for uncovering the electronic and structural characteristics of atomic-scale defects in MoTe2. This work contributes to a deeper understanding of how these defects influence the electronic properties of TMDs, paving the way for future advancements in the manipulation and control of defect-driven functionalities in these materials.