Floquet engineering, featuring time-periodic control of various systems, has enabled observations of many exotic phenomena such as time crystals, breaking of reciprocity symmetry, and exceptional topology. Theoretically, a periodic drive can make the system inherit the time period and generate new harmonics or distort the band structure at the fundamental frequency. Here, by combining such a technique with levitated optomechanics, we present an instructive example of a coherent acoustic frequency comb with microsphere phonon lasers. This work shows that our technique offers the capability of flexibly controlling both the teeth number and the teeth spacing of the resulting coherent acoustic frequency comb. In particular, we confirm that all Floquet-driven comb teeth can reach the truly coherent regime, i.e., satisfying all the characteristic features of phonon lasers. Our work provides a platform to drive the nonlinear phonon laser to a coherent acoustic frequency comb with truly coherent comb teeth.

Floquet engineering drives an optical tweezer phonon laser to a coherent acoustic frequency comb.

As a versatile tool to control diverse systems, Floquet engineering with time-periodic driving (1–3) has been widely used in tuning the properties of optomechanical devices (4–7), atoms (8–11), photonic crystals (12–15), and waveguides (16–20). Unique effects have been observed in Floquet-engineered systems, such as time crystals (21), topological materials (22–25), Floquet solitons (19,20), Floquet spin amplifications (9), and skin-topological effects (15). Furthermore, by generating new harmonics, Floquet engineering has also been exploited to couple mechanical modes at different frequencies, a key step to realizing mechanical nonreciprocity (4,5), acoustic bistability (7), and motional quantum entanglement (26). However, as far as we know, Floquet engineering of levitated optomechanical (LOM) systems has not been explored (27,28), especially the possibility of achieving coherent acoustic frequency combs.

Phonon lasers, as mechanical analogs of optical lasers, with a wavelength shorter than optical lasers of the same frequency, have been realized in many systems including ions (29–33), microresonators (34–40), membranes (41,42), nanoparticles (43), and photonic crystals (44). These coherent acoustic sources are potentially important for high-precision mechanical measurements and fundamental studies of quantum phononics. In a recent experiment (6), Floquet engineering of phonon lasers was demonstrated with a silicon photonic nanocavity, featuring the appearance of multicolor phonon modes induced by a temporally modulated driving laser (6). Similar results of multicolor phonon lasers have also been observed in active optomechanical systems with a microsphere levitated in an optical tweezer (45,46). However, these phonon lasers exhibit a distinctly limited number of coherent phonon modes, making them inadequate in achieving coherent acoustic frequency combs which are highly desired for applications (e.g., precision underwater ranging and acoustic imaging) in acoustic metrology.

Here, we show the realization of a coherent acoustic frequency comb with a microsphere trapped in an optical tweezer by harnessing Floquet engineering. We note that in previous works, acoustic frequency combs with thermal phonons (47–56), as acoustic analogs of optical frequency comb (57–61), have been realized by using nonlinear wave mixing (62,63), bifurcation (48,51,64), or a symmetry-breaking method (65). These works, based on nonlinear phononic dispersion relations, usually require high driving power, carefully designed mode frequencies, or engineered mechanical nonlinearities. In contrast, our present work using Floquet engineering is free of these limitations and, in particular, can achieve acoustic frequency combs with coherent phonons instead of thermal phonons.

We consider a microsphere nonlinear phonon laser levitated in an optical tweezer, in which a Floquet pump is used to drive this multicolor phonon laser system to generate new comb teeth on both sides of each phonon lasing mode (seeFig. 1A). More specifically, a sinusoidal signal with frequency Ωmodis applied to periodically modulate the pump power. The power of the fundamental mode Ω0creates the Floquet states Ω±αat the frequencies Ω0± αΩmodwith α ≥ 1. For multicolor phonon lasers, this process can similarly occur in all higher-order harmonics, leading to the emergence of additional Floquet states.

(A) Schematics of the evolutions of the coherent acoustic frequency comb based on the multicolor phonon laser with Floquet engineering. (B) Experimental setup. Ci, collimators; WDMi, wavelength division multiplexers; Mi, mirrors. The injection signal and Floquet signal come from a two-channel function signal generator to guarantee the same frequency criterion. Then, the Floquet signal is fed into the modulator to generate the Floquet pump. (C) Power spectrum of phonons before and after the Floquet pump in experiment and simulation.

When the modulation frequency matches the mode interval Ω0/n, wherenis a positive integer, the sidebands of the fundamental phonon laser mode and the higher-order phonon modes overlap, resulting in equal spacing between sidebands. This enables the realization of a coherent acoustic frequency comb with a multiplicative increase in teeth number, by combining the Floquet technique with the nonlinearity of the phonon lasers.

The experimental setup is shown inFig. 1B(see the Supplementary Materials for details). We use an active LOM system, comprising a SiO2microsphere trapped by a dual-beam optical tweezer and an active optical cavity pumped by a continuous wave laser (45). The microsphere interacts with the optical cavity through dissipative optomechanical coupling. An optical gain in the cavity compensates for scattering losses from the microsphere, enhancing the photon lifetime and allowing the system to reach the coherent phonon-lasing regime. Because of the nonlinear coupling between the microsphere and the active optical cavity, a multicolor phonon laser emerges, featuring both the fundamental-mode phonon laser and nonlinear higher-order mechanical harmonics. Then, an electronic injection signal at the frequency of Ω0is applied to the microsphere via an electrode to further improve the quality of such multicolor phonon lasers, including their brightness, stability, lifetime, and quantum coherence (46,66,67). This approach can simultaneously lock both the fundamental-mode phonon laser and all higher-order harmonics quite efficiently. With such high-quality nonlinear phonon lasers at hand, we then apply the technique of Floquet engineering (i.e., periodically modulating the pump power), generating more phonon sidebands between the phonon-lasing modes. As a result, the multicolor phonon laser can be switched to a coherent acoustic frequency comb in a well-controllable manner. To the best of our knowledge, this work pioneers such a goal with an LOM system, which thus provides a new powerful tool for metrology applications of phonon lasers, especially in marine environments.

We stress that the unique features of this system that support such a coherent acoustic frequency comb can be listed as follows. First, our system has a strong nonlinearity due to the gain-enhanced dissipative coupling. As a result, we realize nonlinear multifrequency phonon lasing, with both coherent fundamental mode and harmonics, providing a large cardinality of phonon lasing modes before Floquet engineering is applied. Second, the performance of the phonon laser, such as coherence, brightness, linewidth, and frequency stability, is effectively improved through injection locking. Such a high-quality phonon laser is essential to drive strong and numerous Floquet sidebands. Third, strong optical gain in our system can generate strong mechanical gain, enabling the coexistence of multiple phonon laser modes, and thus effectively suppresses mechanical mode competition (6,68). That overcomes the obstacle of steering the coherent acoustic frequency comb with multiple phonon lasing modes.

The experimental results before and after the Floquet pump are depicted inFig. 1C, highlighting the differences in the power spectrum between the nonlinear phonon laser and the coherent acoustic frequency comb. In the top case ofFig. 1C, the fundamental mode of the nonlinear phonon laser is measured as Ω0= 10 kHz. In addition, the higher peaks around 5Ω0, 6Ω0, and 8Ω0derive from laser noise (see the Supplementary Materials for details). With the introduction of a Floquet pump at a modulation frequency Ωmod= 2 kHz and a modulation depth η = 35%, a coherent acoustic frequency comb with over 40 teeth is excited as depicted in the middle case ofFig. 1C. The teeth strength presents a gradual reduction in the shape of waves. This phenomenon arises from the combination of two mechanisms. First, the power spectrum of the microsphere displacement obeys the Lorentz distribution (43). Thus, the teeth strength gradually decreases for the higher-frequency comb teeth. Second, the energy of the Floquet sidebands derives from the multicolor phonon laser, i.e., Ω0, 2Ω0, 3Ω0,…, and thus leads to lower amplitudes than that of the nearby multicolor phonon lasing mode.

whereγ=6πη0R0.6190.619+Kn(1+0.310.785+1.152Kn+Kn2)is the damping rate (43), a function mainly related to the dynamic viscosity of air η0, the radius of microsphereR, and Knudsen number Kn.Fth(t)=W(t)2kBTγis the Brownian motion force at the temperatureTandW(t) is the independent white noise.Fopt(x,t) =Q(x)P(x,t) is the optical force exerted by the laser in the ring cavity, whereQ(x) is the trapping efficiency andP(x,t) is the intracavity power. Since there is a response time τ between the intracavity power change and the displacement,P(x,t) can be expressed asP[x(t− τ)] and transformed intoP(x)−dPdxτx˙(t)through Taylor expansion. Then, the optical force can be written asFopt(x,t)=Q(x)P(x)−Q(x)dPdxτx˙(t).Fel(t) =Fel−xcos(Ω0x) is the electric force for injection locking (45,46).

whereγopt=Q(x)dPdxτis the optical damping rate. By numerically integratingEq. 2, we can obtain the theoretical simulation results, as depicted in the lower case ofFig. 1C, generally aligning with experimental observations. The slight difference between simulation and experiment mainly derives from errors in the parameter estimation, e.g., nonlinearity force, optical damping, etc. Both the experiment and simulation are solid to support the validity of the coherent acoustic frequency comb.

Now, we probe the evolutions of such a coherent acoustic frequency comb by gradually increasing the pump powerPp, under the modulation conditions Ωmod= 1.8 kHz and η = 15% (seeFig. 2A). With the pump powerPpincreased from 33.8 to 37.5 mW, we observe an enhancement in the amplitude of the Floquet sidebands. This enhancement arises from the increased nonlinearity of the LOM coupling, which enables the Floquet sidebands to draw more energy from the fundamental-mode phonon laser and its harmonics. Consequently, the number of sidebands increases, and the relative strength distribution of the comb teeth becomes more uniform. Through this process, the LOM system undergoes a smooth transition from the nonlinear phonon-lasing regime to the coherent acoustic frequency comb regime.

(A) Evolutions of the coherent acoustic frequency comb. Measured phonon autocorrelations (B)g(2)(0) and (C)g(3)(0) at zero-time delay for Ω+1, and 2Ω+1showing the phonon lasing behavior of the Floquet sidebands. The error bars denote the standard deviation of each measurement, consisting of 55 samples.

with the annihilation or creation operatorb^orb^†of the phonon mode. Thekth-order correlations of phonons satisfyg(2)(0) = 2 andg(3)(0) = 6 below the thresholdPth, demonstrating the thermal statistics. As the pump powerPpexceedsPth= 34.7 mW,g(k)(0) decreases and approaches 1, which indicates that the phonon dynamics turns from the thermal state to the coherent state. As depicted inFig. 2 (B and C), both the second-order and the third-order autocorrelations for Ω+1and 2Ω+1are confirmed to approach unity, as one of the essential features of phonon lasers. Compared with previous works of acoustic frequency combs with thermal phonons, the higher-order coherence of our comb teeth holds the promise to enhance the performance in future applications.

The phase coherence of all sidebands within the comb can be proved with a zoom-in on the time domain signal. The measured displacement and velocity of the microsphere, as shown inFig. 3 (A and B), are in a stable envelope state, where the envelope frequency is consistent with the frequency of the first tooth. Therefore, it can be qualitatively stated that the frequency comb has phase stability, similar to the optical frequency comb. In an ideal situation, each tooth of the frequency comb has perfect phase consistency, but in practical applications, the phase of the comb will fluctuate because of the influence of various noise sources. To further quantitatively analyze the phase stability, we investigate the phase noise of both the fundamental frequency of the nonlinear phonon laser and the first comb tooth of the coherent acoustic frequency comb, as illustrated inFig. 3C. It is evident that the phase noise of the frequency comb is lower than that of the nonlinear phonon laser, indicating superior phase stability of the coherent acoustic frequency comb.

(A) Measured displacement and (B) velocity of the microsphere, showing a stable envelope state. (C) Phase noise of the coherent acoustic frequency comb and the phonon laser.

the Floquet states Ω+α1from the mode β1Ω0and the Floquet states Ω−α2from the mode β2Ω0can combine to form a single state. Similarly, other states, such as the Floquet states Ω+α1+1from the mode β1Ω0and the Floquet states Ω−α2–1from the mode β2Ω0can also yield the same process. This enables the formation of a coherent phonon frequency comb with uniform tooth spacing. Actually, the adjustable range of tooth spacing extends far beyond what is illustrated inFig. 4B. The maximum teeth spacing is primarily determined by the frequency spacing of the multicolor phonon laser, which depends on the natural frequency Ω0of the microsphere. Meanwhile, the minimum teeth spacing is constrained by the highest order of the Floquet state. As a result, the teeth spacing in this work can be flexibly tuned across a wide range, from 100 Hz to 10 kHz. Compared to previous experimental works covering only two orders of tunable teeth spacing range (48,49,53,55,65,70–72), our approach demonstrates a substantial advancement. It provides a powerful and versatile method for realizing a high-quality, broadband coherent acoustic frequency comb, featuring sufficient comb teeth and highly customizable spacing between the teeth.

(A) Three typical power spectra for different modulation frequencies Ωmod. (B) Evolution of the coherent acoustic frequency comb along increased modulation frequency from 500 Hz to 4.5 kHz. (C) The evolution of the power spectrum with increasing modulation depth η, showing the generation of new comb teeth around the phonon lasing modes Ω0, 2Ω0, 3Ω0with Floquet engineering. (D) The intensity of phonon power spectra of phonon lasing Ω0, Ω+1, and Ω+2, with varying modulation depth, indicating energy transfers from the fundamental mode to two sidebands. (E) Phonon population <N> versus η for the sideband Ω+1. Measured phonon autocorrelations (F)g(2)(0) and (G)g(3)(0) at zero-time delay for Ω+1.

We further investigate the effect of modulation depth η on the coherent acoustic frequency comb, as shown inFig. 4C. With the modulation frequency fixed at Ωmod= 2 kHz, the increase of the modulation depth from 3 to 34% results in a gradual rise in both the number and amplitude of Floquet sidebands, similar to the trends observed inFig. 2A. To provide further insights into energy transfer, we analyze the intensity variations of the fundamental mode Ω0and Floquet sidebands Ω+1and Ω+2as depicted inFig. 4D. The amplitude of Ω0decreases, while the amplitudes of Ω+1and Ω+2gradually increase, indicating energy transferring from the fundamental mode to the Floquet sidebands. However, because of energy redistribution effects, the intensity of Floquet sideband cannot be indefinitely enhanced growing with η. Specifically, as η increases beyond critical levels, power from the fundamental mode Ω0becomes progressively diverted to higher-order sidebands (Ω0±nΩmodwheren> 1), manifested by the sequential saturation of Ω+1and subsequent growth of Ω+2intensity. Even if the sidebands approach saturation, their amplitudes remain lower than that of the fundamental mode. This is consistent with the Lorentzian distribution of the displacement power spectrum (43), which naturally limits the sideband amplitudes relative to the fundamental mode for the same driving energy.

This mechanism of energy transfer not only increases the amplitude of the Floquet sidebands but also enhances their coherence as the modulation depth increases. We calculate the phonon population <N> for the sideband Ω+1as a function of η, as illustrated inFig. 4E. The phonon population change aligns with the variation in amplitude, demonstrating that the Floquet sideband Ω+1transitions from a thermal state to a coherent state as the energy is transferred from the fundamental mode. This transition is further confirmed by calculating the phonon autocorrelation functions g(2)(0) and g(3)(0), as shown inFig. 4 (F and G). These results verify that the increase in modulation depth facilitates the emergence of coherence in the Floquet sidebands.

Last, we emphasize that, although the three core ingredients of our work, i.e., the optical tweezer, the nonlinearity, and the Floquet engineering, are individually well-established powerful techniques, the possibility of combining them to generate coherent acoustic frequency combs has never been demonstrated in previous works. The advantages of this integration are evident not only inFig. 1, which presents the intuitive result of the coherent acoustic frequency comb, but also inFigs. 2and3, which highlight its exceptional coherence. In addition,Fig. 4confirms the system’s unique correlations and remarkable flexibility in regulation.

Parametric modulation on optically trapped particles may have been extensively investigated in the levitated optomechanics community (43,68,73,74). However, most of these studies are dedicated to feedback cooling or heating the microsphere, without attention paid to Floquet engineering or coherent acoustic frequency combs. Our work diverges significantly from existing studies in levitated optomechanics, both in terms of underlying principles and results. To the case of the experimental operation, they apply the parameter modulation according to the phase of the microsphere, i.e., the modulated signal needs to be locked to the motion of the microsphere (68,73,74). In our work, the Floquet sidebands are driven without any need for phase locking. To the case of the experimental result, different from the pioneering work of amplifying or cooling a microsphere, our work develops an instructive strategy to achieve a coherent acoustic frequency comb with Floquet engineering.

Despite significant experimental efforts on acoustic frequency combs based on optomechanical (70), electromechanical (63), and opto-electro-mechanical (55) systems, no method has been demonstrated to enable the thermal phonons in combs convert to coherent regime, i.e., achieve the coherent acoustic frequency comb. For example, Mercadéet al.(6) show two-mode lasing by Floquet engineering. Wanget al.(75) illustrate an optomechanical comb (modulated optical power) based on a two-mode phonon laser. The works as mentioned above realize either multicolor phonon lasers or acoustic frequency combs, which is not yet a coherent acoustic laser comb. In contrast to previous works on acoustic frequency combs, our experiment achieves this powerful tool in a truly coherent regime and thus can significantly enhance the stability and sensitivity of precision mechanical measurements in practice. In addition, our work is intrinsically different from the mode locking of a laser, where the periodic signal is used to lock the phase of multimode lasers, in the absence of the ability to generate new sidebands (6,76,77).

In our future work, we will challenge the requirement for vacuum environment by enhancing the quality factor of phonon lasers with new techniques, e.g., structured light (78–80), decorated particles (81,82). In addition, with the aid of devices like hydroacoustic transducers and acoustic amplifiers (83,84), our coherent acoustic frequency comb can be transmitted to a targeted object for further detection.

In summary, this work demonstrates an instructive example of a coherent acoustic frequency comb with a microsphere LOM system. The high-order coherence of the emerged comb teeth is verified, and the tunable teeth spacing is demonstrated. Our work not only realizes a flexible switch between high-quality phonon lasers and coherent acoustic frequency combs but also provides a new link between Floquet engineering and phonon laser physics. Our experiment can also serve as a new platform to design and use more coherent phonon devices with LOM systems.

The experiment is mainly operated with the following three steps: (i) phonon lasing and electronic injection. Load the microsphere into the trapping region of the dual-beam optical tweezer (green beams inFig. 1B) and reduce the pressure in the vacuum cavity. Then, adjust the position of the active optical cavity, which is installed on a three-dimensional translation stage. After the phonon laser behavior is observed according to the real-time PSD of the microsphere’s displacement, turn on the signal generator and adjust the amplitude and frequency of the electrical signal. (ii) Periodically pump. Apply a sinusoidal signal to the controller of a semiconductor laser to periodically modulate the pump power of the active optical cavity (see the Supplementary Materials for details). Next, to form an ideal frequency comb, we adjust the amplitude and frequency of the modulated signal, so that the new harmonics generated by different modes of phonon lasers partially overlap. (iii) Data acquisition. We investigate the influence of the Floquet pump on the phonon laser comb, as shown in the Results.

The periodic pumping of the active cavity is achieved by the pump laser controller (CLD1010LP) which supports modulation by an external radio frequency (RF) source. It has a 50-ohm input impedance, and the RF signal is ac coupled directly to the laser via a Bias-T network. Then, the required RF voltage can be calculated asURF=50Imod, where the modulation current isImod=imodsin(Ωmodt). When the pump current isI0, the modulated depth can then be expressed asη=Imax−IminImax+Imin=imodI0. In addition, the modulated signal is generated by a function signal generator (DG1402-8750).

Funding:G.X. is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (12474368) and the Natural Science Foundation for Distinguished Young Scholars of Hunan Province (2024JJ2055). H.J. is supported by the NSFC (grant nos. 11935006 and 12421005), the Sci-Tech Innovation Program of Hunan Province (2020RC4047), the National Key R&D Program (2024YFE0102400), and the Hunan Major Sci-Tech Program (2023ZJ1010). T.K. is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (12404420).

Competing interests:The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Data and materials availability:All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials. The data that support the plots within this paper are available at Dryadhttp://datadryad.org/share/AbtXC1alayfDzzdoZJdi4-NWgRSQHtpAqlp8QjehV8s.