Fibroblasts are stromal and connective tissue cells that play crucial roles in the intracellular matrix and granulation tissue synthesis during tissue proliferation. They are also responsible for epithelialization and healing of skin lesions.

Our aim was to compare the use of allogeneic fibroblasts with conventional debridement after successful endovascular interventions (EVIs) for the treatment of chronic ulcers induced by peripheral artery disease (PAD).

A total of 116 participants with chronic ulcers due to PAD were randomly assigned, after successful EVI, to receive either allogeneic fibroblasts (study group; n = 58) or conventional debridement (control group; n = 58) for treatment of the ulcers. The participant data were collected over 1 year of follow-up to compare the effectiveness of both methods.

The mean (SD) duration of initial and complete healing of chronic ulcers after successful EVI was shorter in the allogeneic fibroblast group (2.59 [0.53] and 5.04 [0.58] months, respectively) than in the controls (3.56 [0.44] and 5.8 [0.35] months, respectively;P<⁠0.001 for all). A correlation analysis showed a moderately significant correlation between the healing of chronic ulcers (both initial and complete) after successful EVI and the use of allogeneic fibroblasts.

Allogeneic fibroblasts are an effective and noninvasive option for the treatment of chronic PAD-induced ulcers after successful EVI. The duration of initial and complete healing was significantly shorter in the allogeneic fibroblast group than in the conventional debridement group.

Based on the pathogenesis of chronic ulcers and the roles of fibroblasts in epithelialization and healing, this study hypothesized that EVIs can improve blood flow through the ischemic area and that allogeneic fibroblasts could aid in the healing of PAD-induced chronic ulcers.

This study aimed to compare the use of allogeneic fibroblasts with conventional debridement after successful EVIs for the treatment of chronic ulcers due to PAD.

The study was carried out between January 2023 and September 2024 at the National Research Oncology Center (Astana, Kazakhstan), and included 116 participants with chronic PAD-induced ulcers randomly assigned to receive either allogeneic fibroblasts (study group) or conventional debridement (controls).

EVIs were conducted at the interventional radiology unit of the National Research Oncology Center (Astana, Kazakhstan). The surgical unit of the same institution was the venue of patient admission and the use of allogeneic fibroblasts or conventional debridement.

The participants’ age ranged from 18 to 75 years. They all suffered from chronic ulcers due to PAD and failed medical treatment (eg, failed glycemic and blood pressure control and ineffective antiplatelets and anticoagulants), and underwent successful EVIs for PAD.

Participants with unsuccessful EVI, infected chronic ulcers, congestive heart failure (New York Heart Association class III or IV),17prior cardiac surgery, acute myocardial infarction, acute cerebrovascular accident, history of embolic disorders, impaired renal function, or allergy to radio-opaque dye, or who were pregnant, breastfeeding, or declined to participate were excluded from the study.

The study participants were treated in accordance with the Republic of Kazakhstan management protocol for lower limb angioplasty after the West Kazakhstan Medical University ethical committee approval (No 10.5; protocol No 10). All patients gave their written informed consent. This study was registered as a clinical trial (NCT06724276) and registered within the the Republic of Kazakhstan Ministry of Health (No 207/2020) and the Republic of Kazakhstan Ministry of Justice (No 21683).

Prior to EVIs, the participants were hospitalized for blood sugar and blood pressure monitoring and to discontinue antiplatelets and anticoagulants. Routine investigations were conducted after the hospitalization, including electrocardiograms and renal, liver, and coagulation profiles, as well as hepatitis and HIV screening. Radiological evaluations including chest radiology, abdominal ultrasound, arterial duplex ultrasound, and CTA were also performed.

The ischemic area was carefully assessed using the Wound, Ischemia, and Foot Infection (WIfI) classification to identify changes in the skin and muscles, and to evaluate chronic ulcers18(TABLE 2).

The participants with chronic ulcers were also assessed for infection, and those with infected ulcers were excluded from the study (infection disrupts healing of chronic ulcers and worsens tissue damage19;TABLE 3).

Local infection involving only the skin and subcutaneous tissue (without involvement of deeper tissues and without systemic signs).

EVIs were performed using the retrograde technique to access the common femoral artery under aseptic conditions and local anesthesia.20The sites of vascular occlusion (TAPs) were identified through imaging and instillation of a radio-opaque dye.

In this study, EVIs were aimed at re-establishing blood flow through 1 TAP in each EVI session.11Two vascular surgeons and 2 interventional radiologists attended each EVI session to determine the appropriate EVI (eg, either balloon angioplasty or vascular stenting) for each participant based on their experience and the TAP diameter.

Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) was performed using a Passeo-35 balloon (Biotronic, Berlin, Germany), and a CGuard embolic prevention stent (InspireMD, Brussels, Belgium) was used for vascular stenting if a TAP did not respond to PTA.

Post-EVI angiography was conducted in all participants to assess the result of each EVI on the TAP, followed by application of a pressure bandage for the femoral puncture site and 24 hours of bed rest.

After EVIs, proper glycemic and blood pressure control was ensured, and antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapies were resumed when indicated.

Following successful recanalization, the participants were randomized using computer-based randomization to receive either allogeneic fibroblasts (study group; n = 58) or conventional debridement (control group; n = 58) for the treatment of chronic ulcers.

Allogeneic fibroblasts are a noninvasive treatment for chronic ulcers.21The fibroblasts used in this study were extracted from neonatal foreskin under aseptic conditions, subjected to biological and serological evaluation to ensure their safety for human use, and then cultured at the Astana National Center of Biotechnology. The cultured fibroblasts were mixed in a 10-ml spray dispenser (2 million fibroblasts per 1 ml of the spray) and stored in vials at –86 ºC.

After thawing for 5 minutes, the caps of the vials were replaced with pump heads. The vials were gently inverted to resuspend the fibroblasts before use. Allogeneic fibroblasts were sprayed once daily to completely cover the chronic ulcers.

Participant data, including age, sex, smoking status, body mass index (BMI, kg/m2), medical disorders, the Rutherford’s and WIfI classifications, EVIs, and chronic ulcer healing (initial and complete), were collected over a 1-year follow-up period from the participants during clinical evaluation and from their medical records.

A sample size of at least 100 participants in 2 groups was required to produce an acceptable Figure for this study, as calculated using the Epi InfoTM package (StatCalc, version 7.2.5, Atlanta, Georgia, United States) with 2-sided 95% CI, 80% power, 1:1 ratio of the study to control groups, and a 0.5 risk coefficient. The statistical analysis was conducted using the χ2test and thettest. The Pearson correlation was used to determine the relationship between chronic ulcer healing after EVIs and the use of allogeneic fibroblasts or conventional debridement. APvalue below 0.05 was considered significant.

A total of 116 participants with chronic ulcers due to PAD and after successful EVIs were included in this comparative study. The participants were randomly assigned into the study group (n = 58) receiving allogeneic fibroblasts or the control group (n = 58) treated with conventional debridement for their chronic ulcers.

No substantial differences were reported between the study and control groups regarding mean (SD) age (55.7 [4.12] vs 57.3 [5.04] y;P= 0.06) and BMI (27.4 [2.1] vs 27.7 [1.97] kg/m2;P= 0.4).

Similarly, no marked differences were found between the allogeneic fibroblast group and the controls regarding the percentage of men (74.1% vs 63.8%;P= 0.6), smokers (48.3% vs 41.4%;P= 0.6), individuals with diabetes (41.4% vs 62.1%;P= 0.2), hypertension (43.1% vs 37.9%;P= 0.7), renal diseases (19% vs 13.8%;P= 0.5), cardiac disorders (10.3% vs 5.2%;P= 0.3), or multiple medical disorders (6.9% vs 5.2%;P= 0.7;TABLE 4).

Data presented as number and percentage were analyzed with the χ2 test, and those presented as mean (SD), with thettest.

The external iliac artery was the TAP in 6 patients (10.3%) from the allogeneic fibroblast group and 9 controls (15.5%). The superficial femoral artery was the TAP in 23 cases (39.7%) in the allogeneic fibroblast group and 24 controls (41.4%). The popliteal artery was the TAP in 11 participants (19%) from the allogeneic fibroblast group and 13 controls (22.4%). The anterior tibial artery was the TAP in 8 cases (13.8%) in the allogeneic fibroblast group and 7 controls (12.1%). The posterior tibial artery was the TAP in 10 patients (17.2%) from the allogeneic fibroblast group and 5 patients (8.6%) in the control group (P= 0.5 for all).

PTA was used to manage TAPs in 52 participants (89.7%) from the allogeneic fibroblast group and 49 controls (84.5%). Vascular stenting was used in 6 cases (10.3%) in the allogeneic fibroblast group and 9 controls (15.5%;P= 0.8;TABLE 4).

PTA was used to manage TAPs with segmental stenosis in 89 patients (88.1%), including 47 individuals (52.8%) from the allogeneic fibroblast group and 42 controls (47.2%), and to manage vascular occlusions in 12 patients (11.9%), including 5 (41.7%) in the allogeneic fibroblast group and 7 controls (58.3%) (P= 0.66). Vascular stenting was used to manage TAPs with vascular occlusions in 12 cases (80%), including 5 (41.7%) in the allogeneic fibroblast group and 7 (58.3%) in the control group, and to manage segmental stenosis in 3 participants (20%), including 1 patient (33.3%) in allogeneic fibroblast group and 2 controls (66.7%;P= 0.63;TABLE 4).

The mean (SD) duration of the initial and complete healing of chronic ulcers after successful EVIs was shorter in the study group (2.59 [0.53] and 5.04 [0.58] mo) than in the controls (3.56 [0.44] and 5.8 [0.35] mo;P<⁠0.01 for all;TABLE 4andFIGURE 1).

Initial and complete healing of chronic ulcers after endovascular interventions; whiskers indicate the minimal and maximal values, boxes indicate the interquartile range, X represents the mean value, and the central line represents one value lower than the minimal value for allogeneic fibroblast complete healing.

The correlation analysis showed a moderately significant correlation between the healing of chronic ulcers (both initial and complete) after successful EVIs and the use of allogeneic fibroblasts. The healing times were shorter in the study group than in the controls both for the initial (r = 0.7065;P<⁠0.001;FIGURE 2) and complete healing (r = 0.6208;P<⁠0.001;FIGURE 3).

Based on the pathogenesis of chronic ulcers and the roles of fibroblasts in epithelialization and healing, this study hypothesized that EVIs can improve blood flow through the ischemic area and that allogeneic fibroblasts could aid in the healing of chronic ulcers due to PAD.

Therefore, 116 participants with PAD-induced chronic ulcers and successful EVIs were included in this study comparing allogeneic fibroblasts with conventional debridement after EVIs for treating the ulcers.

After successful EVIs, the participants were randomized using computer-based randomization to receive either allogeneic fibroblasts (study group; n = 58) or conventional debridement (control group; n = 58) for the treatment of chronic ulcers.

The participant data were collected over a 1-year follow-up period to compare allogeneic fibroblasts with conventional debridement after EVIs for treating PAD-related chronic ulcers.

No significant differences were reported between the allogeneic fibroblast group (study group) and the conventional debridement group (controls) in terms of mean age and BMI.

Similarly, no significant differences were found between the allogeneic fibroblast group and the controls regarding the percentage of men, women, smokers, individuals with diabetes, hypertension, renal diseases or cardiac disorders, and participants with multiple medical disorders.

The patients from the allogeneic fibroblast group and controls were also statistically matched, with no difference in the number of participants included from each Rutherford’s classification category or from each WIfI classification class.

PTA was used to manage TAPs in 89.7% of the participants in the allogeneic fibroblast group and 84.5% of the controls. Vascular stenting was used to manage TAPs in 10.3% of the study group patients and 15.5% of the controls.

PTA was used to manage TAPs with segmental stenosis in 88.1% of the participants, and to manage vascular occlusions in 11.9% of the participants. Vascular stenting was employed to manage TAPs with vascular occlusions in 80% of the patients, and to manage segmental stenosis in 20% of the participants.

A randomized study29showed similar outcomes for PTA and self-expanding stents in the treatment of superficial femoral lesions. The BASIL trial (Bypass Versus Angioplasty in Severe Ischaemia of the Leg)30reported similar amputation-free rates at 12 and 36 months after EVIs. A meta-analysis showed significant rates of limb salvage after PTA for severe tibial artery lesions.31A Cochrane review32did not reach a conclusion on PTA vs primary stenting for iliac lesions due to insufficient evidence.

Previous trials, such as THUNDER (Local Taxan With Short Time Contact for Reduction of Restenosis in Distal Arteries),33LEVANT 2 (Moxy Drug Coated Balloon vs Standard Balloon Angioplasty for the Treatment of Femoropopliteal Arteries),34BIOLUX P-I (A Prospective, Multi-centre, Randomized Controlled, First in Man Study to Assess the Safety and Performance of the Passeo-18 Lux Paclitaxel Releasing PTA Balloon Catheter vs. the Uncoated Passeo 18 Balloon Catheter in Patients With Stenosis and Occlusion of the Femoropopliteal Arteries),35AcoArt-I (Prospective, Multi-center and Randomized Controlled Clinical Study to Verify Effectiveness and Safety of Drug-eluting Balloon in PTA Procedure),36IN.PACT (Randomized Trial of IN.PACT Admiral Drug Coated Balloon vs Standard PTA for the Treatment of SFA and Proximal Popliteal Arterial Disease),37and ILLUMENATE (Pivotal Trial of a Novel Paclitaxel-Coated Percutaneous Angioplasty Balloon)38have reported significant patency rates after using paclitaxel balloons in EVIs.

The mean (SD) duration of initial and complete healing of chronic ulcers after successful EVIs was significantly shorter in the study group (2.59 [0.53] and 5.04 [0.58] months) than in the controls (3.56 [0.44] and 5.8 [0.35] months;P<⁠0.001 for all).

The correlation analysis showed a moderately significant correlation between the healing of chronic ulcers (both initial and complete) after successful EVIs and the use of allogeneic fibroblasts.

The initial healing time of chronic ulcers after EVIs was markedly shorter in the study group than in the controls (r = 0.7065;P<⁠0.001), and the same outcome was achieved for complete healing (r = 0.6208;P<⁠0.001).

Torrealba et al116reported an 85% rate of chronic ulcer healing after EVIs (PTA and coated balloons) for TAPs.

Falanga et al44reported rapid healing of venous ulcers after using a skin substitute from neonatal foreskin containing allogeneic keratinocytes and fibroblasts.

In a randomized controlled trial, participants with venous ulcers from 28 centers in the United States and Canada were treated with a spray containing allogeneic fibroblasts and keratinocytes for 12 weeks.21The author of this study concluded that the use of the allogeneic fibroblast and keratinocyte spray (at a dose of 0.5 × 106cells/ml) every 14 days could improve chronic venous ulcer healing.

This was the first comparative study conducted according to the Republic of Kazakhstan protocol to compare allogeneic fibroblasts with conventional debridement after successful EVIs for treating PAD-related chronic ulcers.

The limited number of human studies investigating allogeneic fibroblasts for the treatment of chronic ulcers and lack of follow-up for cases with unsuccessful EVIs were the limitations of this study. Further studies are required to confirm the effectiveness of allogeneic fibroblasts for the treatment of chronic ulcers due to PAD.

Allogeneic fibroblasts are an effective and noninvasive option after successful EVIs for the treatment of PAD-induced chronic ulcers. The d uration of initial and complete healing of chronic ulcers after successful EVIs was significantly shorter in the allogeneic fibroblast group than in the conventional debridement group. Further studies are required to confirm the effectiveness of allogeneic fibroblasts for the treatment of PAD-related chronic ulcers.

The authors are grateful to the participants for providing their consent to participate in this study.

AC, MJ, AD, GK, and DB were responsible for the study concept and design, data collection, literature review, and final revision before submission for publication. SS, BZ, DK, GS, NZ, NZh, and IAA were responsible for the statistical analysis, editing, literature review, and final revision before submission for publication. All the authors have read and agreed to the submission of this manuscript for publication.

Artificial intelligence was not used in preparation of this manuscript.

Chinaliyev A, Saparbayev S, Zhakiyev B, et al. Allogeneic fibroblasts vs conventional debridement after successful endovascular interventions for treating chronic ulcers induced by peripheral artery disease. Wideochir Inne Tech Maloinwazyjne. 2025; 20: 226-234. doi:10.20452/wiitm.2025.17959.

Videosurgery and Other Miniinvasive Techniques is an official journal of the Videosurgery Foundation.