Although maintaining personhood is well‐acknowledged as fundamental in providing high quality dementia care, recognition of personhood in advanced dementia keeps challenging formal caregivers. However, research suggests that personhood in advanced dementia may be evident through expressions of humanness in everyday life. Thus, this study aims to explore how personhood in advanced dementia can be recognised as their expressions as existential human beings.

Following Galvin and Todres' lifeworld‐led approach to care, personhood in advanced dementia was explored through the lived experiences of nursing home residents living with the condition. Participant observations with people living with advanced dementia were conducted at two nursing homes as well as semi‐structured interviews with the care staff.

Process consent was used to assess residents' willingness to participate, and ethical approval was sought and granted by a research ethics committee.

Based on a phenomenological analytic method by van Manen, we found expressions of humanness in advanced dementia can be very ambiguous. Our findings can be summarised in four themes conveyed as anecdotes describing how people living with advanced dementia enact theirhistoric agency, seek a sense ofembodied homeliness, form and nurturecandid relationships, or try to understand thesituated presence. Embodied engagement in understanding the lived experiences of care recipients' ambiguous expressed humanness can assist formal caregivers to really see or feel those they care for as existential human beings.

Approaching behaviours and utterances in advanced dementia as ways of expressing one's humanness can support formal caregivers' recognition of the personhood of their care recipients. And when such expression becomes incomprehensible, we must try to look again and find the human meaning in them.

The current collective representation of people living with dementia tends to regard them as lacking valued distinctive human traits, such as rational thought, coherent memory, and purposeful communication [1,2]. This may lead to the perception that they lack personhood [3,4], defined by Kitwood [5] as “a standing or status that is bestowed upon one human being, by others, in the context of relationship and social being” (8).

The view that people living with dementia may lack personhood is strengthened by a paradigm that solely focuses on pathology and cognitive loss [4,6]. Ever since the initial case description of Auguste Deter by Alois Alzheimer in 1907, perceptions of people living with dementia have been dominated by a reductionist discourse with neuropathology and cognitive decline as focal point [7,8]. Such thinking ultimately leads to ideas that dementia “comprises a state of which its ‘subject’ cannot have subjective experiences” of living with such condition [9], 140. However, this discourse has been criticised and modified by scholars in dementia care who explore ways to understand and maintain the personhood of people living with dementia [3,4,5,10,11]. And promoting personhood has become regarded as essential for high‐quality dementia care [12,13].

Although focus on maintaining personhood is widely acknowledged [12,13] and promoted as a policy aim [14,15], the recognition of personhood remains problematic in dementia care practices [1,2,16]. Formal caregivers may struggle with recognising and accepting it in people living with dementia, especially in the more critical stages of cognitive decline (often described as ‘advanced dementia’ and as used in this article) [17,18,19]. Understanding personhood in advanced dementia is complex and surrounded by great ambiguity in scholarly literature [13,20]. Kitwood's version of personhood is arguably the dominant one at present [12]. However, it is problematic as it represents people living with advanced dementia as rather passive in supporting their personhood and depends on the affirmation of others [21,22]. Other strands of research place more emphasis on lived experience and subjectivity; that is, upon the agentive and subjective aspects of people living with advanced dementia to understand and maintain their personhood [16,18,23].

Drawing on phenomenological theory, Kontos [23] and Käll [24] have argued that the interactions and capabilities of a person living with advanced dementia, as any human being, should be seen as fundamentally embodied in their surroundings and continuously altered in response to being situated in the world and interrelated with others. Thus, their lived experience, expressed and/or embodied, is to be seen as essential in recognising their personhood [11,24]. Consistent with Kontos and Käll's phenomenologically oriented approach to personhood, innovative studies show how personhood fruitfully can be recognised through care recipients' lived experience by highlighting the notion of humanisation in caring relations [25,26,27]. These studies are based on thelifeworld‐led approachto care developed by Galvin and Todres [28], which contends that, to find a way suitable to recognise the personhood of care recipients in all its complexity, we need to meet them as existential human beings. Given this, existential human being is personhood expressed and embodied in concrete time and contexts, acquiring perceptible form. In this article, we will call these expressions of humanness.

The study was conducted in two nursing homes in Denmark specialised in advanced dementia. There were two components: observations of residents and their interactions with others (staff, relatives, and other residents) and interviews with care staff members.

Participant observations were conducted with a total of 83 participating residents living with advanced dementia, 50 in one home and 33 in the other. The research was conducted over a four‐month period consisting of daily three to six‐hour visits across different shifts and days of the week. The observations consisted both of active participation in the resident's daily routines, meals, conversations, and activities (both at a communal and individual level), and also simply observing them intently. To observe expressions of humanness in advanced dementia Galvin and Todres' [28] lifeworld‐led approach guided the focus of ‘grand tour observations’ through which the most general features of the residents' lived experiences were captured and described. Gradually, observations were focused on certain elements of these lived experiences, changing them to ‘mini tour observations’ [29]. Here the observer (the first author) was open to informal conversations and interactions as well as the unplanned, allowing opportunities of serendipity to present themselves. Descriptive and reflective field notes were recorded during the observations and transcribed daily [30].

In observing the lived experience of people with limited or no verbal language, memory, or activity, observations were approached as embodied communicative processes, including both the participants and the observer himself [31]. This made the observer closely attentive to the participants' non‐verbal communication (appearance, grooming), body language (gesture, posture), and facial expressions (mimicry, signals). It was also important to interrogate periods of silence, which are not just the absence of speech or actions, but may include important qualities such as affect, function, purpose, and meaning from the participant [31]. At the same time, the observer was also aware of the sensory (vision, but also hearing, touch, taste) and emotional aspects of his own experiences conducting the observations. Such embodied insights could be employed to help understand and interact with the participants and the site [31].

In addition, semi‐structured interviews were conducted with 10 care staff (see Table1) at each nursing home. Purposeful sampling was used to ensure varying interviewee characteristics such as educational background, work experience, gender, and age [32]. The primary focus of these qualitative interviews was on caregivers' experiences (being continuously around people living with advanced dementia) of how residents' express their humanness in their everyday lives. All interviews began with the question: “can you describe an episode where you had a special experience caring for a resident living with dementia?” and were conducted with the support of an interview guide with open‐ended questions based implicitly on Galvin and Todres' lifeworld‐led approach to humanisation. This to enable the caregivers freely to provide detailed descriptions [32]. One such question was: “can you describe an episode where a resident showed signs of their unique character?”. All interviews were audio recorded, anonymised, and transcribed verbatim [32].

Overview of the 20 interview participants (number of participants in parentheses).

Educational titles are taken from a Danish healthcare context, as all participants were receiving or had received their education in Denmark (except for one participant who completed the education in Sweden). Regarding the students and trainees, the former were employees alongside their studies and the latter were in an internship as part of their education.

All the participants had good Danish comprehension and expressive language skills.

All participants identified as either male or female gender.

To use process consent requires making efforts to understand a participant's basic biographical information and general well‐being, as well as assessing how they may be supported to make a voluntary choice about taking part. Preceding the study, information material (information leaflets, posters, pdf files, etc.) was prepared and placed in relevant places at each nursing home and sent out to staff and relatives. Thus, the residents themselves or together with their relatives and staff could read and talk about participating in the study. Also, the observer made himself physically accessible prior to and during his observations, so the residents noticed him and could talk with him about who he was and what he was doing there. This led to residents either directly asking or indirectly showing curiosity about the researcher and his study, to which they were told about his role, the study purpose, and whether they were interested in participating. Residents who did not show visible interest were also given explanations of the research. This needed to be repeated throughout the study.

In addition, the observer continuously used his clinical and academic experience in dementia care to pay close attention to the health and comfort of the participants. This included, for example, looking for any signs of distress in body language, facial expressions, and gestures. One resident, who had verbally agreed to participate, showed clear signs of irritation towards the observer's presence. After discussion with his regular care staff and relatives, it was agreed that he was indicating that he did not wish to participate, so he was withdrawn from the study.

In accordance with legal and ethical principles, all participants in the observations and interviews received written and oral information about the study purpose and were informed that they could withdraw voluntary consent and participation at any time without consequence [38,39]. No residents or care staff took advantage of this. However, the observer was aware of how residents living with advanced dementia were not necessarily capable of withdrawing. Therefore, he took extra precaution to frequently telling them about the study and checking their voluntary participation.

In studying the lived experience of people who may not be able to explicitly explain their thoughts and actions, our analysis is based on the phenomenological idea ofintersubjectivity. It describes how we as humans always exist as members of a community, where we share environments, language and meanings. Furthermore, human subjectivity is not a private affair, but always a ‘cosubjectivity with others’ [40]. This means that intersubjective experience permits us to empathically apprehend the experience of other humans to some extent [41]. Although such understanding always has a certain gap to the other's experience, research has demonstrated how intersubjectivity makes it possible to understand the lived experience of participants with cognitive difficulties [42,43].

Data from both interviews and observations were continuously compared throughout the analysis process by the first author using a phenomenological method, consisting of sequential holistic, selective, and detailed reviews [44]. First, the interview and observational data was reviewed as a whole, integrating residents' and care staffs' lived experiences. This initial stage used the lifeworld‐led approach's description of humanisation to identify instances when humanness was expressed. Secondly, the focus was narrowed to reviewing selected sections and phrases in both types of data that contained descriptions of expressed humanness. Finally, each line of text in both data was reviewed in detail to look for any further evidence in single sentences or sentence clusters that could be identified as expressed humanness. Triangulation was made between the first, second, and last author, and the data were reviewed iteratively to patiently enable themes to evolve. This analysis yielded general themes of phenomenological description of how people living with advanced dementia express themselves as existential human beings [44].

The results include general observations and an exploration of four themes derived from our analysis. Our observations revealed that care recipients living with advanced dementia express their humanness through everyday actions and utterances, like anyone else. In gaining close insights into their daily lives, we observed a wide range of these expressions. Some were clear, such as vocal pleasure getting their hair, nails, and feet cared for, savouring sweets and a cup of morning coffee, or pride in events like the Danish Royal succession. Others were subtler, like longing for the arrival of spring, reacting emotionally to global tragedies, or finding peace in brief silences in an otherwise hectic environment. Additionally, some expressions were less apparent, such as sudden aggression, repetitive behaviours, or apathy, which could obscure the recognition of their humanness.

Following the work of van Manen [44], we analysed the ambiguous expressions of humanness in advanced dementia and summarised them in four general themes: (i)Historic agency, (ii)Embodied homeliness, (iii)Candid relationships, and (iv)Situated presence. These are phenomenological themes that convey human descriptions of the phenomenon in focus. To strengthen our phenomenological themes our findings are formed into ‘exemplary anecdotes’ that reflect the emotions and meanings of people's everyday lived experiences [44], which otherwise may be difficult to capture and express in a scientific text [45,46]. The aim is to engage the reader and generate reflections related to the anecdotes. As such, we want our findings not just to be read and understood, but also to draw in the reader, involve the reader personally, and touch and move the reader [46]. Anecdotes can give the reader useful insights to the noteworthy or important of other people's life [44], which, we argue, is hugely relevant for humanisation in advanced dementia.

Today a nursing home resident stands and hammers away on his reflection in a window, something he has started to do lately. “Let's stop doing that Kristoff, you'll end up hurting yourself” a caregiver calmly says while approaching him and drawing the curtain. Kristoff just stands there, tense in his body and gaze. “It was a mess back then when you were a boy” she sighs and lays her arm around him as they start to walk together. Kristoff's body becomes more relaxed, and he begins to tell stories from his childhood, about how his father regularly had beaten him up. While walking they come across another window in the hallway as Kristoff once more begins to hammer on his own reflection, which in his old days has become the spitting image of his father.

People living with advanced dementia can express their humanness through an agency that is bound to who they were, who they are, and who they want to be. The residents living with advanced dementia seem to act in the present moment in ways that are tied to their own past, to support how they saw themselves and continuously want to see themselves in the world they live in. As such, their present agency is charged with their history. This was sometimes expressed in relation to certain events, but it could also be expressed more subtly, lying imperceptibly across their everyday life. For example, one resident who had grown up and lived his entire life as an entertaining acrobat in a travelling circus proudly told stories and showed pictures of his performing life. In the institution, he continued enthusiastically to entertain those around him with jokes, rhymes, gestures, and excessive positivity. He was still able to contribute by lifting the moods of others and the whole atmosphere of the ward. Another resident communicated how she always had enjoyed serving guests in her home, tirelessly made sure that no‐one lacked anything to eat or drink when residents, relatives, and staff visited her room or gathered in the kitchen. In this way, she continued to be an excellent host.

People living with advanced dementia can express their humanness through a sense of feeling at home or, conversely, through the opposite of not feeling at home. Residents would often, in various ways, avoid acceptance of their new accommodation as home. Some found the apartment strange and desired every day to return home to where they lived before. Others were more accepting of it, some even cherished it, but still viewed the apartment more as a place they needed to be as they couldn't continue living in their actual home. Instead, they seem to find homeliness in relations to other people such as recognisable staff and residents resembling their own personality or culture. Expressions of homeliness could also be found in their relationships to certain objects, behaviours, activities, events, and places. For example, one resident showed close compassion with her walker, which she used for walking tirelessly up and down the hallways to see if her relatives had come to visit her. She spoke about how dear this walker was to her, made sure it never left her side, carefully petted and nurtured it, and always smiled looking down at it. Another resident found comfort, refuge, and ease at the end of the garden. Here she calmly enjoyed looking at, smelling, and touching the flowers and bushes predicting how they would come to grow.

As the evening begins a confrontation between two residents breaks out. Elsa, who has shown herself increasingly irritated over the weekend, hits and pushes the other, who ends up on the floor. Immediately, caregivers step in and help him back to his feet, while others shield off Elsa. “Now that's enough Elsa! We can't tolerate this kind of behaviour and need for you to go down and stay in your room” they call out in unison and form an arc around her. Elsa does not respond to their wish and continues to hit out and shout. Then one caregiver steps forward as she looks tenderly into Elsa's eyes and asks her, “Don't you think you need a hug?”. Elsa now stands still, lowers her shoulders, and looks back at this caregiver. “Yes, I think I do,” Elsa replies with a sob.

People living with advanced dementia can express their humanness through a need for being seen by other people as the person they truly are, including both their qualities and limitations. When sincerity, curiosity, and genuine interest in the residents as the person they are were shown, it had a huge impact on their readiness to open up and relate to staff, other residents, and even their relatives. Intimate relationships were something that people living with advanced dementia sought out and nurtured, thus expressing themselves in ways that emphasised togetherness and tenderness towards certain others. This could not only develop into good relationships, but also compassionate friendships and even romantic partnerships. For instance, mutual interest was expressed when some female residents became flirtatious with the young male researcher, who wanted to spend time with them and was keen to learn about their everyday lives. Or when several residents developed good relationships with each other based on a common interest in a shared culture, language, profession, preference, or personality. Conversely, lack of common ground could foster a bad relationship, kindling a mutual dislike between residents. As an example, one resident always left the room as soon as a certain person entered, and another resident was overtly bullied by a small group of three.

As Olaf enters the kitchen, he greets the other residents and looks around. “Good morning, Olaf, would you like a cup of coffee to warm you on?” a caregiver asks him. He nods and sits down next to the other residents. While drinking his coffee Olaf looks at them and enthusiastically says, “So are you looking forward to celebrating the New Year tonight?”. They just keep sitting quietly and mind their own business. “Are none of you excited about it, it's New Year! At least I am” Olaf exclaims. The caregiver looks at him. “But Olaf, it's January and New Year was several days ago”. Olaf looks baffled around and stares into the darkness outside where snow is falling. He gets up and leaves the room, passing the wall calendar that still shows ‘31. Dec.’ in clear black letters.

People living with advanced dementia can express their humanness in trying to understand and make sense of the setting around them. Attempts to put together a meaningful picture of their outside world from the pieces available to them were apparent in the residents. As such, they asked repetitive questions on why and how things are, walked around in their surroundings looking for the recognisable, and valued more natural environments, animals, and plants than artificial alternatives. When people living with advanced dementia appear to make sense and apply meaning to actions, things, and environments in their surroundings, they tend to become more at ease and livelier. Thus, one resident stood calmly in her apartment surrounded by colourful yet artificial plants and smelled and nibbled the leaves of the only authentic plant in there, which was colourless and beginning to wither. The same applied for several residents when they engaged in activities that were meaningful for them, understood what needed to happen with them in care situations, or recognised and remembered the person who was interacting with them. Conversely, if this was not meaningful and honest to them, they were likely to walk away from the social activity, remain passive in the care situation, or avoid interactions with the other person.

Based on our analysis, expressions of humanness in advanced dementia are characterised by great variety, including whether the manifestations are obviously apparent or more subtly disguised. We found that even the most ambiguous expressions of humanness bear witness to the lived experience of being human and living with cognitive limitations. This is the case when people living with advanced dementia enact theirhistoric agencybased on a present connected with their past and future, seek a sense ofembodied homelinessin an unfamiliar place, form and nurturecandid relationshipswith others, or try to understand thesituated presenceof the world around them.

Our findings show how people living with advanced dementia can be said to express their humanness by enacting their present based on how they saw themselves in the past and would like to continue to see themselves. This being in the present is not to be misunderstood as a mere collection of disconnected instants, but rather an intensive moment that reaches to both past and future. In this sense they retain an historical existence in the present moment [47,48]. Expressed humanness also occurred when trying to find a feeling of home in other persons and objects. This resonates with Dyring and Grøn's [49] research on Ellen, a nursing home resident living with advanced dementia. Ellen finds, adopts, and cares for the ‘Little One’—a stuffed toy cat—which she indignantly considers abandoned and alone. Instead of perceiving such adoption and devoted care as absurd and signs of cognitive decline, they propose an understanding of it as expressing Ellen's sense of her own abandonment in her past, being left on her own in a strange institution (the nursing home), and her attempt to create a sense of homeliness in this new place. Ellen and the Little One are not to be seen as exceptional but as witness of how the ‘everydayness of anarchic events’ can be perceived as ‘everyday creativity’ in which people living with advanced dementia have the potential to express their human lived experiences [49].

Similarly, in exploring the edge of humanity, other researchers have rendered the ‘human’ visible in nursing home residents living with the last stages of dementia who, allegedly, did not possess the usual markers of ‘human personhood’. Regardless of impaired language, apathy, and needing help with basic self‐care their “barely audible humming, a difference in the tone of ‘gek‐gek’ or a raised eyebrow” can be identified as valued expression of humanness in caring relations [50], 216. This resonates with other dementia literature that emphasises how, in even the most advanced stages of dementia, there is still a potential to recognise and understand the human meaning of these people's behaviour and utterances [11,17,23]. And, we argue, our findings provide an important message for anyone involved in the care of people living with advanced dementia. Despite all the changes and limitations resulting from dementia, people still manifest a rich and varied range of expressions of their humanness. Formal caregivers need to be aware of this in order to celebrate the flame that persists, rather than looking merely at the consequences of deterioration. In turn, this awareness will stimulate caregivers into forming more humanising caring relations with those for whom they are responsible [25,26].

Therefore, if we are to recognise personhood through all stages of dementia, we must try to look again when expressed humanness is ambiguous, anarchic, or unusual. Due to cognitive decline, people living with advanced dementia enact their everyday lives in certain ways, which at first sight may appear to be incomprehensibly aggressive, passive, or repetitive, if they are only viewed isolated in that given moment [4,51,52]. Instead, by looking again, aiming for a deeper understanding, such behaviours can become comprehensible expressions of humanness. Aggression, passivity, repetitiveness, or similar behaviours are lucid human reactions to anyone who is willing to see what they see or feel what they feel. Hughes [53] parallels it to drug dealer‐related societies' use of the phrase ‘y' feel me?’—where what needs to be understood is often what is not evident. In other words, when expressions of humanness in people living with advanced dementia seem incomprehensible, it may be our understanding which is inadequate. Understanding what is not evident, Hughes [53] emphasises, is closer to a kind of embodied engagement rather than a mere rational explanation (in line with our methodological use of intersubjectivity). “For the issue is one of really knowing the person [living with dementia], of having a feel for what he or she wants and would have wanted” (356). An embodied engagement in the other, even though it may be difficult to verify [53], can assist the caregiver to attend more insightfully to the lived experiences of those they care for [54].

The point is not simply to rely on a rational explanation of an otherwise obscure behaviour or utterance, but to actively engage with the lived experience of those living with advanced dementia. This engagement is based in a deeper form of understanding where caregivers develop a way of ‘feeling’ their care recipients' experiences and in doing so tries to approach the incomprehensible as reasonable ways to expressing one's humanness. In this way, formal caregivers can learn to really see or feel the existential human being, hence their personhood, in people living with advanced dementia, more than simply talking about it. Draper [54] calls for more attention on embodiment in person‐centred care and contends “if embodiment (…) is at the ‘heart’ of being human and of personhood, it follows then that embodiment should be at the ‘heart’ of person‐centred [care] practice” (2238). Therefore, it is highly significant that formal caregivers in caring relations become attuned to the lived embodied experience of their care recipients. But also, to their own embodied knowledge being in this shared caring relation [28,54]. By representing our findings in a more aesthetic way, as anecdotal vignettes, they can reflect a felt sense of the care recipient's personhood in advanced dementia [44,45]. A felt sense that cantouchthe caregivers and ignite their embodied knowledge, in which they recognise the person behind the dementia and in so doing guide them towards a more humanly sensitive person‐centred care.

Phenomenological research requires the researcher to free themselves from their own assumptions, explanations, interpretations, and constructions about the phenomenon in focus and bracket their preconceptions. While also acknowledging that it is not possible completely to leave one's preconceptions behind. Therefore, to adopt an attitude of openness and wonder, the first author elucidated and discussed his preconceptions and use of a lifeworld‐led approach as a guide for humanisation with the other authors prior to and throughout the research process [46].

Our use of anecdotes creates for the reader a reflexive distance from the immediate experiences of living with advanced dementia. However, anecdotes are intended to provide credible accounts of human experience that will resonate with the reader, thereby encourage them to recognise the plausibility of others' lived experiences despite their own lack of direct experience [44]. Thus, they enable generalisations as “we can generalise from the anecdote about the data and generalise to other contexts and populations” [45], 1020, and in this way our anecdotal vignettes can be used to improve humanly sensitive care.

To support formal caregivers in recognising the personhood (in all its 'human' complexity) of people living with advanced dementia their behaviours and utterances should be approached as existential expressions of their humanness. However, when such expressions become elusive and incomprehensible we must take another look, trying to find more human nuance and meaning in them. Such comprehension demands more than just accepting a theoretical statement, such as ‘they are humans, just like anyone else’ or assuming that ‘they should be treated as humans, like anyone else’. It requires us to make humanisation of the other not merely a theoretical postulate, but an undeniable lived experience in caring relations that we try both to see and feel. And for this, we argue, our themes and anecdotes offer valuable directions.