Human brain tumors were commonly monitored in hospital/clinical laboratories by immunohistochemistry (IHC) technique, which provides major insights into their classification. However, this technique remains laborious and still shows pitfalls. Therefore, the current study was endeavored to reveal the assets of the application of high‐throughput mass spectrometry (MS) for medical diagnosis. In this study, we focused on the Grade IV astrocytoma and meningioma brain tumors. The collected specimens were first monitored for histopathological diagnosis, followed by IHC staining for the characterization of stemness gene marker, then analyzed by a shotgun proteomic–based approach with high‐resolution tandem MS. The IHC analysis only confirmed the histopathological diagnosis, whereas the proteomic analysis unraveled several differently expressed proteins. By bioinformatics, the major enriched pathways and the significance of each protein with its meaningful relationships were identified. The key hub genes were allied for prognostic biomarkers of malignant, metastatic, and invasive forms of cancer with poor prognosis. Overall, the high‐throughput MS technique is the most powerful tool to achieve medical analysis at high sensitivity and accuracy and in a very straightforward and timely manner. Hence, its medical implementation in the hospital management system is imperative to counteract the caveats of traditional diagnostic methods and improve the quality of healthcare performance and therapeutic targets.

Brain tumors, as one of the most important causes of death, represent the 17th most common cancer worldwide and account for 1%–2% of all tumors. Because of their increased incidence and death rates in many developed countries, brain tumors should be accurately diagnosed and monitored (Mohammed et al.2019).

Meningiomas (MNGs), derived from arachnoid cells, are the most common intracranial tumor. They are classified into three different grades, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). The recurrence rate and the risk of malignant transformation depend on the histopathological type. Grade I is the most common type of MNG and is considered benign, whereas Grade III is the most aggressive form and is considered malignant, associated with a higher risk of recurrence and shorter survival times (Torp et al.2022).

Gliomas are characterized by diffuse infiltration into the surrounding brain parenchyma. They are the most common brain astrocytomas, constituting about 40% of all the primary intracranial tumors. They exhibit various genetic alterations along with phenotypic diversity, contributing to numerous dysregulated pathways. Glioblastoma multiforme, previously categorized under Grade IV gliomas, is the most aggressive, infiltrative, and highly vascularized malignant astrocytoma with very poor prognosis that cannot be completely eliminated by surgery (Joo et al.2013; Niclou et al.2010). It occurs mainly in adults with very low survival rates after diagnosis (6 months to 2 years) even if an aggressive treatment involving a combination of surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy is given (Bhatia et al.2012; Friedman et al.2000). Moreover, these aggressive tumors express local metastases, with relapse and resistance against a wide range of chemotherapeutic agents (Stupp et al.2007; Uribe et al.2017).

Based on the 5th edition of the WHO new classification (2021) of brain tumors and the isolation of isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) mutant forms, glioblastomas (GBMs) are now considered biologically and molecularly distinct entities, namely, GBM IDH‐wildtype (IDH‐wt), which account for more than 90% of all gliomas with a poor prognosis, and Grade IV astrocytomas IDH‐mutant (IDH‐mut) (Louis et al.2021). Although IDH‐mutated gliomas generally exhibit a better disease outcome with prolonged median survival (IDH‐wt: 15 months vs. IDH‐mut: 31 months), tumor recurrence is inevitable over time despite gross total resection and adjuvant chemoradiotherapy (Han and Batchelor2017; Han et al.2020).

Thus, early diagnosis of cancers is still a major challenge worldwide. The prompt diagnosis and understanding of the severity of tumors would not only reduce their associated morbidity and mortality but also help achieve a better future management of the patient (Buerki et al.2018; Lim et al.2013).

Brain tumors are usually diagnosed based on the examination of hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stained sections of formalin‐fixed and paraffin‐embedded biopsy specimens. However, many brain tumors contain so few mitoses that an accurate mitotic index is impossible in biopsy specimens. This dilemma is improved by immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining, which provides major insights into potential tumor growth as well as tumor classification through the identification of stemness gene markers (Madabhushi et al.2015). However, this technique remains a very time‐consuming, laborious, and cost‐effective process, as it requires the use of primary and secondary antibodies as well as plenty of materials and complex workflows to allow only the detection of a limited number of antigens simultaneously. In addition, a large amount of human workforce is needed (Mebratie and Dagnaw2024). Similarly, other traditional methods based on antibodies, namely, ELISA (enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay), Western Blotting, and immunofluorescence, still display limitations and pitfalls, such as the insufficient blocking of immobilized antigens leading to the risk of false positive/negative results, antibody instability, cross‐reactivity, epitope occlusion, lack of accuracy, expensive culture media, and the lack of specific antibodies or their exorbitant costs (Ghosh et al.2014; Jiang et al.2021; Sakamoto et al.2017; Thomas et al.2019).

Therefore, the improvement of diagnostic performance is required as it plays a key role in achieving accurate results by reducing subjectivity, increasing standardized diagnosis, as well as predicting prognosis and planning better individual treatment with minimal side effects.

To this end, the application of new technologies in medical analyses is warranted in order to overcome the caveats associated with traditional methods, ameliorate the quality of healthcare performance in the hospital management system (HMS) and resolve current health problems alleged by the majority of patients (e.g., the lack of chemical reagents, the lack of specific tumor antibodies, human errors, overseeing employees, funds and resources, long‐time processing in workflow analysis, or for the acquisition of specific reagents, or in lending rapid and reliable results) (Hristova and Svinarov2022; Sinha2024; Unger and Kather2024).

Currently, mass spectrometry (MS) has steadily emerged to be implemented in routine analyses from various disciplines, including the development of reference methods, therapeutic drug monitoring, toxicology, endocrinology, pediatrics, immunology, and microbiology to identify and quantify biomolecules in a variety of biological specimens (Baghel et al.2017; Y. Chen, Chen, et al.2022; Fung et al.2019; Maekawa and Mano2022; Zhang and Garg2023). It is the most powerful technique that has offered significant advantages over traditional methods, thanks to its high‐throughput screening, qualitative and quantitative analysis at high sensitivity, accuracy, and robustness, making it an advantageous tool in a wide range of biological and clinical applications. More interestingly, it has been recently involved in omics studies, including specific genes (genomics), mRNAs (transcriptomics), proteins (proteomics) and metabolites (metabolomics) for screening, diagnosis, and prognosis, as well as in drug discovery and clinical trials through the assessment of toxicity and efficacy in diagnosed patients compared to healthy volunteers (Agulló et al.2024; Birhanu2023; Girolamo et al.2013; Lin and Garcia2012; Noberini et al.2021; Rochat2018; Zaikin and Borisov2021). Strikingly, it has enabled the discovery of cancer biomarker panels along with their quantitative measurement in an unbiased manner (Fan et al.2024; Son et al.2024).

In this respect, we have opted for the state of the art proteomics in our clinical investigation of human brain tumors as it has held great promise in cancer‐related scientific research, due to the recent advances in the high‐throughput MS technique with the powerful research algorithms that have facilitated the identification and characterization of proteins even expressed at low abundance in complex biological mixtures, along with their key encoding hub genes (Carrillo‐Rodriguez et al.2023; Cho2017; Kwon et al.2021; Wenk et al.2024). These genes are envisaged as obvious diagnostic biomarkers and pivotal predictors of pathology progression and prognosis, whose mapping and characterization constitute a critical field of study with great interest in both disease and drug discovery as they help gain two potential benefits: first, better understanding of the key molecular mechanisms implicated in pathogenesis, which is imperative for establishing standardized diagnosis, and second, optimization of treatment guidelines for the development of new therapeutic targets at the most basic level of gene expressions (Åkesson et al.2023; Ciocan‐Cartita et al.2019; Teunissen et al.2011).

Overall, our investigation as a multiomic study was endeavored to make the differential diagnosis of human brain tumors, namely, Grade IV astrocytomas and MNGs, as the most commonly occurring types in our hospital medium, by proteome‐wide profiling and mapping using a shotgun proteomic–based approach with high‐resolution tandem MS.

Our aim is to highlight the advantages and the usefulness of this technique in clinical analyses compared to the traditional method based on IHC staining through the assessment of pivotal diagnostic biomarkers of malignant, metastatic, and invasive forms of cancer with poor prognosis. The framework adaptive strategy for our proteomics analysis of human brain tumors is illustrated in Figure1.

A flowchart depicting the process of a typical shotgun proteomic–based approach for the analysis of human brain tumors.

Our clinical study was conducted on patients operated on for brain tumors in the neurosurgery department of the Habib Bourguiba Hospital medium during the period from January 1 to May 30, 2024. We have mainly focused on gliomas and MNGs because both were the most frequent types of brain tumors. Each patient was exposed to image examinations, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), presurgery and postsurgery for the identification and evaluation of tumor growth and recurrence.

For our analysis, human specimens were collected immediately after the surgical resection of brain tumors. The samples of the control group consisted of some collected specimens taken from brain tissues derived from temporal lobe epilepsy surgeries, which are generally described as experimental controls in research studies (Polisetty et al.2012).

All the used chemicals and compounds were pure (> 95%) for HPLC analysis.

DL‐dithiothreitol (DTT) (3483‐12‐3), iodoacetamide (IAA) (144‐48‐9), formic acid (FA) (64‐18‐6), ammonium bicarbonate (1066‐33‐7), acetonitrile (ACN) (75–05‐8), and methanol (67‐56‐1) were supplied by Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Trypsin (V5280) derived from porcine pancreas was supplied by Promega (Madison, WI, USA). Ultrapure water was prepared by the Millipore purification system (Billerica, MA, USA).

Primary cell identity was confirmed prior to use by IHC staining for neuronal cell markers namely, CD133 (BD Biosciences Cat# 747569, RRID: AB_2744141), CD44 (BD Biosciences Cat# 558739, RRID: AB_397098), NES (Nestin) (IMGENEX Cat# IMG‐6492A, RRID: AB_2033866), VIM (Vimentin) (Abcam Cat# 4211–1, RRID: AB_765097) SOX2 (SRY‐Box Transcription Factor 2) (BD Biosciences Cat# 560291, RRID: AB_1645334), βIII‐tubulin (Promega Cat# G7121, RRID: AB_430874), GFAP (Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein) (Aeonian Biotech Cat# AE00178, RRID: AB_2750965), and IDH1 (Proteintech Cat# 12332–1‐AP, RRID: AB_2123159) genes for glioma brain tumors.

The EMA (epithelial membrane antigen) (Bio‐Rad Cat# MCA1908, RRID: AB_322557) and VIM were used as stemness markers of MNG diagnosis. GATA3 (Trans‐acting T‐cell‐specific transcription factor) (BD Biosciences Cat# 563349, RRID: AB_2738152) and keratin (RayBiotech Cat# DS‐MB‐01725, RRID:AB_854575) were adapted for the diagnosis of brain metastases from carcinoma.

Human brain tumor tissues were harvested and processed into histological blocks that, after standard fixation and embedding procedures, were sectioned to produce slides for IHC staining, which the detailed protocol is described in theSupporting Information.

Brain tumor tissues were harvested, pooled in a centrifuge tube, washed with cold PBS at 4°C, centrifuged at 2500 rpm for 10 min, and then collected and lyophilized by a freeze dryer (CHRIST). The following steps of cell lysis, protein extraction, reduction, alkylation, and then trypsin digestion were processed in the same way as the detailed protocol described in our previously published studies (Louati et al.2023,2024). The resulted extracted peptides were lyophilized to near dryness, then resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1% FA for analysis by MS technique.

Samples were analyzed on the same day by a high‐resolution tandem MS consisting of an Ultimate 3000 nano‐ultra‐high performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA), electrospray ionization (ESI) nanospray source, a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), and a higher energy collision‐induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation mode. The nanocolumn associated a trapping column (PepMap C18, 100 Å, 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm) and an analytical column (PepMap C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm). The loaded sample volume was 1 μg, and the total flow rate was 250 nL/min. The mobile phase was a combination of solvent A (0.1% FA in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% acetonitrile) by linear gradient: from 2% to 8% buffer B in 3 min, from 8% to 20% buffer B in 56 min, from 20% to 40% buffer B in 37 min, and then from 40% to 90% buffer B in 4 min. The full scan was performed between 300 and 1650 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z. The automatic gain control target for the full scan was set to 3e6.

The MS/MS scan was operated in Top 20 mode using the following settings: resolution 15,000 at 200 m/z; automatic gain control target 1e5; maximum injection time 19 ms; normalized collision energy at 28%; isolation window of 1.4 Th; charge state exclusion: unassigned, 1, > 6; dynamic exclusion 30 s.

Raw MS files were analyzed and searched against the human protein database based on the species of the samples using the MaxQuant software (V.1.6.1.14, RRID: SCR_014485). The setting parameters were as follows: The protein modifications were carbamidomethylation (C) (fixed) and methionine oxidation (variable); the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with two maximum missed cleavages allowed; the precursor ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and the MS/MS fragment ion tolerance was 0.6 Da. Proteins were identified with a high confidence interval at 95%, containing at least one identified peptide. Only proteins identified three times were considered. Scaffold (Version 4.10.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate the MS/MS‐based peptide and protein identification.

We scrutinized protein/gene names by the use of Human Protein Atlas, which is a freely available interactive resource offering the possibility to explore the proteomes in tissues and organs (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/). Annotations of the identified proteins to their ontology terms were carried out based on their biological processes (BPs), molecular functions (MFs), and protein classes (PCs).

The Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was performed by PANTHER database (Version 19.0,2025), which provides comprehensive information about the evolution of protein‐coding gene families (online available:http://www.pantherdb.org). Then, for a better understanding of the molecular relationships between each protein/gene function from their various biological processes, a pathway enrichment analysis of regulated proteins at proteomic levels was performed by METASCAPE (2019) and PANTHER databases (Y. Zhou, Yu, et al.2019; online available:https://metascape.org/gp/index.html#/main/step1). Further, to ensure consistency between the GO and pathways enrichment, a ClueGO (Version 2.5.10) and CluePedia (Version 2.5.10) of Cytoscape plugin module (Software 3.10.3) analysis integrating both GO terms and pathways annotation was performed to create interrelational networks (Bindea et al.2009; Bindea et al.2013; online available:https://string‐db.org).

In addition, hub genes were predicted by the protein–protein interaction (PPI) network analysis using the STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins) database (Version 12.0,2023) (online available:https://string‐db.org) in order to reveal their relevance as well as their meaningful relationship and regulation. The minimum combined score of the hub gene network was set to 0.4 by default, but only interactions with a confidence score larger than 0.9 were selected.

Following our study's population, we found that the incidence of gliomas was higher in men than in women, occurring across all age groups, especially between 45 and 65 years old. IDH1 was the most detected isoform. High‐grade gliomas, including Grade IV astrocytomas and GBMs, were the most abundant and deadly forms in our patients.

MNGs, as the most prevalent intracranial type of tumor, occurred at the highest female‐to‐male ratio. Their incidence increased along with age, which was especially observed in middle‐aged women between 40 and 70 years old, with a median age of 65 years. Grade I represented the most frequent type in our study's population. The high‐grade form (MNG‐Grade III) was only observed in people around 60 years old. Demographics and clinical characteristics of some of our selected participants are summarized in Table1.

Demographics and characteristics of some selected patients for our case study on human brain tumors.

Abbreviations: F: female; IDH: isocitrate dehydrogenase; M: male; MNG: meningioma.

Nine freshly resected human specimens were collected from patients diagnosed with MNGs Grades I, II, and III, and six samples were collected from patients diagnosed with Grade IV astrocytomes.

(A) Histopathological diagnosis of high‐grade gliomas (WHO Grade IV astrocytomas): high cellularity diffuse proliferation with hyperplastic endothelial cells (shown on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) × 200). (B) Immunoreactivity of tumour cells with the isoform IDH‐1, confirming the diagnosis of IDH‐mutant WHO Grade IV astrocytomas (IHS × 200). HE:hematoxylinand eosin; IHS: immunohistochemical staining.

Histological diagnosis and grading of meningiomas (MNGs) following the WHO classification, shown on H&E stains by formalin fixation–paraffin embedding technique: MNG Grade I: The tumor proliferation is regular with low density of meningothelial whorls (magnification × 50 μm and × 100 μm). MNG Grade II: meningiomal infiltration of adjacent brain tissue by tumor proliferation, giving the appearance of irregular protrusion (tongue‐like) (magnification × 200 μm and × 400 μm). MNG Grade III: Tumor cells are large and round with atypical proliferation, sometimes pleomorphic with prominent eosinophilic nucleolus (magnification × 400 μm).

Grade I (benign) MNGs were recognized by meningothelial whorls with low‐density proliferation and lack of anaplastic features, whereas Grade II (atypical) MNGs were characterized by brain infiltration, increased cellularity, sheet‐ or tongue‐like growth, and necrosis.

Grade III (anaplastic/malignant) MNGs resembled the histological characteristics of carcinomas, melanomas, or high‐grade sarcomas, by atypical proliferation, increased mitoses, and pleomorphic and prominent eosinophilic nucleoli.

Furthermore, in order to identify tumor cell markers, the IHC staining confirmed the isoform IDH1 mutation for the WHO Grade IV astrocytomas (Figure2B) and the positivity for EMA and VIM for atypical MNGs (Figure4A,B). Glioma tumor cells also showed positive expression of VIM, Nestin, CD44, GFAP, and βIII‐tubulin but negative expression of CD133+ and SOX2 genes, confirmed later by proteomics analysis. In addition, MNG tumor cells showed negative expression of keratin and GATA3 (Figure5A–C).

Immunohistochemical staining for atypical MNG tissues: Representative microphotographs showing positive immunoreactivity with epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) (A: magnification × 200 μm) and vimentin (B: magnification × 200 μm) compatible with human MNGs.

Immunohistochemical staining for meningioma metastasis of carcinoma: Positivity of tumor cells with Keratin (A, B: magnification × 100 μm) and GATA3 (trans‐acting T‐cell‐specific transcription factor) (C: magnification × 100 μm).

Our proteomic analysis identified a total of 2906 differently expressed proteins in MNG and a sum of 836 differently expressed proteins in Grade IV‐astrocytoma brain tumors, as shown in the Venn diagrams illustrating their relative encoding genes (FigureS1). Based on bioinformatics in the GO enrichment analysis, all the differentially expressed proteins were mapped to their enriched GO terms and categorized into three different classes (BP, MF, and PC). For our case study dealing with two types of brain tumors, in terms of MF, the majority of enriched GO terms were involved in binding, catalytic, and structural molecular activity. As for BP, genes were relevant to cellular and metabolic processes as well as biological regulation. Concerning the class of proteins, in glioma brain tumors, most proteins were related to metabolite interconversion enzymes and binding activities. In MNGs, the majority of proteins were involved in DNA metabolism, cytoskeletal activities, and metabolite interconversion enzymes and protein binding activity.

By the METASCAPE pathway enrichment analysis of the differentially expressed proteins, the biological significance of enriched pathways for the annotated genes involved in our case studies of brain tumors was identified. In Grade IV astrocytomas, proteins were relevant to the immune response, hemostasis, signaling by Rho GTPase, angiogenesis, and neurogenesis (illustrated in FigureS2), whereas in MNGs, genes were mainly involved in the immunity response, metabolic process, neurogenesis, angiogenesis, and signaling by the Rho GTPases, micro‐GTPases, and RHOBTB3 (illustrated in FigureS3).

The resultant PPI network analysis conducted by the STRING database showed several nodes as well as the mapping of all the subsets of proteins exhibiting physical interactions and expressed at a high confidence score of 0.9, along with their degree of connectivity.

In the Grade IV astrocytomas, there were 714 nodes as illustrated in Figure6A,B, in which the key hub genes associated in modules were encoding for mitochondrial metabolic enzymes, ATP‐binding cassette subfamily (ABC) and solute carrier (SLC) transporters, Ca2+‐binding proteins (ANXA, S100A, CAMK2), protein transport and transmembrane trafficking (RAB GTPases), chaperone/co‐chaperone proteins (HSP), protein biosynthesis (EIF/EEF), mitochondrial ribosomal protein (RPL/RPS), angiogenic proteins (MMP), histone superfamily (HIST), SERPIN superfamily, DNA‐binding proteins, mRNA processing–mRNA splicing proteins (snRPs and hnRNPs), RNA‐binding, cytokinesis proteins (TUBB, actin‐capping/actin‐binding proteins, and SEPTIN family), cell adhesion molecules (integrins subfamily, LAMB1, COL, and CD44), signal transducer and adaptor proteins (GNB, GNG, and YWHA), downstream effectors of signaling pathways involved in tumorigenesis (DPYSL, MAPKs, LAMTOR, and CAV1), coagulation factors, family of Na+/K+‐ATPase transporting, and some adaptive immunity‐response proteins (HLA‐A, HLA‐B, and HLA‐DR).

(A) PPI (protein–protein interaction) networks for Grade IV astrocytoma tumors established by the STRING database, (B) PPI networks for Grade IV astrocytoma tumors visualized by Cytoscape.

Table2resumes in detail these key identified hub genes along with their main molecular functions, involved in gliomagenesis.

The key identified hub genes involved in the tumorigenesis of gliomas.

In MNG brain tumors, there were 959 nodes as shown in Figure7A,B. The key hub genes were encoding drug transporters, mainly, ATP‐binding cassette subfamily (ABC) and SLC transporters, mitochondrial metabolic enzymes, Ca2+‐binding proteins (ANXA, S100A, and CAMK2), protein transport and transmembrane trafficking (RAB GTPases, SNX, TMED, VPS), chaperone/co‐chaperone proteins (HSP and FKBP), protein biosynthesis (EIF/EEF), mitochondrial ribosomal protein (RPL/RPS), histone superfamily (HIST), SERPIN superfamily, DNA‐binding proteins (HMGA and HMGB), mRNA processing–mRNA splicing proteins (snRPs and hnRNPs), RNA‐binding proteins (LSM, SRP, SRSF, and PABPs), cytokinesis proteins (TUBB, Rho family of Ras small GTPases, SEPTIN family, and actin‐capping/actin‐binding proteins), cell adhesion molecules (integrins subfamily, LAM, PGM, and CD44), signal transducer and adaptor proteins (GNA, GNB, GNAS, and YWHA), downstream effectors of signaling pathways involved in tumorigenesis (MAPK, LAMTOR, and CTNNB), family of Na+/K+‐ATPase transporting (ATP), and adaptive immunity–response proteins (HLA‐A and HLA‐B).

(A) PPI networks for MNGs established by the STRING database. (B) PPI networks for MNGs visualized by Cytoscape.

Table3resumes in detail these key identified genes along with their main molecular functions, involved in MNG tumorigenesis.

The key identified hub genes involved in the tumorigenesis of meningiomas.

Afterward, to ensure consistency between GO and enriched pathways, the interrelational analysis performed using the ClueGO and CluePedia module of Cytoscape with the predicted PPI networks revealed for the Grade IV astrocytoma tumors the overexpression of caveolin‐mediated endocytosis, AMP metabolic process, peptidase regulation process, structural constituent of cytoskeleton, homeostasis, collagen fibril organization, actin filament assembly, pyrimidine metabolic process, cell matrix adhesion, and actin nucleation (as demonstrated in Figure8). For MNGs, genes were found relevant to Bergman glial cell differentiation, regulation of telomere maintenance, homeostasis (regulation of granulocytes chemotaxis), cell–cell adhesion mediated by integrins and cadherin, positive regulation of metabolic process, regulation of Type 2 immune response, vesicle transport along actin filament, protein localization to plasma membrane, pseudopodium organization, biocellular tight junction assembly, and negative regulation of oxidative stress–induced cell death (as illustrated in Figure9A,B).

Interrelational pathway enrichment analysis visualized by the ClueGO and CluePedia Cytoscape plug‐in module for the differentially expressed proteins in Grade IV astrocytoma tumors.

(A, B) Interrelational pathway enrichment analysis visualized by the ClueGO and CluePedia Cytoscape plug‐in module by using different layouts for the differentially expressed proteins in MNGs.

Gliomas and MNGs were the most frequent types of brain tumors in our neurosurgery department. For the case of gliomas, based on our IHC analysis, we have selected the IDH mutations because they are involved in the earliest genetic events in gliomas' development and in order to conduct uniformity analysis by avoiding any ambiguities and misleading results with IDH wild‐type (GBMs). For MNGs, we have untangled our analysis on all the histopathological grades classified following the WHO into three classes: Grade I (benign), Grade II (atypical), and Grade III (malignant and the most aggressive form associated with the highest risk of recurrence and shortest survival times) because we were unable to conduct a homogenate study by selecting a specific grade due to the fact that the incidence of MNGs increases with age, being most common in females aged 65 years old and relatively uncommon in children, whereas our study's population differentiated by age and sex. In addition, the brain tissue and memory could be degenerated with advancing age.

From this clinical study, our investigation, as a multiomic study, was endeavored to make the differential diagnosis of human brain tumors, namely, Grade IV astrocytomas and MNGs by proteome‐wide profiling and mapping using a shotgun proteomic–based approach with high‐resolution tandem MS.

Our aim is to highlight the advantages and the usefulness of this technique in clinical analyses when compared to the traditional method based on IHC staining through the assessment of pivotal diagnostic biomarkers of malignant, metastatic, and invasive forms of cancer with poor prognosis.

By applying the IHC staining as the most widely used method for histopathological diagnosis and following the availability of some antibodies in our laboratory, we have focused on glioma brain tumors regarding the expressions of CD133, CD44, Nestin, VIM, and SOX2 as indicative of stemness cell markers (Ehteram et al.2022; Favaro et al.2014; Neradil and Veselska2015; Xiao et al.2018), IDH1 as a diagnostic marker of gliomas (Han et al.2020), GFAP as an astrocytic marker (Brehar et al.2014) and βIII‐tubulin as a representative of neuronal differentiated cells (Mariani et al.2015). For MNG diagnosis, we have scrutinized the expression of EMA and VIM as the most widely used markers.

Based on the literature review, CD133 is one of the most immunohistochemical markers observed in stem cells that are related to cell proliferation and the differentiation of various cancer types (Ehteram et al.2022; Xiao et al.2018). Nestin (NES), a Type VI intermediate filament, is an important cancer stem cell marker for CNS tumor growth, migration, and invasion (Alamir et al.2018), detected at higher levels in grades II and III MNGs, compared to Grade I (Galani et al.2015). The transcription factor SOX2 has been observed in several central nervous system cancer stem cells (Alamir et al.2018; Favaro et al.2014).

VIM is highly associated with MNGs. It is a class III intermediate protein, expressed in mesenchymal cells and involved in neurogenesis and cytoskeleton structure (Alamir et al.2018; Bouamrani et al.2010). GFAP is a Class III intermediate filament and a cell‐specific marker that distinguishes astrocytes from other glial cells during the development of the CNS (Mariani et al.2015). βIII‐tubulin is a neuron‐specific microtubule required for neuronal axon guidance, maintenance, and development (Xiao et al.2018).

EMA is one of the most widely used immunohistochemical markers to facilitate histological detection and assist in determining brain‐invasive growth of MNGs (Backer‐Grøndahl et al.2014; Boulagnon‐Rombi et al.2017). GATA3 is a transcription factor involved in epithelial cell differentiation. It is one of the most commonly mutated genes in breast cancer. It is used as an immunostaining diagnostic marker for breast and urothelial cancers to support the origin of MNG starting from the primary breast carcinoma (Klotz et al.2018; Reiswich et al.2023).

For patients without a clinical history ofcarcinoma, malignant MNGs can morphologically simulate metastatic carcinoma, which necessitates an IHC study ofcytokeratins to achieve a correct diagnosis. Keratins represent the intermediate filament‐forming proteins of epithelial cells that are widely used as diagnostic markers for tumor invasion and metastasis because epithelial malignancies largely maintain the specific keratin patterns associated with their respective cells of origin (Karantza2010). However, this type of immunohistochemical marker was not reliable to separate a malignant MNG from metastatic carcinoma (Liu et al.2004).

Thus, our results based on IHC analysis have only confirmed the presence of some basic neural tumor stemness markers for our case study of brain tumors, for example, positivity expression to VIM, Nestin, CD44, IDH1, but lack of CD133+, GFAP, βIII‐tubulin, and SOX2 genes for the diagnosis of glioma brain tumor. For human MNGs, we detected only positivity to EMA and VIM as the most widely used markers. The negativity expression to keratin and GATA3 has confirmed the differential diagnosis of MNGs from brain metastasis of carcinoma.

Despite its low cost, the IHC staining technique still shows pitfalls and caveats, namely, a very time‐consuming process, a laborious and unreliable procedure as it requires the use of primary and secondary antibodies as well as multiple other materials. In addition, a larger human workforce is needed for complex workflows. Similarly, other traditional methods based on antibodies, namely, the ELISA and gel‐electrophoresis techniques, still exhibit limitations, such as insufficient blocking of immobilized antigens leading to the risk of false positive/negative results, antibody instability, cross‐reactivity, epitope occlusion, lack of accuracy, expensive culture media, and the lack of specific antibodies or their exorbitant costs (Ghosh et al.2014; Jiang et al.2021; Sakamoto et al.2017; Thomas et al.2019). Moreover, the biological mechanisms underlying brain‐invasive growth are still incompletely understood. Therefore, there is an urgent need for more prognostic biomarkers that can identify aggressive and recurrent forms of cancer.

The proteomics analysis could be achieved by using one of these approaches, either the “Top‐Down” or the “Middle‐Down” or the “Bottom‐Up” approach. The “Top‐Down” approach involves the analysis of the intact protein. However, it has faced challenges, namely, lower analytical throughput, difficulties in protein identification, and posttranslational modifications (PTMs) localization because many proteins involved in human diseases share similar masses, which makes this approach ineffective for distinct clinical subtyping (Melby et al.2021; Top‐Down Proteomics,2024). The middle‐down approach, although offering advantages like improved sequence coverage and better handling of PTMs, still exhibits limitations, including challenges in achieving consistent reproducibility and robustness when compared to the “Bottom‐Up” approach (Sidoli and Garcia2017). The latter is the most efficient technique for analyzing complex protein mixtures, allowing their comprehensive identification and quantification in an unbiased manner. It relies on the proteolytic digestion of proteins into peptide fragments for their identification (Zhang et al.2013).

The “shotgun proteomics” refers to the use of the “Bottom‐Up” approach in combination with the HPLC–MS technique. It remains the most popular approach that could be applied to consistently identify the relative abundance of proteins as well as their qualitative and quantitative analysis, including co‐occurring PTMs taken from complex matrices (Cassidy et al.2021). Hence, by adopting this strategy in our analyses, the differentially expressed proteins have been identified by proteome‐wide profiling and mapping after extraction from human brain tumor tissues and enzymatic digestion by trypsin. The yielded peptides were then analyzed by a nanoflow‐UHPLC coupled with high‐resolution tandem MS and identified using a spectra MS/MS comparison with theoretical spectra generated from the in silico digested protein databases, using the MaxQuant software that matches the experimental spectra to the most likely theoretical matching peptides. Hence, the corresponding proteins from which these peptides originated have been identified.

Afterward, using the bioinformatics analysis, we deciphered the relative abundance of the differently expressed proteins, their relevance as well as their meaningful relationship, degree of connectivity, and regulation.

Following our previously published study on gliomas (Louati et al.2024), the initiation and progression of this type of brain tumor arise from various molecular abnormalities, including mutations in oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, as well as disruptions in signaling pathways and key regulatory networks.

These genetic and epigenetic alterations consequently lead to uncontrolled cell growth and division, as a main characteristic of brain tumors. In this respect, mitochondrial metabolism, drug transporters, calcium influx, protein transport and trafficking, protein folding and biosynthesis, angiogenesis, neurogenesis, cytokinesis, cell adhesion, signal transduction, hemostasis, electron transport, and adaptive immunity response are the major identified aberrant processes underpinning gliomagenesis.

By way of elucidation, gliomas undergo metabolic reprogramming to support their rapid growth and proliferation (Strickland and Stroll2017). Several mitochondrial metabolic enzymes involved in the development and progression of tumors were revealed at altered in expression in our previous study on gliomas (Louati et al.2024). These alterations include shifts in energy metabolism, like the Warburg effect, by which cells favor glycolysis over oxidative phosphorylation. Additionally, mutations in enzymes like IDH are frequent in several glioma subtypes (e.g., Grade IV astrocytomas) to generate 2‐hydroxyglutarate (2HG) via α‐ketoglutarate (α‐KG) inhibition. This overproduction of 2HG consequently inhibits histone and DNA demethylases, resulting in a hypermethylation phenotype, blockage of cellular differentiation, and alterations in epigenetic status. Hence, genome transcription and DNA are the two main ways that occur to a greater extent in the IDH‐mutated gliomas (Han et al.2020).

Drug transporters, particularly the ABC and SLC families, play a crucial role in glioma drug resistance and treatment efficacy (Phon et al.2025).

Calcium‐binding proteins, specifically, Annexins (ANXA), S100A family, and calcium/calmodulin‐dependent protein kinase II (CaMKII), play fundamental roles in cancer progression by mediating cell proliferation, migration, invasion, and treatment resistance (He and Li2021; H. Lee et al.2021; H. Wang, Mao, et al.2022) as we have previously explained in our published study on gliomas (Louati et al.2024). ANXA2 is often overexpressed in gliomas, correlated with poorer prognosis (X. Li et al.2021; Ma et al.2021).

Rab GTPases are a family of small GTPases involved in intracellular vesicle trafficking, whose dysregulation is closely related to the development and progression of tumors (Jin et al.2021; Xu et al.2024).

Protein folding is a crucial process for tumor growth and survival. The heat shock proteins (HSPs) with other molecular chaperones that assist in protein folding are frequently found dysregulated in gliomas (Xu et al.2025).

Dysregulation of eukaryotic translation and elongation initiation factors (EIF/EEF) leads to protein synthesis reprogramming, which promotestumor initiation, progression, chemoresistance, and poor prognosis (Chu et al.2016). EEF‐2 kinase is frequently found at upregulation in several types of malignancies, including gliomas (Zhang et al.2011).

Mitochondrial ribosomal proteins (MRPS) involved in protein synthesis within the mitochondrion have been implicated in tumor cell proliferation, migration, and invasion through modulating oxidative stress levels, metabolic reprogramming, disrupting cell cycle regulation, inhibiting apoptosis, promoting mitophagy, and remodeling the tumor microenvironment. MRPS were found at altered expression patterns in many cancers, adapted as prognostic biomarkers for predicting patient survival and response to treatment (Hao et al.2018; Z. Li et al.2025; Wu et al.2025; Zhu et al.2025).

Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) are involved in breaking down the extracellular matrix to facilitate tumor cell invasion, angiogenesis (formation of new blood vessels), and overall tumor growth. The enhanced expressions of MMP‐2 and MMP‐9, as detected in our case study, were associated with poor prognosis in glioma patients (W. Zhou, Zhou, et al.2019).

Epigenetic alterations are primordial in glioma genesis. Among epigenetic marks, histones (HIST) are involved in most biological processes, and their misregulation may perturb chromatin contacts and alter DNA‐binding properties, leading to aberrant gene expression that is closely related to many human diseases, especially in cancerogenesis (Kim2014; J. Lee et al.2017). Lamins (LMNA and LMNB) provide a framework for the nuclear envelope and play an important role in nuclear assembly, chromatin organization, and telomere dynamics (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/). Hence, mutations in lamins are associated with gliomagenesis by affecting nuclear shape, cell proliferation, and invasion (Pei et al.2021). DNA‐binding proteins assist in regulating gene expression, DNA repair, and other cellular processes. Dysregulation or mutation of these proteins can disrupt normal cellular functions and lead to aberrant gene expression, consequently resulting in tumor initiation, progression, and resistance to treatment (Papavassiliou and Papavassiliou2021).

SERPIN genes, which encode serine protease inhibitors, may promote tumor growth, although described for opposing roles in cancer (Valiente et al.2014). For example, the SERPINA1 identified in our case study was reported to be expressed abundantly in gliomas, predicting unfavorable prognosis (Liu et al.2022).

Spliceosome is frequently altered in tumors associated with changes in the expression and activity of heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs) and small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs). These latter mediate cancer development and progression by aberrant splicing and other RNA processing events, resulting in the production of altered proteins with oncogenic properties (Mrid et al.2025). Similarly, dysregulation of RNA‐binding proteins can lead to altered RNA splicing, stability, and translation, contributing to tumor formation and aggressiveness (Z. Wang et al.2020).

Several proteins regulating cytokinesis have been linked to glioma pathogenesis (Zottel et al.2021). Among which, actin (ACT) is a key structural protein that makes up the cytoskeleton of cells and plays crucial roles such as division, migration, and vesicle trafficking (Suresh and Diaz2021). Cancer cell movement is possible because of the development of invasive structures like invadopodia, lamellipodia, and filopodia, which are dependent on the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton. In many tumor cells, the actin and actin‐associated proteins may affect the progression of cancer by regulating gene expression (Izdebska et al.2018). In addition, the aberrant expression of actin subunits can confer cells with greater proliferation ability, increased migratory capability, and chemoresistance by incorporation into the normal cellular F‐actin network (Suresh and Diaz2021). Cofilin‐1 (CFL1) protein assists in the control of actin dynamics in the nucleus, and it may promote the formation of invasive structures, such as filopodia, involved in tumor proliferation and migration. Elevated levels of CFL1 expression were associated with tumor progression and increased invasiveness in breast, urothelial, prostate, and gastric cancer (Izdebska et al.2018).

Tubulins (TUBB) are the major constituent of microtubules, and calpains (CAPN) are microtubule‐stabilizing proteins. Both proteins play a crucial role in cell support and cell movement (Breuss et al.2017). Notably, TUBB2B has been identified to interact with VIM, a protein involved in cell structure and movement, to facilitate epithelial–mesenchymal transition (EMT) and promote glioma cell invasion and migration (J. Li et al.2024). Additionally, other beta‐tubulin isotypes like TUBA1B and TUBA1A have also been implicated in glioma cell proliferation, migration, and invasion (Sun et al.2025).

The Rho GTPases are key regulators of cell migration and survival through effects on actin cytoskeleton rearrangement during the EMT, in which epithelial cells lose their polarity and junctions and gain migratory potential and invasiveness (Izdebska et al.2018). These proteins, along with their regulators, Rho GTPase‐activating proteins (ARHGAP), exhibit pivotal roles in glioma development and progression (Fortin Ensign et al.2013).

Filamin A (FLNA) is an actin‐binding protein involved in various cellular processes, including cell migration, adhesion, proliferation, and DNA repair. The overexpression of this protein was confirmed by samples from patients with numerous oncological diseases (Zawadka et al.2024). Profilin (PFN1) is also a critical actin‐binding protein that was found to be dysregulated in many cancers. Its high expression was associated with worse prognosis, which makes it possible to be used as a biomarker for tumor diagnosis and prognosis (Y. Wang et al.2021).

Myosins (MYH) are involved in cell migration, invasion, extracellular matrix production, and EMT in various cancers (L. Liu, Chen, et al.2023). It was reported that LAMC2 forms complexes with MYH9 and MYH10 in order to promote endoplasmic reticulum (ER)–mitochondria interaction to alleviate ER stress and allow cancer cells to adapt and proliferate under stressful conditions (Tong et al.2023). Septins (SEPTIN) are required for normal organization of the actin cytoskeleton and dynamics by interacting with actin and microtubules; consequently, they may be implicated in the growth and migration of glioma cells (Spiliotis and Nakos2021).

Integrins (ITG), known as “bridge” proteins, are highly expressed in glioma stem cells and play a vital role in self‐renewal, differentiation, high drug resistance, and chemo‐radiotherapy resistance through cell adhesion and signaling (Valdembri and Serini2021; M. Wang, Shen, et al.2022). Collagen (COL) plays a multifaceted role in tumor progression, acting as a scaffold for cell adhesion and migration. Elevated collagen levels are often observed in gliomas, correlating with tumor progression and affecting cell proliferation, migration, and invasion (Y. Wang, Ichinose, and Nakada2022).

Laminins (LAMB) are a family of extracellular matrix proteins that are involved in many biological activities such as cell adhesion, differentiation, migration, signaling, neurite outgrowth, and metastasis. They promote the invasive phenotype of cancer cells, whose effects are mediated via receptors that are categorized into two different groups, namely, integrin and nonintegrin receptors (Givant‐Horwitz et al.2004; Patarroyo et al.2002). The expression of laminin subunit beta 1 (LAMB1) was elevated in several cancers. Thus, it could serve as a potential biomarker and therapeutic target (H. Lee et al.2021). Laminin‐5, fibronectin, and Type IV collagen were reported as potential biomarkers of brain glioma malignancy (Oldak et al.2022).

The CD44 is a cell surface receptor involved in cell adhesion, migration, and interaction, which are crucial for cancer cell invasion. It is also linked to the survival and proliferation of glioma stem‐like cells, thought to be responsible for tumor recurrence (Inoue et al.2023).

High CD44 expression was associated with increased tumor aggressiveness, poor patient prognosis, and resistance to therapy (Mooney et al.2016).

G proteins (GNB and GNG) are involved as modulators or transducers in various transmembrane signaling systems, whose mutations can lead to aberrant activation of downstream signaling pathways, promoting cell growth, survival, and potentially contributing to glioma malignancy (Cherry and Stella2014).

Some adapter proteins, for example, YWHA, play a multifaceted role in glioma development and progression through influencing cell cycle control, apoptosis, and DNA damage response. For example, by interacting with key proteins involved in cell cycle progression, such as cyclin‐dependent kinases (CDKs) and their inhibitors (CKIs), YWHA proteins influence the transition of cells through different phases of the cell cycle to promote uncontrolled proliferation (X. Zhou, Chen, and Zhang2023).

The PI3K/Akt/mTOR and RAS/MAPK/ERK are the key signaling pathways involved in cell proliferation, survival, and differentiation that are closely related to tumorigenesis (Krishna et al.2020; Salles et al.2022; Stachyra and Grzybowska‐Szatkowska2025). LAMTOR protein is involved in regulating the mTORC1 pathway, which mediates tumor growth and progression (Gamallat et al.2024). Its activity was revealed to be enhanced by the activation of transmembrane protein TMEM9 (S. Zhang, Lee, et al.2022). Dihydropyrimidinase (DPYSL) proteins are involved in tumorigenesis by mediating signals for numerous intracellular/extracellular pathways and by stimulating a variety of cellular processes, including cell migration, neurite extension, axonal growth and guidance, dendritic spine development, and synaptic plasticity through their phosphorylation status (Pooladi et al.2014). Caveolin‐1 (CAV1), as a major structural protein of caveolae, activates the PI3K/Akt signaling pathway and promotes the proliferation and metastasis of brain tumors, particularly the malignant glial subtype, through enhanced EMT and angiogenesis (Moriconi et al.2021; Ocak et al.2019; Z. Wang et al.2024).

Tumor patients often show aberrant coagulation andfibrinolysisactivation due to the fact that tumor cells directly activate hemostasis by producing tissue factor as the principal activator of the blood coagulation process, promoting thrombin generation and facilitating fibrin deposition, hence creating a microenvironment in solid tumors that protects cancer cells from the immune system attack (Mandoj et al.2019). In particular, GBM is associated with a state ofhypercoagulabilityandvenous thromboembolismas a common complication of this cancer and its treatment (Navone et al.2018).

Proton pump ATPase subunits are frequently found upregulated in gliomas, especially in cancer stem cells, to sustain their viability and tumorigenicity by maintaining a suitable intracellular pH homeostasis that facilitates some processes like autophagy (S. Lu et al.2021). These ATPases have been allied with tumor aggressiveness and poor patient prognosis (Giambra et al.2024; L. Li et al.2017).

The UQCR (ubiquinol–cytochrome c reductase) gene family plays a role in gliomas, particularly in relation to mitochondrial function and cancer stem cell‐like properties. Notably, the UQCRB gene, which encodes a subunit of the mitochondrial respiratory chain complex III, has been identified as a potential prognostic marker and therapeutic target in gliomas (Jung et al.2017).

Finally, cancer cells evade attacks from the immune system through various mechanisms in order to fuel their growth and resistance. By way of illustration, human leucocyte (HLA) genes of the major histocompatibility complex play a crucial role by adjusting the tumor microenvironment and modulating the immune response to gliomas through restricting the presentation of tumor antigens to immune cells. Expression of HLA‐DR genes could be used as a biomarker for patient prognosis as well as to predict the tumor grade in gliomas (Diao et al.2015; Fan et al.2017).

The mitochondrial metabolic enzymes, including aldehyde dehydrogenase family (ALDH), acetyl‐CoA acyltransferases (ACAA), aconitases (ACO), apolipoprotein (APO), enolases (ENO), ER lipid raft (ERLIN), cytochrome c oxidase (COX), carboxypeptidase (CPX), glucose‐6‐phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PDH), glutathione synthetase/transferase (GSS/GST), deshydrogenases (IDH and HSD), peroxiredoxin peroxidase (PRDX), reductases (AKR, CBR, NDUF, and PYCR1), phosphofructokinases (PFKM), were expressed to the greatest extent in MNG tumors, which reflect the alteration in the metabolic process by cancer cells in order to satisfy their biosynthetic needs of high energy, fuel their growth, rapid proliferation and seed in secondary organs from the aberrant and reprogrammed metabolism such as changes in glycolysis, oxidative phosphorylation, lipid oxidation and synthesis, and amino acid metabolism. This altered expression of metabolic enzymes was chiefly explained in our previously published study on glioma brain tumors (Louati et al.2023).

The ABC and SLC transporters that facilitate the movement of diverse molecules across cellular membranes, including blood–brain barrier, were expressed to a great extent, as reported by studies in the literature showing that their expression and function are altered in brain pathologies and are involved in drug resistance (Baltira et al.2024; Jia et al.2020).

The Ca2+‐binding proteins (S100A) play a crucial role in a number of cellular processes such as cell cycle progression and differentiation, inflammation, migration and/or invasion,apoptosis, Ca2+homeostasis, and energy metabolism (Zhu et al.2024). As we have explained in our previously published study on gliomas, S100A4 interacts with tropomyosin (TPM4) implicated in the stability of filaments and other actin‐binding proteins, and with myosins (MYH9) involved in cytokinesis, cell motility, and cell shape maintenance, thus suggesting it affects the cytoskeleton of the tumor cells (Mazzucchelli2002; Zhu et al.2024). The complex formed between ANXA2/S100A10 and the nucleoprotein AHNAK was reported to regulate the actin cytoskeleton and cell membrane architecture (Benaud et al.2003). Changes in the calcium‐related proteins and their interactors imply cytoskeletal changes leading to tumor cell proliferation and metastasis in a calcium‐dependent manner.

Annexin (ANXA), a calcium‐dependent phospholipid‐binding protein, is endowed with a key role in the brain as it is expressed in many neurovascular unit cells, including brain endothelial cells, microglial cells, astrocytes, pericytes, and neurons, to provide neuroprotective and repair functions (Sheikh and Solito2018). As we have explained in our previously published study on IDH‐mutant high‐grade gliomas (Louati et al.2023), ANXA is highly expressed in gliomas, and it is positively correlated with malignancy, tumor progression, and metastasis as calcium‐regulatory proteins. Studies in the literature have involved the role of ANXA1 in the development and progression of malignant gliomas, especially GBM, by increasing the IL‐8 expression through NF‐κB (p65) activation, leading to immune escape in GBM (R. Chen, Xie, et al.2022). Other studies reported the role of ANXA2 in the pathogenesis of CNS tumors to promote tumor proliferation by upregulating several oncogenes, such as β‐catenin, cyclin D1, oncostatin M receptor, and c‐Myc (X. Li et al.2021). Hence, ANXA was assigned to act as an important biomarker of diagnosis and prognosis for a variety of cancer types. It was effectively selected as an FDA‐approved therapeutic target (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/).

The family of Ca2+/calmodulin‐dependent protein kinase II (CAMK2) has been well described for its critical role in cancer development, metastasis, resistance, recurrence, and sustentation of glioma cells' stemness markers, as we have previously demonstrated in our published study on IDH‐mutant high‐grade gliomas (Louati et al.2023). Recently, CAMK2A has been involved in the progression of MNGs, attributed to the mutation of the NF2 gene (Lei et al.2024).

The member RAS oncogene family (RAB‐GTPases) are key regulators, involved in axonogenesis through regulation of vesicular membrane trafficking toward the axonal plasma membrane (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/). They mainly regulate the trafficking of glucose transporters (GLUT) and the formation of lipid droplets during the metabolism of glucose and lipids by cancer cells; hence, the dysregulation of RABs has been unveiled in various diseases, including cancers (Jiang et al.2022; Jin et al.2021; Xu et al.2024).

The members of the transmembrane emp24 trafficking protein (TMED), also known as p24 proteins, are involved in protein vesicular trafficking and quality control in the ER and Golgi (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/). They were reported to be implicated in the pathogenic processes of many human diseases, including carcinomas, by acting as an oncogene (Yang et al.2022; L. Zhou, Li, et al.2023). The TMED4 and TMED9 genes were reported to be highly expressed in low‐grade glioma andGBM multiformetissues, negatively associated with theoverall survival (Ullah et al.2022). The sorting nexin family member proteins (SNX) are also involved in intracellular trafficking. The overexpression of sorting nexin 9 (SNX9) was reported in cell invasion and metastasis from human mammary cancers (Bendris et al.2016; Xu et al.2023). The SNX6 was shown to interact with Cullin3, an E3 ubiquitin ligase responsible for the programmed death ligand 1 (PD‐L1) ubiquitination and subsequent degradation, which is a critical process for the ability of cancer cells to evade the host immune system (Ghosh et al.2021). The SNX21 is used as a prognostic marker in GBM multiforme (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/).

The vacuolar protein sorting (VPS) genes play a crucial role in vesicle‐mediated protein trafficking from the Golgi stack through the trans‐Golgi network that are implicated in various cancers, including brain tumors (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/). For example, in GBM, VPS4B was reported to maintain the integrity of the nuclear envelope during stress (Wu et al.2024). It was also evidenced to be involved in cell division and mitosis through ensuring the maintenance of centrosome and spindle assembly (Liu et al.2013). The mutation of this gene has been evidenced in cancer development and progression (Huang et al.2023).

The chaperone proteins assist in the proper folding of specific target proteins by the use of an ATPase activity modulated by co‐chaperones. Among these proteins, the HSPs are implicated in a wide variety of cellular processes, including protection of the proteome from stress, folding and transport of newly synthesized polypeptides, activation of proteolysis of misfolded proteins, and the formation and dissociation of protein complexes. Hence, they play a pivotal role in the protein quality control system, ensuring the correct folding of proteins, the re‐folding of misfolded proteins, and controlling the targeting of proteins for subsequent degradation (He et al.2024). HSPs with antiapoptotic properties were detected at higher levels in many human cancers associated with poor survival and response to therapy (Alexiou et al.2014; Babi et al.2022). FKBP proteins, particularly FKBP51, acting as co‐chaperones for Hsp90, play a multifaceted role in MNGs by influencing steroid hormone receptor activity such as the progesterone receptor (PR), which is often expressed in MNGs. They also interact with signaling pathways involved in cell growth and survival like NF‐κB and PI3K/Akt, contributing to the abnormal phenotypes observed in MNGs (Agam et al.2024).

The EIFs and EEFs involved in mRNA translation and protein biosynthesis play a significant role in tumor development and progression. Specifically, the EIF4F complex composed of EIF4A, EIF4E, and EIF4G was shown to be a crucial component for sustaining the growth of MNG cells (Oblinger et al.2017; Xue et al.2021). Strikingly, high expression levels of EEF proteins are associated with malignant forms and high‐grade MNGs to support their rapid growth (Cristiano2021).

Ribosome modifications drive tumor progression and metastatic development by remodeling tumor cell translational events. In this context, the mitochondrial ribosomal protein large/small subunits (RPL/RPS) were overexpressed and implicated in the onset and progression of melanoma brain tumors (Bowley et al.2022). A recent study conducted by Ebright et al. (2020) has also revealed elevated expression of RPL15 in breast cancer circulating tumor cells, which had triggered massive metastatic spread and induced the translation of other ribosomal subunit proteins. The mitochondrial ribosomal protein‐L (MRPL) genes have been reported to be implicated in many cellular processes, such as cell proliferation, apoptosis, and cell cycle (H. Zhang, Li, et al.2022). Although their dysfunction has been allied to diseases, including cancer, neurodegenerative, and metabolic disorders (Bacon et al.2024), they are not commonly reported to be mutated in MNGs. Among the identified MRPL genes in our case study of MNGs, MRPL13 was recently shown to be overexpressed in breast cancer, which could be a novel biomarker for predicting diagnosis and therapy response (Ye and Zhang2021).

Many other differently expressed proteins in MNG brain tumors have been identified to be involved in neurogenesis, including DNA repair, DNA‐binding, transcription regulation, mRNA processing/mRNA splicing, and cell differentiation (as described in Table2), which are all crucial steps for tumor growth and invasion.

Among the key identified proteins, lamins (LMNA and LMNB) are intermediate filament proteins, which provide a framework for the nuclear envelope, bridging the nuclear envelope and chromatin, thereby playing a pivotal role in nuclear assembly, chromatin organization, nuclear membrane, and telomere dynamics (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/). The damage‐specific DNA‐binding proteins (DDB) are involved in DNA repair through the ubiquitination of histones to facilitate their removal from the nucleosome (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/). These proteins were reported to be involved in the occurrence and development of cancer by affecting nucleotide excision, repair, and cell apoptosis (Bao et al.2022).

The histone superfamily proteins are basic nuclear proteins that are responsible for the nucleosome structure. They play a predominant role in transcription regulation, DNA repair, DNA replication, and chromosomal stability (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/). It was reported that epigenetic modifications beyond DNA methylation, including the level of histones, are involved in the aggressiveness of MNGs (Katz et al.2018). Indeed, a recent study has revealed that the loss of trimethylation from lysine 27 on histone 3 (H3K27me3) has been implicated in worse prognoses for patients with MNGs (Cello et al.2023). In addition, altered DNA methylation, microRNA expression, histone, and chromatin modifications were frequently reported in MNGs (Murnyák et al.2015).

The SERPIN superfamily of proteins is highly expressed in glioma brain tumors, as we have demonstrated in our previously published study (Godinez et al.2022; Louati et al.2023). They are involved in calcium homeostasis and play a crucial role in mediating neurite outgrowth, axonal development, as well as maintaining normal synaptic plasticity through their inhibitory effects on tissue plasminogen activator (tPA) in the CNS to prevent its interaction with NMDA receptor‐mediated calcium influx (Nicole et al.2001). The elevated expression of SERPIN superfamily proteins was associated with low survival and increased recurrence rates (Chuang et al.2021).

The High mobility group of proteins (HMGA and HMGB) act as DNA chaperones involved in transcription regulation, DNA organization, DNA binding, cell differentiation, and tumor cell migration (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/).

The spliceosome is a complex molecular machine responsible for RNA splicing as a crucial process for gene expression. Hence, aberrant RNA splicing driven by dysregulation of spliceosome contributes to tumor development and progression, associated with MNGs phenotypes and used as a predictor for tumor recurrence and overall survival (Bielli et al.2019; Leclair et al.2024).

Among the key identified proteins involved in mRNA processing/mRNA splicing, the uridyl‐rich snRNPs (U snRNPs), mainly the subunit G as an indispensable component in the biogenesis of spliceosomes, were reported to be involved in the tumorigenesis of different types of cancers (Mabonga and Kappo2019). Similarly, other subunits, namely, SNRPB and SNRPN, were reported for their oncogenic role in human tumors (Ji et al.2020; Wu et al.2022).

Additionally, the hnRNPs also represent a large family of RNA‐binding proteins that are associated with pre‐mRNAs in the nucleus and contribute to multiple aspects of nucleic acid metabolism, including alternative splicing, mRNA stabilization, transcriptional, and translational regulation. Hence, their dysregulation can contribute to cancer cell proliferation, metastasis, and drug resistance (Siculella et al.2022; The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/).

Among the other identified RNA‐binding proteins, LSM have been evidenced to be implicated in the tumorigenesis and metastasis of several cancer types (Q. Liu, Lian, et al.2023). In addition, dysregulation of the superfamily of the signal recognition particle (SRP) proteins involved in protein translocation to the ER or plasma membrane is allied to various diseases, including cancer, by affecting protein biogenesis, leading to cell dysfunction (Kellogg et al.2022). Moreover, the family members of serine and arginine‐rich splicing factor (SRSF) play an essential role in altered splicing dynamics associated with cancer progression (Sharma et al.2024). The snRPs and the poly(A)‐binding protein cytoplasmic (PABPs) proteins may also act as RNA‐binding proteins involved in posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression in tumors (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/).

Cytokinesis includes regulation of the cell cycle, cell shape, actin‐binding and actin‐capping activities, which are all essential processes for invasive tumor growth and proliferation. Among the key identified proteins involved in this process, myosins (MYO) are actin‐based motor molecules with ATPase activity (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/). Tubulins (TUBB) are the major constituent of microtubules, performing as regulators with binding activities, and reported as a robust biomarker with satisfying abilities in cancer diagnosis and prognosis (Zhu et al.2024; The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/). The SEPTIN family of GTPases is required for normal organization of the actin cytoskeleton and is involved in cytokinesis (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/). The collapsin response mediator protein (CRMP1) protein participates in cytokinesis and is involved in invasive growth and cell migration (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/).

The Rho GTPases (RHOA and RHOB) are a subfamily of the Ras small signaling G proteins, which play essential roles in a number of biological processes, especially in the regulation of cell morphology, survival, proliferation, and adhesion. Hence, they are key regulators of cytoskeleton reorganization and cell polarity. These biological processes are crucial for tumor development and metastases (Liu et al.2024; Q. Lu et al.2009). The micro GTPases affect a wide range of critical processes, including gene expression, signal transduction, cell morphology, vesicle trafficking, and nuclear trafficking. The GTPase domain of RHOBTB3 is divergent from other Ras‐like superfamily members and displays ATPase activity. It is involved in cullin‐3 (CUL3) dependent protein ubiquitination, retrograde transport from endosomes to the Golgi apparatus, regulation of the cell cycle, and modulating the adaptive response to hypoxia (National Center for Biotechnology Information2025). Hence, Rho GTPases are involved in cancer progression and dissemination, showing altered activities in many types of primary brain tumors (Crosas‐Molist et al.2021). Protein kinases (PAK) are critical effectors that link Rho GTPases to cytoskeleton reorganization and nuclear signaling (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/).

The cell adhesion molecules play a critical role in MNG development by mediating cell‐to‐cell and cell‐to‐extracellular matrix interactions. Their expression was shown to be correlated with tumor grade, subtypes, and location. The most investigated proteins are E‐cadherin, catenins (CTNNA), integrins (ITGA, ITGB), laminins (LAMB1), and CD44 (Arsene et al.2014; Figarella‐Branger et al.1997; F. Liu, Wu, et al.2023).

The family of guanine nucleotide‐binding proteins (GNA proteins) acts as modulators or transducers in various transmembrane signaling systems controlled by G protein‐coupled receptors (GPCRs) (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/). Hence, their mutations have been allied to dysregulation of these pathways, potentially contributing to tumor development and progression. Specifically, GNAS are recently discovered to be mutated in a subset of MNGs, with effects on tumor behavior and potential therapeutic targets (Hong et al.2021). The adapter proteins (YWHA) are implicated in the regulation of a large spectrum of both general and specialized signaling pathways, which may potentially contribute to tumor development and progression (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/; J. Lee et al.2023). Indeed, some studies have shown that specific YWHA isoforms, like YWHAZ, are overexpressed in MNGs (Freitag et al.2017).

The MAPK and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways are the most dysregulated signaling pathways in brain tumors, including MNGs. Activation of the PI3K/Akt signaling was reported to contribute to the aggressive behavior of malignant MNGs, whereas the MAPK signaling activation is involved in both proliferation and apoptosis of malignant MNGs(Mawrin et al.2005). The ß‐catenin (CTNNB) is a multifunctional protein from the E‐cadherin family, involved in theWnt signal transduction pathwayafter translocation to the nucleus to form a β‐catenin/TCF transcription activation complex. It promotes angiogenesis by stimulating the expression of proangiogenic factors like VEGF and MMPs (Olsen et al.2017). It was reported as an obvious biomarker for tumor proliferation and progression, namely, in MNGs (Ibrahim et al.2021; Nager et al.2012). Its high‐level expression was significantly associated with transitional and meningiotheliomatous MNGs, low tumor grade, low recurrence rate, and low incidence of brain invasion (Ahmed et al.2017; Ibrahim et al.2021).

LAMTOR protein is involved in regulating the mTORC1 pathway, which is often dysregulated in cancer, promoting cell proliferation and survival (Gamallat et al.2024). Its activity was revealed to be enhanced by the activation of the transmembrane protein TMEM9 (S. Zhang, Lee, et al.2022). The protein kinases (PAK) are involved in intracellular signaling pathways downstream of integrins and receptor‐type kinases, playing a pivotal role in cytoskeleton dynamics, cell adhesion, migration, proliferation, mitosis, and vesicle‐mediated transport processes. They can directly phosphorylate BAD (BCL2‐associated agonist of cell death) and protect cells against apoptosis (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/). The proteasome subunit beta (PSMB) has an ATP‐dependent proteolytic activity (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/) that has recently been proved to be implicated in the proliferation and invasion of glioma cells (He et al.2024) through modulating ERK1/2 and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways (Yang et al.2018).

Thioredoxin (TXN) protein participates in various redox reactions. It contributes to the response to intracellular nitric oxide and regulates several physiological and biochemical functions, such as growth, apoptosis, and cellular defense (the Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/). The TXN system was reported to be highly expressed in the lower pathological grade of MNGs and also involved in the malignant progression of MNGs (Cai et al.2017; Esen et al.2015). The family of Na+/K+‐ATPase transporting (NKA) is an integral membrane protein responsible for establishing and maintaining the electrochemical gradients of Na+and K+ions across the plasma membrane. It has been proposed as a signal transducer involved in various pathobiological processes, including tumorigenesis (the Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/; S. Lu et al.2021).

Finally, tumor cells evade immune response to promote their growth by several mechanisms, among which is alteration in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) expression. Studies have shown that MNGs can express MHC class I and class II molecules (Caffo et al.2005; Taylor and Balko2022).

Neutrophils are also implicated in several mechanisms of cancer progression such as promoting angiogenesis, matrix remodeling, immunosuppression, and cancer metastasis; hence, they could be adapted as potential cancer biomarkers of disease status (Mollinedo2019; Wu et al.2020). The CD superfamily genes are involved in negative regulation of cytokine production and monocyte activation (The Human Protein Atlas2024, online available:https://www.proteinatlas.org/). A study by Kanno et al. revealed that the overexpression of CD163 prevents apoptosis through the production of granulocyte colony‐stimulating factor in MNGs (Kanno et al.2013).

Overall, all these described biological functions involved by the key identified hub genes in both types of brain tumors comply well with our bioinformatics analysis. The better understanding of these molecular mechanisms is crucial for the development of more effective targeted cancer immunotherapies circumventing these evasion tactics.

By our adaptive strategy based on the “Bottom‐up” proteomic‐based approach with high‐resolution tandem MS, we have gained significant advantages over IHC staining in the analysis of human brain tumors, namely, saving time, cost, and resources. Moreover, we succeeded in the identification and characterization of several proteins at high sensitivity, accuracy, and in a very straightforward and timely manner, which is not readily available from the IHC technique. In addition, by proteome‐wide profiling and mapping, we deciphered the relative abundance of proteins related to each type of tumor, known as an expression pattern, which further enhances our understanding of tumor heterogeneity, suggesting that gene expression may be either differentially regulated across cell types or specifically dysregulated in cancer biology, as demonstrated in the clustered heatmap shown in Figure10.

A hierarchical clustered heatmap of the relative abundance of proteins between the two groups of brain tumors, Grade IV astrocytomas and meningiomas (MNGs); referred to as the expression patterns. The green blocks represent the overexpressed proteins, whereas the blue blocks represent proteins with the lowest expression level. Colored bars indicate the expression levels.

Hence, the MS technique has improved issues related to traditional methods based on antibodies because these approaches are low‐throughput, biased against hypermodified proteins, semiquantitative, time‐consuming, and lacking of sensitivity and accuracy in detecting low concentrations of proteins and in discriminating between certain tumor subtypes, giving usually subjective interpretation and discrepancies in results (Ghosh et al.2014; Jiang et al.2021; Sakamoto et al.2017; Thomas et al.2019).

Strikingly, our findings enabled the discovery of key hub genes specific to each type of brain cancer, emphasizing their dual potential role for being both obvious diagnostic biomarkers and pivotal predictors for tumor progression and prognosis.

Notably, they could also be untangled for their role as tumor suppressors and oncogenes as well as potential targets for epigenetic cancer therapies. By way of illustration, following the clustered heatmap presented in Figure10, the most relevant genes dealing with metastatic and invasive forms of cancer with poor prognosis are NES, VIM (Nowicki et al.2019; Sugawara et al.2002; Sun et al.2011; Szymańska‐Chabowska et al.2021), some isoforms of Ca2+proteins (S100A and S100B, ANXA1 and ANXA2, CAMK2A) (Camby et al.2000; He and Li2021; Lei et al.2024; X. Li et al.2021; Polisetty et al.2012; H. Wang, Mao, et al.2022), SERPINA1 (Liu et al.2022), TUBB2B (J. Li et al.2024), LAMB1 (H. Lee et al.2021), EEF2 (Cristiano2021; Zhang et al.2011), SNRPG (Mabonga and Kappo2019), CD44 (Inoue et al.2023; Mooney et al.2016), and CD163 (Kanno et al.2013).

The accuracy and sensitivity of our analyses of brain tumors versus the IHC technique depend on the high‐throughput MS technology and the latest advances in the performance of database research engines, which represent our case study in adopting the Q‐Exactive hybrid quadrupole‐Orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer as well as the MaxQuant software. The selected mass spectrometer has played a prominent role in proteomics and PTMs analysis due to its high resolution and accurate MS data. In addition, it provides new levels of speed and resolution for every scan while maintaining high spectral quality for sensitive detection and confident quantitation of peptides (Thermo Scientific2017, Product Specification, Available on‐line:https://assets.thermofisher.com/TFSAssets/CMD/Specification‐Sheets/PS‐64048‐LC‐MS‐Q‐Exactive‐HF‐Orbitrap‐PS64048‐EN.pdf). The MaxQuant software is a famous platform for LC–MS/MS shotgun proteomics that achieves peptide mass accuracies with high sequencing coverage, thanks to its advanced nonlinear recalibration algorithms (Prianichnikov et al.2020).

Overall, genoproteomics has become a critical part of cancer research that integrates multiomics data benefiting from the recent advances related to the MS–high‐throughput technique, powerful algorithms in protein database search, andbioinformaticstools. These advances have allowed the reliable detection of prognostic biomarkers involved in the progression and invasion of brain cancer, as well as a better understanding of the main warped mechanisms involved in tumorigenesis, which helps to counteract the limits and pitfalls of traditional diagnostic methods and the lack of specific antibodies in numerous hospital and clinical laboratories.

The present study highlights the advantages of the application of the MS–high‐throughput technology in medical analyses thanks to its high reproducibility, sensitivity, and efficiency by providing accurate and precise measurements leading to the improvement of the quality of healthcare performance in the hospital management system through overseeing employees, funds, and resources, including human errors (Thomas et al.2022). Besides, it has promoted issues and caveats of traditional diagnostic methods and the lack of specific antibodies in numerous hospitals and clinical laboratories. Consequently, the current health problems in the medium hospital, where the majority of patients' claims nowadays could be addressed.

The state of the art, dealing with proteomics, comprises a set of tools for the large‐scale study of gene expression at the protein level, which provides comprehensive insights into the dynamics of cellular processes, modifications, and interactions. Thus, genoproteomics has emerged as an important component of cancer research that incorporates multiomics data processing, benefiting from the recent improvements in the MS–high‐throughput technology, sophisticated protein database search algorithms, and bioinformatics tools.

In this regard, we succeeded in our study by proteome‐wide profiling and mapping using a shotgun proteomic–based approach with high‐resolution tandem MS, the discovery of the key hub genes specific to each type of brain tumor, emphasizing their dual potential role for being both obvious diagnostic biomarkers and pivotal predictors for tumor progression and prognosis. Notably, from these genes, we have unveiled the major aberrant mechanisms underpinning tumorigenesis, which are mitochondrial metabolism, drug transporters, calcium influx, protein transport and trafficking, protein folding and biosynthesis, angiogenesis, neurogenesis, cytokinesis, cell adhesion, signal transduction, downstream signaling pathways related to cancer growth and progression, hemostasis, electron transport, and adaptive immunity response.

Accordingly, our findings from the reliable identification of prognostic biomarkers involved in tumorigenesis present two major assets: First, they mitigate our understanding of tumor physiopathology as well as the degree of invasiveness and metastatic potential across diverse tissue types. Second, they pave the way for better diagnosis and optimization of treatment guidelines to support the development of personalized therapies targeting specific biomarkers, while effectively minimizing adverse effects and circumventing cancer evasion tactics (Herrmann et al.2001; Procópio‐Azevedo et al.2023).