People with low back pain (LBP) report different perceptions of reassurance after a consultation. We aimed to determine whether patient characteristics are associated with differences in patient perceptions of reassurance.

Secondary analysis of 2048 adults presenting with back pain to a chiropractor. We used linear mixed models to determine associations between patient sociodemographic, clinical and psychological characteristics and the outcome of reassurance measured using the four subscales of the Consultation‐based Reassurance Questionnaire (CRQ).

Patients with higher perceived risk of pain persistence reported perceiving less reassurance in their consultation, on all four subscales of the CRQ: data‐gathering (regression co‐efficient −0.13 [99% confidence interval: −0.23, −0.03]), relationship‐building (−0.13 [−0.22, −0.04]), cognitive reassurance (−0.20 [−0.30, −0.10]) and generic reassurance (−0.27 [−0.39, −0.15]). Older age was associated with lower cognitive reassurance (−0.03 [−0.05, −0.01]) and generic reassurance (−0.04 [−0.07, −0.02]). Males were associated with lower relationship‐building scores (0.70 [−1.13 to −0.28]), compared to females. Previous spinal imaging was associated with lower generic reassurance (−0.68 [−1.28, −0.09]). Compared to acute pain, higher levels of reassurance were perceived by patients with subacute pain [data‐gathering (0.83 [0.10, 1.65]), relationship‐building (0.70 [0.02, 1.37]), cognitive reassurance (0.87 [0.11, 1.56])]. Higher back pain intensity was associated with higher levels of relationship‐building (0.13 [0.01, 0.25]) and generic reassurance (0.18 [0.02, 0.34]).

People with higher perceived risk of pain persistence, previous spinal imaging, male and older age perceived slightly lower levels of reassurance. The impact of these associations on the success of a LBP consultation is unclear.

People seeking care for LBP report receiving variable levels of reassurance from healthcare providers. It is unknown whether perceived reassurance may differ according to patient characteristics. We identified several patient characteristics associated with lower perceived reassurance during a consultation for LBP, including higher perceived risk of pain persistence, previous imaging for LBP, males, older age, acute pain and lower LBP intensity. Knowledge of these characteristics may help inform optimal delivery of individualised patient reassurance.

The provision of reassurance is universally recommended in clinical practice guidelines for managing low back pain (LBP) (Oliveira et al.2018). In the context of a consultation with a patient with LBP, reassurance should include information about the absence of underlying serious pathology, the likelihood of a favourable prognosis and reassurance about the safety of movement (Australian Commission for Safety and Quality in Health Care2022; Oliveira et al.2018). The delivery of this type of information has been referred to as ‘cognitive reassurance’ (Pincus et al.2013). A systematic review of observational studies found evidence that the delivery of cognitive reassurance is associated with increased patient satisfaction, enablement and reduced concerns directly after consultations (eight observational studies); improved symptoms (seven observational studies); and decreased healthcare utilisation (three observational studies) (Pincus et al.2013). Similarly, there is moderate quality evidence from randomised controlled trials that the provision of reassurance reduces further healthcare use (n= 7 trials,n= 2107 participants) (Traeger et al.2015).

Healthcare providers also engage in implicitly reassuring behaviours during consultations such as creating rapport and showing empathy. These behaviours have been termed ‘affective reassurance’ (Kessel1979; Pincus et al.2013). Although providing affective reassurance is common practice, evidence of its effect on patient outcomes is inconsistent (Pincus et al.2013). This inconsistency may be due to challenges in quantifying the delivery of affective reassurance. The consultation‐based reassurance questionnaire (CRQ) was developed to further investigate perceptions of reassuring behaviours in a consultation. The CRQ measures patient reports of reassurance (both cognitive and affective) during a consultation for LBP (Holt and Pincus2016). The CRQ includes subscales related to different clinician behaviours related to providing reassurance, including data‐gathering (demonstrating an understanding of a person's pain), relationship‐building (demonstrating empathy), cognitive reassurance (providing education) and generic reassurance (providing empathic and positive messages without the delivery of education).

Despite recommendations to deliver reassurance for LBP (Oliveira et al.2018), there appear to be scenarios where primary care providers do not deliver reassurance. A study of primary care providers found that in over a quarter of patient encounters (n= 1135) providers reported not delivering reassurance about prognosis (cognitive reassurance) (Morsø et al.2022). This may be because primary care providers deliver reassurance on a needs basis (Young et al.2024), or that there may be certain populations where reassurance is less likely to be delivered. Identifying patients who are less likely to perceive reassurance in a consultation for LBP may help clinicians provide more targeted reassurance.

We aimed to determine whether patient characteristics (sociodemographic, clinical and psychological factors) are associated with patient perceptions of reassurance following a clinical consultation for LBP with a chiropractor.

We performed a secondary analysis on the Danish Chiropractic Back Pain Cohort (ChiCo) dataset (Kongsted et al.2020). The ChiCo study was a prospective longitudinal observational study of patients presenting with a new episode of LBP to a chiropractor between November 2016 and December 2019. Ethical approval was not required as determined by The Health Research Ethics Committee of Southern Denmark (S‐20.162.000‐109). Macquarie University Human Research Ethics Committee provided a waiver for this secondary analysis, as ethical standards were adhered to when conducting the study, and analysed data were anonymised.

Our protocol was pre‐registered in Open Science Framework on the 13th of September 2023 (Young et al.2023). Patients were eligible to participate in the ChiCo study if they presented to a chiropractor with a new episode of non‐specific LBP (with or without radiculopathy) of any duration, were at least 18 years old, Danish speaking, and had access to an email account. Patients were excluded if they had LBP that was suspected to be caused by a serious pathology or required immediate referral for surgery. To be included in this analysis, participants needed to have completed both of two baseline questionnaires and have completed at least 6 out of 12 items in the CRQ.

Participants completed two discrete questionnaires, first baseline questionnaire (BQ1) before they consulted with the chiropractor and a second baseline questionnaire (BQ2) sent immediately after their initial consultation (mean response time was 2‐days post consultation). No measures were repeated across the two questionnaires (BQ1 and BQ2). As such, the data collected from these questionnaires are not paired. Data were collected via the electronic data capture system REDCap (Harris et al.2019,2009). BQ1 collected data on patient factors including sociodemographic factors (age, sex, education level), clinical factors (low back and leg pain intensity, episode duration, disability, prognostic risk, yellow flag screening questions, co‐morbid musculoskeletal pain, questions about spinal imaging, previous healthcare consultation) and psychological factors (back pain beliefs, fear‐avoidance, kinesiophobia). BQ2 contained the CRQ and healthcare utilisation pre‐consultation. For a detailed list of the variables collected, refer to AppendixS1.

Valid and reliable tools were used to measure relevant patient factors such as low back and leg pain, disability, prognostic risk, yellow flag screening and psychological factors such as back beliefs, fear‐avoidance and kinesiophobia. Back and leg pain intensity were individual items, scored on a numerical rating scale 0–10 (Jensen and McFarland1993). Disability was assessed using the 23‐item Roland Morris Disability Questionnaire (RMDQ), scored from 0 to 23, and transformed into a percentage for interpretation (Albert et al.2003; Roland and Morris1983). Prognostic risk of persistent LBP was measured using the Keele STaRT Back screening tool (STaRT Back), which is a 9‐item tool scored from 0 to 9 (Hill et al.2008). Yellow flag screening was conducted using three individual items from the Örebro Musculoskeletal Pain Questionnaire (ÖMPQ), where each item is scored from 0 to 10 (Linton and Halldén1998). Back pain beliefs were assessed using the Back Beliefs Questionnaire (BBQ), which is scored from 9 to 45 (Symonds et al.1996). Fear‐avoidance beliefs related to work were measured using the Fear‐Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire—Work subscale (FABQ‐W), which is scored from 0 to 42 (Waddell et al.1993). Finally, kinesiophobia was assessed using the sum score of two items from the Tampa Scale for Kinesiophobia (TSK), where each item is scored from 1 to 4 (Weermeijer and Meulders2018).

Our outcome variables of interest were the four subscales of the CRQ (AppendixS2). The subscales of the CRQ address reassuring behaviours, including data‐gathering (demonstrating an understanding of a person's pain), relationship‐building (demonstrating empathy), cognitive reassurance (providing education) and generic reassurance (providing empathic and positive messages without the delivery of education). Each subscale includes three items phrased as ‘to what extent did the chiropractor…’, followed by the phrasing of the item. Each item is rated by the patient on a 0 (not at all) to 6 (a great deal) Likert scale. The sum of the three items equals the total score for each subscale, ranging from 0 to 18, where lower scores indicate less reassurance perceived during the consultation. The CRQ demonstrated acceptable reliability and high item‐total correlations in UK general practice (Holt et al.2018; Holt and Pincus2016). Clinimetric testing of the CRQ in a Danish chiropractic setting showed acceptable internal consistency for all subscales, demonstrating that the CRQ was feasible for use in a Danish chiropractic setting (Kongsted et al.2018). The minimally clinically important difference (MCID) for this tool is yet to be established.

We tested the dataset for missingness using Little's test and based on this, we assumed that the data were missing completely at random (MCAR). As the data were assumed to be MCAR, we performed multivariate chained multiple imputation. The median proportion of missing data was 1.9%, with an interquartile range from 1.0% to 3.0% and ranged from 0.6% to 23.8% across all variables. The Fear‐Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire—Work subscale (FABQ‐W) had 24% missing data, with the remaining variables having less than 6% missing data. The FABQ‐W outlier was due to skip‐logic in the questionnaire, only letting these items be completed if participants answered ‘yes’ to having a job. Accordingly, the amount of missingness informed the number of imputed datasets to be generated. As one variable had moderate missingness greater than 20%, we created 20 imputed datasets (Yuan2005). Chained imputation was performed for all patient factors except for age and sex. Age and sex were used as auxiliary variables to improve the accuracy of imputation. To understand how imputations influenced results as compared to complete case analysis, we performed a sensitivity analysis by conducting the same analysis on the original dataset (no multiple imputation).

We performed univariate analyses for each patient factor to assess the association with the four CRQ subscales (outcome variables) using linear mixed models with a random intercept for clinics to account for the dependency of observations. As this analysis was exploratory and we were testing multiple patient factors, we set the statistical significance level for each comparison at 0.01. However, for the interpretation of associations, we primarily considered the potential clinical importance of effect (sizes of regression coefficients), and their 99% confidence intervals (CIs), as opposed to just thep‐value. We tested for multicollinearity by ascertaining the variable inflation factor (VIF) and pairwise correlation coefficients. We proposed that model reduction would only be performed if any VIF was greater than 5, or the pairwise correlation coefficient was over 0.8 (Shrestha2020; Vatcheva et al.2016). We performed multivariable analyses to test the association between all patient factors and each CRQ subscale, using linear mixed models with a random intercept for clinics to account for the dependency of observations. All patient‐related variables were retained in the final multivariable models in accordance with our pre‐specified protocol (Young et al.2023). Selection of candidate variables was guided by clinical expertise, theoretical relevance and supporting evidence from the literature, rather than by statistical significance. This strategy ensured that important confounders and rare but meaningful predictors were retained in the model, even if they did not show statistically significant associations (Riley et al.2019). Although univariable analysis was not used for predictor selection, it was performed to provide an understanding of crude associations, and it allows for informative comparison to multivariable results (Riley et al.2019). To understand how variable selection for the multivariable model influenced results, we conducted a sensitivity analysis comparing our model with a backward step‐wise model that included only patient factors with univariatep‐values < 0.20. All analyses were performed using STATA (StataCorp. 2023. Stata Statistical Software: Version 18. College Station, TX: StataCorp LLC). Univariate and multivariable analyses were computed on the average of the imputed datasets (Rubin1987).

We included 2048 participants in the analysis. In total, 28.1% (800/2848) of ChiCo participants were excluded from these analyses; 765 participants (26.9%) were excluded because they did not respond to BQ2, and 35 participants (1.2%) were excluded because they were non‐responders to the CRQ; that is, they received BQ2 but completed fewer than half of the items on the CRQ. The demographics of the participants are presented in Table1. AppendixS3contains participant demographics stratified by responders, non‐responders to BL2 and non‐responders to the CRQ. There were small observable differences between the groups for the previous number of episodes and episode duration. For further details about the ChiCo population who completed the CRQ, refer to Kongsted et al. (2020). VIF and pairwise correlation coefficients were under the respective thresholds, indicating that model reduction was not necessary. Therefore, all patient factors were included in multivariable analyses for each CRQ subscale. Our sensitivity analysis revealed comparable results for imputed compared with non‐imputed data. We compared our planned approach with a backward stepwise model that included only patient factors with univariatep‐values < 0.20. We found that results were largely unchanged, with effect estimates differing by less than 0.1 in nearly all cases. These findings suggest that our models are robust to differences in approaches to variable selection.

Participant demographics of 2048 patients with LBP responding to the CRQ.

Abbreviations: BBQ, Back Beliefs Questionnaire; CRQ, Consultation‐based Reassurance Questionnaire; FABQ, Fear‐Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire; LBP, Low back pain; OTC, over the counter; RMDQ, Roland‐Morris Disability Questionnaire; SD, standard deviation.

Kinesiophobia measured using two items from the Tampa Scale of Kinesiophobia (TSK).

Univariate analysis (Table2) found that being a male patient (regression coefficient = −0.49, 99% CI: −0.88 to −0.09) and having a higher perceived risk of pain persistence (−0.09, 99% CI: −0.16 to −0.02) were associated with lower levels of reassuring data gathering from the chiropractor. When accounting for other factors in a multivariable model (Figure1), on average, higher perceived risk of pain persistence maintained a negative association: with each 1‐point increase in perceived risk of pain persistence translating into 0.13 points lower scores on the data‐gathering subscale (99% CI: −0.23 to −0.03). On average, people with sub‐acute or chronic LBP scored 0.83 (99% CI: 0.11–1.56) and 0.76 (99% CI: 0.07–1.44) points higher than those with acute LBP on the data‐gathering subscale, respectively.

Univariate analysis of associations between patient factors and the four CRQ subscales.

Note:Negative co‐efficient values indicate lower levels of reassurance for CRQ subscales (data gathering, relationship‐building, cognitive reassurance and generic reassurance).

Abbreviations: BBQ, Back Beliefs Questionnaire; CRQ, Consultation‐based Reassurance Questionnaire; FABQ, Fear‐Avoidance Beliefs Questionnaire; LBP, Low back pain; OTC, over the counter; RMDQ, Roland‐Morris Disability Questionnaire; SD, standard deviation; TSK, Tampa Scale of Kinesiophobia.

Kinesiophobia measured using two items from the Tampa Scale of Kinesiophobia (TSK).

Multivariable analysis of associations between patient factors and the data gathering CRQ subscale.

Univariate analysis (Table2) found that being male (−0.77, 99% CI: −1.14 to −0.40), having a higher perceived risk of pain persistence (−0.13, 99% CI: −0.19 to −0.06), a higher total number of pain sites (−0.09, 99% CI: −0.17 to 0.00), previous consultation with a healthcare provider (−0.50, 99% CI: −0.90 to −0.11) and previous consultation with a chiropractor (−0.85, 99% CI: −1.49 to −0.21) were associated with lower levels of reassuring relationship‐building from the chiropractor. Conversely, higher back pain intensity (0.10, 99% CI: 0.01–0.19) was associated with more relationship‐building. When accounting for other factors in a multivariable model (Figure2), only being male and higher perceived risk of pain persistence maintained a negative association. On average, males scored 0.70 (99% CI: −1.13 to −0.28) points less than females, and for each 1‐point higher in perceived risk of pain persistence, there was a 0.13 (99% CI: −0.22 to −0.04) point reduction in relationship‐building subscale score. Positive associations were maintained for higher back pain intensity and sub‐acute pain. On average, for each 1‐point increase in back pain intensity, there was a 0.13 (99% CI: 0.01–0.25) point increase in subscale score, and participants with sub‐acute pain scored 0.70 (99% CI: 0.02–1.37) points higher than those with acute pain.

Multivariable analysis of associations between patient factors and the relationship‐building CRQ subscale.

Univariate analysis (Table2) found that being male (0.47, 99% CI: −0.88 to −0.05), having a higher perceived risk of pain persistence (−0.16, 99% CI: −0.24 to −0.09), and previous spinal imaging (−0.43, 99% CI: −0.85 to −0.01) were associated with lower levels of cognitive reassurance. Positive back beliefs were associated with more cognitive reassurance (0.04, 99% CI: 0.01–0.08). When accounting for other factors in a multivariable model (Figure3), only higher perceived risk of pain persistence maintained a negative association with cognitive reassurance, with on average a 0.20 (99% CI: −0.30 to −0.10) point reduction in cognitive reassurance subscale score for each 1‐point increase in perceived risk of pain persistence. In addition, negative associations were also found for age, with a reduction in score on average of 0.03 (99% CI: −0.05 to −0.01) points for every year increase in age. Sub‐acute pain was positively associated with cognitive reassurance, with those with sub‐acute pain on average scoring 0.87 (99% CI: 0.10–1.65) points higher when compared with acute LBP.

Multivariable analysis of associations between patient factors and the cognitive reassurance CRQ subscale.

Univariate analysis (Table2) found that age (−0.04, 99% CI: −0.06 to −0.02), chronic LBP (−1.60, 99% CI: −2.27 to −0.93), previous episodes of LBP (−1.02, 99% CI: −1.71 to −0.33), high‐risk STaRT Back score (−0.91, 99% CI: −1.58 to −0.24), higher fear‐avoidance (−0.03, 99% CI: −0.06 to 0.00), higher perceived risk of pain persistence (−0.37, 99% CI: −0.46 to −0.28), previous spinal imaging (−1.47, 99% CI: −1.99 to −0.96), previous healthcare consultation with any provider (−1.32, 99% CI: −1.85 to −0.78), and previous consultation with a chiropractor (1.43, 99% CI: −2.31 to −0.55) were all associated with lower levels of generic reassurance. Higher back pain intensity (0.13, 99% CI: 0.01–0.26) and more positive back beliefs (0.08, 99% CI: 0.04–0.13) were positively associated with generic reassurance. When accounting for other factors in a multivariable model (Figure4) we found that LBP intensity, age, perceived risk of pain persistence, and previous spinal imaging maintained their respective associations. For every year increase in age, there was on average a 0.04 (99% CI −0.07 to −0.02) reduction in the generic reassurance subscale score; each 1‐point increase in perceived risk of pain persistence showed on average a 0.27 (99% CI −0.39 to −0.15) point reduction in generic reassurance subscale score; and those who had previously received imaging for their LBP scored on average 0.68 (99% CI −1.28 to −0.09) points less. Conversely, for each 1‐point higher back pain intensity, there was on average a 0.18 (99% CI: 0.02–0.34) point increase on the generic reassurance subscale score.

Multivariable analysis of associations between patient factors and the generic reassurance CRQ subscale.

We identified a number of patient‐level factors that were weakly associated with perceptions of reassurance following a consultation for LBP. In particular, higher levels of perceived risk of pain persistence were consistently associated with lower levels of perceived reassurance across all CRQ subscales. Patients who were male, older and those with previous imaging for LBP also reported lower levels of perceived reassurance on at least one subscale from their chiropractor following a LBP consultation. In contrast, patients with higher LBP intensity and subacute or chronic LBP, when compared with acute pain, reported perceiving higher levels of reassurance on at least one subscale.

Our results support the findings from existing literature, while also providing evidence that is contrary to previous research. Kongsted et al.2018conducted feasibility testing of the CRQ using a subset (n= 717) of the dataset used in the current study. An exploratory analysis of the association between age, sex, level of education, symptom duration and previous visit to a chiropractor and CRQ subscale scores was performed. Our findings confirmed that of previous research that older persons are less likely to perceive consultation‐based reassurance (Kongsted et al.2018). In contrast, contrary to Kongsted et al.2018, we did not find an association between higher levels of education or previous visit to a chiropractor for LBP and consultation‐based reassurance and perceived reassurance. Differences in approach likely explain the contrasting findings, and we are more confident in the results from the updated analysis on the full ChiCo cohort. This analysis included more patient characteristics that may have confounded these relationships and had a significantly larger sample size than the previous analysis. To our knowledge, no other studies have investigated patient characteristics and the association with CRQ scores; instead, existing literature utilising the CRQ has focused on its association with patient outcomes (Holt et al.2018; Simonsen et al.2021).

Reassurance is recommended for people with LBP of any duration; however, our findings highlight that certain people perceive less reassurance in a consultation with a chiropractor. Further, clinical practice guidelines recommend that reassurance is individualised (Australian Commission for Safety and Quality in Health Care2022) but how reassurance is best individualised and reassurance ‘dosage’ is not clearly defined in these guidelines. Providing reassurance is a complex clinical skill that is employed on an individual basis (Australian Commission for Safety and Quality in Health Care2022; Young et al.2025,2024). Therefore, perhaps reassurance ‘dosage’ should not look identical for all people presenting with LBP, and some people simply require less reassurance as part of this individualisation process. The weak associations found in this analysis may point to patient perceptions of reassurance being highly individualised.

We found similar patient‐level factors associated with data gathering, relationship‐building and cognitive reassurance subscales; however, we found that patient‐level factors differed for the generic reassurance subscale. Specifically for generic reassurance, males and those who had received previous spinal imaging were associated with perceiving less generic reassurance. This means that, on average, females and those who had not received previous spinal imaging perceived that they received more generic reassurance; this is of interest as more generic reassurance appears to be associated with less favourable downstream patient outcomes. Previous research by Pincus et al. (2013) indicated that higher scores on the generic reassurance subscale were linked to less favourable outcomes for LBP, such as decreased function, worsened symptoms and increased healthcare utilisation at follow‐up (Pincus et al.2013).

In our study, higher perceived risk of pain persistence (poorer recovery expectations) was consistently associated with perceiving less reassurance in a consultation. Previous research has demonstrated that negative recovery expectations are associated with increased risk of negative outcomes (Kongsted et al.2014). An individual's recovery expectations have similar predictive value to empirically derived measures used to predict prognosis. A qualitative study highlighted that patients presenting at risk of poorer prognosis (poorer recovery) were more challenging to reassure (Young et al.2025). These challenges were primarily due to the unwillingness of clinicians to deliver negative prognostic information and clinician uncertainty about their predictions of clinical course. There appear to be situations where information about prognosis is not delivered in a consultation, evidenced by a study of usual care in Denmark where information about prognosis was delivered approximately 50% of the time in LBP consultations (general practitioners 41.8%, physiotherapists 56.0% and chiropractors 48.9%) (Madsen et al.2023). This may be one of the reasons that people with poorer recovery expectations perceive less reassurance in an LBP consultation.

Our study had a number of methodological strengths. Data used for this analysis were from a large prospective study. Participants completed the CRQ in close temporal proximity to their consultation with the chiropractor, which limited recall bias. Our analysis utilised the CRQ, a validated outcome measure (Holt and Pincus2016; Kongsted et al.2018) of patient perception of reassurance during a consultation. To ensure meaningful results for interpretation, we considered multiple elements, including the strength of the associations and associated confidence intervals of associations, in conjunction with thep‐value (set conservatively at 0.01 to reduce imprecision).

Some methodological limitations in our study mean that caution should be used when interpreting these data. We classified participants as a ‘'non‐responders’ if they completed fewer than six items on the CRQ and excluded them from our analysis. This may have introduced selection bias. However, non‐responders were broadly similar in their characteristics to responders. Previous drop‐out analyses of the ChiCo data have confirmed minimal attrition bias (Kongsted et al.2020). While the associations reported in this study were statistically significant, they were small, and whether these associations are clinically meaningful is uncertain. This analysis is explorative, and the more patient factors included in the model the greater the chance of finding statistically significant associations due to Type 1 Error. We are not certain as to whether these findings would be the same when applied to different geographic locations or different clinical settings (e.g., physiotherapy or general medical practice).

As the CRQ is patient‐reported, it is a measure of the patient's recall or perception of the amount and types of reassurance delivered by the chiropractor and may not directly reflect what the chiropractor actually did. Therefore, with these data, we cannot make inferences as to whether the chiropractor performed more or less of the subscale behaviour (data gathering, relationship‐building, cognitive and generic), or whether it was the patient who was more or less receptive to reassurance.

While associations identified in this study found that patient factors were only associated with slight differences in levels of perceived consultation‐based reassurance, there is an indication that people with the following characteristics may be more difficult to reassure: patients with higher perceived risk of pain persistence (low recovery expectations), those with previous spinal imaging, males and older persons. Modifiable patient characteristics are possible targets to enhance consultation‐based reassurance. Education or other strategies designed to reduce the perceived risk of pain persistence may also help improve the delivery of reassurance. Interventions aiming to reduce unnecessary imaging for LBP (Jenkins et al.2015) may have additional benefits related to how a patient perceives reassurance in the future. While targeting these modifiable patient factors may slightly change the level of perceived consultation‐based reassurance, it could lead to improvement in other downstream patient outcomes (Braeuninger‐Weimer et al.2021; Holt et al.2018; Simonsen et al.2021), evidenced by higher levels of consultation‐based reassurance being associated with small reductions in pain intensity and disability, and increased levels of patient enablement and satisfaction post consultation.

Limited evidence exists that explores the association between patient characteristics and consultation‐based reassurance, highlighting the need for further investigation. While we present several patient characteristics that are associated with reassurance, there may be additional factors that are not explored in our data. Qualitative work has highlighted scenarios where clinicians find it more challenging to provide reassurance, such as when patients have had previous non‐reassuring encounters and patients with previous experience with unfavourable LBP outcomes (Young et al.2025). Further investigation could explore these factors and their influence on clinicians' use of reassurance.

Future research on the CRQ should establish clinically meaningful differences and determine causal associations with other patient outcomes. In addition, it could be useful to incorporate additional measures to determine the extent to which providers delivered reassurance during a consultation, rather than just relying on perceptions of reassurance. One approach to enhance this investigation could be to include self‐reported items from clinicians regarding the reassurance they provided, in addition to the CRQ.

We identified patient characteristics associated with the amount of reassurance a patient perceived during a chiropractic consultation for LBP. Patients with a higher perceived risk of pain persistence, previous spinal imaging for LBP, male gender and older age perceived slightly lower levels of reassurance. Patients with higher LBP intensity and pain lasting longer than 4 weeks perceived slightly higher levels of reassurance. The clinical importance of these associations is unclear.