To understand, through the study of telerehabilitation introduction, whether telerehabilitation in physical therapy (‘masso‐kinésithérapie’) represents a lasting change in professional practices in France.

A triangulation of different qualitative methodologies was used, including eight semi‐structured interviews, an observation of a telerehabilitation session and a participant and retrospective observation. A specific interview guide was developed for the interviews and another specific guide was developed for the telerehabilitation session observation to analyse this session. All semi‐structured interviews were transcribed, and an in‐depth thematic analysis based on grounded theory was performed.

Three key themes emerged from our analysis. Firstly, physiotherapists quickly adopted telerehabilitation due to the widespread use of digital technologies and perceived clinical benefits. Secondly, they adapted their care delivery methods, transitioning from in‐person to digital formats, and engaged in self‐learning and peer support. These changes led to modifications in workspaces and communication practices, fostering closer relationships between physiotherapists and patients. Lastly, the implementation of telerehabilitation faces challenges, including technical difficulties, the lack of physical contact, and an unfavourable implementation context.

Our results provide key elements to focus on for telerehabilitation implementation in physical therapy and professions for which professional practice is strongly associated with hands‐on interventions.

The use of telehealth has grown significantly in rehabilitation care in recent years, especially at the onset of the pandemic. In France, the use of telerehabilitation by physical therapists (PTs) was authorised for the first time by decree on April 16, 2020, in response to the unprecedented health situation of Covid‐19 in France (Journal officiel de la République française2020). It was subsequently made permanent on June 4, 2021, by regulatory and legislative frameworks (Journal officiel de la République française2021a,2021b). Telerehabilitation involves providing care remotely using information and communication technologies (ICT). This practice falls under telehealth, a term that replaced telemedicine in France in 2021 (Journal officiel de la République française2021a). Historically, telemedicine referred to the practice of medicine using ICT and was reserved for French physicians only (Journal officiel de la République française2010; Haute autorité de santé2021).

There are numerous examples in the international scientific literature of the use of telerehabilitation by PTs well before 2020 (Mani et al.2017; Zischke et al.2021). Systematic reviews and meta‐analyses have shown that remote patient follow‐up after an in‐person evaluation is a valid alternative to traditional in‐person follow‐up (Cottrell et al.2017; Gava et al.2022; Krzyzaniak et al.2023; Suso‐Martí et al.2021). Remote follow‐up leads to similar clinical improvements for various musculoskeletal disorders (MSKDs) such as low back pain or neck pain, as well as for neurological conditions (Cottrell et al.2017; Gava et al.2022; Krzyzaniak et al.2023). Remote evaluation could also be used to make diagnoses and treatment plans remotely for MSKDs patients (Vincent et al.2024).

Telehealth is now commonly used within the health care systems of high‐income countries in teleradiology, teledermatology, and telepsychiatry (W. H. O. Global Observatory for eHealth2010). However, the use of ICT by allied health professionals to provide remote care remains low, although it increased during the Covid‐19 pandemic (El Aoufy et al.2022; Turolla et al.2020; W. H. O. Global Observatory for eHealth2010; Webster2020). Beyond the pandemic, telerehabilitation could be a relevant modality to improve access to care for populations living in areas with few health care providers or for populations with mobility difficulties (Marcin et al.2016; Moffatt and Eley2010; World Confederation for Physical Therapy2020).

The use of telerehabilitation by PTs in France has been little studied so far (Le Toullec et al.2022). Like their international counterparts, they express a feeling of lack of training and knowledge about telerehabilitation (Aloyuni et al.2020; Baadjou et al.2020; Lee2020). In addition, the loss of physical contact during care has created uncertainty about the clinical efficiency of this care modality among clinicians and patients (Kairy et al.2013; Le Toullec et al.2022; Malliaras et al.2021). Touch plays an essential role in the practice of physical therapy, known in France as ‘masso‐kinésithérapie’ (literally massage and physical therapy) (Le Toullec et al.2022; Remondière and Durafourg2018). The use of telerehabilitation, with the inevitable loss of physical contact between the patient and the health care provider, could thus disrupt the professional practices of PTs in France. Therefore, the aim of this study was to explore and understand PTs experiences with using telerehabilitation during COVID‐ 19 pandemic.

To achieve our objective, an exploratory qualitative study was conducted, relying on a triangulation of different methodologies. This study is grounded in a constructivist paradigm (Charmaz2006), which posits that reality is socially constructed by individuals. Specifically, it aims to explore the meanings that physiotherapists attribute to the use of telerehabilitation in their clinical practice. This work follows the COREQ guidelines (Tong et al.2007) (Appendix1: TableA1).

The participants were French PTs who had previously provided telerehabilitation to patients. Participants were initially recruited through purposive sampling with recruitment announcements posted on social media, followed by snowball sampling. They were not subject to criteria of gender, diploma origin, or conditions of practice (specialities practiced, etc.) and the goal was to obtain the widest variety of views on telerehabilitation uses. Participants were informed of the research objectives before their interviews and gave their oral consent at the beginning of the interviews or observations.

In‐depth semi‐structured interviews were conducted between November 2020 and April 2021. The interviews were led by PL, a female PT with telerehabilitation experience in her clinical practice. An interview guide (Appendix2) was created to conduct the interviews. The interview guide was developed by PL under the supervision of other member of research team, drawing on their own clinical experience with telerehabilitation, as well as the findings of Mathieu‐Fritz et al. (Mathieu‐Fritz2018; Mathieu‐Fritz and Esterle2013), which focus on how telemedicine uses transform professional practices. The first part of this guide explored the clinical profile and experience of the participants, the second part focused on the PTs' experience of rehabilitation care during the health crisis and explored their use of telerehabilitation (spatialisation, efficiency, effectiveness, patient‐provider relationship). The last part questioned their perceptions of telerehabilitation care. The interviews were recorded using a voice recorder and were fully transcribed. PL transcribed the first 4 interviews, and RV transcribed the last 4 interviews. The statements were anonymised. The transcriptions were not returned to and validated by the participants.

The observation (Tillard2011) of a telerehabilitation session (Zoom platform) between a PT and her patient was conducted during the investigation following the suggestion of an interviewed PT. This method allowed triangulation of methods and data to improve their quality. It could only be conducted with one participant as the others were no longer practicing telerehabilitation at the time of the study. The PT, her patient, and PL were present during the session. An observation guide on the use of telerehabilitation (spatialisation, efficiency, effectiveness, relationship with the patient) was created to guide this observation. This observation was supplemented by discussions conducted via videoconference, which immediately followed the session with the PT and the patient separately. These discussions were guided by questions that emerged from the observations. An observation report was written, and the discussions were recorded using a voice recorder and fully transcribed. The statements were anonymised. This observation was associated with the participant observation of the team member responsible for the study (Hughes1996), who is herself a PT. Observation becomes participant and retrospective when the observer already plays an existing role in the situation being studied (Hughes1996). As a PT who had already performed telerehabilitation, the study was enriched by the investigator's reflections.

All transcriptions underwent a thematic and constant comparative analytical approach based on grounded theory to identify, compare, contrast, and synthesise themes arising from the data (Glaser and Anselm2009; Terry et al.2017). This process was carried out by PL in collaboration with another PT (RV) who verified the analysis in order to identify and interpret recurring patterns and themes in an iterative and flexible manner throughout the data collection progress. RV had no contact with the participants.

A total of eight interviews and one observation were conducted. Mean duration was 90 min (from 70 to 131 min). They were conducted via videoconference calls or in person.

The participants were aged between 26 and 55 years and included 4 women and 4 men. One participant took part in both an interview and the observation. The PTs interviewed had diverse practices, working either as employees or in private practice, and in both rural and urban areas (Table1).

Three overarching themes related to PTs' experiences with telerehabilitation emerged from our thematic analysis (Figure1).

Exploration of PTs experiences of telerehabilitation during the COVID‐19 pandemic.

Participants reported clinical benefits and a potential improvement in access to care when using telerehabilitation. The PTs interviewed saw clinical benefits in telerehabilitation. PT1 and PT5 considered telerehabilitation as a way of empowering patients, ‘a good transitional step [that] could be the second part before I leave you completely’ [PT1]. They believe that telerehabilitation can help achieve rehabilitation goals and promote self‐management by changing the care environment.

[Telerehabilitation] meets the needs of a medical desert.

Certain specific practices, such as ano‐rectal rehabilitation for men practiced by PT1 or vestibular rehabilitation by PT2, require postgraduate training and are less common. Telerehabilitation could be a relevant solution for these specialised treatments, especially for patients in remote areas. According to PT1, telerehabilitation could reduce the difficulties of accessing physical therapy care by easing logistical aspects, particularly for people with reduced mobility.

I have patients who come for ano‐rectal treatments, and they travel two hours to get to the clinic and two hours back. There are no traffic jams here, so the two‐hour journey is because it’s over 100 km. I think for these patients, maybe one in person session and then a session supplemented by telehealth could be a good idea.

PTs adapted what they already knew about in person rehabilitation to deliver telerehabilitation when it was introduced in March 2020. The PTs interviewed emphasised that, despite the need to adapt to ICT, the fundamental principles of rehabilitation remained unchanged. Key principles, such as working on and regaining joint range of motion or gradually reloading a tendon or muscle structure, remain the same. Some manual techniques, usually performed by the PT, can be adapted for telerehabilitation and performed by the patient (self‐mobilisation, massage of an area, etc.).

We were taught to perform movements correctly, to have optimal technique, but [telerehabilitation] forced me to accept that a movement might be performed a bit less perfectly.

Oh yes, because she always does the exercises herself. It’s not like she tells me to lift her leg and doesn’t do it. She always does it. So, I watch what she does. If I don’t understand something, I watch what she does or ask her. It’s exactly like being in the clinic, I think.

For PT1, whether in telerehabilitation or in person, the care approach for a patient remains the same.

You need people who are motivated […] So I think the limitations are the same as when you have people who arrive late and have all the excuses in the world and don’t have their things. You’ll always have people who aren’t necessarily motivated, you see, but for me, it’s not more on one side than the other.

For many PTs, telerehabilitation was not something they had considered incorporating into their practice before the pandemic.

Well, let’s say that before the first lockdown, honestly, we didn’t hear about telerehabilitation at all.

In the absence of regulations, telerehabilitation was not practiced, and PTs were not trained.

The other problem is that I learnt telerehabilitation on the job by practicing. So, I made mistakes, did some things very well, did some things very poorly, and some things didn’t work at all. When I realized this, I made adjustments.

I'm not sure because (silence) I don't have enough data. Generally speaking, I'm not always satisfied with my care. So, I'm basing this on the entire patient base I may have. Comparing 6 patients against a 12‐year history of private practice in person. It's a bit complicated.

With the pandemic and the restriction in direct contact, an important aspect emerged with telerehabilitation. The therapist's home space became their workspace.

I basically had two setups in my office: either I was at my desk for discussions and data entry, or the computer was placed on a piece of furniture that allowed the patient to see me doing the exercises. Not entirely, because I didn’t have enough space, but with a medium shot so that it was enough for them to see a bit of what needed to be done.

Thus, therapists had to transform their workspace into sub‐spaces with a sub‐space for close‐up one‐on‐one exchanges and a sub‐space for exercises with sufficient framing to see and be seen in full body during the execution of a movement or exercise.

My level of attention wasn’t necessarily optimal. I had a screen in front of me, my laptop screen, and two other screens behind me. Plus, a phone next to me. I had many screens around me, and they were all potential sources of distraction.

PT4 explained that to compensate for aspects of in‐person communication that are absent in telerehabilitation, such as non‐verbal communication or touch, she tends to talk more and ask her patients more questions.

So, the physical therapist needs to be a skilled verbal communicator to effectively conduct telerehabilitation sessions.

All PTs interviewed agreed that communication via a video transmission tool is a skill that can be learnt. They considered communication with the patient to be an essential element for the effective delivery of care.

The change in the space and in communication in which care is provided has led to a change in the therapeutic relationship, according to the PTs interviewed.

It’s quite amusing. I feel like I’ve had a more intimate relationship with them due to telerehabilitation than in person at the clinic because we each intrude into each other’s environment.

PTs observed greater closeness and a more intimate relationship with their patients during the lockdown. The care taking place in private spaces and the use of personal communication tools (like SMS and WhatsApp) made communication more familiar, reducing some therapeutic barriers. Additionally, the stress and social isolation caused by the pandemic pushed both patients and PTs to be more intimate and to confide in each other more.

PTs emphasised the importance of trust between the patient and therapist for successful telerehabilitation and follow‐up, despite their lack of mastery of this new delivery of care. Patients had to trust their therapist even more to experiment with this new technology together, which solidified the therapeutic relationship in physical therapy.

But then I think it works well because I know her. After all, I’ve seen her at the clinic for maybe 2 or 3 years. And that’s definitely what I rely on.

I didn’t do exercises where she had to stand up or anything because it wouldn’t have worked, for example. I think she would have struggled to place her phone on a table or something like that. So, you see, I stuck to mat exercises and the usual stuff.

In addition, interactions can be complicated by problems with the internet connection or the telephone network, which can lead to sound difficulties and delays. ‘The unpredictability of live sessions’ [PT4] alters the course of the care session.

During the pandemic, the PTs interviewed used common video call applications such as WhatsApp and Zoom. Only PT4 and PT5 used specialised applications. PT5 explains, ‘For me, it takes time because I'm not used to the tool.’ However, PT4 and PT5 now have a preference for in person care since the resumption of normal activities.

Whether in a common, secular vision or through its history, physical therapy in France is associated with touch. All the PTs we interviewed agreed that physical therapy is not only about touch, let alone massage. Nevertheless, ‘touch is also the basis of our profession, so it's still essential’ [PT1]. They consider it to be clinically useful, regardless of how much scientific credibility they give to it. For PT1 and PT2, for example, touch is essential for clinical assessment.

Touching a scar, touching a muscle tension. Find out if it's inflammatory, if there's too much pressure. In short, all kinds of things that give you information you can't get any other way.

The assessment includes muscular testing with a vaginal touch, or a rectal touch, an evaluation of whether there's a descending perineum with the Valsalva manoeuvre, etc. You see, these are things that can only be done manually or in‐person.

When telerehabilitation in physical therapy was introduced in April 2020, not all interventions were authorised for telerehabilitation. For example, PT1 explained that telerehabilitation was not authorised for perineo‐sphincter rehabilitation, and justifies this by the fundamental role, for her, of touch in this rehabilitation.

Additionally, without the use of manual techniques in telerehabilitation, it was difficult for PTs to judge whether they had provided effective physical therapy care or not.

Although PTs like PT5 recognized the clinical effectiveness of their telerehabilitation techniques, they sometimes felt frustrated that they could not do everything as they would in person. This limitation pushed them to be more inventive and adapt their care approaches. PT4 added that the necessary adaptations in telerehabilitation have also transformed her in‐person practice and helped her to evolve professionally.

PTs have expressed that using telerehabilitation is not a priority for them, highlighting many difficulties in their context of practice in physical therapy in France. PT5 joins PT6 in pointing out that financial difficulties, recruitment problems, team management and outdated digital equipment are major obstacles in hospital physical therapy. PT continuing professional development is often lacking, with few opportunities for advancement. The shortage of PTs in public hospitals has forced these institutions to focus on recruitment rather than developing innovative digital care models. These barriers may prevent the integration of new digital care techniques, such as telerehabilitation, into their practices.

In the salaried sector, the picture is quickly painted: they're so bad at recruiting that they're not even at physical therapy 2.0 yet.

According to the PTs interviewed, the private model of urban‐based physical therapy care also presents a number of difficulties, making it difficult to implement innovations such as telerehabilitation. PT3 and PT5 criticise the fee‐for‐service model, with its low remuneration, which leads to abuses such as reducing the time spent with each patient and increasing the number of patients treated simultaneously. The PTs interviewed felt that their continuing professional development and the quality of their work were not sufficiently valued, which discouraged them from developing telerehabilitation practices.

All these barriers and challenges to implementing telerehabilitation lead to a difficult time to sustain telerehabilitation. When the clinics reopened, the PTs who had been using telerehabilitation, such as PT4 or PT5, resumed all in person care except for one or two patients. Where this was not the case, and telerehabilitation continued when the clinics reopened, this was at the initiative of the patients themselves, due to concerns about coming to the clinics and the COVID‐19 epidemic.

It's clearly more comfortable to be in the office than doing telerehabilitation.

It's so far removed from our usual practices that I think it will take some time.

That’s the whole challenge over a defined period; telerehabilitation clearly has its place during a health crisis.

Several of the PTs we interviewed, such as PT1, PT3 and PT5, saw a real clinical interest in telerehabilitation as a complement to or for specific reasons during rehabilitation. However, it is difficult to project telerehabilitation into usual clinical practice, which will remain ‘marginal’ [PT5].

This qualitative study has provided a better understanding of how the use of telerehabilitation in physical therapy is changing professional practices in France. This is the first study to examine the implementation of an unauthorized, unpractised practice, with untrained PTs in a pandemic context. Through experience feedback, we were able to appreciate all the adaptations and work these PTs had to make.

PTs interviewed have rapidly adopted telerehabilitation. As the use of digital technology is already very widespread among them, telerehabilitation was viewed positively. Telerehabilitation could help to address the difficulties of access to care due to the sometimes‐uneven geographical distribution of PTs in France (Conseil national de l’ordre des masseurs‐kinésithérapeutes2023). Indeed, the international literature on telerehabilitation and telemedicine highlights benefits such as reduced travel and time savings (George et al.2010; Linton and Shaw2011; Wideman et al.2019).

PTs interviewed have adapted their practice to accommodate telerehabilitation, moving from in person care to digital formats. The use of telerehabilitation is based on previous care practices, with rehabilitation principles such as working and gaining joint amplitude or progressive re‐loading of a tendon or a muscle structure remaining unchanged (Jull et al.2008). The PTs interviewed engaged in self‐learning and peer support. They had to learn by trial and error how to adapt to the digital tool they were using, for example, modifying their way to communicate and learning to cope with various technical problems. This process, often invisible and unrecognised, has already been described in the literature as the ‘invisible work’ of users, which is intensified with the use of telerehabilitation (Lima et al.2014; Linton et al.2018; O'Sullivan PB et al.2018; Okafor et al.2023).

PTs interviewed also have had to adopt a new way of communicating with patients, by speaking more slowly, giving simple, clear instructions, or making sure they are understood. They also needed to verbalise actions that they did not verbalise before (Augeard et al.2022; Darnall et al.2021; Geneen et al.2017; Heikkala et al.2023; Kennedy et al.2016; van den Heuvel et al.2021; Wertli MM et al.2014). This ‘interactional work’, which includes all verbal and non‐verbal communication during care, increased significantly with the use of telerehabilitation (Darnall et al.2021; Linton et al.2018; O'Sullivan PB et al.2018).

Our results showed that the introduction of the digital device changes the organisation of physical therapy care, creating four new subspaces: two for the therapist and the patient, each subdivided into a space for face‐to‐face exchange and another for exercises. This differs from, for example, telemedicine consultations, which have been shown in the literature to require only two subspaces (Mathieu‐Fritz2018). In addition, the results show that the PTs interviewed involved their patients more in the care, which led them to perform more tasks alone (exercises, mobilisation, etc.). It has been shown in the literature that video care is based on the delegation of tasks and skills from the professional to the patient (Mathieu‐Fritz and Gaglio2018), especially tasks that correspond to the physical therapist's core skills (e.g., self‐mobilisation of joints) (Ayesha et al.2021; George and Zeppieri2009; Linton et al.2018). This enhances the patient's work and promotes empowerment and self‐management, in line with the professional culture of rehabilitation (Alexanders et al.2015).

In the pandemic context in which telerehabilitation was introduced, the PTs interviewed observed a greater closeness in their relationships with patients, despite the physical distance (trust granted, subjects discussed during care, etc.). Previous studies have shown that the use of the same digital media as for other leisure activities leads to a mixing of spaces (e.g., use of WhatsApp for personal and professional use) and to transformations in the therapeutic caregiver/care receiver relationship (e.g., familiarity of exchanges or proximity) (Mathieu‐Fritz2018). With the experience and habit of video care, the practitioner is immersed in the interactions and forgets the physical distance (Mathieu‐Fritz2018). Despite the geographical distance, the spaces of care are transformed in such a way that their perception by the actors leads them to a rapprochement in the relationship between the provider and the patient.

We highlighted a number of difficulties in implementing telerehabilitation in physical therapy and barriers to its use. PTs have to cope with many technical problems. Moreover, providing care without touch remained difficult for these PTs, who emphasised the emotional and physical properties of touch. Touch has analgesic effects and an affective role in communicating and arousing emotions (Geri et al.2019). Even if non‐manual techniques such as active exercise, education and prevention were important to the PTs interviewed, touch is one of the foundations of the professional identity of the PT. It was difficult for the PTs interviewed to provide care or to project themselves into a practice without touch.

The implementation of telerehabilitation in physical therapy in France was not planned or anticipated by decision‐makers, but its adoption was accelerated by the health crisis of the time. However, its use was not sustained in the context of practice of PTs, where they perceived a lack of recognition, such as low hospital status, low remuneration, and a lack of opportunities for skills development.

The sustainable implementation of such devices in care practices requires several phases which are often poorly anticipated and limit their efficient implementation (Mathieu‐Fritz and Gaglio2018). Tools are already available to support the implementation of telehealth interventions (Ezzat et al.2023; Munce et al.2023). Our results highlight the importance of these elements and point out other issues that need to be addressed. To understand the difficulties of implementing telerehabilitation in physical therapy in France, we need to understand the context in which it is implemented, and the sometimes complex reality of the professionals who use it. In the French context, it is important to take into account the professional identity associated with touch (e.g., considering a hybrid practice rather than a completely virtual one) and the needs of professionals in relation to other aspects of their practice (e.g., considering specific remuneration for these acts), which may influence their use of this digital tool in the long term.

This study provides the first French empirical data on the use of telerehabilitation in physical therapy, following its introduction and use in real‐life care settings. It constitutes the first French feedback data on a practice that was not regulated and used before the pandemic. The triangulation of data (observation, semi‐structured interviews, bibliographic research) ensures the credibility, reliability and confirmability of the results (Fortin and Gagnon2022). The precise description of the steps carried out during the survey ensures its transferability and reproducibility (Fortin and Gagnon2022).

The data collected were not sufficiently informative to reach thematic saturation as the number of interviews conducted was limited (Malterud et al.2016). The limited use of telerehabilitation among French physiotherapists, combined with time constraints during the study period, limited our ability to recruit a larger number of participants. In addition, we used a convenience sample, and the population studied is heterogeneous in terms of the context of practice (private vs. public sector, subspeciality, etc.). However, they all shared the same experience of telerehabilitation in the pandemic context. The absence of consultation with other stakeholders, such as patients and members of the public, represents a limitation of this study and may affect the breadth and applicability of the findings. Further studies need to be carried out with more PTs interviewed, as well as with different stakeholders (patients, professional representatives, telehealth software developers), to gain a better understanding of the use of telerehabilitation and to better situate its place within the profession.

This first qualitative study on the use of telerehabilitation in physical therapy in France reveals a number of transformations in professional practice brought about by the use of digital tools. PTs have had to adapt their way of working for the digital video‐call tool and modify the way they communicate with patients. The use of telerehabilitation was viewed positively by the PTs, as it could improve access to care, despite the technical challenges and the lack of training in this area. However, the lack of physical contact remains one of the main barriers to sustaining the use of telerehabilitation, as touch is essential in physical therapy and part of the profession's identity. In addition, issues such as lack of human resources, low remuneration and outdated digital equipment prevent its implementation and sustained use in the clinical practice of PTs. To build sustainable use of telerehabilitation in physical therapy, further studies are needed to better understand the determinants of adopting this technology in this specific practice context and to develop tailored strategies to enhance telerehabilitation use.

The study poses minimal risk to participants. The interview transcripts have been coded, and the anonymity of the participants has been preserved. Therefore, the data are not subject to the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). The study did not require the approval of an ethics committee according to current French legislation.