Steroid supplementation remains controversial in septic shock, partly due to the heterogeneity of the populations studied. Cirrhotic patients with sepsis frequently develop relative adrenal insufficiency, showing poor response to vasopressors and poor prognosis. Early administration of low‐dose hydrocortisone might facilitate shock reversal and reduce mortality in this population.

Double‐blind, randomised, placebo‐controlled multicentre trial, enrolling adult cirrhotic patients with septic shock. Patients were assigned to receive i.v. hydrocortisone (100 mg followed by a continuous infusion of 200 mg/24 h) or placebo, for at least 3 days, followed by a tapering period of 3–7 days, depending on the time of shock resolution. Primary endpoint was 28‐day all‐cause mortality.

After enrolment of 83 patients the trial was stopped early due to slow inclusions. Most patients required low‐to‐moderate doses of vasopressors. There was no difference in 28‐day mortality (35% vs. 39.5%;p= 0.84) between hydrocortisone and placebo groups. Shock resolution (85% vs. 72.1%;p= 0.25) and days to shock resolution [3 days (2.2–4; IQR) vs. 4 (2–7.5; IQR)] were also similar between groups. More patients receiving placebo died of refractory shock (47.6% vs. 8.7%). No significant differences between treatment arms were observed in shock relapse, new shock episodes or bacterial or fungal superinfections during hospital stay. Hypo‐ and hyperglycaemias were more frequent in the hydrocortisone arm. Severity of ACLF at inclusion and inadequacy of empirical antibiotic therapy (HR = 6.40; 95% CI: 3.21–12.79) independently predicted 28‐day mortality.

Supplemental hydrocortisone did not improve short‐term survival in cirrhotic patients with septic shock requiring low‐to‐moderate doses of vasopressors.

Steroid supplementation remains controversial in septic shock, both in cirrhotic and non‐cirrhotic populations.

This double‐blind RCT showed no improvement in short‐term survival or shock reversal in cirrhotic patients with septic shock receiving supplemental low‐dose steroids. Since the study was not statistically powered, our findings should be interpreted with caution and considered inconclusive.

Severity of liver disease and of acute‐on‐chronic liver failure were major determinants of mortality together with the inadequacy of empirical antibiotic strategies.

The role of steroid supplementation in patients with high vasopressor requirements remains to be elucidated since only one third of our patients needed high norepinephrine doses (≥ 0.25 μg/kg/min) at inclusion.

Treatment of relative adrenal insufficiency (RAI) in septic shock is still a matter of debate [1] with several randomised controlled trials (RCTs) [2,3,4,5], systematic reviews, and meta‐analysis [6,7] showing conflicting results. Possible explanations are the lack of a universally accepted definition for the entity, evaluation of heterogenous populations, and the use of different treatment protocols (type of steroids/doses/duration). Moreover, novel insights into the pathophysiology of RAI further question the diagnostic tests and the beneficial effect of stress‐dose steroids [8,9,10].

Many studies have shown that a significant number of patients with cirrhosis develop RAI, especially in cases of sepsis (52%–77%) [11,12,13,14]. Its aetiology is multifactorial, including low HDL levels, substrate for adrenal steroidogenesis, and high pro‐inflammatory cytokines that suppress the hypothalamic–pituitary axis and reduce peripheral tissue glucocorticoid sensitivity [15]. Moreover, bile acids suppress cortisol metabolism, resulting in higher cortisol levels and chronic suppression of adrenal glands [9,16]. RAI impairs haemodynamic stability and contributes to the development of acute‐on‐chronic liver failure (ACLF) [17,18].

Although retrospective data [11,13] and recent consensus statements [19,20,21] suggest a possible beneficial effect of steroids in patients with cirrhosis and septic shock, large, randomised trials are lacking. Furthermore, since steroids may aggravate immune dysfunction in critically ill patients with cirrhosis, increasing the risk of infections, unreasoned use of steroids could be harmful.

Therefore, our objective was to investigate the clinical impact of treating this specific population with stress‐dose steroids in addition to standard medical therapy to reverse haemodynamic instability and organ failure and decrease mortality. The safety profile of steroids in this setting was also evaluated.

Double‐blind, randomised, placebo‐controlled, multicentre trial, involving 3 European tertiary ICUs with expertise in the management of patients with cirrhosis. From 2015 to 2019 all adult patients with cirrhosis and septic shock [defined as sepsis requiring vasopressors despite adequate fluid resuscitation to achieve a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of > 60 mmHg (> 65 mmHg if signs of hypoperfusion)] were screened for inclusion (Figure1). Main exclusion criteria were vasopressor for > 24 h, active GI bleeding, steroid/other immunosuppressive drug in the past 3 months, active malignancy, SOFA score > 16 and recent use of etomidate among others (all exclusion criteria are shown in the DataS1). Patients were randomised after providing written informed consent by the patient/legal representative if the patient lacked mental competency (with retrospective consent obtained from all patients who regained competency). The study was performed in the Medical ICU, University Hospitals Leuven, Belgium, the Liver ICU, Hospital Clinic Barcelona, Spain and University Hospital Plymouth NHS Trust, United Kingdom. The study was approved by local Ethical Committees (LeuvenS55168, Barcelona HCB/2014/0268, Plymouth 207 950). All authors had access to the study data and reviewed and approved the final manuscript.

Randomization was stratified according to center with a block size of 10 opaque envelopes and a random 1:1 allocation. Each local pharmacy department was responsible for the randomization and preparation of the study drug vials. Patients, medical and nursing staff, relatives, investigators, and members of the monitoring board remained unaware of study group assignments throughout the whole study period.

Pharmacy department of the participating hospitals prepared an infusion of 50 mL of saline serum containing 200 mg of hydrocortisone (HCS group) or 50 mL of saline (placebo group). Both solutions were identical and delivered daily to the ICU. Before starting the continuous infusion at a rate of 2 mL/h, all patients received an i.v. bolus of 50 mL of saline serum (placebo group) or 50 mL of saline containing 100 mg HCS. The study drug was initiated within 24 h after the start of norepinephrine (FigureS1). Initial rate of the study drug was maintained until the start of Day 4 and at that point gradually discontinued [reduction of 0.5 mL/h per day (50 mg HCS per day)] when: (1) patients did not require vasoactive drugs anymore to maintain MAP > 60 mmHg or > 65 mmHg if signs of hypoperfusion or (2) in any case after a 7‐day treatment period (see FiguresS2andS3for details regarding study overview and study drug tapering flow chart). Study protocol is available in the DataS2.

Definitions of cirrhosis, hypotension/shock, sepsis, different bacterial and fungal infections, adequate fluid resuscitation, refractory shock, shock relapse, new shock, ACLF, and appropriateness of empirical antibiotic therapy as well as clinical and laboratory data collected throughout the study are shown in the DataS1.

The primary endpoint was 28‐day all‐cause mortality analysed from the day of randomisation. Secondary endpoints were ICU, hospital and 90‐day mortality, rate and time to shock reversal, reversal of organ failures, and ICU and hospital length of stay.

Adverse events were recorded as safety assessment, particularly shock relapse, new shock, new infections (bacterial, CMV or fungal episodes), hypo‐ and hyperglycaemia, and GI bleeding.

We estimated a 28‐day probability of survival of 35% in the placebo group and of 50% in the HCS group [11]. Considering 5% wrong inclusions, 178 patients had to be included in each arm to detect a significant difference in 28‐day mortality (α error: 5%, β error: 20%; two‐tailed test). All analyses were performed on an intention‐to‐treat basis. Variables are summarised as frequencies and percentages or median and IQR, as appropriate. Continuous variables were compared with Kruskal‐Wallis' test. Categorical variables were compared with Chi‐square or Fisher's exact test. Time to event analyses were assessed by estimating the cumulative incidence function (CIF) and compared with the Grey's test. Predictors for 28‐day mortality were evaluated by fitting Cox proportional hazard regression models using backwards stepwise procedures.p< 0.05 was considered statistically significant. All statistical analyses were performed using R Software v4.1.0/SAS v9.4.

Three hundred eighteen patients with cirrhosis and sepsis requiring vasopressors were screened. After exclusion of 225, 93 were randomly allocated into the study. Ten patients (4 in the placebo and 6 in the HCS group) did not fulfil inclusion criteria (n= 2) or had some exclusion criteria (n= 8), resulting in 83 patients included in the final modified intention to treat analysis (43 in placebo and 40 in HCS arm; Figure1). Patients assigned to each treatment arm were balanced among hospitals. All patients received the study medication according to the protocol. One patient in the placebo group received HCS after the study period due to persistent shock. The trial steering committee decided to terminate the study early due to slow inclusion.

Baseline clinical characteristics including biochemical tests, especially total and free cortisol, MELD, MELD‐Na, Child‐Pugh, SOFA, and CLIF‐C OF scores were comparable between groups except for total serum bilirubin and albumin levels. Results of the Synacthen test are not reported since they were not available in most of the patients included in the Barcelona cohort due to technical reasons. Most patients had ACLF at inclusion with similar distribution of ACLF grades between groups (Table1).

Abbreviations: ACLF, acute‐on‐chronic liver failure; ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; BMI, body mass index; CBG, cortisol binding globulin; CLIF‐C OF, chronic liver failure‐organ failure score; HDL. high‐density lipoprotein; INR, international normalised ratio; LDL, low‐density lipoprotein; MELD, Model for End‐Stage Liver Disease; NAFLD, non‐alcoholic fatty liver disease; SOFA, Sequential Organ Failure Assessment.

Data are presented as number (percentage) for categorical variables and median (IQR) for continuous variables. For continuous variables, the number of included patients is mentioned between brackets.

There was no difference between groups regarding MAP, heart rate, serum lactate levels, time elapsed between the start of vasopressor and initiation of study drug [15 (11–19.5; IQR) vs. 18 h (12.5–22.5; IQR)], and norepinephrine dose at inclusion [0.2 μg/kg/min (0.1–0.3; IQR) vs. 0.1 μg/kg/min (0.1–0.3; IQR)]. Prevalence of refractory shock (norepinephrine dose [3] 0.5 μg/kg/min) was also not statistically different between groups. Similar baseline requirements of mechanical ventilation (42.5% vs. 48.8%) and renal replacement therapy (RRT) (15% vs. 14%) were observed between groups (Table1).

Table2shows the clinical and microbiological characteristics of baseline infections in both groups. There were 92 baseline infections, 42 and 50 in the HCS and placebo groups, respectively. Pneumonia was the most common infection (20.7%), followed by urinary tract infections and spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Fifty‐one infections were culture positive. Origin, type, and microbiological characteristics of infections were similar between groups. Pathogens isolated in baseline infections are shown in the DataS1and TableS1. Prevalence of multidrug‐resistant (MDR) infections at inclusion did not differ between groups.

Data are presented as numbers (percentage) for categorical variables.

Secondary peritonitis (HCS = 6, placebo = 6), severe acute pancreatitis (HCS = 1, placebo = 1), spontaneous empyema (HCS = 1, placebo = 1), pseudomembranous colitis (HCS = 2, placebo = 1), candidemia (HCS = 1, placebo = 3), catheter‐related infection bacteremia (placebo = 1), cholecystitis (placebo = 1), secondary bacteremia (HCS = 1), other gastrointestinal infection (placebo = 1), infected splenic infarct (placebo = 1), aortic valve endocarditis (placebo = 1).

Table3shows the clinical evolution of patients during the study period. At 28 days, 14 of 40 patients receiving HCS had died, compared to 17 of 43 assigned to receive placebo (35% vs. 39.5%;p= 0.84). CIF of survival at 28 days was also comparable between groups (Figure2A). ICU, hospital, and 90‐day mortality also did not differ between groups. ACLF (65.2%) and refractory septic shock (47.6%) were the main causes of death in HCS and placebo groups, respectively. No differences in 28‐day mortality were also observed when patients were grouped according to their clinical severity (grade of ACLF, MELD, doses of vasopressors), TableS2.

Abbreviations: ACLF, acute‐on‐chronic liver failure; ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; MDR, multidrug‐resistant.

Data are presented as number (percentage) for categorical variables.

Other main causes of death: unknown (n= 4), heart failure (n= 1).

Cumulative incidence function of 28‐day mortality (panel A) and shock resolution (panel B) in patients receiving HCS (red line) or placebo (blue line).

No significant difference in median duration of study drug (8 days), median and maximum dose of norepinephrine, shock resolution rate (85% vs. 72.1% in the HCS and placebo groups, respectively), time to shock resolution [3 days (2.2–4; IQR) vs. 4 (2–7.5; IQR)] and shock relapse (5% vs. 4.7%) was observed between groups. A trend towards a faster resolution of shock was observed in patients receiving HCS in the CIF analysis (85% vs. 74.4%;p= 0.09; Figure2B). Figure3shows the evolution of MAP and norepinephrine requirements during the first 7 days. No significant differences were observed between groups at any time point. Median vasopressor‐, ventilator‐ and RRT‐free days and length of ICU and hospital stay were similar between groups.

Mean arterial pressure and norepinephrine requirements in patients receiving HCS (red line) or placebo (blue line) during the first 7 days of therapy.

Initial infection resolved in 69.9% of patients, with no significant differences between groups (77.5% in HCS group vs. 62.8% in placebo group). The median duration of antibiotic treatment was also similar between groups (9.5 vs. 11 days). Importantly, most patients in both groups received adequate empirical antibiotic treatment (82.5% vs. 67.4%, respectively).

Table3shows the adverse events that occurred in both groups. During hospitalisation, 34.9% of patients developed new bacterial infections, with no significant differences between groups (32.5% in HCS and 37.2% in placebo). TablesS3andS4describe clinical and microbiological characteristics of these new infections. Notably, 16.7% of these superinfections were MDR (20% vs. 13.5% in the HCS and placebo groups, respectively). Invasive fungal infections were more frequently observed in patients receiving HCS, although differences were not statistically significant (7.5% and 2.3% in the HCS and placebo groups, respectively). No CMV infection was observed in the study. Figure4shows CIF for the development of superinfections, MDR infections, and fungal episodes between groups.

Cumulative incidence function of new bacterial (panel A), new MDR bacterial (panel B), and new fungal infections (panel C) in patients receiving HCS (red line) or placebo (blue line).

Risk of GI bleeding, new shock episodes (7.5% vs. 11.6%), and new organ failures were comparable between groups. In contrast, HCS was associated with higher rates of hyperglycemia (82.5% vs. 43.9%;p< 0.01) and hypoglycemia (17.5% vs. 2.4%;p= 0.03).

Table4shows the baseline clinical and analytical characteristics in survivors and non‐survivors at 28 days. Non‐survivors at 28 days showed more advanced liver disease, with higher SOFA and CLIF‐C OF scores. All deceased patients had ACLF at inclusion. Severity of ACLF correlated with 28‐day mortality. Patients with ACLF‐3 at inclusion showed the highest mortality rate compared to ACLF‐2 and 1 (CIF: 59.4% vs. 30.4% vs. 20%, respectively; FigureS4A). ACLF grade at day 7 after ICU admission was the best prognostic indicator. Patients with ACLF‐3 at day 7 showed an extremely high mortality compared to patients with ACLF‐2/1 or no ACLF (93.3% vs. 33.4% vs. 5.4%, respectively; FigureS4B).

Abbreviations: ACLF, acute‐on‐chronic liver failure; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; BMI, body mass index; CBG, cortisol binding globulin; CLIF‐C OF, chronic liver failure‐organ failure score; HDL, high‐density lipoprotein; INR, international normalised ratio; LDL, low‐density lipoprotein; MELD, Model for End‐Stage Liver Disease; NAFLD, non‐alcoholic fatty liver disease; SOFA, Sequential Organ Failure Assessment.

Data are presented as numbers (percentage) for categorical variables and median (IQR) for continuous variables. For continuous variables, the number of included patients is mentioned between brackets.

Characteristics of baseline infections did not differ between survivors and non‐survivors (TableS5). In contrast, the adequacy of initial empirical antibiotic treatment was significantly associated with outcome. Inadequate initial treatment was observed in 54.8% of non‐survivors compared to only 7.7% of survivors. Mortality of ACLF 2–3 subjects who initially received inappropriate antibiotics doubled that observed in patients treated with appropriate antibiotics (FigureS4C). The impact of the adequacy of initial antibiotic strategies was also observed when only culture‐positive infections were analysed (FigureS5).

Multivariable analysis identified inadequacy of empirical antibiotic treatment (HR = 6.52; 95% CI: 3.23–13.16) and ACLF grade (grade 3 vs. grade 1 HR = 5.72; 95% CI: 2.30–14.22; grade 3 vs. grade 2 HR = 3.29; 95% CI: 1.37–7.90) as the only independent predictors of 28‐day mortality. Variables entered in this model and an alternative prognostic model in which ACLF was replaced by different organ failures are described in the DataS1and in TableS6.

Prognosis of cirrhotic patients with septic shock is worse than that observed in the general population. Preexisting circulatory dysfunction, more severe systemic inflammation, and poor response to vasopressors increase the risk of refractory shock, organ failure, and mortality [22]. RAI, a frequent entity in cirrhotic patients with sepsis, impairs haemodynamic stability and systemic inflammation and contributes to the development of ACLF [17,22]. RAI is not only highly prevalent in cirrhosis, with poorer liver function correlating with higher incidence [23], but also associated with increased mortality [22]. Therefore, there is a pathophysiological rationale for expecting a beneficial effect of steroids in cirrhotic patients with septic shock.

Regretfully, in this randomised controlled trial evaluating HCS versus placebo in cirrhotic patients with septic shock requiring mainly low to moderate doses of vasopressors, we observed no significant difference in 28‐day mortality between treatment groups. Key secondary objectives including shock resolution, renal and respiratory support, and length of ICU stay were also not impacted by the study drug.

Data from retrospective studies and RCTs on the effect of HCS supplementation for septic shock in both general and cirrhotic populations showed a beneficial haemodynamic impact with faster vasopressor reduction and more shock reversal, especially in patients with RAI [3,4,5,11,13,22,24,25]. The effect on mortality, however, was unclear. Only one RCT has been published investigating the effect of HCS in 75 patients with cirrhosis and septic shock [24]. HCS increased shock reversal but did not affect short‐term mortality. A higher incidence of shock relapse after discontinuation of HCS and a higher number of adverse events were reported in the steroid group. A late initiation of the study drug (72 h from the onset of shock) and the inclusion of extremely ill patients could explain these negative results. In the current RCT, both potential confounders were avoided. HCS was started within the first 24 h of the onset of shock, and extremely ill patients (Child Pugh > 13 and/or SOFA > 16) were excluded. Consequently, the severity of our patients was substantially lower than that observed in the Arabi study in terms of vasopressor doses, mechanical ventilation (45.8% vs. 82.7%) and RRT (14.5% vs. 69.3%) requirements. 28‐day mortality was also markedly lower in our study, 37.3% vs. 78.6% in the Arabi study [24]. The mortality rate observed in our study was also lower than that estimated in our power calculation [11]. Earlier and aggressive ICU treatment, previously thought to be futile, probably resulted in better outcomes [26]. Indeed, the prognosis of patients with or without cirrhosis in ICU using propensity score matching is similar [27].

A possible explanation for the lack of positive effects of HCS in the current study could be the low baseline vasopressor requirements observed in most of the patients. Recent guidelines suggest the use of HCS in septic shock with norepinephrine dose ≥ 0.25 μg/kg/min for more than 4 h [21,28], a threshold that only a third of our patients reached (37.3%). Since RAI has been reported in a high proportion of patients with cirrhosis and sepsis even without shock, we decided to include patients with low vasopressor requirements considering their high risk of organ failure. The effect of HCS in patients with refractory shock could not be elucidated in this study due to the low number of subjects with high doses of vasopressors.

When comparing survivors and non‐survivors, we observed that norepinephrine dose at inclusion and mechanical ventilation were similar in both groups. However, non‐survivors presented more frequently with ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, coagulation, and renal failure and higher severity scores. ACLF was more frequent in deceased patients. This suggests that the severity of the underlying cirrhosis and renal impairment are the most important factors contributing to mortality (as opposed to circulatory and respiratory failure), factors which cannot be reversed or prevented with HCS treatment [29]. In that sense, ACLF was identified as an independent predictor of mortality and was also the major cause of death in patients receiving steroids. As such, early liver transplantation should be considered in patients with severe ACLF and septic shock, once infection is under control.

As expected, the use of inadequate empirical antibiotic strategies was identified as an independent predictor of mortality, especially in ACLF 3. This finding was reported in observational studies in patients with cirrhosis and septic shock [30]. Our results support, therefore, current guidelines on the use of broad‐spectrum antibiotics covering all potential pathogens in patients with septic shock. This recommendation is also applicable to community‐acquired episodes given the wide spread of antibiotic resistance in the community [21].

In contrast to our trial, other studies have reported a significant increase in steroid‐associated adverse events, such as shock relapse, new shock episodes, new infections and GI bleeding. In the current study, the incidence of bacterial superinfections, a feared complication in cirrhosis associated with worse outcome [31], was similar between treatment arms. New MDR bacterial and fungal infections were observed more frequently in patients receiving HCS, although differences were not statistically significant.

There were three main limitations of our study. First, the pre‐planned inclusion number and the calculated statistical power were not reached, indicating that our results should be interpreted with caution and considered inconclusive. Subsequent pre‐planned subgroup analyses could not be performed due to low numbers. Despite this weakness, this is the largest RCT conducted so far on HCS supplementation in cirrhotic patients with septic shock and was double‐blind. Second, we did not use cortisol levels to randomise the groups or to perform subgroup analyses, as the interpretation as well as the definition of RAI is still controversial, especially in cirrhosis. Additionally, guidelines do not advise basing the decision to initiate steroid treatment in septic shock patients on cortisol levels. Moreover, different measurement methods make comparison with other trials and usability in daily clinical practice difficult [32,33]. Third, the study was analysed on a modified intention‐to‐treat basis since 10 subjects were considered ineligible post‐randomisation. However, their inclusion in the ITT analysis could have biased the final results of the study.

Finally, several reasons explain the low recruitment rate that led to the early termination of the study. Significant budgetary constraints (no inclusion fee), highly demanding and complex investigation, and a limited network of centres with dedicated research staff complicated the conduct of this investigator‐initiated research.

In conclusion, supplemental HCS showed no impact on survival in patients with cirrhosis and septic shock requiring low to moderate doses of vasopressors. However, as the study was underpowered, the findings should be interpreted as inconclusive. Larger, adequately powered studies are needed to determine whether hydrocortisone confers a mortality benefit in this specific population. Severity of underlying liver disease, ACLF, and inadequate empirical antibiotic treatment played a more important prognostic role than circulatory failure in this population.