Stress granules (SG) are biomolecular condensates that represent an adaptive response of cells to various stresses, including heat. However, the cell type–specific function and relevance of SG formation, especially during reproductive development, are largely not understood. Here, we show that the meiotic A-type cyclin TARDY ASYNCHRONOUS MEIOSIS (TAM) is recruited to SGs in male meiocytes ofArabidopsisafter exposure to heat. We find that the amino terminus of TAM is necessary and sufficient for the localization of proteins to meiotic SGs. Swapping the amino terminus of TAM with the one of its sister protein CYCA1;1 resulted in a separation-of-function allele ofTAM, which prevents the partitioning of TAM to SGs while restoring a wild-type phenotype in atammutant background under nonheat stress conditions. Notably, plants expressing thisTAMversion prematurely terminate meiosis under heat resulting in unreduced gametes. Thus, the formation of TAM-containing SGs is necessary for genome stability under heat stress.

The concentration of a meiotic regulator into membrane-less compartments assures genomic stability during reproduction.

Ambient temperature is one of the most crucial environmental factors for growth and reproduction of most living organisms. In the course of the current climate change, extreme weather events such as heat waves have increased markedly, and even more extreme conditions are predicted for the near future. It is therefore increasingly important to understand how organisms, in particular plants as the main food and feed source, react to heat stress and counteract it to be able to breed heat-resilient crops.

Current work has shown that the reproductive life phase of plants, particularly meiosis, is very sensitive to heat stress resulting in a critical impact not only on fertility but also on the genetic make-up of plants due to effects on meiotic recombination [reviewed in (1)]. Beyond its role for genetic diversity, meiosis is crucial for sexual reproduction by reducing the DNA content, so that the full DNA content is restored after the fusion of the female and male gametes during fertilization. This reduction, especially on the male side, has been found to be very important for the reproductive success of plants. On the one hand, impairing male genome reduction leads to triploid plants (in diploid species), which suffer from chromosome missegregation and hence sterility in the next generation. On the other hand, genomic imbalances due to an excess of the paternal genome often result in seed abortion (2).

Unreduced gametes can result from either a failure to segregate chromosomes in meiosis I and/or disturbance of the separation of sister chromatids in meiosis II (3,4). Previous work has shown that especially the entry into meiosis II is compromised by heat (5). For the entry into meiosis, the activity of cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK)–cyclin complexes has been found to be required since weak loss-of-function mutants ofCDKA;1, the major cell cycle regulator inArabidopsis thaliana(Arabidopsis) and homolog of Cdk1 in humans, have not only severe defects in meiotic recombination but also terminate meiosis after the first division (6–8). For its full activity, CDKA;1 requires the binding of a cyclin cofactor and the phosphorylation in the substrate binding loop, the so-called T-loop, which is executed by CDK-activating kinases (CAKs) (6,9–11). Reducing CAK activity also results in the premature termination of meiosis after the first division (12). In addition, the meiosis-specific A-type cyclin (CYCA1;2), also known as TARDY ASYNCHRONOUS MEIOSIS (TAM), which builds active complexes with CDKA;1, is needed for the entry into meiosis II (13–18).

CDKA;1 has been found to be included into stress granules (SGs) in hypocotyl cells under heat stress (19). Furthermore, CDKA;1 was found to be concentrated into cytoplasmic foci in the cells undergoing meiosis, called meiocytes, upon exposure to temperatures above 30°C (20). SGs are biomolecular condensates, which have been shown in animals and plants to assemble in response to stress through liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) (21–23). SGs typically contain components of the translational machinery such as eukaryotic translation factors and poly-A binding proteins. In addition, different RNA specimens have been found to be present in SGs. Thus, the current view is that SGs are mainly involved in regulating translation by protecting mRNAs and proteins and/or inhibiting translation although in proteome analyses of SGs proteins with no obvious link to translation have also been found (24–28). However, most of what we know about SGs is derived from somatic cells, and very little is known about the role of SGs in reproductive cells.

By following the localization of three meiotic cyclins in heat-exposed male meiocytes ofArabidopsis, we identify that specifically TAM is recruited to SGs. We further map the region in TAM that is responsible for its uptake into SGs and show that this domain is not only necessary but also sufficient to target other proteins to SGs. Then, by mutating this domain, we generate a separation-of-function allele of TAM that can restore a wild-type phenotype intammutants at normal temperature conditions but fails to be recruited to SGs at heat stress. Notably, these plants terminate meiosis after the first meiotic division revealing SG formation as a crucial determinant to maintain ploidy under heat stress.

Previously, the major cell cycle regulator CDKA;1 was found to be present in heat-inducible foci in meiocytes (20). Since CDKs usually work together with a cyclin cofactor, we examined the localization of three well-characterized meiotic cyclins upon heat treatment, namely, CYCB3;1, SOLO DANCERS (SDS), and TAM, which all have been shown to build active complexes with CDKA;1 (12,14,29). For CYCB3;1 and SDS, we used previously described reporter lines (12,30). ForTAM, a genomic reporter line (TAM:mGFP) was generated that was found to be functional as determined by its capacity to fully restore a wild-type phenotype when expressed intammutants (Fig. 1and fig. S1).

Localization of (A) CYCB3;1:EGFP, (B) SDS:EGFP, and (C) TAM:mGFP in male meiocytes in leptotene (L), late leptotene-zygotene (late L-Z), zygotene-early pachytene (Z-early P), and pachytene-diakinesis (P-D) under ctcs (21°C; no heat stress) and heat shock conditions 34°C (hsc, heat stress). (DandE) Colocalization analysis of TAM:TagRFP with CDKA;1:mVenus and (FandG) with PAB4:EGFP. [(D) and (F)] Confocal images of male meiocytes during late prophase (P-D) at hsc and [(E) and (G)] corresponding pixel intensity plots across cross sections through TAM foci. (H) Localization of CDKA;1:mVenus intammale meiocytes during late prophase (P-D) and dyad stage under ctc and at hsc. (I) Duration of CDKA;1 and TAM recruitment to SGs (in minutes). Scale bars, 10 μm. a.u., arbitrary units.

Next, we followed the expression of the reporters over the course of meiosis using confocal microscopy making use of the finding that meiotic phases can be defined using morphological criteria, such as cell shape, allowing the dissection of meiotic prophase into leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, diplotene, and diakinesis (18,31). At control temperature condition (21°C, ctc from now) as well as at heat stress condition (34°C, hsc from now), CYCB3;1, as described before at ctc, gradually accumulates in the cytoplasm from early leptotene until nuclear envelope breakdown (Fig. 1A), whereafter it localizes to the meiotic spindle (12,32). Similarly, we found no obvious heat-associated change in SDS localization, which is distributed in the nucleus of meiocytes from leptotene to late zygotene, at ctc and hsc (Fig. 1B). TAM is found in the cytoplasm from leptotene until late meiosis I at ctc and over time displays an increasing expression level, as derived from several independent reporter lines (one shown here as representative) (Fig. 1C, fig. S1, and movie S1). At hsc, TAM still accumulates in the cytoplasm from leptotene to zygotene but additionally forms foci from late zygotene onward (Fig. 1C). These foci are reminiscent of the size and number of the foci observed for CDKA;1 at hsc (20).

Because of the similarities of TAM- and CDKA;1-containing foci, we investigated whether CDKA;1 and TAM colocalize in these foci. To this end, we generated an additional genomicTAM:TagRFPreporter. The reporter was also found to be fully functional in several independent reporter lines (one shown here as representative) (fig. S1). Through crossing, plants were generated that harbor bothCDKA;1:mVenusandTAM:TagRFPreporters. When exposed to hsc, meiocytes in late prophase (from pachytene onward) showed foci, in which both fluorescence signals highly overlapped in most of the foci as revealed by pixel intensity measurements (CDKA;1 fluorescence enrichment in 92% of the TAM foci;n= 35 of 38 foci) (Fig. 1, D and E). Thus, we conclude that CDKA;1 and TAM colocalize in most if not all foci in late prophase.

Earlier, CDKA;1 was found to be present in SGs of leaves and roots (19). Therefore, we asked whether the CDKA;1 and TAM-containing foci in meiocytes would also classify as bona fide SGs. A hallmark of typical SGs is the presence of components of the translation machinery, such as poly-A binding proteins, and the two poly-A binding proteins PAB4 and PAB6 were previously found to be present in SGs in hypocotyl cells (19,33). Since PAB6 expression in the published reporter is driven from the 35S CaMVpromoter, which is poorly expressed in meiocytes, we generated new reporters forPAB4andPAB6including the genomic region for both genes (PAB4:EGFPandPAB6:EGFP). On the basis of several independent reporter lines, we found that PAB4 and PAB6 accumulate in the cytoplasm of meiocytes throughout the meiotic division as well as in the cytoplasm of the tapetal surrounding cell layers at ctc. At hsc, PAB4 and PAB6 formed SGs in the cytoplasm, consistent with earlier reports. These PAB-positive SGs can be found in any stage of meiosis, e.g., also in leptotene, where CDKA;1- and TAM-positive granules could not be observed (one representative line per reporter is shown in fig. S1). To analyze whether TAM would colocalize with PAB4/6 in late zygotene and pachytene, plants containing bothTAM:TagRFPandPAB4:EGFPorTAM:TagRFPtogether withPAB6:EGFPwere exposed to heat, and the pixel intensity was measured for green fluorescent protein (GFP) and red fluorescent protein (RFP) fluorescence over a cross section through TAM-containing foci. This analysis revealed that most TAM-containing condensates also contain PAB4/6 (PAB4 presence in 82% of the TAM foci;n= 68 of 83 foci; PAB6 in 90% of the TAM foci;n= 54 of 60 foci) (Fig. 1, F and G, and fig. S1).

Next, we compared the appearance of CDKA;1- versus TAM-containing foci using live-cell imaging. To this end, we followed meiosis under ctc in real time, and once meiocytes reached late zygotene, in which CDKA;1 and TAM are recruited to SGs, the temperature was increased to 34°C and the formation of foci was monitored. CDKA;1 was associated with SGs for approximately 65 min (±21 min;n= 6 anthers) (Fig. 1Iand movie S2). TAM displayed a different pattern and was present in SGs for approximately 254 min (±33 min;n= 7 anthers) (Fig. 1Iand movie S3).

Taken together, the pattern of SGs composition during meiosis is highly dynamic. PAB4 and PAB6, and likely other components of the translational machinery, are partitioned into SGs immediately after exposure to heat, even in early meiotic stages. TAM and CDKA;1 are recruited to heat-induced SGs after exposure to heat from late zygotene onward. Last, CDKA;1 disappears from SGs faster than TAM.

The partitioning into biomolecular condensates such as heat-induced SGs often depends on an intrinsically disordered region (IDR) of a protein (34,35). TAM, but notably not CDKA;1, has an IDR, which according to FuzDrop has a high condensate-promoting probability (figs. S2 and S3) (36). To test whether TAMs IDR, located at the N terminus of the protein, is necessary for the localization of TAM to SGs, we constructed a TAM reporter version, in which the predicted IDR sequence was deleted (amino acids 1 to 159) (delIDR:TAM:GFP) (Fig. 2A). Two independent reporter lines in thetammutant background were selected and compared with respect to their localization pattern with the full-length genomic reporter (TAM:GFPintam). Under ctc, delIDR:TAM:GFP accumulates in the same pattern as TAM:GFP (Figs. 1Cand2Band fig. S4). However, delIDR:TAM:GFP is not recruited to SGs at hsc but rather shows a homogeneous cytoplasmic localization pattern in male meiocytes resembling its localization pattern at ctc (Fig. 2Band fig. S4).

(A) Schematic representation of TAM, CYCB3;1, and mutated variants of these cyclins; IDR of TAM and CYCB3;1 and CYCA1;1 in blue/cyan/dark blue, respectively; cyclin domains of TAM and CYCB3;1 in yellow/orange, respectively; and serine (S) and alanine (A) substitution. (B) Localization of TAM:GFP intam; delIDR:TAM:GFP intam; and IDRswap:CYCB3;1:GFP, Aro2Ser:TAM:GFP, 15PtoA:TAM:GFP, and IDRswap:TAM:GFP intamin male meiocytes during late prophase under ctc and hsc. Complementation analysis at ctc with confocal bright-field images of tetrad or dyads (C), Peterson-stained pollen (D), and pollen diameter quantification (in micrometers) (E). Significant differences were determined by analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey post hoc test (P< 0.05). Scale bars, 10 μm [(B) and (C)] and 100 μm (D). WT, wild type.

Next, we asked whether the IDR of TAM determines the partitioning into SGs. To address this, we fused theIDRofTAMtoCYCB3;1:GFP. As CYCB3;1 also has a predicted IDR (amino acids 1 to 388), which, however, does not appear to promote foci localization under hsc (Fig. 1Aand figs. S2 and S3), we generated two different constructs. First, one where the IDR of TAM is added before the start codon of CYCB3;1 in the full-length genomicCYCB3;1reporter (IDRTAM:CYCB3;1:GFP) and one where we replaced the IDR of CYCB3;1 with the IDR of TAM (IDRTAM:delIDRCYCB3;1:CYCB3;1:GFP; in the following calledIDRswap:CYCB3;1:GFP) (Fig. 2A). At ctc, the IDR of TAM is not affecting the localization of CYCB3;1 in bothIDRTAM:CYCB3;1:GFPandIDRswap:CYCB3;1:GFPplants compared toCYCB3;1:GFPplants (Figs. 1Band2Band fig. S4). Notably, both versions facilitated GFP-positive foci at hsc, althoughIDRTAM:CYCB3;1:GFPless prominently (fig. S3). Thus, the IDR of TAM appears to be not only necessary but also sufficient to drive proteins into heat-inducible SGs.

In the light of the absence of an IDR in CDKA;1, we next asked whether TAM directs its kinase partner to SGs. We found that the localization of CDKA;1:mVenus intammale meiocytes during the first meiotic division is not altered at ctc compared to the wild-type background (Fig. 1H) (12,20). Because of the absence of the second division intam, which leads to the formation of dyads, the localization pattern of CDKA;1:mVenus cannot be scored after meiosis I (Fig. 1H). CDKA;1 is still recruited to the SG in the absence of TAM at hsc (Fig. 1H). Thus, CDKA;1 recruitment to SGs does not require TAM. An independent recruitment of CDKA;1 and TAM to SGs is also consistent with our above findings that CDKA;1 disappears from SGs before TAM while both proteins are still present in the cytoplasm of meiocytes until the beginning of anaphase I and even beyond in the case of CDKA;1.

To further investigate the dynamics of TAM recruitment into meiotic SGs, we performed in vivo fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) experiments. First to understand the dynamics of TAM in the cytoplasm, free cytoplasmic TAM:GFP was bleached, and the fluorescence recovery was analyzed and compared to the SG marker PAB4 fused to GFP. Cytoplasmic TAM and PAB4 fractions are highly mobile with a fluorescence recovery level of 80 and 78%, respectively (Fig. 3, A and B). Next, once the SGs were clearly visible after raising the temperature to hsc, they were subjected to bleaching. The fraction of PAB4 in SGs appears to be mobile with a recovery degree of 60% (Fig. 3B). In comparison, the recovery degree of TAM:GFP fluorescence was 40%, indicating that TAM is also mobile consistent with being in a liquid environment as opposed to an aggregate (Fig. 3A). The difference between the recovery rates of PAB4 and TAM is interesting, but the underlying reason is not clear, possibly TAM and PAB4 take a different position in SG and/or TAM may be more solidly bound than PAB4 to other SG components with CDKA;1 being a prime candidate.

(AandB) FRAP analysis of TAM:GFP and PAB4:eGFP in meiocytes at hsc. Representative confocal image during FRAP and normalized intensity prebleaching, bleached, and upon recovery of cytoplasmic (dotted line) and condensates (solid line) fluorescent signal. (CandD) Localization of TAM-GFP or GFP in transiently transformedArabidopsismesophyll protoplasts. Representative confocal images of GFP fluorescence of protoplasts expressing TAM-GFP (C) or GFP (D) under ctc and hsc and quantification of SG formation in percent; white bar, cells without SGs; gray bar, cells with at least five SGs. The absolute sample size is given in the corresponding bar. Data were collected in at least five independent transformation experiments. (E) Colocalization of TAM-GFP and PAB8-mCherry in transiently transformedArabidopsismesophyll protoplasts. Representative confocal images of a protoplast showing coexpression of TAM-GFP and PAB8-mCherry after incubation at hsc and fluorescence intensity plots of GFP (green)– and mCherry (magenta)–derived fluorescence. Scale bars, 10 μm [(A) to (E)] and 1 μm [recovery images, (A) and (B)].

The recruitment of TAM into SGs is meiosis specific (Fig. 1C). To test whether this recruitment depends on TAM itself or the developmental context/cellular state, we generated a TAM:GFP reporter construct driven by the 35Spromoter and expressed it in leaf protoplasts (Fig. 3C). Under ctc, TAM accumulated in granules in 11% of the protoplasts in contrast to free GFP, which did not show any granule formation under control conditions, indicating that phase separation might be an intrinsic property of the TAM protein (Fig. 3D). Under hsc, the condensate formation of TAM was much more prominent with 89% of the TAM expressing protoplasts showing condensates, while no condensates were observed when free GFP was expressed (Fig. 3C). To test whether these condensates are SG related, we coexpressed the SG marker PAB8 with TAM in protoplasts and heat-shocked them. Notably, most TAM foci colocalized with PAB8 (PAB8 presence in 93% of the TAM foci;n= 103 of 113 foci), indicating that the phase transitioning of TAM and inclusion in SGs are not restricted to meiosis or a meiotic stage but rather reflect a property of TAM (Fig. 3E).

Since other abiotic stresses are also known to induce condensate formation (37), we further asked whether salt stress could trigger SG formation in meiocytes and whether the condensate formation of TAM can also be promoted by this stress. To answer these questions, we subjected PAB4:GFP and TAM:GFP to high salt stress. While PAB4 underwent condensate formation under salt stress, TAM foci could not be observed (fig. S5). This result shows that the recruitment of TAM to SGs is not a general stress response of meiocytes but specific to elevated temperatures.

The occurrence of PAB4/6 in SGs in early meiosis before the accumulation of TAM in SGs and the finding that CDKA;1-containing foci are formed intamalso demonstrated that TAM is not necessary for SG formation per se but likely serves a different function. To shed light on this function, we sought to generate a TAM version that is active but not recruited to SGs under heat. To this end, we first analyzed the above-describeddelIDR:TAMversion in detail in atammutant background. However, since almost a third of the TAM protein is missing, it was not unexpected that this TAM variant was not able to promote entry into the second meiotic division intammutants, as seen by the formation of dyads and subsequently the development of much larger pollen grains than in the wild type. Thus, thisTAMversion was considered as nonfunctional (Fig. 2, C, D, and E, and fig. S4).

Aromatic amino acids have been found to be particularly effective in driving LLPS necessary for condensate formation (38). Although the IDR of TAM contains only three aromatic amino acids, we decided to test their relevance for partitioning of TAM into SGs by mutating them to Ser residues. However, expressing anAro2Ser:TAM:GFPreporter construct still produced a homogeneous distribution of TAM-GFP in the cytoplasm at ctc and GFP-positive SGs under heat (Fig. 2B, fig. S4, and table S1) (38).

Analyzing the IDR of TAM further, we recognized that the N terminus of TAM contains more proline residues than found on average in theArabidopsisproteome (9.3% in TAM compared to 7% average) (39). Prolines are well-known helix breakers and could potentially contribute to the disordered nature of TAM’s IDR (40–42). We therefore generated three additional TAM reporter versions in which 6, 10, and 15 of 15 proline residues were changed to alanines, called6PtoA:TAM:GFP,10PtoA:TAM:GFP, and15PtoA:TAM:GFP, respectively (table S1). However, all proline substitutions showed a localization pattern indistinguishable from the wild-type TAM version, i.e., they accumulated evenly in the cytoplasm at ctc and localized to SGs at hsc (Fig. 2Band fig. S4).

Therefore, we sought for another approach to test the relevance of TAM presence in SGs. Cyclins build large families in flowering plants and even inArabidopsiswith its rather small genome, more than 30 cyclins exist. Members of the same cyclin subfamily often have redundant functions, as, for instance, seen for B1-type cyclins (43). TAM has one very closely related sister protein, called CYCA1;1, which we found, on the basis of generated genomic reporter lines, to be absent in male meiocytes (fig. S6). This expression pattern is also consistent with earlier genetic analyses that did not find a function of CYCA1;1 in meiosis (17). On the basis of these findings and the prediction that the N terminus of CYCA1;1 also forms an IDR, we constructed a TAM version, in which we exchanged the IDR of TAM with the IDR of CYCA1;1 (IDRCYCA1;1:delIDRTAM:TAM:GFP, in the following calledIDRswap:TAM:GFP) (Fig. 2A). Two independent reporter lines in thetammutant background were selected and analyzed for their localization pattern and functionality. Under ctc, IDRswap:TAM:GFP accumulates in the cytoplasm of meiocytes in a finely granular fashion. The reason of this pattern and difference to TAM:GFP is unclear (Fig. 2Band fig. S4). However, expression of theIDRswap:TAMversion could restore a wild-type phenotype in atammutant background, i.e., meiocytes progressed into and completed the second meiotic division as seen by the formation of tetrads instead of dyads at the end of meiosis and a wild-type–like pollen size, which indicated successful genome reduction in meiosis (Fig. 2, C, D, and E). Knowing that IDRswap:TAM:GFP can fully replace TAM function in meiocytes, we then analyzed its expression pattern at hsc. Notably, and in contrast to TAM, IDRswap:TAM:GFP barely accumulates in bright foci at hsc, allowing us to judge the effect of meiotic progression with a highly reduced SG-localized TAM under heat (Fig. 2Band fig. S4).

Since a prolonged heat treatment ofArabidopsisplants leads to sterility due to defects during pollen development (44), we exposed flowering wild-type plants andtammutants expressingIDRswap:TAM:GFPto 34°C for 16 hours and monitored pollen sizes as a proxy for the completion of a meiotic program 5 to 8 days afterward. One complication for this approach is that the bud size of a flower in which we expect meiosis to take place varies. Therefore, three consecutively developing flower buds per inflorescence on at least four heat-shocked plants per genotype were analyzed with the intent that one of them contained meiocytes in late prophase, where TAM-containing SGs are present. The pollen diameter of both wild-type andtamheterozygous mutant plants was not significantly different from the ctc control in the three flowers that were heat-shocked around meiosis (Fig. 4, A and B). Likewise, we did not find difference in pollen sizes oftamhomozygous plant under ctc versus hsc conditions although, as expected, pollen sizes were roughly twice as large in comparison to the wild-type andtamheterozygous plants. In contrast, pollen sizes from 7 of 12 flowers fromIDRswap:TAM:GFPexpressing plants were significantly enlarged under hsc in comparison to ctc resembling pollen sizes found intammutants (Fig. 4, A and B, and fig. S7). These results suggested that a heat shock triggers the exit of meiosis after the first meiotic division inIDRswap:TAM:GFPexpressing plants and with that the formation of unreduced gametes.

Peterson-stained anthers and pollen that come from heat-shocked flower buds containing anthers in meiotic stages (A) and quantification of pollen diameter (in micrometers) per flower (B). Significant differences were determined by ANOVA and Tukey post hoc test (P< 0.05). Scale bars, 100 μm.

To further investigate whether meiocytes ofIDRswap:TAM:GFPexpressing plants exit meiosis prematurely, we performed live-cell imaging of male meiosis. To allow the staging of meiocytes in these experiments, we introduced a microtubule reporter (TagRFP:TUA5) intoIDRswap:TAM:GFPexpressingtammutant plants. Under ctc, meiocytes ofIDRswap:TAM:GFPexpressingtamplants form tetrads (n= 90 cells originating from 10 anthers) (movie S4). To investigate the effect of heat on meiosis in these plants, meiocytes in microtubule stage 2-3-4 (late leptotene-early pachytene) were selected and followed under ctc until they reached microtubule stage 5-6 (pachytene-diakinesis), the stage when TAM strongly accumulates in SGs. During this stage, we increased the temperature to 34°C. As a control, we performed the same procedure withTAM:GFP TagRFP:TUA5expressingtammutants that immediately produced SG after exposure of heat from microtubule stage 5-6 onward. Notably, all meiocytes of the control plants progressed into meiosis II, resulting in the formation of tetrads (n= 119 cells originating from 14 anthers) (movie S3). In contrast, heat-treated meiocytes ofIDRswap:TAM:GFP TagRFP:TUA5expressingtammutants did not form clear SGs, as observed above, and 75% of the cells terminated meiosis after the first division with the formation of dyads, consistent with our analysis of pollen sizes (n= 50 of 66 cells originating from 11 anthers) (Fig. 5, A and B, and movie S5). We conclude that the recruitment of TAM to SGs is essential for the faithful completion of meiosis under heat highlighting the importance of SGs during stress adaptation in sexual reproduction.

(A) Confocal images extracted from live-cell imaging ofTAM:GFP TagRFP:TUA5 tamandIDRswap:TAM:GFP TagRFP:TUA5 tammale meiocytes. T, temperature (from movies S3 and S5). (B) Quantification of the ratio of premature meiotic exit (dyad formation; dark gray) and no premature exit (tetrad formation; white) ofTAM:GFP tamandIDRswap:TAM:GFP tamat ctc and hsc,n= cells analyzed. MI, meiosis I.

Many animal and plant cells form SGs in response to heat. Although already identified in plants several decades ago (23,45,46), much of our knowledge of SGs comes from animal studies, shaping the view that SGs are predominantly involved in controlling the homeostasis of RNAs under stress conditions by modulating the balance between their protection, translation, and degradation (35). Only recently, SGs in plants were found to be involved in stress tolerance, and the importance of a few RNA binding proteins in translational regulation in SGs upon stress was shown (47,48). A DEAD-box RNA helicase was found to accumulate in cytoplasmic SGs under salt stress, and its removal and overexpression caused salt hypersensitivity and resistance to osmotic stress, respectively (48). The mutated versions of two other RNA binding proteins, which were abolished from SGs, caused a reduced survival rate of those plants under heat (47).

Here, we have studied the effect of heat on male meiocytes during reproductive development inArabidopsis. Up to now, little is known about SG function during reproduction, even in animals. Notably, we have revealed that SG composition during meiosis is highly dynamic and revealed a crucial and unexpected role of TAM-containing SGs for meiotic progression under stress conditions.

A crucial but often not resolved question concerning SGs and other biomolecular condensates is whether the partitioning of a target protein into SG is of biological relevance. To address this point is not simple since it requires a variant of the target protein that is not included into phase-separated condensates. At the same time, it is important that such a variant is still functional.

Now, it is difficult to faithfully predict whether a protein will be partitioned into condensates. Phase-separated proteins often contain an IDR, but it has been predicted that about 30% of allArabidopsisproteins have an IDR; thus, it seems likely that the presence of an IDR is a not stringent predictor whether a protein undergoes phase separation (49). Conversely, CDKA;1 has no IDR and, as shown here and previously (19), clearly partitions into SGs in seedlings and meiocytes when exposed to heat. Phase separation has been found to often rely on aromatic amino acids, which are thought to promote LLPS by π-π interactions, i.e., noncovalent, attractive interactions between the planar aromatic rings. Moreover, aromatic amino acids are generally hydrophobic, promoting their aggregation in an aqueous environment such as the cytoplasm. However, TAM only has three aromatic amino acids in its IDR and mutating them to Ser did not affect the uptake of TAM into SGs. Likewise, we found that the overproportionate occurrence of Pro residues in the IDR of TAM is not a driving force of condensate formation. It is, thus, now not clear what biochemical properties of the N terminus of TAM (and CDKA;1) promote LLPS. However, the IDR of TAM is sufficient to drive other proteins, here shown for CYCB3;1, into SGs. Therefore, the N terminus of TAM may serve as a test system and tool in the future to dissect the biochemical properties needed for recruitment into SGs.

Notably, replacing TAM’s IDR with that of its sister protein CYCA1;1 resulted in the generation of a separation-of-functiontamallele. This TAM version could restore a wild-type phenotype intammutants at ctc, but this version was not included into SGs at hsc and plants expressing the IDRswap:TAM version suffered from heat treatment by terminating meiosis after the first meiotic division resulting in unreduced pollen grains and subsequently into polyploid plants. Thus, the wild-type TAM protein is required to maintain genome balance under stress conditions.

It will be interesting and important to understand in the future what the molecular role of TAM partitioning into SGs is. We propose two, not mutually exclusive possibilities for such a role. First, considering the role of TAM as a cyclin cofactor of CDKA;1, the major driving force of meiotic progression, gives rise to the hypothesis that the recruitment of TAM, as well as CDKA;1, to SGs could serve to protect them under stress conditions, while the remaining cytoplasmic non-SG located TAM and CDKA;1 might become inactive (Fig. 6). According to this hypothesis, the failure of the IDRswap:TAM version to accumulate in SGs lets the cytoplasmic level of TAM activity drop and hence causes the termination of meiosis after the first division. TAM and/or CDKA;1 may be protected in SGs until the cell has launched a full heat response, including the expression of heat shock factors, which may help to stabilize CDKA;1-TAM complexes. SGs have been previously found to function by protecting its constituents under stress conditions. For instance, in yeast, a meiosis-specific RNA binding protein and translational repressor of the b-type cyclin, clb3, during meiosis I, Rim 4, was identified to assemble into condensates triggered by heat stress. It was further proposed that Rim 4–containing SGs protect sequestered mRNA and Rim 4 itself to facilitate resumption of the meiotic cell division after stress relief (50).

Two potential mechanisms that are not mutually exclusive: TAM removal from cytoplasm (A) and TAM active control in SGs (B). At the onset of hsc, TAM (and CDKA;1 and PAB4/6) sequestration in SGs until heat stress response (hsr) is launched. TAM could have a role in translation regulation (with PAB4 and PAB6) and/or control of other substrates in SGs (no supporting experimental data provided). (C) The separation of function alleleIDRswap:TAMbecomes inactive in the cytoplasm under hsc and, by this, fails to phosphorylate substrates, which are required for meiosis I to meiosis II transition, and, by this, triggers meiotic exit.

An alternative hypothesis is that TAM plays an active role under hsc within the SGs. In this scenario, SG localization might not only provide shelter for TAM but also allow for an association with potential targets at hsc that is disrupted or reduced in plants expressingIDRswap:TAM:GFP(Fig. 6). Our finding that the RNA binding proteins PAB4 and PAB6 colocalized with TAM in SGs possibly hints at TAM targets being involved in translational regulation. Notably, TAM in complex with CDKA;1 can phosphorylate the protein THREE DIVISION MUTANT (TDM1), which functions as a translational repressor in meiocytes. Translational repression is crucial for the termination of meiosis after the second division, and loss of TDM1 results in additional meiotic divisions after meiosis II, resulting in highly aneuploid gametes and, consequently, in high sterility (14,51). Mutating the CDK phosphorylation site in TDM1 causes a premature termination of meiosis, indicating that CDKA;1-TAM represses TDM1 activity at the end of meiosis I (14). However, TDM1 was found to reside on P-bodies, and it remains an open question, whether and if so how TAM in SGs could regulate TDM1 in P-bodies. The identification of further meiotic SG and P-body components might help to understand the molecular details of the partitioning of CDKA;1-TAM and the translational machinery in meiosis, especially under heat stress.

AllA. thalianaplants used in this study were from the Columbia (Col-0) ecotype. TheCDKA;1:mVenusreporter line, theCYCB3;1:EGFPreporter line, and theSDS:EGFPreporter line were previously described (12). Transferred DNA insertion lines forTAM (tam;SAIL_505_C06) was obtained from Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre (table S2).

Seeds were surface-sterilized with chlorine gas and germinated after 2 days of stratification on 1% agar containing half-strength Murashige and Skoog (MS) salts and 1% sucrose (pH 5.8). Antibiotics were added for seed selection when required. All plants were grown under long-day conditions (16 hours light, 21°C and 8 hours dark, 18°C).

For heat treatment, plants were first grown until flowering under standard long-day conditions until sample preparations for live-cell imaging or transferred to a climate chamber at long-day photoperiod with continuous temperature (34°C) for 16 hours, whereafter flower buds past meiotic stage were removed, and plants were transferred back to standard long-day conditions for further growth. For crosses, flowers of the female parent were emasculated 1 to 2 days before anthesis and hand-pollinated 2 days later.

The reporter constructPRORPS5A:TagRFP:TUA5was previously described (18).

For the generation of the genomicTAMreporter, the sequence ofTAM(AT1G77390) was amplified from genomic DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), andmGFPorTagRFPwas inserted via Sma I restriction ligation at the C terminus (table S2). The reporter construct was then further inserted into the pGWB501 Gateway vector;gTAM:mGFP:pGWB501andgTAM:TagRFP:pGWB501.

For the generation of the reporter ofTAM-mutated versions, the N terminus (602 nt) of the genomic TAM reporter construct was deleted or replaced by either synthesized proline to alanine or aromatic residues to serine N terminus versions (table S1) or the N terminus ofCYCA1;1(869 nt) using seamless ligation cloning extract (SLiCE) (52). For the generation of the mutated versions of theCYCB3;1reporter, the N terminus ofTAM(602 nt) was added or replaced by the N terminus ofCYCB3;1(3638 nt) from the genomicCYCB3;1reporter construct, previously described (12), and then further inserted into the pGWB604 Gateway vector.

For the generation of the genomicCYCA1;1reporter, the sequence ofCYCA1;1(AT1G44110) was amplified from genomic DNA by PCR, and enhanced GFP (EGFP) was inserted using SLiCE and then further inserted into the pGWB501 Gateway vector (table S2). The above constructs were transformed intoAgrobacterium tumefaciensstrain MP90 and then intoA. thalianaCol-0 accession using a floral dip method.

For the generation of the genomicPAB4andPAB6reporters, the sequences ofPAB6(AT3G16380) andPAB4(AT2G23350) were amplified from genomic DNA by PCR and inserted into the pGWB604 Gateway vector;PAB4pro:PAB4:EGFP:pGWB504andPAB6pro:PAB6:EGFP:pGWB504(table S2) (53). These constructs were transformed intoA. tumefaciensstrain GV3101 and then intoA. thalianaCol-0 accession using a floral dip method. For the generation of thep35S:TAM:GFPandp35S:PAB8:mCherryfusion constructs, the full-length CDS without the STOP codon was amplified by PCR (table S2), cloned into pDONR221, and subsequently inserted into pABINDGFP or pABINDmCherry (54).

Protoplast isolation and transformation were performed as previously described with several adjustments (55). Plants used for protoplast isolation were grown in short day conditions (8 hours light, 22°C/16 hours dark, 18°C cycles). Leaves from 6-week-old plants were cut in small stripes and incubated in enzyme-containing protoplasting buffer [500 mm sorbitol, 1 mm CaCl2, 0.25% macerozym R10, 1% cellulase R10, and 10 mm MES-KOH (pH 5.7)] for 2 hours at 26°C with 40 rpm in the dark. Isolated protoplasts were washed twice in MaMG buffer [450 mM sorbitol, 15 mM MgCl2, and 5 mM MES-KOH (pH 5.7)]. For protoplast transformation, 300 μl of protoplast suspension was carefully mixed with 25 μg of plasmid DNA and 330 μl of polyethylene glycol (PEG)–Ca buffer (40% PEG 4000, 200 mM mannitol, and 100 mM CaCl2) and incubated for 30 min in the dark. To eliminate PEG, protoplasts were washed twice in 3 ml of wash buffer (154 mM NaCl, 125 mM CaCl2, 5 mM KCl, 5 mM glucose, 2 mM MES, pH 5.7) and lastly left in 3 ml of wash buffer for overnight incubation. Gene expression from estradiol-inducible pABind vectors was induced by addition of 50 μM estradiol to the protoplasts for overnight incubation. Heat stress was applied by incubating the 3 ml of protoplast suspension on a heat plate (PREMIERE slide warmer with cover) for 30 min at 40°C, and subsequently, 20 μl was transferred on a microscope slide for imaging.

For protein localization experiments, healthy flower buds were dissected exposing two anthers and carefully positioned in a petri dish, with 0.8% agar with half strength MS salts (pH 5.8), and meiocytes of different meiotic stages were imaged using a Zeiss LSM880 confocal microscope equipped with an incubation chamber. GFP and TagRPF were excited at λ 488 and 561 nm, respectively and detected between 498 to 560 and 520 to 650 nm respectively. Autofluorescence was detected between 680 and 750 nm. For the application of salt stress, medium was supplemented with 300 mN of NaCl.

For the protoplast experiments, confocal laser scanning microscopy was performed using the Leica TCS SP8 Confocal Platform (Leica Microsystems). Excitation wavelength of 488 nm was used for GFP, and 561 nm was used for mCherry/RFP. Emission was detected as follows: 498 to 514 nm for GFP, 590 to 630 nm for mCherry/RFP, and 712 to 724 nm for autofluorescence of chloroplasts. All protoplast images are shown as two-dimensional maximum intensity projection from z-stacks.

Live-cell imaging was performed as described previously (18,56). In short, up to six flower buds of 0.2 to 0.6 mm were carefully positioned in a petri dish with 0.8% agar with half strength MS salts (pH 5.8). Time lapse was performed using an upright Zeiss LSM880 confocal microscope with ZEN 2.3 SP1 software (Carl Zeiss AG, Oberkochen, Germany) and W-plan Apochromat 40×/ 1.0 differential interference contrast (DIC) objective (Carl Zeiss AG, Oberkochen, Germany). With the time interval of 10 min, a series of six z-stacks with a distance of 50 μm was acquired under a thermally controlled environment (21°/34°C) in an incubation chamber. Because of a sample movement, thezplanes were manually selected, and thexymovement was corrected using the Stack Reg plugin of Fiji.

Flower buds were dissected, and the anthers in late prophase were imaged using a Zeiss LSM880 confocal microscope with the exact same settings for the different heat conditions (ctc and ±25 min after hsc). For the pixel intensity plots, the pixel brightness was measured through a region of interest using ImageJ and plotted against thexdimension, which is the distance of the region of interest, or time.

In planta FRAP experiments were performed after GFP-labeled condensates were formed using the same conditions as described above, using a Zeiss LSM900 confocal microscope with W-plan Apochromat 20×/1.0 DIC objective. SGs (diameter, 2 um) were bleached with a 488-nm laser (100%, 100 iterations). To obtain the recovery curve, the intensity was normalized using Fiji.

Rescue of thetamphenotype was assessed at pollen level using a Peterson staining protocol as described in (57). For the heat shock analysis, anthers from the first three flowers 5 to 8 days after heat shock were collected and stained using Peterson staining, and then the pollen diameter was measured using Fiji.

Pollen diameters of the different genotypes and flowers were tested for significant differences using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) Tukey post hoc withP< 0.05 using IBM SPSS.

We thank L. Strader (Duke University, Durham) and A. Holehouse (Washington University, Saint Louis) for discussion and input in LLPS. We thank T. Nakagawa (Shimane University, Matsue) for providing the pGWB604 Gateway vector containingbargene identified by Meiji Seika Kaisha Ltd. We thank M. Heese (Hamburg University) for the critical reading and comments on this manuscript. We further thank J. Mehrmann (Hamburg University) for technical assistance. We thank the ISTA imaging facility for assistance for microscopy.

Funding:This project has received funding from JST-PRESTO (JPMJPR18H7), JST-CREST (JPMJCR18H4), European Union’s Horizon 2020 under MSCA grant 101034413, and a federal grant from the state of Hamburg (LFF-BiCon).

Competing interests:The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Data and materials availability:All data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.