Porphyrin-based
metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) offer a
unique platform for building porous donor–acceptor networks
that exhibit long-lived charge separation and transport upon incorporation
of electron acceptor guest species. Here, porphyrin-based MOFs, PCN-222­(H2) and PCN-222­(Zn), synthesized as nanoparticle suspensions,
are successfully infiltrated with fullerene acceptor molecules, C60or PC61BM, in both polar and nonpolar solvent
environments. The location and relative binding strength of these
guest species are evaluated through a combination of N2physisorption measurements, photoluminescence quenching, and UV–vis
absorption titration experiments. Semiempirical tight binding calculations
are used to screen potential locations of the fullerene guest within
the MOF pores, and hybrid density functional theory (DFT)-computed
interaction energies confirm the energetically favorable positions.
The fundamental photophysics of these donor–acceptor host–guest
combinations are probed using ultrafast transient absorption spectroscopy.
Sub-picosecond electron transfer involving initial exciplex population
is observed, with slow charge recombination lifetimes on the order
of τ ∼1 ns for all systems in both dimethylformamide
and 1,4-dioxane. Charge recombination occurs through population of
fullerene and/or framework porphyrin triplet states depending on the
porphyrin metalation status. The photophysics of the fullerene-loaded
MOFs are discussed in the context of relevant porphyrin–fullerene
donor–acceptor molecules to highlight the unique role of the
framework environment in dictating photoinduced electron transfer
and decay pathways.

Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)
present both technological
promise in a wide array of applications and a fruitful platform for
fundamental studies of host–guest chemistry, electron transfer,
and photophysics in three-dimensional (3D) coordination space.−Composed of metal ions or clusters connected through coordination
bonds with organic or organometallic linkers, MOFs self-assemble under
controlled solvothermal conditions to yield a variety of microporous
environments and precise chemical tunability not found in other solid-state
hybrid materials.,The retention of crystallinity
upon solvent removal or exchange renders the porous frameworks accessible
to other potential guest species during subsequent postsynthetic modification
(PSM) treatment. This provides another handle to further alter the
framework composition and electronic structure. The resulting diversity
in chemical makeup and tunable, permanent porosity make MOFs attractive
candidates for potential adsorption-based applications. While initial
targets focused on gas separation and storage,−and catalysis,−more recent
efforts to impart and study electron transfer and transport properties
in these materials pave the way for applications that rely on MOF
conductivity and/or long-lived charge separation such as resistive
sensors, electrochromic devices, and electro- or photocatalysis.−In one approach, introducing redox-active guest species via PSM
can yield MOF host–guest donor–acceptor (D–A)
systems with the desired charge transfer (CT) and transport properties.
Leveraging established molecular D–A combinations, focusing
solely here on archetypal electron-rich porphyrins and electron-deficient
fullerenes, organized D–A arrangements within the porous structures
can be achieved through host–guest interaction. Supramolecular
porphyrin–fullerene D–A complexes, which have been studied
extensively,−typically rely on self-assembly methods to build extended arrays
to reach longer length scales needed for device fabrication.,In MOF-based systems, the introduction of fullerene acceptor guest
molecules via postsynthetic modification into preformed MOF structures
containing porphyrin donor linkers can promote these D–A interactions
upon confinement within the porous structure while avoiding additional
self-assembly steps. The ideal framework for most applications, and
in particular photo­(electro)­catalysis, would promote selective infiltration
of these fullerene guests to foster the D–A host–guest
interactions yet possess a pore structure that remains accessible
to other guest molecules. PCN-222 is a MOF structure predicted to
exhibit such behavior.

The PCN-222 framework contains nodes
of Zr6clusters
connected by tetracarboxyphenylporphyrin linkers to form a 3D architecture
with two types of one-dimensional (1D) channel pores that are considerably
different in size and shape. The smaller
of the two channels is ideally suited for housing electron-deficient
molecules such as C60and other fullerene derivatives.
Preferential confinement within these triangular pores would likely
facilitate their D–A interactions with the host framework linkers,
triggering directional charge transport. The much larger hexagonal
porous channels, however, would not likely have this confinement effect
on fullerene, leaving them effectively available for other guest species.
The isostructural framework, NU-1000 (with tetracarboxyphenyl pyrene
in place of the porphyrin linkers) provides
precedent for this host–guest arrangement and D–A behavior.
Introducing metal­(IV) bis­(dicarbollide) complexes as electron-deficient
guests to this framework leads to preferential confinement within
the smaller channels, and the composite host–guest material
shows increased electrical conductivity. Furthermore, photoconductive behavior is predicted for this guest
molecule as well as C60incorporated in metal-free or zinc
porphyrin versions of PCN-222. The photophysics
and electrochemistry of similar porphyrin units, along with the precedent
for noncovalent D–A interaction with electron acceptor molecules
in cage complexes and other frameworks,,,−suggests their likely participation
as electron donors upon visible light irradiation in these PCN-222
host–guest systems. An additional advantage of MOFs with multiple
pore types is the unique chemical environments that they might exhibit
due to steric effects, mass transport limitations, or pore surface
chemistry that is distinct in different pores.

In this investigation,
we examine a series of PCN-222 frameworks
loaded with fullerene guest molecules to experimentally confirm the
predicted confinement within the porous structure and accompanying
D–A interaction with the porphyrin linkers. While charge transport
is expected to be an important property of these materials for some
applications, this study focuses on understanding the initial photoinduced
CT process and associated decay pathway of these systems. C60or fullerene derivative, [6,6]­phenyl-C61-butyric acid
methyl ester (PC61BM), guest species are incorporated in
either the metal-free or zinc porphyrin version of this MOF, PCN-222­(H2,Zn), to probe the steric effects of guest functionalization
and influence of porphyrin metalation status on the host–guest
cofacial binding strength and resulting D–A excited state decay
pathways. BothN′,N-dimethylformamide
(DMF) and 1,4-dioxane solvent environments are employed to determine
the influence of the solvent polarity on these excited state dynamics.
Steady state electronic spectroscopy combined with N2gas
physisorption measurements are used to establish the location and
relative binding strength of the fullerene guests within the frameworks,
while ultrafast optical transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy studies
reveal their excited state landscapes and associated dynamics. Optical
spectroscopic measurements of MOF materials, in general, can be challenging
because of light scattering interference. Here, we use a modified
MOF synthesis method that generates extremely stable nanoparticle
suspensions of PCN-222 to allow for in-depth steady state and time-resolved
optical spectroscopy characterization. The photophysics of the porphyrin
and fullerene components in other D–A contexts are well established,−and therefore provide a useful benchmark to help interpret the TA
results of the MOF host–guest systems and the observed trends.
By tracking the spectral signatures of the charge transfer and triplet
excited states following porphyrin photoexcitation, we observe subtle
differences in both the rate of electron transfer and the recombination
pathways depending on the fullerene guest/porphyrin linker combination.
Furthermore, global fitting and target analysis of these TA data reveal
that exciplex formation likely precedes the CT state population along
the decay path. These results are discussed in the context of related
D–A molecular systems and their established photoinduced electron
transfer pathways. The comparisons highlight how the pore structure
of the MOF uniquely promotes confinement of the acceptor species along
the rigid framework channels, which in turn influences the charge
transfer and recombination behavior toward specific triplet state
populations.

meso-Tetracarboxyphenylporphyrin
(TCPP), tetraphenylporphyrin (TPP), and zinc tetraphenylporphyrin
(ZnTPP) were synthesized using literature precedent.−Zirconyl chloride octahydrate (99% purity) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.N′,N-Dimethylformamide (DMF), toluene,
and 1,2-orthodichlorobenzene (ODCB) were purchased from Millipore
Sigma. Dichloroacetic acid (DCA) (97%) was purchased from TCI Chemicals.
Buckminsterfullerene (C60) (99.9% purity) was obtained
from Thermo Fisher Scientific, and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric
acid methyl ester (PC61BM) was obtained from Nano-C.

PCN-222 nanoparticles were synthesized following
literature precedent with some procedure
modifications. 24 mg of TCPP was added to a 100 mL pressure vessel
containing 60 mL of DMF and ultrasonicated until dissolved. 180 mg
of ZrOCl2·8H2O and 1 mL of DCA were subsequently
added, and the reaction flask was ultrasonicated for another 10 min.
Finally, the reaction flask was placed in a 135 °C oven for 24
h. After cooling to room temperature, solutions were centrifuged in
40 mL of DMF at 10,000 rpm for 10 min. Subsequently, the supernatant
was decanted, 40 mL of fresh DMF was added, and the nanoparticles
were resuspended through ultrasonication for 30 min. This process
was repeated two times. To ensure the removal of ZrOCl2·8H2O and TCPP starting material, the nanoparticles
were resuspended in 20 mL of a 1 M HCl/DMF mixture using ultrasonication
and left in a 120 °C oven for 18 h. Next, 20 mL of DMF was added
to the suspension, which was then centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000
rpm. Finally, the supernatant was decanted and 40 mL of DMF was added
to resuspend the nanoparticles. PCN-222­(Zn) nanoparticles were synthesized
by postmetalation of PCN-222­(H2) using a previously reported
procedure with slight modification. 100
mg of ZnCl2was added to 40 mg of PCN-222­(H2) suspended in 20 mL DMF. The mixture was heated to 90 °C for
24 h. After cooling to room temperature, the PCN-222­(Zn) suspension
was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min, decanted, and resuspended
in 20 mL 0.5 M HCl/DMF. Subsequently, the 0.5 M HCl/DMF suspension
was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min, decanted, and resuspended
in 40 mL fresh DMF. After the centrifugation step in fresh DMF was
repeated two more times, the PCN-222­(Zn) nanoparticles were resuspended
a final time in DMF. To generate these MOF suspensions in 1,4-dioxane,
solvent exchange was performed by centrifuging the DMF nanoparticle
suspension at 10,000 rpm for 10 min followed by decantation and resuspension
of the solid in 40 mL of 1,4-dioxane. This process was repeated five
times.

For powder X-ray diffraction
and N2physisorption measurements, 40 mg of washed PCN-222­(H2) or PCN-222­(Zn) nanoparticles suspended in 10 mL of DMF were
combined with 100 mg of C60or PC61BM dissolved
in 10 mL of ODCB and allowed to soak for 7 days. This 8:1 fullerene/porphyrin
ratio PCN-222­(H2,Zn) nanoparticle suspension was then centrifuged
at 10,000 rpm for 10 min. After the supernatant was decanted, the
nanoparticles were subsequently washed and centrifuged in 40 mL of
toluene two times to achieve solvent exchange and remove unbound C60. Following the final decantation step, the sample was allowed
to air-dry overnight. For transient absorption spectroscopy, PCN-222­(H2) or PCN-222­(Zn) nanoparticle suspensions in ∼10 mL
of DMF (or 1,4-dioxane) were concentration adjusted to achieve an
optical density of ∼0.2 at 400 nm absorption wavelength (resulting
porphyrin concentration is ∼6.7 × 10–6M). Subsequently, a 200 μL aliquot of C60in toluene
was added to achieve a final molar ratio in a solution of 8:1 C60guest to porphyrin linker. The samples were allowed to soak
for 7 days.

The zinc content
in PCN-222­(Zn) was
evaluated using atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) (Thermo Scientific
iCE 3500 with a Zn hollow cathode lamp). 10 mg of PCN-222­(Zn) was
activated in a vacuum oven at 130 °C for 24 h. Then, 7 mg was
added to 10 mL of saturated NaOH and allowed to digest overnight prior
to the AAS measurement. PCN-222­(H2,Zn) nanoparticles were
characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and dynamic light
scattering (DLS). SEM images were captured on a Hitachi S-4800 field
emission scanning electron microscope using a secondary electron detector
with an accelerating voltage of 15 kV and a probe current of 10 mA.
SEM samples were prepared on a fixed aluminum stub, carbon conductive
tape, and 1 mm of iridium sputter treatment. DLS measurements of the
PCN-222­(H2,Zn) nanoparticle suspensions in DMF were obtained
using a Malvern Zetasizer Nano-ZS instrument equipped with a 4 mW,
633 nm He–Ne laser and an Avalanche photodiode detector at
an angle of 173°. Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) measurements
were completed on a Rigaku MiniFlex 6G from 2 to 60° 2θ
running at 40 kV and 15 mA (600 W). UV–visible absorption spectra
were collected on a Cary 5000 UV–vis spectrophotometer in a
quartz cell with a 1 cm optical path. The fluorescence data were collected
on a Horiba Fluorolog-3 spectrofluorometer using λ = 421 or
430 nm excitation wavelength for the metal-free porphyrin- and Zn
porphyrin-containing frameworks, respectively. Emission lifetime measurements
were collected using a Light Conversion Harpia ultrafast spectroscopy
system equipped with time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC)
capability. λ = 421 or 430 nm excitation pump pulses were generated
using a Yb:KGW pumped femtosecond laser source run at 10 kHz with
noncollinear optical parametric amplification.

The samples were degassed
against vacuum (1 × 10–5Torr) at room temperature
for 15 h, heated to 120 °C in 30 min, and held at 120 °C
for 2.5 h prior to surface area and pore size distribution measurements.
This procedure was performed in a home-built temperature-programmed
desorption setup equipped with a residual gas analyzer (RGA) able
to monitor mass-to-charge ratios up from 1 to 200 amu. Using RGA,
this degassing procedure was determined to be sufficient to remove
remaining solvents and water potentially obstructing N2binding sites. N2physisorption isotherms at 77 K performed
in a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 were collected with 45 s equilibration
time in thep/p0range
of 0–0.001 decreased to 10 s forp/p0> 0.001. From these isotherms, the specific
surface area was extracted through the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller
(BET) model in the range ofp/p0from 10–5to 0.1 and respecting the Rouquerol
criterion. The pore size distribution
and pore volume of the samples were modeled in the range of 5 ×
10–5<p/p0< 0.8 using the commercially available DFT model for cylindrical
geometries called “N2@77 Koxide cylindrical
pores Tarazona” available in the Micromeritics software.

For UV–vis titration
measurements and photoluminescence (PL) quenching studies, C60⊂PCN-222­(H2,Zn) and PC61BM⊂PCN-222­(H2,Zn) suspension samples with a range of C60or
PC61BM concentration were prepared by adding 200 mL total
volume aliquots of toluene containing 0.1–8 mol equiv of C60or 0.1–16 mol equiv PC61BM per porphyrin
linker to 10 mL PCN-222­(H2,Zn) suspensions in DMF. The
final porphyrin linker concentration in each sample is 1.67 ×
10–6M. Samples were allowed to soak for 7 days
to ensure diffusion of guest into pores prior to UV–vis and
photoluminescence spectroscopy measurements.

MOF suspension samples
were measured in a 2 mm optical path quartz cuvette. Transient absorption
data sets were acquired using a Coherent Libra Ti:sapphire laser,
with an output of 800 nm at 1 kHz. A Light Conversion TOPAS-C OPA
was used to generate the ∼150 fs pump pulse tuned to 400 nm
for these studies to excite near the peak of the porphyrin Soret band.
The pump pulse energy was typically 100 nJ, and the pump spot size
was found to be ∼300 μm through the use of a beam profiler
(ThorLabs). In an Ultrafast Systems Helios Spectrometer, a small amount
of 800 nm light was used to pump a 1 mm sapphire crystal to generate
450–800 nm probe light for UV–vis TA. NIR supercontinuum
was generated in a 10-mm-thick sapphire crystal. A delay up to 5 ns
can be achieved with the Helios. Two-dimensional (2D) maps were processed
averaging three spectra for background and scattering light subtraction,
chirp correction, and single-wavelength kinetic slices using Surface
Xplorer. Data were then imported into MATLAB software to extract 
decay and species-associated spectra (SAS) using a custom global fitting
routine.

Nudged elastic
band (NEB)−calculations are performed using
the GFN2-xTB method in the ORCA,program package. The previously reported C60position centered within the triangularly arranged porphyrin
linkers (P1) is taken as the start structure, and the position in
between adjacent porphyrin trimers along thec-axis
of the framework is taken as the final position (P2) of the NEB search.
Due to the symmetry of the MOF along thec-axis,
this search for the energetically lowest path from P1 to P2 covers
all possible positions of the fullerene guest species along this pore.
The calculation is performed with a cutout of the MOF as illustrated
inFiguresandS9. The resulting energy curve (Figure S10) does not show any local minima between P1 and
P2, allowing further investigations to focus on these two positions.
Interaction energies between the C60guest and the framework
are calculated with PBEh-3c on GFN2-xTB
geometries. For structures in which both P1 and P2 are occupied, interaction
energies are calculated with and without a single explicit solvent
molecule (DMF or 1,4-dioxane) located between the two C60molecules, along with an implicit solvation model using SMD for the respective solvent. Molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations with mcGFN-FF and NEB
calculations with GFN2-xTB are performed to model the diffusion of
these solvent or C60guests from the small to large pores
of the framework.

Illustration of C60positions in the PCN-222 model system.
(a) Top view along the triangular porous channel including a C60molecule at position 1 in between the porphyrin linkers.
(b) Side view of the model system with two C60molecules
located at positions 1 and 2. (c) Side view of the model system with
a single DMF molecule between the two C60at positions
1 and 2.

PCN-222 nanoparticles
were characterized by PXRD, SEM, and DLS (Figures S1 and S2). While diffraction measurements confirmed the crystallinity
and phase of the framework, SEM revealed particle sizes of ∼120
nm. DLS characterization showed similar results, yielding an average
particle size of ∼140 nm. The PCN-222 DMF suspensions display
UV–vis absorption spectra typical of porphyrins like tetraphenylporphyrin
(TPP) in solution (Figure S3). Notably,
the Soret band for PCN-222 is red-shifted compared to that of analogous
complex TPP in DMF. Postsynthetic metalation of the free base porphyrin
linker sites of PCN-222 with Zn was first indicated by the distinct
color change of the MOF nanoparticle suspension from magenta to violet
and then confirmed by UV–vis absorption spectroscopy as revealed
by the characteristic change in the Q-band region (Figure S3). Elemental analysis by AAS characterization is
consistent with complete metalation of the porphyrin linkers (5.7
wt % Zn measured compared to the theoretical 5.2 wt %). Upon introduction
of the fullerene guests (C60or PC61BM), PXRD
characterization confirmed the retention of crystallinity and phase
of the PCN-222 hosts in each case (Figure S1).

N2physisorption measurements provide some insight into
the location and distribution of the fullerene guest species in the
MOFs. N2physisorption isotherms and the results of pore
size distribution analyses for PCN-222­(H2,Zn), C60⊂PCN-222­(H2,Zn), and PC61BM⊂PCN-222­(H2,Zn) are shown inFigure S4and
summarized inTable S1.Figuresummarizes the pore volume
changes derived from these adsorption data when C60is
infiltrated in either the metal-free or Zn porphyrin versions of PCN-222.
Similar results are found for PC61BM guests. The surface
area and pore volume of the C60- and PC61BM-infiltrated
MOFs are lower than those of the parent PCN-222 material, confirming
the incorporation of these guest species within the porous frameworks.
The pore size distribution analysis of these data reveals two different
pore sizes consistent with the ∼1.2 nm-wide triangular porous
channels and 3.7 nm-wide hexagonal porous channels of the PCN-222
framework. Notably, in the metal-free MOFs, the triangular pore volume
decreased by nearly 59% while the hexagonal pore volume decreased
by only 16% upon incorporation of C60. For PCN-222­(Zn),
both the small and large pore volumes decreased by similar amounts,
24% for the triangular pores and 34% for the hexagonal pores, upon
introduction of C60. The same volume reduction trends are
observed for the PC61BM-loaded MOFs. The significantly
larger reduction in small pore volume in PCN-222­(H2) upon
incorporation of fullerene guests indicates higher loading of C60or PC61BM in the triangular channels of this
MOF compared to PCN-222­(Zn). This preferential adsorption may be a
consequence of stronger binding affinity of the metal-free porphyrin
linker sites for fullerene guests, as will be explored below.

(Left) Pore
volume of PCN-222­(H2,Zn) (solid) and C60⊂PCN-222­(H2,Zn) (patterned) in the hexagonal
and triangular pores determined through fitting N2physisorption
isotherms. Arrow labels indicate the percent pore volume reduction
upon introduction of C60in PCN-222­(H2,Zn).
(Right) Hexagonal (red) and triangular (blue) pores of the PCN-222
structure are illustrated, where the proposed location of C60is graphically depicted and the weak interaction of C60in the hexagonal pores is highlighted by using parentheses.

While
the N2physisorption characterization revealed the relative
loading of
the fullerene within the small triangular and large hexagonal pores
of the framework, it does not offer direct evidence of interaction
between the framework porphyrin linkers and fullerene guests. Photoluminescence
quenching titration measurements provide initial confirmation of these
binding interactions and insight into their relative strengths for
the two MOFs and two fullerenes.Figureillustrates the characteristic porphyrin
linker emission of PCN-222­(H2) and PCN-222­(Zn), along with
the quenching observed upon the introduction of C60or
PC61BM in each case. Compared to the analogous fluorescence
titration measurements of TPP or ZnTPP in solution, which show negligible
quenching upon fullerene titration (Figure S5), the fluorescence quenching behavior observed for the MOF systems
indicates linker–guest interaction and implicates the unique
confinement effect of the framework as its primary driving force.
The PCN-222­(H2) framework exhibits more pronounced fluorescence
quenching compared to PCN-222­(Zn) upon introduction of either C60or PC61BM, indicating a greater association of
the fullerene guests with the metal-free porphyrin linker sites compared
with the Zn porphyrin analogues.

Fluorescence titration measurements of
(a) C60⊂PCN-222­(H2), (b) C60⊂PCN-222­(Zn), (c) PC61BM⊂PCN-222(H2), and (d) PC61BM⊂PCN-222­(Zn) in
DMF. Insets: Stern–Volmer plots ofI0/Ias a function of the C60or PC61BM concentration (mM).

The inset graphs ofFigureshow Stern–Volmer plots derived from
the titration
measurements. The plots further illustrate the marked difference in
fluorescence quenching between the metal-free and Zn porphyrin-based
MOFs upon introduction of fullerene guests. Notable deviations from
linearity are observed in the higher fullerene concentration range
in each case. Interpreting these deviations, however, is complicated
by the multiple factors likely influencing fluorescence quenching
behavior in these materials. While combined static and dynamic quenching
processes as well as sphere-of-action quenching are marked by upward
curving Stern–Volmer plots, fractional accessibility of fluorophores
yields the opposite trend, producing downward curvature of the plot
with higher quencher concentration. In
fluorescent MOFs such as PCN-222, all of these factors may be influencing
the observed trends. Pore confinement, coupled with different fullerene–porphyrin
ground state binding strengths that depend on the porphyrin metalation
status, would likely influence the relative contribution of static,
dynamic, and sphere-of-action fluorescence quenching by the fullerene
guests, whereas incomplete diffusion of the fullerene guest molecules
within the porous structure would render some framework porphyrin
fluorophore linker sites effectively inaccessible to the fullerene
guests. The net downward trend for the PCN-222­(H2) Stern–Volmer
plot suggests that the latter factor dominates at higher C60and PC61BM concentrations. However, the near-complete
fluorescence quenching observed even at modest fullerene concentrations
suggests that this population of inaccessible fluorophores is quite
small. The overall upward curvature of the PCN-222­(Zn) Stern–Volmer
plot at higher C60concentration indicates the dominant
effects of increased contribution of collision and/or sphere-of-action
quenching between excited porphyrin linkers and weakly/nonbound, yet
confined, fullerene guests. Evidence for this behavior can be found
in a changing fluorescence lifetime with increased C60loading
(Figures S6 and S7). Interestingly, this
upward curvature trend is not observed for PC61BM in PCN-222­(Zn).
Its downward curving Stern–Volmer plot suggests that the added
steric bulk of this fullerene guest may inhibit its diffusion, outweighing
any collision or sphere-of-action quenching contributions.

UV–vis
absorption spectroscopy characterization provides evidence for a ground
state interaction between the fullerene guest and porphyrin linkers
in PCN-222­(H2,Zn) through the observed red shift and absorbance
decrease of the Soret band (Figure). These spectral changes occur when electron density
is withdrawn from the porphyrin units by cofacial van der Waals interactions
with the fullerene molecules within the porous framework. Note, no porphyrin-based Soret or Q-band spectral
changes are observed upon addition of PC61BM or C60to TPP or ZnTPP in DMF solutions (Figure S8), confirming the unique confinement effect of the porphyrin-based
frameworks on the fullerene guests.

UV–vis titration measurements for
(a) C60⊂PCN-222­(H2), (b) C60⊂PCN-222­(Zn), (c) PC61BM⊂PCN-222­(H2), and (d) PC61BM⊂PCN-222­(Zn)
in DMF. Inset: binding isotherm generated by monitoring absorbance
at λ = 421 nm (metal-free versions) and λ = 430 nm (Zn
versions) as a function of relative fullerene/porphyrin concentration,
expressed as fullerene to porphyrin trimer ratio, (e.g., [C60]/[P]3) in line with a triangular pore location.

UV–vis titration experiments (Figure) are used to establish association
constantsKassocfor each fullerene-loaded
MOF system.
Titration isotherms are generated from the Soret band changes measured
for the MOF suspensions upon introduction of the fullerene guests.
On the basis of this analysis,,theKassocvalues were evaluated to be 1.69 × 106M–1for C60⊂PCN-222­(H2), 2.88 × 106M–1for PC61BM⊂PCN-222­(H2), 1.66 × 105M–1for C60⊂PCN-222­(Zn), and 3.26 ×
105M–1for PC61BM⊂PCN-222­(Zn).
These results show that C60and PC61BM have
similar binding strengths within PCN-222. However, the metal-free
porphyrin framework exhibits higher binding affinities for these fullerene
species compared with the zinc analogue. While this trend contradicts
the reported computational studies of C60binding strength
on this system, analogous titration studies
of related metal-free and zinc porphyrin complexes with cofacial C60interaction also showed stronger binding for the metal-free
porphyrin versions. Notably, those studies
similarly predicted a higher affinity for the Zn porphyrin version
as well. The single inflection point in these titration data suggests
that only one axial coordination site involves significant binding
interaction. Based on the appropriately sized small triangular pores
of the PCN-222 structure, we hypothesize that this is the location
of the bound fullerene guest species. This binding location is both
theoretically predicted and in line with
reported cyclic porphyrin trimer supramolecular cage systems with
similar dimensions that form analogous complexes with fullerenes. UV–vis titration measurements of that
supramolecular system yielded association constants on the order of
104–106M–1depending
on the solvent.

Computational modeling further elucidates the
likely locations of the fullerene guest species within the triangular
pore volume of the framework. In previous computational studies, only the position of the guest species that
are cofacially associated with the porphyrin linkers in the small
triangular pore has been considered. However, other positions along
this channel might be occupied and could affect the properties of
the MOF. To this extent, possible locations of the C60molecule
along the triangular porous channel of the PCN-222 structure were
investigated by using the NEB reaction path exploration algorithm.
Two minima were identified: one associated with the C60interacting with the triangularly arranged porphyrin linkers (P1)
and the other for the C60located at the position between
adjacent porphyrin sites along the triangular channel (P2) (seeFigure).

Calculated interaction energies,
listed inTable,
show that both positions can be occupied
simultaneously without an energetic penalty. Specifically, the interaction
energy with both positions occupied is 1.7–1.8 kcal/mol lower
than the sum of the interaction energies of only P1 or P2 occupied
depending on the implicit solvent. To investigate whether a solvation
shell around the C60molecules at P1 and P2 is feasible,
we additionally calculated interaction energies with a single explicit
solvent molecule between the two C60molecules along with
implicit solvation contributions. The energies reported inTableshow that with the
addition of a DMF molecule, the interaction energy is reduced by 82%,
and for 1,4-dioxane it is reduced by 108%. This indicates that occupying
both positions in the small triangular pore with C60molecules
does not leave enough space for solvent molecules. Furthermore, molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations showed that both solvent molecules can move
from the small pore to the large pore through the gap between the
two linkers in PCN-222, while the C60molecules are unable
to move through this gap. This suggests that upon fullerene loading,
the small triangular pores are mostly occupied by the C60molecules and the solvent molecules are displaced into the larger
voids of the hexagonal pores. The results of the MD simulation are
presented inFigures S11–S13of
the Supporting Information. The geometries for all calculations and
the reaction equations for the interaction energies are given in theSupporting Information.

The energies include solvation contributions
from the SMD model as indicated.

A single solvent molecule located
between the two C60molecules as described in the text.

To analyze the excited
state dynamics of these fullerene-loaded MOF systems, we turned to
femtosecond transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy. TA data collected
for C60⊂PCN-222­(H2) and C60⊂PCN-222­(Zn) are presented inFigure. The top panels (Figurea,b) contain spectral slices extracted at
different time delays over the 5 ns window and kinetic traces (inset
graphs) collected at diagnostic probe wavelengths associated with
different transient species. The bottom panels (Figurec,d) show the species-associated spectra
(SAS) of these two systems derived through the TA data global fitting
analyses (vide infra). The TA results for the PC61BM-loaded
MOFs are found inFigure S14, and those
of the MOF nanoparticle suspensions without fullerene guests are shown
inFigure S15. Upon photoexcitation, each
MOF system displays characteristic porphyrin excited state absorption
(ESA) at ∼480 nm along with Soret and Q-band ground state bleach
(GSB) features, reflecting the immediate population of the S1excited state of the porphyrin moiety (following fast internal conversion
from S2that occurs within the instrument response time).
While PCN-222­(H2) and PCN-222­(Zn) in the absence of fullerene
exhibit a decay of these features that indicates direct return to
the ground state, the presence of the acceptor guest species in these
MOFs yields TA spectral signatures that reflect CT excited state population
along their decay path in each case. Following well-established literature
precedent, the broad absorption band between 600 and 800 nm arises
from the porphyrin radical cation, and
the 1080 and 1020 nm ESA bands are due to the C60and PC61BM radical anion species, respectively.
By 5 ns, the broad visible ESA band converges into a feature centered
around ∼740 nm, while the broad ESA in the NIR region beyond
900 nm decays to zero. This spectral evolution at longer delay times
suggests charge recombination to the fullerene triplet excited state based on similar observations of electron transfer
pathways in molecular porphyrin-C60systems. At this long delay time, TA spectra for the
metal-free porphyrin frameworks with fullerene guests also display
residual absorption at ∼475 nm, accompanied by the GSB features,
which is the hallmark of porphyrin locally excited triplet state population and has been documented in molecular porphyrin-C60analogues.,The persistence of both ESA features
along with the GSB at long time delays in this case indicates that
charge recombination occurs via both porphyrin and fullerene triplet
excited state decay paths. In contrast, TA spectra for the Zn-metalated
porphyrins in PCN-222­(Zn) with fullerene guests only show absorption
around 740 nm by 5 ns, with all other features decaying to zero, indicating
that the reverse charge transfer (RCT) event decays primarily to the
C60triplet state.

TA spectral overlays of (a) C60⊂PCN-222­(H2) and (b) C60⊂PCN-222­(Zn); the insets show
kinetic slices obtained from the corresponding spectra at 475, 740,
and 1080 nm. Species-associated spectra of (c) C60⊂PCN-222(H2) and (d) C60⊂PCN-222­(Zn).
Samples were measured as nanoparticle suspensions in DMF with λ
= 400 nm excitation.

The global fits of the
TA data provide further insight into the
excited state decay pathways and kinetics for these fullerene guest-containing
MOFs. Target analyses (seeSIfor more
details) reveal four intermediate state components for both C60⊂PCN-222­(H2) and PC61BM⊂PCN-222­(H2) and five components for C60⊂PCN-222­(Zn)
and PC61BM⊂PCN-222­(Zn). The SAS with the fastest
lifetime component for both C60⊂PCN-222­(H2) and C60⊂PCN-222­(Zn) is assigned to the singlet
excited state of the porphyrin donor linkers,1P*-C60or1ZnP*-C60with lifetimes τ
= ∼0.3 and ∼0.2 ps, respectively. In C60⊂PCN-222­(H2), this initial porphyrin excited state decays to subsequent
intermediate species, one with τ = ∼55 ps and another
with τ = ∼1110 ps. These SAS components each display
absorption features at ∼625 and ∼1080 nm (i.e., porphyrin
cation and C60anion spectroscopic signatures, respectively),
indicating population of excited states with CT character. Notably,
the τ = ∼55 ps SAS component displays broader spectral
features that become slightly more resolved by the third component.
These global fit results align with those reported for related porphyrin–fullerene
molecular dyads that involve through-space electron transfer.−In these systems, exciplex formation is invoked to explain the shorter
lifetime component, indicating that its population precedes that of
the formal charge transfer excited states along the decay pathway.
The exciplex species in this molecular dyad, characterized by broader
spectral features compared to the pure CT state, is a geometrical
rearrangement of the donor and acceptor in the excited state that
delocalizes the initial excitation of the donor with the possibility
of some CT character. Thus, we assign the shorter and longer lifetime
intermediate SAS components in C60⊂PCN-222­(H2) to the exciplex (PC60)* and P+C60–CT state decay pathways, respectively.
The C60⊂PCN-222­(Zn) excited state deactivation pathway
also involves exciplex (ZnPC60)* and CT excited state,
ZnP+C60–populations; however,
the exciplex involves two decay components (with τexciplex= 6.6 and 145 ps). These observed kinetics may be attributed to
weaker fullerene binding affinities of the Zn porphyrin linkers (Figure), which allow multiple
relaxation steps toward the optimal exciplex geometry. The formal
CT excited state, with population similarly confirmed by the sharpened
spectral features, has a lifetime of τRCT= 986 ps.
The final “infinite” SAS component for C60⊂PCN-222­(H2) that persists beyond the 5 ns time
window of the TA experiment, displays absorption features at ∼475
and ∼740 nm, corresponding to the triplet states of the porphyrin and C60, respectively. The final SAS component for C60⊂PCN-222­(Zn)
only displays the ∼740 nm feature confirming exclusive decay
via the C60triplet excited state as previously discussed.
A summary of the proposed excited state deactivation pathways derived
from these TA analyses for the two MOF systems is depicted inFigureb.

(a) Illustration of photoinduced
electron transfer pathway as it
relates to the proposed encapsulated location of the fullerene guests
within the small triangular pores of the MOF. (b) Proposed excited
state decay pathway of C60⊂PCN-222­(H2) (top) and C60⊂PCN-222­(Zn) (bottom).

Aside from the differences in exciplex and triplet
decay
pathways,
both metal-free and zinc porphyrin frameworks loaded with C60acceptor guests exhibit similar excited state dynamics with respect
to charge transfer behavior and reverse charge transfer lifetimes
(∼1 ns). The deviation in triplet decay pathways between C60⊂PCN-222­(H2) and C60⊂PCN-222­(Zn)
can be rationalized based on the established triplet state energy
levels of relevant porphyrin and zinc porphyrin complexes relative
to that of C60. While the triplet energies reported for
metal-free and zinc tetraphenylporphyrin complexes are 1.43 and 1.61
eV, respectively, that of the fullerene
triplet state3C60* is 1.55 eV. Assuming similar triplet state energies of these moieties
in the MOF-C60donor–acceptor systems, dual population
of the lower-energy metal-free porphyrin triplet state along with3C60* upon charge recombination is plausible, while
the analogous population of the Zn porphyrin triplet state may be
fleeting or energetically inaccessible. Furthermore, the significantly
enhanced binding interaction and greater pore volume reduction for
the fullerene-loaded PCN-222­(H2) framework compared to
those of PCN-222­(Zn) are a potential source of divergent behavior.
If the triplet energy migrates to more weakly bound fullerene in the
large pore of PCN-222­(Zn), the proposed equilibrium between3P* and3C60* could be interrupted by subsequent
fullerene diffusion that renders triplet energy transfer irreversible
to3P*. The global fit analyses of the PC61BM⊂PCN-222­(H2) and PC61BM⊂PCN-222­(Zn) TA results (Figures S19 and S20) reveal similar decay pathways
and kinetics as the C60-loaded MOFs, including exciplex
state formation, RCT lifetimes, and triplet state populations, indicating
minimal impact of the butyric-methyl ester appendage on the electron
transfer photophysics in this host–guest arrangement. This
similar excited state behavior for the two fullerene intercalants,
despite the apparent absence of a dynamic quenching channel for free
or weakly bound PC61BM, suggests that energy offsets in
the triplet manifolds may be the primary factor that dictates the
product of reverse charge transfer.

The TA results presented
thus far were obtained using DMF as the
solvent environment for the fullerene-loaded framework suspensions.
TA measurements were also collected for these MOF systems upon 1,4-dioxane
solvent exchange to probe the influence of solvent polarity on their
photophysical responses following the C60introduction.
Charge-separated excited state energies in most D–A systems
are heavily influenced by solvent polarity, which can lead to drastic
changes in observed photoinduced electron transfer and recombination
pathways.,,−While polar or moderately polar solvents such as DMF can facilitate
charge separation by stabilizing the CT state, nonpolar media can
hinder photoinduced charge separation by rendering the CT state less
energetically favorable, or even inaccessible. The TA data collected
in 1,4-dioxane are shown inFigure S16with
the results of the global fitting analysis depicted inFigures S21 and S22. Using the same sequence
models applied to these systems measured in DMF, global fitting yielded
analogous intermediate SAS components associated with singlet porphyrin-localized
excited state, exciplex, and CT excited state populations. Furthermore,
the TA analyses reveal comparable charge recombination pathways dominated
by C60triplet excited state population for C60⊂PCN-222­(Zn) or a dual population of both porphyrin and C60triplet excited states for C60⊂PCN-222­(H2). Notably, despite the significant difference in solvent
polarity between DMF (ε = 36.7) and 1,4-dioxane (ε = 2.20)
environments, the TA results revealed similar CT state formation and
decay lifetimes for these fullerene-loaded MOF materials in both solvents.
This suggests that the C60acceptor species are sufficiently
shielded when confined within the small triangular channels of the
framework, such that the resulting D–A CT excited state energies
are essentially impervious to the surrounding solvent environment.
As a result, only the electrostatic interaction between the framework
porphyrin linkers and fullerene guest species influences their electron
transfer behavior and kinetics. The expulsion of solvent from the
small triangular channels upon introduction of the fullerene guests
is further supported by the computational results presented above,
which reveal that the C60-loaded MOF in the absence of
solvent is more thermodynamically favorable than this system in the
presence of interstitial DMF or 1,4-dioxane solvent molecules.

Comparing electronic structure and excited state
dynamics derived from the observed photophysics of these fullerene-loaded
MOF materials with those of relevant molecular porphyrin–fullerene
D–A systems highlights the unique role of the framework in
dictating photoinduced electron transfer and decay pathways. It is
well established that covalently linked C60-porphyrin­(Zn,H2) dyads undergo D–A electron transfer following local
porphyrin donor excitation, with charge separation and recombination
pathways and kinetics determined by the linker distance between the
porphyrin donor and fullerene acceptor moieties as well as the solvation
environment.,,,In these molecular examples, however, the
fullerene and porphyrin moieties are connected via a single linker,
which leads to substantial conformational flexibility and negligible
direct π–π interaction between the porphyrin plane
and the convex π surface of the fullerene. Cyclophane-like C60-porphyrin dyads, with two separate linkers symmetrically
connecting the porphyrin and fullerene components, yield face-to-face
π-stacked structures,,while cage complexes
such as the covalent organic polyhedron, COP-5, possess a fixed cofacial
orientation of two porphyrin sites for encapsulation of fullerene
(C70in the reported system). These molecular analogues display through-space π–π
interactions that in some ways resemble those of the fullerene-loaded
porphyrin-based MOFs. In each molecular case, direct interchromophore
interaction, with similar fixed edge-to-edge donor–acceptor
distances,REE∼2.8 Å, is
evinced by absorption spectra perturbations like those observed in
C60⊂ and PC61BM⊂PCN-222­(H2,Zn). Unlike the MOF systems, however, the molecular analogues
exhibit additional NIR absorption and emission features (at least
in nonpolar solvents). The appearance of the new absorption band indicates
a direct excitation to the CT excited state, while the emission band
is attributed to its radiative decay.,For the cyclophane-like
dyads, despite the lack of this CT emission in polar solvents, exciplex
formation is assigned as a precursor to the fully charge-separated
state, as mentioned above. In the C70@COP-5 system, however,
the charge transfer state forms from the COP-5 porphyrin singlet excited
state without evidence of an intervening exciplex, regardless of solvent
polarity. While the PCN-222 framework rigidity and cage-like encapsulation
of the fullerene guest molecules might predict similar behavior, exciplex
intermediate is nonetheless detected in this system in both polar
and nonpolar solvent environments. The different pathways may be attributed
to the fullerene triangular pore location and subsequent electronic
coupling with three porphyrin moieties in PCN-222 (rather than two
in the case of COP-5) as well as the different fullerene species encapsulated
in each case (C60vs C70). Regardless of the
participation of exciplex states, the electron transfer process occurs
on the ultrafast time scale in each case.

The reverse charge
transfer lifetime trends observed for the C60⊂ and
PC61BM⊂PCN-222­(H2,Zn) series resemble
the behavior reported for the fullerene-loaded COP-5 system. Namely,
electron transfer occurs for the cage complex in both polar and nonpolar
solvents with similar charge recombination lifetimes, despite a large
difference in solvent dielectric constant. The prolonged CR lifetimes
are attributed to the rigidity of the porphyrin cage in COP-5 and
very small reorganization energy upon photoinduced electron transfer.
Framework rigidity in the PCN-222 series likely plays a similar role
along with the solvent-excluded pore location of the acceptor species,
which essentially eliminates the solvent reorganization effects on
the energetics of the CT state and, therefore, the rate of charge
recombination. Notably, the lifetime is even longer than the 300–600
ps range reported for the COP-5 system, and more impervious to solvent
polarity with τRCT∼1 ns for all MOF systems
in both polar and nonpolar solvents. The deviation in charge recombination
pathways further highlights how the unique arrangement, rigidity,
and solvent exposure of the fullerene and porphyrin moieties in each
case influence the relative energy of the CT excited state. The cofacial
C60-porphyrin molecular systems that form charge-separated
excited states in polar solvents decay via direct recombination to
the ground state, bypassing any triplet excited state population.
Only in the C70@COP-5 system with a nonpolar solvent environment
is a porphyrin triplet state invoked as the dominant charge recombination
pathway. The dual triplet decay pathway observed upon charge recombination
within the fullerene-loaded PCN-222­(H2) framework suggests
near-energetic resonance between the CT state and both porphyrin and
fullerene triplets.

The framework-imposed
arrangement of porphyrin linkers in PCN-222
is responsible for the unique donor–acceptor interactions with
encapsulated fullerene guests. The distinct occupation, binding strength,
and solvent accessibility of acceptors in different pore types of
these tailored MOFs lead to electronic structure perturbations that
are unmatched in molecular analogues. Although in all cases fast charge
transfer occurs from porphyrin to fullerene, the subsequent flow of
energy and charge is redirected by the tunable energy landscapemost
notably, through varying excimer relaxation pathways and an eventual
exclusive formation of fullerene triplet in the Zn-metalated MOF.
Employing this energy flow strategically in a photochemical or catalytic
reaction is a future goal that may require additional structural optimization
and the inclusion of catalytic metal species.

The development
of synthesis, structural, and steady state
characterization and their analysis were supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. DMR-2423113. Transient absorption
spectroscopy, N2physisorption experiments, and their analysis
were supported by the Solar Photochemistry Program, Division of Chemical
Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences (CSGB) Division, within the
Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Office of Science, DOE. This work
was authored in part by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory,
operated for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) under Contract No.
DE-AC36-08GO28308. A.A. would like to acknowledge partial support
provided by an NIGMS Graduate Research Training Initiative for Student
Enhancement (G-RISE) Grant (5T32GM140951-03) and National GEM Consortium
fellowship. The views expressed in the article do not necessarily
represent the views of the Department of Energy or the U.S. Government.
The U.S. Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article
for publication, acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a nonexclusive,
paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the
published form of this work, or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government
purposes.

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jpcc.5c00161.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.