Acute kidney injury (AKI) is a common complication of coronary artery bypass surgery (CABG) and is associated with worse outcomes. It remains unclear whether AKIs impact on prognosis can be attributed to other concurrent major complications.

This retrospective cohort study included consecutive patients undergoing isolated CABG at a single nationwide center from 2001 to 2020. Patients receiving preoperative dialysis and those with insufficient pre‐ and postoperative serum creatinine values were excluded. AKI and postoperative chronic kidney disease were defined by the serum creatinine component of the kidney disease: improving global outcomes criteria. Cox regression was used to estimate the impact of AKI on short‐ and long‐term risk of mortality and major adverse cardiac and cerebrovascular events (MACCE); before and after excluding patients with other major complications. Propensity score matching was used to balance heterogeneity.

Out of 2287 individuals, criteria for AKI were met by 459 (20.1%), distributed as 375 (16.4%), 36 (1.6%), and 48 (2.1%) for Stages 1 through 3, respectively. The incidence of any major complication was 561 (24.5%), with 203 (8.9%) individuals having both AKI and major complications. Patients with AKI were older and had a higher incidence of comorbidities. AKI was associated with higher 30‐day mortality (HR: 2.02, CI: 1.10–3.70) and inferior long‐term outcomes (mortality, HR: 1.46; CI: 1.14–1.86; MACCE, HR: 1.48, CI: 1.20–1.81), but also predicted a higher hazard of postoperative chronic kidney disease (HR: 1.82, CI: 2.53–2.17). However, after excluding patients with other major complications, AKI was not associated with short‐ or long‐term mortality but predicted inferior MACCE‐free survival (HR: 1.59, CI: 1.23–2.06).

AKI following CABG was not associated with short‐ and long‐term mortality in the absence of major complications but predicted a higher risk of MACCE and postoperative chronic kidney disease. These results highlight AKIs role in progressive renal dysfunction and long‐term cardiovascular morbidity, while its association with short‐term mortality may be mediated by other major complications.

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is one of the most common complications of coronary artery bypass surgery (CABG), affecting approximately 15%–30% of patients based on its definition, and remains a critical determinant of both early and long‐term morbidity and mortality [1]. In cardiac surgery, the development of AKI involves complex interplay between patient‐specific factors, in particular advanced age and underlying chronic kidney disease (CKD), but also procedural characteristics, such as cardiopulmonary bypass time and emergency surgery [2]. Following surgery, AKI can also manifest as a sequela to other physiological compromise resulting in renal hypoperfusion and nephrotoxicity, such as perioperative myocardial infarction (MI), bleeding, infection, and prolonged use of vasopressors [3]. As such, AKI is therefore not a singular disease, but a collection of syndromes with heterogeneous etiology and pathophysiology, characterized by an abrupt decrease in glomerular filtration [4].

Several studies have associated AKI after cardiac surgery with short‐ and long‐term mortality [5,6]. It is widely recognized that AKI can influence long‐term outcomes by increasing the risk of CKD and thereby precipitating progressive cardiorenal dysfunction over time [7,8]. Although this dynamic may depend on the severity of AKI, even mild serum creatinine (S‐Cr) elevations have been associated with end‐stage kidney disease [9]. However, the disproportionate risk of early mortality associated with AKI after cardiac surgery is less apparent, especially for milder stages.

Another major predictor of early mortality is major complications, such as stroke, deep sternal wound infection, or re‐exploration for bleeding. While major complications are mostly isolated, approximately 20% occur concomitantly, which carries a multiplicative increase in mortality [10]. Conversely, patients with AKI after CABG are twice as likely to have simultaneous major complications than those without AKI [11]. Thus, evaluating the prognosis and risk associated with AKI may be subject to confounding by superimposed conditions, but studies reporting the outcomes of AKI in the context of other complications are scarce. We therefore aimed to describe to what extent the association of AKI with short‐ and long‐term prognosis can be attributed to superimposed major complications.

This retrospective cohort study included consecutive first‐time isolated CABG patients from January 1, 2001, to December 31, 2020, at Landspitali University Hospital (LUH), Iceland. LUH is a tertiary‐care referral center and the only institution in the nation performing cardiac surgery. Patients without at least one pre‐ and postoperative S‐Cr measurement and those receiving preoperative dialysis were excluded. Our results were reported in accordance with the strengthening of reporting in observational studies in epidemiology (STROBE) statement.

The study was approved by the ethics committee of LUH and the National Bioethics Committee of Iceland (10‐009‐V14), with a later addendum on October 19, 2022. Owing to the retrospective nature, individual consent was waived.

Clinical data were derived from an internal cardiac surgery registry at LUH, containing data from patient charts, surgical reports, and medical records from all other domestic hospitals. The database assembly is thoroughly described elsewhere [12]. In addition, patient identification numbers were used to retrieve S‐Cr measurements from a central registry containing data on all bloodwork performed at LUH from December 12, 1999, and onward.

The exposure of interest was AKI with and without postoperative major complications. The diagnosis and staging of AKI were defined by the S‐Cr component of the kidney disease: improving global outcomes (KDIGO) criteria over the week following surgery [13]: Stage 1 (increase in S‐Cr ≥ 26.5 μmol/L within 48 h from surgery or by 1.5–1.9 times the baseline), Stage 2 (increase in S‐Cr of 2.0–2.9 times the baseline), and Stage 3 (increase in S‐Cr to ≥ 356 μmol/L with an acute rise of at least 44 μmol/L or > 3.0 times the baseline or requiring renal replacement therapy in the immediate postoperative period). The baseline S‐Cr was defined as the closest S‐Cr value in the 30 days prior to surgery.

Major postoperative complications were identified through review of medical records and included ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke (by clinical and/or radiological findings), deep sternal wound infection, perioperative MI (creatine kinase MB elevation over 70 μg/L concurring with incident left bundle branch block or Q‐waves on electrocardiogram, or diagnostic imaging consistent with ischemia), major bleeding event (Bleeding Academic Research Consortium [14] Type 4, excluding intracranial hemorrhage within 48 h), and multiorgan failure. Stage 3 AKI was omitted from the definition, although usually classified as a major complication.

The estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was calculated using the 2009 CKD Epidemiology Collaboration equation [15]. Preexisting CKD stages were defined by the KDIGO criteria for patients with an eGFR persistently < 60 mL/min/1.73 m2in two or more preoperative S‐Cr measurements at least 3 months apart [16]. For patients with less than two available S‐Cr measurements, the last preoperative S‐Cr within 30 days defined the preoperative eGFR. For patients with preexisting CKD Stages 3 or higher, postoperative progression of preexisting CKD was defined as an increase of at least one CKD stage, sustained for > 90 days. For the remaining patients, postoperative incident CKD was defined as reaching Stage 3 or above sustained for > 90 days. Finally, for individuals meeting any criteria for AKI, renal recovery up to 30 days postoperatively was defined as follows: complete (decline in S‐Cr to < 1.25 times the baseline); partial (decline in S‐Cr to 1.25–1.5 times the baseline); nonrecovery (sustained S‐Cr elevation > 1.5 times the baseline).

The primary outcome was all‐cause mortality. Secondary outcomes were major adverse cardiac and cerebrovascular events (MACCE), defined as stroke, MI, coronary revascularization (percutaneous coronary intervention or re‐CABG), and cardiovascular mortality; and the incidence of postoperative CKD, either by progression of preexisting CKD or incident CKD. Differences in outcomes were compared at 30 days postoperatively, as well as the 1‐, 5‐, and 10‐year marks.

Statistical analyses were conducted using R (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Austria), version 4.4.2, via R Studio (RStudio, PBC, USA), version 2024.12.0 + 467. As this study was explorative in nature and included all eligible patients over the study period, no formal sample size calculation was performed before data analysis.

Comparisons were made between patients with and without AKI. Continuous variables were compared with at‐test or Mann–WhitneyUtest for variables violating normality and presented as means with standard deviation or medians with interquartile range, respectively. Categorical variables were compared with the chi‐square test and presented as count with percentage.

The cumulative incidence of postoperative CKD, accounting for death as a competing event, was calculated at 1, 5, and 10 years postoperatively and presented with a cumulative incidence function. A Fine‐Gray model was used to estimate the subdistribution hazard ratio (SHR) of developing CKD in patients with AKI, relative to those without AKI. Death was accounted for as the main competing event as it precludes the possibility of fulfilling the CKD criteria; the model was adjusted for age, sex, and preoperative kidney function.

To estimate the outcomes of death and MACCE in association with AKI while accounting for simultaneous major complications, comparisons were made both when including and excluding those who had other major complications. Optimal propensity score matching (PSM) was used to generate covariate balance. This method of matching includes all individuals in the analysis, limiting potential bias due to exclusion of unmatched subjects, which may occur with caliper‐based matching [17]. Covariates for matching were selected based on plausibility to affect mortality and major complications and are shown with applied balance metrics in FiguresS1andS2. All covariates demonstrated adequate balance. Differences in outcomes were visualized with Kaplan–Meier curves and compared using weighted Cox regression. Statistical analyses are further described in theS1.

Figure1shows a flowchart describing patient selection. In total, 2300 patients were identified, out of which 2296 (99.8%) had at least one pre‐ and postoperative S‐Cr measurement. Nine patients were excluded for having dialysis preoperatively, leaving a final cohort of 2287 patients. The median follow‐up time was 9.6 years (interquartile range: [5.6, 13.4]) and no patients were lost to follow‐up for mortality.

A flowchart describing patient selection. The primary analysis included all patients without ESKD that had sufficient S‐Cr measurements. In a secondary analysis, patients with additional major complications were excluded. AKI, acute kidney injury; CABG, coronary artery bypass graft surgery; ESKD, end‐stage kidney disease; PSM, propensity score matching; S‐Cr, serum creatinine.

In total, 459 patients developed AKI, corresponding to an average incidence rate of 20.1% (95% confidence interval [CI] 18.3%–22.0%). This was distributed as 375 (16.4%), 36 (1.6%), and 48 (2.1%) for Stages 1, 2, and 3, respectively.

Baseline characteristics of the unmatched cohort are shown in TableS1. Before PSM, patients with AKI were significantly older, had a higher incidence of comorbidities, such as preoperative CKD, and a higher EuroSCORE‐II. Patients with AKI more often underwent emergency surgery, had longer cardiopulmonary bypass times, and more often required perioperative use of inotropes and intraaortic balloon pumps.

Table1shows the rate of major postoperative complications. The frequency of any major complications was 561 (24.5%), with the AKI group having a significantly higher rate of all individual complications compared to those without AKI. Across both groups, the most frequent complication was any major bleeding event, with 244/424 patients meeting the criteria only based on blood transfusions. The prevalence of renal replacement therapy in the AKI group was 21/459 (4.6%), or 0.9% for the entire cohort. Out of those with isolated AKI, 84.7%, 10.2%, and 5.1% had AKI Stages 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Corresponding numbers for patients with major complications and AKI occurring simultaneously were 77.8%, 4.9%, and 17.3% for Stages 1, 2, and 3, respectively.

Incidence of major complications and renal outcomes after CABG stratified by AKI status.

Note:Values are presented as count (%) unless specified otherwise.

Abbreviations: AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney disease; DSWI, deep sternal wound infection; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; MI, myocardial infarction.

Ineligible patients not included in denominator (n= 106).

Presented as cumulative incidence estimates (%, [95% CI]) at 10 years with the competing risk of death, adjusted for age, sex, and preoperative kidney function.

Follow‐up for renal recovery was available for 353 (76.9%) individuals, excluding 28 patients who died and 78 without an additional S‐Cr measurement within 30 days of AKI. For the remaining patients, criteria for complete recovery were met by 181 (51.3%), partial recovery by 97 (27.5%), and nonrecovery by 75 (21.2%). Figure2depicts the cumulative incidence function of new CKD or progression of prior CKD. At 10 years after surgery, AKI was significantly associated with higher rates of incident CKD (57.0% vs. 21.5%) and CKD progression (89.0% vs. 80.6%), along with a corresponding increase in the subdistribution hazard for both outcomes (incident CKD: SHR 2.42, 95% CI 2.02–2.91; CKD progression, SHR 1.39, 95% CI 1.03–1.89) when adjusting for age, sex, and preoperative eGFR.

Cumulative incidence function for incident or progressed CKD occurring after surgery based on AKI status. AKI, acute kidney injury. SHR, subdistribution hazard ratio.

Table2shows the results of Cox regression after PSM for AKI. In the crude analysis, where the impact of major complications was not accounted for, AKI was associated with a significantly higher risk of 30‐day mortality (HR 2.02, 95% CI 1.10–3.70), as well as a higher risk of mortality at landmarks for 1‐year (HR: 2.02, 95% CI: 1.10–3.70), 5‐year (HR: 1.94, 95% CI: 1.00–3.76), and 10‐year (HR: 1.46, 95% CI: 1.14–1.86) follow‐up (FigureS5). Similarly, AKI was associated with a higher risk of MACCE at 5 years (HR: 1.46, 95% CI: 1.07–1.98) and 10 years (HR: 1.48, 95% CI: 1.20–1.81), but with a nonsignificant association at 1 year (HR: 1.61, 95% CI: 0.98–2.63). Individual MACCE components for AKI versus no AKI were distributed as 11.0% versus 7.4% for MI, 10.6% versus 9.2% for stroke, 6.1% versus 5.7% for coronary revascularization, and 72.3% versus 77.7% for death.

Impact of AKI on short‐, mid‐, and long‐term outcomes based on the presence or absence of major complications.

Note:Weighted cox regression estimates after propensity score matching for AKI status.

Abbreviations: AKI, acute kidney injury; CI, confidence interval; HR, hazard ratio; MACCE, major adverse cardiac or cerebrovascular event.

Repeated analysis when excluding patients with major complications.

All‐cause mortality (A) and MACCE‐free survival (B) of postoperative AKI stratified by concurring major complications. AKI, acute kidney injury; MACCE, major adverse cardiac and cerebrovascular events.

In the present study, we explored the associations and outcomes of AKI with other major complications in a nationwide cohort of consecutive CABG procedures. AKI was mild in most instances, often occurring in patients with simultaneous major complications, and was strongly associated with worse short‐ and long‐term prognosis. However, after accounting for major complications, we observed that differences in short‐term outcomes were mostly attributable to patients where AKI concurred with other major complications, and isolated AKI was not independently associated with inferior short‐term outcomes. Additionally, AKI was associated with an increased risk of new‐onset and progression of CKD after surgery, regardless of prior kidney function.

There are few studies describing early outcomes of AKI following CABG where the impact of other major in‐hospital complications is also accounted for. Still, several studies describing AKI in acutely ill cohorts, including after cardiac surgery, have reported a higher risk of early mortality, even with only modest changes in S‐Cr [11,18,19,20]. This was originally used as an argument when the definitions of AKI were established, and despite some shortcomings, ultimately led to relatively small S‐Cr elevations being included in the current AKI definitions, first by the Acute Kidney Injury Network and later by the KDIGO criteria [13,21]. However, our results provide new insight into the short‐term course of AKI, both regarding the in‐hospital period and the following months thereafter, and support that AKI as an isolated phenomenon of transient S‐Cr elevation after cardiac surgery does not seem to predict worse short‐term outcomes. For clinicians in the immediate postoperative setting, this could provide considerations for risk stratification of a common but highly variable complication to better balance vigilance and resources.

When surgical cohorts are analyzed, it is rarely taken into account that AKI principally occurs in the postoperative period, albeit typically within 48 h [13]. This leaves a relatively wide timeframe for clinical deterioration due to concurring illness, which can interfere with the outcome of patients with mild S‐Cr elevations. As an example, a study by Lopez‐Delgado et al., including an assorted cardiac surgery cohort of 2940 patients, reported that AKI was strongly associated with postoperative characteristics reflecting more complex and critical illness, with AKI patients having substantially higher APACHE‐III scores upon intensive care admission [22]. Furthermore, patients with AKI of any stage had a significantly higher rate of all complications, increasing proportionately with the severity of AKI. Similarly, a large‐scale meta‐analysis by Yi et al. exploring risk factors for AKI after cardiac surgery reported significant associations with several postoperative risk factors, including a low cardiac output state, reoperation, and infection [23]. Evidently, even mild AKI may therefore serve as a marker for patients with superimposed conditions, which mediates a higher mortality rate. This is supported by our finding of a nonsignificant association between AKI and early mortality after excluding patients with other major complications and could be extrapolated to other similar studies describing noninferior short‐term survival in patients with mild AKI [24,25].

An important observation is that AKI showed a stronger association with MACCE than mortality, mostly driven by a higher incidence of MI after hospital discharge. Previous studies have demonstrated the correlation between AKI and cardiac‐specific outcomes after CABG [26], and even noncardiac surgery [27]. Our findings, therefore, emphasize the need for close surveillance and risk management in patients with AKI, as follow‐up may be underutilized despite a sustained long‐term risk for cardiovascular and renal disease [28,29]. Moreover, the steep incidence of new or worsened CKD may have contributed to AKIs association with increased risk of MACCE by facilitating cardiovascular disease progression. AKI remains one of the most described risk factors for CKD development, and the two are now widely regarded as a disease continuum through the intermediary state of acute kidney disease [30]. While various characteristics of the injury modify the risk of CKD, physiological vulnerabilities occurring in this state precipitate chronic impairment in epithelial regeneration through interstitial fibrosis and loss of peritubular microvessels [31]. This predisposes the kidneys to further damage in the case of prolonged or repeat injury and has been associated with a high risk of CKD development 1 year after valvular surgery, regardless of renal recovery [32]. Therefore, rapid CKD progression in the AKI group is somewhat expected, even though the renal recovery rate was high.

Finally, we found that AKI was associated with a significantly higher incidence of CKD after surgery, with 57% of patients with normal preoperative renal function meeting CKD criteria within the next 10 years. Although this cumulative incidence rate must be regarded as high, similar results have been reported in retrospective data; the difference may be explained by our competing‐risk approach [33]. Additionally, approximately 20% of patients without AKI fulfilled CKD criteria in the long term. This may partly be explained by a natural decline in patient kidney function occurring postoperatively, as similar progression has been reported in a mixed surgical cohort of comparable age and baseline kidney function [25]. However, it should also be mentioned that CKD in general appears to be common in the Icelandic elderly population [34].

This study is subject to several limitations. First, we emphasize that our findings are associative, as the temporal relationship between AKI and major complications could not be determined. Therefore, we cannot infer causality between these conditions. Second, we were unable to use the fourth universal definition of MI. The proper definition of postoperative MI remains controversial, but our combination of biomarkers and additional diagnostics is likely to detect prognostically relevant cases [35]. Third, our data only included blood products administered up to 7 days postoperatively, which likely resulted in over‐detection of major perioperative bleeding. Fourth, although we consistently found no association between isolated AKI and mortality, the wide confidence intervals in our results cannot exclude small effect sizes that we may be underpowered to detect in some parts of the analysis, resulting in a risk of Type II error. Additionally, the number of comparisons performed introduces a risk of chance findings, although most analyses were hypothesis‐driven and interpreted conservatively. Finally, although full PSM may mitigate exclusion bias, other limitations that could affect transferability of the results should be considered, such as residual confounding, variability in match quality, and imbalanced weights. While residual confounding is inherent to retrospective studies, the implemented models demonstrated adequate covariate balance, and the results were consistent when accounting for outlier weights. At the same time, we acknowledge that the 20‐year study period encompasses gradual shifts in perioperative care and clinical decision making, which could influence outcomes, although core elements such as surgical indications and technique, as well as RRT criteria and availability, did not change meaningfully at our center. Similarly, although AKI definitions evolved during this period, we applied the S‐Cr component of the KDIGO criteria uniformly across the cohort, and AKI capture was therefore not affected.

Key strengths of the study include a population‐based cohort receiving surgical and postoperative management at the same tertiary‐care hospital, limiting treatment variability. More importantly, all patients had access to postoperative follow‐up with a primary care physician or cardiologist. Likewise, access to centralized registry data allowed for accurate and complete follow‐up for mortality. Finally, our extensive pre‐ and postoperative S‐Cr data provided baseline values for > 99% of the cohort and detailed postoperative measurements, enabling accurate AKI and CKD estimations.

In this nationwide study on consecutive CABG patients, AKI often concurred with other major postoperative complications and was associated with inferior short‐ and long‐term outcomes, as well as postoperative CKD. However, AKI was mild in most instances and did not predict worse survival in the absence of other major complications. Our results warrant consideration of confounding when analyzing short‐ and long‐term outcomes of AKI, as it is often secondary to other complications.