The aggregation and accumulation of oligomers of misfolded A-amyloids in the human brain is one of the possible causes for the onset of the Alzheimer’s disease in the early stage. We introduce and study a new ODE model for the evolution of Alzheimer’s disease based on the interaction between monomers, proto-oligomers, and oligomers of Aamyloid protein in a small portion of the human brain, based upon biochemical processes such as polymerization, depolymerization, fragmentation and concatenation. We further introduce the possibility of controlling the evolution of the system via a treatment that targets the monomers and/or the oligomers. We observe that a combined optimal treatment on both monomers and oligomers induces a substantial decrease of the oligomer concentration at the final stage. A single treatment on oligomers performs better than a single treatment on monomers. These results shed a light on the effectiveness of immunotherapy using anti-Aantibodies, targeting monomers or oligomers. Several numerical simulations show how the oligomer concentration evolves without treatment, with single monomer/oligomer treatment, or with a combined treatment.

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is one of the most common neurodegenerative disorder, affecting millions of people worldwide and severely worsening their quality of life. It is characterized by progressive cognitive decline, loss of memory, synaptic dysfunction, and neuronal loss, WHO (2023). One of the main recognisable pathological effects of AD is the presence of amyloid-beta (A) plaques and neurofibrillary tangles composed of tau protein in the brain of AD patients. Among the various hypotheses proposed to explain the etiology of AD, the Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis (ACH) remains one of the most widely studied and debated, Hardy and Higgins (1992).

The ACH states that the misfolding and aggregation of Apeptides, particularly A, act as a primary trigger in the disease progression, leading to synaptic impairment, tau pathology, neuroinflammation, and ultimately neuronal death, Chiti and Dobson (2017). Aaggregation follows a complex nucleation-dependent polymerization process, starting with monomer misfolding and oligomer formation, followed by protofibril and fibril development, ultimately leading to mature amyloid plaques, Kamatham et al. (2024). Under physiological conditions, Aexists in a dynamic equilibrium between monomeric, oligomeric, and fibrillar forms. However, in AD, an imbalance in Aproduction, clearance, or aggregation, results in the formation of toxic oligomers and fibrils that disrupt neuronal function.

Emerging evidence, Kamatham et al. (2024), suggests that Aoligomers, rather than mature fibrils, are the most neurotoxic species, capable of inducing oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction, and synaptic loss. Despite extensive research, the precise mechanisms linking Amisfolding to AD progression remain incompletely understood. Therapeutic strategies targeting Ahave recently started to yield positive results, confirming the pivotal role of Aamyloids in the progression of AD, Aisen (2005); Sancesario et al. (2018); in the USA, two anti-amyloid monoclonal antibodies have been recently approved for the treatment of AD, after showing slowing of clinical decline in the trials, Aisen (2005); Cummings et al. (2021).

In Tamagno et al. (2018) an in vitro study in cerebrospinal fluid of Alzheimer’s disease patients was done in order to analyze the degradation efficacy of bromelain on monomers and oligomers. Acting on monomers and oligomers before the amyloid plaques are formed is important for preventing or delaying cognitive decline, Härd and Lendel (2012). In particular, it was shown that Amonomers has an important role in sustaining the pathogenesis of AD, Tamagno et al. (2018), and, beside acting on the oligomers, Kass et al. (2022), also the removal of monomers might help for developing new therapeutic approaches to treat the disease.

In addition to in vitro and in vivo experiments for therapeutic drug development of Alzheimer’s disease also the mathematical models play an important role, Andrade-Restrepo et al. (2021); Bertsch et al. (2018,2016); Andrade-Restrepo et al. (2020); Hao and Friedman (2016); Brennan and Goriely (2025); Ficiarà et al. (2023); Ramos et al. (2021); Menale and Travaglini (2024). In fact, the models, can be used as non invasive tools to better understand the disease and the interaction between the main actors of it. Moreover, by using optimal control theory, Hao et al. (2022); Torres et al. (2025); Rabiei et al. (2025), one can study the effect of the treatments in time on the populations of the models.

In this paper a novel mathematical model for the biochemical interactions between monomers, proto-oligomers, and oligomers of Aamyloids, is introduced, Ashe (2020). The interactions between the populations of the ordinary differential equation (ODE) model are: polymerization, depolymerization, fragmentation, degradation and concatenation. Differently than in literature, here, we have also considered the concatenation terms between proto-oligomers of length, as was done in Andrade-Restrepo et al. (2021) for the Partial Differential Equation (PDE) model. More importantly, here we have introduced two control terms, one for the degradation of the monomers and a second one for the degradation of the oligomers. Four different optimal control formulations were introduced assuming only the monomers or oligomers are treated, as well as both of them, with different treatments or the same treatment, respectively. Numerical results for all the cases complete the study, on one side by comparing the effect of different treatments on the monomers and oligomers and, on the other side, by analyzing the role of some key parameter values and of the initial conditions on the output of the optimal control formulations.

In the next section the ODE system is introduced. In Sect.3some analytical facts related to the boundedness of the solution and the equilibrium points of the model are reported. In Sect.4, four different optimal control formulations are studied, i.e. CM, CO, CMO, CMOST, related to the control of the monomers, oligomers, both monomers and oligomers with different treatments and the same treatment, respectively. In Sect.5numerical results related to the optimal control formulations introduced in Sect.4are compared. Finally, Sect.6contains a summary of the main results of the paper.

Polymerization. A monomer and a proto-oligomer of length, 3 or 4 react together to produce a proto-oligomer of length, with rate.

Depolymerization. A proto-oligomer of lengthor 4 breaks down due to oxydation or flaws in the chain, losing a monomer from the bottom or the top of the chain, with rateb.

Fragmentation. A proto-oligomer of length, 3 or 4 breaks down into monomers or shorter proto-oligomers, with ratedepending on the lengthlof the chain. The coefficientswere introduced in Doumic et al. (2009) under the assumption that the probability of obtaining a proto-oligomer of lengthifrom one of lengthlis uniform. In other words, we are assuming that each of thebonds in proto-oligomer of lengthlhas the same probability of breaking, thus implying that the fragmentation rate is linear in the proto-oligomer length.

Degradation. Monomers undergo proteolytic degradation due to peptidases and proteinases, with rate of concentration reduction.

Concatenation. The aggregation between two proto-oligomers of length, 3 or 4 and, 3 or 4, produce a proto-oligomer of length, with rateand the aggregation between two monomers of length 1, produce a proto-oligomer of length 2 with rate.

All the parameters assume non negative values and their meaning is the following:,is the polymerization rate;bis the depolymerization rate;is the fragmentation rate;is the natural degradation rate of the monomers; while, withor 4 andor 4, is the concatenation rate. Here we also assume that the concentration of the monomers follow a logistic growth law (Whittington et al.2018; Hao et al.2022), with intrinsic growth ratesand carrying capacityK, while the population of the oligomers experiences “intraspecific competition” for space at ratem. Moreover, two different type of treatment can be introduced, a first one that act on the monomers population and degrade them at ratev(t), Tamagno et al. (2018); Sancesario et al. (2018), and a second one that act on the oligomers population, degrading it at rateu(t), Kass et al. (2022); Sancesario et al. (2018). In model (1)andcan assume the value 0 or 1, depending if the treatment of only monomers, only oligomers or both treatments are considered.

In Table1are summarized the parameters related to model (1), next we will also introduce the values used for the simulations.

Let us assume throughout this section that, this simplification is needed in order to study the model (1) without control and to perform a linear stability analysis of it. We first note that the unique solution to (1) remains bounded for all times, with an explicit upper bound.

Given an initial datum, with non-negative components, the unique non-negative solutionof system (1) is bounded for all times.

We conclude that; but since the upper boundsdo not depend ont,remains bounded as. We conclude that it must be, and.

In general system (1) does not admit explicitly computable solutions. We can however establish some semi-explicit bounds as follows.

Given an initial datum, withsmall, the first componentM(t) of the solution to (1) is increasing for, decreasing for, for small values of.

The second claim follows by observing that for,, for a suitable constantdepending on the modulus of continuity ofM; the solution is therefore very close to, for.

It is not difficult to check that either, corresponding to the trivial equilibrium; or, in which caseandfor all. Therefore all the other possible equilibria are in the form, with all positive components. See Fig.1for one possible coexistence equilibrium obtained numerically for a chosen set of parameter values and initial conditions.

Thus, we see that for this particular choice of initial data the solution is stable and tends asymptotically to the equilibrium.

In this section we focus on some optimal control problems related to (1). The state variables of the system are the populationsM(t),,,andO(t) in (1) while the two controlsv(t) andu(t) can be seen as two treatments that degrade the monomers’s populationM(t) and the oligomer’s populationO(t), respectively. Our goal is to minimize a suitable objective functional, denoted byJ, that considers the populations of monomersM(t) and oligomersO(t) over time, the final populations at the treatment’s conclusion (), as well as the costs of the controls, their interaction, and potential side effects over time. To provide a comprehensive overview of the possible scenarios, we address various cases of optimal control here. We will then compare the results obtained in Sects.5and6. In each case, we will introduce an appropriate objective functionalJ, which will be defined accordingly. The first case involves two treatments,v(t) andu(t), acting separately on the populations of monomersM(t) and oligomersO(t), respectively, called CMO from now on. In the second and third cases, we choose to apply a single treatment, eitherv(t) oru(t), targeting their respective populations, called CM and CO from now on, respectively. Finally, in the last case, we consider a single treatment acting simultaneously on both populations, called CMOST.

In this subsection we will consider the controlsv(t) andu(t) which act separately on the monomers’s populationM(t) and the oligomer’s populationO(t), respectively, in the model (1) with. We will introduce a given objective functional in order to minimize both populationsM(t) andO(t) at the end of the treatment (with weights) and over the treatment (in [0,T] with weights), the cost of the two therapies over the treatment (with weights), their side effects over the treatment (with weights) and their possible interactions (with weight), i.e.

where.,are the maximum rate of the therapiesvandurespectively.

The optimality system is then given by equation (1) with, with initial conditions,,,,and the adjoint system (7) with the final time conditions,and, subject to (9). We solve it numerically in Sect.5.

In this subsection we will consider the case of a controlv(t) which acts on the monomers’s populationM(t) in the model (1) withand. We will introduce a given objective functional in order to minimize both the populationsM(t) andO(t) at the end of the treatment (with weights) and over the treatment (in [0,T] with weights), the cost of the therapy over the treatment (with weight) and its side effects over the treatment (with weights), i.e.

The optimality system is then given by equation (1) withand, with initial conditions,,,,and the adjoint system (25) with the final time conditions,and, subject to (13). We solve it numerically in Sect.5.

Here we will consider the case of a controlu(t) which acts on the oligomers’s populationO(t) in the model (1) withand. As before, we will introduce a given objective functional in order to minimize both the populationsM(t) andO(t) at the end of the treatment (with weights) and over the treatment (in [0,T] with weights), the cost of the therapy over the treatment (with weight) and its side effects over the treatment (with weights), i.e.

The optimality system is then given by equation (1) withand, with initial conditions,,,,and the adjoint system (26) with the final time conditions,and, subject to (18). We solve it numerically in Sect.5.

Finally, we consider here the case of a single controlw(t) which acts simultaneously on the monomers’s populationM(t) and the oligomer’s populationO(t), in the model (1) withand. The objective functionalJ(w) is defined considering the populationsM(t) andO(t) at the end of the treatment (with weights) and over the treatment (in [0,T] with weights), the cost of the therapy over the treatment (with weight) and its side effects over the treatment (with weights), i.e.

The optimality system is then given by equation (1) withand, with initial conditions,,,,and the adjoint system (27) with the final time conditions,and, subject to (23). We solve it numerically in Sect.5.

In this section we present numerical results related to the optimal control formulations introduced in the previous section. All the simulations were made in MATLAB. Next, we will present four different scenarios: results for the case when only one treatment is administered, i.e. for the degradation of monomers (CM) or oligomers (CO), respectively, a combined treatment for the degradation of both monomers and oligomers (CMO) and, last, the same treatment for both monomers and oligomers (CMOST), respectively. We will compare the four different strategies, i.e. CM, CO, CMO and CMOST, in terms of the trend of the populations of monomers,M, proto-oligomers of size 2, 3 and 4, here the sumwas considered, and of oligomers,O, for the case without control, with maximum control and optimal control. Furthermore, we also present results of the optimal controls for the third case (CMO) where some key parameters of the model can assume different values, as well as the initial conditions of monomers or oligomers.

The numerical method used to approximate the optimal piecewise continuous controls,and, which solves the optimal control problems introduced in (5), (11), (16) and (21) is the forward-backward sweep method introduced in Lenhart and Workman (2007). The forward-backward sweep method is an iterative scheme, an initial guess for the controls,,and, are chosen and corresponding solutions to the state and adjoint equations are computed, substituting this last values in formulas (9), (14), (19) and (24) a first approximation of the controls is obtained. The process is repeated until the obtained sequences which approximatesv,uandwconverge to within a given tolerance innorm.

In Table2are summarized the parameters related to model (1), together with the values used for the simulations. With the exception of few cases, i.e. the new parameters introduced in our model, the values were taken from literature, as specified in the last column of the Table2.

Furthermore, Table3introduces the initial conditions of the five populations in model (1) used in the simulations and Table4presents the weight parameters in the objective functions to be minimized, introduced in (4), (10), (15) and (20), respectively. If not otherwise specified the parameters will assume fixed values as in Tables2,3and4.

In this subsection we first compare the optimal control results for CM, CO, CMO and CMOST as well as the state variables associated with them.

In the first two columns of Fig.2, the results for CM and CO, respectively, are compared. In the first column, the control acts only on monomers, whereas in the second it acts only on oligomers. In particular, the optimal controlsandfor the two cases are compared, as well as the state variables corresponding to the optimal controls, and the state variables of the model (1) for the case when the maximum dose of treatment is administered. Moreover, the aforementioned results can be compared with those where no treatment is considered. From the first row of Fig.2one can see that the shape of the two optimal controls are different. If the treatment acts only on monomers, then the optimal control assumes its maximum in the first days of treatment and then decreases until reaching zero at the final time of treatment (s); If the treatment acts on oligomers instead, the optimal control starts from zero at the beginning of the treatment, increases until reaching a maximum value 0.006 at times, and then slowly decreases until the final times.

Let us now compare the curves describing the evolution of the state variablesof model (1) when the optimal controloris chosen. First, acting on monomers has an impact on all the populations of the model. We observe that the treatment decreases the monomersMfromM(0) to, maintaining at the same time the oligomers at a low level (, lower thanwithout control) and substantially decreasing the proto-oligomer populations of size 2, 3 and 4.

Acting only on the oligomers instead has a significant impact only on the oligomer population itself. After a first increasing phase, the oligomer population decreases to. Notice that this value is smaller than the one obtained controlling only the monomers but it is close to the value obtained treating the monomers with the maximum treatment,.

Second, comparing the effect of the treatments on monomers and oligomers at maximal dose, the oligomer treatment seems more efficient, as the red curves in the second column of Fig.2are below or equal to the red ones of the first column.

Furthermore, in the last column of Fig.2, a joint control on bothMandOis considered. In this case, the optimal controlsand(qualitatively) maintain the same trend; however, the doses for both treatments are lower compared with the case when only one treatment is considered (columns one and two). Acting both onMandOhas an impact on all the populations of the model (1), and it is a combination of the “best” results from only one treatment.

In Figure3the results for the case where the same treatment is used for both the degradation of the monomers and oligomers (CMOST) are plotted. The optimal control, compared withandobtained in the previously considered scenarios, starts at a maximum value at the beginning of the treatment, which is in any case lower than in the cases seen before, and then decreases gradually until, which corresponds to the end of the treatment. Hence, in the first days of treatmentbehaves asand in the last days as. Comparing the state variables associated with the optimal controlwith those corresponding toor, the monomer curvebehaves qualitatively as, whereasbehaves similarly to.

In this subsection we investigate how the optimal control related to CMO changes when some parameters of the model or of the objective functions (see (5), (11), (16) and (21)) changes, as well as when the initial conditions of monomers and oligomers assume different values. From now on we will present numerical results related to the third case, i.e. CMO, since CM, CO and CMOST can be seen as particular cases of it.

As can be seen in Table2, three parameters, i.e. the monomers intrinsic growth rate,s, the monomers carrying capacityKand the oligomers intraspecific competition ratemare assumed variable. In fact, to best of our knowledge no data is present in literature about their values. In order to understand how different values ofs,Kormimpact on the output of the CMO optimal control formulation, numerical test were conducted. For the parameter values as in Tables2,3and4, withKormassuming four different values inor, respectively, the optimal controlsandare the same as in Fig.2(first row, last column), results not reported here. While for three different values ofs, i.e.,or, three qualitative different optimal controlsandare obtained (Fig.4). Forthe results are the same as in Fig.2(first row, last column). For, meaning increasing the growth rate of the monomers, the control on the monomers starts with an initial peak to then remain constant at 0.018 from 120 s for almost all the treatment duration, before starting to drop at 800 s until to reach value zero fors. On the other side, for, the optimal treatment starts at a zero value and ends at zero, but for 172sit maintains the constant value 0.0218; note that this value is higher than the one corresponding to(0.018). For, when the growth rate of monomers is high, both the treatments must be administered at their higher dose for all the duration of the treatment with the sole difference thatstarts from the maximum value 0.03 to end at zero ats, whilestarts at zero and ends at the maximum value.

In Fig.5, the optimal controlsandare compared for three different choices of the weightsandin (5). Recall thatandcorrespond to the effective cost of the treatment of the monomer and oligomer populations, respectively. Choosing a low value forresults in a higheroptimal control curve and a lowercurve. For,is constantly zero, whileassumes the biggest dose, compared to the other lowervalues. A similar result is obtained for, the cost of the treatment for oligomers, with the role ofandbeing interchanged.

In Fig.6, the optimal controlsandfor four different values of the weights,andin the objective functional (5) are compared. Recall that,, andcorrespond to the impact of the side effects for the treatment on the monomer, on the oligomer or for the combination of the two treatments, respectively. The higheris, the loweris and the higheris; conversely, the higheris, the higheris and the loweris. A similar pattern is also seen when the parameterchanges, provided it verifies the convexity assumption, see Fig.6, where we chose the values,and.

In Fig.7are represented the optimal control strategies for the monomers and oligomers treatment for three different i.c. of monomers or oligomers, e.g.,,and, first row, the same values are considered for the oligomers, assuming fixed the other i.c. values, second row. Comparing the obtained results one can see that higherM(0) orO(0) are, higher the treatment of the oligomers must be.

The numerical study introduced in this section has two main purposes. On one hand we wanted to compare four different treatment strategies, by computing the corresponding numerical optimal controls. On the other hand, we have analyzed the behaviour of the optimal controls with respect to some key parameter values and different initial conditions of the considered populations.

For the four different treatment strategies we have learned that a combined treatment for the degradation of both monomers and oligomers is more efficient in terms of depleting all the populations of the model, differently that happens where only one treatment at the time is considered. In fact acting only on oligomers has a direct impact only on the oligomers population itself.

Regarding the study of some key parameter values, we have learned that higher the intrinsic growth rate of monomers is, a higher dose of treatment is need. Moreover, the optimal control that acts on monomers starts at the maximum value, at the beginning of the treatment, to then decrease at the end, while the optimal control that acts on the oligomers starts at its lowest value to then increase and eventually decrease again at the end of the treatment. Moreover, for the analysis of the impact of the initial condition of monomers and oligomers on the optimal control output, one can see that the presence of the oligomers, at high or low values at the beginning of the treatment, will demand higher treatment doses for both treatments, differently that for the monomer’s initial conditions where the optimal control is more relevant only for monomer’s population.

The mathematical models are often used as complementary tools to better understand biological systems. Recently, ODE and PDE models were used to describe the interaction of the main actors of the Alzheimer’s disease, Andrade-Restrepo et al. (2021); Bertsch et al. (2018,2016), Andrade-Restrepo et al. (2020); Achdou et al. (2013) with a particular focus on the Amyloid Cascade Hypothesis (ACH), which is one of the most widely studied and debated, Hardy and Higgins (1992).

Here a mathematical model for the biochemical interactions between monomers, proto-oligomers, and oligomers of Aamyloids, was developed by assuming that the interactions between the populations of the ordinary differential equation (ODE) model are: polymerization, depolymerization, fragmentation, degradation and concatenation. Moreover, we have also introduced two different controls, one on the monomers population and a second one on the oligomers. For the introduced model four different optimal control formulations were studied. First, we have assumed that only one in between the monomers and oligomers population is degraded, CM and CO, respectively. Secondly, we have assumed that both the populations can be degraded, by the same treatment or a different one, CMOST and CMO, respectively.

Comparing the numerical results for the four cases one can conclude that acting only on monomers or only on oligomers leads to different effects on the five populations of the model. Degrading only the monomers, with an optimal control, will have a chain effect on all the populations of the model, by decreasing them at the end of the treatment if compared to the case where no treatment was administered, while, degrading only the oligomers, again with an optimal control, will affect only the population for which the treatment is considered. Furthermore, if both the monomers and oligomers are subject to two optimal control treatments simultaneously, the two optimal controls assume the same shape as for the first two cases but with lower dosed, while all the populations of the model decrease at the end of the treatment.

If the same treatment is administered for both monomers and oligomers, the numerical evidence shows that only one treatment is more advantageous in terms of the treatment doses needed, for the optimal case. Moreover, the objective functional that has been minimized assumes the minimum value if compared with the other three cases.

Modeling Alzheimer’s disease is a growing research area, in particular there are several future research directions one might want to explore and extend. On one hand, the study of a PDE model that describes the dynamics and aggregation of A-amyloids in a small neighbourhood of a few neurons, Bertsch et al. (2018), might give interesting insights on the disease. On the other hand, implement optimal control formulations also for models describing a more advanced stage of the disease, where the plaques are already formed, Ficiarà et al. (2023), could help in finding the best treatment strategy. Moreover, would be interesting to combine the above mentioned studies with clinical data related toin vitro(Sancesario et al.2018) orin vivo(Cummings et al.2021) treatments.

IMB has been supported by Mobilità Giovani Ricercatori 2022, and by the project TIGRECO funded by the MUR Progetti di Ricerca di Rilevante Interesse Nazionale (PRIN) Bando 2022, Grant 20227TRY8H, CUP-J53D23003630001. This research has been accomplished within RITA (Research ITalian network on Approximation) and the UMI Group TAA (Approximation Theory and Applications). This work has been developed within the framework of the project e.INS- Ecosystem of Innovation for Next Generation Sardinia (cod. ECS 00000038) funded by the Italian Ministry for Research and Education (MUR) under the National Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP) - MISSION 4 COMPONENT 2, "From research to business" INVESTMENT 1.5, "Creation and strengthening of Ecosystems of innovation" and construction of "Territorial R&D Leaders". IMB and FG are funded by Next Generation EU-CUP-J55F21004240001, DM 737-2021, risorse. FF and FG are partially funded by Gruppo Nazionale per l’Analisi Matematica, la Probabilità e le loro Applicazioni (GNAMPA) of the Istituto Nazionale di Alta Matematica (INdAM).