Semi‐structured one‐on‐one interviews were carried out with 17 patients aged 12–30 years (M= 20,SD= 5) who received organ transplants between the ages of 9 and 20 years (M= 13,SD= 3). The data were qualitatively analyzed via content analysis with a focus on an adolescent's involvement in decision‐making.

The participants considered various factors important for their appropriate involvement in decisions. These factors were grouped into three main areas: (1) a participant's role in decision‐making, (2) determinants of involvement in decision‐making, and (3) expression of the final decision. The most frequently described factors included the adolescent's age, concerns about what was happening to their body, the importance of social support systems, capacity to understand, and time given to adapt.

This is the first interview study exploring the perspectives of transplanted adolescents on decision‐making regarding transplantation, and it shows that they want to be part of decision‐making at different levels of involvement.

In pediatrics, the triadic relationship between the adolescent1, parents, and healthcare providers (HCPs), as well as an adolescent's evolving developmental status, renders decision‐making unique and particularly challenging. Adolescents are a group in a vulnerable position and are known to be “therapeutic orphans”, which means that they have historically been excluded from research and healthcare decision‐making [1,2]. However, available evidence suggests that adolescents desire to be informed about their medical condition and treatment [3]. Furthermore, their ability to cope with upcoming medical procedures is enhanced when they are actively involved in the process [3,4], such as being made aware of potential side effects [4]. Studies show that parents choose different degrees of involvement and often follow HCP advice even if it goes against their child's wishes [5]. For instance, in oncology, parents may follow the advice of HCPs to initiate chemotherapy even if their children wish to preserve their fertility, which would delay the start of treatment [4,6,7]. A hypothetical case study conducted by American researchers examining decision‐making for lung transplants in pediatric patients with cystic fibrosis shows that physicians will follow parents' choices regardless of the child's age or maturity [8].

Compared with a paternalistic approach, modern medicine focuses on patient autonomy. This, however, raises questions concerning the autonomy of adolescents [9,10]. Ross and colleagues emphasized that adolescents have the right to make their own healthcare decisions in many U.S. states; however, most HCPs tend to side with parents in case of conflicts [11]. This is partially explained by the lack of education concerning the ability to appropriately involve adolescents, even if it has been proven to increase satisfaction with decision‐making and decrease conflicts between involved parties [12,13]. Parents often attempt to protect their children and feel that this is an integral part of their role [6,14]. Even if they let their children make their own decisions, parents' beliefs influence the decision‐making process. Hence, parents and HCPs must be aware of these relational aspects of autonomy [15,16].

In Switzerland, the law (Swiss Civil Code, Art. 16) distinguishes patients with and without the capacity for judgment, irrespective of their age. Decision‐making capacity is defined by an adolescent's mental ability to understand the matter and to act in a reasonable way, which needs to be assessed in relation to a specific situation and for a specific question [17]. Respective legislation varies across countries and even within countries [18]. The European Council published a guide on children's participation in decisions about their health, emphasizing that the views of adolescents should be given due weight in accordance with their age and maturity [19]. According to Grootens‐Wiegers and colleagues, based on insights from numerous fields it can be concluded that adolescents at the age of 12 have the capacity to be decision‐making competent (i.e., understanding, appreciating, reasoning, communicating a choice); however, due to various factors diminishing adolescents' competence in some contexts, the authors argue that some adolescents may need support from facilitating environmental factors [20]. For urgent life‐limiting diseases, when adolescents are shaken by the diagnosis, time to assess their understanding might not be sufficient to establish whether they are fully capable of making decisions [21]. Yet, organ transplantation is often a question that arises after patients have lived with a disease for a few years, and with the progress of medicine, there can be acceptable alternatives to gain additional time [22,23]. Thus, situations in which patients cannot be included should be rare.

We conducted a qualitative study with 17 semi‐structured interviews with participants from four Swiss university hospitals between June 2018 and February 2022. The study was approved by the competent cantonal research ethics committee (Nr. 2016–00444).

Participants were included if they had received a solid organ transplant before the age of 20 and were more than 9 years old at the time of the interview. This limit was chosen based on the experience of collaborating pediatric transplant specialists, the World Health Organization's definition of adolescence, and the cognitive development of adolescents. We deliberately chose a broad range to include the maximum number of developmental parameters related to decision‐making (e.g., age, diagnosis, prognosis, cause of disease, response to treatment) at the time of organ transplantation [26]. Another criterion was that the organ transplant occurred within the last 10 years for participants to be able to remember the process sufficiently. The interviews were carried out in French and German. Adolescents were excluded if they did not speak the same language as the interviewer did and if physicians did not consider them to be mentally and physically fit for participation. All patients gave their written consent to the person interviewing them. The parents of minor patients also gave their consent.

Participants were recruited with the help of head physicians. At the time of recruitment, 31 patients were eligible for the study. One of the collaborating physicians wanted to ask permission from their three patients before we contacted them. The remaining 28 were approached via telephone by the research team2. The background and aim of the study were explained to the participants. Ten of them refused to take part in the study without providing reasons. Four patients agreed initially but never found time for an interview. Since the research team had no contact with these patients prior to the study, and apart from approaching them to introduce the study, we cannot provide further details on why they have not participated. In total, 17 participants were interviewed.

Who took the final decision concerning your treatment? Please explain.

In which situation, and how, should children be included in the decision‐making? Please explain.

The interviews lasted between 10 and 60 min, were audio‐recorded, and were transcribed verbatim. Situations and names were anonymized. Transcripts were not returned to participants for comment. The interviewers were three team members, two women and one man, who were French and German speakers. Interviews were conducted at the time and place of the patient's choice, by video call for one patient and in person for 16 patients, which occurred in their home (n= 5), at the hospital (n= 6), or at another neutral place (n= 5) where they had follow‐up appointments. No differences in the data quality were noted. Short field notes were taken during the interview. The patients were only met once. Due to the adolescents' preference, seven patients had their parents present during the interview. Data collection continued until data saturation was reached.

Content analysis was chosen to identify, analyze, and report relevant categories [27]. The analysis started with reading and rereading the transcripts. Line‐by‐line coding and analysis were performed via the software atlas.ti by two researchers. Transcripts were analyzed inductively. Identified categories were discussed, aiming to, first, establish a consistent understanding of the interview content (e.g., reflecting on researchers' possibly existing biases and positionality) and, second, specifying, revising, and agreeing on identified codes (including resolving conflicts through discussion). In the next step, approved codes were combined into three main themes and eight subthemes. Throughout analysis, codes and themes were continuously discussed with the entire team. All authors have experience with qualitative research; three worked as health care providers and two as researchers at the time of the study. This qualitative analysis enabled us to better understand how decision‐making regarding pediatric organ transplantation unfolds and how discussions were approached [28,29].

We interviewed 17 patients who received a solid organ transplant (liver, lung or kidney) between the ages of 9 and 20. The demographics of the participants and disease‐related information are presented in Table2. The participants described their illness experience, their experiences with decision‐making, their perceived reasons for their degree of involvement, and their attitudes toward children's and adolescents' involvement in decision‐making. They also expressed their general opinion on the topic of decision‐making in pediatrics. Content analysis revealed three main themes and several subthemes related to decision‐making regarding organ transplantation: (1) the participants' role in decision‐making, (2) determinants of involvement in decision‐making, and (3) expression of the final decision. In the following paragraphs, we refer to participants with a random number, followed by the age they received the transplant and the type of organ in parentheses.

Cystic fibrosis, Wilson's disease, biliary atresia, Alagille syndrome, ascending cholangitis, Langerhans cell histiocytosis.

Nephronophthisis, Congenital anomaly, IgA Nephropathy.

The participants' opinions on the content and amount of information received varied. They all agreed that they had the right to know everything if they asked for it (Table3). However, not all (n= 5/17) expressed a desire to have complete information.

Several participants (n= 5/17) mentioned that they did not understand everything during technical conversations between HCPs, parents, and themselves. The participants who had more passive attitudes (n= 7/17) said that they were content with the fact that their parents were present to play the intermediary, to advise them, or to explain later the content of meetings using other terms. In contrast, those who wanted to be more actively involved (n= 10/17) expressed their wish to fully understand the discussion's content and were sometimes frustrated when this was not the case. The participants (n= 7/17) appreciated when physicians took the time to explain things in a manner that enabled them to understand what was going to happen (Table3).

The participants (n= 12/17) agreed that age is a key factor in determining the extent to which adolescents should be involved in their overall medical care (Table4). Nevertheless, they believed that it is always connected with other factors, such as decision‐making capacity, maturity, or time lived with the disease. Moreover, the participants shared different points of view about the role of age. Some (n= 7/17) expressed the view that minor patients should never make medical decisions on their own. Others (n= 7/17) said that it is rather the capacity to comprehend than age per se that matters, and that this capacity does not come at the same age for everyone. When asked about what a suitable cut‐off could be, adolescents had very different points of view. Those involved (n= 10/17) in the decision‐making process estimated the age at which adolescents were capable of decision‐making to be younger than their own. Two participants set the age at 12, two others set it at 15, and one set it at 17. It was difficult to define an age for the younger patients who were less involved.

Quotes: Determinants of involvement in decision‐making.

A social support system often provided by family members was deemed crucial for adolescents (n= 6/17). All participants talked about the roles and support of their parents and family members – “My grandparents, my aunts and uncles came to visit. I'm lucky to have a close‐knit family, so I've had a lot of support from my family.” (Patient 7, 13, kidney). At the same time, they talked (n= 5/17) about the intrafamilial difficulties (e.g., siblings left alone at home) that may arise from their disease. They (n= 6/17) also emphasized the importance of feeling close to their families while in hospital (Table4). Patient 10 (16, lung) also had the support of a fellow patient through a hospital “buddy system”, which allowed them to share experiences, ultimately helping the adolescent make decisions (Table4).

Regarding reasons for their inclusion in decision‐making, most participants (n= 8/17) stated what was emphasized by patient 4 (16, kidney): “because it was my health that was at the centre of it all, it concerned me.” Even if sometimes, they could not make their own decisions, adolescents always wanted to be informed about the options and wanted their decisions and wishes to be taken into consideration, regardless of their age, as it was about their body and life.

Some (n= 3/17) even expressed that forcing someone to undergo an unwanted medical procedure could have important repercussions and compromise the success of the procedure. One participant reported that the physician in charge also agreed with this line of reasoning (Table4). Some participants (n= 2/17) also stated that forcing them into a medical procedure that they would not have wanted would have caused them to feel that they were no longer in charge of their own body. This happened to two patients, who remembered it as traumatic. For example, one patient woke up naked with a urinary catheter, but no one explained what was going to happen.

The participants were convinced that the capacity to understand the details of a decision is central to the ability to make a proper decision (Table4). However, they had different ideas on what influenced this capacity. For some (n= 4/17), it was better to let the doctor, who had medical expertise, decide on the best option. For others (n= 12/17), age had a great deal to play in the ability to understand or the experience that comes with dealing with an illness daily. Patient 5 (13, kidney) also stated that HCPs should explain details in different ways for the adolescent to be able to understand (Table4).

A patient explained that providing argumentation can be a form of assessment regarding whether an adolescent has understood the pros and cons of the transplantation and is therefore able to decide. According to this participant, patients should be taken seriously if they are able to explain their arguments. If the argumentation is valid, there is no reason not to listen, regardless of age (Table4).

Some participants (n= 6/17) reported that their lived experience of the illness helps in the decision‐making process. At the time of diagnosis, their life changed; there was much information to process, and it was very difficult, if not impossible, to make decisions at that time. Once they learned to live with their disease, became accustomed to medical appointments, and familiarized themselves with some of the vocabulary related to their medical condition, their ability to make their own decisions increased (Table4).

All the participants (n= 17/17) expressed the wish to make the decision together with their family and the involved HCP. They had a strong need to feel their family's support during this process. They agreed that their health choices are complicated and that it is reassuring that family members are included and agree with the decision (Table5).

Furthermore, for the adolescents (n= 8/17) who wanted to hold an active role in decision‐making, there was a need to be listened to, to be given the chance to express themselves, and to actually make the final decision (Table5).

To our knowledge, this is the first empirical study worldwide to explore the perspectives of transplanted minors and the first publication on adolescents' views in Europe. Christian and colleagues published a case report concerning one adolescent patient with cystic fibrosis and his journey through decision‐making leading to transplantation in the USA. Notably, this patient actively participated in determining the appropriate timing for the transplant and was involved in the decision‐making process [30]. Our study confirms how important it is for adolescents to be involved and able to make decisions about their health care.

Concerning the relationship between age and a patient's preferred degree of involvement, our findings show that there is no rule of thumb that would enable HCPs to exactly know how to proceed. It is generally agreed that by “the age of 14 to 15 years, most young people possess the capacity to make treatment decisions” [30], but our study shows that not all adolescents agree with this when they face a life‐changing decision. Indeed, there is great variability in the age at which patients want to be able to make the decision, with some adolescents wanting to do so before the age of 14. We found that the included adolescents agreed that the illness experience and the capacity to comprehend it are crucial determinants of a patient's decisional capacity. Both depend on many factors in addition to age and thus must be assessed carefully for each individual. Relatedly, studies have shown that HCPs need more training to be able to better support patients and their families in their decision‐making [42,43].

First, as the mean time between transplantations and interviews was five years, some recall bias probably exists. In addition, as the period between transplantations and interviews was long, the participants gained in maturity, which could have biased their recall toward a more positive view of the decision‐making process. However, as transplantation is a critical life event, recall bias is assumed to be minor. Second, since patients were selected by their physician to participate in our study, we cannot exclude possible selection bias, especially since one of the physicians talked to his patients first. Indeed, refusal to participate in our study for “personal matters” could be caused by a complicated relationship between patients and HCPs, dissatisfaction with decision‐making, or parents' opposition to participate rather than adolescents' choices. However, the exclusion of adolescents with lower satisfaction could mean dissatisfaction due to both too little or too much involvement in decision‐making (or other reasons). The motivation to participate in the study could also be influenced either by satisfaction or dissatisfaction with care and decision‐making; thus, we have no reason to believe that the selection was biased toward patients who were more positive toward involvement in decision‐making. Third, our sample is composed of different organ transplants (liver:n= 9, kidney:n= 6, lung:n= 2), and adolescents with a liver transplant were younger. While we did not identify differences in answers between groups, possible differences could be addressed with future research, particularly for age.