The invasive nature of liver biopsy and the risk of complications make patients reluctant to undergo the procedure. This situation has necessitated the search for easily accessible haematological indexes such as neutrophil‐to‐lymphocyte ratio (NLR) and red cell distribution width to lymphocyte ratio (RDW/LYM) to contribute to the clinical diagnosis and prognosis evaluation processes in dogs with cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis.

The aim of the study is to evaluate some predictive markers to contribute the clinical diagnosis in dogs with cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis.

Seventeen client‐owned dogs with cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis were randomly allocated. Nine clinically healthy dogs (control group) confirmed with clinical examination, complete blood count (CBC) and serum profiles were used. Cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis was diagnosed in dogs with dilated bile ducts, thickened gallbladder wall up to 4 mm and increased parenchymal echogenicity. Clinical procedures including clinical examination, blood analyses and diagnostic abdominal ultrasonography were performed in all dogs. CBC indices such as NLR, mean platelet volume to platelet ratio (MPV/PLT), red cell distribution width to platelet ratio (RDW/PLT), monocyte‐to‐lymphocyte ratio (MLR), platelet‐to‐lymphocyte ratio (PLR) and RDW/LYM were calculated using absolute CBC values.

A final total of 10 dogs were enrolled in the study. NLR and RDW/LYM ratios were significantly higher (p< 00.5) in dogs with cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis compared to healthy ones.

The results of this study suggest that the use of NLR and RDW/LYM ratio in dogs with cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis complex appears potentially promising. Larger prospective, case‐control studies are needed to further evaluate these findings. Veterinary practitioners can obtain valuable diagnostic data before possible invasive liver procedures by evaluating NLR and RDW/LYM ratios, which are easily obtained from CBC parameters.

The invasive nature of liver biopsy and the risk of complications make patients reluctant to undergo the procedure. This situation has necessitated the search for new markers to contribute to the clinical diagnosis and prognosis evaluation processes in dogs with cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis. The use of NLR and RDW/LYM ratio in dogs with cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis complex appears potentially promising. Veterinary practitioners can obtain valuable diagnostic data before possible invasive liver procedures by evaluating NLR and RDW/LYM ratios.

The cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis complex in dogs is a more common problem than previously thought, and there is still limited data in the literature on clinical diagnosis (Center1998; Tamborini et al.2016). In classifying liver diseases in dogs, the World Small Animal Veterinary Association (WSAVA) preferred to use the term cholangitis to cover both conditions instead of cholangiohepatitis. It stated that the bile ducts are the primary source of liver parenchymal inflammation (Van den Ingh et al.2006). While cholangitis is defined as inflammation of the intrahepatic bile ducts limited to the portal area, cholangiohepatitis is defined as inflammation around the bile ducts extending into the periportal hepatic parenchyma. When cholangitis is associated with secondary inflammation in the hepatic parenchyma, it can cause cholangiohepatitis, and the two conditions often coexist. Therefore, it is generally accepted that cholangiohepatitis develops as a possible consequence of cholangitis (Kelly1993; O'Neill et al.2006). Various indices derived from whole blood analysis parameters have long been used in medicine to evaluate the diagnostic and prognostic processes of cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis (J. Wang et al.2020). However, the literature on this subject is still limited in veterinary medicine.

The neutrophil‐to‐lymphocyte ratio (NLR) and platelet‐to‐lymphocyte ratio (PLR) are economical and availability‐advantaged biomarkers that are frequently used to monitor sepsis and inflammation. Neutrophils are an important component to promote inflammation by secreting cytokines, leading to sepsis in cholangitis. Lymphocyte regulates systemic inflammation. Ongoing inflammatory process also causes lymphopenia as a result of redistribution and apoptosis (Hodgson et al.2018; Zahorec2001; Cho et al.2017). Therefore, NLR reflects the dynamic changes in immune system in cholangitis. Many studies have concluded that NLR is also useful in various clinical conditions, including cardiovascular diseases, malignancies and infectious diseases. A correlation between neutrophilia and lymphocytopenia and the severity of the clinical course has been reported, and NLR has been suggested as an indicator of disease severity (Hwang et al.2017). Mean platelet volume (MPV), which reflects platelet size, is associated with platelet function and activation (Sandhaus and Meyer2002). Therefore, an increase in MPV indicates an increase in platelet production and activation. An increase in MPV indicates that platelets are larger and more active (Kısacık et al.2008; Ulaslı et al.2012). Inflammation in critically ill patients causes vascular endothelial dysfunction in the microcirculation and platelet activation and consumption. Although MPV is normally inversely correlated with platelet count, the clinical significance of the relationship between MPV and platelet count in severe sepsis has not yet been determined (Yazici et al.2010). In human and veterinary medicine, mean platelet volume to platelet ratio (MPV/PLT) has been identified as a potential diagnostic marker of systemic inflammatory response. However, data describing their potential value in veterinary medicine are very limited (Rejec et al.2017). NLR and MPV have been associated with poor prognosis in several cohort studies, including patients with coronary artery disease, acute respiratory distress syndrome, cancer and sepsis (Ham et al.2020). Like NLR, studies evaluating MPV prognostically are limited (Ham et al.2020). Increased monocyte‐to‐lymphocyte ratio (MLR) correlates directly with disease severity and indicates poor prognosis in liver diseases (Li et al.2020). Red cell distribution width to lymphocyte ratio (RDW/LYM) is a strong indicator of inflammation, and its increase is the most important early marker of hepatic fibrosis and cirrhosis (Meng et al.2018). RDW measures the variation in erythrocyte (red blood cell [RBC]) size (Fan et al.2018); its elevated values are associated with elevated inflammatory markers such as sedimentation rate, C‐reactive protein (CRP) or interleukin (IL). Several studies have attempted to identify a possible association between RDW and the prognosis/mortality of various liver diseases. Damage to the liver parenchyma leads to the formation of many pathologic factors in the distribution of RDW (Aslam et al.2023). This cumulative change in inflammation plays a vital role in regulating erythropoiesis, resulting in anisocytosis and increased RDW. With the progression of this condition, chronic inflammation, fibrosis or cirrhosis may develop (Fan et al.2018; Aslam et al.2023). One study concluded that RDW fails to provide prognostic information without other specific inflammation indicators (Aslam et al.2023). The erythrocyte distribution width to platelet ratio (RDW/PLT), a combination of two independent parameters, has been accepted as a new index reflecting the severity of inflammation. It has been proposed as a diagnostic or prognostic parameter in humans and dogs with cardiovascular disease (Çelik et al.2016). Studies in humans have concluded that the RDW/PLT ratio may provide a prediction of fibrosis and cirrhosis formation in patients with chronic hepatitis (Taefi et al.2015).

Although liver biopsy is the gold standard for the diagnosis and severity of the disease, the invasive nature of liver biopsy and the risk of complications make patients reluctant to undergo the procedure. This situation has necessitated the search for easily accessible haematological indexes to contribute to the clinical diagnosis and prognosis evaluation processes in dogs with cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis. The purpose of the current study was therefore to evaluate haematological indexes, including NLR, MPV/PLT, RDW/PLT, MLR, PLR and RDW/LYM, in dogs with primary cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis and to compare them with a control series of healthy dogs.

A total of 17 non‐pregnant client‐owned dogs with the signs of cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis including anorexia, vomiting, weight loss, lethargy or jaundice were referred to the Veterinary Teaching Hospital. All dogs in control group were chosen in those referred to hospital for the routine health check‐ups. Clinically healthy dogs confirmed with clinical examination, complete blood count (CBC) and serum profiles were used in the current study as a control group. Nine clinically healthy dogs were assigned to control group by computer‐based randomisations among 16 clinically healthy dogs. All dogs had also undergone antiparasitic therapy and routine vaccination against rabies, distemper, parainfluenza, parvoviral enteritis, leptospirosis and infectious canine hepatitis. The dogs were fed commercial dry food. Some dogs were excluded from the study when the presence of concurrent secondary disease affecting liver parenchyma, bile ducts and gallbladder. No dogs in groups had also inflammatory, infectious, immune‐mediated or neoplastic disease. None of dogs had receive medical or surgical treatment at least 3 months before blood analysis. The dogs were also free of pancreatic and inflammatory bowel disease. Based on these exclusion criteria, a final total of 10 dogs were enrolled in the study.

Clinical procedures including clinical examination, blood analyses (CBC, urea, creatinine, total protein, total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, albumin, ALT, AST, ALP, GGT, glucose, cholesterol, triglyceride, fasting and postprandial bile acids—Exigo Eos Vet Hematology Analyzer, Erba XL Biochemical Analyzer) and diagnostic abdominal ultrasonography were performed in all dogs. CBC indices such as NLR, MPV/PLT, RDW/PLT, MLR, PLR and RDW/LYM were calculated using absolute CBC values. All dogs fasted at least 12 h before blood samplings. CBC analyses were performed with blood taken from the cephalic vein and stored in EDTA tubes. During ultrasonography, all liver lobes, bile ducts, gallbladder, liver parenchymal echogenicity and vascular structures were evaluated. Cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis was diagnosed in dogs with dilated bile ducts, thickened gallbladder wall up to 4 mm (reference range 2–3 mm) and increased parenchymal echogenicity (Spaulding1993; Kemp et al.2013). The animals were treated with appropriate medications. Written consent from the owners and the written permission of teaching hospital management was obtained. The present study was carried out in accordance with the principles of the European Convention for the Protection of Vertebrate Animals Used for Experimental and Other Scientific Purposes and the requirements of European Union Directive 2010/63 on the protection of animals used for experimental and other scientific purposes.

Before performing the statistical analysis, data were examined with Shapiro–Wilk test for normality and Levene test for homogeneity of variances as parametric test assumptions. Studentt‐test was used to evaluate the differences between groups for the variables when parametric assumptions were provided and Mann–WhitneyUtest was used if the assumptions were not provided.p< 0.05 was considered as significant in all analyses. All data were analysed using IBM SPSS 23.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).

Data were collected from 19 client‐owned dogs including mixed breeds (n: 5), Terrier types (n: 5), Golden Retriewer (n: 1), Shar‐pei (n: 1), Chihuahua (n: 1), Husky (n: 1), Kangal (n: 1), Cavalier King Charles (n: 1), Bulldog (n: 1), Pinscher (n: 1) and Rottweiler (n: 1). The mean age, weight and gender distributions of dogs in groups are presented in Table1. Haematological variables in groups are also shown in Table2. Serum biochemical profiles in dogs with cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis are presented in Table3.

Abbreviations: HCT, haematocrit; HGB, haemoglobin; MCH, mean corpuscular haemoglobin; MCHC, mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration; MCV, mean corpuscular volume; MLR, monocyte‐to‐lymphocyte ratio; MONO, monocyte; MPV, mean platelet volume; MPV/PLT, mean platelet volume to platelet ratio; NLR, neutrophil‐to‐lymphocyte ratio; PLR, platelet‐to‐lymphocyte ratio; PLT, platelet; RBC, red blood cell; RDW, red blood cell distribution width; RDW/LYM, red cell distribution width to lymphocyte ratio; RDW/PLT, red cell distribution width to platelet ratio; WBC, white blood cell.

Serum biochemical mean profiles in dogs with cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis.

Abbreviations: ALP, alkaline phosphatase; ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; GGT, gamma‐glutamyl transferase.

Many haemogram parameters can interact with pathological processes of conditions characterized by marked or mild severity inflammation. The relationships between these indices and inflammatory diseases are well known. New inflammatory indices derived from routine haemogram parameters have recently been suggested to predict outcomes in chronic conditions (Bilgin et al.2020). Many haemogram parameters, such as NLR, which represents the balance between neutrophils and lymphocytes, have been reported to be useful as a new marker for systemic inflammation (Zahorec2001). This study evaluated the relationships between several new haemogram parameters in patients diagnosed with cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis. NLR was significantly lower in the control group compared to the patient group. An increase in NLR is expected in cases of neutrophilia and lymphopenia. In the patient group, lymphopenia was observed in 4 cases and neutrophilia in 5 cases. In the control group, neutrophil and lymphocyte values were within the reference values. When NLR rates were evaluated, there was a significant difference between the patient and control groups. NLR rates are thought to increase in patients with cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis complex due to inflammation. This change in NLR may be due to neutrophilia, which occurs due to inflammation, and the increase in cortisone levels, which develop due to the stress factor caused by inflammation. It is also thought that neutrophil production is stimulated depending on the severity of inflammation, and the cause of lymphocyte apoptosis also affects the NLR rate (Zahorec2001; Neumann2021; Kocaturk et al.2024).

In parallel with the cases in which lymphopenia and neutrophilia were observed in the patient group, an increase in PLT values was also observed. In parallel with previous studies, this supports the idea that increased neutrophil count may contribute to the thrombotic status of the inflammatory process (Zahorec2001). MPV reflects platelet size, and an increase in MPV indicates an increase in platelet production and activation. This study found no significant difference in the MPV/PLT ratio when the patient and control groups were compared. Within 8 h after the onset of thrombocytopenia (in cases requiring higher demand), platelet production can increase up to 10‐fold. Platelets also contain secretory granules that act on the coagulation system and vascular endothelium to maintain haemostasis. Since the amount of granules depends on the size of platelets, larger platelets contain more granules and are more reactive. Furthermore, a study (Güçlü et al.2013) suggested that coagulation and platelet activation may occur in the early stage of sepsis. Platelets change their shape from discoid to spherical during activation to have a larger surface area. This change may also increase MPV in the early phase of sepsis. Therefore, MPV is expected to increase over time depending on the severity of inflammation (Güçlü et al.2013; Lance et al.2012; Oh et al.2017). In this study, no significant difference was observed between MPV/PLT in the control and patient groups, suggesting that it may be related to the change in inflammation severity over time.

RDW reflects the heterogeneity of the size of circulating RBCs. High RDW values indicate more variation in the size of RBCs and increased heterogeneity. An increased RDW may be associated with various underlying metabolic abnormalities such as inflammation, oxidative stress, poor nutritional status, dyslipidaemia, hypertension, erythrocyte fragmentation and alterations in erythropoietin function (Sitia et al.2012; Yuyun et al.2019). Studies have shown that inflammation can inhibit the maturation of RBCs and shorten their half‐life. Lack of nutrition in critically ill patients may also lead to inadequate haemoglobin synthesis, increasing RDW. Therefore, high levels of MPV/PLT, MPV and RDW usually indicate poor outcomes in critical illness (Ham et al.2020). Although not statistically significant, RDW increased in the patient group compared to the control group. A study (Gökçe and Gökçe2019) evaluated PLR in patients and healthy people diagnosed with acute cholecystitis and found that PLR and RDW ratios were higher in the patient group. In our study, RDW and PLR values were higher in the patient group with inflammation. In another study, the PLR value was used as a marker of inflammation in multiple myeloma and carcinoma cases and was found to have high values (Wongrakpanich et al.2016; Zheng et al.2017). Recently, NLR, PLR and MLR rates were compared in patients diagnosed with COVID‐19, and it was observed that NLR and PLR had the highest values in the critically ill group, but the MLR rate was lower in the patient group compared to the healthy group (Peng et al.2020; Ayalew et al.2022). NLR and MLR ratios were also examined in dogs with myxomatous mitral valve disease; it was concluded that NLR was higher in the patient group and MLR was higher in the healthy group (Ku et al.2023). In a study conducted in veterinary medicine, PLR and NLR ratios were also evaluated in cats and dogs diagnosed with pancreatitis, higher ratios were found in sick animals compared to healthy animals, and no relationship was established between the severity of the disease (Neumann2021). The results of these studies and our study's data are similar. In our study, dogs diagnosed with primary cholangiohepatitis had high NLR and PLR rates, while the MLR rate was low.

In a study conducted with dogs with different stages of heart failure, RDW/PLT ratios were higher in the sick group than in the healthy group (Kocaturk et al.2024). Blood was taken from patients admitted to the paediatric intensive care unit on the first day, and the RDW/PLT ratio was examined and found to be quite high. As a result of the study, they concluded that it is an important marker that can be used to predict the prognosis of children with sepsis (L. Wang and Cai2016). In patients diagnosed with chronic hepatitis with different aetiologies, RDW and RDW/PLT ratios were found to be quite high in the patient group. It has been observed that the RDW/PLT ratio may be a strong indicator of the degree of fibrosis and cirrhosis in patients with chronic hepatitis (Taefi et al.2015). RDW/LYM, derived from the ratio of RDW and lymphocytes, is a new marker. Although RDW is defined as an indicator of erythrocyte heterogeneity, studies have shown that it is closely associated with inflammation. High immature RBCs in the peripheral circulation increase RDW, which explains the close relationship between increased RDW and inflammatory cytokines (Song et al.2018). RDW/LYM rates were examined in colorectal cancer patients and cancer patients diagnosed with malignant melanoma and were found to be high in the patient group (Huang et al.2019; Hunnarici et al.2021). In recent studies, inflammation has been thought to play a role in tumour formation. Accordingly, an increase in RDW/LYM is possible (Mantovani et al.2008). In another study, PLR rates were evaluated to predict liver failure and prognosis in patients infected with the hepatitis E virus. As a result of the study, RDW, NLR and RDW/LYM rates were found to be higher in patients with hepatitis who developed liver failure compared to patients who did not develop liver failure (Wu et al.2019). RDW/LYM value has started to be used as a new marker, and there have not been enough studies on this subject in veterinary medicine yet. In this study, the results of dogs diagnosed with primary cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis showed that the PLR rate in the patient group was higher than that of the healthy group.

It is well known in human patients that major pathophysiological mechanism of cholangitis is immune response and inflammation of the biliary system as similar to veterinary medicine (O'Neill et al.2006; Wu et al.2019; Liso et al.2017). NLR reflects the immune and inflammatory condition earlier and more precisely compared to total WBC count in pancreatobiliary disease (Jeon and Park2017). NLR, considered a reflection of systemic inflammation in humans, has been studied extensively in cancer and cardiovascular diseases, and has proven to be an important marker in determining long‐term prognosis, especially in patients with hepatitis B and C. It has also been defined the cut‐off values of NLR in liver failure in human patients (Kuo et al.2014). However, no studies in veterinary literature yet that include prognostic results and cut‐off values of NLR in dogs with cholangitis having a pathophysiological mechanism of inflammation of the biliary tract. The current study here reflects a potentially promising clinical parameters for diagnosing dogs with cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis complex. In human studies, the ability of NLR to predict fibrotic stage‐severity was also supported by histopathological liver biopsies (Tenlik et al.2022). Although liver biopsy is the gold standard for the diagnosis and severity of the disease, a study considering ultrasound‐guided liver biopsies in dogs has reported a high incidence of clinically silent, major haemorrhage (Reece et al.2020). However, due to the invasive nature of liver biopsy and the risk of complications, owners are reluctant to undergo the procedure. However, clinical use of these parameters instead of invasive liver biopsy may help veterinary practitioners manage the clinical course of disease in dogs with cholangitis. Therefore, this study has several limitations. First, the lack of liver biopsy samples in the presented study may be a limiting factor. Second, a larger number of dogs may better demonstrate the potential of whether NLR and RDW/LYM can predict cholangitis in dogs.

A study in human patients has investigated the RDW and lymphocyte counts in primary biliary cholangitis. In the study, authors aimed to identify non‐invasive markers of the severity of cirrhosis in human patients with primary biliary cholangitis. In the study, patients with advanced stage had significantly higher RDW, significantly lower lymphocyte counts and significantly higher RDW/LYM ratio as compared with patients with early stage cirrhosis. Staging of liver disease was confirmed by liver biopsy in the study as well (Meng et al.2018). Although studies are insufficient in veterinary medicine, human studies accept the NLR and RDW/LYM ratio as a predictor in determining the severity of liver diseases without biopsy (Tenlik et al.2022; Ding and Xia2022).

The findings obtained from this study suggest that NLR and RDW/LYM ratios are potentially promising clinical parameters for diagnosing dogs with cholangitis‐cholangiohepatitis complex. Further case‐control studies involving a larger number of dogs including comparison of these parameters with the severity the cholangitis defined by liver biopsies, and survival and treatment response are necessary to better understand these results.