Desmopressin (DDAVP), which indirectly increases Coagulation Factor VIII concentrations in the blood, is a common treatment for bleeding disorders such as von Willebrand disease or hemophilia A. However, DDAVP exhibits significant variability in response due to interindividual differences in pharmacokinetics. Consequently, exploring its pharmacokinetics is of primary importance to better understand the relationship between DDAVP administration and therapeutic outcomes. To that end, the measurement of DDAVP concentration is essential. This article describes the development and validation of a liquid chromatography method coupled with high‐resolution mass spectrometry detection for quantifying DDAVP in human plasma. After sample pretreatment involving protein precipitation followed by solid‐phase extraction, quantification was based on the four most intense isotopes, utilizing targeted single ion monitoring, with a method range of 20–2000 pg.mL−1. For the four QC levels, accuracy and precision for both inter‐ and intra‐assay measurements were below 11.6% and 13.8%, respectively, meeting FDA recommendations. After validation, this method was applied to a cohort of 10 patients with a deficiency in Coagulation Factor VIII, who received 0.3 μg.kg−1of desmopressin acetate. The mean volume of distribution at steady state was 18.8 L (CV% 26.7), the mean clearance was 7.8 L.h−1(CV% 25.1), and the mean half‐life was 1.8 h (CV% 14.7). Offering valuable insights into the pharmacokinetics of DDAVP, this method will be useful for further studies and holds promise for optimizing treatment regimens in this patient population.

Desmopressin (D‐amino D‐arginine vasopressin [DDAVP]), a synthetic analogue of vasopressin with a molecular weight of 1069.2 Da, is used in various contexts, including the management and prevention of bleeding during minor invasive procedures in patients with von Willebrand disease, mild hemophilia A, or as carriers of hemophilia A [1].

The full mechanism of DDAVP's action remains only partially elucidated. It is known to bind to endothelial cell V2 receptors, triggering the release of von Willebrand factor (vWF) and tissue plasminogen activator from Weibel–Palade bodies. As vWF is a carrier of Coagulation Factor VIII (FVIII), protecting it from degradation in blood, increased blood FVIII concentrations are observed after the administration of DDAVP [2]. By increasing FVIII levels, DDAVP indirectly shortens the prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time and the bleeding time in patients [3]. This prohemostatic effect, which usually lasts less than 12 h, is often sufficient to control minor bleeding and prevent bleeding during minor invasive procedures. However, DDAVP's clinical application is complicated by significant interindividual variability in response, necessitating a prior therapeutic test to gauge efficacy [4,5,6].

To enhance our understanding of the pharmacokinetics and therapeutic response of DDAVP, precise quantification in human plasma is essential. Different liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry methods have been developed to quantify DDAVP in several biological matrices [7,8,9,10,11,12]. Liquid chromatography coupled with triple quadrupole mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) in the multiple reaction monitoring mode has been the standard approach for quantifying DDAVP, owing to its sensitivity for peptide analysis. However, data in the literature have shown that liquid chromatography coupled with high‐resolution mass spectrometry (LC‐HRMS) can offer comparable or higher sensitivity for peptide measurement, particularly for peptides smaller than 10 000–15 000 Da, which are suitable for analysis by full‐scan LC‐HRMS [13,14]. This is notably due to the data acquisition process in this mode, which generates full‐scan data for the analyte over a selected mass range by recording all ions in the sample without requiring fragmentation for quantification. Fragmentation, required for LC–MS/MS quantification of peptides, can produce many low‐abundance ions, diluting the analytical signal [14]. Additionally, LC‐HRMS eliminates the time‐consuming MS/MS method development required to maximize sensitivity and selectivity [15].

Building on these insights, and with more and more labs being equipped with LC‐HRMS—sometimes the only technology available—this article introduces and validates a quantitative method for analyzing DDAVP in human plasma using full‐scan LC‐HRMS and describes its application in hemophilia A patients.

Acetate desmopressin and its internal standard (IS)2H5‐desmopressin were purchased from Alsachim (Illkirch, France). Acetonitrile (ACN), water, and formic acid (FA) were provided by Carlo Erba reagents (Val‐de‐Reuil, France). Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH), and phosphoric acid (H3PO4) were purchased from Sigma‐Aldrich (Saint‐Quentin‐Fallavier, France). The drug‐free human plasma was obtained from the regional blood service (EFS Auvergne‐Rhône‐Alpes, France).

Chromatographic separation was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Saint‐Quentin‐Fallavier, France). Two microliters of the sample was loaded in the trap column (PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 A, 0.3*5 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 5 min at 20 μL.min−1with water containing 2% ACN and 0.05% TFA. The separation was performed on the analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 3 μm, 100 A, 75 μm*15 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL.min−1. Mobile Phase A consisted of 0.1% FA in water, while Mobile Phase B comprised 0.08% FA in 80% ACN. The following gradient was achieved: 0–7 min 2% B, 7–24 min linear from 2% to 50% B, 24–25 min linear from 50% to 90% B, 25–29 min 90% B, and 29.1 min return to 2% B up to 39.5 min.

Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a QExactivePlus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an EASY Spray source. The acquisition mode was targeted single ion monitoring (tSIM)/data dependant‐MS2(dd‐MS2). During the tSIM method, the following parameters were applied: a resolution of 70 000 (at m/z 200), an AGC target of 5.104, a maximum injection time of 100 ms, and an isolation window of 4 Da. An inclusion list including m/z values of DDAVP predicted ion by Skyline software was used. For dd‐MS2mode, the following parameters were applied: a resolution of 17 500 (at m/z 200), an AGC target of 5 × 104, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, an isolation window of 4 Da, and a normalized collision energy of 20.

Data was acquired and analyzed using TraceFinder software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). DDAVP quantitation was carried out on the parent ion analysis by tSIM. The DDAVP fragment ions obtained by dd‐MS2analysis and the DDAVP isotopes identified on tSIM analysis were used for confirmation. The tSIM analysis was used for quantitation only if the two fragment ions were identified and at least four isotopes were present. The standard curve was generated by plotting the area ratio of DDAVP and IS peak versus DDAVP concentration. The standard curve was obtained by a linear regression using a weighting factor of 1/x.

Several protein precipitations were evaluated by mixing 100 μL of plasma with 500 μL of different combinations of methanol, ACN, FA, and TFA. Samples were centrifuged at 10 000 g for 15 min, and the supernatant was collected and evaporated using a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dried samples were suspended in 100 μL of IS at 500 pg.mL−1in water and diluted with 100 μL of 4% H3PO4(vol/vol). A solid phase extraction (SPE) with Oasis WCX μElution plate was then performed according to the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, the plate was conditioned with methanol and equilibrated with water before loading samples. A first wash was applied with 5% NH4OH followed by a second wash with 10% ACN in water. Finally, samples were eluted twice with 25 μL of an ACN/water solution (1:1 vol/vol) containing 2% FA. The eluate was evaporated and suspended in 25 μL of mobile phase before injection.

The method was validated according to the FDA guidance for bioanalytical method validation [16]. Standards and controls were obtained by diluting stock solutions in blank plasma. According to the FDA guidelines, a 7‐point calibration curve was performed with the following concentrations: 0, 20, 50, 100, 500, 1000, and 2000 pg.mL−1. Quality controls (QCs) were prepared to obtain the lower limit of quantification (LLOQ) QC at 20 pg.mL−1, and low, midrange, and high QC levels at 40, 250, and 1250 pg.mL−1, respectively. The LLOQ was defined as the lowest concentration at which the fragment ions and the four isotopes of DDAVP were detected. It was evaluated by an injection of decreasing concentrations of DDAVP. Within‐run and between‐run accuracy and precision were performed on the four QC levels during three runs in six replicates. Accuracy was expressed as a percentage of deviation (%DEV) compared to the nominal concentration. For precision, the coefficient of variation (CV) was estimated for the four QC levels across each run. The acceptance criteria were 20% for LLOQ QC and 15% for other levels. Linear regression was applied to the standard curve generated by fitting the sum of peak area ratios for DDAVP concentration against the IS. A weighting factor of 1/concentration regression was applied. Selectivity was assessed on blank plasma and blank plasma spiked with DDAVP or its IS. Their chromatograms should be free of interference at the retention time of DDAVP and its IS. Carryover was performed by injecting a blank after the highest standard. The carryover should be less than 20% of LLOQ. Long‐term, autosampler, and freeze–thaw stability were evaluated for low and high QC in at least three replicates. The long‐term stability was performed after storage at −20°C for 1 month. Postpreparation stability in the autosampler was determined by injection QC suspended in phase after storage in the autosampler at 4°C during 24 and 48 h. For freeze–thaw stability, the QC concentration was determined after three thaw and freeze cycles. Accuracy and precision should not exceed 15%. The matrix effect was performed by spiking four biological matrices of human plasma with DDAVP at 40 and 1250 pg.mL−1, corresponding to low and high QC concentrations, and comparing with a neat solution at the same concentration. The matrix effect was calculated by comparing the areas under the curve of peak chromatograms. Total recovery was determined by comparing peak areas between plasmas spiked with DDAVP at 40, 250, and 1250 pg.mL−1before and after sample preparation.

The analytical method was used to determine the concentration of DDAVP in 10 patients with hemophilia A. Blood samples were collected at 0.5, 1, 2, and 4 h after a 30‐min infusion of 0.3 μg.kg−1of desmopressin acetate (Minirin, Ferring, Gentilly, France).

The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Rennes University Hospital (avis 13–75). All patients received an information letter about the study. Pharmacokinetic parameters were computed by a noncompartmental analysis using PKanalix software (2023R1, Lixsoft SAS, a Simulation Plus company). The following parameters were computed: half‐life (t1/2) calculated by the equationt1/2= ln(2)/kel, wherekelwas estimated from the slopes of the terminal phases of the logarithmic plasma concentration‐time curves using at least three points; AUC from dosing time extrapolated to infinity (AUCINF); clearance = dose/AUCINF; Vss, an estimate of the volume of distribution at steady state based on the last predicted concentration.

Initial experiments indicated that SPE without protein precipitation was not sufficient to prevent column clogging. To preserve the column, various protein precipitations were assessed prior to SPE to reduce the concentration of total proteins entering the column. The results displayed in Figure1revealed that the intensity of the chromatographic peak for DDAVP was better when the ACN/2% FA mixture was used for protein precipitation.

The representative chromatograms of drug‐free human plasma, LLOQ, and postdose human plasma are shown in Figure2. The total run time of the method was 39.5 min. Retention time for both DDAVP and2H5‐desmopressin was 20.7 min.

Representative chromatograms and calibration curve of desmopressin and internal standard.

The LLOD and LLOQ were determined at a concentration of 10 and 20 pg.mL−1, respectively. At the LLOQ, four isotopes were identified (535.22075, 535.72217, 536.22201, 536.72205 m/z), and two daughter ions of the most abundant parent (535.22075 m/z) were present (328.20929 and 120.08109 m/z) (Figure3).

Chromatogram, isotope distribution, and daughter scan of desmopressin from plasma patient.

The method was linear over the range of 20–2000 pg.mL−1The calibration curve was fitted with a weighted (1/x) linear regression. The mean regression coefficient (R2) for three runs was 0.999 ± 0.001.

Within‐ and between‐run accuracy and precision of the four QC levels (LLOQ, low, mid, and high) are summarized in Table1. For the four QC levels, accuracy and precision were below 11.6% and 13.8%, respectively, meeting FDA recommendations [16].

The selectivity and specificity of the method were acceptable. Blank and zero were free of interference at the retention time of DDAVP and its IS (Figure2). Furthermore, the IS response in the blank was less than 5% of the IS responses during validation.

For DDAVP, as recommended, the remaining area was less than 3%, thus under the recommended level of 20% of LLOQ and less than 5% for IS.

The postpreparation stability in the autosampler was evaluated at Levels 40 and 1250 pg.mL−1(n= 4, for each level). Upon reinjection after 24 and 48 h, variations in DDAVP concentrations were less than or equal to 1.6% (CV% 7.9) and 1.4% (CV% 9.5), respectively. After three freeze/thaw cycles, the degradation was less than 5.5% (CV% 7.1). Finally, the long‐term stability was less than or equal to 6.6% (CV% 6.6) (Table2).

For matrix effect, the accuracy at the concentrations of 40 and 1250 pg.mL−1was 14.9 and 5.4%, and the precision was −6.4 and 5.1%. Based on the FDA guidance, the method shows no matrix effect.

This method was successfully applied to the pharmacokinetic study of intravenous administration of 0.3 μg.kg−1desmopressin acetate in hemophilia A carriers (severe and mild familial hemophilia A,n= 5) and in patients with mild hemophilia A (n= 5). Figure4shows pharmacokinetic curves for all the patients. The mean volume of distribution at steady state was 18.8 L (CV% 26.7), the mean clearance was 7.8 L.h−1(CV% 25.1), and the mean half‐life was 1.8 h (CV% 14.7).

Pharmacokinetic profile of 10 patients exposed to 0.3 μg.kg−1of desmopressin acetate. Patients shown in red are those with mild hemophilia A, while those in blue are carriers of hemophilia A.

DDAVP remains the primary treatment option for patients with mild hemophilia A or carriers of hemophilia A to prevent or manage minor bleeding episodes. However, the efficacy of DDAVP treatment can vary significantly among individuals, highlighting the need for reliable methods to quantify DDAVP levels in plasma.

This study reported the development and full validation of a method for quantifying DDAVP in human plasma, utilizing ion exchange and reverse‐phase microelution coupled with LC‐HRMS detection. To achieve satisfactory sensitivity, multiple peaks from different charge states and isotopic distributions were incorporated into the quantification process. Specifically, four isotopes and two fragments were monitored to ensure optimal quantification of DDAVP. To our knowledge, this was the first time such an approach had been developed for this purpose. In terms of method development, we also explored a nanoflow rate strategy to enhance sensitivity. However, we encountered challenges during sample processing, which resulted in crude extracts unsuitable for nanoflow analysis, leading to instrument column or tubule clogging. To address this issue, we introduced a precipitation step prior to SPE.

Developed in this manner, our method demonstrated excellent performance across all validation criteria, including satisfactory linearity over a concentration range of 20–2000 pg.mL−1. This range was comparable to the range of the most recent LC–MS/MS method for desmopressin quantification (20–3200 pg.mL−1), with the LLOQ of 20 pg.mL−1being identical [12]. Furthermore, this range encompassed the DDAVP concentrations measured in patients in our study (ranging from 30 to 1100 pg.mL−1). These data confirm the feasibility of using LC‐HRMS for DDAVP quantification. Previous methods for quantifying DDAVP in biological samples have predominantly relied on LC–MS/MS, regarded as the gold standard for peptide quantification, notably due to its high sensitivity [9,10,12]. However, LC–MS/MS is not always available in laboratories, particularly those equipped with LC‐HRMS systems marketed as capable of achieving satisfactory sensitivity for targeted quantification, including peptides. Beyond the question of technology accessibility, data have emerged in recent years suggesting that LC‐HRMS may be more effective than LC–MS/MS for peptide quantification [14,15,17]. Indeed, LC–MS/MS has inherent limitations, including restricted mass resolution and accuracy, which may lead to interference from complex biological matrix components [18]. LC–MS/MS also requires fragmentation for peptide quantification, unlike LC‐HRMS. Fragmentation can produce many low‐abundance ions, diluting the analytical signal [14]. These limitations, combined with the fact that MS/MS method development is time‐consuming, may explain the paradigm shift in peptide quantification, as evidenced by recent studies reporting the application of LC‐HRMS for the detection of peptides or small molecules [13,15].

In addition to demonstrating the feasibility of using LC‐HRMS for the quantification of DDAVP, our method exhibits several interesting characteristics. First, an isotope‐labeled IS of DDAVP (2H₅‐desmopressin) was used, in contrast to most other methods for desmopressin quantification, where vasopressin or morphine was used [7,8,9,11,12]. With a structure highly similar to DDAVP, the isotope‐labeled IS ensured identical behavior with DDAVP throughout the entire analytical process, enabling accurate compensation for variations in extraction, matrix effects, and instrument fluctuations. This aspect is particularly important in methods involving complex extraction steps and peptide stability issues, especially when correcting for interindividual variability in recovery from patient plasma samples [19]. Moreover, vasopressin is naturally present in blood, with levels varying between patients. This can affect the accuracy and reliability of quantification, leading to inconsistent results [20]. Another advantage of our method is its requirement for only a minimal sample volume of 100 μL. Indeed, DDAVP quantification can be performed in pediatric populations, where blood sample volumes are limited. Moreover, in the context of hemophilia A, other hemostasis tests are typically required to monitor the disease and DDAVP activity, which necessitates a portion of the available sample.

Finally, the successful application of our method in pharmacokinetic analysis demonstrates the utility of HRMS for quantifying DDAVP levels in patients with hemophilia A. To our knowledge, this is the first study to describe both concentration profiles and pharmacokinetic parameters of DDAVP in this population. Most previous quantitative studies on DDAVP did not report pharmacokinetic data and focused on alternative matrices such as skin [7] and urine [8] or investigated oral administration [10]. Interestingly, two studies allowed for comparison with our results. In the first study, DDAVP concentrations were measured in six healthy volunteers following intravenous administration at 0.3 μg.kg−1—matching our dosage [12]. Reported concentrations ranged from approximately 25 to 550 pg.mL−1, which were comparable to those observed in our patients, ranging from 30 to 1100 pg.mL−1. In the second study, pharmacokinetic parameters reported in von Willebrand disease patients following intravenous administration of DDAVP at 0.3 μg.kg−1(volume of distribution: 25.9 L; clearance: 9.43 L.h−1) were comparable to those observed in our cohort (volume of distribution: 18.8 L; clearance: 7.8 L.h−1) [21]. Such results highlight the potential of our innovative approach in monitoring DDAVP therapy for individuals with hemophilia A. The ability of our laboratory to quantify DDAVP using a validated and reliable method will facilitate the realization of multicenter pharmacokinetic studies of DDAVP in the context of coagulation disorders, especially as few laboratories currently offer this capability. Multicenter studies are particularly crucial given the rarity of hemophilia A, while large cohorts enhance the robustness and informativeness of study conclusions.

We have developed and fully validated a LC‐HRMS method for quantifying DDAVP in human plasma. This study marks the first application of LC‐HRMS for quantifying DDAVP levels in hemophilia A patients. These findings hold promise for optimizing DDAVP therapy and improving clinical outcomes in patients with hemophilia A.