To map the literature on blood concentrates for managing postoperative sequelae after third molar extraction through a scoping review.

MedLine, Latin American and Caribbean Health Sciences Literature, Scientific Electronic Library Online, EMBASE, Cochrane Library, Scopus, and Web of Science were the search databases. MedRxiv and EASY provided the grey literature. The investigation included observational studies and clinical trials reporting at least one postoperative sequela. After selecting the articles, the extracted data included study author, year, and country, study design, sample size, age distribution, the type of third molar impaction, flap design, the presence of osteotomy and/or odontosection, co-interventions, blood concentrate type, centrifuge model, centrifugation protocol, collection tubes, outcomes, and the main findings for each outcome. After data extraction, an analysis of the geographic distribution of publications was carried out based on the MapChart website.

This review included 63 studies. The leading countries in publications were Turkey, India, and Brazil. Common postoperative sequelae included pain, edema, trismus, alveolar osteitis, and infection. Outcomes varied regarding the effectiveness of concentrates in controlling inflammation, edema, trismus, and alveolar osteitis. Advanced platelet-rich fibrin was the most applied concentrate in recent studies and was associated with reduced edema and trismus.

All concentrates demonstrated some effectiveness in managing sequelae after third molar extraction, but most did not show significant outcomes in controlling inflammatory signs. It emphasizes the need for further randomized clinical trials and systematic reviews to strengthen the evidence on blood concentrates for managing postoperative sequelae.

Tissue repair aims to restore tissue integrity and function after lesions by the coordinated interaction between cells and several chemical mediators. This process starts immediately after the traumatic event and may persist for varied periods1. Factors such as third molar extraction may exacerbate the inflammatory response, limiting patients’ daily activities and compromising their postoperative quality of life2. This outcome may be attributed to the higher complexity and, sometimes, the need for more invasive surgical techniques to remove these teeth3.

Developing strategies for tissue repair optimization to restore tissue physiology and minimize postoperative consequences is an ongoing challenge to improving patients’ quality of life3,4. Several therapies work for this purpose, each presenting advantages and disadvantages, including anti-inflammatory and analgesic administration5, low-level laser therapy6, cryotherapy7, phytotherapeutics8, and blood-derived product application9.

The development of platelet-rich blood concentrates originated from collecting platelets and growth factors from the patient’s blood and applying them to surgical sites9. The platelet-rich plasma (PRP) was the first-generation blood concentrate10-12. Later, new blood concentrates emerged, such as platelet-rich fibrin (PRF), whose nomenclature was updated to leukocyte- and PRF (L-PRF)13, advanced platelet-rich fibrin (A-PRF), advanced platelet-rich fibrin plus (A-PRF+), concentrated growth factor (CGF), among others11-14. These new concentrates stemmed from research that changed collection methods, tube types, the presence or absence of additives in these tubes, centrifugation times, the number of centrifugations, and the g force applied during centrifugations, providing concentrates with different physical, chemical, and biological characteristics10.

Blood concentrates are fibrin-based biomaterials containing cells, extracellular matrix proteins, pro- and anti-inflammatory mediators, and growth factors. These biomaterials have favored the management of postoperative sequelae, such as pain, edema, trismus, and alveolar osteitis15,16. However, assessing this performance has been the target of conflicting analyses in systematic literature reviews, leading to the recommendation of randomized clinical trials with larger samples and more uniform methodologies17-20.

Therefore, this study proposed a scoping review to investigate the findings of articles related to this topic and identify the main publication niches.

This scoping review was conducted following the recommendations of the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) manual21and written according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses extension for Systematic Reviews (PRISMA-ScR)22. The review protocol was registered in the Open Science Framework database (https://osf.io/) under registrationhttps://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/ATSU2.

This review included observational studies and randomized clinical trials of parallel and split-mouth designs with non-smoker adults without any systemic disease. There was no restriction neither on language nor on year of publication. Studies involving the application of biomaterials with blood concentrates to only one socket were excluded.

The electronic searches occurred up to April 2024 in the MedLine (via PubMed), Latin American and Caribbean Health Sciences Literature (LILACS), Scientific Electronic Library Online (SciELO), EMBASE, Cochrane, Scopus, and Web of Science databases. The MedRxiv and EASY platforms partially captured the grey literature. This search model aimed to minimize the selection bias. The Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), Embase Subject Headings (Emtree), and Health Science Descriptors (DeCS) platforms provided the search descriptors. The Boolean operators “AND” and “OR” combined the keywords, respecting the syntax rules of each database (Table 1).

The results from the primary databases were exported to EndNote Web software (Clarivate Analytics, Philadelphia, United States of America). The program automatically excluded duplicates, and the remaining ones were manually removed. The remaining findings were exported to Rayyan Qatar Computing Research Institute (QCRI, Doha, Qatar) for selecting and evaluating titles and abstracts23. The grey literature was manually, simultaneously, thoroughly analyzed, and exported to Microsoft Word 2010 (Microsoft Ltd., Washington, United States of America).

Two reviewers (VLA and MDMAC) discussed the inclusion and exclusion criteria before selecting the studies, then performed the calibration exercise by assessing 20% of articles to determine evaluator agreement. Selection started after reaching an adequate level of agreement (Kappa ≥ 0.81).

In the first review step, two examiners (VLA and MDMAC) evaluated the titles independently, according to the eligibility criteria. The titles unrelated to the review proposal were discarded. Next, the reviewers assessed the abstracts independently, according to the eligibility criteria. Finally, the eligible studies were fully read, following the same process as the previous steps. A third examiner (LRP) helped assess and solve reviewer disagreements in all stages.

After selecting the articles, the reviewers performed a calibration exercise to ensure consistency, coherence, and agreement in data extraction. They jointly collected data from three eligible studies in this exercise. Then, two evaluators (VLA and MDMAC) independently extracted the data from the eligible articles. A third reviewer (LRP) analyzed conflicts, and the researchers discussed them.

The extracted data included study author, year, and country, study design, sample size, age distribution, the type of third molar impaction, flap design, the presence of osteotomy and/or odontosection, co-interventions, blood concentrate type, centrifuge model, centrifugation protocol, collection tubes, outcomes, and the main findings for each outcome. After data extraction, an analysis of the geographic distribution of publications was carried out based on the MapChart website.

In cases of data unavailability, the authors of the included studies were contacted via e-mail. Regarding missing or incomplete data and the absence of further clarification from the authors, a “no information” notation was applied.

The initial phase of study selection yielded 2,213 results across nine electronic databases, including the grey literature. After duplicate removals, 1,798 results remained for title and abstract screening. These studies underwent evaluation, with 104 selected for a full-text assessment, but one study could not be retrieved. Consequently, 103 articles underwent a full-text review and were subjected to the eligibility criteria. Subsequently, articles unrelated to the topic or failing to meet the inclusion criteria were excluded, leaving 63 studies.Figure 1illustrates the search, identification, inclusion, and exclusion of eligible studies.

Table 2presents the general characteristics of the eligible studies. Concerning study type, one was a pilot study24, one was observational retrospective31, one was observational, prospective, and non-randomized44, two were quasi-experimental25,28, and the remaining 58 were randomized clinical trials with split-mouth or parallel designs. Approximately half the studies determined third molar position classification according to Winter and/or Pell and Gregory, and the others only stated whether they were impacted or did not provide precise information regarding their positioning in maxillary bones. All articles were in English, and only two examined blood concentrate performance after upper third molar extraction44,82, while the others solely included lower third molars.

n. r.: not reported; ATB: antibiotic; NSAID: non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug; SAID: steroidal anti-inflammatory drug; ANA: analgesic; AMW: antiseptic mouthwash; SMW: saline mouthwash; SD: standard deviation; g: relative centrifugal force; PRP: platelet-rich plasma; L-PRF: leukocyte- and platelet-rich fibrin; A-PRF: advanced-platelet-rich fibrin; A-PRF+: advanced-platelet-rich fibrin plus; CGF: concentrated growth factor; Alb-PRF: albumin with platelet-rich fibrin; i-PRF: injectable platelet-rich fibrin; PRGF: platelet-rich growth factor; LPRP: lyophilized platelet-rich plasma.

The publication range of the included articles spanned from 2009 to 2024. The geographical distribution revealed 21 studies conducted in India, 12 in Turkey, five in Brazil, three in Saudi Arabia, three in Poland, three in Iran, two in the United States of America, two in Cyprus, two in China, one in Italy, one in Spain, one in Malaysia, one in Lithuania, two in Nigeria, one in Japan, one in Pakistan, one in Egypt, and one in Ireland.Figure 2shows the countries that most published on the topic.

Most of the 63 eligible studies applied L-PRF, followed by PRP, A-PRF, CGF, platelet-rich growth factor (PRGF), injectable platelet-rich fibrin (i-PRF), advanced platelet-rich fibrin plus (A-PRF+), lyophilized platelet-rich plasma (LPRP), and albumin with platelet-rich fibrin (Alb-PRF).

The outcomes showed that most eligible studies assessed postoperative pain, followed by edema, trismus, alveolar osteitis, and infection. All analyzed outcomes presented contradictory findings when comparing the group performing only clot promotion with the one receiving the blood concentrate or groups comparing two blood concentrates.Table 3presents the main results of the eligible studies.

n. r.: not reported; PRP: platelet-rich plasma; L-PRF: leukocyte- and platelet-rich fibrin; A-PRF: advanced platelet-rich fibrin; A-PRF+: advanced platelet-rich fibrin plus; CGF: concentrated growth factor; Alb-PRF: albumin with platelet-rich fibrin; i-PRF: injectable platelet-rich fibrin; PRGF: platelet-rich growth factor; PRF: platelet-rich fibrin.

Figure 3presents a summary diagram of the results of the performance of blood concentrates according to the statistical analysis.

The present scoping review evaluated the current knowledge of blood concentrates for managing inflammatory signs and symptoms and the complications from third molar extractions. It also analyzed the countries with the most scientific production in this field and the primary researchers and journals that most frequently published articles.

Considering the complexity of this procedure, third molar removal may cause a postoperative period characterized by intense pain, edema, mouth opening difficulty, alveolar osteitis, and infection5,50,81. Alveolar healing involves a complex and highly coordinated sequence of cell and molecular responses to restore tissue integrity. Although the literature findings are contradictory, blood concentrates have been extensively applied to improve this step and optimize the postoperative inflammatory process86,87.

Promising outcomes from applying blood-derived products in the surgical context, such as fibrin adhesives, encouraged studies promoting the development of PRP, the first explored blood concentrate88,89. This blood product contains more than 95% of platelets, high-platelet growth factor, coagulation factor, and cytokine levels. These components demonstrate the capacity to optimize tissue repair by stimulating angiogenesis and cell proliferation and activating cells related to wound healing, such as fibroblasts, neutrophils, and mesenchymal stem cells90,91.

Although PRP appears in several of the included studies, the findings were inconsistent regarding its performance in controlling the inflammatory process and postoperative complications46,64,77. Ogundipe et al.29showed that PRP application to sockets after lower third molar extraction promoted a lower mean score of postoperative pain, and there were no statistically significant differences in edema and trismus reduction compared to the control group. These findings contradict Gandevivala et al.42, whose topical PRP application caused a statistically significant edema reduction, and there were no statistically significant differences in pain between the test and control sides.

Considering some limitations in obtaining PRP, such as prolonged clinical time, the need for adding procoagulant, and especially the fast and unsupported release of components that optimize tissue repair, studies have searched for new blood-derived products92. Thus, in 1999, Anitua93developed PRGF. The PRGF handles several limitations inherent to PRP preparation, such as bovine thrombin replacement with calcium or autologous thrombin as an activator, preventing immune reactions and the risk of disease transmission94,95. Mozzati et al.27determined that PRGF was statistically effective in controlling pain only on the seventh postoperative day, and edema significantly reduced only on the second day. However, O’Sullivan et al.74did not find statistically significant differences in pain, trismus, and alveolar osteitis reduction compared to the control group during the analysis period. PRGF differs from PRP in the selective leukocyte exclusion during preparation, aiming at a homogeneous platelet distribution96. Yet, these two blood concentrates did not show superiority regarding physical properties, physiological performance, or clinical outcomes74.

The second-generation concentrate known as L-PRF represented a breakthrough for new blood concentrate development12. However, the literature also presents contradictory findings about the role of L-PRF in controlling inflammatory signs and symptoms. Kalyani et al.84demonstrated that L-PRF was effective with statistical significance in reducing pain in the first and seventh postoperative days. Daugela et al.16attributed that to platelet growth factors, such as the platelet-derived growth factor, insulin-like growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor, and the transforming growth factor-beta. Although Asutay et al.41affirmed that this blood concentrate benefits tissue repair, the findings of this study did not show statistically significant differences in pain, edema, and trismus compared to the control group after lower third molar extraction. These authors potentially associated divergent findings with sample heterogeneity, different flap designs, and surgical difficulty levels41. Bolukbasi et al.97and Pathak et al.98affirmed that L-PRF presents high bioabsorption and lower stability, potentially harming growth factor release in the long term. Thus, aiming to reduce bioabsorption and increase L-PRF stability, a new concentrate was developed by adding the liquid portion of L-PRF to the denatured platelet-poor plasma, generating Alb-PRF99. However, Javid et al.80did not find statistically significant differences in pain, edema, and trismus reduction compared to L-PRF.

Wend et al.100showed inconsistency in centrifugation forces to obtain L-PRF, potentially affecting its composition and efficacy. The programmed alternation between acceleration and deceleration is superior to fixed centrifugation forces because it increases platelet collision with the centrifugation tubes, promoting a fibrin network with higher tensile strength and a prolonged release of platelet growth factors101,102. This concept allowed the development of a CGF, also known as L-PRF-derived or Sacco’s PRF103. Except for Fang et al.71, who did not find statistically significant differences in edema and trismus reduction, CGF significantly reduced pain, edema, trismus, and alveolar osteitis incidence in the other studies included in the present review70,104,105. Although CGF efficacy seems superior to L-PRF, these outcomes must be carefully interpreted. The centrifugation protocol and factors such as sample pattern and surgical complexity may also influence the clinical response of blood concentrates82,105.

The concept of low-speed centrifugation emerged to increasingly improve tissue repair, promoting the development of blood concentrates, such as i-PRF, A-PRF, and A-PRF+12,104. Only one study in this review analyzed i-PRF performance, indicating that this blood concentrate did not significantly reduce pain and trismus during the analysis period85. Besides the statistically significant pain reduction on the third postoperative day, Gupta and Agarwal63also showed that A-PRF promoted statistically significant edema and trismus reduction after lower third molar extraction relative to the control group.In-vitrostudies demonstrated that this new generation of blood concentrates has a more porous three-dimensional fibrin matrix, a homogeneous and more concentrated cell distribution, and the possibility of releasing growth factors, potentially making this matrix superior to L-PRF in some clinical conditions99,106. Pereira et al.82analyzed the influence of A-PRF+ on pain and edema reduction after upper third molar extraction. They found no statistically significant differences in both variables compared to the control group. These authors potentially attribute the outcomes to favorable clinical conditions, such as upper third molar positioning relative to the second molar’s occlusal level and the low complexity of the surgical procedure82.

Taken together, the results demonstrate the growing interest in improving surgical outcomes through blood concentrates. However, despite these advances in the application of blood concentrates in tissue repair, the methodological heterogeneity among studies limits the interpretation of results. Standardizing criteria such as participant age, sample size, third molar positioning, study design, surgical complexity, and blood concentrate preparation protocols-including tube type, relative centrifugation force, and time-is essential to enable more robust comparisons and generate reliable evidence.

Most included studies did not standardize third molar positioning or centrifugation protocols to obtain blood concentrates. Moreover, the studies present different designs, some comprising parallel groups and others employing split-mouth. The comparison of inflammatory signs and symptoms among different individuals might introduce an outcome interpretation bias compared to the split-mouth analysis. However, several split-mouth studies did not apply a weekly interval between the operated sides, potentially introducing an outcome interpretation bias.

The literature shows that blood concentrates present biological properties that favor tissue repair. However, the published studies have conflicting findings regarding the performance of these products in controlling inflammatory signs and symptoms. Considering the heterogeneity of the articles, a methodological standardization of randomized clinical trials is recommended to obtain robust outcomes on the topic.