Right ventricular (RV) function is a prognostic factor in patients with pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging has been used to assess RV function. However, it is not determined whether RV longitudinal strain (LS) with a feature-tracking method can accurately assess RV contractility. In this study, feature-tracking-based RVLS and RV ejection fraction (RVEF) were compared with contractile properties of RV muscle obtained from rat hearts with PAH.

Monocrotaline (MCT-rats, n=19) or solvent (Ctr-rats, n=4) was injected subcutaneously into rats. Four weeks after the injection, retrospective electrocardiogram-gated cine magnetic resonance (8 phases/beat) was imaged using a 7-T magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanner and RV pressure was measured. Trabeculae were dissected from the RV and electrically stimulated. Force was measured and maximum dF/dt was calculated as a parameter of contractile properties. Compared with Ctr-rats, MCT-rats showed higher systolic RV pressure. RVLS in all MCT-rats was lower than that in Ctr-rats, while RVEF was preserved (>40%) in 8 out of 16 MCT-rats. MCT-rats showed lower developed force and maximum dF/dt than Ctr-rats. Maximum dF/dt was linearly correlated with RVLS. In contrast, whether RVEF was preserved, maximum dF/dt was decreased in MCT-rats.

The present study suggests that RVLS with a feature-tracking method can assess RV contractile properties more accurately than RVEF in rats with PAH. It is useful to estimate the RV function based on feature tracking.

Recently, feature-tracking wall motion analysis of cine CMR has emerged as a useful tool for the quantitative assessment of cardiovascular function.10Myocardial strain obtained with feature-tracking analysis has been applied in clinical studies11,14–16as a useful indicator of ventricular systolic performance.17In patients with PAH, RV strain values with CMR imaging have also predicted the functional outcome of RV.18However, it has not yet been elucidated which is more useful for assessing RV contractile properties in patients with PAH, RV strain or RVEF. Therefore, in the present study, we focused on RV strain and RVEF obtained from CMR imaging in rat hearts with PAH, comparing each of them with the contractile parameters of cardiac muscle dissected from the RV in the rat hearts.

All animal experiments were performed in accordance with recommendations ofThe Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals,19and all of the investigations and procedures were approved by the Ethics Review Board of Tohoku University (approval reference no. 2017MdA-269, 2019MdA-025).

Male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 180 g received a single subcutaneous administration of MCT at 60 mg/kg to produce a pulmonary hypertension model (MCT-rat)20,21or an equal volume of solvent (Ctr-rats).

CMR was performed at 4 weeks after the injection of MCT or solvent. All studies ware performed with a 7-T MR scanner (Bruker Biospin, Germany) interfaced with a dedicated small-animal electrocardiography and respiratory system.22Anesthesia was induced and maintained with isoflurane (1–3%) in oxygen (0.6 L/min) via spontaneous breathing.

Cardiac cine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was acquired using aCine_brightblood_FLASHsequence (Bruker PharmaScan).22Short-axis views were acquired to assess biventricular function, and RV long axis views cross-sectioned through the tricuspid valve and RV apex (Figure 1A) were acquired to assess RV longitudinal strain (LS). Scan parameters were as follows: echo time, 2.3 ms; repetition time, 23 ms; flip angle, 40º; slice thickness, 1 mm; number of phases per 1 cardiac cycle, 8; number of slices, 10 (short-axis view) or 3 (long- axis view); field of view, 40×40 mm; matrix size, 256×256.

(A) Cine cardiac images of the short-axis view (a), 4-chamber view (b) and right ventricle (RV) long-axis view (c) in Ctr rats. The RV long-axis view was acquired as a cross-section through the tricuspid valve and RV apex (yellow dotted line inb). (B) Representative recordings of electrocardiogram (ECG; top panel) and RV pressure (bottom panel) in MCT rats. (C) Recordings of developed force (top panel) and dF/dt (bottom panel). Maximum dF/dt was calculated to assess contractility of the RV muscle. Ctr, control; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; MCT, monocrotaline; RA, right atrium.

Under adequate anesthesia, multicellular muscle, the trabeculae, (length=1.45±0.07 mm, width=334±27 µm, thickness=114±6 µm) were dissected from the RV of rat hearts and mounted on an inverted microscope between a force transducer and a micromanipulator.27,28All preparations were continuously superfused with HEPES solution. Trabeculae were electrically stimulated at 0.5 Hz through parallel silver electrodes, and force was measured using a silicon strain gauge at extracellular Ca2+([Ca2+]o) of 0.7 or 2.0 mmol/L (24℃). Sarcomere length was determined from the first order of the He-Ne laser light diffraction band and was set at 2.0 µm, as previously described.29To assess the contractility of cardiac muscle, the velocity of muscle contraction (dF/dt) was calculated (Figure 1C).

All statistical analyses were performed using JMP®15 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). Quantitative variables are expressed as mean±standard deviation (SD). Statistical analysis was performed with a t-test for 2-group comparisons, and ANOVA with Dunnett›s test for multiple comparisons when the data were normally distributed. Otherwise, the Wilcoxon signed-ranks test was used for 2-group comparisons. Linear regression analysis was used to assess the correlation. Values of P<0.05 were considered to be statistically significant.

Four weeks after injection of MCT or solvent, 18% of MCT-rats died due to RV failure. In the MCT-rats, RV systolic pressure and weight ratio of RV free wall to LV (RV / [LV + septum]) were increased compared with those in Ctr-rats (Table 1). In addition, developed force and maximum dF/dt in MCT-rats were lower than those in Ctr-rats at 2.0 mmol/L [Ca2+]o(Table 1).

Data are presented as mean±SD. LV, left ventricle; MCT, monocrotaline; RV, right ventricle.

We calculated the weight ratio of RV free wall to LV using the equation: RV / (LV + septum), and the ventricular mass ratio was obtained from CMR cine imaging: (RV mass/LV mass). The RV/LV mass ratio was highly correlated with the weight ratio (Figure 2A), which supports CMR cine imaging acquired with the 7-T MR scanner estimating RV morphological characteristics in rat hearts. CMR cine imaging showed RV hypertrophy and RV dilation in MCT-rats (Figure 2B). CMR cine imaging further revealed the following RV characteristics in MCT-rat hearts (Table 2). First, RV end-systolic and end-diastolic volumes were larger in MCT-rats than those in Ctr-rats, while LV end-systolic and end-diastolic volumes were smaller in MCT-rats, meaning that RV was dilated and LV was compressed by RV in MCT-rats. Second, RVEF and RV stroke volume were lower in MCT-rats, while LVEF presented no difference between Ctr-rats and MCT-rats. Third, RV compliance calculated from CMR cine imaging was decreased in MCT-rats. From these results, it is reasonable to assume that CMR cine imaging can be useful to estimate RV morphological and functional properties in the rat hearts with PAH.

(A) Relationship between weight ratio of the right ventricle (RV) free wall to the left ventricle (LV), and the mass ratio of the RV free wall to the LV obtained using cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging. (B) Representative images of the CMR short-axis view. Ctr, control; MCT, monocrotaline.

Data are presented as mean±SD. LVEDV, left ventricular end-diastolic volume; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; LVESV, left ventricular end-systolic volume; LVSV, left ventricular stroke volume; MCT, monocrotaline; RVEDV, right ventricular end-diastolic volume; RVEF, right ventricular ejection fraction; RVESV, right ventricular end-systolic volume; RVLS, right ventricular longitudinal strain; RVSV, right ventricular stroke volume.

To examine whether RVLS can reflect RV contractile properties in the hearts with PAH, RVLS and RVEF calculated from CMR cine imaging were compared with contractile parameters of trabeculae dissected from the RV of rat hearts. RVLS was declined in MCT-rats (Table 2) and was linearly correlated with systolic RVP (Figure 3A) and RV compliance (Figure 3B), meaning that RVLS reflects RV pressure overload in the rats with PAH. In addition, RVLS was correlated with maximum dF/dt of trabeculae at [Ca2+]oof 0.7 and 2.0 mmol/L (Figure 4), suggesting that RVLS can reflect RV contractile properties in hearts with PAH.

Relationships between right ventricle (RV) longitudinal strain and systolic right ventricular pressure (RVP;A) and between RVLS and right ventricle (RV) compliance (B). RV longitudinal strain was linearly correlated with RVP and RV compliance. Ctr, control; MCT, monocrotaline.

Relationships between right ventricle (RV) longitudinal strain and maximum dF/dt of trabeculae at [Ca2+]oof 0.7 (A) and 2.0 mmol/L (B).

InFigure 5A, RVLS in all MCT-rats was lower than that in Ctr-rats, while RVEF was preserved (>40%, average value of MCT-rats) in 8 MCT-rats, as indicated by the red square. When contractile parameters of trabeculae were compared between the MCT-rats with preserved RVEF and the others, developed force and maximum dF/dt were decreased in both, whether RVEF was preserved or not (Figure 5B,C), showing that RVEF cannot accurately reflect contractile parameters. Taken together, these results suggest that RVLS can more accurately detect RV contractile properties than RVEF in hearts with PAH.

Scatter plots between right ventricle (RV) longitudinal strain and right ventricular ejection fraction (RVEF;A). RV longitudinal strain of all MCT-rats was lower than that of Ctr-rats. Red square indicates MCT-rats with preserved RVEF (≥40%). Comparison of developed force (A) and maximum dF/dt (B) between Ctr-rats, MCT-rats with preserved RVEF (≥40%), and MCT-rats with reduced RVEF (<40%). Developed force and maximum dF/dt obtained at [Ca2+]oof 2.0 mmol/L. *P<0.05 vs. Ctr-rats. Ctr, control; MCT, monocrotaline.

We investigated whether RVLS with CMR can assess RV contractile properties by comparing it with contractile parameters of cardiac muscle dissected from the RV of rats with PAH. Our study revealed that RVLS analyzed with feature-tracking CMR analysis predicts RV contractile properties in rats with PAH earlier and more accurately than RVEF. As this method is clinically applicable, RVLS analysis with feature-tracking CMR wall motion analysis may be a useful tool to estimate RV function in patients with PAH.

PAH is a progressive disease that affects not only pulmonary vasculature but also the right side of the heart,1,30and survival of patients with PAH is related to RV adaptation to the increased afterload.8,9To investigate the mechanism underlying the RV adaptation to PAH, several animal models such as MCT-rats or SuHx-rats have been used.2,3The main difference between these 2 rat models is the different time course of PAH progression, and the SuHx-rat model has been reported to develop pulmonary pathological changes similar to those in severe human PAH.3However, in the present study, we used an MCT-rat model because the purpose of the present study was to investigate RV contractile properties in hearts with PAH, but not pulmonary pathological changes. Moreover, the body size of SuHx-rats was too large to perform CMR imaging with the apparatus used in the present study because it takes 13 or 14 weeks in SuHx-rats to represent PAH and RV hypertrophy. Using the MCT-rats, CMR imaging represented RV hypertrophy, RV dilation, and RVEF reduction in the present study (Table 1), similar to those in patients with PAH. These results suggest that the MCT-rat model in the present study is appropriate for investigating RV contractile properties using CMR imaging in rat hearts with PAH. CMR imaging non-invasively assesses RV morphology and RV function in patients with PAH,1,8and RV characteristics with CMR imaging provide prognostic information of patients.9Although it has been reported that CMR imaging with 7-T MRI scanners can assess myocardial fibrosis or edema in rat hearts with myocardial infraction,22,31assessment of RV function with CMR imaging has not been performed in small animals with PAH. In the present study, we performed CMR imaging on 7-T MRI scanners in rat hearts with PAH and showed that the mass ratio of RV free wall to LV obtained from CMR was highly correlated with the weight ratio (Figure 2A), suggesting that CMR cine imaging with the 7-T scanner can estimate morphological characteristics of the RV in rat hearts.

Myocardial strain (i.e., the degree of circumferential or longitudinal deformation of a myocardial segment) has been regarded as an important indicator of ventricular function,11,14,32and has been reported to change depending on preload and afterload of the myocardium.33,34To eliminate the effect of preload and afterload on contractile properties, we isometrically measured developed force and calculated dF/dt in trabeculae dissected from the RV at resting sarcomere length of 2.0 µm because maximum dF/dt has been used as one of the parameters of muscle contractility.35,36The results in the present study showed that RVLS had a linear relationship with maximum dF/dt of trabeculae in rat hearts with PAH (Figure 4), suggesting that myocardial strain can reflect contractile properties in hearts.

It has been reported that LS reduces earlier than EF in the hearts with LV failure.11,14,37In the PARAMOUNT trial, LS was reduced in patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF),15and LS was the most important predictor of cardiovascular death, aborted arrest, and HF in patients with HFpEF in the TOPCAT trial.16In the present study, RVLS had already been reduced in 8 rats with preserved RVEF (Figure 5A), suggesting that RVLS reduces earlier than RVEF also in rat hearts with PAH. In addition, developed force and maximum dF/dt were decreased in MCT-rats, whether RVEF was preserved or not (Figure 5B,C). Taken together, these results suggest that RVLS with CMR can assess RV contractile properties earlier and more accurately than RVEF with CMR in rat hearts with PAH (Figure 6).

Right ventricle (RV) ejection fraction (RVEF), RV longitudinal strain (RVLS) and RV contractility time course with pulmonary arterial hypertension. Right ventricular contractility is reduced due to pressure overload associated with progression of pulmonary hypertension, resulting in right-side heart failure. RVLS reduces faster than RVEF, reflecting a reduction in contractility, and RVEF decreases later.

Recently, feature-tracking analysis has been applied in routinely acquired cine MR and used to measure strains in clinical practice. Therefore, we assume that RVLS obtained with feature-tracking analysis could be a clinically useful indicator to estimate RV function in the hearts with PAH.

Our study has some limitations. First, maximum dF/dt was measured in trabeculae at a constant sarcomere length of 2.0 µm, while RVLS and RVEF with CMR can change depending on preload and afterload of the myocardium.33,34However, it is hard to measure RVLS and RVEF in rat hearts under the condition of constant preload and afterload. Second, we have not used a conventional technique such as magnetic resonance tagging or speckle-tracking echocardiography to obtain RVSL. Because several studies have reported good inter-modality agreement between myocardial strain obtained from CMR and that from echocardiography,38,39we assume that RVLS from the other modalities would also be useful to assess RV contractile parameters. Third, myocardial fibrosis develops as the right heart failure progresses, so our next step will be to investigate any pathological or biochemical changes.

RVLS obtained with feature-tracking analysis can estimate RV contractile properties earlier and more accurately than RVEF in rat hearts with PAH. Thus, RV strain obtained with feature-tracking analysis may be useful to estimate the RV function of patients with PAH.

This work is supported by the JSPS KAKENHI (grant nos. JP17H06525, JP19K17548). We appreciate H. Nonaka for technical support.