The optimal revascularization strategy for calcified lesions in patients with acute coronary syndrome (ACS) remains unclear. This study aimed to compare the short-term outcomes of intravascular lithotripsy (IVL) and rotational atherectomy (RA) for patients with ACS resulting from calcified lesions.

Among 3,556 consecutive patients with ACS who underwent primary percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) between 2016 and 2024, we retrospectively analyzed 52 patients who received drug-eluting stents with either IVL (n=24) or RA (n=28) for calcified lesions. The primary outcome was the incidence of major adverse cardiovascular events (MACE). In addition, we evaluated slow-flow or no-reflow phenomena incidence during PCI and the procedural success rate. Compared with patients with RA, those with IVL had a smaller preprocedural minimum lumen diameter and a larger preprocedural reference vessel diameter. Primary outcomes and procedural success rates were comparable between both groups. However, the slow-flow or no-reflow incidence was significantly lower in the IVL group than in the RA group. After adjusting for confounders, IVL was independently associated with a lower slow-flow or no-reflow incidence.

In patients with ACS due to calcified lesions, there was no significant difference in 30-day MACE incidence between both groups. However, slow-flow incidence was lower in the IVL group.

Although increasing evidence indicates improvements in both short- and long-term outcomes of percutaneous revascularization using new-generation drug-eluting stents (DES) in acute coronary syndrome (ACS) settings, the efficacy of percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) in highly calcified lesions remains limited.1,2Recent studies have shown that 17–32% of patients with ACS present with moderate to severe coronary calcification.3,4Currently, several calcium modification devices for PCI are available and have recently become integral to contemporary practice.

Rotational atherectomy (RA) is one of the most widely used calcification modification techniques. However, it may increase the risk of periprocedural complications, such as slow-flow and no-reflow phenomena among patients with ACS.5,6Intravascular lithotripsy (IVL) is a newer calcium modification therapy that converts electrical energy into mechanical energy during low-pressure balloon inflation. IVL demonstrated safety and efficacy primarily in stable coronary artery disease, although data regarding its use in ACS is limited.7–9The risk of distal embolization, including slow-flow and no-reflow phenomena, is reportedly low with IVL in patients with stable angina, suggesting that IVL may represent an effective treatment strategy for patients with ACS and calcified lesions.

Therefore, this study aimed to evaluate the differences in real-world clinical outcomes between RA and IVL for patients with ACS caused by calcified lesions.

This retrospective, single-center observational study was conducted at a tertiary hospital, Miyazaki Medical Association Hospital. Initially, 3,556 consecutive patients with ACS who underwent emergency PCI between May 2016 and July 2024 were enrolled. ACS was diagnosed according to the European Society of Cardiology guidelines,10encompassing a spectrum of conditions, including patients with recent changes in clinical symptoms or signs, with or without corresponding changes on a 12-lead electrocardiogram or acute elevations in cardiac troponin concentrations. Patients with suspected ACS may eventually be diagnosed with acute myocardial infarction (MI) or unstable angina. MI diagnosis is associated with cardiac troponin release and established based on the fourth universal definition of MI.10,11Unstable angina is defined as myocardial ischemia occurring at rest or with minimal exertion in the absence of acute cardiomyocyte injury or necrosis.10Primary PCI was defined as procedures performed within 24 h of symptom onset. Of the initial cohort, 66 patients with ACS underwent primary PCI with RA or IVL for de novo calcified lesions. In this study, 14 patients who did not receive DES placement were excluded. Consequently, the final study population comprised 52 patients (Figure).

Study flow chart. ACS, acute coronary syndrome; DES, drug-eluting stent; IVL, intravascular lithotripsy; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; RA, rotational atherectomy.

This study was conducted in accordance with the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Miyazaki Medical Association Hospital (2024-52). Owing to the retrospective observational design of this study, the requirement for written informed consent was waived. However, study details were made publicly available to ensure that patients were informed and provided the opportunity to opt out of participation.

The primary outcome of this study was the incidence of 30-day major adverse cardiovascular events (MACEs) after PCI. MACE was defined as a composite outcome of all-cause death, non-fatal MI, or target lesion revascularization (TLR). The secondary outcome was slow-flow or no-reflow phenomena incidence and PCI success rate, defined as final Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) flow grade 3.

IVL catheter (Shockwave Medical, Santa Clara, CA, USA) is a monorail rapid exchange catheter that delivers an integrated semi-compliant balloon containing 2 lithotripsy emitters. IVL catheters are available in diameters ranging from 2.5 to 4.0 mm and 12 mm in length. The IVL catheter was connected to a generator via a cable and preset to deliver 10 sonic wave pulses per cycle (1 pulse/s) for a maximum of 8 cycles. IVL balloon position was adjusted with overlap to ensure complete coverage of longer lesions.16,17As an early adopting institution, our hospital implemented IVL beginning in 2023. Heparin was administered to maintain an activated clotting time >250 s. All patients were pretreated with aspirin and a P2Y12 inhibitor (clopidogrel or prasugrel).

Categorical variables are presented as numbers and percentages, while continuous variables are reported as means with standard deviations or as median with interquartile ranges for non-normally distributed data. Group differences were analyzed using independent t-tests, or Mann-Whitney U tests for continuous variables, as appropriate, and chi-squared tests or Fischer’s exact tests for categorical variables. A multivariate logistic regression model was constructed to identify predictors of slow-flow or no-reflow phenomena. Results are expressed as odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). All statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS version 19 (IBM Corp., Somers, NY, USA). All tests were 2-sided, and P values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.

Patient characteristics are presented inTable 1. The 52 patients had a mean age of 76.5±9.8 years; 29 (55.8%) were male, and 19 (36.5%) had ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. The mean estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 40.4±24.4 mL/min/1.73 m2, and 13 (25.0%) patients were on hemodialysis.

Data are expressed as n (%), mean±SD, or median [interquartile range]. CPK, creatine phosphokinase; DS, diameter stenosis; ECMO, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; IABP, intra-aortic balloon pump; IVL, intravascular lithotripsy; IVUS, intravascular ultrasound; LDL-C, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; MI, myocardial infarction; MLD, minimum lumen diameter; NSTEMI, non-ST elevation myocardial infarction; OCT, optical coherence tomography; OFDI, optical frequency domain imaging; RA, rotational atherectomy; RVD, reference vessel diameter; STEMI, ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction; TIMI, Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction; UA, unstable angina.

Of the 52 patients, 24 (46.2%) underwent IVL, and 28 (53.8%) underwent RA (Figure,Table 1). No significant differences were observed in patient or angiographic characteristics between the 2 groups. eGFR tended to be lower in the RA group; however, the difference was not statistically significant (Table 1).

Procedural characteristics are presented inTable 1. Intracoronary imaging was utilized in all patients included in this study (IVUS, optical coherence tomography [OCT], or optical frequency domain imaging [OFDI]). The use of OCT or OFDI was significantly more frequent in the IVL group. Only 20 patients (38.5% of the total) could undergo imaging device passage before balloon dilation or the use of a debulking device. Moreover, intracoronary imaging revealed the presence of calcified nodules in 20 (38.5%) patients overall, with no significant difference in their prevalence between both groups. In the RA group, the mean final burr size was 1.51±0.25 mm, and more than 1 burr was used in 32.1% of cases. The mean burr-to-artery ratio was 0.54±0.08. In the IVL group, the mean IVL balloon diameter was 3.2±0.41 mm, and number of IVL pulses was 73.8±11.3. Implanted stent diameter was significantly larger in the IVL group than in the RA group (3.3±0.44 vs. 2.60±0.31 mm; P<0.001). However, no significant difference was observed in stent length between both groups (22.5±8.9 vs. 25.3±9.3 mm; P=0.270).

Regarding preprocedural quantitative angiographic findings, patients in the IVL group had a smaller minimum lumen diameter (0.18±0.17 vs. 0.29±0.18 mm; P=0.028), larger reference vessel diameter (3.34±0.46 vs. 2.80±0.41 mm; P<0.001), and higher diameter stenosis percentage (94.7±5.0% vs. 89.9±5.8%; P=0.005) than those in the RA group. Lesion length did not differ significantly between the groups. Following the procedures, the minimum lumen diameter (3.09±0.49 vs. 2.62±0.43 mm; P=0.001) was significantly larger in the IVL group than in the RA group, while the diameter stenosis percentage (18.4±12.0% vs. 10.6±6.7%; P=0.036) was higher in the IVL group.

Procedure success, complications, and 30-day clinical outcomes are presented inTable 2. Primary outcome incidence (MACE: all-cause death, non-fatal MI, or TLR) at 30 days was similar between both groups (IVL 12.5% vs. RA 14.3%; P=0.851). All-cause death incidence was not significantly different between both groups (IVL 12.5% vs. RA 14.3%; P=0.851). Neither MI nor TLR occurred in either group. Notably, slow-flow or no re-flow phenomena incidence during PCI was significantly lower in the IVL group than in the RA group (16.7% vs. 46.4%; P=0.023). However, the PCI success rate, defined by the achievement of final TIMI flow grade 3, was 87.5% and 89.3% in the IVL and RA groups, respectively, with no significant difference (P=0.841). In contrast, the rate of achieving post-diameter stenosis <20% was significantly lower in the IVL group than in the RA group (66.7% vs. 92.6%; P=0.031).

Data are expressed as n (%). MACE, major adverse cardiovascular events; NA, not applicable; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; TLR, target lesion revascularization. Other abbreviations as in Table 1.

On multivariate logistic regression analysis, IVL was independently associated with a lower incidence of slow-flow or no-reflow phenomena (model 1: adjusted OR 0.154, 95% CI 0.027–0.879; model 2: adjusted OR 0.155, 95% CI 0.032–0.756; and model 3: adjusted OR 0.240, 95% CI 0.061–0.939;Table 3). However, the presence of a calcified nodule was not significantly associated with the occurrence of slow-flow or no-reflow phenomena (Table 3, model 3). Next, clinical outcomes at 6 months were assessed. The incidence of MACE at 6 months was comparable between the 2 groups (Supplementary Table 1).

CI, confidence interval; OR, odds ratio. Other abbreviations as in Table 1.

The primary findings of this study were as follows: (1) in patients with ACS due to calcified lesions, the rates of all-cause death, MI, and TLR at 30 days were similar between the IVL and RA groups; and (2) the incidence of slow-flow or no-reflow phenomena during PCI was significantly lower in the IVL group than in the RA group. This study is the first to compare the short-term outcomes of IVL vs. RA in patients with ACS and calcified lesions.

Approximately 30% of all patients with ACS can present with a heavily calcified culprit lesion.3,4Common risk factors for coronary calcification include advanced age, diabetes, and chronic kidney disease.13,18,19High calcium burden increases the procedural complexity affecting the lesion preparation, stent delivery, and adequate stent implantation, which subsequently results in a higher rate of periprocedural complications and suboptimal long-term clinical outcomes. Therefore, heavily calcified lesions in ACS still represent a challenging subset for PCI. In response to this clinical problem, aggressive plaque modification before stent implantation is considered important in contemporary practice.

Advancements in medical devices have enabled the use of several calcification modification techniques during PCI, including non-compliant, cutting, and scoring balloons, atherectomy (orbital or rotational), and more recently, IVL.20RA is one of the most efficient and widespread plaque modification technique. It is designed to physically remove calcified plaque and facilitate successful balloon and stent delivery. Recent studies have demonstrated that RA, when optimized, is associated with greater acute diameter gain, lower final residual stenosis after stent deployment,21,22and a significant reduction in TLR compared with non-atherectomy approaches.23However, RA use in patients with ACS remains controversial and is considered a relative contraindication owing to the presence of unstable plaques and potential complications associated with platelet activation, risk of thrombotic events, and distal embolization.24Notably, achieving TIMI grade 3 flow following primary PCI is a key therapeutic goal in patients with ACS. Therefore, it is essential to critically evaluate the necessity and clinical utility of atherectomy devices in the ACS setting.

IVL is a novel treatment strategy for coronary calcified lesions. It transforms electrical energy into sonic waves that selectively fracture superficial and deep calcium at low-pressure balloon dilatation, minimizing vessel wall barotrauma. IVL safety and effectiveness in patients with stable angina have been reported across multiple clinical studies.7,8However, there are limited data on its utility in ACS. Rodriguez-Leor et al. recently reported that IVL in patients with ACS achieved similar angiographic success rates but showed a trend toward higher 30-day MACE compared with patients with stable angina.25In this study, the procedure success rate in the IVL group was as high as 87.5% despite the presence of calcified lesions presenting with ACS. Our findings, in conjunction with a recent report by Rodriguez-Leor et al., suggest that IVL may be a feasible and effective treatment option for patients with ACS. However, in this study, post-diameter stenosis was significantly higher in the IVL group than in the RA group. The IVL group had a smaller minimum lumen diameter, larger reference vessel diameter, and higher percentage diameter stenosis than did the RA group, suggesting a potentially greater calcification burden. In cases with greater calcification burden, RA may be more effective than IVL in reducing calcium volume. Additionally, we recently reported that lesions with eccentric calcification or calcified nodules exhibit limited calcium fracture following IVL.26Therefore, RA may be a more suitable strategy for lesions in which IVL catheter delivery is difficult or such specific morphologies are present. Further investigation is needed to identify the types of lesions for which IVL may be most effective.

One notable strength of this study is its inclusion of data on slow-flow and no-reflow phenomena during PCI. The incidence of slow-flow or no-reflow phenomena was significantly lower in the IVL group than in the RA group. Slow-flow and no-reflow phenomena during PCI result from structural and functional alterations in the coronary microcirculation. It is associated with an increased incidence of rehospitalization, negative ventricular remodeling, malignant arrhythmias, and heart failure and is an independent predictor of MI and death.27–29The rate of slow-flow and no-reflow is expected to be high in patients undergoing RA of unstable lesions in ACS settings owing to platelet activation in a pre-existing thrombotic state. In this study, the slow-flow or no-reflow incidence in the RA group was notably high at 46.4%. In contrast, in the IVL group, the deterioration of coronary blood flow during PCI may occur less frequently than in the RA group, as IVL is a balloon-based technique that results in less platelet activation compared with RA. Although there was no significant difference in 30-day MACE in this study, further large-scale studies are warranted to assess the impact of these phenomena on long-term outcomes.

This study has some limitations. First, the small sample size may limit the generalizability of the findings and hinder the ability to draw definitive conclusions. Here, only 1.5% of patients with ACS who underwent PCI were treated with RA or IVL. Importantly, the former has traditionally been considered a relative contraindication due to concerns about the risk of slow-flow and no-reflow phenomena. Consequently, even when lesion expansion was suboptimal due to severe calcification, PCI may have been completed without the use of RA if TIMI grade 3 flow was achieved. Thus, the number of patients included in this study was limited. Notably, the recent introduction of IVL may influence future treatment strategies for this patient population. Further large-scale studies are warranted to validate our findings. Second, as a retrospective, single-center, observational study and not a randomized controlled trial, it might involve selection bias and unmeasured confounders. The decision regarding the use of the PCI device, including whether to perform IVL or RA, was left to the discretion of the operator. Moreover, the minimum vessel diameter for the IVL balloon was 2.5 mm, and IVL was used in patients with larger reference vessel diameters compared with RA. Third, IVL has only been available at our institution since 2023, resulting in a temporal discrepancy in the patient enrollment periods between the 2 groups. In fact, only 3 patients in the RA group were enrolled after 2023, while the majority of patients treated during this period underwent IVL instead. Although no significant differences were observed in the characteristics of patients enrolled after 2023 between the 2 groups (Supplementary Tables 2,3), this temporal imbalance may have influenced the study outcomes. Fourth, we did not evaluate calcification morphology, which may affect vessel patency.30–33Last, we did not assess long-term outcomes, limiting the conclusion to short-term results.

IVL is a feasible and safe procedure for patients with ACS, demonstrating short-term outcomes comparable with those of RA while offering the advantage of a lower incidence of slow-flow or no-reflow phenomena during PCI. Further studies are required to validate these findings and explore the long-term efficacy and safety of IVL in this population.

Institutional review board of Miyazaki Medical Association Hospital (2024-52).

Supplementary Table 1.
Supplementary Table 2.
Supplementary Table 3.