This paper proposes that ethical thinking provides a useful lens for understanding how different approaches to humanitarian thinking may be connected through the values that underpin them. In the era of polycrisis, humanitarianism is continually expanding to accommodate a proliferation of diverse actors. Importantly, concerns are often raised about how ‘humanitarian’ some of them are, which can influence cooperation and interaction. Ethical thinking is a valuable way of interpreting commonalities and differences between actors because actions, policies, and ideas are buttressed by values that frequently remain unspoken. Therefore, we examine 14 approaches to humanitarian thinking so we can highlight key ways of comprehending: what is good; the tension between means and ends; and for whom we are responsible. We propose a number of clusters of ethical thinking that capture how different groups answer these questions, and we discuss how they may help identify points of unity and division and appreciate the values that support choices and actions in humanitarian contexts.

The humanitarian sector has long been engaged in deep and persistent self‐reflection as it struggles to maintain coherence between its principles and practices, and in relation to a world vastly different from the one of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries—the events of which are often credited as its origins. These reflections and debates are occurring in academia, policy settings, and in practice (see, for example, Slim,2016; DuBois,2018; Clarke and Parris,2019), and from philosophical, historical, sociological, political, economic, and cultural perspectives (see, for example, Rysaback‐Smith,2016). What can at times be obscured in these discussions is the sheer volume and heterogeneity captured under the apparently unitary label of ‘humanitarianism’. Even a cursory reading reveals that this term is used to describe an extraordinarily wide range of approaches.

With such enormous application, and with growing demand and funding for humanitarian action, we argue that it is both timely and critical to develop clearer and more nuanced understandings of the many expressions of humanitarian action. We do not propose differentiating humanitarianism to define boundaries of acceptable practice, as can be seen in some attempts to comprehend humanitarian diversity, including the labelling of actors according to motivation (such as the ubiquitous ‘missionaries, mercenaries, and misfits’) or association (local/international, belief system, organisation, and so on), institutional classification (humanitarian, development, mixed‐mandate, and military), size, funding structure, scale, and so much more. Each of these distinctions communicates important information but also conceals equally important details.

as a general rule, understanding detail can assist in making sense of complexity.

We believe that a clearer understanding of the heterogeneity of the field gives us the opportunity to identify shared values as well as dissonant ones, creating spaces for improvements in thinking, practice, and outcomes. In this paper we test our theory that ethics could provide a way to identify clusters of shared values among diverse actors, serving as a useful lens for thinking about similarities and differences in humanitarian action and among actors.

We are not alone in arguing that it is necessary to reconfigure our understanding of this burgeoning field. Humanitarianism seems to be constantly evolving and learning from experience, while at the same time, the humanitarian principles are treated with almost sacred reverence that obscures the reality that they are ‘products of history, ethical imagination, and practical considerations’, which were not cemented as the core principles of humanitarianism until the 1960s (Barnett and Weiss,2011, p. 109). Despite this relatively recent ascent, those principles have secured a dominance and hegemony that is embedded in institutions and practices (Gordon and Donini,2015). Whereas some actors use the label ‘humanitarian’ but have no knowledge of these principles, others argue that the contemporary humanitarian environment has evolved so dramatically that the underpinning principles need revision (Clarke and Parris,2019). We engage with the disorder of humanitarianism and seek to make sense of it in ways that expand reach and capability rather than restricting it.

In this paper we present a range of well‐examined humanitarianisms to highlight the heterogeneity of what can only loosely be categorised as a sector, and we ask whether ethical thinking can help in recognising unifying factors. We identify loosely clustered groupings of ethical approaches that may help broaden the way we think about these humanitarianisms, propose a set of umbrella categories, and explain how these could assist in practice and thinking. In particular, we argue that thoughtfully reconsidering humanitarianism using an ethical lens allows us to step back from homogenisation of humanitarianism to see strength in the diversity of humanitarian actors, and support continual improvement, coordination, and coherence.

Others have undertaken detailed assessments of humanitarianism through a specific ethical approach, or a broader ethical analysis of a specific humanitarian approach (see, for example, Slim,2015). We attempt a broader examination, in which we are looking for different ways of connecting and distinguishing humanitarian approaches, utilising ethics as our lens. We therefore seek to test the hypothesis that ethics can be useful in considering diversity in humanitarian thinking, and our primary focus is on testing this idea rather than achieving a comprehensive disaggregation of the proliferation of approaches to humanitarian action.

This paper proceeds in six sections. In the next section we expand our discussion of what constitutes humanitarianism and explain our selection of the approaches we review. This is followed by an appraisal of why we view ethics as a useful frame of inquiry. Subsequently we list the humanitarian approaches we will analyse, then set out the four ethical clusters we have identified and the approaches we associate with them. In the final sections we consider how this could be of additional value to humanitarian thinking before summarising our conclusions.

Hugo Slim (2015, p. 8) aptly remarked that ‘[i]f one person's terrorist is another person's freedom fighter, then one person's humanitarian is another person's development worker, company employee or bomber pilot’. This is an important point when being humanitarian (within the bounds of the humanitarian principles) is seen as providing a ‘protective shield’ and facilitating access to people in need, and is eroded when others co‐opt a humanitarian banner (Hammond,2008, p. 173; Fast,2014, p. 234). It is also important when measuring global humanitarian aid funding, which continues to rise but remains stubbornly at around 60 per cent of identified need, reaching lows of 51 per cent in 2020 and 53 per cent in 2021 (Urquhart et al.,2022, p. 36). This in turn prompts the important question of what is classified as humanitarian for the purposes of such expenditure—as seen, for instance, in the allocation of development funding for international police training and activities (Harris,2010; Hitch and McElroy,2022), or in domestic spending on refugees being counted as humanitarian assistance (Urquhart et al.,2022, p. 12).

Humanitarian literature is already replete with ways of categorising, reflecting the abundance of actors attracted to the humanitarian space, the diversity of motivations and practices they bring with them, and the concerns this can raise. In some respects, categorisation reflects attempts to differentiate organisations in competition for funding, and it can also be deeply values‐driven, as actors strive to articulate how and why their approach is best. For some humanitarians, especially classical humanitarians committed to the humanitarian principles, these values are universalist, defining the minimum of what is acceptable foranyhumanitarian engagement, and in this context, the diversity of approaches can represent worrying trends and fearful futures.

We locate ourselves among the many theorists, practitioners, and policymakers who struggle with the principles and practices of humanitarianisms in an era demanding urgent, flexible, well‐resourced, and appropriate responses to extremely diverse challenges. Ahmad and Smith (2018, p. 2) assert that ‘there remains a fundamental disconnect between the conceptual frameworks and the disciplinary experiences that seek to make sense of the various aspects of a humanitarian crisis’. One may well ask if we are all trying to invest too much value into a single word, when boundaries are vague and order is elusive. We are interested in discerning patterns within the apparent disorder of humanitarian thinking, and considering how this understanding may impact practice.

Reflections on humanitarianism require metacognitive thinking at the individual and collective levels. There is ample literature to assist us in understanding the ‘waves’ of humanitarianism from a historical and chronological perspective. Humanitarian aid in its modern iteration can be said to have emerged in the twentieth century, but it has been present in various forms throughout history (Rysaback‐Smith,2016). This is reflected in the observation that although the ‘humanitarian gesture’ is centuries old and global, the current form of the international humanitarian system can be traced to European experiences of war and disasters triggered by natural hazards (Davey, Borton, and Foley,2013, p. 1). Davey, Borton, and Foley (2013) propose that contemporary humanitarian action and systems can be divided into four main periods: mid‐nineteenth century; the Wilsonian period of the interwar years and the Second World War; the Cold War period; and the post‐Cold War period. This could potentially be updated to include a present‐day ‘humanitarian reformation’ era, reflecting the introduction of a range of professionalisation and global agreements such as the Sphere minimum standards and, more recently, the Grand Bargain, as well as the emergence of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the Cluster System. The most important aspect of this—and the debates around what characterises the contemporary humanitarian age—is recognition that humanitarian thinking is constantly evolving, and that diversity often aids adaptation.

Many of the people working in humanitarian action share an understanding that the key goal is to save lives, alleviate suffering, and maintain dignity and livelihoods (see, for example, IASC,2024), following clearly articulated guidelines and principles set out inThe Sphere Handbook, theCore Humanitarian Standard on Quality and Accountability, and other key documents. Yet, ‘humanitarian’ is a term in common use, defined more broadly as ‘promoting human welfare’, according to Merriam Webster,1which means that a great number of actors may label their actions as humanitarian without even being aware of those documents and principles.

‘Humanitarian’ thus becomes an adjective with very broad application and interpretation. It is used to mean a wide variety of things, which obscures nuance and renders us ‘divided by a common language’.2For instance, in the case of civil–military interaction in humanitarian environments, it has been noted that different organisations working in the same setting have ‘phrases and concepts we use that may look the same but in fact have different and/or multiple meanings depending on whether we come from a civilian, military or police perspective’ (ACMC and ACFID,2015, p. 5). There is, of course, further diversity within the various civilian entities, and between national (or even provincial) police or military entities.

Under such circumstances, the term humanitarian may be modified to clarify who or what is included (or excluded), giving us a world of what we call ‘hyphenated humanitarianisms’. We use this term to capture the reality that humanitarian is both an adjective (such as humanitarian actors) and noun so expansive that it requires an adjective to be meaningful (such as medical humanitarianism). It points to the ways that modifiers are necessary to create and convey meaning or distinction, despite the absence of an actual hyphen. Recognising this multiplicity of meaning helps us understand how such diverse actors can feel justified in applying the humanitarian label to their practice.

In this paper we start from a broad definition of humanitarianism as a deliberate and active response to human need in crisis, in which the vast range of human response reflects differences including financial and professional capacities, ethical thinking, political environments, and mandates and priorities. This approach allows that the humanitarian principles may still have utility for humanitarianism, but it may not be necessary for the whole field to gather under this umbrella. We therefore reconsider the diversity of humanitarian thinking with a view to recognising the strengths of the many different strands within it. We see analogies with data disaggregation, which is crucial to identifying gaps in data collection, as well as interpreting existing data in support of improved outcomes within and beyond humanitarian environments.

The range of humanitarian action affords a potential conceptualisation of humanitarianism as asocial fieldin the way French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu conceived, as a space of contestation over capital, in which the many actors seeking to practice humanitarianism are engaged in an innate struggle for power over resources and meaning (Navarro,2006). This contestation can be seen in debates around the validity of the humanitarian principles (Clarke and Parris,2019), the allocation of humanitarian funding (Poole,2013), competition for humanitarian funding (Aflaki and Pedraza‐Martinez,2016), and what can be counted in official development spending (OECD,2022). Thus, it may appear that the diverse expressions arise from competition for power within this field. We will focus on the ethical thinking distinction, which is perhaps a way of classifying subfields within a Bourdieusian framing, but which can also be viewed independently as an ethical inquiry.

Ethics is a term as broad as humanitarianism, equally well used and ill‐defined. Blackburn (2002) describes ethics as a ‘climate of ideas about how to live’, informing what we judge to be good and bad, and what we believe is required of us and others. Often invisible and unspoken, these beliefs and practices are critical to social and political functioning. Indeed, Slim (1997, p. 189) has pointed to a deep and persistent sense ‘that “being humanitarian” and “doing good” are somehow inevitably the same’, and as such, it is curious that there has not been a more extensive, explicit examination of humanitarian ethics. Notwithstanding this is the fact that humanitarian principles and the humanitarian imperative stand in as a kind of proxy for the central concerns in normative ethics: the humanitarian principle speaks to what we ought to do (respond to human suffering) and the principles speak to what action, outcomes, and personal/organisational character are valued, as well as to people's ‘moral rights’ (Gensler,2018, p. 3).

What we seek to do in this paper is to make humanitarian ethics more visible, and in doing so, to consider ethical approaches that may underpin action labelled humanitarian but not grounded in the humanitarian principles. This requires a close analysis of humanitarianisms, as a kind of disaggregation allowing us to identify the ethical priorities expressed. This permits a kind of re‐aggregation using ethical thinking, with the aim of demonstrating key values shared by subfields within humanitarianism. We hope that seeing where ethical thinking or values cohere and diverge will help humanitarian actors to make clearer judgements about their capacity to collaborate, coordinate, or co‐exist.

Most of us have a basic understanding that ethics or moral philosophy pertain to questions of what is good or bad, but few people have given more thought to the area. Comprehending right and wrong is foundational to responding to the central ethical question of ‘what should I do or be?’, demonstrating that ethics is a question of action, of putting values (right/wrong) into practice (what I do). The prescription about what to do may be defined in relation to broad principles, particular issues, or specific cases (Cohen,2012, p. 4), with differing levels of acceptance of individual reasoning and contextual variation. Some areas of ethics reframe the central question as ‘what kind of person should I be’, pointing to an emphasis on personal values and motivation, not just outcome or rule‐following.

In addition to establishing what is prioritised, ethics may set out rules and duties (Midgley,1993), and may make claims to being universally applicable, relative to circumstance or culture, or wholly a personal matter (Widdows,2014). Another important central concern in ethical thinking is the degree to which ‘we should focus on the consequences or the nature of actions’ (Frederiksen and Nielsen,2013, p. 1071), or whether we prioritise means (methods) over ends (outcomes). While these may seem to be esoteric questions, their importance lies in the fact that to evaluate something effectively, we must have clear criteria—in other words, they help determine what should be considered when assessing an action as good or bad. For example, the consequentialist approach maintains that the consequences are the most important factor in such an assessment, whereas Deontology maintains that we must do the right thingfor the right reason, indicating that motives can have a negative impact on how an outcome is judged (Widdows,2014). Likewise, German philosopher Immanuel Kant cautioned against treating people as means rather than ends, while the more contemporary field of development ethics underscores that how ends are achieved (process) is as important as the ends themselves (product) (Goulet,1997).

In this section we briefly outline the hyphenated humanitarianisms we have included in our analysis. Our goal is not to develop a comprehensive catalogue of all contemporary humanitarianisms, but rather to begin to test our theory by exploring a broad range of approaches. Consequently, we hope that our brief list points to distinctive approaches and actors, allowing for exploration of the ideals and drivers that most often remain unspoken. This of course leaves important omissions, including South–South and faith‐based humanitarianisms. These and many other humanitarianisms merit further investigation, but for now, we must content ourselves with testing the possibility of ethical analysis of a smaller number of humanitarian approaches to set out our framework.

We start therefore with a list of approaches to humanitarianism identified in academic literature, which we examine to test the possibility of ethical analysis. They are diverse, and while some describe systems (such as military humanitarianism), others relate to specific applications (such as digital humanitarianism). Our intention is to capture a broad range of thinking in the humanitarian space, so we can see how effective or applicable an ethical analysis might be. We have thus sought to include approaches that we identified repeatedly when we combed through the titles, abstracts, and content of English‐language academic texts addressing humanitarianism. The list is intended to be broad but not comprehensive.

New humanitarianism (Fox,2001; Schümer,2008; DuBois,2018).

Political humanitarianism (Framke,2016; Bradley,2022).

Resilience humanitarianism (Ilcan and Rygiel,2015; Hilhorst,2018).

Post‐humanitarianism (Chouliaraki,2010; Bryan,2013; Duffield,2019).

Medical humanitarianism (Ager and Iacovou,2014; Good et al.,2014; Gordon,2014).

Global humanitarianism (Redfield,2008; Lawrence and Tavernor,2019).

Digital humanitarianism (The PLoS Medicine Editors,2012; Burns,2014).

Everyday humanitarianism (Richey,2018; Schwittay,2019).

Localised humanitarianism (Barakat and Milton,2020).

These terms are extremely diverse, with some centring on actors (such as celebrity humanitarianism) and others focusing on methods (digital humanitarianism) or professions (medical and military humanitarianism). Initially this appears to sit in stark contrast to humanitarianisms that describe ideologies (such as neoliberal or resilience humanitarianism), but we propose that they are nonetheless worthy of attention because they describe distinct approaches. That is to say that although celebrity and medical humanitarianism concentrate on specific actors, they are represented and analysed in the literature as humanitarianism practised in particular ways with discernible goals. We expand on these approaches below in the context of the ethical characteristics we identify.

In proposing broad categories of humanitarianisms, we add to an already flourishing field of definitions and descriptions. By disaggregating and rethinking humanitarianisms in an ethical context we seek to assist the metacognitive thinking required to deconstruct and reconstruct humanitarianism in ways that point to what lies behind the actions: the values and judgements inherent in diverse responses to urgent human need. In a way, our categories encompass and extend Peters' (2019, p. 1184) analysis and critique of humanitarian systems, which he argues take three main forms: ‘a political critique that links humanitarianism with international politics of the West; an economic critique that examines humanitarianism as a growing global business; and, a critique that focuses on the pervasive “everyday nature” of humanitarianism and its growing professionalization’. Likewise, DuBois' (2018, p. 1) analysis of the humanitarian sector highlights the need for a vision for future humanitarianism that is ‘responsive, ethical and attainable’, and ‘less paternalistic, bureaucratic and expansive in its ambitions'. He proposes a ‘scaled‐down and rescoped alternative to humanitarianism's dysfunctional exercise in interventionist, international charity’ (DuBois,2018, p. 1).

We take particular note of DuBois' (2018, p. 1) critique of the ‘increasingly prominent mismatch between the needs of people in crisis and the assumptions, approaches and skills of humanitarians’ owing to the lack of coherence and inter‐disciplinarity in approaches, and we try not to perpetuate this in our own methodology. By contextualising humanitarianisms within ethical thinking from different times, cultures, and value systems, we attempt to make a small contribution to decentring Western, neoliberal, or other hegemonic positions, asking what values are present rather than using any single value set as a criterion for evaluation.

In this way we both see and seek patterns, and we argue that see(k)ing order in this manner will assist metacognition of humanitarian principles and thinking in the broader context of the twenty‐first century and the immense political, economic, and environmental changes we are witnessing. Beyond theory, however, we contend that this has value in the messy spaces of practice, by giving practitioners better tools to understand colleagues, communities, and even competitors. Agisilaou and Harris (2023, p. 167) discuss graduate students' experience of learning applied ethics in the sphere of practical professions such as development and humanitarian practice, and report that they described feeling ‘better prepared’ for practice that they understood as increasingly complex. We contend here that practitioners can benefit from having language and concepts to articulate values, and perhaps from having affirmation that values do not have to be homogenous to achieve humanitarian goals.

We propose that ethical theory presents a useful tool for making sense of the diversity of approaches to humanitarianism because values together with judgements of right and wrong are often strong undercurrents in debates about who or what is humanitarian and how humanitarianism is to be practised (Komenská,2018). From the historical antecedents of humanitarian action, ethics and values are central to defining humanitarianism but are rarely made explicit, as in Slim's (2015, p. 5) reflection that ‘the principles and spirit of [The Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and Non‐Governmental Organisations (NGOs) in Disaster Relief] have been increasingly applied as the basis of ethical practice’. We therefore look to the field of ethics as a way to make explicit our assessments about different approaches to humanitarianism. More importantly, this helps to frame these approaches as different but equally driven by a desire to do or be good (using different strategies), allowing scope for more positive mutual recognition and improved coherence.

Ethics is active and practical, requiring not just that we judge what is right or good, but also that we embody this judgement through our actions. While this may seem a deviation from humanitarian concerns, its importance lies in the fact that we require clear criteria to evaluate something effectively, thus assessing an action as good or bad. For many humanitarian actors, the humanitarian principles are the primary evaluative criteria for any action, and we argue that they constitute a set of ethical criteria and can therefore be considered alongside other ethical judgements.

These questions have a long history in (predominantly Western) normative ethical theory, and they continue to be asked in contemporary tensions such as that between individualism and communal orientations. Although we reduce each question to a simple dyad of two answers, we recognise that human beliefs and decisions are far more complex than the apparent binary represented by this structure, and that each of the terms we have chosen is laden with implications that may not be intended. We envisage that each category should be treated as a spectrum rather than a restrictive definition, and we expand these questions before examining their application to humanitarian thinking.

The first ethical question concerns what one should do or be to create a good society, and the answer tends to fall into two main responses: one should follow the rules; or one should be a good person. The first broad school of thought uses rules or guidelines to indicate what to do, and we call this grouplawful. Those rules take different forms: for instance, human rights or the humanitarian principles are clear guidelines for a better world, whereas deontological ethics sets out four key prohibitions that serve as rules for behaviour (Alexander and Moore,2024).

Contrasting approaches emphasise that one should be a good (virtuous) person, and this will mean that we know how to act in ways that bring about a good society. Another way of expressing this is that by striving to be good, we will understand to what virtues we should aspire, and this will guide our behaviour. This spotlight on personal virtue or transcendence can be seen in virtue ethics, Buddhism, and Islamic ethics (which is a specific discipline distinct from the Islamic faith; see Moosa and Mian,2011). These are centrally focused on the individual becoming their most virtuous or ethical self through disciplined development of wisdom, combined with meditation (in Buddhism), faith (in Islamic ethics), or reference to virtuous role models (in virtue ethics). We call this groupvirtuous.

The second ethical question concerns how we know what is right, and the answers to it tend to fall into three categories: from us being rational agents; from us developing personal wisdom; or from us considering relational networks. To a large degree, this pivots on the matter of whether one is afforded the capacity to exercise individual judgement and account for such factors as context and circumstances, or whether there is an external influence over such decisions, through a relationship with a community or deity. For example, Deontology, Confucianism, and rights‐based ethics are keenly concerned with known expectations of behaviour and judgement. Generally, this group views people as rational individuals, who are able to think through how to apply or prioritise these expectations in given situations (with differing levels of flexibility). We call this grouprational.

We contrast this withrelationalapproaches, in which those decisions are mediated by the needs and good of a community. It is not that the decisions of this group are irrational, but that the first priority in such decisions is the good of the group rather than the individual. Key examples of this are Ubuntu (often called African ethics), which relies on the conception that ‘I am because we are’; in addition, care ethics sense that we are all relationally embedded and feminist ethics is concerned with expressions of power in relationships and structures (Koggel, Harbin, and Llewellyn,2022). In these approaches there is little distinction between self and community, in that there is no self without community. While this is expressed very differently across these approaches, decision‐making in each concentrates on the communal good, or how the community is impacted—and in the Australian Indigenous conception, community includes all life forms.

The third ethical question concerns whether to prioritise means (process) or ends (outcome)—or both. The terms we use for this dyad entail a great deal of implicit meaning that may be too heavy to allow the category to be helpful. Nonetheless, we start with thepragmaticcategory, as a term to capture those approaches that prioritise outcomes, in the sense that saving lives may be the ultimate goal of humanitarian action. Utilitarian ethics is broadly understood as emphasising the achievement of the greatest pleasure (or benefit) for the greatest number of people; this rests on a strong emphasis on outcomes rather than measuring the means for accomplishing them.

We juxtapose this group with those that stress the importance of the way those ends are attained, and we call this groupingsystemic. Development ethics sets out means and ends as equally important—or even ‘constitutive of each other’ (Mowles,2012, p. 544)—since, for instance, theoutcomeof capacity‐building can only be achieved through aprocessof mentoring, skills development, and collaboration. Likewise, feminist ethics seeks to expand ethical thinking to address the concerns of those who are oppressed or marginal, and within this aims to balance means and ends (Warnke,2013).

The fourth ethical question concerns to whom we are responsible; that is, whether our first responsibility is to kin and proximate people, or to all people irrespective of relationship or proximity. For the first group, which we labelconstrained, the reference point is the agency, and all motivation is defined in relation to that agent, whether it be their priorities or direct relationships (Ridge,2022). In ethical terminology, this is known as agent‐relative, and Deontology and Confucianism are consistent with this constrictive view that places a person's responsibility first to those closest to them (such as family members). While this is expressed very differently across approaches, decision‐making in each of them prioritises the agent's connections and priorities, with responsibility to kin coming first and to broader community second.

The approach we labelexpansiverelates to the ethical terminology of ‘agent‐neutral’, defining responsibility as for people both near and far (physically and metaphorically). This encompasses approaches that have universalised rules, as in rights‐based ethics (where everyone holds the same rights) and utilitarianism (where the goal is to maximise pleasure, for the greatest number).

These four dyads are summarised in Table1. The table includes the name we have given to each part of the dyad, and the central emphasis that distinguishes them from each other.

Having identified these four core questions and drawn broad categories within them, a wide range of combinations is possible; however, we identified five dominant clusters of ethical thinking when we considered the theoretical framing of each of our selected humanitarianisms. We suggest these categories as non‐restrictive analytical tools that help provide some order and clarity to muddied humanitarian debates, not definitive boundaries to be drawn around thought and practice. This breadth is evident in our selection of just two overarching characteristics of each approach; although each approach responds to the four ethical questions we describe above, we argue that they emphasise some answers more than others. We briefly outline these clusters, before discussing our categories in the subsequent subsections (also see Table2).

We call our first ethical clusterrational–lawful. This group consists of those approaches that are concerned with following clearly articulated, universal rules, although they differ in terms of what these rules are. It views people as rational and able to think through how to apply rules to given situations (with differing levels of flexibility).

The second cluster ispragmatic–lawful, operating within clearly articulated rules, but distinct in being characterised by a strong emphasis on achieving explicitly defined outcomes, which are fundamentally entwined with the rules they follow.

The third group isrational–constrainedand is characterised by an emphasis on human rationality and judgement, with a focus on the individual and their own priorities and relationships rather than distant others.

The fourth group,rational–expansive, also emphasises reason and judgement, but shares a broad sense of responsibility beyond the agent's relationships or direct concerns.

The fifth group isrelational–expansive. These approaches are grounded in a shared emphasis on communities and relationships within them, and they adopt a broad sense of responsibility and engagement. That is, these communities do not need to be connected with the agent for them to be their responsibility, and human connections and equity are critical factors in decisions.

In the subsections that follow we map these groupings against the hyphenated humanitarianisms we set out above, as summarised in Table2. We were able to match the humanitarianisms effectively with our ethical clusters but were surprised by the absence of particular priorities in the final breakdown. For example, we had expectedvirtuousto be a core characteristic but other values received greater emphasis in our assessment; likewise, we expected thepragmatic–systemicdyad to feature more than it did.

We present each of the five clusters in turn, followed by a discussion of what this may mean for humanitarian interactions. We recognise that describing these approaches so briefly decouples them from the context and specific circumstances of each disaster, conflict, or complex emergency. We are restricted by the parameters of a single article and therefore focus here on establishing our categories; we look forward to exploring them in further detail in subsequent papers.

The rational–lawful cluster emphasises rules, rationality, and means (the kind of action, or the process rather than the product). Within this cluster we include classical humanitarianism, post‐humanitarianism, and digital humanitarianism (although we argue this is more a method than an ‘ism’).Classical humanitarianismcan be seen as the foundational assumption of much international agreement, including OCHA, the Cluster System (for the coordination of humanitarian action), andThe Sphere Handbook, which incorporates minimum standards for humanitarian response. Hilhorst (2018, p. 1) explains that classical humanitarianism is dominated by a Dunantist paradigm based on exceptionalism, grounded in the ethics of humanitarian principles (humanity, neutrality, impartiality, and independence), and found in United Nations (UN) agencies and international non‐governmental organisations. It is not deontological, as the rules (the humanitarian principles) pertain expressly to humanitarian practice rather than the four impermissible acts of Deontology (to lie, steal, kill innocents, or break promises). In identifying a fundamental responsibility to those in need, it is externally directed (expansive), means are emphasised, in that it is not just preservation of life that matters, but life with dignity, and action outside of the humanitarian principles is regarded as not humanitarian. Similarly, emphasis is placed on equal rights and access, ensuring assistance is prioritised according to need alone.

Post‐humanitarianismis characterised by critical theory approaches and in some respects, it is a reaction to the articulation between politics and humanitarianism, which has been heavily criticised for relying on ‘“universal” morality and grand emotion’ (Chouliaraki,2010, p. 107). This leads to a shift away from communications designed to stir emotions, to so‐called post‐emotional approaches, responding both to politicisation and to the mediatisation of the global market in which humanitarian agencies operate. Duffield (2019, p. 15) argues that post‐humanitarianism's aim is social reproduction through behavioural change rather than material assistance, such that ‘[r]ather than working to eliminate precarity, post‐humanitarianism is implicated in its reproduction and governance’. Its ‘rules’ are coherent with neoliberalism, emphasising ‘liberal rights and the free‐market economy to protect freedom and promote economic prosperity’ (Vallier,2021), and how outcomes are achieved (means) are at least as important as the outcomes themselves. Likewise, the rejection of emotive components points to the value given to rationality and people's capacity to make decisions that transcend externally‐driven political agendas.

It is possible to includedigital humanitarianismin this cluster, although we contend that it is a set of tools rather than a humanitarian approach. Encompassing the employment of technological innovations in aid of humanitarian action and communication, digital humanitarianisms emerged out of ‘spatial and mass‐collaboration technologies [which] have come to be integrated into humanitarian practices’ (Burns,2014, p. 51; see also The PLoS Medicine Editors,2012). It involves the use of various technologies such as ‘crowdsourcing, crisis mapping, social media monitoring, and remote delegation’ and is discussed in the context of critical theories of knowledge production and politics by Burns (2014, p. 52). In this sense, we associate it with legal–rational approaches, in that it is based on a conviction that individual capacity and active engagement are a means of achieving the right outcomes for oneself.

The pragmatic–lawful cluster remains closely affiliated with rules, with a strong utilitarian focus on achieving specific outcomes. Military and medical humanitarian action fit within this grouping, with their emphasis on clear and defined goals, and explicit guidelines within which they seek to achieve those objectives.

Military humanitarianismis perhaps the most contentious of all of the humanitarianisms we discuss, although it is not a new phenomenon (Weiss and Campbell,1991). Military engagement in humanitarian spaces challenges the humanitarian principles of neutrality and independence, and discussions on this conflict closely intersect with those around humanitarianism's colonial legacy (Ager and Iacovou,2014; Good et al.,2014; Gordon,2014). Of course, national militaries are far from homogenous, and their humanitarian action is similarly diverse, ranging from responses to domestic disasters to armed international interventions that are by invitation from a host government, ‘against the wishes of a local government’, or occur in the absence of any such authority (Weiss and Campbell,1991, p. 451). Chandler (2001, p. 698) proposes the term ‘humanitarian militarism’, contending that it reflects a focus on military action with a humanitarian modifier, rather than the other way around—additionally, he suggests that it is so ubiquitous as to have moved from oxymoron to tautology.

As with many professions, much has been written on military ethics (see, for example, Lucas,2016), but for our purposes, we point to two key aspects: rules and goals. Military action is bound by rules of engagement set out in the 1949 Geneva Conventions and their Additional Protocols as well as in national military doctrine or guidelines—and as in any profession, both the quality of the national rules and adherence to them varies. It is also clearly centred on a set of goals, usually defined by governments, sometimes in tandem with international organisations, and normally with a very clear end goal of military withdrawal. In this way, we view military humanitarianism (or humanitarian militarism) as pragmatic–lawful, and this is perhaps where much conflict arises with followers of the humanitarian principles, who are equally lawful, but bound by a very different set of clearly articulated rules.

Medical humanitarianismis described by Good et al. (2014, p. 311) as ‘the delivery of health‐related services in settings of crisis’. While it may be packaged as an uncomplicated good—directly addressing human suffering with medical tools—it is important to note that historically, medical action has ‘provided ideological and moral justifications for colonialism, capitalism, and other global “civilizing missions”’ (Good et al.,2014, p. 311). Medical humanitarianism may also be a component of military humanitarianism (medical action and provisioning by military personnel), leading to some actors having dual identities ‘in the sense of being both a military and medical professional’ (Gordon,2014, p. 422)—or it may have no military connection or connotations.

We classify medical humanitarianism (or humanitarian medical action) as pragmatic–lawful because medical actors perform within a set of guidelines from ‘do no harm’ to health‐focused processes. They also work with respect to a clear set of goals, namely, life and health. Of course, the methods employed to achieve them matter; however, the emphasis is on achieving the goals bysome(good) method, rather than being on using aspecificmethod to accomplish some outcome. This tends to be less controversial to ‘humanitarians’ because while military, medical, and humanitarian actors may all articulate goals around saving lives, the methods used to fulfil them medically are perceived as independent from political goals (in contrast to military methods).

The rational–constrained cluster sits within what could be termed a Westphalian democratic ethical framing, in which freedom and rights are paramount, and personal wisdom is important in exercising judgement. This category diverges from rational–lawful by underscoring outcomes or ends (rather than means), with decision‐making tending to rest on the ubiquitous utilitarian criterion of the greatest good for the greatest number. It takes a primarily constrictive approach to responsibilities—caring for one's own citizens first—but is universalist in a firm conviction that its models should apply broadly. We see neoliberal, resilience, celebrity, and neo‐humanitarianism as fitting into this grouping, which is closely related to legal–rational, but accords priority to the individual over any social or shared rules (although they remain important). In a development application this would mean that programmes tend to be individualistic and should become self‐funding to demonstrate the capacity of recipients to become full, self‐sustaining members of the international community.

Neoliberal humanitarianismreflects the way humanitarianism has been ‘restructured along neo‐liberal premises regarding its agents and their roles, their activities and their assessment, their ways of thinking and talking, and their self‐perceptions’ (Sözer,2020, p. 2166). In particular, Sözer (2020) argues that this reconfiguration serves to lessen the demands on humanitarian action (and thus its costs and claimed impact), reducing the humanitarian vision to individual projects, measuring efficiency, and most importantly, changing the humanitarian goal to the formation of self‐sustaining communities driven by individual choice. Under neoliberal governance, the humanitarian object (or victim) is transformed into a subject who has agency, resilience, and responsibility for their own actions (Ilcan and Rygiel,2015).

Advocates ofresilience humanitarianismconcentrate on ‘building on local response capabilities’ (Hilhorst,2018, p. 1) to construct community and national capacity to mitigate and respond to crises with minimal external intervention. This approach is often associated with neoliberal humanitarianism, because it also relies on shifting the focus away from the collective vulnerability of a group, and on toindividualvulnerabilities and how to develop capacity to withstand such challenges as independent and self‐reliant beings. Resilience humanitarianism is examined closely within both problem‐solving and critical theory approaches. For example, in seeking to foster ‘normal’ life and social and economic activity within refugee camps—which are now long‐term rather than temporary arrangements for so many people—a focus on individual agency reconstitutes refugees ‘along the lines of the neoliberal subject’ (Ilcan and Rygiel,2015, p. 334).

We would also placecelebrity humanitarianismin this group, an identity‐based practice in which famous people promote humanitarian causes. The contemporary history of celebrity humanitarianism stretches from the UN's first Goodwill Ambassador (actor Danny Kaye, who was appointed in 1954) to the ground‐breaking Band Aid campaign of 1984 in response to the Ethiopian famine, and contemporary tools like Look to the Stars, a currently active website listing more than 4,600 celebrities and the causes they support.3These celebrities seek to lift the profile of specific causes while also promoting their own through such an association. This form of humanitarianism has been strongly linked with neoliberalism in that it is ‘self‐serving’ and despite protestations to the contrary, rationalises global inequality, depoliticises international action, and ‘contributes to a ‘postdemocratic’ political landscape, which appears outwardly open and consensual, but is in fact managed by unaccountable elites’ (Kapoor,2013, p. 1). We categorise it as individual–rational owing to its grounding in neoliberalism and because celebrities' activism uses humanitarianism as a tool for individual fame and profit, appealing to individual choice and rationality, but with a (partially) hidden goal of self‐promotion rather than humanitarian action.

Neo‐humanitarianismis how Mills (2005) describes the increased politicisation and militarisation of humanitarian organisations and actors, citing a key example in the United States government's claim that humanitarian relief was one of the six reasons for invading Afghanistan in 2001. Such application of humanitarian action renders obsolete the principles of independence, neutrality, and impartiality, especially in the context of complex emergencies and asymmetrical warfare (Mills,2005, p. 164)—demonstrating the subversion of rules to a more singular motivation. In this case, it is not the motivation of an individual, but it remains individualistic in the sense of emphasising one country's goals and outcomes over those of others. In contrast to Mills' (2005) use of the term neo‐humanitarianism as a label for this politicisation, Sözer (2020) locates the transformation and absorption of humanitarianism within neoliberal systems. Although it can be connected with warfare, it is distinct from military humanitarianism in being more centred on politics than the actions of militaries alone.

The primary commonality of this cluster is a sense of responsibility beyond oneself and one's family, combined with an emphasis on the rational capacity of individuals. Here, we include political, new, and global humanitarianisms.

Analysingpolitical humanitarianismin the context of Indian aid for Republican Spain in the 1930s, Framke (2016, p. 63) defines it as ‘a form of humanitarianism in which political motivations are particularly explicit’. This highlights the political possibilities of humanitarianism in theory and in practice, focusing on deconstructing the ‘principles’ of humanitarianism and, like neo‐humanitarianism, pointing to the impossibility of separating politics from humanitarianism. Bradley (2022, p. 1029) points to the underpinning ethical frameworks to explain the divergence in approaches to humanitarian action, noting that ‘classical/apolitical humanitarianism is often characterized as an approach grounded in deontological ethics and new/political humanitarianism as one of consequentialist ethics’. Noting that these dichotomies are simplistic while people, crises, and humanitarian action are complex, Bradley (2022) states that this argument rests less on different conceptions of what is good, and more on empirical questions about the impact of different courses of action.

Our second inclusion in this grouping is so‐callednew humanitarianism, which responds to critiques that classical humanitarianism offers only band‐aids because it responds to immediate need rather than root causes. Key characteristics include professionalisation and agreement of humanitarian standards, as well as ‘the adoption of more political and emancipatory forms of humanitarianism’ (Gordon and Donini,2015, p. 88). It also responds to damaging critiques of humanitarian action as complicit in conflict, reinscribing it with moral value as ‘“principled”, “human rights based”, politically sensitive and geared to strengthening those forces that bring peace and stability to the developing world’ (Fox,2001, p. 275). Pointing to the existence of variants within new humanitarianism, Schümer (2008) describes a ‘British variant’ that reaches beyond immediate life‐saving activity to promote human rights, to address conflict's root causes, and mitigate the negative impacts of humanitarian action. This focus invokes a more politicised approach to humanitarian action, which is in tension with commitment to the principle of neutrality. This is highlighted in a protracted crisis when the nexus between humanitarian and development spaces is particularly apparent.

In a similar vein,global humanitarianism(DeChaine,2005; Lawrence and Tavernor,2019) covers contemporary humanitarian issues by concentrating on politics and largely taking a critical theory approach. DeChaine (2005, p. 20) discusses the paradox and politics of humanitarianisms and identifies the ‘symbolic resources used to “conjure” a global humanitarian community into existence as a collection or “people” united in the furthering of humanitarian goals’. This approach has been critiqued for prolonging suffering and conflicts and allowing the conflation of military and humanitarian action. In that sense, the global is used to blur distinctions, and to spotlight the fulfilment of perceived need rather than capacity, agency, or diversity. Global, new, and political humanitarianism share an expansive orientation of responsibility beyond relational and physical proximity, and emphasis on the rationality of all individuals involved in humanitarian actions and transactions.

The final cluster we identified is relational–expansive. The component lies in an understanding that our humanity or personhood is realised only in relationship with others, meaning that it is our connections and interactions with other people that make us human. The expansive aspect of the ethical grouping is found in its attention to relationally distant people rather than focusing on those who are relationally proximate (kin and one's own community). It is emphasised in humanitarianisms that identify a duty to distant, unknown others and invoke a broader, global kinship and responsibility. On this basis we apply the relational–expansive label to everyday humanitarianism and to the movement broadly termed the localisation agenda.

Everyday humanitarianism(Richey,2018; Schwittay,2019) generally concentrates on the interactions of everyday people with humanitarianism and the alleviation of suffering. Focused on ‘ordinary’ citizens who are not employed in humanitarian roles, it describes their actions as they seek ‘to make a difference’ (Richey,2018, p. 625). Schwittay (2019, p. 1922) claims that it is rooted in obligation arising from a feeling of kinship, and conveys a sense of agency and ‘efficacy’ at being able to impact the lives of others. The term therefore also captures broader social inclinations and actions that are conducive to an environment that supports (and funds) other humanitarianisms. It is potentially very important to a political context that sees international humanitarian action as an important component of national budgets.

Thelocalisation agendais not (yet?) recognised as a singular humanitarianism, but it is a commitment that pervades humanitarian discourse. While ubiquitous, the application and intent of ‘localisation’ are extremely broad; the term is employed to describe strategies ranging from tools for effective implementation to ‘self‐determination and political justice’ (Slim,2021, p. 1; see also Frennesson et al.,2022). Our focus is this latter understanding: local humanitarianism that is not only about affected people as first responders, but also about complementarity, equal partnerships, local knowledge and capacity, and negotiation (Khan and Kontinen,2022). This is communal–expansive in the sense of being deeply relational (grounded in actual relationships, or in recognising interdependency and interconnection), and invoking global kinship that demands both action and respectful collaboration.

This study has articulated our attempt to understand humanitarian diversity and coherence through an ethical lens. We believe its utility lies in making explicit the value judgements inherent in contemporary debate—not to reveal who is right or wrong, but to make evident why parties believe a particular course of action has value. This matters because it can foreground areas of potential unity and articulate non‐negotiables, thereby allowing the many humanitarian actors to collaborate, coordinate, or cooperate better (or express why they cannot).

In this sense, the values driving an approach to humanitarian thinking may be key to its ability and willingness to work with other groups. For example, the pragmatic–lawful group—with its goal orientation of maintaining clear rules or guidelines for action—is likely to be open to collaborating with a broad range of actors to meet its specific outcomes. Rational–expansive actors may be willing to engage with them to fulfil a responsibility to a broader other, emphasising the rationality of all actors in making choices about their engagement. In contrast, rational–lawful actors may find themselves unable to collaborate because their rules for action are so central to their values and activities that they cannot be transgressed, even for the objective of saving lives.

We suggest in fact that it is the lawful component that poses greatest difficulty for actors seeking to work together. This will come as no surprise to classical humanitarians, whose humanitarian principles are inviolable, including their emphasis on means as equally important as outcomes. This latter point highlights a factor that did not differentiate along the lines of our categories, namely means versus ends, or process versus outcomes. We found that the answers to three of the four key ethical questions (what should we do or be?; how do we know what is right?; and to whom are we responsible?) tended to be coherent within our nominated clusters, but that there was diversity on whether means or ends are most important.

We interpret this as reflecting the tension expressed in the shared goals of humanitarianism: while saving lives, alleviating suffering, and maintaining livelihoods can all be conceived as outcomes, maintaining dignity strongly emphasises methods, because how lives are saved and the choices available to survivors are critical to dignity. We propose that the means versus ends tension will endure in the various expressions of humanitarianism, within and between these clusters. Nonetheless, we see opportunities for improved engagement between actors. For example, the clusters that share a stress on individual rationality and choice (rational–lawful; individual–rational; and rational–expansive) are likely to cohere around more individually‐focused practice, whereas the communally‐centred groups (primarily communal–expansive) will find their approaches unpalatable. A clearer understanding of where organisations fit within these ethical clusters may therefore help them in understanding their capacity to work together.

This has been a very limited discussion, in which our aim was to test whether ethical analysis can be a meaningful way of making sense of the synergies and disconnections within the varied expressions of humanitarian action. We believe the study demonstrates that thinking about approaches to humanitarianisms using a lens of ethics and values can be useful in relation to theories and practices of humanitarian action, particularly where it points to synergies arising from shared values. The diversity within the humanitarian sector can be understood many ways, and ethics offers a way of underscoring connections rather than ruptures. This suggests that further research would be valuable, both to deepen the ethical analysis of humanitarian thinking and to extend the inquiry to areas we have not included here, such as South–South, faith‐based, and locally‐practised humanitarianisms.

Furthermore, we see opportunities for exploration of what this looks like in practice and through the eyes of practitioners, since the real world of humanitarian action is so much messier and more complex than can be captured in this small, exploratory investigation. While many practitioners are confident in articulating their beliefs and values, Agisilaou and Harris (2023) have pointed to the value that early‐career practitioners can find in building their ethical vocabulary. Further analysis of humanitarian values could also be vital in articulating gaps in humanitarian capability and identifying actors that may be particularly suited to responding or collaborating.

This paper highlights the prominence of values in humanitarian discourses, and from that seeks to understand connections between these values, well‐known ethical thinking, and approaches to humanitarianism. We started with four central ethical questions: what should we do or be?; how do we know what is right?; do we prioritise means or ends?; and to whom are we responsible? Simplifying the answers to these questions, we developed a set of categories to point to dominant values in a range of humanitarianisms.

Approaches that are rational–lawful (classical, post‐, and digital humanitarianisms, for instance) are concerned with rules that are clear and consistent, value rational thinking and decision‐making, and put an emphasis on means or processes. Pragmatic–lawful approaches (including military and medical humanitarianisms) share a rules‐based methodology but place more stress on ends or outcomes. Despite sharing a focus on rules to be followed, these two groups represent what can at times be the most polarised of humanitarianisms, namely, classical and military. In both cases, the rules or values that underpin the approach are central to the methods and goals—with very different strategies emerging.

Individual–rational approaches (neoliberal, resilience, and celebrity humanitarianisms) are distinct from the other groupings, in underscoring the individual over community, while valuing rational thinking and decision‐making in common with two other clusters. The rational–expansive grouping (political, new, and global humanitarianisms) shares the commitment to rationality but is quite different in emphasising responsibility to both kin and the distant other. Its expansive orientation connects it with the final grouping, communal–expansive (everyday humanitarianism and localisation), grounded in communities whose orientation is mutual responsibility, but sensing a duty to others near and far.

Our point is not to rank these groupings by value, impact, or cost‐effectiveness. Rather, it is to open new avenues for thinking, whereby diverse humanitarian actors may begin to see ways in which they might better understand and communicate with other actors, based on recognition of the values that drive action. Understanding these values can help us make sense of actions and choices, and this in turn can improve communication and decision‐making. Ultimately, our aim is to support those who would change the lives of the people most affected by crises, providing ways to comprehend and respond to obstacles and highlighting connections that already exist.

We set out to examine the utility of ethics as a means of understanding and categorising humanitarian actors. This paper outlines our attempt to categorise a number of diverse contemporary approaches to humanitarian action, using key questions of ethical thinking. It proposes loose ethical classifications of humanitarianisms, which may evolve with changes in practice, and as a result of further debate. We propose that further inquiry into how ethics and values feature in humanitarian thinking and practice would be valuable and could open spaces for connection and collaboration between actors.

The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.

We are grateful to the peer reviewers of this paper, who gave generously of their time and ideas, and whose thoughtful feedback has vastly improved the manuscript.

This paper is theoretical, drawing on published papers and concepts as acknowledged throughout the paper. It does not draw on data available publicly or collected specifically.

Seehttps://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/humanitarian(last accessed on 19 June 2025).

This phrase is generally attributed to George Bernard Shaw, but is not found within his publications.

For more information on the latter, seehttps://www.looktothestars.org/(last accessed on 23 June 2025).

This article is theoretical, drawing on published papers and concepts as acknowledged throughout the study. It does not draw on data available publicly or collected specifically.