Subnormothermic machine perfusion shows promise as a viable alternative to static cold storage for prolonged preservation of vascularized composite allografts. To date, most studies have been conducted in nonprimate models, and we report its first utilization in a cynomolgus forearm preclinical model for 24-h preservation.

Forearms were procured from nonhuman primates weighing between 5 and 8 kg. Two perfusion protocols were implemented. In group 1 (n = 6), limbs were perfused with 1.5 L of recirculating Steen; the perfusate flow was adjusted to maintain stable vascular pressures. In group 2 (n = 6), limbs were perfused with a Steen+ solution, doubling the albumin concentration, with a full-volume exchange at mid-perfusion under a stable low-flow regimen. Dynamic and metabolic parameters, histological analysis, and response to neurostimulation were assessed.

After 24 h of continuous perfusion, mean weight gain was 24.8 ± 5.5% in group 1 and 8.0 ± 4.7% in group 2. Perfusion and metabolic parameters indicated the onset of a compartment syndrome in group 1 with an increase in resistance, lactate, and potassium production at mid-perfusion. In group 2, dynamic and metabolic parameters remained stable for 24 h, and histological analysis showed well-preserved tissues. Finally, in group 2, limbs exhibited muscular contraction recovery quantified at 2.4/5 ± 0.89 after 24 h compared with 0/5 after 3 h of ischemia or after perfusion in group 1.

Successful 24-h perfusion and muscle contractility restoration demonstrate promising outcomes for vascularized composite allograft preservation and reconditioning.

Vascularized composite allotransplants (VCAs) represent a significant advancement in reconstructive surgery, offering unparalleled aesthetic and functional outcomes for patients with severe injuries.1,2However, the ethical considerations are complex since VCAs require lifelong immunosuppressive therapy, and acute rejection episodes remain common.3,4This leads to chronic rejection and graft failure in up to 10% of cases.5,6Additionally, unlike solid organ transplants, VCAs contain multiple tissues: highly immunogenic skin,7bone, nerves, and muscle. The latter makes VCAs highly susceptible to warm ischemia injuries8—exacerbated after revascularization through ischemia-reperfusion injury9—and leads to substantial inflammation, innate immune response, and acute rejection episodes. Challenges persist for VCAs, including the limited brain-dead donor pool geographical constraints and improving immunosuppressive protocols. While static cold storage (SCS) remains the current gold standard, it presents several limitations, with ischemic and cold-induced injuries occurring within a few hours of preservation.10-12Therefore, VCA preservation techniques between procurement and transplantation need to be improved.

Machine perfusion (MP) is a well-established technique in solid organ transplantation.13Our group focuses on translating MP to the VCA field and has successfully adapted it in rodents and swine.14-18Subnormothermic machine perfusion (SNMP) emerges as a particularly promising method for ex vivo preservation due to its simplicity and effectiveness.19-24However, there is a need for more clinically relevant models to bridge the current translational research gap and allow SNMP to be implemented in preclinical, experimental settings.

Additionally, extended graft preservation methods and MP as a therapeutic platform hold potential benefits for tolerance induction protocols.25The nonhuman primate (NHP) forearm26and face heterotopic models27-29are instrumental in developing tolerance strategies for VCAs and studying nerve regeneration and repair. Given the need to implement these techniques in the field of VCA and replantation,30we developed a new relevant preclinical model to study MP in VCA. This article explores the application of SNMP to the NHP forearm model with the aim of optimizing the preservation technique for up to 24 h.

Animals weighing between 5 and 8 kg were euthanized by exsanguination after receiving 300 IU/kg of heparin. The left forearms were used for experiments. The right forearms served as controls. After careful dissection of the brachial vascular pedicle containing the brachial artery and both veins, the artery was cannulated with a 22-gauge catheter, and the limb was flushed with 20 cc of heparinized saline. All the vascular branches supplying the upper limb were ligated to avoid any leakage from the proximal part of the vessels. The superficial and deep venous systems were also dissected, and the distal arm muscles were dissected and detached from their tendinous insertions. Only the brachioradialis muscle had to be divided through its muscle belly (Figure1A).

Study design. A, Nonhuman primate (NHP) forearm with a brachial artery (a) cannulated to allow for inflow perfusion. The deep brachial veins (b) and superficial cephalic vein (c) are preserved to measure outflow composition, as well as the median (d), radial (e), and ulnar (f) nerves. B, Ex vivo subnormothermic machine perfusion set up. The perfusion solution, placed in a plastic reservoir (1), is pumped (2) through the oxygenator (3) and aerated with a carbogen mixture (4) (5% CO2and 95% oxygen). The solution then goes through the bubble trap (5) and the pressure is measured (6) at limb height. The limb is placed on top of a 3-dimensional (3D)-printed scale (7). Inflow is sampled from the stopcock, upstream from the arterial inflow. Outflow samples are taken directly from the vein. Samples are analyzed with a Rapidpoint500 system (8). A microcontroller (9) sends continuous pressure and weight measurements to a computer. Temperature is monitored at each time points with a FlirOne smartphone-based thermal camera (10), and is kept in the subnormothermic range (19–21 °C) without intervention. C, Main perfusate compounds and concentrations in both Steen and Steen+ solutions. D, In group 1, the pressure is aimed to be the stable parameter (red), and 1.5 L of recirculating Steen solutions are used for the entire experiment (representative replicate). E, In group 2, the flow rate is kept stable (red), and 1 L of fresh Steen+ solution is recirculated for 12 h (representative replicate).

with [vein] and [art] being, respectively, the outflow and inflow concentrations (mmol/L).

where 0.0314 corresponds to Henry’s constant in water at 20 °C at 1 atm, pO2art-vein is the difference in partial oxygen pressure between artery inflow and venous outflow (mm Hg),Qis the arterial inflow rate (mL/min), and weight (W) is measured in grams and resulting oxygen consumption is measured in mL/min/g. For perfusate analysis, samples were taken from the inflow (corresponding to the brachial artery) and both superficial (cephalic vein) and deep (brachial vein) outflow. The mean values were used to calculate metabolic consumption and production.

The characteristics of our Steen solution optimized for VCAs have already been described.34,35Briefly, a deionized water base was supplemented with ions, albumin, glucose, and steroids. The main difference between group 1 and 2 was the albumin content (7.5% bovine serum albumin in the Steen, and 15% in the Steen+). Broad-spectrum antibiotics (vancomycin and piperacillin–tazobactam) and sodium bicarbonate (8.4%) were added with a targeted pH range of 7.1–7.4. (Figure1C).

For group 1, perfusion parameters were set according to prior research in a swine hindlimb model.36Flow was dynamically adjusted to maintain a consistent vascular pressure of 40 ± 5 mm Hg, with 1.5 L of Steen solution recirculated over 24 h (Figure1D). Following an intermediate analysis, perfusion parameters were refined for the second experimental group. Group 2 aimed for a stable, low flow of 1 L Steen+ (Figure1E), with a full-volume exchange after 12 h. Steen+ contains twice the amount of bovine serum albumin to enhance oncotic pressure and fight interstitial edema. Flow rate, pressure, weight gain, temperature, and metabolic parameters were monitored hourly for the initial 6 h, followed by 3-h intervals for the subsequent 18 h.

Muscle (central portion of the flexor carpi radialis for the primary biopsy and extensor digitorum as secondary location) and skin biopsies were performed at H0 (on the contralateral control limb), and H24 of ex vivo preservation and fixed in formalin, paraffin-embedded, sectioned, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin and Tunel. Two independent researchers, blinded to the study, evaluated all biopsies using a modified Histology Injury Scoring System (HISS).37In this modified HISS score, the inflammatory criteria were not considered as they primarily relied on the presence of inflammatory cells (polynuclear and lymphocytes), usually recruited from the systemic circulation following replantation. Therefore, the assessment focused on edema, heterogeneity in size and shape among myocytes, and damages such as ischemia (pyknosis, karyorrhexis, karyolysis, vacuoles), necrosis, and phagocytosis. Each parameter was assessed using the following scale: 0 (absent), 1 (partial presence; <50%), 2 (intermediate presence; >50%), and 3 (diffuse presence). The sum of the subcategories resulted in a total score ranging from 0 (no degradation) to 9 (severe degradation).

Muscle and capillary microstructure were assessed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Muscle tissue was stored in formalin and post-fixed in 2.0% paraformaldehyde/2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1M sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4). The following day, specimens were rinsed in 0.1M cacodylate buffer, infiltrated for 1 h in 1% osmium tetroxide, then rinsed again in cacodylate buffer. After undergoing dehydration in ethanol and propylene oxide, tissue was transferred into a 2:1 mix of propylene oxide:Eponate resin (Ted Pella, Redding, CA), then placed into a 1:1 mix of propylene oxide:Eponate resin overnight. Embedding was done in flat molds with fresh 100% Eponate resin. Ultra-thin (70 nm) sections were cut using a Leica EM UC7 ultramicrotome, stained with 2% uranyl acetate and Reynold’s lead citrate, and examined in a JEOL JEM 1011 TEM at 80 kV. Images were collected using an AMT digital imaging system with proprietary image capture software (Advanced Microscopy Techniques, Danvers, MA) by an independent specialist blinded to our study. To limit the sampling error risk, images were acquired at 3 different locations per sample.

Macrovascular integrity was examined by radiographs in 1 representative replicate per group following perfusion. Twenty milliliters of contrast agent (Omnipaque; GE Healthcare, Marlborough) were carefully injected at a steady, controlled pressure of 20 mm Hg, using the same pressure sensor used during perfusion to ensure consistency with the perfusion pressure, through the brachial artery, and images were acquired at the arterial phase when the digital arteries became apparent.

Muscle contractility was tested in group 2 after 24 h of SNMP preservation and in contralateral limbs. A 2 mA neurostimulation (VARI-STIM III Nerve Locator; Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) was applied on the median nerve. Contralateral right limbs were used as controls, with neurostimulation being performed after the same period of warm ischemia as in the perfused limbs. Neurostimulation was not attempted during perfusion to avoid interference with perfusion and potential bias in the metabolic parameters; however, 1 additional replicate per group was performed to assess the timing of muscle contraction recovery. The Medical Research Council Scale for Muscle Strength was used for assessing muscle strength from grade 5 (normal), grade 4 (active movement against mild resistance), grade 3 (active movement against gravity), grade 2 (active movement with gravity eliminated), grade 1 (flicker or contraction unable to induce movement), grade 0 (no contraction).

Data were recorded in Excel (Microsoft, Redmond, WA), and statistical analyses were conducted using Prism (v. 10.1.1; GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA). Theαrisk was set at 5% and was 2-tailed. For each monitored variable, we determined the mean and standard error of the mean. Group comparisons were made using a Mann-WhitneyUtest. Linear regressions were calculated to delineate the first and second phases of perfusion. The Spearman test was used to study correlations between perfusion parameters. No statistical analysis was performed on the raw perfusate concentration data to prevent interpretation bias resulting from perfusate exchange in group 2.

Six continuous SNMP perfusions were performed in each group. The average warm ischemia time was 180 ± 10.95 min in group 1 and 160 ± 6.32 min in group 2 (P= 0.275). The mean initial weight was 219.3 ± 6.68 g in group 1 and 194.8 ± 24.58 g in group 2 (P= 0.667). All limbs were perfused for 24 h.

The perfusion parameters are presented in Figure2. Weight gain profiles were significantly different between both groups throughout the experiment. Mean weight intake was 24.8 ± 2.76% in group 1 and 8.0 ± 1.94% in group 2 after 24 h of perfusion (P< 0.001). The high oncotic pressure perfusate used in the optimized group led to a weight decrease during the first phase of the perfusion. In group 1, the initial flow rate (8.2 ± 0.65 mL/min) had to be increased during the first phase of perfusion to maintain the pressure around 35 mm Hg. Then, as the pressures kept increasing, a slower flow rate was attempted without being successful in controlling the pressure increase. As the flow rate was kept stable and relatively low in group 2 (4.33 ± 0.33 mL/min), the resulting pressure and resistance profile displayed an initial sharp decline followed by a stabilization that lasted until the end of the experiment.

Perfusion parameters differed between both groups. The flow regimen (A) applied to the setup influenced the pressure (B) and resistance (C) profiles of the experiment, leading to a significantly lower increase in weight in the optimized group compared with the standard group (D), respectively in red and black. The “recovery” phase (the first 6 h) and the “preservation” phase (the last 18 h) are separated by a dotted line and highlighted by linear regressions.

Two perfusion metabolic phases could be characterized. The first phase, occurring during the initial 6 h of perfusion, exhibited a clear decreasing trend in metabolite levels, corresponding to the washout of accumulated metabolites during the warm ischemia period (recovery phase). This was followed by a second phase, more influenced by the specific preservation protocol used in each group, extending for the remaining 18 h of perfusion (preservation phase) (Figure3A–C). At the conclusion of the experiment, a significant difference was observed in terms of potassium and lactate production between both groups (24.90 ± 7.19 and 7.07 ± 1.15 µmol/g/min,P= 0.009, for the potassium and 133.8 ± 40.74 and 31.7 ± 7.74 µmol/g/min,P =0.024, for the lactate production). Interestingly, a clear correlation between the weight increase and these 2 markers could be identified from the ninth hour of perfusion (but not before) (Spearman correlationr= 1 for the lactate production andr= 0.886 for the potassium production) supporting the hypothesis of a compartment syndrome taking place in group 1 limb past a weight increase of 10% (Figure3D). While the difference in calcium production was not statistically significant, there was a notable disparity in perfusate calcium concentrations, as for the potassium and lactate (Figure S1A–E,SDC,https://links.lww.com/TXD/A789). Additionally, a strong positive correlation between oxygen consumption and the flow rate was observed in group 1 (but not in group 2), suggesting that the flow rate may have impacted the limb’s oxygen consumption (Figure S1F, SDC,https://links.lww.com/TXD/A789). No significant differences were observed in lactate (P =0.579) and potassium (P= 0.264) production between the superficial and deep venous outflow from the cephalic and brachial veins, respectively (Figure S2, SDC,https://links.lww.com/TXD/A789). The same observation was made when assessing the other metabolic parameters.

Comparison of metabolic markers and weight changes over time during perfusion. Lactate (A), potassium (B), and calcium (B) profiles were similar in both groups until mid-perfusion. After an initial washout during the “recovery” phase, these parameters remained stable in the optimized group for the rest of the perfusion. In group 1, at the 10% weight increase mark, a compartment syndrome was seen (D), ultimately leading to significantly higher levels of lactate and potassium at the end of perfusion in group 1. Statistical significance was not achieved for the calcium production (seeSupplemental Data, SDC,https://links.lww.com/TXD/A789, for more detailed analysis). Spearman test results are reported for the 9–24-h period (shaded area), with strong correlations between the weight increase and the lactate and potassium productions. Standard group 1 is represented in red, and the optimized group 2 is represented in black. The “recovery” phase (the first 6 h) and the “preservation” phase (the last 18 h) are separated by a dotted line and highlighted by linear regressions.

No major myocyte injury, degeneration, or apoptotic cell death was seen in muscle and skin samples stained with hematoxylin and eosin and Tunel in group 2 after perfusion (Figure4). Notably, the endothelium, media, and adventitia of the proximal arteries appeared to be well preserved, with no intramural edema. Median nerve biopsies were also within the normal range (Figure5). The mean total modified HISS scores were 0.25 and 1.50, respectively, for control and group 2 perfused limbs (P= 0.002). Group 1 replicates displayed significantly more tissue damage than group 2 and the controls. Although group 2 muscle biopsies appeared overall well preserved after 24 h of SNMP on the TEM analysis (Figure6), there was some degree of heterogeneity between samples and within the same sample; this was even more apparent in group 1 (Figure S3, SDC,https://links.lww.com/TXD/A789). For comparison, representative TEM images of muscle biopsies from both positive and negative controls are presented inFigure S4(SDC,https://links.lww.com/TXD/A789).

Histological analysis of representative samples revealed good preservation of the muscle and skin after 24 h of optimized perfusion when compared with controls. Interstitial edema (arrows), ischemic myocytes (circles), myocyte fiber injuries (asterisks), and apoptotic cells (with brown nuclei in the Tunel slides) were more frequently seen in group 1 and SCS samples than in the optimized group biopsies. Modified HISS was also significantly increased in the standard group compared with the optimized group. H&E, hematoxylin and eosin; HISS, Histology Injury Scoring System; SCS, static cold storage; SNMP, subnormothermic machine perfusion; WIT, warm ischemia time.

Representative histology of group 2 after 24 h of SNMP. Median nerve (A) and proximal artery (*) and vein (°) sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) (B) demonstrating structural integrity and absence of apoptotic cells on the corresponding Tunel slides (C, D).

Electron microscopy analysis of muscle biopsies reveals structural disparities between experimental groups. Negative controls (1 and 3 h of WIT) and group 2 tissues (after 24 h of SNMP) displayed similar ultrastructural preservation. Muscle fibers showed low edema, near-normal spacing between myofibrillar bundles, and only minor Z-band irregularities (solid vertical arrows). Mitochondria appeared intact, with normal size and shape and well-defined cristae (empty horizontal arrows). Capillaries exhibited no significant endothelial damage or thinning, retained tight junctions (white arrows), and abundant caveolae (circles), with no evidence of luminal debris. In contrast, group 1 tissues showed ultrastructural alterations resembling those observed in the positive controls (3 h WIT followed by 24 h of static cold storage). These included disorganized muscle fibers and signs of endothelial disruption and swelling in capillaries. SCS, static cold storage; SNMP, subnormothermic machine perfusion; WIT, warm ischemia time.

Radiographs performed with arterial injection of contrast agent after perfusion showed a preserved main vascular tree, including distal palmar arches and digital arteries. Limited leaks were noticed in the extravascular compartment in group 1 but not in group 2 replicate, where the distal arteries were also better visualized (Figure7).

Contrast radiographs performed after 24 h of subnormothermic machine perfusion (SNMP) in group 1 (upper) and group 2 (lower). Note the complete opacification of the vascular tree, including distal palmar arches and digital arteries. Limited leaks were noticed in the extravascular compartment in group 1 but not in group 2.

Muscle contraction assays were performed through median nerve stimulation. While none of the contralateral control limbs exhibited contraction after the initial warm ischemia period, or after 3 h of warm ischemia time followed by 24 h of SCS, all the optimized group limbs recovered muscular contractibility after 24 h of perfusion, ranging from 1/5 to 3/5 (Video, SDC). The mean contraction score was 2.4/5 ± 0.89 (P= 0.0079). Notably, when assessing the timing of muscle contraction recovery in 1 replicate, the first contraction at 1/5 was observed at 18 h, followed by a progressive increase in strength to 2/5 at 21 h, culminating in a final score of 3/5 after 24 h of SNMP. No contraction was obtained in the standard group tested limb.

Organ preservation methods can greatly impact graft quality and immunogenicity. There is growing evidence that SCS—the current gold standard in VCA—may contribute to graft degradation. Cold ischemia injuries have been observed in both muscle and nerve as early as after a few hours of SCS,38potentially increasing the host immune response.14Our group has studied importing alternative solid organ preservation methods to VCAs, with encouraging results.17,32-34Among the vast range of potential techniques,14SNMP appears to be well-suited for medium-term preservation, up to 24 h, with the major limitation being the onset of perfusion-induced edema in the graft. The weight gain is mainly driven by shear stress–induced endothelial injuries leading to interstitial leakage.39VCA preservation studies have been performed in rodent and swine models, leaving a gap between research and clinical applications. Most of the described models, such as partial limbs, involve open structures with a disrupted vascular equilibrium between arterial flow and venous drainage capabilities. In contrast, whole limb models are clinically relevant, involving an integral vascular network enclosed in fascial compartments and skin, exposing them to risks of compartment syndromes in the event of muscular edema. As emphasized by Duru et al,40the impact of compartment pressure on the perfused limb still lacks to be addressed in the literature. They suggest investigating this phenomenon through serial biopsies and weight increase profiling for each model. In addition to histological proof of tissue damage at the end of perfusion, we opted for monitoring the weight and metabolic parameters such as potassium and lactate as “real-time” markers of tissue damage. Considering the increased edema following replantation,20weight gain is a critical parameter to address during dynamic preservation methods. Nerves can rapidly suffer from microvascular compression due to compartment syndrome, which can impair post-transplant functional recovery.

We describe the development of an extended SNMP preservation protocol for the NHP forearm model. Initial exploratory experiments and their pitfalls led to several modifications in the protocol and a better understanding of this preclinical model. The first experimental group, through substantial capillary leakage, resulted in the onset of compartment syndrome, supported by changes in metabolic markers after 10% of weight gain. This adverse outcome suggests that the whole limb perfusion model is more sensitive to edema formation compared with previous partial limb models, where the weight gain seemed to have less impact on the metabolism of the perfused limb.17,36Notably, the edema onset is irreversible since attempts to decrease perfusion flow rates in group 1 were unsuccessful in stabilizing the weight. Therefore, the 10% “breaking point” was considered a threshold not to be reached in subsequent experiments, especially considering Meyer et al’s41demonstration that weight gain is the earliest marker of VCA perfusion failure. In contrast, in group 2, the higher oncotic pressure of the perfusate participated in fighting the edema, resulting in an initial weight decrease and a final weight gain below 10%. Our study also suggests that a stable low flow may achieve better graft preservation, probably due to a smooth initial vascular dilation. Trying to maintain a stable pressure, especially during the recovery phase, could pave the way for pronounced capillary leakage. As our experiments were performed at 20 °C, the metabolic needs were decreased. Therefore, reaching full capillary capacity may not be required to provide sufficient metabolic support to the limb. A perfusion flow rate that is only high enough to allow for venous outflow may be sufficient on a limb devoid of sympathetic innervation and vascular tonus regulation. This must be contextualized by the strong correlation observed between flow rate and oxygen consumption in group 1, highlighting the graft’s dependence on the imposed flow rate for oxygen uptake (which was not the case for the other metabolic parameters). The optimal balance between oxygen delivery and the risk of microvascular damage from excessive flow must be carefully fine-tuned, which we aimed to achieve in the optimized group. In this group, although statistical significance was not reached, the trend showed a good alignment between flow rate and oxygen consumption. The metabolic and dynamic profiles and histological analysis suggest that, even at a stable lower flow rate, the graft received nearly adequate oxygen without causing significant vascular damage. However, we observed intragraft variability in capillary and muscle fiber integrity, suggesting that further refinements in oxygen delivery may be necessary. This finding highlights that, despite the limb appearing fully perfused from a macrovascular perspective, capillary and muscle fiber integrity can still vary. Additionally, the greater variability in tissue integrity in the first group, observed via TEM, indicates that this effect is particularly pronounced in limbs with poorer preservation, suggesting that certain areas of the graft may be more susceptible to early damage. It cannot be ruled out, as suggested by observations in group 1, that after reperfusion, injury may selectively occur in specific areas of the optimized group 2 limbs. It is important to acknowledge that the constraints of the NHP model dictated the simultaneous modification of several parameters to optimize the protocol (perfusate oncotic pressure and exchange, flow rate), which represents a potential confounding factor.

Since VCAs are functional transplants, motor function recovery is a critical objective and remains poorly explored.42Therefore, it seemed paramount to assess muscular contractility following prolonged preservation. If normothermic perfusion has been proven to maintain muscle contraction after 76 min of warm ischemia,43the present SNMP protocol demonstrated for the first time the restoration of muscle contraction that was lost after a prolonged initial warm ischemic period. One hypothesis is that SNMP subphysiological temperatures cause a decrease in metabolic requirements of the skeletal muscle tissue, allowing for ex vivo contraction despite prolonged preservation.23However, muscle contraction was only observed after an extended period of SNMP. A progressive restoration of the ionic and pH balance, along with toxic metabolic clearance, is probably in play. Contrary to the concept of minimizing preservation duration, this suggests the need for a minimal perfusion time to achieve reconditioning after ischemia and highlights this technique’s potential role in limb replantation and allotransplantation. Cypel et al44already provided strong evidence of the restoration potential held by ex vivo perfusion in the human lung model. It is still to be determined if further extension of perfusion durations can help recover stronger muscle contractility or may be detrimental and what would be the ideal perfusion protocol.

The forearm model also offers several advantages over previous experimental models. Due to its anatomical integrity and the absence of electrocautery during procurement, vascular equilibrium, including lymphatic drainage, is preserved. Moreover, the model contains minimal amounts of devascularized or damaged muscle, thus avoiding perfusion leaks. However, several limitations to our study must be noted, starting with the absence of normothermic reperfusion or replantation to study ischemia-reperfusion injuries. This limitation is inherent to the forearm model, as replantation may not be ethical to perform and MP using NHP blood is complex to implement. A replantable partial face transplant model is currently being investigated by our group, but its perfusion characteristics significantly differ from the forearm model, which makes the latter instrumental for bridging the translational gap between animal studies and clinical applications. Also, while the perfusate pH was aimed at a physiological range before starting the perfusion, the gas exchange process using a carbogen mixture accounted for a decrease of around 0.3 points, which was only partially anticipated. This may have been detrimental to tissue preservation and muscle contraction recovery. Also, one limitation of this study is the potential subjectivity in histological scoring, as assessments were performed manually by 2 independent investigators. Although efforts were made to minimize bias, future studies would benefit from the use of imaging software to enable more objective and quantitative analysis. Finally, although the difference in perfusate exchange between both groups may represent a confounding factor, it has been reported that lactate accumulation does not seem to affect muscle contraction.43Metabolite and ion concentrations appear to be more indicative of the perfusion quality, and ion concentrations remained within an acceptable range in both groups.

Overall, developing a clinically relevant and realistic model seemed crucial, leading us to study NHP forearms. Although the NHP hand transplantation model has been described, the most reliable and widely used NHP VCA model remains the heterotypic partial face transplant. Even if its clinical relevance seems lower, with the forearm model remaining a critical bridge to clinical applications, further study in our laboratory is studying similar protocols in a partial face model. High ethical standards and cost, coupled with complex regulatory compliance, represent limitations in conducting NHP transplant experiments. Despite these obstacles, our group has developed expertise in the past decade with over 30 VCA procedures performed and, recently, very promising results in tolerance induction. Therefore, we believe it is crucial to continue the efforts with this model as it represents a vital step toward human clinical trials. Although our study has shed light on the potential of SNMP in VCA preservation, several challenges will require further investigation. Future studies should focus on simulating replantation or reperfusion scenarios to assess functional outcomes and long-term graft viability. Addressing the limitations of our experimental model will be crucial for translating these findings into clinical practice. This study provides valuable data, building a first step toward clinical VCA transplantation following extended preservation. MP reconditioning may also provide an opportunity to extend VCA donation after circulatory death.

This study demonstrates the feasibility and potential benefits of SNMP in preserving NHP forearms for up to 24 h, with encouraging outcomes observed in terms of metabolic parameters, tissue integrity, and muscle contractility. Through optimization of the perfusion protocol, near-optimal preservation was achieved, maintaining metabolic equilibrium, minimizing ischemic injuries, and preserving tissue microstructure and vascular integrity. Importantly, our findings suggest that extending the perfusion duration beyond conventional limits may facilitate the recovery of muscle contractility after a warm ischemia period, challenging the notion of minimizing preservation time before transplantation. Finally, the development of this new clinically relevant model provides a valuable platform for future research.

Electron microscopy was performed in the Microscopy Core of the Program in Membrane Biology, which is partially supported by an Inflammatory Bowel Disease Grant DK043351 and a Boston Area Diabetes and Endocrinology Research Center (BADERC) AwardDK135043. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the Knight Surgery Research Laboratory for this study and support by the Department of Defense through the U.S. Army Medical Research Acquisition Activity (W81XWH-17-1-0440 and W81XWH2210957).