Achilles tendon rupture is a frequently addressed subject in foot and ankle research. A bibliometric analysis of the existing literature may provide valuable insights for surgeons and others involved in the diagnosis, treatment, and research of Achilles tendon ruptures. The purpose of this study was to identify and analyze the most-cited research articles regarding Achilles tendon rupture.

Using the Web of Science Database,over 1500 publications were identified. The search was refined to include only original articles, resulting in the inclusion of 1,341 articles. Co-authorship between authors was analyzed using a readily available online citation manager software. The 50 most-cited articles were exported into Microsoft Excel for analysis of publication year, journal, authors, and institution of publication.

Of the 1,341 articles published between 1948 and 2023, a notable concentration appeared in 2021 and 2022, with 117 and 113 publications, respectively. The 50 most-cited articles were published between 1974 and 2017, and were cited an average of 166 times, ranging from 79 to 672 citations. The American Journal of Sports Medicine was the most prolific journal with 10 of the top 50 most-cited articles.

The substantial volume of research on Achilles tendon rupture can make it challenging for surgeons and other stakeholders to navigate the relevant literature. Bibliometric analyses such as this provide a structured overview and help identify the most significant contributions in the field.

The Achilles tendon was first described as a distinct anatomical structure in 1693 by the anatomist Philip Verheyen. Prior to this, it had been referred to as the ‘tendo magnus’ or, more modestly, the ‘chorda Hippocratis,’ a term attributed to Hippocrates [1]. Irrespective of its nomenclature, the first described Achilles tendon rupture was documented in 1575 by Ambroise Paré [2]. Since its first description, the debilitating nature of this injury has remained self-evident. As a result, Achilles tendon rupture and its management have become some of the most extensively studied topics in the foot and ankle literature.

Presently, a database search for “Achilles rupture” yields over 4,000 results, with results ranging from the years 1852 to 2023. This number appears staggering, and all rationale would indicate that this mounting body of research will continue to grow, in the same exponential pattern demonstrated by scientific literature as a whole [3]. To help navigate this expanding body of research, bibliometric analyses have been widely employed across various fields of medicine [4-6]. Bibliometrics is the application of mathematical methods to evaluate published documents [7]. This is commonly used to determine the most influential articles available in a particular field of study. Such application has become commonplace in foot and ankle surgery, with analyses of the most cited articles in hallux rigidus, hallux valgus, ankle arthroplasty, and arthroscopy [8-12]. To date, there exists no such analysis of Achilles tendon rupture and its management.

As the body of research surrounding Achilles tendon rupture and management expands, challenges in navigating this landscape of literature will arise. An analysis of the most highly cited articles in Achilles tendon research may offer valuable insights for surgeons, trainees, and other interested professionals. This would also provide guidance as to the most influential papers within the topic of Achilles tendon rupture. The purpose of this study was to identify and analyze the most cited and influential research articles regarding Achilles tendon rupture. The abstract for this manuscript was previously presented at the Annual AOFAS meeting in 2024.

The Web of Science Database was queried with the search terms Achilles Tendon Rupture OR Achilles Tendon Tear OR Achilles Tendon Surgery OR Achilles Tendon Repair OR Achilles Tendon Reconstruction. This initially identified over 1500 publications. The search was then refined to include only original articles. This resulted in a total of 1,341 articles included in the final analysis (Figure1).

The identified articles were then sorted by citation number within the Web of Science Database, and the top 50 most-cited articles were exported into Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA) for complete analysis of publication year, journal, authors, impact factor, etc.

A total of 1341 original articles were identified and included in the final analysis, which were published between 1948 and 2023. The number of articles published per year is shown in Figure1. There was a general trend of increasing publication over time, with the highest number of articles published in 2020, 2021, and 2022, totaling 88, 117, and 113 articles, respectively. Meanwhile, 130 articles were published in the 42 years prior to 1990, and 104 articles were published from 1990-1999.

The 50 most-cited articles are shown in Table1. All 50 articles were published between 1974 and 2017, and were cited an average of 166 ± 111 times, ranging from 79 to 672 total citations. The study by Young et al., published in the Journal of Orthopaedic Research in 1998, was the most-cited article overall with 672 citations [13]. This article was also the most-cited publication in the past 10 years, with 64 citations since 2013. The top 10 most-cited articles since 2013 are shown in Table2.

Co-authorship between individual authors was analyzed using VOSviewer (Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands), a freely available citation mapping software (Figure2). Figure2provides a map of co-authorship within the 50 most-cited articles analyzed. Analysis indicated that Silbernagel KG, Karlson J, Ackerman P, and Maffulli N were the authors with the most significant contributions to this research on Achilles tendon rupture. Leppilahti J, Nilsson-Helander K, and Silbernagel K were the most prolific primary authors, with 2 publications each.

The research represented in the top 50 publications originated in 16 different countries and was published by 22 unique medical journals from 6 different countries (Tables1,2). The average impact factor of the journals represented in this body of research was 8 ± 5.7 and ranged from 1.5 to 43.2 (Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports, and Archives of Internal Medicine, respectively).

Twenty-two different journals in six unique countries were included, with The American Journal of Sports Medicine contributing the most (11/50). Interestingly, this is different than other foot and ankle bibliometric analyses, which have often shown either the Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery (JBJS) or the Foot and Ankle International (FAI) as the leading journals [9-14]. In this study, six articles were published by JBJS (the second highest contributor), while 3 appeared in FAI. The vast majority of articles were published in the United States (35/50). This was closely followed by Sweden with 10 and Denmark with six. In total, there were contributions from researchers based in 16 unique countries on 5 of the 7 world continents (excluding only Africa and Antarctica). Other bibliometric analyses in the foot and ankle literature have also found the United States to be the most productive country, with similar rates of papers publishedas reported in this study [9-12]. The broad spread of the location of origin of the research included in this study also highlights the interest in this condition worldwide and the increasingly broad landscape of foot and ankle research generally.

The distribution of publishing year of our original search, which included over 1300 publications, can be seen in Figure1. Although research activity on this topic has steadily increased over the years, newer articles were not necessarily cited more frequently. On the contrary, all of the top 50 most-cited articles were published between 1974 and 2017. Of these, only four have been published in the past ten years. Although older articles have had more time to accumulate citations, this does not necessarily imply that earlier literature is more significant than newer research. To better capture recent research trends, we also analyzed the most-cited articles from the past 10 years (Table2). While the results were slightly different, the most-cited papers tended to be the most cited in the past 10 years as well. There continues to be an upward trend in research regarding Achilles rupture, which will likely culminate in an increasing number of citations for these more recent publications.

The most-cited publication of this study was the article by Young et al., which was published in 1998 in the Journal of Orthopaedic Research and cited 672 times overall [13]. Young et al. assessed the biomechanics of mesenchymal stem cell-seeded implants versus suture material. This article attempts to help guide the operative management of Achilles Rupture. Its results demonstrated that the use of mesenchymal stem cells in the repair of a tendon defect is biomechanically improved when compared to repair with suture alone. This article as helped guide treatment and further research of the use of biologics in the repair of Achilles Tendon ruptures, and is the most-cited article overall and in the past 10 years.

The use of biologics and, more broadly, the optimal operative management in the surgical treatment of Achilles Tendon rupture is an important topic of research. The third most-cited article, written by SF Badylak et al., investigated the use of xenogeneic biomaterial in dogs [15]. Their study indicated that the use of xenogeneic biomaterial resulted in stronger tendons when compared with ruptures treated with traditional suture fixation and ruptures treated non-operatively. This study was cited 381 times. In addition to the two articles by Young et al. and Badylak et al., six other studies in this analysis investigated topics broadly encompassing the use of biologics and/or grafts in the surgical treatment of Achilles rupture, while three other articles investigated differences between traditional open and percutaneous surgical management of Achilles rupture.

Perhaps the most significant topic in the literature on Achilles tendon rupture is the debate between non-operative versus operative management. The second most-cited article overall, Cetti et al., and the second most-cited article since 2013, Soroceanu et al., investigated this subject [16,17]. Ten articles in the top 50 most-cited, including four articles in the top ten, investigated the general topic of operative vs. non-operative treatment in Achilles tendon rupture.

There were several limitations of our study. The first being that only one database was used to obtain the articles used in this study. This may limit the available literature, as there is a small possibility that some articles are not included in the database. This study aimed to identify the most-cited articles; however, the number of citations does not necessarily correlate with the quality of those citations. While this study can serve as an initial reference for those researching Achilles tendon ruptures and management, future studies would be beneficial to investigate the significance of these landmark studies.

The abundance of literature on Achilles tendon rupture and its management has resulted in a substantial body of available research. The purpose of this article was to perform a bibliometric analysis of the current literature to define the top 50 most-cited articles on this topic. The use of biologics is a well-established and extensively studied aspect of Achilles tendon rupture management. Two of the top three most cited articles on Achilles rupture focus on the augmentation of Achilles tendon repair using biologics. Further, six studies within the top fifty discuss the topic more broadly.

The United States continues to be the most productive country contributing to this topic. Overall, there were contributions from authors based in 16 countries. There were 22 journals in six countries included in our review, with the most prevalent being The American Journal of Sports Medicine, followed by The Bone and Joint Surgery and Foot & Ankle International. This is in contrast to previous bibliometric studies on the topic. The debate of non-operative versus operative management of Achilles rupture remains highly contested. Ten articles in the top 50 most-cited, including four articles in the top ten, investigated the general topic of operative vs. non-operative treatment in Achilles tendon rupture. Our study will help surgeons, students, and other stakeholders navigate the relevant literature and identify significant contributions in the field of Achilles tendon rupture.