Given the advent of the internet and its growing resources as well as the availability of smart mobile phones among the younger generation, Problematic Internet Use (PIU) has become a globally identified contemporary issue of public health concern. This study aimed to determine the prevalence, self-reported effects, and associated factors of problematic internet use among in-school adolescents in Calabar Municipality, Nigeria.

The findings in this study revealed a 62.6% prevalence of PIU. Chi-square tests showed significant associations between PIU and female gender, caregiver’s low education, living with siblings, parental unawareness, loneliness, idleness, isolation, low self-esteem, poor physical relationships (p≤ 0.027). Multivariate analysis found lower odds of PIU among adolescents aged 15–19 (aOR = 0.236,p< 0.001), females (aOR = 0.557,p= 0.009), and those with primary-educated caregivers (aOR = 0.273,p= 0.008).

A multi-disciplinary approach is essential to regulate adolescent internet use in Nigeria, requiring coordinated efforts across individual, community, institutional, and policy levels, alongside promoting digital literacy and responsible online behaviour.

By considering a wide range of factors associated with PIU, including individual, interpersonal, and contextual elements, this study provides a holistic understanding of the issue, which can inform both research and practice. The collection of empirical data strengthens the credibility and validity of the findings, enhancing the relevance of the study.

However, a major limitation encompasses the fact that assessing PIU and associated factors often relies on self-reported measures, which may be subject to response biases. Also, because this is a cross-sectional design, we are limited in establishing causal relationships between variables.

The emergence of the internet as a global network has made communication, socialization, entertainment, and the acquisition of new information by people across the world possible, making it a part of everyday life [1]. Internet connection is no longer a luxury exclusively for the wealthy but a necessity for all irrespective of age, race, or social class. The Internet can be accessed using internet-enabled mobile phones, laptops, and other handheld devices [2]. According to UNICEF [3] about 33% of young persons aged 25 years and below globally, have access to the internet from home. Only 5% of youths and children in West and Central Africa have access to internet connection at home but there is a tremendous increase in mobile connection [3,4]. As a result of the changes adolescents experience at this stage, their quest for new knowledge makes them more attracted to technology [5]. Many adolescents with internet access, use the internet to escape the realities of life [1]. Social media platforms such as Facebook, WhatsApp, YouTube, X (formerly known as Twitter), TikTok, Instagram, and online games are most frequently used by young people [1]. For many internet users, the World Wide Web presents numerous opportunities that enhance access to job and training information, entertainment, and educational materials like e-books and e-journals [4]. However, the prolonged and excessive use of the internet can lead to internet addiction, which could be problematic because of the negative outcomes it has on its users [2,6].

Lai and Kwan [7] defined Problematic Internet Use (PIU) as the excessive use of the internet that causes disturbances or harm to users. People who develop PIU tend to experience poor impulse control and an inability to stop the use of the internet services they patronize [4]. According to a Problematic and Risky Internet Use Screening Scale (PRIUSS) by Jelenchick [8], PIU has three components namely; Social/functional impairment which includes difficulty in concentrating, and associating with the immediate environment, recalling or making decisions; risky/impulsive use which could result in aggressiveness, reckless behaviour, hasty decision making; and emotional impairment; which can result to inability to build and sustain healthy relationships with family, friends, peers, and teachers. According to Statista [9] Nigeria is the largest internet user in Africa, with about 109 million of its total population having access to internet connection. The majority of Nigerian youths, access the internet through their mobile phones. A survey by Nigeria Demographic Health Survey, 15.6% of adolescents aged 15–19 years use the internet, with most of them living in urban areas [10].

PIU is closely linked with some psychosocial factors like loneliness, low self-esteem, depression, signs of antisocial behaviours, and shyness [11]. Problematic internet users develop physical and mental symptoms, with the manifestation of physical symptoms like insomnia, eye strain, and daytime sleepiness [12]. Despite the numerous advantages associated with using the internet, unlimited and unrestricted access to the internet by adolescents predisposes them to PIU. A study [13] showed that family restrictions, poor communication with parents and loved ones, and social status are closely associated with PIU. There is a dearth of information on PIU among young adults in Cross River state given the advent of the internet and its constantly growing resources as well as the growing availability of smart mobile phones. Therefore, this study aimed to determine the prevalence of PIU, self-reported effects, and its associated factors among in-school adolescents in Calabar Municipality.

H01;There is no statistically significant association between associated factors of PIU and the prevalence of PIU among in-school adolescents in Calabar Municipality.

This study adopted a cross-sectional study design using a quantitative method of data collection. A cross-sectional design was used because it allowed for a quick and cost-effective assessment of the prevalence of PIU, self-reported effects, and its associated factors among in-school adolescents.

The study population included adolescents living in selected streets within the age range of 10–19 years in Calabar Municipality, Cross River State, Nigeria.

A probability sampling method was employed to select secondary school students residing in Calabar Municipality. Data collection was conducted at the respondents’ residences, as the study took place during the summer holidays, spanning from July to September. A multi-stage sampling technique was utilized in the selection of both streets and respondents.

Stage 1: Selection of wards: There are ten wards in Calabar Municipality LGA and a simple random sampling was used to select five wards by balloting.

Stage 2: Selection of streets: Six streets were selected from each of the five wards using a simple random sampling method making 30 streets.

Stage 3: Selection of households: In each of the streets selected, systematic random sampling was used to select fourteen (14) households (422/30 = 14.1). This was done using the fixed interval and the random starting point. The number of households in each street was identified. At the end of the identification of households, the interval was determined by dividing the total number of households in each street by the desired households (14) to be sampled per street.

Stage 4: Selection of respondents: In each of the selected streets 14 respondents (422/30 = 14.1) were selected using purposive sampling from all the selected streets and the other 2 respondents left to complete the sample size were picked at random from any household. Since fourteen (14) households were selected using systematic random sampling from each street, 1 respondent (14/14 = 1) was selected from each household. In situations where a selected household did not have an eligible respondent (in-school adolescent), the research team proceeded to the next adjacent household until a suitable participant was identified.

Section A consisted of a semi-structured questionnaire to collect relevant socio-demographic characteristics of the respondents. Section B consisted of the Problematic and Risky Internet Use Screening Scale (PRIUSS) questionnaire adopted from Jelenchick, Eickhoff [8] which was used for identifying the prevalence of PIU in the study location. Jelenchick, Eickhoff [8] validated 18-item PRIUSS scale with three subscales: (1) Social Impairment (items 1–6), which evaluates the impact of internet usage on both offline and online social interactions; which evaluates the impact of internet use on both offline and online social interactions; (2) Emotional Impairment (items 7–11), which evaluates degree of emotional attachment to Internet use, and (3) Risky/Impulsive Internet Use (items 12–18), which evaluates salient problematic behaviors regarding Internet use.

Section C consisted of a questionnaire adapted [5] to assess the self-reported effects of PIU among in-school adolescents.

Section D was also a questionnaire adapted [5] to determine the Pattern of Internet Use among adolescents. The questionnaire assessed the amount of time spent on the internet and the purpose of usage.

Section E assessed the associated factors that contribute to PIU among in-school adolescents.

Face and content validity were established through expert review within the Department of Public Health, University of Calabar, Nigeria. The questionnaire was pre-tested among 42 in-school adolescents in Calabar South Local Government Area of Cross River state. The essence of Calabar South Local Government Area is that Calabar South shares a border with Calabar Municipality. The local government area has some similarities in characteristics to the study area. The effectiveness of the instruments in collecting appropriate data relevant to the objectives was determined as well as the level of comprehension of the questions. The pre-testing exercise was used to confirm the relevance of the questions and variables under measurement, to remove ambiguity and to evaluate the effectiveness of the questionnaire in collecting relevant data aligned with the study objectives and also assess the level of comprehension of the questions among the target population. Findings and feedback from the pre-test exercise were used to identify and address any ambiguities or issues with the questionnaire.

The reliability coefficient of the questionnaire was determined from the pre-test using the Cronbach-alpha correlation coefficients, which yielded a value of 0.7, indicating high internal consistency and reliability.

Data were collected with the assistance of three (3) trained research assistants using an interviewer-administered questionnaire. The questionnaire, developed in English and consisting of semi-structured questions, was administered in soft copy using the Open Data Kit (ODK) data collection tool on mobile devices. The research assistants received training on the proper use of the ODK tool to ensure consistency and accuracy in data collection.

Questionnaires on completion were checked manually to ensure there was no missing information. All relevant data was recorded, cleaned and analyzed using Microsoft Excel. Data was conveyed to Statistical Product and Service Solutions (SPSS) Version 23 for further analysis. This data gotten was scrutinized using the PRIUSS scoring scale. All responses in the PRIUSS were separated between ‘never’ ‘rarely’ ‘sometimes’ ‘often’ and ‘very often’ as authenticated by [8]. This entails that all responses between ‘never’ ‘rarely’ ‘sometimes’ ‘often’ and ‘very often’ were classified as 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4 respectively. A cut-off of 25 for the overall scale score was used for identifying those at risk for PIU. Socio-demographic attributes of the respondents and pattern of internet use were analyzed using descriptive statistics (frequencies and percentages). Descriptive statistics also were used to determine the general prevalence of PIU and to evaluate the self-reported effects, pattern of use and associated factors of PIU. Pearson’s Chi-Square of independence was used to test bi-variate associations in the outcomes across Socio-demographic features. The significance threshold was set at α = 0.05. Multivariate logistic regression models were applied to measure the association between the prevalence of PIU and other predictor variables. Results were presented as adjusted odd ratios (AORs) and 95% confidence interval (CI). P-values less than 0.05 were considered significant.

Table1below, shows the socio-demographic characteristics of respondents. The results revealed that less than three-quarters (61.2%) of the respondents were between the ages of 15 to 19 years, while about (38.8%) of the respondents were between the ages of 10 to 14 years. Half of the respondents (50.2%) were males while about (49.8%) were females. Over half (53.6%) of the respondents lived with their parents. Most of the respondents (61.6%) caregivers had attained tertiary education. Half of the respondents (50.5%) indicated that their caregivers were self-employed. Regarding the family type respondents currently live with, more than three-quarters (84.6%) indicated that they lived with a nuclear family. Additionally, most of the respondents (68.2%) reside in households with 0–4 adults.

Self-employed = farming, business ownership, trading, craft, etc.

Figure1illustrates the prevalence of PIU among in-school adolescents and the result showed that there was a 62.6% prevalence of PIU among in-school adolescents in the study area. Generally, there is a high prevalence of PIU among in-school adolescents.

Table2below shows the self-reported effects of PIU among in-school adolescents. Loss of concentration was the most reported effect of internet use among adolescents (78.6%). About 65.1% of the respondents indicated that internet use had led to their poor academic performance. About 28.1% reported that internet use had led to reduced family intimacy. Also, about 33.7% reported that internet use had led to risky sexual behaviours. Additionally, 42.5% indicated that internet use had led to reduced physical activity time. About 42.5% reported that internet use had led to poor socialization with peers.

Multiple responses are allowed and Percentages do not amount to 100%.

*Others = Eye problems due to concentration on the screen.

Table3below shows the pattern of internet use among in-school adolescents and the results indicated that smartphones were the most commonly used devices for internet access. The results also indicated that the most reported place of connection to the internet was at home (90.6%), and about 58.8% of the respondents reported that they connected to the internet for the past week from school. Most respondents (65.7%) connected to the internet for the past week through their phones. The results also indicated that 74.5% of the respondents reported that their parents provided the devices they used to connect to the internet. About (63.7%) of the respondents reported that their friends provided the devices that they used to connect to the internet.

Also, the results indicated that most respondents (77.4%) reported that the reason for going online was because of school assignments while 75.1% indicated that the reason they go on the internet is for communication. Furthermore, 69.8% reported that the reason they go online is for socialization. The results also indicated that most of the respondents (62.1%) reported they had gone online for the past 24 h to listen to and watch music videos. Over one-quarter of the respondents (34.3%) indicated that they had gone online in the past 24 h to watch adult movies (pornography). About (45.5%) of the respondents indicated that they went online for the past 24 h to read magazines or books. The results indicated most of the respondents (90.4%) reported that for the past week, they had used Facebook. About (69.5%) indicated that they had used WhatsApp for the past week. Additionally, about (38.6%) of the respondents indicated that for the past week, they had used Instagram. Less than half (44.5%) indicated that for the past week, they had used Snapchat.

Table4below shows the factors associated with PIU among in-school adolescents. The results indicated that the biggest factor of PIU among in-school adolescents is the fact that more than three-quarters (93.1%) of the respondents reported that their parents or guardians are aware of their internet use. Also, 90.3% indicated that someone had told them before that excessive internet use could be problematic for them. Over a third (77.7%) of the respondents indicated that their parents or guardians frequently remind them to be careful with internet use. The results indicated that most of the reported factor influencing respondent’s internet use (76.5%) is loneliness. About 75.6% indicated boredom to be a factor influencing their internet use. More than half (62.6%) of the respondents indicated that idleness was a factor influencing their internet use. About 34.6% of the respondents indicated stress to be a factor influencing their internet use.

Table5below presents a Chi-square analysis to identify possible associations between respondents’ prevalence of PIU and their socio-demographic characteristics. Results showed that there was a statistically significant association between the presence of PIU and gender (χ2 = 7.513, df = 1,p= 0.006). Phi coefficient statistic showed an effect size of 0.133 (P =0.006) indicating that being female had a small effect on the prevalence of PIU among the respondents in the study area. Additionally, there was a statistically significant association between the presence of PIU and respondents’ caregiver’s level of education (χ2 = 9.985, df = 3,p= 0.019). Cramer’s V statistic showed an effect size of 0.154 (P =0.019) indicating that respondents’ caregivers with no formal education had a small effect on the prevalence of PIU among the respondents in the study area.

There was a statistically significant association between the prevalence of PIU and living with siblings (χ2 = 14.27, df = 4,p= 0.006). Cramer’s V statistic showed an effect size of 0.191 (p< 0.001) indicating that living with siblings had a small effect on the prevalence of PIU among the respondents in the study area.

Table5also presents a Chi-square analysis to identify possible associations between respondents’ prevalence of PIU and associated factors of PIU. Results showed that there was a statistically significant association between the prevalence of PIU and respondents who indicated that their parents or guardians were not aware of their internet use (χ2 = 19.626, df = 1,p< 0.001). Phi coefficient statistic showed an effect size of 0.216 (p< 0.001) indicating that parents’ lack of awareness of their wards’ internet use had a moderate effect on the prevalence of PIU among the respondents in the study area.

Also, there was a statistically significant association between the presence of PIU and indications of lack of monitoring of excessive internet use by other people (χ2 = 16.934, df = 1,p= < 0.001). Phi coefficient statistic showed an effect size of 0.201 (P< 0.001) indicating that having little or no prior information that excessive internet use could be problematic had a moderate effect on the prevalence of PIU among the respondents in the study area. Additionally, there was a statistically significant association between the presence of PIU and loneliness (χ2 = 14.304, df = 1,p< 0.001). Phi coefficient statistic showed an effect size of 0.184 (P< 0.001) indicating that loneliness had a small effect on the prevalence of PIU among the respondents in the study area. We found a statistically significant association between the presence of PIU and boredom (χ2 = 4.882, df = 1,p= 0.027). Phi coefficient statistic showed an effect size of 0.108 (P =0.027) indicating that boredom had a small effect on the prevalence of PIU among the respondents in the study area. Idleness had a statistically significant association with the presence of PIU (χ2 = 13.752, df = 1,p= < 0.001). Phi coefficient statistic showed an effect size of 0.181 (P< 0.001) indicating that idleness had a small effect on the prevalence of PIU among the respondents in the study area. Additionally, there was a statistically significant association between the prevalence of PIU and physical isolation (χ2 = 25.752, df = 1,p< 0.001). Phi coefficient statistic showed an effect size of 0.247 (P< 0.001) indicating that physical isolation had a moderate effect on the PIU among the respondents in the study area. Also, there was a statistically significant association between the presence of PIU and parental internet addiction (χ2 = 4.893, df = 1,p= 0.027). Phi coefficient statistic showed an effect size of 0.108 (P =0.027) indicating that parental internet addiction had a small effect on the PIU among the respondents in the study area.

There was a statistically significant association between the presence of PIU and low self-esteem (χ2 = 25.678, df = 1,p< 0.001). Phi coefficient statistic showed an effect size of 0.247 (P< 0.001) indicating low self-esteem had a moderate effect on the prevalence of PIU among the respondents in the study area. There were also statistically significant associations between the presence of PIU and poor physical relationship (χ2 = 16.560, df = 1,p< 0.001). Phi coefficient statistic showed an effect size of 0.198 (P< 0.001) indicating that poor physical relationships had a small effect on the prevalence of PIU among the respondents in the study area.

Adolescents aged 15–19 years had significantly lower odds of PIU compared to those aged 10–14 years (AOR = 0.236, 95% CI: 0.152–0.366,p= 0.000). Therefore, we infer that being in the 15–19 age group reduces the odds of the outcome by approximately 76.4%, while controlling for sex, who they are living with, caregivers’ education, caregivers’ employment status, family type and household occupants. Similarly, female adolescents were significantly less likely to experience PIU compared to males (AOR = 0.557, 95% CI: 0.359–0.865,p= 0.009) reflecting a 44.3% lower likelihood, while controlling for age, who they are living with, caregivers’ education, caregivers’ employment status, family type and household occupants. With regard to living arrangements, adolescents residing with guardians, grandparents, siblings, or others had increased odds of PIU compared to those living with parents (AORs ranging from 3.575 to 8.861), while controlling for age, sex, caregivers’ education, caregivers’ employment status, family type and household occupants. However, these associations were not statistically significant (p> 0.05), indicating no conclusive evidence of an effect. While controlling for age, sex, who they are living with, caregivers’ employment status, family type and household occupants, caregiver educational attainment showed a significant association only at the primary education level. Compared to caregivers with no formal education, those with primary education were significantly less likely to have adolescents with PIU (AOR = 0.273; 95% CI: 0.105–0.711;p= 0.008), suggesting a 72.7% reduction in odds. Secondary (p= 0.729) and tertiary education levels (p= 0.862) did not show statistically significant associations. Caregiver employment status was not significantly associated with PIU while controlling for age, sex, who they are living with, caregiver educational attainment, family type and household occupants. Neither employment (p= 0.800) nor self-employment (p= 0.971) differed significantly from unemployment in relation to PIU. Adolescents from extended families had higher odds of PIU compared to those from nuclear families (AOR = 1.338) while controlling for age, sex, who they are living with, caregiver educational attainment, caregivers’ employment status and household occupants. However, this association was not statistically significant (p= 0.387), suggesting family type is not a significant predictor of PIU. Similarly, residing in households with 5–10 adults, compared to 0–4 adults, was associated with slightly lower odds of PIU (AOR = 0.838), though this was also not statistically significant (p= 0.529) while controlling for age, sex, who they are living with, caregiver educational attainment, caregivers’ employment status and family type (Table6).

The findings from this study show that there is a high prevalence of PIU among in-school adolescents. This study resonates with a study [15] in Egypt to examine the prevalence of PIU related to Facebook and gaming among adolescents in Egypt. The findings revealed that 65.6% of the adolescents exhibit symptoms of internet addiction, 61.3% have online gaming addictions, and 92.8% have social media addictions, particularly Facebook addictions. The results of this study are in line with a recent review of the prevalence of PIU among in-school adolescents across southwestern Nigeria conducted by Ilesanmi, Afolabi [16], using a structured questionnaire, which included a 20-question internet addiction test, established that out of 440 adolescent respondents who attended high schools during the COVID-19 lockdown 7.7% of the participants displayed signs of PIU before the lockdown. However, during the lockdown period, this number increased significantly to 64.3%.

On the other hand, the results of this study are higher than the results from a study conducted by Gómez, Rial [17] to determine the prevalence of PIU and risky online behaviours among a large group of in-school adolescents. The study included 40,955 participants and aimed to provide updated data on the prevalence of PIU, different types of risky online activities, and rates of internet and social network usage. The results indicated that the overall prevalence of PIU among Spanish teenagers was 16.3%, with higher rates observed among females, older teenagers, intensive internet users, and those lacking parental control. Similarly, the results of this study are higher than the results from a cross-sectional study conducted in China by Wu, Zhang [18] on randomly selected Chinese teenagers, consisting of 10,158 participants which revealed that among the participants, 10.4% exhibited signs of internet addiction, 1,038 (10.2%) showed moderate addiction levels and 21 (0.2%) classified as severely addicted to the internet.

The self-reported effects of PIU identified in this study include poor academic performance, reduced family intimacy, risky sexual behaviours, reduced physical activity time, and poor socialization with peers. This study resonates with a study [19] aimed at examining the prevalence of unwanted online exposure and solicitation of a sexual nature among youths from January 1990 to January 2016, utilizing a search strategy that showed that 1 in 5 young persons are exposed to online sexual content. From the study, it was revealed that exposure to sexual content online, can lead to risky sexual behaviours such as rape, urge for unprotected sex and even masturbation among adolescents. Similarly, the findings are in line with a study by Orzech, Grandner [20] on 254 students which showed that a prolonged use of the internet is associated with reduced sleep time which has physical and mental implications such as fatigue, insomnia, daytime sleepiness, eye strain and even eye health deterioration, have been reported. A study [21] examined the association between adolescent life profiles and smartphone addiction among 1,447 Filipino adolescents. The study showed that 1,440 had nomophobia, a condition associated with the fear of being detached from mobile phone connectivity. This condition can lead to spending a lot of time using the internet, thereby consuming a lot of meaningful time that would have been used for productive academic activities, thus resulting to poor academic performance. Karingada and Sony [22] in recent study, aimed to investigate musculoskeletal disorders (MSD) related to learning during the COVID-19 pandemic lockdown in India. The results from this study showed that 85% of respondents reported having pains in the head, eyes and neck. Interestingly, 58% of the respondents reportedly had MSD on their right shoulder and 56% had MSD in their right-hand fingers.

The study revealed that over three-quarters of the respondents started using the Internet between the ages of 6 to 12 years. Furthermore, most of the respondents indicated that they currently own an internet-enabled device of their own. Additionally, most of the respondents have access to the device more than three times weekly. More than three-quarters indicated that they have a computer laboratory in their school, with most reporting that there are rules to student’s use of the computer in their school. More than one-quarter of the respondents indicated that they spend more than four hours on the Internet in the school during the weekdays. Also, most of the respondents indicated that they spent more than four hours averagely on the Internet during the weekdays for the past two weeks. Also, more than half of the respondents indicated that they spent more than four hours on the Internet during weekends for the past week. This study is in line with a study [23] on internet use patterns among 1,086 university engineering students in India. The study showed that males who accessed the internet multiple times a day, spent about 3 h per day on the internet and experienced psychological distress [23].

According to a study on 584 students in Egypt by Khalil, Kamal [15] 61.3% used the internet for online gaming, and 92.8% used it for social media activities especially Facebook which predisposes them to PIU [15]. Anthony, Zhu [24] in a study on the relationship of interactive technology use for entertainment and school performance and engagement in China, showed that almost 40% of the 9,949 respondents used the internet for entertainment and non-schoolwork-related activities during weekends.

The result of this study indicates that most of the reported factors influencing respondent’s internet use include loneliness, boredom idleness and stress. This study is in line with a study by Vigna-Taglianti, Brambilla [25] aimed at identifying factors associated with PIU underlining gender differences among high school students. The study found that feelings of loneliness, frequency and duration of internet use, and visiting pornographic websites were associated with the risk of PIU in both genders. Similarly, a recent survey by Hassan, Alam [26] on associated factors of internet addiction among young adults in Bangladesh, revealed that spending time online daily, social status, smoking habits, broken family relationships and staying apart from loved ones were significantly associated with PIU.

The results of this study revealed that parental internet addiction has an association with PIU among adolescents. This resonates with the results of a study by Yankouskaya, Ali [27] on the emerging impact of parental internet addiction on adolescent internet use which identified parental internet addiction as a contributing factor to PIU among adolescents. The study demonstrated that children often model their internet use after their parents, thereby increasing the likelihood of developing similar addictive behaviours. A similar study by Alshakhsi, Chemnad [28] showed that parental PIU predicts adolescent PIU, highlighting the influence of intergenerational digital behaviour patterns.

The high prevalence of PIU and its associated emotional, behavioural, and physical effects on adolescent health as revealed in this study points to PIU as an emerging public health concern. PIU during adolescence can impair academic achievement, strain family and peer relationships, and lead to mental health issues such as anxiety, depression, and social withdrawal [29]. Additionally, the association with risky sexual behaviour and reduced physical activity underscores the risk of sexually transmitted infections, unwanted pregnancies, obesity, and poor physical well-being.

This study focuses on the prevalence, self-reported effects and associated factors of PIU among in-school adolescents in Calabar Municipality, Cross River State Nigeria. The data show that the high prevalence of PIU among the study population may be attributed to a variety of socio-demographic as well as contributive associated factors. Adolescents as future leaders, have to be protected from the adverse effects associated with excessive use of the internet. Based on the findings from this study, individuals should be encouraged to set clear boundaries for screen time by creating a schedule that includes offline activities and using apps or tools to monitor and limit online activities. Also, individuals should seek support from friends, family, or a mental health professional.

At the community level, there should be a promotion of digital literacy and responsible online behaviour through educational programs. Establishing support groups or counselling services, and encouraging open communication about the potential risks of excessive internet use can also be facilitated at this level. Health institutions should provide access to counselling or mental health support for individuals struggling with internet-related issues and staff should be trained to recognize signs of PIU and provide adequate support. Lastly, National policies should support research to better understand the impact of PIU and use data to inform policies and interventions. Also, establishing and promoting treatment programs for individuals with internet addiction, including counselling and therapy options is recommended.