To characterize the serum protein profiles of osteoarthritis model mice, particularly mice with early-stage osteoarthritis, using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

Serum and knee samples were collected from 5 control mice and 15 osteoarthritis model mice that underwent destabilization of the medial meniscus (DMM). Osteoarthritic knee samples were collected 4, 8, and 12 weeks after DMM. Knee osteoarthritis severity was scored using the Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OARSI) scoring system. All serum samples were analyzed via LC-MS/MS after removing highly abundant proteins using a ProteoMiner kit (Bio-Rad).

The average OARSI scores of the medial tibial plateau and medial femoral condyle at 8 weeks after DMM (3.40 ± 1.02 points,P= 0.03; 2.60 ± 1.71 points,P= 0.03) and 12 weeks after DMM (8.30 ± 3.12 points,P= 0.03; 4.80 ± 0.75 points,P= 0.03) were significantly higher than the corresponding values in the control group. Compared to those in the control model, 15, 35, and 56 proteins showed different expression levels at 4, 8, and 12 weeks after DMM, respectively. Differentially expressed proteins at 4 weeks after DMM included adenylate kinase, type IV intermediate filament protein, nestin, and insulin-like growth factor-binding proteins. The pathways activated at 4 weeks after DMM differed from those activated at 8 and 12 weeks after DMM.

Protein expression and activation pathways in the osteoarthritis model differed from those in the control model. Several proteins differentially expressed at 4 weeks postoperatively may be involved in the pathogenesis of osteoarthritis and serve as potential biomarkers of early-stage osteoarthritis.

New criteria for detecting EKOA without assessment of radiographic abnormalities were recently proposed at the first international EKOA workshop.5These criteria will allow the identification of patients with mild knee symptoms who have identical risk factors as those with definitive KOA. An increasing number of studies have evaluated the features of EKOA on the basis of these new criteria.6,7EKOA prevalence was estimated to be 9.5% and 15.0% in males and females, respectively, with the highest prevalence observed in middle-aged females in the Japanese population.8Nevertheless, the pathology of EKOA remains unclear, and biomarkers that reflect the progression of EKOA are yet to be established.

To date, the identified KOA biomarkers include cartilage oligomeric matrix protein and type II collagen marker.9These biomarkers exhibit changes that reflect the progression of KOA; however, no single clinically applicable biomarker characteristic of EKOA has been identified. More recently, different omics strategies have been employed to identify biomarkers and improve prognosis and diagnosis.10In particular, proteomics strategies are being increasingly applied to osteoarthritis (OA) research and for the identification of OA biomarkers.11In contrast to metabolomics and genomics, proteomics can reflect the patient’s specific condition and allows more stable analyses than evaluations based on metabolites.12Proteomics using liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) can identify and quantify thousands of proteins in a single analysis using a relatively small sample amount, making it an ideal approach for high-throughput analysis of a sample with a high dynamic range, such as serum.13,14In the current study, we aimed to identify serum biomarkers for diagnosing EKOA using LC-MS/MS with EKOA model mice. We hypothesized that the detected serum proteins would differ between the early and later stages of KOA.

Twenty male C57BL/6J mice were purchased from Clea Japan (Tokyo, Japan). The mice were maintained in temperature- and humidity-controlled rooms under a 12-h light-dark cycle (light from 8:00 to 20:00). All mouse experiments were approved by the Committee for the Ethics of Animal Experimentation of Hirosaki University and were conducted in accordance with the Principles of Laboratory Animal Care (National Institutes of Health, publication no. 85-23, revised 1985) and the Guidelines for Animal Experimentation of Hirosaki University. All mice were acclimatized to the laboratory environment for 2 weeks before the experiments. The mice were randomly divided into an OA group (n= 15) and a control group (n= 5). At 8 weeks of age, mice in the OA group underwent surgery to destabilize the medial meniscus (DMM).15Briefly, the mice were administered anesthesia with 2.5% isoflurane. After a 3-mm longitudinal incision over the distal patella to the proximal tibial plateau of the right leg, the joint capsule immediately medial to the patellar tendon was incised using a #15 blade. The medial meniscus was then destabilized by sectioning the medial meniscotibial ligament using a #11 blade. The skin was closed using continuous 8-0 tapered Vicryl sutures. The mice exhibited excellent mobility within 2 h after surgery. The control group did not undergo any surgery.

The control mice were euthanized at 8 weeks of age for collection of serum and right knee samples. In contrast, 5 OA model mice each were euthanized at 4, 8, and 12 weeks after DMM. Serum protein composition may show post-traumatic changes immediately after DMM or sham surgery; therefore, this study did not evaluate mouse models at 0 weeks after DMM surgery. To collect serum samples under anesthesia with 2.5% isoflurane, 1,000 μL heart blood was obtained in a serum tube microtainer. Afterward, the tubes were gently inverted 6 times to activate clotting factors. After allowing 20 minutes to activate clotting factors, the serum samples were centrifuged at 1,200 ×gat 4°C for 10 minutes to remove cells and clotting factors. The serum was stored at −80°C until processing. After collection of the right knee joint, each mouse was euthanized by cervical dislocation.

The knee joints were fixed in paraformaldehyde after excising the attached muscle, decalcified in ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) after washing with water, and dehydrated in a graded alcohol series. Finally, the specimens were embedded in paraffin and cut sagittally into serial sections. Each slide was stained with hematoxylin and eosin, safranin-O, and fast green for general histological evaluation.16KOA severity at the medial tibial plateau (MTP), medial femoral condyle (MFC), lateral tibial plateau, and lateral femoral condyle was evaluated using the Osteoarthritis Research Society International (OARSI) scoring system.17The OARSI scores are presented as mean ± standard deviation.

A ProteoMiner kit (Bio-Rad) was used to enrich the minor component proteins in serum samples. In this method, serum proteins bind to beads bearing randomly assembled peptide ligands, removing the excess major proteins and enriching the minor protein fraction. A total of 100 µL of mouse serum was added to the beads equilibrated with phosphate-buffered saline and incubated at room temperature for 2 h with inverted mixing. The beads were washed 3 times with 40 µL of phosphate-buffered saline. The supernatant was removed by centrifugation at 1,000 ×gfor 1 minute, and 8 µL of eluent (8 M urea, 2% CHAPS) was added to the beads and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes. The supernatant was collected via centrifugation. The elution procedure was repeated twice, and the eluates were pooled. The pooled eluate was added to 200 µL of acetone and maintained at −20°C for 2 h, following centrifugation at 15,000 ×gfor 10 minutes to remove the supernatant.

Label-free proteomics analyses of minor protein fractions in serum were performed using a NanoLC Eksigent 400 system coupled to a Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Briefly, acetone-precipitated proteins were denatured with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 8 M urea and reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol. After incubation at 95°C for 15 minutes, iodoacetamide was added to achieve a final concentration of 40 mM to alkylate the free cysteines, followed by incubation for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark. After 8-fold dilution with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1 µg of trypsin was added and incubated at 37°C for 24 h. Peptides were desalted and purified using ZipTip C18 (Merck Millipore). The tryptic peptides were analyzed using a mass spectrometer operated in information-dependent acquisition mode. The acquired spectra were searched against the UniProt database using a Paragon algorithm embedded in the ProteinPilot 5.0.1 software program (AB Sciex). Identification was considered positive when the identified proteins and peptides reached a 1% local false discovery rate. Each sample was assayed in a data-independent acquisition mode, and the proteins were quantified using information-dependent acquisition data as a library.

The average OARSI scores were analyzed using the Steel–Dwass test. Statistical significance was set atP< 0.05. Statistical analysis of the proteomics data was performed using transformed normalized abundances in thet-test, with statistical significance set atP< 0.05. The expression levels between the control and OA groups were compared. Differentially expressed proteins were defined as those with a >2.0- or <0.5-fold change in expression, withPvalues <0.05. A protein expression level showing >2.0-fold change was defined as protein upregulation, and that showing <0.5-fold change was defined as protein downregulation.

Partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) plots and heatmap analysis were performed using MetaboAnalyst 5.0 (http://www.Metaboanalyst.ca/; accessed on February 26, 2023). The heatmap was created for proteins with correctedP-values < 0.05 in a one-way analysis of variance among four groups. The statistical extraction of canonical pathways was performed using KeyMolnet (KM Data, Tokyo, Japan).18The list of proteins was imported into KeyMolnet, and the “Interrelation search” algorithm was used to generate the network of molecular interactions between the related proteins. The top canonical pathways associated with the generated network were extracted from the KeyMolnet knowledge base, andP-values were calculated using a hypergeometric test. For pathway analysis, the protein list contained differentially expressed proteins with a >2.0-fold change or <0.5-fold change andP-values <0.05. IBM SPSS Statistical Software (version 25.0; IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA) was used for all analyses.

Compared with the control group, the OA groups showed time-dependent OA-related changes in the medial femorotibial joint (Fig. 1). The average OARSI score for both the MTP and MFC in the control model was 0. However, the average OARSI score for the MTP at 4, 8, and 12 weeks after DMM was 1.70 ± 1.89, 3.40 ± 1.02, and 8.30 ± 3.12, respectively. Compared with the control group, the average OARSI score for the MTP was significantly higher at 8 (P= 0.03) and 12 weeks after DMM (P= 0.03). The average OARSI score for the MFC at 4, 8, and 12 weeks after DMM was 1.40 ± 1.96, 2.60 ± 1.71, and 4.80 ± 0.75, respectively. Compared with the control group, the average OARSI score of the MFC was significantly higher at 8 weeks after DMM (P= 0.03) and 12 weeks after DMM (P= 0.03). No significant changes were observed in the OARSI scores of the lateral femorotibial joint (Fig. 1).

Histological analysis of the medial tibial plateau (A–H). Regional vertical fissures (D: black arrow) of the cartilage surface were detected 12 weeks after DMM. Scale bar: 200 μm. OARSI scores of control mice and the 4-, 8-, and 12-week post-DMM surgery model mice (I–L). OARSI scores of the medial tibial plateau (I) and medial femoral condyle (J) are increase at all time points. No statistical difference in the scores can be observed on the lateral side of the joint (KandL). The average OARSI scores were analyzed using the Steel–Dwass test. Statistical significance was set atP< 0.05. DMM = destabilization of the medial meniscus; OARSI = Osteoarthritis Research Society International.

PLS-DA modeling showed modest separations between the control group and the 4-week post-DMM model. In contrast, the 8- and 12-week post-DMM models showed marked group separations from the control group and 4-week post-DMM model (Fig. 2). The heatmap of clustered protein intensities revealed the patterns of protein upregulation and downregulation among the experimental groups. The significant differentially expressed proteins that correlated with the deviation between the control and OA groups showed different profiles. The 12-week post-DMM model showed more specific protein upregulation than the other groups (Fig. 3).

PLS-DA score plots of the control group and the 4-, 8-, and 12-week post-DMM models. The shaded regions on the PLS-DA plots correspond to the 95% confidence interval region. Partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) plots were performed using MetaboAnalyst 5.0 (http://www.Metaboanalyst.ca/; accessed on February 26, 2023). DMM = destabilization of the medial meniscus; PLS-DA = partial least squares discriminant analysis.

Heat maps of differentially expressed proteins show different profiles based on time-dependent osteoarthritis changes. Each column indicates a different sample group. Each row indicates one protein. The red shading indicates increased expression, and the blue shading indicates decreased expression. Heatmap analysis was performed using MetaboAnalyst 5.0 (http://www.Metaboanalyst.ca/; accessed on May 24, 2024). The heatmap was plotted for proteins with correctedP-values < 0.05 in one-way analysis of variance among four groups.

LC-MS/MS analysis of the serum identified 605 proteins (Supplemental data S1). Highly abundant proteins in the serum, such as albumin and IgG, were removed using a ProteoMiner kit (Bio-Rad). Compared with that in the control group, 15 proteins were differentially expressed in the 4-week post-DMM group, with 8 proteins upregulated and 7 downregulated. In the 8-week post-DMM group, 35 proteins were differentially expressed, including 9 upregulated and 26 downregulated, when compared with the control group. In the 12-week post-DMM group, 56 proteins were differentially expressed compared with the control group, with 19 proteins upregulated and 37 downregulated (Table 1).

Differentially Expressed Proteins on Comparing the Control Group With the 4-, 8-, and 12-Week Post-DMM Group.

Statistical analysis of the proteomics data was performed using transformed normalized abundances in thet-test. Statistical significance was set atP< 0.05. The expression levels between the control and OA groups were compared. Differentially expressed proteins were defined as those with a >2.0- or <0.5-fold change in expression, withP-values < 0.05.

Compared with the control group, the 4-week post-DMM model shows significant upregulation or downregulation of 15 proteins (a). Compared with the control group, the 8-week post-DMM model shows significant upregulation or downregulation of 35 proteins (b). Compared with the control group, the 12-week post-DMM model shows significant upregulation or downregulation of 56 proteins (c). DMM = destabilization of the medial meniscus.

To identify relationships between the molecular network of the serum proteins and the canonical pathway, an “interrelation” network search was performed using KeyMolnet. In the extracted molecular network, several pathways relevant to the differentially expressed proteins in the 4-, 8-, and 12-week post-DMM model scored > 20 and significantly contributed to the extracted network when compared with the control group (Table 2).

Pathways Relevant to the Differentially Expressed Proteins Between the Control Group and the 4-, 8-, and 12-Week Post-DMM Model.

For pathway analysis, the protein list contained differentially expressed proteins with a >2.0- or <0.5-fold changes andP-values < 0.05. The statistical extraction of canonical pathways was performed using KeyMolnet (KM Data, Tokyo, Japan).18The list of proteins was imported into KeyMolnet, and the “Interrelation search” algorithm was used to generate the network of molecular interactions between the related proteins. The top canonical pathways associated with the generated network were extracted from the KeyMolnet knowledge base, andP-values were calculated using a hypergeometric test. (a) Pathways relevant to the differentially expressed proteins between the control group and the 4-week post-DMM model. (b) Pathways relevant to the differentially expressed proteins between the control group and the 8-week post-DMM model. (c) Pathways relevant to the differentially expressed proteins between the control group and the 12-week post-DMM model. DMM = destabilization of the medial meniscus.

Comparing the control and 4-week post-DMM model, the top three relevant pathways were the intermediate filament signaling pathway (score 53.244), p160 SRC (Steroid receptor coactivators) signaling pathway (score 52.418), and microtubule-associated protein signaling pathway (score 41.202). Upon comparing the control and 8-week post-DMM model, the top three relevant pathways were the complement pathway (score 108.621), matrix metalloprotease (MMP) signaling pathway (score 74.647), and alternative complement pathway (score 63.445). Comparing the control and 12-week post-DMM model, the top three relevant pathways were the complement pathway (score 186.506), classical complement pathway (score 94.511), and lectin complement pathway (score 71.22). Comparing the control and 4-week post-DMM model, the relevant pathways were distinct from the pathways identified in the 8- and 12-week post-DMM model.

We conducted a precise network analysis focused on the differentially expressed proteins to extract abnormal signaling patterns using KeyMolnet.18Network analysis showed three different molecular networks in the 4-, 8-, and 12-week post-DMM models (Figs. 4–6). The 4-week post-DMM model exhibited fewer correlated proteins than the other models. In addition, the 4-week post-DMM model showed no correlations with complements, including C3, C5, and factor B.

Molecular network analysis by KeyMolnet between the control group and the 4-week post-DMM model. The statistical extraction of canonical pathways was performed using KeyMolnet (KM Data, Tokyo, Japan). The list of proteins was imported into KeyMolnet, and the “Interrelation search” algorithm was used to generate the network of molecular interactions between the related proteins. Oval, rectangular, capsule-like, hexagonal, and asymmetrical hexagonal shapes represent proteins, metabolites, complexes, exogenous molecules, and micro-RNA, respectively. The molecular relationships are indicated by a solid line with an arrow (direct binding or activation), a solid line with an arrow and stop (direct inactivation), a solid line without an arrow (complex formation), a dashed line with an arrow (transcriptional activation), and a dashed line with an arrow and stop (transcriptional repression). The black line indicates correlations of the expressed molecules. The gray lines indicate correlations of unexpressed molecules. Red, violet, pink, light blue, blue, and dark blue coloration indicate expression levels over 2-fold higher, within 2-fold higher, within 1.5-fold lower, within 1-fold lower, within 0.75-fold lower, and under 0.5-fold, respectively. DMM = destabilization of the medial meniscus.

Molecular network analysis by KeyMolnet between the control group and the 8-week post-DMM OA model. The statistical extraction of canonical pathways was performed using KeyMolnet (KM Data, Tokyo, Japan). The list of proteins was imported into KeyMolnet, and the “Interrelation search” algorithm was used to generate the network of molecular interactions between the related proteins. Oval, rectangular, capsule-like, hexagonal, and asymmetrical hexagonal shapes represent proteins, metabolites, complexes, exogenous molecules, and micro-RNA, respectively. The molecular relationships are indicated by a solid line with an arrow (direct binding or activation), a solid line with an arrow and stop (direct inactivation), a solid line without an arrow (complex formation), a dashed line with an arrow (transcriptional activation), and a dashed line with an arrow and stop (transcriptional repression). The black line indicates correlations of the expressed molecules. The gray lines indicate the correlations of unexpressed molecules. Red, violet, pink, light blue, blue, and dark blue coloration indicate expression levels over 2-fold higher, within 2-fold higher, within 1.5-fold lower, within 1-fold lower, within 0.75-fold lower, and under 0.5-fold, respectively. DMM = destabilization of the medial meniscus; OA = osteoarthritis.

Molecular network analysis by KeyMolnet between the control group and the 12-week post-DMM OA model. The statistical extraction of canonical pathways was performed using KeyMolnet (KM Data, Tokyo, Japan). The list of proteins was imported into KeyMolnet, and the “Interrelation search” algorithm was used to generate the network of molecular interactions between the related proteins. Oval, rectangular, capsule-like, hexagonal, and asymmetrical hexagonal shapes represent proteins, metabolites, complexes, exogenous molecules, and micro-RNA, respectively. The molecular relationships are indicated by a solid line with an arrow (direct binding or activation), a solid line with an arrow and stop (direct inactivation), a solid line without an arrow (complex formation), a dashed line with an arrow (transcriptional activation), and a dashed line with an arrow and stop (transcriptional repression). The black line indicates correlations of the expressed molecules. The gray lines indicate the correlations of unexpressed molecules. Red, violet, pink, light blue, blue, and dark blue coloration indicate expression levels over 2-fold higher, within 2-fold higher, within 1.5-fold lower, within 1-fold lower, within 0.75-fold lower, and under 0.5-fold, respectively. DMM = destabilization of the medial meniscus; OA = osteoarthritis.

The objective of the current study was to investigate the proteins expressed during the early stages of KOA. The most important finding of this study was the detection of serum changes in mice over time after joint trauma using proteomics. Differentially expressed proteins were detected in the control and OA groups. PLS-DA and heat maps revealed that protein properties and expressions differed at 4, 8, and 12 weeks post-DMM surgery. Moreover, the activated pathways and molecular networks in the 4-week post-DMM model were distinct from those observed in the 8- and 12-week post-DMM models. These results may help characterize the pathology of EKOA and facilitate the identification of EKOA biomarkers.

Luytenet al. stated that EKOA is defined by the presence of some knee symptoms with KL grade190-I radiographs showing the absence of osteophytes in the knee.5In their histological assessment of EKOA in humans, Madryet al.20defined EKOA as OARSI grade 1–3 (depth progression into cartilage) and OARSI score 1–12. In contrast, it is unclear how many weeks post-DMM mice can be deemed equivalent to EKOA in humans. Huanget al.21focused on OA changes in the DMM model mice and reported increased OARSI scores in the MTP and MFC over time when compared with the sham group. The authors further reported that the period beyond 5 weeks post-DMM represents late stages of OA, exhibiting subchondral bone with bone sclerosis, substantially increased bone mineral density in medial compartments, and severe osteophyte formation around the joint when compared with the sham group. In the present study, all mice were within OARSI grade 1–3, with an OARSI score of ≤12. Based on previous reports, the 4-week post-DMM model was considered to be the closest to the EKOA stage in humans.

Upon comparing the control and 4-week post-DMM groups, 15 proteins showing different expression levels were identified: adenylate kinase 1 protein (Adk 1p), adenylate kinase (AK), type IV intermediate filament protein (IF-IV), nestin, insulin-like growth factor-binding proteins (IGFBPs), insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 5 (IGFBP-5), tubulin (beta5-tublin and b-tub), resistin-like molecules beta (RELMbeta), fibulin-1, 5', 3'-nucleotidase, cytosolic (5'Ntdase, NT5C), aminoadipate-semialdehyde dehydrogenase (AADISADH), and fructose biphosphatealdolase (ALDO, aldolase B).

Among the detected proteins, Adk 1p, AK, IF-IV, nestin, IGFBPs, and IGFBP-5 showed lowerP-values (P= 0.001). We searched for literature that reported a relationship between OA and the detected proteins.

Nestin is a cytoskeletal protein classified as a type IV intermediate filament, and its protein sequence is similar to that of type IV intermediate filaments.22Although this protein was initially detected in neural stem cells of the brain,23it was subsequently found to be expressed in various tissues and stem or progenitor cells. Nestin+ cells from the adult brain can generate differentiated cells of neuronal and astrocytic lineages,23whereas nestin+ cells from the adult bone marrow can differentiate into osteoblastic, adipocytic, and chondrocytic lineages.24Aberrant mechanical stress plays a role in the alterations observed in the subchondral bone during OA development.25Zhenet al. demonstrated that transforming growth factor b1 (TGF-b1) was activated in the subchondral bone of the knee in response to abnormal mechanical loading in an OA mouse model. Higher concentrations of TGF-b1 induced the formation of nestin+ mesenchymal stem cell clusters and led to the formation of marrow osteoid islets along with high levels of angiogenesis.25The association between nestin-positive cells and OA is becoming more apparent, and the correlation between serum nestin and EKOA warrants future examination.

IGFBP-5 is one of the IGFBPs regulating IGF bioavailability by binding to IGF ligands.26Clemmonset al.27investigated the effect of IGFBP-5 on improvements in joint architecture in canine OA models. Increased IGF-1 expression reportedly inhibits MMPs by enhancing the cartilage synthesis of tissue inhibitors of metalloproteases.28An increase in the concentration of IGFBP-5 in synovial fluid leads to a rise in IGF-1 levels. Thus, an increase in IGFBP-5 contributes to an increase in IGF-1 levels in the synovial fluid and reduces joint destruction. Although the relationship and mechanism between the expression levels of IGFBP-5 in serum and joint fluid remain elusive, a decrease in serum IGFBP-5 expression could indicate the onset of EKOA.

AKs are phosphotransferases that regulate nucleotide homeostasis and energetic metabolism by catalyzing reversible phosphoryl transfer.29A search of databases, such as PubMed, failed to identify any relevant literature on the association between AKs and OA. Thus, further studies are required to identify their potential as EKOA biomarkers.

Fibulin-1 is one of the proteins that was only detected in the 4-week post-DMM model. Tardifet al.12performed a proteome analysis of human serum proteins between patients with OA and controls and found that revealed that fibulin-1 was markedly upregulated in patients with OA. Fibulin-1 is an extracellular matrix (ECM) protein that assembles into microfibrils to form the template for elastic fiber formation. In cartilage metabolism and OA pathogenesis, fibulin-1 can activate the TGF-b pathway and promote chondrocyte proliferation via the phosphorylation of Smad2 in the signaling pathway.30Moreover, fibulin-1 is a new regulator of ADAMTS-1-mediated proteoglycan proteolysis and may play an important role in proteoglycan turnover in tissues.31Fibulin-1 would be an interesting protein for further analysis as a potential EKOA biomarker.

Herein, we compared pathways activated at 4, 8, and 12 weeks after DMM and detected differences in the pathways activated before and after 4 weeks after DMM. Although the complement pathway was the most activated at 8 and 12 weeks after DMM, it was not activated at 4 weeks post-DMM. The complement system is an important component of the innate immune system and consists of the alternative, classical, and lectin complement pathways. Activation of the complement system is evident in patients with OA. The alternative, classical, and lectin complement pathways are activated in the synovial fluid of patients with OA.32Quantitative proteomics of serum from patients with OA revealed that the levels of complement proteins (C3, 4A, 6, and 9) were substantially altered in late OA (KL-Ⅳ) when compared with levels detected in moderate OA (KL-II).14The absence of activation of the complement pathway at 4 weeks post-DMM may reflect the pathology of EKOA and its differences from the later stages of OA.

The MMP pathway was identified as an activated pathway in the 8- and 12-week post-DMM models. MMPs are enzymes that can degrade all ECM components. Within each synovial joint, the ECM undergoes degradation to produce several inflammatory mediators,33which stimulate the production of MMPs. MMP-1, produced by synovial cells, and MMP-13, produced by chondrocytes,34play notable roles in OA because they function as rate-limiting factors in the collagen-degradation process. In addition, the expression of other MMPs, such as MMP-2, MMP-3, and MMP-9, is known to be elevated in arthritis, and these enzymes degrade the non-collagenous substrate components of the joint.35The results of the molecular network analysis revealed that the only relevant MMP in the 4-week-post-DMM model was MMP2, which differed from that in the 8- and 12-week DMM models.

Conversely, pathways activated in the 4-week post-DMM model were the intermediate filament, p160 SRC, microtubule-associated protein, GSK3, Wnt, and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways. Members of the p160 SRC family, SRC-1, SRC-2, and SRC-3, interact with nuclear receptors and other transcription factors to drive target gene expression by assembling transcriptional coactivator complexes to increase the transcription of growth-related genes.36In a mouse model of OA, loss of the nuclear receptor coactivator 3 (NCOA3), which is one of the SRC-3, promoted post-traumatic OA by enhancing NF-κB activation.37The Wnt signaling pathway is involved in the homeostasis and degradation of the cartilage matrix by regulating the expression of anabolic or catabolic genes, such as increased expression of MMP–2, MMP–3, MMP–9, MMP–13, ADAMTS4, and ADAMTS5, which promote the degradation of the ECM and trigger KOA.38Gsk3b is critical for maintaining the chondrocytic phenotype by controlling the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. Inhibition of Gsk3b in chondrocytesex vivoleads to loss of cartilage markers expression, induces matrix degradation by stimulating the expression of MMPs, and inhibits chondrocyte proliferation.39DDR-mediated p38 MAPK activation can induce MMP-13 activity.40The intermediate filaments relay mechanical signals into downstream biochemical responses. At the tissue level, the ECM, composed mostly of collagen II and proteoglycans, provides mechanical integrity; at the cellular level, the cytoskeleton fulfills this role, with vimentin intermediate filaments exerting a major function.41Early OA changes in developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) cartilage have been shown to originate at the chondrocyte level and could be linked to intermediate filaments.42Although the undamaged DDH cartilage exhibits minimal ECM changes, a pronounced reorganization of vimentin intermediate filaments occurs. The activated pathways detected in the 4-week post-DMM model were associated with the pathology of KOA. Further research is necessary to comprehensively clarify the pathogenesis of EKOA.

In recent years, several studies have explored potential human serum proteomic biomarkers for KOA.43-46In a large study that examined 4792 proteins in human plasma, cartilage acidic protein 1 (CRTAC1) was found to be associated with OA pain.1In the Rotterdam cohort, serum CRTAC1 was identified as a biomarker for the severity and progression of radiographic KOA after adjusting for age, sex, and body mass index.44Multiple-reaction-monitoring mass spectrometry of human serum peptides in the New York University cohort also revealed that CRTAC1 had the highest odds of predicting OA progression.46In the Foundation for the National Institutes of Health cohort, 3 proteins, VTDB, CRTAC1, and C1R, were selected as essential biomarkers, demonstrating their importance as prognostic indicators of KOA progression.45CRTAC1 is a glycosylated ECM protein that is found in the interterritorial matrix of articular deep zone cartilage.47Patients with OA reportedly exhibit higher concentrations of CRTAC1 in the knee synovial fluid than controls, along with higher levels in OA cartilage.48Recently, CRTAC1 has attracted attention as a candidate novel biomarker for KOA. However, its function in the EKOA is yet to be comprehensively established, and CRTAC1 was not detected as a serum biomarker in the current study. Examining whether CRTAC1 can be detected in the knee articular cartilage of mice 4 weeks after DMM surgery as an EKOA model may provide more detailed information on the mechanism underlying EKOA.

Although not a serum protein, the ECM protein periostin has been identified as a new therapeutic target for preventing the progression of OA in human knee joints. Periostin is a matricellular secretory matrix protein expressed by mesenchymal stem cells and the periosteum.49Chijimatsuet al.50revealed that periostin was positively stained in the erosive surface layer of human knee cartilage. The authors concluded that periostin may be upregulated in chondrocytes in response to mechanical stress. Atturet al.51reported that the expression of periostin mRNA was substantially upregulated in osteoarthritic cartilage. The authors suggested that periostin promotes cartilage degeneration in KOA by upregulating MMP-13 via canonical Wnt signaling.51In the current study, periostin was not detected as a differentially expressed protein. Activation of the Wnt signaling pathway in the 4-week post-DMM model may be associated with cartilage degeneration by upregulation of periostin expression. To date, there have been no reports regarding periostin expression in human or mouse EKOA cartilage. Immunostaining of periostin in the cartilage of the 4-week post-DMM mouse may provide further insights into the pathogenesis of EKOA.

This study had some limitations. First, this study did not incorporate the use of sham surgery models. The composition of serum protein may exhibit post-traumatic alterations following DMM or sham surgery. Ideally, this study should encompass sham surgery models at 4, 8, and 12 weeks post-sham surgery to validate the impact of post-traumatic changes resulting from the DMM surgery. Consequently, our findings do not allow us to dismiss the influence of post-traumatic changes on serum proteins, as this proteome analysis solely compared the control and DMM models. Although mouse joints are similar to human joints, mice and humans show inherent differences (e.g., mouse physes remain open in mature animals compared with the adolescent closure in humans, quadruped vs. bipedal gait).52These differences may limit the clinical generalizability of these data. Finally, our results only support the associations between cartilage damage and specific serum proteins in early post-traumatic OA. Further functional studies should be conducted to explore the mechanisms of EKOA and determine the potential use of the suggested serum proteins or activated pathways as biomarkers for EKOA onset or progression.

Collectively, this study used proteomics analysis to detect differentially expressed proteins by investigating serum changes over time following the onset of OA in mice. The histological evaluations indicated that the 4-week post-DMM model was the closest to EKOA in humans. The differentially expressed proteins in the 4-week post-DMM model included Adk 1p, AK, IF-IV, nestin, IGF-BP, and IGF-BP5. The activated pathways and molecular networks in the 4-week post-DMM model differed from those in the 8- and 12-week post-DMM models. These results may help elucidate the pathology of EKOA and facilitate the identification of EKOA biomarkers.

The authors thank the Shared Facility Center for Science and Technology, Hirosaki University (SFCST) for helping with proteomic analysis. The authors also thank Editage (www.editage.jp) for the English editing.