In this article, we explore how logics and systems of coloniality are reproduced through the bureaucracy of international aid.
Drawing on qualitative research with civil society and international aid workers in Myanmar, we examine tensions between international agencies' ‘do no harm’ and ‘localisation’ commitments and their compliance requirements.
We demonstrate that international compliance frameworks are experienced as top‐down and overly rigid by civil society actors leading aid programmes, and that they can have unintended negative consequences, causing harm to Myanmar aid workers and communities.
These frameworks also reinforce logics and systems of coloniality, by valuing the technocratic knowledge and approaches of international agencies over the ‘ways of being’ of civil society actors, and by crystallising artificial and hierarchical distinctions between the ‘local’ and ‘international’.
Compliance systems in turn highlight the inadequacies of current ‘localisation’ endeavours, which fail to recognise and redress deep‐seated inequalities and injustices in the international humanitarian industry.
Despite international commitments to ‘shift power’ within humanitarian systems, civil society actors in complex emergencies like Myanmar continue to perceive the approaches of international aid agencies as top‐down, unequal, and unjust.
Many critics have highlighted the failure of international donors and aid agencies to meet goals established through the Grand Bargain and other international frameworks and commitments (Slim,2022; Metcalfe‐Hough, Fenton, and Manji,2023).
Other observers argue that the Grand Bargain that emerged from the World Humanitarian Summit in 2016 has served to reinforce rather than challenge the status quo (Shuayb,2022; Mihlar,2024).
Critics also describe how international agencies all too often reduce ‘localisation’ to technical adjustments, which do not adequately resolve underlying power inequalities or the political and neocolonial nature of control over the humanitarian system (see, for example, Slim,2022).
Going further, more radical critics highlight the ongoing inability of current localisation endeavours to recognise and redress the underlying logics and systems of coloniality within the humanitarian industry (see, for example, Shuayb,2022; Mihlar,2024).
Yet, while these criticisms are valid, there remains a lack of empirical evidence relating tohowlogics and systems of coloniality may be reproduced through international aid systems and practices—and, therefore, how and why current localisation endeavours ultimately fail to rectify ongoing inequalities and injustices in the international humanitarian industry.
The complex emergency triggered by the 2021 military coup in Myanmar has, in some ways, created opportunities for more locally‐led humanitarian aid.
In a setting where international access has been heavily curtailed, Myanmar civil society actors have continued to draw on their strong contextually grounded knowledge and networks to navigate military restrictions and to deliver essential aid to communities in need.
As well as being accountable to the communities they serve, these Myanmar aid workers must meet the compliance requirements of international funding agencies.
On one level, civil society actors describe compliance systems as important to ensure the accountability and effectiveness of internationally funded aid programmes.
At the same time, though, they describe experiencing international compliance frameworks as top‐down, overly rigid arrangements that are unsuited to a highly volatile conflict and politically complex crisis—and this despite international commitments to ‘do no harm’ as well as promises made in the Grand Bargain to ‘localise’ aid systems and to simplify and streamline requirements like reporting (IASC,n.d.).
Additionally, Myanmar actors argue that compliance systems play a key role in reproducing neocolonial power inequalities within aid systems and practices.
In this article we analyse the reproduction of logics and systems of coloniality through the bureaucracy of international aid.
We draw on qualitative research conducted in 2023 with civil society and international aid workers in Myanmar, to explore tensions between international actors' ‘do no harm’ and ‘localisation’ commitments, on the one hand, and bureaucratic requirements, on the other.
We begin by reviewing key debates and literature on the ‘localisation’ and ‘decolonisation’ of aid, before outlining our research methodology.
Next, we demonstrate that, even if established with good intentions, international compliance frameworks and requirements can have unintended negative consequences.
For one, context‐ and conflict‐insensitive compliance requirements can cause very real and practical harms to aid workers and communities in volatile settings like Myanmar.
Furthermore, top‐down compliance systems can act to perpetuate unequal and unjust aid relationships—ultimately, going against commitments to redress power inequalities in international humanitarian systems.
Subsequently, we show how compliance frameworks reinforce logics and systems of coloniality, by valuing the technocratic knowledge and approaches of international agencies over the ‘ways of being’ of actors leading aid programmes on the ground, and by crystallising artificial and hierarchical distinctions between the ‘local’ and ‘international’.
In conclusion, we argue that ongoing logics and systems of coloniality in international humanitarianism must be recognised and redressed, and that the knowledge, perspectives, and approaches of communities, networks, and organisations in the ‘Global South’ should be driving forces for decolonial reforms of aid systems.
What is more, radical shifts are needed in international aid systems and practices, to recognise and valorise the leadership, agency, knowledge, and practices of actors steering humanitarian responses in emergency situations.
The terms ‘localisation’ and ‘decolonisation’ are at times used interchangeably in the aid sector, amid growing calls for aid systems and practices to be both ‘localised’ and ‘decolonised’ (Patel,2021; Paige,2021).
Yet, as scholars such as Tuck and Yang (2012) remind us, decolonisation is not a metaphor, nor is it a metonym for broad social justice, but it is a specific, historical process requiring material restitution of indigenous lands and lives.
The authors caution that ‘describing all struggles against imperialism as “decolonizing” creates a convenient ambiguity between decolonization and social justice work’ (Tuck and Yang,2012, p. 17), which in turn risks undermining the material and radical nature of decolonial movements.
In recognition of the complex terrain of the ‘post‐colonial project’, here, we look specifically therefore at how the ‘coloniality of power’ and its ‘specific modalities of violence’ (Persaud and Kumarakulasingam,2019, p. 200) remain embedded in the frameworks, systems, and practices of humanitarian aid.
In countries like Myanmar, attempts at aid ‘localisation’ are often described by international aid workers and analysts as part of broader decolonial processes.
But as decolonial scholars highlight, current ‘localisation’ endeavours all too frequently fail to redress deep‐seated logics and systems of coloniality, or to achieve material restitution for past and ongoing injustices (Shuayb,2022; Mihlar,2024).
In this article, we build on the work of decolonial critics to explore how logics and systems of coloniality continue to be reproduced through aid systems and practices.
In so doing, we engage critically with debates on aid ‘localisation’, demonstrating how, despite international commitments to ‘shift power’, inequalities and injustices, as well as artificial and hierarchical distinctions between the ‘local’ and ‘international’, are reproduced through the bureaucracy of international aid.
As such, the findings of this research are of relevance beyond the borders of Myanmar.
The types of international compliance requirements and systems with which local actors in Myanmar must engage are replicated in other conflict situations and complex emergencies across the world; critics have previously highlighted that these can play a key role in reproducing logics and systems of coloniality in international aid (Mihlar,2024).
As highlighted above, however, there is a lack of empirical research intohowlogics and systems of coloniality are reproduced in practice through international aid systems and approaches.
This article, then, contributes to broader discussions at the international level about how and why current localisation endeavours ultimately fail to redress ongoing inequalities and injustices in the international humanitarian industry.
Over the past decade, attention to processes of aid ‘localisation’ has grown, with tangible commitments made by international agencies through frameworks like the 2015 Charter for Change and the 2016 Grand Bargain.
Yet, debates concerning ‘localisation’ are far from new.
It has long been recognised that actors on the ground are typically the first to respond to crises impacting their communities, and that their responses are commonly more effective, relevant, and sustainable than those of international agencies (Rieff,2002; Aldrich,2012).
Even before the 2021 coup d'état and ensuing humanitarian catastrophe in Myanmar, aid practitioners and analysts had underscored the strengths and advantages of locally‐led emergency responses (see, for example, Walsh,2020; L2GP,2024).
Nonetheless, despite widespread recognition of the necessity of local leadership to help the humanitarian sector better achieve its goals (Gómez,2021), contemporary aid systems and practices continue to perpetuate inequalities between international actors and their counterparts in countries like Myanmar.
These inequalities are particularly visible in the ongoing dominance of international actors vis‐à‐vis greater decision‐making power, mobility, and agency, as well as in the unequal pay structures, benefits, and levels of protection accorded to international versus local/national aid workers (Fassin,2012; Redfield,2012; Décobert,2023).
As Didier Fassin (2012, p. 3) asserts, international humanitarianism is thus fundamentally paradoxical, uniting a politics of solidarity with a politics of inequality, a relation of assistance with a relation of domination.
Frameworks like the Grand Bargain were (initially, at least) lauded for generating concrete commitments by international aid agencies to address underlying power inequalities in international aid systems.
The Grand Bargain notably emphasises the need to ‘localise’ aid systems, by putting more resources and decision‐making power into the hands of local and national responders—with the commitment, in particular, to transfer at least 25 per cent of international aid as directly as possible to these actors (IASC, n.d.).
It also includes a commitment to simplify and standardise compliance frameworks, by pledging to ‘[m]ake joint regular functional monitoring and performance reviews and reduce individual donor assessments, evaluations, verifications, risk management and oversight processes’ (IASC,2017, p. 7).
Over time, though, there has been increasing criticism of contemporary ‘localisation’ endeavours.
Many analysts have highlighted the failure of international agencies to meet their Grand Bargain commitments (Slim,2022; Mihlar,2024).
For instance, an independent report commissioned by the Humanitarian Policy Group at ODI in 2023 underlined that ‘actual progress towards the target of providing 25% of funding to local/national actors as directly as possible appears to have been very limited, with Financial Tracking Service … data suggesting a further decline in the percentage of funding provided for coordinated appeals reaching local actors’ (Metcalfe‐Hough, Fenton, and Manji,2023, p. 18), and that ‘the majority of signatories are still not fully reporting how much of their funding flows to local/national actors’ (Metcalfe‐Hough, Fenton, and Manji,2023, p. 61).
These types of international trends are replicated in Myanmar, where civil society organisation (CSO) members have been demanding that more funding be transferred directly to local and national responders, and that these responders be given more decision‐making power in international aid programming (MLHN,2022).
While important, percentages of funding channelled to responders on the ground are also only one aspect of aid ‘localisation’.
At the same time, the lack of clarity about and consensus on what ‘localisation’ means and what it should look like in practice (see, for example, Barbelet,2018; Gibbons and Otieku‐Boadu,2021; Mihlar,2024) creates ambiguity and can make it easier for international actors to dilute the localisation agenda's more radical potential.
The need to ‘localise’ aid systems and practices is commonly justified in relation to operational effectiveness (IFRC,2018; Barbelet et al.,2021).
Owing to local‐level actors and organisations being deeply embedded in crisis‐affected contexts and communities, they can respond and address local needs more rapidly and effectively.
Yet, as analysts like Hugo Slim (2022) have highlighted, ‘localisation’ should really be about power: realising political rights and defining humanitarian citizenship, with those affected by crises, their local organisations, and their leaders driving decisions about humanitarian responses that will shape the long‐term future of their communities.
As Charlotte Dany (2021, p. 2) emphasises, localisation can then become a means by which ‘humanitarian aid may help to achieve common goals among equals and thus to integrate a more solidarity‐focused approach that empowers the receivers of aid’.
Nevertheless, ‘localisation’ endeavours have generally failed to shift the status quo of unequal power relations underlying aid systems (Alexander,2022; Kelly, Pardy, and McGlasson,2024; Mihlar,2024).
As Farah Mihlar (2024, p. 6) underlines, localisation's ‘locus of enunciation is in the Global North’—in other words, localisation frameworks and processes generally continue to be defined by those with a vested interest in the preservation of the status quo.
Combined with institutional inertia, vested interests produce a tendency towards minor tweaking of aid programmes instead of real shifts in power—something documented well beyond Myanmar (see, for example, Ayobi et al.,2017).
Localisation is all too often reduced to international agencies employing a few additional local/national staff, engaging in limited extra and often largely tokenistic ‘consultations’ with communities, or, in other ways, ‘talking the talk without really walking the walk’ when it comes to change (Décobert,2023).
Also, in countries like Myanmar, more radical interpretations of ‘localisation’ that focus on shifting power have typically been overridden by conservative approaches prioritising aid effectiveness—the latter defined from the point of view of international actors (Décobert and Wells,2025).
And as Dustin Barter and Gun Mai Sumlut (2023) illustrate, the result is often ‘poor quality’ localisation, with ‘partner’ agencies on the ground continuing to be treated as subcontractors on programmes they have not designed while bearing the brunt of an unequal distribution of risk.
The ‘watering down’ of localisation's radical potential is in turn inextricably linked with a lack of institutional commitment and political will towards radical systems change.
Furthermore, the norms and practices of the humanitarian system—which, again, are predominantly defined in the ‘Global North’—serve to ‘mute or silence the voices of the Global South … through a reframing or capturing of localisation’ (Kelly, Pardy, and McGlasson,2024, p. 18).
More radical critics contend that localisation endeavours are, as Maha Shuayb (2022) suggests, ‘only pay[ing] lip service to fixing aid's colonial legacy’.
Drawing on the work of decolonial scholars enables us to highlight the ways in which international aid systems and practices are not only unequal but also continue to be shaped bycoloniality—that is, the underlying logic of colonialism, which comprises the control and management of knowledge by supposed ‘universals’ of Western modernity, Eurocentrism, and global capitalism, and which is in turn grounded in a colonial and racist hierarchy of human beings (Quijano,2000; Grosfoguel,2007; Walsh and Mignolo,2018).
As Swati Parashar and Michael Schulz (2021, p. 869) assert, modernity has carried forward the ‘civilising mission’ of the colonial enterprise and its normative power, which ‘tends to shape the discourses of being progressive, modern and scientific in these formerly colonised societies’—and, as we show, this is true also of contemporary aid systems.
Decolonial scholars and other critics argue that contemporary configurations of international aid are rooted in and underpinned by racialised systems of inequality (Pallister‐Wilkins,2021; Shuayb,2022; Khan, Dickson, and Sondarjee,2023; Mihlar,2024).
The perpetuation of the ‘coloniality of knowledge/power’ (Quijano,2000) in the humanitarian system depends on the maintenance of the frameworks of legitimation necessary for the exercise of a hierarchy of rights and privileges (Persaud and Kumarakulasingam,2019).
‘Localisation’, as Mihlar (2024) notes, all too often fails to recognise and redress the ongoing logics and structures of coloniality underlying humanitarian systems.
Recognising these logics and structures in turn helps us to understandwhy, for example, international aid systems continue to prioritise the technocratic knowledge and approaches of international ‘experts’ over the knowledge and approaches—or ‘ways of being’ (Escobar,2018; Baguios et al.,2021)—of actors in the ‘Global South’ (Burns,2014; Fitzpatrick et al.,2023; Mihlar,2024).
‘Ways of being’ can be understood as the different fundamental ways in which individuals exist and interact with the world, as well as associated forms of knowledge, practices, and experiences.
Mobilising this concept brings, as Arbie Baguios et al. (2021) maintain, a decolonial lens to studies of localisation: it enables both an acknowledgement of dominant forms of knowledge and practice that privilege Western ontologies and epistemologies, and the recognition and elevation of local and indigenous knowledge systems, cultures, ways of working, meanings, and values.
Yet, despite the importance of decolonial critiques of ‘localisation’, there continues to be insufficient evidence regardinghowconceptualisations of and approaches to ‘localisation’ relate to different forms of knowledge or ‘ways of being’ (Mihlar,2024).
While previous analyses (see, for example, Burns,2014; Fitzpatrick et al.,2023; Mihlar,2024)—including by members of our team (Nwe Hlaing, Wells, and Décobert,2024)—have highlighted the ongoing sidelining of ‘local’ knowledge and approaches in humanitarian programming, there continues to be a lack of empirical evidence pertaining tohow, in practical terms, the knowledge and approaches of actors on the ground are undermined through the systems and practices of international aid, and how this relates to ongoing inequalities and injustices in the humanitarian industry.
More generally, there is a paucity of empirical analysis of how coloniality is reproduced through aid systems—and, therefore, how and why current localisation endeavours fail to redress inequalities and injustices in the international humanitarian industry.
Another critique of debates, interventions, and literature concerning ‘localisation’ is that these aspects can reproduce an artificial distinction between the ‘local’ and ‘international’.
They can essentialise—and reproduce a simplistic binary between—these categorisations, when the ‘local’ and ‘international’ are in fact much more interconnected, complex, fragmented, and multifaceted than such bifurcations imply (Rossi,2004; Roepstorff,2020).
Additionally, as Kristina Roepstorff (2020) has emphasised, the binary framing of ‘international’ versus ‘local’ in the conceptualisation of localisation can itself reproduce a logic of coloniality.
It does so by defining the ‘local’ as inherently lacking ‘capacity’ and by creating a hierarchy of knowledge and practices linked with ‘local’ versus ‘international’ actors—a form of knowledge politics that also forecloses the possibility of alternative ways of understanding and being (Hall,2019; Mihlar,2024).
The essentialisation and division of ‘local’ and ‘international’ then lends itself to the preservation of the status quo (Roepstorff,2020).
However, while previous research has highlighted that the ‘local’ and ‘international’ are instead co‐constituted and intertwined in complex ways (see, for example, Paffenholz,2015; Roepstorff,2020), there is a lack of evidence on how these different categories—and the power relations involved—are (re)produced in practice.
In this article, therefore, we expand and build upon the work of Hall (2019), Roepstorff (2020), Mihlar (2024), and other decolonial scholars, and we draw on the Myanmar example to identify broader conclusions about the limitations of current ‘localisation’ endeavours and lessons for international aid system reform.
We thus show, in concrete terms, how the compliance systems of international agencies perpetuate the ongoing ‘coloniality of knowledge/power’ in humanitarian systems, and how they reproduce an artificial, hierarchical, and colonial distinction between the ‘local’ and ‘international’.
In so doing, we also highlight the need to move beyond dominant and conservative localisation approaches, by recognising and redressing the underlying systems and logics of coloniality in international aid.
This research stems from a partnership between our team at The University of Melbourne, Australia, and a network of Myanmar humanitarian organisations, which is not named here for security reasons.
Our team first started working with this network in 2022, when one of its founding members approached us with a request to assist in documenting and analysing their work—some of which is described in the findings and discussion section below.
This laid the ground for a partnership that has developed over several years, and which has involved a range of activities and studies identified based on the needs and priorities of the Myanmar network members.
At a workshop in Bangkok, Thailand, in mid‐2023, members described top‐down and overly rigid compliance requirements of international agencies as major impediments to their work.
They recounted concrete examples of compliance requirements causing harm to Myanmar aid workers and their communities, and they pinpointed compliance systems as key mechanisms impeding genuine shifts in power inequalities in international aid.
As a result of the Myanmar network members' identification of the need to document the impacts of international compliance systems, our team conducted 25 in‐depth interviews between November and January 2023 with leaders of CSOs and staff of international agencies supporting aid programmes in Myanmar.
Ethics approval for this research was granted by the Office of Research Ethics and Integrity at The University of Melbourne (project number: 22961).
All participants provided verbal informed consent to engage in interviews, and no individuals or organisations involved in the research are named here owing to confidentiality and security concerns.
The interviews were conducted online through secure channels (to minimise security risks for participants) and primarily in the Burmese language.1Interviews focused on the impacts of compliance requirements for Myanmar actors and systems, in relation to international agencies' ‘localisation’ commitments, and the wider agenda of ‘shifting power’ in aid systems.
Interviews were translated, transcribed, coded, and analysed according to key thematic areas identified inductively from the data; preliminary findings were shared with the Myanmar network members for their feedback before being finalised.
Additionally, this research is further informed by a multi‐year programme of research conducted by our team members with civil society and international aid actors in Myanmar, spotlighting ‘localisation’, and involving dozens more structured interviews and informal discussions with aid stakeholders.
Since the 2021 coup in Myanmar, civilian populations have faced an escalating complex emergency, with widespread conflict, deliberate attacks by the military on civilian populations, and ever‐escalating impoverishment and displacement resulting in an estimated 19.9 million people (OCHA,2024, p. 3)—more than one‐third of the population—needing urgent aid as of the end of 2024.2Despite systematic restrictions on humanitarian access by the military's State Administration Council (SAC), Myanmar aid workers and systems have continued to provide life‐saving aid to civilians in need.
These Myanmar aid workers have been leading a flexible and low‐profile humanitarian response, navigating the country's restrictive operational environment in ways often impossible for international agencies.
Yet, they have done so at great risk to their own lives and safety.
Indeed, in its attempts to weaken popular resistance against renewed dictatorship, the military has blocked the delivery of humanitarian aid in many areas, as well as destroying food and medical supplies, diverting aid away from the intended recipients, and deliberately targeting, attacking, arresting, and even killing aid workers (African Great Lakes Action Network et al.,2021; Kamal,2023).
Simultaneously, racialised power inequalities remain deeply embedded in the current humanitarian landscape of Myanmar.
International localisation commitments have been translated at the national level via initiatives such as the Myanmar Humanitarian Fund (MHF), which is managed by the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs.
But Myanmar actors described the Humanitarian Country Team (HCT)—which plays a strategic role in shaping the MHF's funding priorities and models—as replicating a top‐down humanitarian coordination and implementation model.
In other words, this humanitarian coordination mechanism is seen as reproducing what has variously been called the ‘empire of humanitarian aid’ or ‘the humanitarian club’—an ‘empire’ or ‘club’ dominated by ‘Global North’ countries and transnational institutions like the United Nations (UN) and international non‐governmental organisations (INGOs) (Barnett and Walker,2015, p. 131; Hilhorst,2018, p. 4).
Additionally, and although the MHF has determined localisation commitments in its humanitarian response plan, including increased direct funding for Myanmar actors and equitable risk‐sharing (OCHA,2023, pp.
30–31), there is in Myanmar—as in other parts of the world (see, for example, Metcalfe‐Hough, Fenton, and Manji,2023)—a lack of transparent information about actual achievements vis‐à‐vis these goals.
Despite the increasingly prominent role of Myanmar actors in leading humanitarian responses, participants in this research therefore lamented that the commitments of international donors and aid agencies have not been met, and that current ‘localisation’ endeavours have failed to redress ongoing power inequalities.
Where there have been shifts in the status quo, these could be better interpreted as ‘localisation by default’, with a move to indirect implementation resulting largely from the access restrictions faced by international agencies, rather than any real ‘localisation by design’ (Global Mentoring Initiative and RAFT Myanmar,2022, p. 9)—or, in other words, rather than any real concerted effort by international actors to redress power inequalities.
At the same time, Myanmar organisations have continued to be constrained not just by the actions of the junta but also by the heavily bureaucratised systems of international agencies.
As demonstrated in the following subsections, these bureaucratic systems can, first, do very real harm to aid workers and communities in Myanmar, and second, reproduce inequalities and injustices in international aid systems—ultimately reproducing logics and structures of coloniality.
International aid agencies have a moral duty to ‘do no harm’ within the contexts where they support and implement humanitarian responses (Anderson,1999).
Over the years, this broad moral duty has also been translated into concrete frameworks, such as Collaborative for Development Action's ‘Do No Harm framework’, foranalysing the impacts of aid on conflict dynamics.5Our evidence from Myanmar shows, though, that international compliance frameworks are commonly experienced by Myanmar actors as top‐down and overly rigid, and that they are unsuited to a highly volatile and politically complex crisis—and that, in often failing to be context‐ and conflict‐sensitive, they can create very real harm by increasing the risks faced by local aid workers and their communities.
Furthermore, the imperative to ‘do no harm’ often ends up being subordinated to the compliance requirements and fiduciary risk management of international agencies.
Our evidence also revealshow, in concrete ways, the bureaucratic requirements of international aid agencies sideline the contextually grounded knowledge and ways of working of Myanmar actors and systems, which are essential to ensure that aid does no harm in this politically complex and sensitive situation.
While some international agencies have temporarily relaxed their compliance requirements in the post‐coup complex emergency, Myanmar aid workers described international actors as too often still prioritising international standards and approaches over the highly contextual and relational approaches of those on the ground.
Research participants commonly experienced international compliance requirements as excessive, unfeasible, and unsuited to a volatile and restrictive setting.
For one, Myanmar aid workers have confronted increasing restrictions on accessing communities, as well as information and communication barriers, including telecommunication shutdowns—which in turn create challenges for collecting and communicating the type of high‐quality, very detailed information still required by many international agencies.
Myanmar CSO staff also said that they are commonly required by international funding agencies to keep hard copies of supporting documentation (such as receipts and beneficiary lists) for at least three to five years—and some even require them to retain this documentation after completing any external audits.
With their agencies under ever‐increasing scrutiny by the junta, Myanmar aid workers reported having to hide sensitive documents, often storing them at staff houses and therefore risking the safety of their personnel, in order to meet compliance standards.
Overall, though, in the eyes of CSO members, this balance has not been achieved; any flexibility on behalf of international agencies was seen as a temporary ‘fix’ rather than a sustained change in the status quo.
Indeed, while some international agencies have increased the flexibility of their compliance systems and rules since the 2021 coup, civil society actors in Myanmar depicted increased flexibility as more of an exception than a rule; and, over time, as ‘emergency exceptions’ expire, they voiced fears that this flexibility would revert to ‘business‐as‐usual’ practices.
Myanmar actors portrayed such practices as not only doing harm in various ways, but also as reinforcing deep‐seated inequalities and injustices in aid systems and practices.
As revealed through the examples above, and as unpacked further below, international compliance requirements end up homogenising what counts as humanitarian standards and approaches.
They sideline the context‐sensitive knowledge and ways of working of actors on the ground; as noted by Ryan Burns (2014, p. 56) elsewhere, this ‘knowledge politics foreclosed multiple ways of understanding’ what constitutes desirable and effective humanitarian action.
Overall, our research reveals that donor compliance systems can cause many forms of practical harm for Myanmar aid workers and communities, as well as reproducing coloniality in international aid, as outlined in the following subsection.
While compliance systems are important to ensure the accountability and effectiveness of internationally funded aid programmes, past research has demonstrated that top‐down and rigid approaches can end up prioritising ‘upward’ (donor‐facing) rather than ‘downward’ (community‐facing) accountability (Kilby,2006).
Moreover, as highlighted by decolonial scholars like Mihlar (2024), top‐down compliance systems that are imposed in humanitarian responses across the world can reproduce the ‘coloniality of power/knowledge’ (Grosfoguel,2011)—and our research in Myanmar shows how compliance systems have become key to reproducing inequalities and injustices in international aid systems.
Understanding the role of compliance systems in replicating the status quo of unequal power relations is in turn central to comprehending how and why current localisation attempts fail to redress deep‐seated structures and logics of coloniality in international aid.
Drawing on their deep contextual knowledge and strong networks, CSOs in Myanmar have developed low‐profile approaches, which have enabled them to navigate military restrictions and continue to reach communities in need of aid.
They have also developed contextually relevant internal policies and systems to ensure their organisations' accountability and compliance.
But when internationally determined compliance frameworks are imposed on CSOs, the knowledge and expertise of their members are undermined.
As other analysts in Myanmar have noted, the rigid and bureaucratic systems of many international donors and aid agencies ‘conceptually privilege and prioritise their own knowledge and expertise, often imposing Western‐centric structures on contexts for which they are ill suited’ (Walsh,2020).
At a deeper level, furthermore, these systems reproduce what Ramón Grosfoguel (2011) calls the ‘coloniality of power/knowledge’.
They do this by valorising the technocratic knowledge and approaches of international agencies and actors over the ‘ways of being’ of those who are leading responses on the ground (Baguios et al.,2021).
Additionally, top‐down and rigid compliance systems also acted to crystalise divisions and tensions between ‘local’ and ‘international’ actors.
As highlighted by Roepstorff (2020), localisation conceptions and interventions often perpetuate an artificial and hierarchical divide between the ‘local’ and ‘international’—and this criticism is justified.
Yet, at the same time, what we see through the Myanmar example is that compliance regimes in fact act to crystallise and reinforce this artificial division.
Furthermore, they reproduce ‘othering’ constructions of the ‘local’ as always lacking and in need of further intervention, reinforcing the status quo of power inequalities.
In Myanmar, as elsewhere, ‘local’ and ‘international’ actors, systems, and approaches are much more complex, intertwined, and co‐constituted than simple binaries suggest.
But many research participants described an ongoing tendency to essentialise and homogenise the ‘local’, with many international actors failing to recognise the diversity and heterogeneity of actors and systems on the ground in Myanmar.
They also highlighted how the ‘local’ has continued to be pitted against and framed as in many ways ‘less than’ and inferior to the ‘international’.
International actors have commonly cited compliance‐related concerns as barriers to increasing more direct funding to Myanmar actors and systems, and as reinforcing the need for donors to work through international intermediary agencies to channel funding to organisations and networks on the ground.
While it is of course true that Myanmar organisations can be overwhelmed by international compliance requirements, the current narrative reproduces a ‘deficit model’ that essentialises ‘local’ actors and assumes that they are lacking—or, in other words, that the knowledge and practices of ‘local’ actors are inferior to those of ‘international’ actors.
A logical response is then typically ‘capacity‐building’ for local agencies (Mihlar,2024), as well as working with and through (often multiple layers of) international intermediaries.
Participants in our research, including staff of international aid agencies, underlined, however, that it is the current international aid architecture itself and frameworks imposed by international aid agencies that create the local ‘capacity gap’.
They also highlighted the ways in which a ‘compliance‐first’ culture forces agencies on the ground into prioritising what one CSO leader called the ‘capacity to comply’ with internationally determined standards (which, again, are established as the ‘gold standard’), rather than focusing on the ‘capacity to grow’ of their organisation and human resources, as determined by the context and needs on the ground.13This in turn undermines the agency and autonomy of civil society actors and agencies—going against ‘localisation’ as an approach for enhancing the agency of populations impacted by crises to develop their own social contracts and humanitarian systems (Slim,2022).
The supposed ‘capacity gap’ then results in ‘local’ actors being trapped in never‐ending cycles of ‘capacity‐building’, which one CSO leader portrayed as a ‘new form of colonisation’.14This again shows how compliance systems, and the ‘capacity‐building’ approaches of international agencies in relation to these systems, end up reproducing artificial and hierarchical divisions between the ‘local’ and ‘international’—and, more generally, reproducing underlying systems and logics of coloniality.
Analysing compliance systems and practices in Myanmar enables us to understand better how logics and systems of coloniality are reproduced through the bureaucracy of international aid.
In Myanmar, civil society actors have been vital in ensuring life‐saving aid for civilians affected by the multi‐pronged humanitarian crisis triggered by the 2021 coup d'état.
These actors have demonstrated that they are adept at navigating Myanmar's complex and unstable political environment, drawing on their highly contextual knowledge and networks to deliver aid through low‐profile and conflict‐sensitive approaches.
Yet, in a setting where humanitarian actors are being deliberately targeted by the military, a ‘compliance‐first’ culture highlights the visibility and impedes the agency and autonomy of Myanmar CSOs, doing very real harm to their staff and their communities.
This ‘compliance‐first’ culture also reinforces power inequalities in aid relationships and ultimately reproduces underlying logics and systems of coloniality in international aid.
The compliance regime in Myanmar illustrates the broader inadequacy of contemporary localisation endeavours, which fail to redress underlying logics and systems of coloniality embedded within the humanitarian sector (Mihlar,2024).
As shown in this article, international compliance systems valorise the technocratic knowledge and approaches of international agencies over the contextually grounded knowledge and ways of working of actors on the ground.
In so doing, they reproduce what Grosfoguel (2011) calls the ‘coloniality of power/knowledge’, and they maintain the prominence of international aid workers (typically from the ‘Global North’) as ‘experts’ and providers of superior ‘technical’ knowledge.
This superiority in turn reproduces colonial binary constructs of ‘civilised’ and ‘enlightened’ versus ‘primitive’ and ‘backward’.
Localisation endeavours have also been criticised by analysts like Roepstorff (2020) for perpetuating an artificial and unhelpful divide between the ‘local’ and ‘international’.
Yet, while such criticisms are very valid, what we see here is that compliance regimes crystallise and reinforce this artificial division.
In addition, they reproduce constructions of the ‘other’ as always lacking and in need of further intervention, which in turn reinforces the status quo of power inequalities and injustices.
These findings have significant implications for humanitarian systems and practices beyond Myanmar.
As argued by decolonial scholars, it is essential to recognise and redress ongoing coloniality in international humanitarian systems.
As Mihlar (2024, p. 10) maintains, ‘[d]ecoloniality does not require discarding the methods, tools, and practices of the Global North but dislocating the powerful position they hold and reconfiguring them with “othered”, “marginalised” knowledge and ways of being’.
While the real impacts of the United States Agency for International Development funding freeze and further major cuts to Western aid remain to be seen, the current ‘crisis’ in international aid can also be viewed as a time of opportunity to move truly beyond systems and practices that continue to privilege Western ontologies and epistemologies and reinforce a fundamentally unequal status quo.
Indeed, radical changes are needed in international aid systems and practices to decentre and dismantle the powerful position of ‘international’ actors and to recognise and valorise the leadership, agency, knowledge, and practices of those who are driving humanitarian responses on the ground in complex emergency situations.
Without these changes, ‘localisation’ will ultimately fail to redress ongoing inequalities and injustices within the humanitarian sector.
Our initial research on compliance systems in Myanmar was supported through a partnership project funded by an international NGO, which cannot be named due to security concerns.
The authors would like to thank all those who participated in this research, and who unfortunately cannot be named due to the current security situation in Myanmar.
Special thanks are also due to the international NGO that funded our collaborative work with Myanmar civil society organisations, and who also cannot be named right now.
Of the 25 interviews, 21 were conducted in Burmese, with the rest held in English.
Myanmar's currently ‘acute’ and multifaceted complex emergency needs to be understood within the context of a long history of structural violence and conflict.
In this sense, the complex emergency is not entirely novel; however, the 2021 coup has provoked an ‘acute’ crisis, which is characterised by country‐wide instability and violence, the collapse of the economy and public services, and unprecedented levels of displacement and humanitarian need.
Online interview, Myanmar CSO leader, 15 February 2022.
Online interviews, Myanmar CSO leaders, November–December 2024.
For more information, seehttps://www.cdacollaborative.org/cdaproject/the-do-no-harm-project/(last accessed on 10 July 2025).
Online interview, Myanmar CSO member, 25 September 2023.
Online interview, Myanmar CSO member, 27 September 2023.
Online interview.
Myanmar CSO leader, 3 October 2023.
Online interview, Myanmar CSO leader, 3 October 2023.
Online interview, Myanmar CSO member, 23 September 2023.
Online interview, Myanmar CSO leader, 2 November 2023.
Online interview, Myanmar CSO member, 2 October 2023.
Online interview, Myanmar CSO leader, 16 November 2022.
Comment made at the online launch of the Myanmar Local Humanitarian Network, 31 January 2022.