Noise and light are frequently cited as major factors contributing to sleep disturbance.
The paediatric intensive care unit (PICU) layout may increase environmental stimuli and limit nurses' control over the environmental disturbances that patients encounter.
This study aims to describe nurses' perceptions regarding the layout of the PICU and its potential impact on environmental disturbances and patients' sleep.
Additionally, it seeks to investigate the extent to which unit layout impacts environmental disturbances across Scandinavian countries.
A comparative cross‐sectional study was conducted using an online questionnaire in three PICUs in three large university hospitals in Norway, Sweden and Denmark.
Out of the 79 study participants, 63% did not agree that their PICU layout was conducive to their patients sleeping well.
While 52% reported having control over the light at nighttime, 55% felt that they were unable to control noise levels during the night.
Monitors and alarms were rated as the highest contributing factors limiting control over noise.
Compared to the Danish nurses, the Norwegian nurses were five times less likely to agree that the unit layout supported a normal sleep–wake cycle.
The Scandinavian nurses perceived the PICU layouts as inadequate for promoting control over the environment and patients' sleep.
The Norwegian PICU layout, with larger multibed units, was perceived as inferior in promoting sleep and controlling noise and light compared with the Swedish and Danish PICUs.
This study provides valuable insights to nurses regarding the specific factors influencing noise and light in the PICU, enabling nurses to take appropriate measures to improve sleep by gaining control over the patient's environment.
Additionally, the results of this study can inform future renovations or modifications of multibed units, with the aim of preventing the layout from restricting nurses' control over the noise and light levels experienced by patients.
Parents of children in the paediatric intensive care unit (PICU) report noise from alarms, machines and nurses in the room as a factor disturbing sleep.
Noise and light have been shown to affect sleep quality and are reported to be the most significant factors disturbing sleep for ICU patients.
Compared to multibed units, single‐patient rooms are more conducive to sleep.
Scandinavian nurses perceive their PICU layouts as inadequate for promoting environmental control and patients' sleep.
The highest‐ranked factors affecting control over noise and light in the PICUs were found to be related to monitors and alarms, as well as patient care and nursing interventions.
Nurses working in a PICU with multibed units perceived the layout as inferior for promoting sleep and controlling noise and light compared with nurses working in two‐bed units.
Considering that the hospital environment can impact children's sleep quality,14and given that nurses may face challenges in controlling environmental factors such as noise and lighting because of the layout and design of the unit,15it is necessary to explore this issue further.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study in Scandinavia on nurses' perceptions of unit layout in terms of sleep.
In particular, it aims to describe nurses' perceptions of the PICU layout with respect to the environment and patients' sleep in Scandinavia.
Moreover, it aims to investigate how the number of patients per room in the PICU layout influences sleep promotion and environmental disturbances by comparing three different PICU layouts.
The three PICUs included in this study were all regional PICUs with a full spectrum of life‐support treatments and invasive monitoring, admitting critically ill children with a wide range of medical and surgical diagnoses.
The PICUs exclusively admitted paediatric patients under the age of 18 years, including those with complex postoperative care needs and those with critical illnesses.
However, they differed in the layouts and designs of the units, as the Norwegian PICU was the only unit with large multibed units.
In addition to single‐patient isolation rooms, the PICU in Norway had rooms for up to four patients, with one of the beds being behind a walled cubicle.
By contrast, the PICUs in Denmark and Sweden had rooms for a maximum of two patients.
This study's target population comprised nurses permanently employed and working in the PICUs, including nurses, registered nurses, critical care nurses and paediatric nurses.
Students and temporarily employed nurses were omitted.
All nurses working in the PICUs who were not on sick leave, vacation or absent for other reasons received an e‐mail containing information about this study and a link to the study questionnaire.
The inclusion period spanned seven weeks during September and October 2023.
Each PICU had a designated local coordinator from the research team, who was responsible for distributing the questionnaire through a research leader employed at their PICU.
The local coordinator monitored the response rate and maintained close communication with the research leader at their respective facility.
Nurse leaders responsible for daily operations at each PICU actively reminded the nurses to complete the questionnaire, and e‐mail reminders were sent twice during the inclusion period.
The questionnaire used in this study was developed by Kudchadkar et al.15to investigate nurses' perceptions of the PICU environment and their work experiences by comparing single‐ and multibed units.
The original English questionnaire was translated and culturally adapted, with approval from Kudchadkar et al., into three new versions: Norwegian, Swedish and Danish.
The translation was performed based on the ISPOR task force's principles of good practice for translation and cultural adaptation.17For each version, two researchers independently conducted the forward translation.
The resulting translations were then merged into a single version for each language.
Subsequently, a professional translator performed a back translation of each version into English.
The research team developed the final translated versions for each language through a harmonization process involving comparisons between the original and translated versions, using both forward and back translations.
Each version underwent separate piloting through a cognitive debrief with nurses working in ICUs, which were different from the PICUs included in this study, to assess comprehensibility and cognitive equivalence and ensure content validity.18Before finalization, a comprehensive harmonization of the languages was performed, incorporating feedback from the cognitive debriefs to ensure the comparability of responses.
The translated questionnaires consisted of 26 questions, divided into 3 sections: 8 questions assessed respondent characteristics, 13 questions were about layout, noise and light in relation to patient care, and 5 questions were on the nurses' work environment with respect to noise and light.
Because of the aim of this study, this article is based on the 13 questions related to patient care.
Of the included questions, most involved a five‐point Likert scale ranging from ‘strongly disagree’ to ‘strongly agree’.
Three questions asked the respondents to rank the factors affecting control over the noise or light in the PICU, and there was one open‐ended question asking for additional comments.
The questionnaire took about 10 min to complete.
The nurses did not receive any compensation for their participation.
Data were collected using Nettskjema, an online questionnaire website developed by the University of Oslo for research purposes.19Before sending out the final version, research colleagues tested the digital questionnaire to identify and eliminate potential technical errors.
While most questions were made mandatory to rule out missing answers, exceptions were made for questions related to specific shifts that not all nurses might work, such as the night shift.
Descriptive statistics (involving frequency, median and range) were used to present the demographic and questionnaire data.
Non‐parametric tests were employed to test for differences in group characteristics based on PICU employment.
The Kruskal–Wallis test was used to analyse the continuous data, while the chi‐squared test was utilized to analyse the categorical data.
In the event of missing data, cases were excluded through pairwise exclusion.
Responses from the PICUs in Norway, Sweden and Denmark were compared using logistic regression, with the odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) showing the odds of agreeing with a statement based on the PICU in which the nurses worked.
The original measurement scale for the outcomes had five categories ranging from ‘strongly agree’ to ‘strongly disagree’.
However, for the logistic regression analysis, we dichotomized the outcomes into two categories: ‘agree’ based on ‘strongly agree’ and ‘agree’, and one category with all the remaining options (reflecting varying degrees of disagreement).
Significant differences in demographic characteristics between the PICUs were used to adjust for confounders.pvalues below .05 were considered statistically significant.
The data were analysed using IBM SPSS Version 29.0.1.0.
All the participants received written information about this study, their participant rights and how the data would be handled.
The questionnaire was anonymous.
After pressing the link to the questionnaire, the participants had to confirm that they had read the information and consented to participate.
Only completed questionnaires were received, and the questionnaire data were stored on a safe research server.
The study was approved by the Norwegian Regional Ethics Committee on 12 May 2023 (ref. no. 346140), the Norwegian Agency for Shared Services in Education and Research on 16 May 2023 (ref. no. 307722) and the institutional review board at each hospital.
A total of 117 nurses received the questionnaire, and 79 (68%) responded.
The response rate by country was 58.6% (17 out of 29) in Sweden, 76.7% (23 out of 30) in Denmark and 67.2% (39 out of 58) in Norway.
Most of the respondents were female (89%), critical care nurses (72%) and working full‐time (72%) (Table1).
Significant differences in education level and age were observed between the groups based on the PICU in which they were employed.
Demographic characteristics of nurses in the three paediatric intensive care units (PICUs).
Almost two‐thirds (63.3%) of the respondents did not agree that the current layout of their PICU was conducive to patients sleeping well at night, and more than half (53.2%) reported that the layout did not promote a normal sleep–wake cycle (Figure1).
Nurse's perceptions of the environment in the paediatric intensive care unit.
Regarding noise control, 83.5% of the respondents did not agree that they were able to control the noise to which their patients were exposed in the daytime, and over half (55.7%) stated that they could not control noise at nighttime.
When asked about their ability to manipulate the environment to promote sleep through light control, 69.6% of the respondents agreed, and more than half (52%) agreed that they had control over their patients' exposure to light at nighttime.
The respondents identified monitors and alarms, the voices of clinical staff and other patients in the room as the top three factors affecting patients' exposure to noise, with monitors and alarms ranked highest during both daytime and nighttime.
However, other patients in the room were ranked higher than the voices of clinical staff during nighttime, while the opposite was true during daytime.
Regarding the factors adversely affecting their light control at night, the respondents ranked the most important aspects as follows: patient care / nursing interventions, safety issues and other patients in the room (Table2).
Respondents' ranking of factors affecting noise and light.
Without adjusting for confounding variables, the nurses employed in the PICU in Norway were nearly eight times less likely than their counterparts in Sweden to agree that the layout contributed to patients' ability to sleep well.
Similarly, the nurses from Norway were almost four times less likely than those in Sweden to agree that they could promote sleep through noise control.
Compared with the nurses from Denmark, those employed in the PICU in Norway were five times less likely to agree that the layout promoted a normal sleep–wake cycle and three times less likely to report having control over the light that their patients were exposed to during the day.
However, when adjusting for age and education, which were significantly different between the groups, only two findings of the analysis remained statistically significant.
Specifically, the nurses employed in the PICU in Norway were nearly five times less likely to agree that the layout promoted a normal sleep–wake cycle compared with those in Denmark.
Similarly, the nurses in Norway were nearly five times less likely to agree that they could promote sleep through noise control compared with their Swedish counterparts (Table3).
Odds ratios for agreeing with the statements based on places of employment.
The results of this study indicated that compared with the respondents from the PICUs in Denmark and Sweden, the nurses from the PICU in Norway, where the rooms accommodated more patients than the other PICUs, perceived an inferior layout that posed more significant challenges in facilitating optimal sleep for patients.
These are significant findings that are supported by previous research, which has shown that multibed units are more likely to have a disturbing environment, whereas the environment in single‐patient rooms is more straightforward to manipulate in terms of limiting disturbances for the patient.10,29One can also expect more traffic from health care personnel in multibed rooms,10and room entries by health care personnel have been shown to cause nighttime awakenings.30Research has demonstrated that adult patients in single‐patient rooms have a significantly lower prevalence of delirium compared with those in multibed units and that children sleep significantly more in single‐patient rooms compared with multibed units.8,31It is also noteworthy to observe that in this study, other patients in the same room were highly ranked as a factor affecting control over the noise and light.
This factor would be eliminated in a PICU with only single‐patient rooms or with fewer beds per room, as in the PICUs in Sweden and Denmark.
Despite being one of the few studies conducted on sleep in the PICU in a Scandinavian context, this study is not without limitations.
One such limitation is the small number of respondents, which may have affected the results.
This study has not accounted for other factors that may have differed in the three PICUs and affected the respondents' answers.
The results of this study can provide informed guidance for future architectural construction and renovation projects, as well as for modifications to existing multibed units.
Health care administrators should consider the impact of the hospital environment on patients' sleep quality and take proactive measures by modifying the layout to minimize the stimuli that patients are subjected to during admission.
Furthermore, despite the limitations imposed by the PICU layout, there are several interventions that individual nurses can and should implement in their practice to limit the noise and light that their patients experience.
By addressing factors that impact noise and light control, such as minimizing the number of alarms from medical equipment and utilizing flashlights for patient assessment at night, nurses can gain greater control over the patient's environment, ultimately improving the patients' sleep quality.
According to the respondents, the layouts of the included PICUs in Scandinavia were inadequate for limiting stimuli and promoting sleep.
The nurses in our study reported that there was substantial room for improvement in the layout of the PICU environment to better promote children's sleep and nurses' ability to control or manipulate noise and light.
Even though there are several interventions that nurses can implement to lower noise and light for sleep promotion, the layout limits their possibilities.
The respondents in Norway more often perceived themselves as having a PICU layout that was poorly designed to promote sleep compared with those employed in Sweden and Denmark.
Strategies for redesigning or modifying the environment to limit environmental disturbances should be assessed.
Participants consented to the study by answering yes to consenting to participate on the first page of the questionnaire before the rest of the questionnaire was conducted.