The NHS Patient Safety Syllabus highlights human factors as a core education theme for all healthcare staff.
Despite this, no multidisciplinary Human Factors courses in NHS Wales have previously been reported.
A multidisciplinary Human Factors course was created and delivered by a faculty with varied clinical and teaching backgrounds.
The 1‐day course included an introductory lecture, themed workshops and discussion about practical applications using pre‐filmed simulations.
A pre‐course handbook and online platform facilitated consolidation of the learning.
To date, we have run three courses with a total of 83 attendees: 38 doctors, 34 nurses, three managers, three midwives, two physician associates, one dentist, one pharmacist and one physiotherapist.
All attendees were requested to complete pre‐course and post‐course questionnaires to ascertain their level of learning and knowledge gained.
The majority, 62.0% (49/79) reported having minimal or no prior human factors teaching, clearly identifying the need for education.
Confidence about human factors increased by 65.2% (17.7% [14/79] to 82.9% [68/82]), and awareness of the impact of human factors increased by 39.5% (54.4% [43/79] to 93.9% [77/82]) following the course.
Qualitative feedback suggested that the course was well delivered, engaging and interesting.
Comments also showed the learning would help attendees improve their clinical practice by sharing their knowledge.
This multidisciplinary pan‐speciality Human Factors course has proven its need and value for all healthcare professionals.
Next steps include increasing the number of courses delivered and widening the reach across the Health Board as well as gathering evidence on the patient safety implications.
Human factors refers to the interactions between humans and the rest of a system.
The main principle of human factors is to understand the ‘fit’ between staff members and their environment.
It includes equipment design, processes, communication, teamworking, leadership and organisational culture.
Human Factors professionals use human factors principles and methods when designing systems and services to optimise human and overall system performance [1].
Understanding these principles can result in a reduction in human error and therefore positive results on quality of care and patient safety [2].
Human factors refers to the interactions between humans and the rest of a system.
‘Non‐technical skills’ (NTS) and ‘human factors’ are related but distinct concepts.
NTS refer to cognitive, social and personal skills that improve safety and efficiency.
This includes situational awareness, decision‐making, communication, teamwork and leadership.
NTS are trainable and measurable [3].
Human factors is a broader interdisciplinary field that focuses on designing systems that fit human capabilities and limitations.
Examples of human factors include workload and fatigue, human‐machine interaction, organisational culture and physical ergonomics [4].
A specific example of human factors would be inadequate design or poor usability of infusion pumps.
If the buttons are too small, difficult to read or the interface is unintuitive, a nurse might inadvertently programme the wrong dose or misinterpret the settings resulting in patient harm.
Well‐developed NTS help individuals adapt to system limitations and mitigate risks, reducing the likelihood of accidents caused by human error.
Effective communication helps teams work seamlessly within a system, ensuring that information flows efficiently and errors are minimised.
Strong NTS ensure that individuals can make informed decisions despite system limitations, workload pressures or unexpected events.
A workplace where NTS like teamwork, leadership and stress management are emphasised supports human factors efforts to create safer and more efficient systems.
NTS training helps individuals adapt to new technologies or procedures, reducing frustration and improving system usability [3].
Medical error in healthcare is a wide‐ranging problem.
Evidence suggests that approximately 1 in 20 hospital admissions are complicated by a preventable human error and 1 in 400 are affected by a serious error [5].
Recognising and mitigating against human factors can actively reduce medical error and improve patient safety [6].
Recognising and mitigating against human factors can actively reduce medical error and improve patient safety.
Following the Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust Inquiry 2010 [7], the Human Factors Concordat was published, emphasising the need for the NHS to work together to avoid or mitigate risk to high‐quality patient care and ensure that such circumstances are not repeated.
To achieve the Concordat's aims, it is vital to ensure that all staff are aware of how human factors affect their everyday clinical practice and embed an understanding of human error and how to mitigate against it in healthcare systems [8].
The evidence published about human factors education, although limited, suggests that providing healthcare professionals with human factors training, covering a variety of topics, can result in course attendees understanding the breadth of human factors principles.
This increased awareness results in increased identification of areas within their clinical work where human factors approaches could result in patient safety improvements [9].
Human factors training is now a core part of many post‐graduate curricula.
Despite the established link between human factors and clinical errors, there remain limited courses available, and those available come with costs and are for specific groups.
There was a lack of generic human factors teaching/training for all healthcare professionals within Wales.
We aimed to fill that education gap by developing, implementing and evaluating a 1 day, free to attend, multispeciality, interprofessional Human Factors course.
Through course evaluations, we assessed the course's effectiveness at increasing awareness and confidence in human factors.
The course was developed by a multidisciplinary, multispeciality group of faculty, with interest and expertise in human factors.
The faculty group consisted of a retired Anaesthetist, a Respiratory consultant, an Emergency Medicine consultant, an ENT surgeon, a paediatric registrar and a consultant nurse in Emergency Medicine.
This was designed to be a generic course for all healthcare professionals and not designed with one speciality in mind.
This was designed to be a generic course for all healthcare professionals and not designed with one speciality in mind.
The course starts with a ‘Human Factors: The Basics’ lecture followed by small group, rotational workshops and then an afternoon analysing the human factors within a pre‐filmed simulation (Table1).
The workshops were themed around communication, conflict, decision‐making and situational awareness.
The afternoon analysis based around pre‐filmed simulation scenarios provided a clinical context to reinforce the knowledge and skills introduced during the lecture and workshops.
Both pre‐filmed scenarios focused on a child presenting with wheeze, with his mother, and the management by the emergency medicine team.
Lesson plans for all sessions can be found inSupplementary Information.
To review why communication is critical in healthcare and the different communication styles.
To discuss challenges in communication and how to improve communication using verbal and non‐verbal approaches.
Content delivery interspersed with short activities highlighting key points, e.g., ability to communicate a message only with voice or only with body language.
To learn about conflict, its types, the effects and how to identify conflict.
Content delivery about conflict and conflict resolution interspersed with simulated conflict scenarios.
To understand the theory of situational awareness.
To understand and demonstrate the practical application of situational awareness.
Content delivery interspersed with videos demonstrating situational awareness and activities using a simulated situation to highlight the importance of developing and maintaining high‐level situational awareness.
To understand what decision‐making is—the process and the factors affecting it.
To learn how to make an effective decision and the importance of this.
Content delivery about the models of decision‐making followed by a decision‐making game where participants are given limited but variable information to make decisions followed by game debrief.
Participants watch two pre‐filmed simulation scenarios with a variety of human factors demonstrated.
In small groups, participants are given a theme to focus their analysis and discussion on before feeding back to the wider group.
Prior to each course, participants were asked to complete a pre‐course questionnaire and were given access to a pre‐course reading booklet.
The pre‐course booklet aimed to provide an overview of human factors, outlining a definition, the history, the importance and its implications on patient safety that could be expanded upon during the face‐to‐face component.
Following each course, participants were asked to complete a post‐course questionnaire, given access to an online platform containing course content and further reading.
The online platform aimed to consolidate learning and direct participants to further learning resources to allow them to develop further knowledge in this area.
The post‐course questionnaire feedback allowed for adjustments to be made in preparation for the next course.
Quantitative data were analysed using descriptive statistics, and qualitative data were analysed using identified themes.
Between September 2023 and September 2024, the course was delivered three times with a total of 83 attendees from one Health Board in Wales.
The breakdown by professional group can be seen in Table2.
The pre‐course questionnaire was completed by 95.1% of participants (79/83), and the post‐course questionnaire by 98.8% (82/83).
Course candidates were from multiple specialities, including adult medical specialities such as cardiology, geriatrics and endocrine, adult surgical specialities such as general surgery, trauma and orthopaedics, and cardiothoracic surgery, emergency medicine, anaesthetics and paediatrics.
Participants were asked ‘How much teaching have you had on human factors’?
with answers on a 5‐point likert scale ranging from ‘Loads/plenty’ to ‘None at all’.
The majority, 62.0% (49/79) reported having minimal or no prior human factors teaching, clearly identifying the need for education.
The majority, 62.0% (49/79) reported having minimal or no prior human factors teaching, clearly identifying the need for education.
Participants were asked ‘How confident do you feel about human factors?’ in both pre‐course and post‐course questionnaires.
Answers ranged from ‘Very confident’ to ‘Not confident at all’ on a 5‐point likert scale.
Confidence about human factors increased by 65.2% (17.7% [14/79] to 82.9% [68/82]).
Confidence about human factors increased by 65.2%.
In both pre‐course and post‐course questionnaires, participants were asked ‘How aware are you of how human factors affects your clinical work?’.
Answers were rated on a 5‐point likert scale from ‘Very aware’ to ‘Not aware at all’.
Awareness of the impact of human factors increased by 39.5% (54.4% [43/79] to 93.9% [77/82]).
Awareness of the impact of human factors increased by 39.5%.
Participants were asked about the clarity of the course's learning objectives and if these were met.
Nearly all participants (98.8%, 82/83) felt that the course's learning objectives were clear and achieved.
The post‐course questionnaire gathered quantitative data including ratings for individual sessions and ratings of the general usefulness, content, relevance, facilitation and organisation.
Figure1, below, shows the scores out of 10 for the course's usefulness, content, relevance, facilitation and organisation.
Course scores, out of 10, for usefulness, content, relevance, facilitation and organisation.
Course attendees were asked to rate the individual course components on a scale of 0–10.
Figure2, below, shows the scores out of 10.
Course scores, out of 10, for individual components of the course.
Qualitative feedback was gathered in the pre‐course questionnaire by asking participants; ‘What are you hoping to gain from this course?’.
Themes of the responses were awareness, knowledge and understanding, minimising and reducing impacts, achieving curriculum needs and ability to teach others.
Gaining knowledge and/or understanding was the aim for the majority of course attendees.
Qualitative feedback was also gathered in the post‐course questionnaire by asking participants open‐ended questions such as ‘What was the best part of the course?’, ‘What learning will change your practice?’ and ‘How could the course be improved for future?’.
Attendees commented that the best parts of the course were its content, often referring to particular sessions they enjoyed, and many attendees said that the best part of the course was ‘all of it’.
Figure3, below, is a word cloud created from the attendees thoughts on the ‘human factors: The Basics’ lecture.
Word cloud representation of course evaluation comments.
Attendees commented that all the content would result in changes in their clinical practice, with many commenting that the learning around communication was particularly beneficial.
The majority of attendees were unable to think of any improvements that could be done to the course.
Of the suggested improvements, the most common themes were changes to the timings of sessions, the need for further breaks between content and some suggested changes to session content.
Figure4, below, is a combination of photographs showing the course in action.
We created a novel, interactive, free to attend, interprofessional, multispeciality Human Factors course.
This educational initiative was designed to help attendees gain an understanding of the principles of human factors, their importance and their application in practice.
Delivering an initial overview lecture allowed the attendees to understand the basic principles of human factors before interactive workshops on the main themes of human factors reinforced the learning through activities and discussions.
The practical applications session allowed the learning to be practised on a simulated clinical situation.
The course was effective, as demonstrated by improvements in awareness and confidence scores and positive course evaluations.
The most noticeable effects were an increase in awareness of the impact of human factors by 39.5% and an increase in confidence about human factors by 65.2%.
This increased awareness should result in increased identification of clinical situations where human factors approaches could result in improved patient safety [9].
The course was effective, as demonstrated by improvements in awareness and confidence scores and positive course evaluations… This increased awareness should result in increased identification of clinical situations where human factors approaches could result in improved patient safety.
Interprofessional education has more impact when aiming to change clinical practice.
As healthcare systems become more complex, collaborative interprofessional team‐based care has been linked to safer, higher quality care for patients [10].
The course promoted collaborative learning and appreciation of a system‐wide approach to human factors.
This was achieved by course attendees being from multiple disciplines and differing levels of training and clinical experiences, alongside a focus on interactivity and discussion in all course sessions.
Interprofessional education has more impact when aiming to change clinical practice… The course promoted collaborative learning and appreciation of a system‐wide approach to human factors… This was achieved by course attendees being from multiple disciplines and differing levels of training and clinical experiences.
The interprofessional, multispeciality nature of the faculty that developed this course has resulted in the course being accessible and generalisable to all staff working in the Health Board.
Within the interactive workshops, activities have been designed to be adaptable to the participants.
As an example, in the conflict workshop, many simulation scenarios are available, and different simulated scenarios are chosen to suit the participants that are involved.
The course has been developed with sustainability in mind.
The course content and resources are held within the Medical Education department, making it available to any faculty that is available on a given course date.
The course faculty group is continuously being grown and developed, acknowledging that reliance on a small group of faculty will limit the availability of the course.
This evaluation has some limitations.
It was a single‐centre evaluation of a small‐ to medium‐sized education programme.
Our data was based on 83 course attendees, but we had more than a 95% response rate to both pre‐course and post‐course questionnaires.
We used a questionnaire that had not been previously validated.
However, the questionnaire was reviewed by members of the medical education department and the course faculty.
The evaluation was also based on self‐reported responses to surveys, with no follow‐up assessment after the post‐course questionnaire.
Paired data were not available for all attendees.
The unidimensional nature of Likert scales limits more nuanced findings.
Long‐term data on the implications on practice is not currently available to support this analysis.
However, plans to analyse the patient safety reporting system within the Health Board pre‐ and post‐introduction of this course are in progress.
This further data will allow us to analyse the patient safety implications of this course over the longer term.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first initiative of its kind providing interprofessional education on human factors to a range of attendees regardless of their speciality.
This course has resulted in widespread increased interest in human factors across our Health Board, neighbouring Health Boards and from Health Education and Improvement Wales.
Further courses need to be delivered to increase the beneficial impact of human factors training and collect further data to reinforce the importance of this education.
This course has resulted in widespread increased interest in human factors across our Health Board, neighbouring Health Boards and from Health Education and Improvement Wales.
Collaboration with neighbouring Health Boards, opening the course up to their staff groups and partnering with Health Education and Improvement Wales are currently ongoing in order to increase the scalability of this project.