Individuals with Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD) are frequent users of mental health services and may be perceived negatively by mental health professionals.
Educational training has been associated with improved attitudes towards individuals with this diagnosis, but few interventions have been delivered in collaboration with lived experience experts.
This study evaluated an educational intervention for mental health professionals that was delivered with lived experience experts.
The impact of the training on staff attitudes, namely personal competence, empathy and treatment optimism was examined.
Professionals in South Australian public sector health and community‐based services attended a 1‐day training on Foundation Skills for working with individuals with BPD.
Each session was co‐delivered with a lived experience expert.
Participants (N= 694) completed a brief survey to assess staff attitudes, namely personal competence, empathy and treatment optimism towards people with BPD pre‐ and post‐training.
They also provided open‐ended feedback about what they liked most and least about the training.
Personal competence, empathy and treatment optimism were significantly improved post‐training.
Participant characteristics related to experience and familiarity with BPD were key factors associated with training outcomes.
The findings provide support for training delivered collaboratively with lived experience experts.
Further research is needed to determine to what extent the lived experience perspective contributed to training outcomes.
Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD) is a complex mental health condition characterised by pervasive emotional dysregulation, impulsivity, unstable interpersonal relationships and poor self‐image (American Psychological AssociationForthcoming).
Individuals with BPD are frequent users of mental health services, with some studies reporting that up to 43% of adult mental health inpatients and 23% of outpatients meet diagnostic criteria for BPD (Carrotte et al.2019; Grenyer2014; McKenzie et al.2022).
Concerningly, research suggests that mental health clinicians perceive individuals diagnosed with BPD as manipulative, unrelenting and time‐consuming (National Health and Medical Research Council2012).
Further, these service‐users are perceived to be more in control of the causes of their behaviour, and in some instances, more dangerous than individuals with other mental health diagnoses (Sansone and Sansone2013).
Studies have also found that clinicians are more pessimistic about treatment outcomes for individuals with BPD, despite evidence to the contrary (Sansone and Sansone2013).
Mental health clinicians also frequently report feelings of discomfort, anxiety and frustration coinciding with behavioural responses such as self‐distancing, avoidance, defensiveness, and reduced helpfulness (Sansone and Sansone2013; National Health and Medical Research Council2012).
A growing body of research suggests that individuals diagnosed with BPD receiving mental health care experience stigma, discrimination, and invalidation (Proctor et al.2021).
Australians with this diagnosis report feeling dismissed, misunderstood and in some cases demonised by health care professionals (Proctor et al.2021).
A survey of 153 Australians with diagnoses of BPD found that 65.4% reported experiencing discrimination when seeking help from mental health services and most felt anxious about discrimination associated with their diagnosis (Lawn and McMahon2015).
Individuals with BPD also reported feeling that they did not receive the help they required, that they were actively ignored, and mistreated by health staff when seeking help (Proctor et al.2021).
Lamont and Dickens (Lamont and Dickens2019) found that individuals with BPD often received minimal information about professionals' roles and their BPD diagnosis which resulted in them feeling unsupported, confused about what to expect and pessimistic about their prognosis (Lamont and Dickens2019).
Unsurprisingly, negative attitudes from care‐providers have been identified as a key barrier to treatment by individuals diagnosed with BPD (Lawn and McMahon2015; Lamont and Dickens2019; Lohman et al.2017).
Strike et al (Strike et al.2006).
explored health service use among suicidal men with BPD and found that engagement with services often followed a cyclical pattern, wherein negative experiences with health care providers were followed by avoidance of health care settings, crisis, and then by involuntary service utilisation.
Thus, negative reactions from care providers may not only impede help‐seeking behaviour in the first instance, but also result in premature termination or sporadic engagement with treatment.
Difficulties experienced by those with BPD are commonly triggered by or occur within the context of interpersonal situations, including the patient‐clinician relationship (Aviram et al.2006).
Given this, when clinicians' respond to challenging interactions with patients with BPD by withdrawing physically or emotionally they may unintentionally trigger or increase behaviours such as self‐harm or suicidality (Aviram et al.2006).
This may not only reinforce stigmatising beliefs about BPD held by clinicians, but also simultaneously reinforce fears of abandonment and negative self‐perceptions (Aviram et al.2006).
Significant gaps in the availability and accessibility of specialist treatment for individuals with personality disorders means clinicians are often required to treat and manage them, without the training or skills to deliver care that meets their needs (Klein et al.2022).
Clinicians report a lack of confidence in their skills and knowledge regarding BPD and have acknowledged a need and desire for further training (McKenzie et al.2022).
Importantly, low BPD literacy among health professionals has been identified as a key factor that contributes to the stigmatisation of individuals with BPD in health care settings (Ring and Lawn2019).
Thus, there is a need for BPD‐specific education and training to assist health professionals to better understand and effectively work with individuals with this diagnosis (Klein et al.2022).
While BPD is associated with more negative reactions from clinicians compared with other diagnoses, this may be associated with factors such as years of professional experience and familiarity.
Baker and Beazley (Baker and Beazley2022) conducted a systematic review of clinicians' attitudes and responses towards BPD which highlighted a consistent trend towards more favourable attitudes among clinicians who had prior training and more regular contact with individuals with BPD.
Alternatively, another study found that while increased contact was associated with more positive attitudes towards BPD among psychologists, social workers and psychiatrists, the opposite relationship emerged among psychiatric nurses, for whom higher caseload numbers were associated with more negative attitudes (Baker and Beazley2022).
Interestingly, less experienced clinicians were found to demonstrate more positive attitudes towards individuals with BPD, despite experiencing more difficulties when working with individuals with this diagnosis than their more experienced colleagues (Baker and Beazley2022).
Training has been shown to be effective in improving mental health professionals' attitudes towards individuals with BPD (Klein et al.2022).
While many studies have demonstrated effectiveness, there are very few empirically evaluated interventions that have been co‐delivered with individuals who have lived experience of BPD and which have involved meaningful longitudinal follow‐up.
‘Co‐delivered’ training refers to that which actively involves individuals with lived experience of BPD in the presentation and facilitation of the training.
Research suggests that in adult education, in‐person contact or first‐person narratives from individuals with a lived experience of mental illness, are more effective at improving attitudes and behavioural intentions toward individuals with mental illness, than education alone (Corrigan et al.2012; O'Reilly et al. Forthcoming).
In the mental health field more broadly, similar approaches to co‐production of training with experts by lived experience has been used to improve nurses attitudes to children presenting with self‐harm (Manning et al.2017).
The few studies that have included individuals with lived experience in clinician training in the context of BPD, have found that the integration of a lived experience perspective is highly valued by clinicians, particularly when the person with lived experience was perceived to be functioning well (Davies et al.2014; Dickens et al.2019; Krawitz and Jackson2007).
The present study examined whether a 1‐day workshop entitled ‘Foundations Skills for Working with People with Borderline Personality Disorder’ (herein referred to as Foundation Skills training), co‐delivered with a person with lived experience of BPD, would improve participant's attitudes towards individuals with BPD, namely feelings of personal competence, empathy and treatment optimism.
Specifically, we hypothesised that participants would demonstrate significantly increased ratings of personal competence, empathy and treatment optimism at the end of training, relative to the beginning.
Also, given the mixed evidence regarding the impact of staff characteristics on attitudes, we undertook exploratory analysis to examine whether change in attitudes differed depending on level of expertise and familiarity with the BPD diagnosis.
The Foundation Skills training has been delivered across South Australia since 2019 by the Borderline Personality Disorder Collaborative (BPD Co).
BPD Co is a South Australian service that was developed in response to the demonstrated need for enhanced, evidence‐based BPD service development.
BPD Co was established to support the implementation of an integrated system of care for people with BPD across all 10 South Australian local health networks (LHNs).
Training, research and service development roles were embedded within the BPD Co team to support implementation of the model of care.
The Foundations Skills training was implemented with the aim to reduce stigmatisation of individuals with BPD within the health system through training and education of staff.
The development of the BPD Co Lived Experience Education (LEE) team occurred in a staged manner, drawing on principles of co‐design and co‐production and is outlined in diagram1.
The process was led by the Lived Experience Project Officer and Training Coordinator.
First, prospective LEE's self‐identified via an expression of Interest (EoI) process attended an information session and workshops covering key considerations on how to contribute LE for educational purposes.
A train‐the‐trainer process followed, which included observation of an experienced educator and workshopping course content.
Third, LEE's developed their personal contributions to deliver the key messages throughout the workshop.
An ongoing cyclical process, supported the training delivery, post‐training support and refinement of personal contributions for the LEE team.
The process utilised for developing a Lived Experience Education Team.
Foundation Skills training is a 1‐day workshop developed by the Project AIR (‘Affect, Identity, Relationships’) Strategy of the University of Wollongong.
The training aligns with the Project AIR Treatment Guidelines for Personality Disorders.
Topics covered include (but are not limited to) diagnostic criteria, prevalence and aetiology, evidence‐based treatments, principles based on the common factors derived from the evidence‐based treatments for working with individuals with BPD and strategies for working with carers and families of individuals with BPD.
All clinicians delivering the Foundation skills workshop have participated in a train‐the‐trainer workshop that followed a ‘watch one, teach‐one, do‐one’ model.
This included the lived experience educators who also participated in a multi‐faceted train‐the‐trainer program, which involved workshops on using lived experience for educational purposes.
Individual mentoring and a group lived experience community of practice was also provided to support ongoing professional development of the lived experience education team.
The train‐the‐trainer model was adopted with the aim of making the training an economical, local and sustainable resource.
The Foundation Skills workshop was delivered by two‐clinician and one lived experience co‐facilitators.
Training sessions were delivered on average to 20 participants per session.
The training was offered face‐to‐face (n= 51) and via video conferencing (n= 3) which supported attendance from regional and remote participants.
This also enabled the education program to continue to be delivered during the global pandemic.
Participants were asked to complete a 19‐item questionnaire designed to assess empathy, treatment optimism and attitudes toward individuals with BPD at the beginning and end of the training.
This questionnaire included items from a Treatment Optimism Summary Scale (Bodner et al.2015), the empathy subscale from the BPD‐Emotional Attitudes Inventory (Black et al.2011) and the Attitude and Skills Questionnaire (Bodner et al.2011b).
All items were scored on a 5‐point scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree, with higher scores indicating greater empathy, optimism, and perceived personal competence.
Internal consistency was acceptable at both pre‐ and post‐test for all three measures (the Empathy subscale from the BPD‐EAI; pre‐test α = 0.62 and post‐test α = 0.68; TOSS; pre‐test: α = 0.64 and post‐test: α = 0.56; ASQ:pre‐test: α = 0.77 and post‐test: α = 0.78).
Social and demographic data were also collected including gender, age, profession, years of professional experience and number of individuals with BPD cared for in the past 12‐months.
Post‐training, participants were asked to rate their satisfaction with the training and how helpful they felt the training was for improving outcomes for individuals with BPD on a 4‐point scale ranging from Not at all = 1 to Very = 4.
Finally, three open‐ended questions were asked about what aspects of the training they got the ‘most’ and the ‘least’ out of, and recommendations for improvement.
Empathy was assessed using three items from the empathy subscale from the Borderline Patients Emotional Attitudes Inventory which was designed to measure feelings of empathy towards patients with BPD (Krawitz2004).
While this is originally a 5‐item scale, the questionnaire used in this study included the three items that were most relevant to the clinical context of the training (e.g., ‘I feel empathy towards people experiencing BPD symptoms/a diagnosis of BPD’ and ‘I would like to relieve the suffering of people with BPD symptoms/a diagnosis of BPD’).
The wording of item 3 was changed from that in the original subscale (‘evoking parental emotions in me’ to ‘evoking caring emotions to me’) to ensure relevance to the participant group.
All items were scored on a 5‐point scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree.
Higher scores indicated greater empathy for people with a diagnosis of BPD.
Clinician's feelings of optimism towards treatment outcomes for patients with BPD was assessed using three items from the Treatment Optimism Scale (Bodner et al.2011b).
Items included statements such as ‘I feel I can make a positive difference in the lives of people experiencing borderline symptoms/diagnosis of BPD’, ‘the prognosis for the treatment of BPD is hopeless’ and ‘I feel professionally competent in caring for a person experiencing borderline symptoms/diagnosis of BPD’.
All items were scored on a 5‐point scale ranging from strongly disagree to strongly agree.
Higher scores indicated greater treatment optimism for people with a diagnosis of BPD.
Clinician's overall personal competence in working with individuals with BPD was assessed using 5 items from the Attitude and Skills Questionnaire (ASQ) (Australian Institute of Health and Welfare2024) (e.g., ‘I am willing to work with people BPD symptoms/a diagnosis of BPD’ and ‘I am enthusiastic about working with people with borderline symptoms/a diagnosis of BPD’).
The ASQ is a 6‐item measure that aims to assess ability and attitudes towards working with people with BPD and includes items relating to willingness, enthusiasm, confidence, theoretical knowledge, clinical skills and clinician optimism.
The item relating to treatment optimism was not included as this was covered by the treatment optimism scale.
All items were measured on a 5‐point scale.
In the current study we reported a total ASQ score which ranged between 5 and 25, with higher scores indicating greater perceived personal competence.
To evaluate changes in attitudes, empathy and treatment optimism, repeated measurest‐tests were completed to compare pre‐ and post‐ workshop ratings across the sample.
One‐way Analyses of Variance (ANOVAs) were used to compare attitudes, empathy and treatment optimism at pre‐test across all relevant participant characteristics.
To explore the association between participant characteristics on the training outcomes, a series of two‐way mixed Analysis of Variance models (ANOVAs) were completed for groups that differed at pre‐test.
Text responses from the open‐ended questions were examined for each post‐training open‐ended question (i.e., what people liked/disliked about training and recommendations for improvement).
Thematic analysis is a flexible approach which can even be used with concise textual data if the focus is on interpretating patterns and meaning (Braun & Clark, 2013).
NVivo (QSR International) was utilised to sort feedback into codes, then common themes, and hierarchy charts were utilised to assist interpretation.
A total of 694 participants completed the training and consented for their information to be analysed for quality assurance between May 2020 and November 2021.
Respondents were predominantly women (81.9%), aged between 35–54 years (46.3%), working across government (47.2%) and non‐government services (49.95%).
Most participants had worked in their profession between 0–4 years (35.9%) or 5–10 years (22.5%) and reported having worked with between 1 and 4 (35.6%) individuals with BPD in the past 12 months.
Participants self‐identified their level of experience working with individuals with BPD as ‘developing’ (51.6%), ‘sound’ (25.8%) or ‘minimal’ (17.3%) or ‘advanced’ (4.8%).
Professions represented included social workers (34.4%), nurses (21.8%), paraprofessionals (15.1%), psychologists (9.7%), occupational therapists (5.4%), mental health peer workers (2.7%), Aboriginal mental health consultants (1.5%), psychiatrists (1.4%), administration staff (0.5%) and other professions (5.8%).
Clinicians employed in government mental health settings worked across a range of contexts, including inpatient units (8.3%), mental health triage services (13.9%), community mental health teams (72.1%) and community rehabilitation centres (2.4%).
This sample is somewhat representative of the general mental health workforce in South Australia where mental health nurses make up the majority of the workforce (42.74%), and also the National mental health workforce which is predominantly female (Bodner et al.2011a).
One‐way ANOVA results are presented in Table1and baseline means and standard deviations in Table2.
One‐way ANOVA Differences For Clinician Characteristic Across Outcome Variables At Pre‐test.
Baseline Means and Standard Deviations for Clinician Characteristics Across Outcome Variables.
Prior to training, feelings of personal competence toward working with individuals with BPD differed significantly between all levels of expertise, with participants with minimal expertise reporting significantly lower personal competence overall.
Similarly, participants who had worked for 0–4 and 5–10 years also reported significantly less personal competence at baseline than participants working in their profession for 11 or more years.
Personal competence did not differ significantly once participants had been working for 5 years or more in their profession.
Before the training, participants who had worked with none or 1–4 clients with BPD in the past 12‐months reported significantly less personal competence, than those who had worked with 5 or more clients.
Baseline feelings of personal competence were similar once participants had worked with 5 or more clients in the past year.
Finally, participants employed in government settings reported greater feelings of personal competence towards working with individuals with BPD, than those working in non‐government settings.
Significant differences in baseline optimism across participant characteristics were also recorded.
At pre‐test, those with minimal expertise reported significantly lower treatment optimism, than the other participants.
Similarly, participants who had worked in their profession for 0–4 years reported significantly lower optimism regarding treatment outcomes for BPD than those who had been working for 5 or more years.
In addition, those who had not worked with any individuals with BPD in the past year reported significantly lower optimism for treatment outcomes, compared to participants who had worked with 1 or more individuals with BPD.
Professionals working in government settings reported significantly greater optimism for treatment outcomes for those with BPD, than those working in non‐government settings.
Comparatively, empathy scores only differed significantly across levels of expertise and number of years in profession at pre‐test.
Participants with minimal expertise reported significantly less empathy towards people diagnosed with BPD, than those with sound and advanced expertise.
In addition to this, participants who had worked in their profession for 0–4 years reported significantly higher levels of empathy towards individuals with BPD than those who had worked in their profession for 20 or more years.
Most participants reported that they were ‘satisfied’ (32%) or ‘very satisfied’ (53.4%) with the training, with 86% rating it as very helpful/helpful in improving outcomes for individuals with BPD.
Participants who were ‘not satisfied’ or only ‘somewhat satisfied’ with the training tended to be social workers, aged between 35–54 or 55–65, who self‐identified as having ‘developing’ expertise in working with individuals with BPD and who were employed in non‐government settings.
The results from a series of repeated measurest‐tests, showed that overall, participant attitudes, empathy, and treatment optimism towards individuals with BPD were significantly greater following training, with large effect sizes.
Table3summarises the results for these analyses.
Overall Personal Competence, Empathy and Treatment Optimism Before and After the Foundation Skills Training.
Note: N= 694, higher scores indicate more positive attitudes and greater empathy and optimism.
Results were not significantly different between modes of training (i.e., face‐to‐face or online), with the effects remaining significant (with large effect sizes) when only face‐to‐face training was considered (N= 639, Personal Competence:t(638) = −27.85,p< 0.001,d= 2.41; Empathy:t(638) = −13.90, p < 0.001,d= 1.55; Optimism:t(638) = −22.90,p< 0.001,d= 2.10).
Mixed‐model ANOVAs showed a significant main effect of training, with all participants showing an improvement in personal competence following training.
However, the effect of training was moderated by significant interactions between level of expertise (F(3,690) = 36.29,p< 0.001, partial eta2= 0.136), number of years in profession (F(3,685) = 3.63,p= 0.013, partial eta2= 0.016), number of individuals with BPD worked with in the past 12‐months (F(4,686) = 7.41,p< 0.001, partial eta2= 0.041) and whether participants worked in the public sector or in a non‐government setting (F(1,672) = 7.51,p= 0.006, partial eta2= 0.011).
To examine these interactions further, contrasts were performed across all levels of the independent variables.
The results revealed that training had the greatest impact on perceived personal competence for those who identified has having minimal expertise in working with individuals with BPD (Figure1).
In addition to this, the Foundation Skills Training was found to be associated with greater improvement in perceived personal competence for participants who reported working in their profession for 0–4 years, compared to those who had worked in their profession for 11–19 years.
Those who had worked in their profession for 0–4, 5–10 and 20 + years all showed a similar level of change post‐training, as did those who had been worked for 5–10, 11–19 or 20 + years.
Similarly, participants who identified as having worked with no individuals with BPD in the past 12‐months demonstrated the greatest improvement in perceived personal competence following the Foundation Skills training.
Participants who identified working with 1–4 individuals with BPD in the past 12‐months also demonstrated significantly greater improvement personal competence post‐training compared to those who identified having worked with 5–10, 11–19 or 20 or more individuals with BPD.
Professionals who had worked with 5 or more individuals with BPD all demonstrated comparable improvement in personal competence as a result of the training.
Participants across both government and non‐government settings showed significant improvement in personal competence towards BPD post‐training, however this was greatest for those working in non‐government contexts.
Results revealed a significant interaction between Foundation Skills training and level of expertise (F(3,690) = 6.233,p< 0.001, partial eta2= 0.026).
Those who rated their level of expertise as advanced demonstrated significantly less improvement in empathy post‐training, compared to all other groups (minimal, developing and sound) (Figure2).
While there was a significant main effect of Foundations Skills training (F(1,685) = 183.145,p< 0.001, partial eta2= 0.211) and a significant between‐subjects main effect for number of years in profession (F(1, 685) = 7.883,p< 0.001, partial eta2= 0.033), there was no significant interaction between these two factors.
This suggests that the impact of the training on empathy was similar, regardless of how many years clinicians had worked in their profession.
While all participants showed an improvement in treatment optimism following the Foundation Skills training, there were significant interactions between the Foundations Skills training and level of expertise (F(3,690) = 37.946,p < 0.001, partial eta2= 0.142), number of years in profession (F(3,685) = 2.755,p = 0.042, partial eta2= 0.012), number of individuals with BPD worked with in the past 12‐months (F(1, 4)=9.438,p< 0.001, partial eta2= 0.052) and whether participants worked in a government or non‐government setting (F(1,672) = 5.430,p= 0.02, partial eta2= 0.008).
Post‐hoc tests revealed that, the Foundation Skills training had the greatest impact on treatment optimism for those with less expertise in working with individuals with BPD and that the training had less impact on optimism as clinician expertise increased (see Figure3).
Similarly, the Foundation Skills Training was found to be associated with greater improvement in treatment optimism for participants who reported working in their profession for 0–4 years, compared to those who had worked in their profession for 11–19 years.
As with attitudes, those who had worked for 0–4, 5–10 or 20 + years all showed a similar increase in optimism post‐training, as did those who had been working for 5–10, 11–19 and 20 + years.
Participants who identified having worked with no individuals with BPD in the past 12‐months demonstrated the greatest improvement in treatment optimism following the training, compared to all other groups (i.e., those who reported working with 1–4, 5–10, 11–19 and 20 or more individuals with BPD).
Those who reported working with 5 or more individuals with BPD in the past year all demonstrated similar improvement in treatment optimism following the training.
Again, while participants across both government and non‐government settings demonstrated an improvement in treatment optimism following the training, this was most improved for those working in non‐government contexts.
Thematic analysis of all open‐ended feedback was undertaken to explore what participants indicated they got the most or least out of the training day and recommendations for improvement.
Key themes that emerged across questions included reflections on training content, delivery, lived experience and training impact.
There were 630 references to what people liked about the training.
The lived experience co‐facilitation was most frequently referenced positively (i.e., 198 references) with comments such as, ‘the benefit of having a trainer with lived experience and sharing anecdotes through‐out the session was fantastic ‐ powerful in helping me be a better clinician’.
Some participants expanded on why they valued the lived experience co‐facilitation with reasons including increased insight, hope and optimism, and contextualising the training content, e.g., ‘the lived experience helped build empathy and hope as a therapist’ and ‘deeply personal and triumphant story resonated with me and inspired me’.
In contrast, there were 8 references to the lived experience contribution which were negatively valanced or recommendations for improvement such as ‘The lived experience person overshared, talked too much, dominated.
Great information from them but they could “pull back a bit”’.
The delivery of training was reflected on positively (i.e., 164 references) with participants noting the quality of the resources, the knowledge and skill of the facilitators, and interactive activities (e.g., inclusion of a quiz, videos, role play, and group discussions).
Though there were people that noted aspects of delivery that they liked least (i.e., 103 references) such as the scope and pitch of the day ‘It was targeted at new graduates and so I felt I did not really add a huge amount to my learning needs’ and ‘As a non‐clinical worker with very limited knowledge prior it was a great intro but felt many aspects were more outside my current scope of practice’.
There was also feedback provided about the resources which included some references to increasing font size on the handouts, aligning slides and improving audio on the videos.
There was also feedback and recommendations about the structure of the day.
The content of the training was reflected on positively (i.e., 143 references) with particular reference to psychoeducation about BPD and the common factors across interventions.
Many people valued the practical skills included in the training such as ‘to remember to validate people's feelings, not to transfer your feelings onto them’.
There were also some people who felt there wasn't enough focus on practical aspects e.g., ‘perhaps more space for discussions or reflections ‐ applying theory to examples from our practice’.
Finally, there were also positive references about the impact of training which in addition to developing their knowledge, included clinicians reflecting on their practice and in some cases validating the approaches they were already using.
Some people also asked for further training.
This study aimed to evaluate a BPD‐specific educational intervention for professionals working with people living with BPD, that was co‐delivered with experts by lived experience.
Overall, the results showed that participants' attitudes, namely personal competence, towards BPD, empathy and treatment optimism were improved after the training, compared to before.
These findings are consistent with existing studies.
Thematic analysis of the open‐feedback demonstrated that the most frequently cited aspect of the training that participants got the most out of, was the lived experience co‐facilitation.
This helped to contextualise the content, deepen participants insight and promoted hope and optimism about recovery.
While there is currently limited research examining the efficacy of clinician training that has been co‐delivered with experts by lived experience, the results from this study are encouraging and provide support for this emerging body of literature.
While participant attitudes were improved after the workshop, participant characteristics related to experience and familiarity with BPD were found to be key factors associated with training outcomes.
The results showed the training had the greatest impact on perceived personal competence and treatment optimism for participants who were in the early stages of their career and who identified as being less skilled and less familiar in working with people with BPD.
Professionals in the first 4 years of their career demonstrated a significantly greater improvement in personal competence and treatment optimism, compared to those who had been working in their profession for 11–19 years.
Interestingly, the training had a similar impact on perceived personal competence and treatment optimism for participants who had worked for 0–4, 5–10 and 20 (or more) years, as did it for those who had worked 11–19 and 20 (or more) years.
Intuitively, this pattern of results may be best understood as those in the early stages of their career having the ‘most to learn’ from the training.
Similarly, the greatest improvement in personal competence and optimism was demonstrated by participants who had not worked with any individuals with BPD in the past year, followed by those who had only worked with 1–4 individuals with BPD.
Once professionals had worked with 5 or more individuals with BPD in the past year, the impact of the training on personal competence and treatment optimism was similar, regardless of the total number of individuals worked with during that preceding 12‐month period.
These findings are consistent with existing literature that has shown higher levels of clinical experience and more frequent contact with individuals with BPD to be associated with more positive attitudes and more favourable perceptions regarding the chronicity of this diagnosis (Bodner et al.2015; Bodner et al.2011b; Liebman and Burnette2013; Carrara et al.2021).
The inclusion of people with a lived experience of BPD in the co‐facilitation may have had a particular impact on the attitudes of this group of professionals who have had less exposure to people with a diagnosis of BPD.
In their review of anti‐stigma interventions for health care providers working with people with mental illness, Carrara et al (Nembhard et al.2023).
found that the most effective interventions utilised contact‐based education involving either direct or indirect social contact with individuals living with mental health diagnoses.
Comparatively, the impact of the Foundation Skills training on empathy was less influenced by participant characteristics and differed only according to level of expertise.
The results showed that the training was least effective in improving empathy for participants who already had a high level of expertise in working with individuals with BPD, although this group of professionals also reported significantly higher levels of empathy towards individuals with BPD at baseline.
Participants who self‐identified as having minimal to sound expertise all demonstrated a similar improvement in empathy following the training.
While it cannot be ascertained from this study design, it may be that when professionals feel more confident in their ability to work effectively with clients with BPD, their interactions with this client population become less self‐focused and more client‐centred, generating more empathetic responses.
In support of this, Liebman & Burnette (Carrara et al.2021) found that greater expertise and prior training in BPD was associated with greater empathy towards individuals with this diagnosis.
Furthermore, research on empathy in health care has demonstrated links between empathy and clinician knowledge, attitudes and skills more broadly (Treloar2009).
This proposition is in line with speculation that uncomfortable personal reactions and feelings of incompetence may underly mental health clinicians' negative reactions towards individuals with BPD in the first place (Sansone and Sansone2013; Commons Treloar and Lewis2008).
In addition to participant characteristics, the results also revealed differences in training outcomes according to participants' treatment setting.
Whilst professionals across both government and non‐government sectors demonstrated improvement in personal competence, empathy and optimism following the training, personal competence and optimism were most improved for professionals working in non‐government settings.
Given that familiarity and frequency of contact have been shown to be associated with more positive reactions to people with BPD, this finding may reflect the frequency in which professionals working in non‐government settings provide care to individuals with BPD.
Equally, this pattern of results may reflect differences in training or educational opportunities across sectors.
For example, it may be that non‐government organisations receive less BPD specific educational opportunities compared to tertiary mental health settings, where individual with complex presentations such as BPD are considered core business.
Research on the impact of clinician characteristics on training outcomes in the context of BPD‐specific training is mixed.
Commons‐Treloar and Lewis (Clark et al.2015) found that clinicians who had less frequent contact with individuals with BPD demonstrated significantly lower attitudinal improvement post‐training, compared to clinicians who had more regular contact.
Further, Clark and Long (Renneberg et al.2024) found that changes in knowledge following a BPD educational intervention for mental health professionals did not differ at all according to experience or previous training in BPD.
While these findings differ from that of the present study, it is important to note significant differences in methodology, including length of and content of the training evaluated, work setting of participants and acuteness of BPD presentations worked with.
Furthermore, while Commons‐Treloar and Lewis (Clark et al.2015) found contrasting results regarding the impact of frequency of contact on training outcomes, they found that clinicians with fewer years of clinical experience (0–15 years) demonstrated an improvement in attitudes post‐training, whereas clinicians who had with more years of clinical experience (16+) did not.
While these results are more in line with our findings, comparison is limited by differences in the categorical organisation of years of experience.
While Foundation Skills training showed to be effective in modifying participants' perceived personal competence and increasing feelings of empathy and optimism overall, the results suggest that the training may be best targeted towards those who are in the early stages of their career and, or who have had less contact with individuals with BPD.
Given this, future research may wish to further consider the utility of the training in settings where contact with individuals with BPD is likely, but BPD‐specific expertise is less common.
For example, the education system, child protection setting, the broader criminal justice system or at a University level for training of health students across nursing, allied health or medical professions.
Globally, there is growing recognition of the importance of the inclusion of lived experience perspectives of BPD in research, health care service design (and re‐design) and to broaden perspectives of recovery (Proctor et al.2021; Lamont and Dickens2019; Tedesco et al.2024; Wright et al.2016).
In line with this, there have been similar efforts to highlight perspectives of those with lived experience of BPD by BPD advocacy groups such as the National Education Alliance for Borderline Personality Disorder (NEA BPD) and the Australian BPD Foundation.
This study has several limitations that must be considered when interpreting the results.
First, while personal competence, empathy and treatment optimism were greater following the training, this study did not include measures of behavioural outcomes and therefore the extent to which these improvements translate to changes in clinical practice, remains unknown.
Given this, a follow‐up study that examines the clinical practice of attendee's post training (e.g., whether they are seeing more BPD clients or feeling more competent in working with BPD clients) is recommended as a consideration for future research.
Moreover, while clinicians demonstrated improvement directly following the training, this study did not include follow‐up assessment to measure whether changes were sustained.
Future research may benefit from the inclusion of both measures of clinical skills and behaviour, as well as follow‐up assessment of attitudes, empathy and optimism.
This will help to determine the extent to which the Foundations Skills training results in sustained and tangible improvements in the care received by individuals with BPD.
Furthermore, while this study adds to the literature by evaluating an BPD‐specific educational training that was both developed and delivered in collaboration with individuals with lived experience, the study design did not allow for the specific examination of the lived‐experience perspective.
It would be useful for future research to consider the use of a control and experimental groups in which lived experience involvement is varied, as well as interviews with lived experience experts regarding their experiences of co‐delivering training.
This would also act to provide further, more robust evidence for the effectiveness of the Foundation Skills training.
Additionally, the measures used within this study were modified to fit the specific clinical context of the training, so information on content and construct validity, as well as re‐test reliability was not available.
Lastly, because all individuals who participated in the training self‐nominated to undertake further education on BPD, they may have been more open to attitudinal change.
Consequently, the results of this study may not generalise to clinicians who have less interest in learning about BPD.
In conclusion, this study provides support for the Foundations Skills training as an effective intervention for modifying mental health clinicians' attitudes towards BPD.
The findings suggest that training that is developed and delivered in collaboration with experts by lived experience can lead to increases in clinicians' feelings of personal competence, empathy and optimism regarding treatment outcomes for individuals with BPD.
However, further research is needed to determine to what extent the lived experience perspective contributed to the training outcomes.
The results provide further support for existing literature that highlights clinician training an important tool for targeting BPD‐related stigma within health care settings and adds to the limited body of research evaluating BPD‐specific training that has been developed in collaboration with individuals with BPD.
For the Foundation Skills training specifically, the results showed that clinician characteristics related to experience and familiarity with BPD played an important role in the level of benefit received from the intervention.
This finding has clinical implications for the delivery and implementation of the Foundation Skills training moving forward and may be useful in informing the application of other, similar intervention programs targeted at improving clinician attitudes and emotional reactions toward individuals with BPD.
The study was approved by the University of Adelaide Human Research Ethics Sub‐Committee for the School of Psychology (approval number: 21/66).
All participants provided consent for their information to be audited for quality assurance purposes.
All authors consent to the publication of this paper.