After the identification of five novel feline erythrocyte antigens (FEAs) and evidence establishing FEA 1's immunogenicity, attempts to sensitize a cat to FEA 4 unexpectedly resulted in the production of alloantibodies directed against an unknown antigen, named FEA 6.
To estimate the prevalence of FEA 6 as a presumably new antigen, identify corresponding naturally occurring alloantibodies (NOAb), and investigate the associations between known FEAs.
Prospective blood typing for FEAs 1–6 was conducted in Type A cats (n= 193), followed by serial crossmatching in groups of 3–7 cats to detect NOAb and identify their target FEA.
Agreement between FEA 6 blood typing and other FEAs was assessed.
Associations between FEAs were evaluated to identify expression patterns.
Among 193 Type A cats, 67% were FEA 6‐positive.
Agreement analyses were supportive of FEA 6 being distinct from FEAs 1–5.
NOAb were detected in 11 cats (5.7%), none of which were anti‐FEA 6.
Only FEA 1‐negative status was significantly associated with the presence of NOAb (OR = 6.6, 95% CI, 1.9–23.1;p< 0.001).
Significant associations were observed between the expressions of FEAs 1 and 4 (χ2= 25.7,p< 0.001), and FEAs 3 and 5 (Fisher's exact test,p< 0.001), respectively.
The immunogenicity and prevalence of the newly discovered FEA 6 raise concerns regarding its clinical relevance and role in posttransfusion sensitization.
FEA 1/FEA 4 and FEA 3/FEA 5 pairs might belong to distinct antigenic systems.
Knowledge in feline transfusion medicine has expanded in recent years owing to the characterization of feline erythrocyte antigens (FEA) outside the AB system [1,2,3,4].
AB blood typing remains standard practice before transfusion given the presence of strong anti‐A naturally occurring alloantibodies (NOAbs) in Type B cats and the major risk of hemolytic transfusion reaction [5,6,7].
Additionally, with up to 29% of cats reported to possess NOAb against non‐AB antigens, extensive research has been carried out to better define their clinical relevance to the efficacy and safety of feline blood transfusion [1,2,4,8,9,10,11].
The first feline blood group unrelated to the AB system,Mik, and its corresponding alloantibodies were described in 2007 [4].
Subsequent mapping efforts led to the identification and characterization of five novel distinct FEAs (FEAs 1–5, designated in chronological order of identification) based on corresponding NOAb in a population of Type A, transfusion‐naive cats [1].
Random crossmatching between two cats revealed a 3.9% risk of incompatibility, detecting 7% of cats with NOAb [1].
Since then, anti‐FEAs 1–5 sera (i.e., five distinct sera targeting each of the described FEAs) have been banked and made available for extensive blood typing purposes.
Information has been lacking regarding the immunogenicity of FEAs, notably the risk that a cat might develop clinically relevant non‐AB alloantibodies after a blood transfusion [10,12].
In 2022, two FEA 1‐negative transfusion‐naive cats transfused with FEA 1‐positive blood were sensitized against FEA 1 within 5 days posttransfusion [2].
In this study, an acute hemolytic transfusion reaction was also reported in an FEA 1‐negative, transfusion‐naive anemic cat after receiving Type AB‐compatible, non‐crossmatched whole blood, later confirmed crossmatch‐incompatible.
Subsequent transfusion of Type A, FEA 1‐negative red blood cells (RBCs) from a compatible donor resulted in a long‐lasting increase in packed‐cell volume (PCV).
Similarly, the immunogenicity of FEA 4 was recently investigated by transfusing FEA 4‐positive RBCs to four FEA 4‐negative, transfusion‐naive cats [3].
Although none developed anti‐FEA 4 alloantibodies, one cat unexpectedly developed posttransfusion alloantibodies detectable from 21 days posttransfusion against a presumably distinct FEA, namely FEA 6.
Anti‐FEAs 1 and 6 polyclonal sera were subsequently banked [2,3].
The objectives of this study were (1) to estimate the prevalence of FEA 6 as a potential new antigen and update the respective prevalence of FEAs 1–5 within the region served by a university veterinary hospital, including the greater Montreal area, Quebec; (2) to assess the association between FEA 6 and age, sex, and breed; (3) to examine associations between FEAs 1–6; (4) to estimate the prevalence of NOAb and identify associated risk factors; and (5) to investigate whether any of the detected NOAb target FEA 6.
This prospective study was conducted at the Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vétérinaire (CHUV) of the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine of Université de Montréal between September 2021 and March 2022 following approval by the Animal care and use Committee of Université de Montréal (Rech 21‐2145).
Employee‐owned or student‐owned cats (n= 67) from the university hospital, with informed consent obtained specifically for this study following an internal recruitment call.
Client‐owned cats (n= 24) presented to the general practice service for routine care, sterilization, or minor health issues, with informed consent for participation.
Shelter cats (n= 5) located at the same hospital were included when the shelter notified the research team of availability.
Surplus ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) anticoagulated blood samples (n= 111) submitted to the hospital's Diagnostic Laboratory for hematological analysis, from either hospitalized cats (n= 85) or cats from external clinics (n= 26).
Cats were recruited on a first‐come, first‐served basis, depending on eligibility and the researcher's capacity to form pools of six cats, with one to two pools analyzed weekly depending on logistical capacity.
The following information was collected when available: breed, age, sex, PCV (or hematocrit) and total solids.
Cats were not included if they were known FIV or FeLV‐positive, had received prior blood transfusion, or had been previously diagnosed with an autoimmune disease.
These criteria were verified either through the medical records, including for shelter cats, or directly with the owners during recruitment.
For diagnostic laboratory samples (Source 4), medical records were available and reviewed only if the cat was an internal hospital patient.
If a sample came from an external clinic, the cat's medical history was not accessible, but it was still included if no exclusion criteria could be confirmed.
For cats directly recruited into the study (Sources 1–3), 3 mL of blood was collected via jugular venipuncture during recruitment and immediately centrifuged as described below.
For surplus diagnostic samples (Source 4), only EDTA blood samples collected within the past 3 days and stored at 4°C were included.
All blood samples followed the same processing protocol: PCV (or hematocrit) and total solids were determined if not already in the medical record.
Samples were centrifuged at 3000gfor 5 min, and RBCs and plasma were separated.
RBCs were washed three times using isotonic saline (0.9% NaCl) before 10 μL was mixed with 1000 μL of low ionic strength saline (Ortho Clinical Diagnostics, Raritan, New Jersey) to obtain a 0.8% RBC suspension.
Blood typing, crossmatching, and interpretation were performed by a single observer (F.B.
).
AB blood typing was performed in all cats using a saline gel column technique, as previously described [1].
Briefly, six‐column cards filled with gel beads and no added reagent (ID‐Micro Typing System Cards, Ortho Clinical Diagnostics, Pompano Beach, Florida) were used.
Fifty microliters of 0.8% RBC solution were added to (1) 25 μL of anti‐B reagent (Triticum vulgarislectin, 8 mg/mL, stored at −15°C); (2) plasma from a Type B cat from the hospital's blood donor colony (anti‐A serum); or (3) sterile isotonic saline (0.9% NaCl) as a negative control.
Extensive blood typing for FEAs 1–6 was conducted in Types A and B cats using the gel column method described above.
In this step, either banked sera from previously identified cats with NOAb [1] (anti‐FEAs 2–5) or polyclonal sera from previously sensitized cats [2,3] (anti‐FEAs1 and 6) were utilized.
RBC migration through the gel was scored as 0: all RBCs at the bottom; 1+: some RBCs dispersed in the lower half of the column, yet the majority found at the bottom; 2+: RBCs distributed throughout the column; 3+: most RBCs distributed in the upper half of the column, some agglutinated at the surface; 4+: all RBCs agglutinated at the surface, forming a red line.
For this step, reactions ≥ 1+ were considered positive, indicating the expression of the tested FEA.
For convenience, the term “serum” (plural “sera”) hereafter refers to both NOAb (anti‐FEAs 2–5) and sensitized polyclonal alloantibodies (anti‐FEAs 1 and anti‐6).
AB and B cats, and any cat with a positive saline test during Step 1 were excluded from later steps and omitted from statistical analysis.
Type A cats were subsequently crossmatched in pools of 3–7 to assess the presence of NOAb.
This was performed similarly using the gel column method, with 25 μL of plasma from each cat mixed with 50 μL of 0.8% RBC solution from every other cat in the same pool, including an autocontrol (plasma and RBCs from the same cat).
RBCs' migration through the gel was scored from 0 to 4+, as described above.
In this step, only reactions ≥ 2+ (i.e., indicating the presence of NOAb) were considered incompatible to increase specificity, and cats with a positive autocontrol were excluded.
When NOAb were detected in a cat, additional EDTA‐anticoagulant blood sample (5 mL) was eventually collected depending on the cat's availability, and plasma was banked at −20°C for further investigation.
When NOAb were detected, specific incompatibilities within each pool were analyzed based on the extensive blood typing results to infer which FEA these NOAb targeted.
This method assumes that a cat can only have NOAb against an FEA it does not express (to prevent self‐reactivity) and that each NOAb is directed against a single FEA, rather than multiple FEAs simultaneously; otherwise, accurate deductions cannot be made.
A practical example is provided in Figure1.
Illustrative example of the method used for identifying the target antigen of newly detected naturally occurring alloantibodies based on crossmatch incompatibilities.
Cat 33.6's plasma was found incompatible to all FEA 5‐positive cats in the pool (i.e., crossmatches between cat 33.6 and cats 33.1, 33.3, 33.4 and 33.5) and compatible to all FEA 5‐negative cats (i.e., crossmatch between cat 33.6 and cat 33.2).
Given that this cat was FEA 5‐negative, its NOAb were likely directed against FEA 5.
Besides, all other cats were compatible with each other (data not shown).
−, negative (blood typing) or compatible (crossmatch); +, positive (blood typing) or incompatible (crossmatch); A/C, autocontrol; FEA, feline erythrocyte antigen.aResults ≥ 1+ were considered positive for blood typing, whereas results ≥ 2+ were considered incompatible for crossmatching.
To specifically identify anti‐FEA 6 NOAb, if a group fortuitously consisted solely of FEA 6‐negative cats (i.e., susceptible to have anti‐FEA 6 NOAb), each plasma was retested against known FEA 6‐positive and FEA 6‐negative RBCs to confirm the true absence of anti‐FEA 6 NOAb.
Serum titers were measured for suspected anti‐FEA 1 NOAb, with the titer defined as the highest dilution of plasma with phosphate‐buffered saline at which a positive agglutination reaction (≥ 1+) was observed, expressed as the corresponding dilution factor.
Statistical analyses were performed using SAS Statistical Software, version 9.3 (SAS Institute Cary, North Carolina).
Descriptive data are presented as median, range, and percentage.
Prevalence of FEAs 1–6 and of NOAb with 95% confidence intervals (CI) were estimated.
To establish whether FEA 6 is a distinct antigen from other FEAs, the agreement between FEA 6 blood typing results (positive or negative) in comparison to other FEAs, McNemar's test, percentage of agreement, Kappa statistic, and Gwet's coefficient were estimated.
For the McNemar's test, the null hypothesis was that the proportion of cats with a positive reaction for the anti‐FEA 6 serum was the same as the proportion of cats with a positive reaction for a second NOAb.
The percentage of agreement between anti‐FEA 6 and a second NOAb was estimated as the proportion of cats that had the same FEA typing results (defined as positive or negative) divided by the total of cats tested for the two NOAb.
Associations between FEAs 1–6 were estimated using Chi‐square or Fisher's exact tests (if ≥ 1 cell of the contingency table had an expected frequency less than five) with Bonferroni post hoc correction to adjust for multiple testing.
Univariable logistic regressions were used to model the status for FEA 6 according to cat's sex, age, and purebred status, as well as the presence of NOAb (reaction ≥ 2+) according to cat's characteristics (sex, age, purebred status) and extensive blood typing results.
To identify factors independently associated with the presence of NOAb or with FEA 6 status, a multivariate logistic regression analysis was performed including all variables withp< 0.2 (likelihood ratio test) in univariate analyses, followed by a backward selection procedure withp> 0.05 as the criteria for rejection.
Odds ratios (ORs) were used to present the results with a significance level of 0.05.
From September 2021 to February 2022, 207 cats were enrolled; 193 (93%) were Type A. Thirteen Type B and one AB cat were excluded after the extensive blood typing step.
Type A cats included 85 females, 100 males, and 8 of unknown sex.
The median age was 5.7 years (range, 3 months to 19.8 years;n= 170).
Most cats were domestic shorthairs (n= 155), followed by Highland Lynx (n= 5), Persian (n= 5), Sphynx, Siamese (n= 3 each), Ragdoll (n= 2), and Bengal, Maine Coon, Oriental shorthair, Siberian, and Himalayan (n= 1 each).
Breed was unknown for 15 cats.
FIV/FeLV tests were negative in 141 cats; the viral status of 52 was undetermined.
The median RBC volume percentage (hematocrit or PCV) was 37% (range, 15% to 53%) and the median total solid or total proteins was 70 g/L (range, 59–120 g/L).
All saline tests were negative (no autoagglutination).
Medical history was unknown for 26 cats in the surplus EDTA group.
The extensive blood typing results for the 193 Type A cats are shown in Table1.
FEAs 1 and 5 were the most common, found in 82% and 87% of cats, respectively.
FEAs 2 and 3 were less frequent, occurring in 9% and 15% of the study cohort, respectively.
FEA 6 had a prevalence of 67%.
During FEA 6 blood typing, positive agglutination reactions in the gel column were graded from 1+ to 4+ in 39, 59, 18, and 13 cats, respectively.
Among the 13 Type B cats, the prevalence of FEAs 1–6 was 86%, 43%, 50%, 57%, 100%, and 93%, respectively.
Prevalence of FEAs 1–6 compared to published prevalence in Type A cats from Quebec, Canada (2021–2022).
Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; EA, feline erythrocyte antigen.
In the study by Binvel et al. [1], seven naturally occurring alloantibodies (NOAb) were identified, three of which (NOAbs 4, 6, and 7) targeted the same feline erythrocyte antigen (FEA), which was referred to as FEA [4,6,7] or, more conveniently, FEA 4.
In this table, the prevalence of FEA 4 is the prevalence of “FEA 6” reported in the aforementioned study, as it was the antigen for which the largest number of cats were tested.
For reference, the prevalences of “FEA 4” and “FEA 7” were 70/93 (75%) and 42/74 (57%), respectively.
Table2compares the reaction between anti‐FEAs 6 and 1–5 sera.
McNemar's test was statistically significant for each pair, except FEA 6/FEA 4 (p= 0.32).
Overall agreement was low (< 75%) across all pairs.
Similarly, Cohen's and Gwet's Kappa coefficients indicated low agreement (< 0.20), except for FEA 6/FEA 5 (Gwet's AC1 = 0.42).
Despite the moderate agreement, the cat sensitized against FEA 6 (whose serum was used for FEA 6 blood typing) was also FEA 5‐positive [3].
Therefore, it could not have been sensitized against FEA 5.
Agreement between FEA 6 and FEAs 1–5 blood typing results determined by McNemar's test, percentage of agreement, Cohen's Kappa, and Gwet's AC1 in Quebec, Canada (2021–2022).
Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; FEA, feline erythrocyte antigen; neg, negative; pos, positive.
No association was found between FEA 6 status and age, sex, or breed (Table3).
Association between the status for FEA 6 and demographic characteristics of Type A cats in Quebec, Canada (2021–2022).
Sex, age, and breed were not recorded for 8, 22, and 25 cats, respectively.
p‐value from univariable logistic regression modeling the presence of FEA 6 (likelihood ratio test).
The percentage of cats positive for each FEA based on the positive or negative status for each other FEA is shown in Table4.
Briefly, assuming that the expression of a given FEA is independent from that of other FEAs, its prevalence within FEAs subgroups (FEAs 1–6 positive or negative) should match its overall prevalence within the study population.
Contingency table analysis with Bonferroni correction revealed significant associations between FEA 1/FEA 4 (χ2= 25.7,p< 0.0001) and FEA 3 / FEA 5 (Fisher's exact test,p< 0.0001) expressions, suggesting that these pairs of FEAs are associated.
Notably, no FEA 1‐negative cat was simultaneously FEA 4‐negative, indicating at least one of these two antigens is invariably present in this population.
The expression of FEA 6 appeared independent of the expression of other known FEAs.
Number (%) of positive cats for each FEA according to its status (positive or negative) for every other FEAs.
Note:Statistical significance was set at < 0.001 to account for multiple testing (Bonferroni correction).
Fisher's exact test applied to the 2 × 2 contingency table of FEAs 1 and 4 was statistically significant (χ2= 25.7,p< 0.0001) in Type A cats.
Pearson's chi‐square test applied to the 2 × 2 contingency table of FEAs 3 and 5 was statistically significant (p< 0.0001) in Type A cats.
A total of 856 crossmatches were performed across 37 pools of 3–7 Type A cats, with each cat crossmatched with an average of 4.2 others.
Twenty‐nine incompatible reactions (≥ 2+) were observed: 28 graded 2+ and one graded 3+, representing 3.4% of all crossmatches.
This identified 11 cats with NOAb (nine domestic shorthair, one Bengal and one Persian), totaling 5.7% (95% CI: 2.4%–9.0%) of all Type A cats.
Two cats were incompatible with only one other cat in their pool (pools of four and five cats), four with two others (pools of two to five cats), two with three others (pools of five cats), two with four others (pools of four and five cats), and one with all five others (pool of six cats).
Among FEAs 1–6, only FEA 1‐negative status was significantly associated with higher odds of carrying NOAb (OR = 6.6, 95% CI, 1.9–23.1;p< 0.001).
Neither sex, age, nor breed predicted NOAb presence on multivariate analysis (Table5).
Distribution of Type A cats and associations with naturally occurring alloantibodies according to their clinical and demographic characteristics in Quebec, Canada (2021–2022).
Abbreviations: FEA, feline erythrocyte antigen; NOAb, naturally occurring alloantibodies.
Sex, age, and breed were not recorded for 8, 22, and 25 cats, respectively.
Results ≥ 2+ were considered incompatible (i.e., presence de NOAb).
These results derived from the second step of the study where cats were crossmatched within pools of three to seven individuals.
p‐Value from univariable logistic regression modeling the presence of NOAb (likelihood ratio).
Based on the extensive blood typing performed in all cats, the target antigen for 7 of the 11 cats with NOAb could be inferred, as illustrated in Figure1.
Three of them were suspected to be directed against FEA 1, one against FEA 4, and one against FEA 5.
Titers obtained for suspected anti‐FEA 1 alloantibodies ranged from 1:4 to 1:8.
Each pool had at least one FEA 6‐positive cat.
Two cats were suspected to have NOAb against FEA 6.
Further testing was conducted using RBCs from two known FEA 6‐positive cats and two FEA 6‐negative cats, serving as positive and negative controls, respectively.
No incompatibilities were observed in these crossmatches, suggesting that these alloantibodies were most likely directed against undetermined FEAs rather than FEA 6.
Similarly, the incompatibilities observed in the four remaining cats with NOAb could not be linked to the known FEAs 1–6 antigenic system; this means they were likely directed against an antigen or group of antigens yet to be determined.
This study first aimed to estimate the prevalence of FEA 6 as a presumably new antigen using stored plasma from a cat that had developed uncharacterized non‐AB alloantibodies 21 days following a packed RBC transfusion [3].
Agreement analysis confirmed FEA 6 as distinct from the known FEAs 1–5, with a prevalence of 67% in the study population.
No anti‐FEA 6 NOAb were detected among the 64 FEA 6‐negative cats.
The study findings further refine understanding of the FEA system by updating the respective prevalence of FEAs 1–5 and NOAb in a large feline cohort and suggest distinct FEA expression patterns, particularly involving the pairs FEA 1/FEA 4 and FEA 3/FEA 5.
The initial objective was to estimate the prevalence of FEA 6 as a potential new antigen and update the prevalence of FEAs 1–5.
Consistent with previous data, FEAs 1 and 5 were the most frequent, followed by FEAs 4, 3, and 2 (Table1) [1].
In the original publication describing FEA 6 sensitization of an FEA 6‐negative feline recipient, 41% (7/17) of prospectively typed cats were positive for this antigen [3]; one strength of this study is the large number of Type A cats included and blood typed (n= 193; prevalence of 67%), possibly explaining slight prevalence differences despite both studies being conducted in the same area.
Although the conventional agglutination test tube is often referred to as the gold standard for antibody detection in the veterinary literature, it has been replaced by gel column agglutination technology in people as the reference method [13].
We used this technique for blood typing (AB and FEAs 1–6) and crossmatching, which also ensures comparability with previous research [1,2].
It was shown to be less labor‐intensive than the routine tube testing, simpler to perform, and operator‐independent for result interpretation [1,4,8,9,10,12,14,15].
Excellent sensitivity and specificity have been reported in human and veterinary medicine [15,16,17].
A prospective study demonstrated a higher sensitivity of the antiglobulin‐enhanced gel column test over the saline gel column test for the detection of blood‐related incompatibilities in cats [8].
Using a similar kit here might have increased the observed prevalence of FEAs 1–6 positive cats and of cats with NOAb.
For extensive blood typing, a positivity threshold of 1+ was used, aligning with Binvel's research [1]; positive reactions for FEA 6 ranged from 1+ to 4+, despite using a single reagent with presumably constant serum antibody titer.
This variability likely reflects the inherent lack of specificity in polyclonal serum, prone to cross‐reactivity (i.e., recognition of non‐specific epitopes), and potential variability in RBC antigenic expression.
Monoclonal antibodies specific for FEAs 1–6 could help clarify whether this variability stems from cross‐reactivity or variable antigen expression, but are not yet available.
There is still a lack of standardization in the veterinary literature regarding the threshold at which gel column crossmatch results are deemed incompatible, with some studies using the Grade 1+ and others the Grade 2+ [1,4,8,14,15,16,18].
Here, a 1+ threshold was used for typing to maximize sensitivity, and 2+ for crossmatching to prioritize specificity.
This minimized false negatives for FEAs 1–6 detection while reliably identifying cats with NOAb causing easily observable in vitro agglutination, possibly of greater clinical relevance.
Notably, all reactions observed during NOAb screening were graded ≥ 2+, indicating that a lower detection threshold would not have changed the reported prevalence of NOAb in this population.
Extensive blood typing of 13 Type B cats was performed, showing a distribution comparable to that of Type A cats.
Although anti‐FEAs sera might also carry weak anti‐B NOAb (since plasma from Type A cats were used as reagent [1,3]) and thus bias blood typing, these exploratory findings in Type B cats suggest that FEAs 1–4 and 6 might be expressed independently from A and B antigens.
Regarding FEA 5 (for which all cats were positive), it remains unclear whether all cats were truly FEA 5‐positive or whether the anti‐FEA 5 serum used might have carried anti‐B NOAb.
Associations found between the expressions of FEA 1/FEA 4 and FEA 3/FEA 5 pairs might indicate distinct regulatory mechanisms.
While the AB system is well understood to be governed by the activity of the cytidine monophosphate‐N‐acetylneuraminic acid hydroxylase (CMAH) gene, which regulates sialic acids on erythrocyte surfaces, it remains speculative whether similar enzymatic systems exist for the aforementioned pairs of antigens.
In Type A cats, the CMAH gene is active, facilitating the conversion ofN‐acetylneuraminic acid (NeuAc) toN‐glycolylneuraminic acid (NeuGc, the A antigen).
In Type B cats, the CMAH gene is inactive, resulting in the presence only of NeuAc (the B antigen).
In Type AB cats, reduced activity of the CMAH gene results in the simultaneous presence of NeuGc and NeuAc in smaller quantities [19].
FEAs 1 and 4 were interdependent in such a way that, while both antigens could be expressed together, at least one was always present, as no cat was found negative for both antigens simultaneously.
This might suggest an underlying enzymatic mechanism that ensures the expression of one antigen if the other is absent.
In contrast, the expression pattern of FEA 3/FEA 5 suggests a competitive or balancing regulatory mechanism, where the presence of FEA 3 decreases the likelihood of FEA 5 expression and vice versa.
However, the underlying mechanism remains hypothetical and might involve more complex genetic or regulatory factors that influence antigen expression.
The next objective was to assess the prevalence of NOAb in this cohort and identify associated risk factors.
NOAbs targeting non‐AB antigens have been documented in multiple countries with a prevalence high enough—up to 29%—to raise concerns about the potential for transfusion reactions in transfusion‐naive cats [1,8,10].
However, differences in crossmatching techniques and geographical considerations limit the generalizability of these results.
In transfusion‐naive Type A cats, 3.9% of 1228 crossmatches were incompatible (graded ≥ 2+), representing 7.0% of cats with NOAb (18 cats) [1].
Comparable results were found in the present study with 3.4% of 856 crossmatches incompatible, detecting 5.7% of cats with NOAb (11 cats).
However, it is worth noting that each cat was crossmatched with a different average of other cats (4.8 and 4.2, respectively) across these two datasets.
Undoubtedly, the more crossmatches are performed, the greater the likelihood of detecting NOAb.
Pools of 6 cats were chosen for convenience, as each gel column card has six columns; larger pools might therefore have identified more cats with NOAb.
Consistent with published literature, only FEA 1‐negative cats had a higher risk of having NOAb (against FEA 1 or other FEAs) [1].
Interestingly, FEA 1 andMikshare similar prevalence, and both anti‐Mikand anti‐FEA 1 NOAb have been associated with posttransfusion hemolytic reaction [1,4].
Whether FEA 1 corresponds to the lost Mik antigen will likely remain an unanswered question, as anti‐Mikreagent is no longer available.
In clinical practice, descriptions of non‐AB incompatibilities associated with NOAb have supported the use of crossmatched RBCs to ensure transfusion efficacy and safety in cats.
There is still a lack of evidence that pre‐transfusion major crossmatching benefits posttransfusion outcomes, as previous retrospective studies showed conflicting results [9,10,20,21,22,23].
A retrospective study reported a lower incidence of febrile non‐hemolytic transfusion reactions in cats receiving crossmatch‐compatible RBCs (2.5%) versus non‐crossmatched RBCs (10.1%) [10].
However, the contribution of NOAb to transfusion reactions could not be fully assessed, as most cats in the non‐crossmatched group were likely “compatible” given the reported prevalences of NOAb.
More recently, a study in transfusion‐naïve cats found no association between crossmatch incompatibility and lower PCV 12 h posttransfusion compared to compatible blood [21].
This timeframe remains questionable and might have been too short to document a significant effect on PCV.
The current study sought to identify the specific target of detected NOAb, going beyond simple compatibility assessments.
Eleven cats with NOAb were identified through crossmatching studies, and each specific FEA targeted by these NOAb was inferred from extensive blood typing and crossmatch incompatibilities.
No anti‐FEA 6 NOAb were found, and six detected NOAb likely targeted unrecognized FEAs.
For example, one cat with NOAb was FEAs 1–6‐positive, indicating its NOAb were necessarily directed against another antigen yet to be characterized.
This emphasizes two key limitations in collecting relevant data regarding non‐AB blood groups.
First, ethical constraints limit research to in vitro studies with polyclonal, natural, or sensitized alloantibodies, which lack specificity.
Second, identifying and banking NOAb is costly, time‐consuming, and requires repeated sampling of cats as well as optimal storage conditions.
The loss of anti‐Mikand more recently anti‐FEA 2 reagent due to the index cat's [1] death underscores the need for molecular characterization of FEAs and monoclonal antibodies production.
In people, as of October 2024, 47 blood group systems are documented to encompass 366 FEAs (International Society of Blood Transfusion, available athttps://www.isbtweb.org).
Although human patients are routinely tested only for ABO and Rhesus(D), extensive blood typing and pretransfusion crossmatching are performed for multiple transfusions due to the 0.7%–9.8% risk of alloimmunization in these patients [24,25].
In theory, the same rationale applies to cats, although the current knowledge is yet insufficient to make strong recommendations in clinical settings on which antigens should be tested prior to an RBC transfusion (except for A and B) or after documented alloimmunization.
Sensitization risk for a given antigen in a random recipient‐donor pair depends on its prevalence and immunogenicity; the closer the prevalence is to 50%, the higher the likelihood of the donor being positive for this antigen and the recipient negative.
Thus, the newly established prevalence of FEA 6 (67%) and its demonstrated immunogenicity [3] raise concerns about the clinical importance of this FEA, but unlike anti‐FEA 1 and anti‐Mikalloantibodies [2,4], no transfusion reaction related to anti‐FEA 6 antibodies has been documented to date.
Hence, based on available data, only FEA 1 (andMik) might have enough clinical relevance to warrant routine testing.
Mapping non‐AB blood groups in cats ultimately aims to refine treatment strategies for anemic cats needing RBC transfusions by identifying clinically relevant (i.e., immunogenic) FEAs.
While NOAb appeared relatively uncommon in the present cohort, previous studies indicate a notably higher prevalence of non‐AB RBC incompatibilities—25%–27%—in previously transfused cats [10,12,20].
While crossmatching transfusion‐naïve cats is controversial, these findings highlight the importance of posttransfusion crossmatching, ideally starting 48 h after an initial transfusion [26].
However, in cases of blood incompatibility, conducting extensive crossmatching across all available blood units (and/or feline donors) in the blood bank becomes a time‐consuming and costly process that is unlikely to provide practical benefits for the anemic patient.
Targeted antigen typing, starting with FEA 1 due to its immunogenicity and role in hemolytic reactions, could streamline the process by reducing exhaustive crossmatches, saving time and resources [2,4].
Similarly to FEA 1, sensitized antibodies against FEA 6 were mainly composed of immunoglobulin M, which is known to have a greater agglutination capacity than immunoglobulin G and might contribute more strongly to hemolytic transfusion reactions [3,5].
In contrast, lack of alloimmunization to FEA 4 was documented despite sensitization in three feline recipients [3].
Without thorough characterization of existing alloantibodies, whether natural or posttransfusion, efforts to support anemic patients remain limited, potentially delaying identification of compatible blood.
This study has several limitations.
First, 52 cats for which the FIV/FeLV status was unknown were enrolled to allow for a large sample size.
Also, 26 cats had unknown medical histories, especially regarding autoimmune diseases and previous blood transfusions.
While these factors could influence blood typing and crossmatching results [27,28], the study protocol, which included repeated RBC washing, saline control, and autocontrol, mitigated these effects.
Furthermore, a recent large multicenter study did not find an association between retroviral status or health status (sick or healthy) and AB typing results [29].
Second, despite efforts to achieve a representative sample, several limitations related to a potential selection bias must be acknowledged.
The inclusion of cats from a referral hospital and external diagnostic submissions likely resulted in an overrepresentation of sick or chronically ill cats compared to the general population.
This could bias prevalence estimates of FEAs and NOAb, as these conditions might affect immunological profiles.
Therefore, convenience‐based recruitment to maximize weekly enrollment might not reflect a balanced portrait of the feline population.
Third, a single operator performed the analyses and interpreted the results; while this might be felt to be a limitation, the gel column technique has been shown to have excellent interobserver agreement, and the learning curve for execution and interpretation is steep [14,30].
Fourth, a progressive decrease in incompatibility grades during blood typing raised concerns over anti‐FEA reagent stability due to freeze–thaw cycles.
Even though the same reagents were used throughout the study (most of which had been stored in the institution's Blood Bank since the time of Binvel's research [1]), 3+ and 4+ incompatibilities were much more frequent at the beginning than at the end of data collection.
Human studies have demonstrated antibody stability for 30 freeze–thaw cycles (this study exceeded 40 per reagent, excluding clinical use) at −20°C to −25°C, but no such veterinary data exist [31,32].
In conclusion, FEA 6 appears to be a distinct non‐AB FEA in this group of cats.
Its prevalence (67%) and previously demonstrated immunogenicity raise concerns about its clinical relevance and role in posttransfusion sensitization.
Also, the level of agreement between FEA 1/FEA 4 and FEA 3/FEA 5 suggests that they might belong to distinct antigenic systems.
The need for further banking of anti‐FEA reagents, as well as the production of monoclonal antibodies for clinical and research purposes is clear.
Regarding FEA 6, given that no corresponding NOAb were detected, repeating targeted sensitization of the FEA 6‐negative index cat [3] turns out to be an imperfect but equally necessary solution to renew anti‐FEA 6 reagents and contribute to pursuing mapping feline blood groups.
Ultimately, the molecular characterization and genetic determinism of FEAs 1–6 still need to be established.
Authors declare no off‐label use of antimicrobials.