Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has the highest mortality rate among all cancers; hence, multidisciplinary treatment is essential for patients with PDAC.
Although the resectability status, tumour marker,KRAScirculating tumour DNA (mutKRAS-ctDNA) mutations, and GATA binding 6 (GATA6) expression status are promising prognostic biomarkers, their effective integration before and after surgery remains unclear.
In this retrospective cohort study, patients with PDAC who had undergone radical resection were enrolled, and pre- and postoperative independent factors associated with poor prognosis were identified using Cox hazard modelling.
Risk stratification systems were developed using the identified prognostic factors and investigated for the ability to predict prognosis.
A total of 91 patients with PDAC were included (median follow-up duration, 28 months).
Borderline resectable or locally advanced cancer at diagnosis, elevated carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9) level, and mutKRAS-ctDNA-positive status were identified as independent preoperative factors associated with poor prognosis.
The postoperative factors significantly associated with shorter overall survival were low GATA6 expression, elevated CA19-9 level, and mutKRAS-ctDNA-positive status.
Finally, the preoperative and postoperative risk scoring systems developed using Cox modelling hazard ratio values could significantly stratify prognosis after curative resection for PDAC.
A risk stratification system based on liquid biopsy, specialised for each phase (pre- and post-surgery), has been proven to be a useful, simple, and practical prognostic prediction clinical tool to determine the optimal multidisciplinary treatment protocol for PDAC.
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12935-025-03894-9.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has a predominantly poor prognosis among all cancers [1].
More than 80% of patients with PDAC already have locally advanced or distant metastatic disease at diagnosis [2,3]; the median survival time (MST) after potentially curative resection of localised PDAC is reported to be < 30 months [4].
The optimal regimens, duration, and intensity of perioperative adjuvant/neoadjuvant treatment protocols and timing of surgery also vary considerably [5–8].
Thus, practical preoperative or postoperative risk stratification systems that could predict prognosis could prove very useful for overcoming some of these issues.
Notably, since there is a difference in the information available before and after surgery, constructing an optimal risk stratification system for each phase is required.
In the current clinical setting, morphological findings are the main considerations for treatment strategies [9].
Resectability status is a well-known radiographical classification widely utilised for decision-making on initial treatment and has been reported to reflect pathological tumour size, portal vein invasion, resection margin, TNM classification, and prognosis after upfront surgery [10].
Carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9) level is another useful prognostic biomarker reported to correlate with tumour stage and radical resection rate in patients with potentially resectable pancreatic cancer [11].
CA19-9 level has also been shown to estimate malignant potential tumours and determining surgical indication or treatment response, wherein elevated levels have been associated with a lower resectability ratio and poor prognosis in cases of radiographically potentially resectable PDAC [12–14].
In addition to these clinical factors, the utility of novel biomarkers based on genomic analysis has also gained considerable attention.
Cell-free DNA (cfDNA) derived from tumours is often detectable as circulating tumour DNA (ctDNA), which can be a promising biomarker for monitoring tumour progression, treatment response, and prognosis [15,16].KRASoncogene mutations have emerged as important candidates for gene mutation analysis in patients with PDAC, as they are detected in more than 90% of cases [17].
Some studies have reported that patients with preoperatively mutatedKRASctDNA (mutKRAS-ctDNA)-positive have poor prognosis [18,19].
Furthermore, patients with postoperatively mutKRAS-ctDNA-positive have been shown to have shorter survival times than do those who are mutKRAS-ctDNA-negative [20,21].
Thus, mutKRAS-ctDNA status could be a promising biomarker for therapeutic management.
Additionally, several studies have used comprehensive gene expression analyses to investigate tumour biology and molecular subtypes in patients with PDAC [22–24].
Loss of expression of GATA binding protein 6 (GATA6), a transcription factor in pancreas acinar cells known to be involved in epithelial-mesenchymal transition regulation and tumour dissemination [25,26], has been reported as a common predictor of poor prognosis in several studies on PDAC molecular subtypes.
Although the prognostic significance of these conventional and novel indicators has been investigated individually, possible associations between them and the practical utility of combining them in the present clinical setting remain unclear.
This study aimed to identify the prognostic potential of some of these clinical factors and propose a combination of optimal prognostic markers before and after surgery.
This retrospective cohort study included consecutive patients who underwent radical resection of invasive PDAC at Okayama University Hospital, Okayama City, Japan, between January 2016 and October 2020.
Patients were excluded if they lacked pair-matched pre- and postoperative plasma samples, had missing CA19-9 values, had CA19-9 level < 2.0 U/mL (regarded as Lewis antigen-negative), or died within 3 months postoperatively.
Resectability status at initial diagnosis was assessed according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines [9].
Preoperative CA19-9 levels were measured immediately before surgery, and postoperative CA19-9 levels were evaluated after discharge.
Patients without progressive disease based on image analyses and a decrease in serum CA19-9 levels were scheduled to undergo surgery within six weeks after completing NAC or systemic therapy.
Post-operative adjuvant chemotherapy was administered if patients tolerated it.
The details of these treatment protocols in our institution have been previously reported [27].
Overall survival (OS) was defined as the time from surgery to death or last follow-up.
The recurrence-free survival (RFS) rate was calculated from the date of the surgery until confirmed disease recurrence or death.
This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Okayama University Hospital (approval numbers: 2008–022, 2207–020) and was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.
Written informed consent was obtained from all eligible patients.
At our facility, neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) was administered to patients who were diagnosed with resectable (R) PDAC after February 2019.
For patients with borderline resectable (BR) and locally advanced (LA), systemic chemotherapy was administered as the first-line treatment.
Patients without progressive disease, assessed based on image analysis and the changes in serum CA19-9 levels, were scheduled to undergo surgery within six weeks after completion of NAC.
The surgical procedure was determined on the basis of tumour extent, and post-operative adjuvant chemotherapy was administered if the patient tolerated it.
Preoperative and postoperative plasma samples stored at the Okayama University Hospital Biobank (Okadai Biobank) were used for mutKRAS-ctDNA analysis.
Preoperative blood samples were collected on the day before surgery or immediately after induction of general anaesthesia on the day of surgery.
Postoperative samples were obtained during follow-up visits to the outpatient clinic after discharge.
Pathological diagnosis of pancreatic adenocarcinoma was performed by a pathologist, based on the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) TNM classification, 7th edition.
Protocols of cfDNA or genomic DNA extraction from samples are described in Supplemental methods 1.
Extracted cfDNA or genomic DNA was analysed using droplet digital PCR (Bio-Rad, CA, U.S.)
to assessKRASstatus.
SevenKRASmutations (i.e., G12A, G12C, G12D, G12R, G12S, G12V, and G13D) were examined using a multiplexKRASscreening kit (No. 1863506, Bio-Rad), according to the manufacturer’s protocols.
The PCR protocol is summarised in Supplemental methods 2 and Table S1.
Samples with one or more positive droplets in the plasma sample were defined as mutKRAS-ctDNA-positive, whereas those with a mutant allele frequency (MAF) ≥ 0.1% in genomic DNA analysis were defined asKRAS-mutation positive.
Immunohistochemical staining was performed using the same primary tumour sections as those used forKRASstatus assessment.
GATA6 stained sections were scanned using a digital scanner (Zeiss Axio Scan.Z1) at 40 × magnification for whole-slide image analysis.
The digital images were imported into open-source software (QuPath ver.0.3.0) and analysed using cell detection tools (Supplemental Methods 3).
The GATA6-positive cell rate was calculated, and the samples with less than 50% GATA6-positive rate were defined as low-GATA6 based on a previous report [33,34].
Continuous variable data were presented as median (interquartile range [IQR]) values and were compared using the Mann–Whitney U test.
Categorical variables were compared using the chi-squared exact tests.
Survival curves were constructed using the Kaplan–Meier method, and the log-rank test was used for survival comparisons.
Independent poor prognostic factors for OS were determined using Cox proportional hazard modelling.
Variables with a P value < 0.2 from the univariate analysis were fitted into the multivariate Cox models.
Statistical significance was set at P < 0.05.
Preoperative or postoperative risk scoring systems were developed using the Cox model hazard ratios for each identified poor prognostic factor; the usefulness of each scoring system for stratifying prognosis was investigated.
All statistical analyses were performed using JMP (version 14.2.0; SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA).
During the study period, preoperative plasma samples were obtained from 122 patients who underwent radical resection of PDAC.
Of these, 20 patients without postoperative plasma samples; 10 patients without detectable CA19-9; and one patient who died were also excluded.
Thus, 91 patients were included in the final analysis (Fig.1a).KRASmutations in ctDNA were analysed using blood samples taken before and after surgery.
Additionally, expression analysis of GATA6 was performed using the resected specimen after surgery (Fig.1b).
The clinicopathological characteristics of these patients are summarised in Table1.
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy was administered to 55 (gemcitabine/S-1 [GS], n = 22, 24.1%; gemcitabine/nab-Paclitaxel [GN], n = 31, 34.0%; modified oxaliplatin/irinotecan/fluorouracil/leucovorin [FFX], n = 2, 2.1%), while 36 (39.6%) patients underwent upfront surgery.
Of the 91 patients, 60 (65.9%) were initially diagnosed with resectable (R), 25 (27.5%) with borderline resectable (BR), and six (6.6%) with unresectable locally advanced (UR-LA) PDAC.
Elevated CA19-9 levels (≥ 40 U/mL) were detected in 35 (38.5%) and 19 (20.9%) patients preoperatively and postoperatively, respectively.
The median duration between surgery and postoperative CA19-9 assessment was 36 (31–49) days.
Adjuvant chemotherapy (S-1 for six months after surgery) was administered in 79 (86.8%) cases.
The median follow-up period after surgery was 28 (15–42) months.
Until the last follow-up, 49 (53.8%) patients experienced recurrence.
The MST for the study cohort was 45 months.
The mutKRAS-ctDNA status and GATA6 expression data are shown in Fig.1c.
The median duration between surgery and postoperative sample collection for mutKRAS-ctDNA analysis was 36 (31–56) days.
No significant relationships were observed between postoperative mutKRAS-ctDNA status and intervals from surgery to postoperative plasma sample collection (median interval days, mutKRAS-ctDNA negative; 36 days, positive; 46 days, P = 0.202, Fig. S1).
Preoperative and postoperative mutKRAS-ctDNA were detected in 19 (20.9%) and 21 (23.1%) cases, respectively.
Tumour GATA6 expression was defined as low in 21 (23.1%) of cases.
There were no significant relationships between neoadjuvant chemotherapy and these genomic factors (Table S2a-c).
Both pre- and post-operative mutKRAS-ctDNA status significantly influenced the MST after surgery (preoperative: not reached [NR] vs 44 months; HR: 0.43; 95% CI: 0.17-1.11; P = 0.006; Fig.1d, postoperative: NR vs 21 months; HR: 0.38; 95% CI: 0.15-0.93; P = 0.004; Fig.1e).
The MST in the low GATA6 group was marginally significantly lower than that in the high GATA6 group (45 months vs 23 months; HR: 0.51; 95% CI: 0.22–1.19; P = 0.057; Fig.1f).
Examining the status of mutKRAS-ctDNA and GATA6 revealed that several areas of no overlap existed.
The mutKRAS-ctDNA analysis can be evaluated pre- and post-operatively.
On the other hand, GATA6 expression analysis using the resected specimen can only be evaluated postoperatively.
Therefore, we considered that by understanding the characteristics of each marker and establishing the optimal combination of prognostic markers for both pre- and post-operative phases, we could establish the optimal combination of markers for each phase.
According to the results of univariate and multivariate analysis for OS based on preoperative clinical factors, BR or LA at diagnosis (hazard ratio [HR]: 2.39, 95% confidence interval CI 1.16–4.91, P = 0.017), preoperative elevated CA19-9 value (HR: 4.05, 95% CI 1.89–8.69, P < 0.001), and preoperative mutKRAS-ctDNA-positive status (HR: 3.47, 95% CI 1.56–7.69, P = 0.002) were independent poor prognostic factors (Table2).
Next, a scoring system was calculated as the sum of the weighted scores for each parameter (Fig.2a).
In the comparison of OS among the preoperative scores using the Kaplan–Meier method, patients with higher risk scores tended to have shorter OS than did those with lower risk scores (Fig.2b).
The patients were then divided into three risk groups according to their score: the low-risk (score 0), intermediate-risk (scores 2–5), and high-risk (scores 6–9) groups.
The MST in the low-risk group was significantly higher than that in the intermediate-risk group (NR vs 44 months, HR: 0.22, 95% CI 0.09–0.48, P = 0.006, Fig.2c), and that in the intermediate-risk group was significantly higher than that in the high-risk group (44 months vs 14 months, HR: 0.24, 95% CI 0.08–0.72, P < 0.001).
In addition, Kaplan–Meier curves for RFS based on the scoring system were also significantly stratified (Fig. S2).
Conversely, survival by preoperative clinical stage could not be significantly stratified (Fig.2d).
Therefore, the optimal combination of parameters for preoperative risk assessment included the resectability status (BR or LA at diagnosis), mutKRAS-ctDNA-positivity, and elevated CA19-9 levels.
When conducting preoperative risk assessment, evaluating and combining these three factors is recommended.
Not all pancreatic cancers can be resected; however, the resected specimen can be analysed postoperatively.
According to the univariate and multivariate analysis of postoperative clinicopathological factors, low GATA6 expression (HR: 2.64, 95% CI 1.22–5.72, P = 0.013), elevated postoperative CA19-9 value (HR: 3.66, 95% CI 1.80–7.47, P < 0.001), and preoperative mutKRAS-ctDNA-positive status (HR: 2.32, 95% CI 1.09–4.91, P = 0.027) were independent poor prognostic factors (Table3).
The postoperative risk score was calculated as the sum of the weighted scores for each parameter, as well as preoperatively (Fig.3a).
As with the comparison of OS for preoperative scores, patients with higher risk scores tended to have shorter OS than those with lower risk scores (Fig.3b).
Therefore, patients were assigned to three risk groups according to their postoperative score—the low-risk (scores 0–2), intermediate-risk (score 3), and high-risk (scores 4–7) groups.
The MST in the low-risk group was significantly longer than that in the intermediate-risk group (NR vs 28 months, HR: 0.40, 95% CI 0.11–1.38, P = 0.019), and that in the intermediate-risk group was significantly longer than that in the high-risk group (28 months vs 9 months, HR: 0.38, 95% CI 0.14–1.00, P = 0.026) (Fig.3c).
Furthermore, there was a tendency for the cumulative interval until recurrence to become shorter as the score was higher, although not statistically significant (Fig. S3).
However, the pathological stage did not significantly stratify prognosis after radical surgery (Fig.3d).
In conclusion, the optimal parameters for postoperative risk assessment; CA19-9 levels, mutKRAS-ctDNA positivity, and GATA6 expression status, should be evaluated and combined when performing postoperative risk assessment.
Herein, we have established a method for assessing risk based on mutKRAS-ctDNA status that is optimal before and after surgery (Fig. S4).
Combining markers that can only be obtained before surgery (resectability status) and those that can only be obtained after surgery (GATA6) with mutKRAS-ctDNA status and CA19-9 would enable accurate risk assessment.
Our study demonstrated the possibility of developing a practical and useful stratification system using genomic information to provide more effective multidisciplinary treatments for managing patients with PDAC.
First, we confirmed that perioperative plasma sample mutKRAS-ctDNA status and GATA6 expression in resected specimens were useful prognostic indicators.
Next, our findings demonstrated that a combination of new biomarkers based on genomic analysis (mutKRAS-ctDNA and GATA6 expression) and widely used prognostic indicators in clinical practice (CA19-9 and resectability status) can clearly stratify post-surgical prognosis in patients who had undergone radical resection for pancreatic cancer.
As the optimal timing of surgical resection could be determined by assessing pre-operative mutKRAS-ctDNA status and the optimal intensity of adjuvant therapy could be determined by analysing GATA6 expression and post-operative mutKRAS-ctDNA status, our findings could help overcome urgent challenges in pancreatic cancer treatment, for which there are few useful prognostic indicators, and devise optimal treatment strategies according to malignant biological potential assessed using genomic information.
The pre- and postoperative mutKRAS-ctDNA detection rates were 20.9% and 23.1%, respectively, which are comparable to those in previous studies with similar cohort sizes [15,18,19].
Some reports indicate higher ctDNA detection rates with a larger number of plasma samples [20].
These differences suggest the importance of sample volume in ctDNA analysis for future clinical applications.
Although our study included both patients who had and had not received NAC, no correlation was observed between the presence or absence of NAC and status of each biomarker.
A recent report suggested that NAC may alter the ctDNA status and that cases with ctDNA clearance after NAC may have a favourable prognosis [32].
However, since this study included cases in which samples were stored in our facility's Biobank just before surgery, it was impossible to verify the dynamics of ctDNA before and after NAC.
Hence, we plan to analyse these issues in our ongoing study (UMIN000042331).
The optimal timing for postoperative sample drawing remains debatable.
Some reports have suggested that ctDNA detected on the third postoperative day may be responsible for intraoperative tumour manipulation [28].
This report found no association between postoperative positive ctDNA and poor prognosis.
In contrast, other reports that collected postoperative samples 4–8 weeks after surgery showed that postoperative positive ctDNA had an association with poor prognosis [29].
Further verification is warranted to confirm the optimal first postoperative timing for ctDNA analysis.
Therefore, this is also a key topic of our ongoing research.
Our research also demonstrated the clinical significance of GATA6 by examining the entire tumour section.
In our study, prognosis tended to be shorter in the low GATA6 expression group.
Moreover, low GATA6 expression was independently associated with poor postoperative prognosis using multivariate analysis.
GATA6 expression has been reported to correlate with malignant potential in patients with pancreatic cancer, wherein GATA6 can regulate epithelial-mesenchymal transition; its downregulation induces tumour cell invasion and dissemination in PDAC [24].
GATA6 has also recently attracted attention as a poor prognostic subtype marker in pancreatic cancer cases [22–24].
Additionally, low GATA6 expression through biopsy-based analysis has been reported to be more common in patients with distant metastases, particularly liver metastases [33].
Thus, GATA6 might be a potential marker for tumour malignancy.
If its significance is demonstrated in biopsy specimens before surgery, its usefulness may be further expanded, although further analysis will be required since the amount of tissue available for analysis differs between resected specimens and biopsy specimens.
Our preoperative risk stratification system based on three preoperative prognostic factors—mutKRAS-ctDNA status, CA19-9 value, and resectability status—could significantly stratify the postoperative prognosis.
The median OS in the “high-risk” group was 14 months, which was as low as that in patients with distant metastases at initial diagnosis in previous studies [30,31].
Conversely, the 3-year survival rate of the 25 patients in the “low-risk” group was 82.1%, which was an excellent treatment outcome.
Notably, although no significant differences were observed in prognosis between patients preoperatively diagnosed with Stage IIA or IIB/III, our risk systems showed that they could significantly stratify prognosis.
These results suggest that accurately assessing the true malignant potential of a tumour using preoperative diagnostic imaging alone is difficult.
Considering that mutKRAS-ctDNA status and CA19-9 values ​​may improve during preoperative treatment [32], our preoperative risk system might hold promise for determining the optimal timing of surgery in the current pancreatic cancer treatment, in which preoperative systemic chemotherapy is becoming widely used.
Postoperative ctDNA was detected in 21 cases (23.1%), and low GATA6 expression was also observed in 21 cases (23.1%).
However, only a small subset of patients (six of 21, 28.6%) exhibited both features.
Among the 21 cases with detectable ctDNA, eight (38.0%) cases had elevated postoperative CA19-9 levels.
Similarly, among the 21 cases with low GATA6 expression, only six (28.6%) showed elevated CA19-9 levels.
These findings suggest that ctDNA, GATA6 expression, and CA19-9 levels may have limited correlation with one another.
Nevertheless, this study showed that a combination of these indicators could significantly stratify prognosis, even postoperatively.
Several recent studies have shown that postoperative adjuvant therapy in patients with pancreatic cancer who have undergone radical resection is useful for improving treatment outcomes [7,8].
However, the optimal treatment regimen and duration of adjuvant therapy remain unclear.
One of the main reasons for this is the lack of indicators of optimal postoperative adjuvant therapy strategies.
Currently, pathological findings are commonly used as indicators of the malignant potential of a tumour after radical resection; however, the modification of preoperative treatment, which is becoming widely used, may make accurately assessing this potential in cases of pathological tumour findings difficult.
In fact, although prognosis tended to worsen with pathological progression in our analysis as well, the differences were not significant.
Our postoperative scoring systems combining postoperative mutKRAS-ctDNA status, CA19-9 value, and GATA6 expression were able to significantly stratify postoperative prognosis in surgically treated cases.
Thus, assessment of malignant potential from various aspects, including postoperative mutKRAS-ctDNA status and GATA6 expression level, might help to select intensification of adjuvant therapy; single-agent therapy for the low-risk group, and multi-agent regimens or extending the duration of adjuvant therapy for the intermediate or high-risk groups.
This study has several limitations.
First, it was a retrospective, single-centre study with a small sample size.
Second, this study included patients who received preoperative treatment or not.
Thus, further verification in validation cohorts is required.
Third, the optimal timing for postoperative analysis of the biomarkers remains unclear, as the period between surgery and postoperative plasma collection for mutKRAS-ctDNA and postoperative CA19-9 analyses varies from patient to patient.
Despite these challenges, the results of this study highlight new possibilities for multidisciplinary pancreatic cancer treatment with improved outcomes; thus, multicentre prospective randomised controlled trials are warranted to resolve these issues.
In conclusion, our risk stratification system using mutKRAS-ctDNA, which is set up before and after surgery, could be a valuable tool in clinical practice.
Particularly, using the resectability status preoperatively and the GATA6 expression level postoperatively as a combination factor for theKRASctDNA status is beneficial.
We thank Tae Yamanishi and Sueishi Tomoko for their assistance with performing the experiments.
We also thank the Okayama University Hospital Biobank (Okadai Biobank) for their assistance with performing the experiments.