The purpose of this study was to examine how the work rate (WR) influences whole‐body metabolic rate (MR) and more local measures of intensity (i.e., pole power, joint power, and triceps brachii (TB) and vastus lateralis (VL) tissue saturation index (TSI)) across skating style sub‐techniques in cross‐country skiing (XCS).
Five‐minute efforts were performed at a range of submaximal speeds at constant inclines of 2% for G4, 5% for G3, and 12% for G2.
Pole forces and 3D motion capture were used to calculate pole, elbow, and shoulder power.
TSI in the TB and VL muscles was measured using near‐infrared spectroscopy.
There was a significant interaction effect of WR and sub‐technique on MR (p< 0.001), with a steeper slope in G4 followed by G3 and G2.
Similar interaction effects were evident for shoulder power (p< 0.001), but neither for elbow power (p= 0.512) nor for arm or leg tissue saturation (p= 0.766).
Relative pole and arm power contributions were independent of WR but differed between sub‐techniques.
Both VL and TB had greater TSI in G4 (p= 0.025) and G3 (p< 0.001), respectively, compared to G2, and the triceps brachii had a ∼15 ± 7% (p< 0.001) greater TSI than the vastus lateralis across sub‐techniques.
Differences in WR‐induced responses on various metabolic and mechanical responses across sub‐techniques demonstrate the necessity of a more nuanced view on exercise load and intensity, especially on the local joint and muscle level, in XCS.
Work rate induces different physiological responses across cross‐country skiing sub‐techniques in the skating style.
External exercise intensity has nuanced effects on different levels of internal intensity.
Pole power was highest in G3 (∼58%) followed by G4 (∼51%) and G2 (∼41%) but not affected by the work rate.
Work rate led to a larger decrease in vastus lateralis compared to triceps brachii oxygen saturation (i.e., 0.3% per 10 W).
Cross‐country skiing (XCS) is an outdoor endurance sport typically conducted in hilly terrain, necessitating the use of specialized sub‐techniques tailored for different incline‐speed combinations.
In the skating style of XCS, the predominant sub‐techniques are G2, G3, and G4 commonly applied in steep uphill terrain (low speed), moderate uphill terrain (moderate speed), and flat terrain (high speed), respectively.
The sub‐techniques differ by pole push‐off on every (G3) or every other ski push‐off (G2 and G4) and lateral symmetry (G3 and G4) or asymmetry (pole plant and arm position; G2) (Andersson et al.,2010; Losnegard,2019).
In XCS, both the external work rate (WR) and metabolic rate (MR) fluctuate with changing terrain.
It has consistently been demonstrated that WR is the highest in steep terrain, primarily attributed to higher gross efficiency (Sandbakk et al.,2012,2013), but also due to increased relative intensity and MR in steeper terrain.
For example, Sandbakk et al. (2013) observed greater MR for a given WR at a moderate (5% incline, G3) compared to steep uphill (12% incline, G2) incline.
However, although Losnegard et al. (2012) found similar MRs between G2 and G3 when skiing on similar inclines, ranging from ∼7% to ∼12%, suggesting that incline may explain the primary variability within this MR–WR relationship, other studies suggest that sub‐technique itself also plays a role (Millet et al.,2003).
Due to varying contributions from power generated by poles and skis, along with corresponding alterations in the utilization of arm, trunk, and leg muscles across sub‐techniques and inclines, understanding the effect of WR on metabolic and mechanical loading across sub‐techniques provides pertinent information about training load and intensity in XCS.
External power generated in skating‐style XCS is produced through propulsive forces from the poles and/or skis, propelling the body's center of mass (CoM) forward.
During pole‐ground contact, the poles remain fixed to a point on the ground, whereas the skis continuously glide during ski‐ground contact including the ski push‐off phase.
As a result, incline and speed may have differing effects on the generation of pole power compared to ski power, as pole contact time is inversely related to speed, whereas ski contact or push‐off time is less coupled with speed.
Additionally, changing incline, independently of speed, modifies resistance and necessitates adjustments in body configuration to maintain dynamic force balance such as aligning the CoM with the center of pressure.
These factors may influence the contribution of pole versus ski and upper body versus lower body power production across various incline‐speed combinations and sub‐techniques (Kvamme et al.,2005; Millet et al.,1998,2003).
These considerations may also explain differences in mechanical and metabolic responses in more local muscles.
Previous studies have indicated that pole force contribution ranges from approximately ∼44% (Stöggl & Holmberg,2015) to ∼65% in G2 uphill skiing (Smith,1992), whereas Millet et al. (1998) demonstrated that pole or upper body contribution was highest in G3 compared to G2 and G4 at equal inclines.
The proportion of pole power originating from arm muscle action across sub‐techniques in the skating style is not well‐understood.
Most studies often equate pole contribution with that of arm or upper body involvement.
However, as demonstrated in classical style double poling (Danielsen et al.,2019), this assumption may not be accurate.
A comparison of power generated at the poles to that generated by the arms, through the inverse dynamics of elbow and shoulder joints, could provide insights into technical aspects and local loads in cross‐country skiing.
Calculating the mechanical work required to move the CoM and/or joint mechanical work using rigid‐body dynamics (Danielsen et al.,2018; Donelan et al.,2002; Farris & Sawicki,2012; van; Ingen Schenau & Cavanagh,1990) can help estimate the contribution of the poles, skis, arms, and legs in terms of muscle mechanical power output.
In cycling, an increase in WR consistently shifts power contribution from the knee to the hip (McDaniel et al.,2014; Skovereng et al.,2016a).
How these contributions are influenced by WR in various skating sub‐techniques at their preferred incline‐speed combinations remain to be further examined.
Additionally, advancements in wearable sensors have made it widely possible to continuously measure muscle oxygenation used as a proxy for ‘muscular intensity,’ using near‐infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) (Born et al.,2014; Skovereng et al.,2016b).
Case studies by Stöggl and Born (2021) and Hesford et al. (2013) demonstrated differences in the tissue saturation index (TSI) between sub‐techniques and muscles in classical cross‐country skiing.
Seeberg et al. (2021) found that TSI in vastus lateralis (VL) and triceps brachii (TB) muscles was affected by combined terrain and WR fluctuations, with a larger desaturation in the VL compared to TB as skiing intensity increased.
In speed skating, Foster et al. (1999) observed greater VL desaturation in a low (more tucked) body position compared to a high (more upright) position.
Previous findings in cycling have demonstrated a relationship between joint power and muscle oxygenation or oxygen consumption (VO2) (Skovereng et al.,2016a,2017).
Overall, technical changes associated with skiing with different sub‐techniques could potentially influence muscle oxygen saturation XCS.
Taken together, the combination of both whole‐body and more local measures (i.e., pole, joint, and muscle) of intensity can provide a complementary understanding of the demands of various skating style sub‐techniques.
Therefore, the purpose of this study was to examine how WR influences whole‐body MR and more local measures of intensity (i.e., pole power, joint power, and TB and VL muscle oxygen saturation) across sub‐techniques in XCS.
Thirteen well‐trained male XC skiers and biathletes (age 25 ± 3 years, height 183 ± 6 cm, body mass 79.3 ± 5.2 kg, peak oxygen uptake (VO2peak) 69.5 ± 3.6 ml·kg−1min−1, and skinfold thickness TB 6.6 ± 1.8 mm and VL 7.3 ± 1.3 mm) participated in this study.
After being verbally and in writing informed about the study and the possibility to withdraw at any time without providing a reason, the participants provided written informed consent.
Participants were asked to abstain from strenuous exercise 24 h before the start of the experiment.
The study was approved by the Norwegian Center for Research Data and the study was conducted in accordance with the principles outlined in the declaration of Helsinki.
The participants completed 1 day of experimental testing.
The protocol started with a 4 min seated resting measurement followed by a warm‐up (5 min roller skiing at 10 km/h−1and 5% incline).
Subsequently, a total of 12 roller‐skiing bouts, each lasting for 4 min, using 4 different intensities were performed in each of the three different sub‐techniques.
The total duration was ∼85 min including warm‐up.
Inclines and speeds were 12% and 6, 7, 8, and 9 km/h−1for G2, 5% and 10, 12, 14, and 16 km/h−1for G3, and 3% and 15, 18, 21, and 24 km/h−1for G4.
The roller‐skiing bouts were performed with randomized sub‐technique, incremental intensity (i.e., starting with the 6, 10, and 15 km/h−1for G2, G3, and G4, respectively), and separated by ∼2 min rest.
The incline‐speed combinations were chosen based on pilot testing and previous research (Grasaas et al.,2004; Sandbakk et al.,2012) and in order to result in overlapping WR.
The participants were allowed fluid intake ad‐libitum using the participants' personal sports drink.
All roller skiing was performed on a 3‐by‐5 m motor driven roller‐ski treadmill (ForceLink S‐mill, Motek force Link, Amsterdam) with personal boots and poles fitted with carbide pole tips but using the same skating roller skis (IDT Sports, Lena, Norway, rolling friction coefficient (μ) = 0.016).
The warm‐up for the athletes also served as a warm‐up for the roller ski wheels, which was measured and remained unchanged before and after the experiment.
Body mass was determined before the test using an electronic scale (Seca 877, Seca GmbH and Co.
KG., Hamburg, Germany).
Respiratory data were collected continuously using an open circuit spirometry system fitted with a mixing chamber (Oxycon Pro, Erich Jaeger GmbH, Hoechberg, Germany) with a sampling rate of 0.1 Hz.
Gas analyzers and the flow transducer were calibrated according to the manufacturer's guidelines before each test.
Heart rate (HR) was measured using a heart rate monitor with chest strap (Polar v800, Polar Electro Oy, Kempele, Finland).
Kinematics were measured using an 8‐camera motion capture system (Oqus400, Qualisys AB, Gothenburg, Sweden) at a sampling frequency of 200 Hz.
Reflective markers were placed at the distal end of the fifth metacarpal, the lateral malleolus (ankle), lateral epicondyle (knee), greater trochanter (hip), lateral end of the acromion process (shoulder), lateral epicondyle of humerus (elbow), and styloid process of ulna (wrist).
Each pole was fitted with markers, below the handle (∼5 cm) and on the lateral side of the pole tips, and each ski frame was fitted with markers approximately 1 cm from the front and rear wheels.
Pole forces were measured using instrumented pole handles (Proskida, Whitehorse, YT, Canada) at a sample rate of 100 Hz.
These pole forces were regularly calibrated by imitating poling actions with the poles against a Kistler force plate (Kistler 9286BA, Kistler Instrumente AG, Winterthur, Switzerland), whereby a gain factor was attained which remained constant throughout the testing period.
Muscle oxygenation was assessed using a wireless near‐infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) system (Portamon, Artinis Medical Systems, the Netherlands) with two optodes each consisting of 3 transmitters and one receiver.
All transmitters emitted light at wavelengths of 760 and 850 nm and used a sample rate of 10 Hz.
The two optodes were used simultaneously at the VL of the right leg and the long head of the TB on the right arm, respectively.
The sites of the optodes were shaved and the optodes were placed on the muscle belly of the VL and TB muscles and secured with tape and elastic bandages.
The optodes were also covered with a black cloth to prevent the interference of ambient light.
Skin‐fold thickness was measured at the sites of optode placement using a skinfold caliper (Holtain skinfold caliper, Holtain Ltd, Crymych, Wales).
The VO2and respiratory exchange ratio (RER) of each stage was determined as the last‐minute average during each of the skiing stages and converted to MR via the conversion table (Péronnet & Massicotte,1991).
WR (mean external power) was calculated by summation of the rate of work done against gravity and rolling resistance: mgv (sin(α) + cos(α)μ), wheremis body mass including equipment (kg),gis gravitational acceleration (9.81 m·s−2),vis treadmill belt speed (m·s−1), andαis treadmill incline (radians).
Gross efficiency (GE) was calculated as WR·MR−1.
Because each skier did not perform each intensity condition at the same relative HR or relative VO2(see Figure1), we used the linear relationship between HR and WR to individually interpolate all variables to 70%, 80%, and 90% of the participants maximal HR.
These percentages were used to indicate low, moderate, and high endurance training intensities, respectively.
Relationship between the work rate and metabolic rate for the different sub‐techniques during treadmill roller ski skating at technique‐specific incline‐speed combinations (A).
(B and C) show all individual data points as well as mean values of the metabolic rate (B) and work rate (C) as a function of exercise intensity expressed relative to the maximal heart rate.
† indicates an interaction between sub‐technique and work rate.
In A, points indicate mean values and error bars indicate standard deviation.N= 13.
Linked segment modeling was used to calculate sagittal plane elbow and shoulder joint moment and power for left and right sides separately (de‐Koning et al.,1991; Winter2009).
The sum of elbow and shoulder joint power was defined as arm power.
Pole power (Ppole) was calculated as the dot product of the pole force (Fpole) and center of mass velocity (VCoM) vectors: Fpole xVCoMx+ Fpole yVCoMy+ Fpole zVCoMz, where subscriptsx,y,andzcorrespond to forward, sideway, and vertical directions in the global reference system (Donelan et al.,2002; Winter,2009).
Treadmill belt speed was decomposed into itsxandzcomponents and these were added as constants to VCoMxand VCoMz(so that average VCoMequals treadmill belt speed (van Ingen Schenau,1980)).
The two markers on each pole defined the direction of Fpole, used to decompose Fpoleinto its forward, sideway, and vertical components.
In this method, the athlete and equipment are taken as a free body diagram and it is assumed that mechanical work is done on the CoM by various (external) ground reaction forces (two poles, two skis), see for example, Donelan et al. (2002). The cycle average of this power must equal the power needed to overcome rolling resistance and gravity (Danielsen et al.,2019; Danielsen et al.,2021; van; Ingen Schenau & Cavanagh,1990; Zatsiorsky,2002).
Since summed joint (approximating muscle) power (e.g., ankle + knee + hip + shoulder + elbow) must equal to external power (van Ingen Schenau & Cavanagh,1990), the difference between external power and arm power was defined as trunk + leg power (Danielsen et al.,2019).
Relative power contribution values from the poles, arm, trunk + leg, elbow, and shoulder were calculated by dividing the cycle mean power values by mean external power (or WR).
For each subject, ∼15–20 cycles of movement were analyzed and then averaged.
One movement cycle was defined as from the right pole plant until the subsequent right pole plant for G2 and G4 and as the time between every second right pole plant for G3.
G2 was analyzed separately for the ‘strong’ and ‘weak’ sides due to the inherent asymmetry of the technique.
At each condition, before starting the treadmill, the skiers kept the poles elevated above the treadmill belt for ∼2 s before hitting them firmly onto the treadmill belt.
This impact gave a clear spike in the vertical acceleration of the pole tip marker, which together with a clear increase in pole force was used to synchronize force and kinematics.
This synchronization was then visually checked and adjusted if needed by the same researcher for all trials.
An inter‐optode distance of 35 mm was used for analysis of the concentration changes in deoxygenated (HHb) and oxygenated (O2Hb) hemoglobin.
TSI was calculated as the O2Hb·(HHb + O2Hb)−1and expressed as percent.
TSI, HHb, O2Hb, and total hemoglobin (tHb) was calculated as the 30 s mean starting 40 s prior to the end of each stage.
HHb, O2Hb, and tHb were calculated as change from mean value obtained during the seated resting condition prior to the exercise protocol.
In XCS, WR is usually higher on steeper inclines at a given MR. Therefore, data were analyzed and presented in two ways.
First, linear mixed models with random intercepts for each subject was fitted (restricted likelihood estimation) for each dependent variable (MR, pole power, arm (sum of elbow and shoulder) power, shoulder and elbow power, and TB and VL TSI).
Fixed effects were WR (covariate, modeled as linear trend) and factors sub‐technique (G2, G3, and G4), limb (arm and leg) and joint (shoulder and elbow).
An interaction term between sub‐technique and WR was included for all dependent variables.
Second, data are also presented at relative HRs corresponding to low (70%HRmax), moderate (80% HRmax), and high (90% HRmax) exercise intensities, thereby reflecting intensities used in daily training.
Statistical analysis was performed using IBM SPSS Statistics (IBM SPSS Statistics 27.0, IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA).
Variables are presented as mean ± standard deviation or mean [95% confidence intervals].
Statistical significance was accepted atα= 0.05.
Figure1shows the WR–MR relationships as well as WR at interpolated (‘internal’) intensities of 70%, 80%, and 90% of HRmax.
A significant interaction between WR and sub‐technique on MR was found (F2,137= 62,p< 0.001), where increasing WR induced a greater increase in MR in G4 compared to G3 (15 ± 5.8 W per 10 W increase in WR andp< 0.001) and G2 (20 ± 4 W andp< 0.001), with a difference also between G3 and G2 (5 ± 4 W andp= 0.004).
The interpolated data to 70%, 80%, and 90% of HRmaxclearly shows how WR differs considerably more than MR at similar %HRmax‐based exercise intensities for the three sub‐techniques (Figure1B,C).
Ppoleincreased linearly with WR in all sub‐techniques (Figure2).
No effect of WR on the relative contribution from Ppolewas found, which was highest in G3 (∼58%) followed by G4 (∼51%) and G2 (∼41%) (allp≤ 0.035).
Ppolewas higher than arm power across all sub‐techniques and WRs (allp< 0.001).
Relationship between the work rate and absolute (A) and relative (B) contribution of pole power for the different sub‐techniques during treadmill roller ski skating at technique‐specific incline‐speed combinations.
Points indicate mean values and error bars indicate standard deviation.N= 13.
(C) shows all individual values for relative pole power contribution as a function of exercise intensity expressed relative to the maximal heart rate.
Leg + trunk power was higher than arm power across all sub‐techniques and WRs (Figure3).
There was a 3‐way interaction between WR, arm versus Leg + trunk power, and sub‐technique (F2,242= 7 andp< 0.001), in which the WR induced response was higher for trunk + leg power than for arm power across all sub‐techniques (i.e., an increase of ∼5.3 , 3.1, and 2.5 W per 10 W in G4, G3, and G2, respectively, allp< 0.001).
A significant interaction between WR and sub‐technique was found for arm power (F2,115= 8 andp= 0.001), increasing more with WR in G4 and G3 compared to G2 (∼1.3 ± 0.8 W andp≤ 0.003), without a difference between G3 and G4 (∼0.4 ± 0.4 W andp= 0.368).
There was no difference in arm contribution between G3 and G4 (∼38 ± 6%,p= 0.953), whereas arm contribution in G3 and G4 was higher than in G2 (∼26 ± 6%,p≤ 0.007) with no effect of WR (p≥ 0.491) on these relative contributions.
A significant interaction effect between WR and sub‐technique was also found for leg + trunk power (F2,115= 6 andp= 0.004), which increased more in G2 compared to G4 and G3 (∼1.1 ± 0.8 W andp≤ 0.009), with no difference between G3 and G4 (∼0.3 ± 0.9 W andp= 0.451).
Relationship between the work rate and absolute (A and B) and relative (C and D) arm and leg + trunk power for the different sub‐techniques during treadmill roller ski skating at technique‐specific incline‐speed combinations.
Points indicate mean values and error bars indicate standard deviation.N= 13.
(E and F) show all individual values for relative arm and leg + trunk contribution as a function of exercise intensity expressed relative to the maximal heart rate.
‡ indicates an interaction of sub‐technique and the work rate.
For joint power, there was a significant three‐way interaction (F2,241= 7 andp= 0.002) with shoulder power increasing more with WR than elbow power in all sub‐techniques (Figure4).
For elbow power, we found neither WRxsub‐technique interaction (p= 0.512) nor a sub‐technique effect (p= 0.921), whereas the effect of WR was rather small (0.6 ± 0.4 W,p< 0.001).
There was a WRxsub‐technique interaction for relative elbow contribution (F2,115= 3 andp= 0.039), with a somewhat larger decrease in the elbow contribution in G4 (−0.6% ± 0.2%) compared to G3 (−0.4% ± 0.2% andp= 0.125) and G2 (−0.2% ± 0.2% andp= 0.011).
For shoulder power, there was a WRxsub‐technique interaction (F2,115= 23 andp< 0.001), in which shoulder power increased more with WR in G4 (3.5 ± 0.1 W) compared to G3 (2.6 ± 0.1 W) and G2 (1.8 ± 0.1 W).
There was also a WRxsub‐technique interaction for relative shoulder contribution (F2,115= 6 andp= 0.005), with a larger WR induced increase in G4 compared to G3 (p= 0.022) and G2 (p= 0.001), with no significant difference between G2 and G4 (p= 0.277).
Relationship between the work rate and absolute (A and B) and relative (C and D) elbow and shoulder power for the different sub‐techniques during treadmill roller ski skating at technique‐specific incline‐speed combinations.
Points indicate mean values and error bars indicate standard deviation.N= 13.
(E and F) show all individual values for relative elbow and shoulder contribution as a function of exercise intensity based on the normalized heart rate.
‡ indicates an interaction of sub‐technique and work rate.
For TSI, there was no three‐way interaction (F2,296= 0.2 andp= 0.844) nor a sub‐techniquexWR interaction (F2,298 = 0.3 andp= 0.766), indicating that WR had a similar effect on TSI across sub‐techniques.
We found a significant interaction between limb (TB vs. VL) and WR (F1,286= 4,p= 0.037), with WR leading to a larger decrease in VL compared to TB saturation (Figure5).
For every 10 W increase in WR, TB and VL TSI were predicted to decrease by 0.8 [0.6 1.0] (F1,139= 55 andp< 0.001) and 1.1 [1.0 1.2] percentage points (F1,138= 375 andp< 0.001), respectively.
There was also an interaction effect between sub‐technique and limb (F2,286= 3.7 andp= 0.026).
The different sub‐techniques had different VL TSI (F2,138= 3.8 andp= 0.025), with G2 demonstrating lower TSI compared to G3 (2.5 ± 1.0%).
There was also an effect of sub‐technique in the TB (F2,138= 34,p< 0.001) with lower TSI in the G2 compared to G4 (4.6 ± 1.1%) and G3 (2.3 ± 0.9%).
Relationship between the work rate and oxygen saturation (TSI) in the triceps brachii (A) and the vastus lateralis (B), and TSI relative to maximum heart rates in the triceps brachii (C) and vastus lateralis (D) for the different sub‐techniques during treadmill roller ski skating at technique‐specific incline‐speed combinations.
Symbols represent individual participants and horizontal lines represent mean values for each sub‐technique.
* indicates a main effect of intensity.
# indicates a main effect of sub‐technique.
† indicates a difference from arm.
‡ indicates an interaction of limb and intensity.
Points indicate mean values and error bars indicate standard deviation.N= 13.
We also found significant main differences between the TB and VL muscles (F1,286= 24,p< 0.001) with the TB demonstrating overall lower saturation ∼15% ± 7% points compared to the leg (Figure5).
At intensities corresponding to 70%, 80%, and 90% of HRmax, we found no effect of sub‐technique (F2,220= 1 andp= 0.283).
However, we found main effects of limb with the TB demonstrating overall lower TSI than VL (10 ± 2%, F1,220= 96, andp< 0.001).
Intensity also had a significant effect (F2,220= 20 andp< 0.001) with TSI at 70% HRmaxbeing 4 ± 3% points greater than 80% HRmax, and 8% ± 3% points higher compared to 90% HRmax.
At rest, there was a significantly greater TSI (p< 0.001) in the leg (72.2 ± 2.8) compared to the arm (65.1 ± 6.2).
However, when resting TSI was added to the mixed model analysis, the effect was not significant (p= 0.266) and it did not change the results presented above.
Increasing WR by 10 W led to an HHb increase of approximately 0.6 0.12 μm in the TB and 0.7 ± 0.10 μm in the VL.
A 10 W increase also led to a tHb increase of 0.2 ± 0.01 μm in the TB and 0.3 ± 0.02 μm in the VL (Figure6).
Finally, a 10 W increase led to an O2Hb decrease of 0.4 ± 0.08 μm in the VL and 0.1 ± 0.13 μm in the TB (Figure6).
Deoxyhemoglobin (HHb, A, and B), oxyhemoglobin (O2Hb, C, and D) and total hemoglobin (tHb, E, and F) in the triceps brachii (A, C, and E) and vastus lateralis (B, D, and F) plotted as a function of the external work rate for tradmill roller ski skating in the G2 (squares), G3 (circles), and G4 (triangles) sub‐techniques.
Points indicate mean values and error bars indicate standard deviation.N= 13.
The purpose of this study was to examine how WR influences whole‐body MR and more local measures of intensity, including pole power, joint power, and TB and VL muscle oxygen saturation, across sub‐techniques in XCS.
As expected, we observed a significant interaction effect between WR and sub‐technique (performed at different incline‐speed combinations) for MR, with a larger increase in MR in G4 on the flattest incline, followed by G3 and G2 at gradually steeper terrain.
Similar interaction effects were only evident for arm and shoulder power but neither for pole power, leg power, and nor for TB or VL TSI.
Specifically, for G2, G3, and G4, the relative pole power contributions were approximately 40%, 58%, and 51%, respectively, with relative arm power contributions of approximately 26%, 38%, and 38%, and the combined leg and trunk contribution ranging from 50% to 60%.
We also found a ∼15% greater TSI for VL compared to TB across sub‐techniques, thus maintaining and slightly increasing the difference observed at rest (∼8%), a difference considerably larger than the variations observed between sub‐techniques within each muscle (∼2−5%).
The steeper slope in the MR–WR relationship, leading to gradually lower gross efficiency in G4 (efficiency ∼12%) compared to G3 (efficiency ∼15%) and G2 (efficiency ∼17%), was as anticipated based on previous findings comparing roller skiing efficiency across different inclines (Sandbakk et al.,2012,2013).
However, in this study, sub‐techniques were performed at practically relevant incline‐speed combinations, where both incline and speed can influence efficiency.
It is unlikely that G2 is more efficient than G4 at a 2% incline and high speeds and vice versa.
This corresponds with a previous study showing that considerably more work is performed in uphill terrain both in training and competitions (Haugnes et al.,2019).
An effect of sub‐technique was observed for the WR‐induced increase in arm power, primarily due to a greater technique‐specific response for shoulder power (largest in G4, followed by G3, and finally G2), with smaller WR effects on elbow power.
This finding could be explained by the larger muscle mass at more proximal‐located joints similar to findings in classical style cross‐country skiing sub‐technique double poling (Danielsen et al.,2018).
In contrast to arm power, no effect of sub‐technique was found on pole power.
In classical XCS, pole power does not equate to arm power because trunk power can be transferred to the pole through biarticular muscle actions (Danielsen et al.,2018,2019).
Thus, pole power is ∼15% greater relative to arm power across a range of double poling intensities.
By adding 15% trunk contribution to arm power values in the current data, we obtain an ‘upper body contribution' (i.e., arm + trunk), which is similar to relative pole power in G2 (∼40%) and G4 (∼51%) but not in G3 (50% vs. 58%).
This suggests that in G3, a non‐negligible part (∼10%) of pole power must be generated by the leg muscles, possibly through elevation of the center of mass, allowing for the transfer of body energy to pole power by ‘falling on the poles' (Danielsen et al.,2015,2019,2021; Holmberg et al.,2005,2006; Lindinger et al.,2009).
The leg power generated in this way (transferred to pole power) is separate from leg power generated directly during ski push‐offs and the 15% estimate is only an approximation and may not be independent of sub‐technique.
A deeper understanding of upper versus lower body contribution requires the measurement of ski forces to examine power output of individual lower body joints.
We observed minor differences in TSI between sub‐techniques in both arms and legs, with higher TB saturation in G4 compared to G3 and higher VL TSI in G4 compared to G3 and G2.
Additionally, there was a reduction in TSI in the TB and VL, but more pronounced in the VL, with increasing WR.
However, we found no influence of sub‐technique on the WR‐induced responses for TSI.
Therefore, TB and VL TSI do not appear to depend any more or less on changes in whole‐body MR compared to changes in joint power, contrary to the suggestion by Seeberg et al. (2021). Although there is a tendency for sub‐technique dependency on the WR‐induced response for VL saturation, with G4 followed by G3 and G2 showing the largest rate of desaturation with increasing WR, our data indicate no statistical relationship.
The relative power contribution from the arm and the trunk + leg remained constant within the range of WRs studied here.
Despite this, TSI in the VL decreased more with increased WR compared to the TB.
Consistent with a previous study (Seeberg et al.,2021), oxygen saturation was lower in the TB compared to the VL, both at rest and during skiing, indicating a greater oxygen extraction relative to oxygen delivery in the TB compared to the VL across sub‐techniques.
The reduced saturation in the TB compared to the VL can be viewed as a right shift in the saturation‐intensity curve, suggesting a lower aerobic training status of arm muscles (Boone et al.,2009).
Correspondingly, Van Hall et al. (2003) demonstrated in classical skiing a net lactate uptake by the legs and a net release by the arms, implying a greater contribution of anaerobic energy in the arms.
If the anaerobic energy contribution increases from a lower intensity in the arm compared to the leg, this could potentially contribute to a greater decrease in leg oxygen saturation as WR increases.
However, Volianitis et al. (2003) showed a reduction in arm oxygenated hemoglobin (O2Hb) and total hemoglobin (tHb) when leg cycling was added to arm cranking, indicating a competition between limbs for oxygenated blood.
It is plausible that the finding of reduced TB TSI is due to competition for blood between the arms and legs during cross‐country skiing even at the submaximal intensities used in this study.
When calculating muscle oxygenation corresponding to 70%, 80%, and 90% of the maximum heart rate in the different sub‐techniques, any tendency for a sub‐technique effect disappeared for TSI.
However, VL maintained greater TSI compared to TB (10.3 ± 6.9% andp< 0.001) and there was still the expected WR effect (i.e., 10% points increase in heart rate led to a 4.1 ± 3.3% reduction in TSI andp< 0.001).
This equates to large effects with Cohen’sdequal to 1.03 between limbs and 1.23 between intensities corresponding to 10% points in the heart rate.
This indicates that although muscle oxygen saturation in a single muscle is more closely linked to an internal intensity measure, such as heart rate, heterogeneity between specific muscles still exists (i.e., the VL and TB in this study).
We did not simulate air resistance during the treadmill skiing in this study.
If air resistance was involved, speed would need to be increasingly more lowered across G2, G3, and G4 at comparable MRs to those in this study.
If matched for WR, speed would likely be even lower.
Future studies are needed to further examine the relationship between various physiological and biomechanical variables and speed and/or work rate in more ecological conditions whereby WR and speed may differ from those obtained here due to air resistance.
For example, even when terrain is almost flat, skiers sometimes choose to use G2 over G3 and G4 in special cases involving very high resistive forces (high ski‐snow friction and high air resistance).
To better understand why, studies are needed whereby several different factors can be manipulated (speed, incline, air resistance, gliding, or rolling friction) while monitoring effects of the metabolic rate and other more local measures of load such as pole/ski power, joint power, and specific muscle TSI.
The differences found in joint power were not completely reflected in TSI.
This may be due to multiple factors, but firstly TSI was calculated for two individual muscles, whereas the joint power is the total contribution of multiple muscles.
The additional measurement of several of the TB heads and for example, the latissimus dorsi in the upper body and the additional vasti and rectus femoris in the lower body would potentially yield addition insights.
Additionally, although the TB is an important muscle in the poling action in XCS, it is also a biarticular muscle.
The biarticular muscle action can involve the transfer of joint power, which can arise from strictly isometric muscle action.
This would reduce metabolic requirements compared to concentric muscle action while potentially increasing joint power.
Cycle rate (CR) is also a factor that can influence TSI.
In cycling, for example, changing CR from 60 to 120 rpm at a constant WR led to a reduction in TSI (Skovereng et al.,2016b).
In the present study, CR linearly increased within in sub‐technique but the change was only marginal since the change in speed was not large (0.69–0.74 in G2, 0.92–0.98 in G3, and 0.58—0.62 in G4).
Accordingly, there was no obvious relationship between CR and any of the other physiological or biomechanical variables examined here.
However, future studies are required to more closely examine how a larger change in CR—which is known to affect GE (Lindinger & Holmberg,2011)—also may affect more local measures such as joint power and muscle TSI.
The present study demonstrates how the MR–WR (i.e., lower GE) relationship gradually steepens from G2 (steep incline and low speed) to G3 (moderate incline and moderate speed) to G4 (low incline and high speed), coinciding with a greater pole and upper body power contribution and somewhat lower TSI in TB and VL muscles for G2 in the steepest terrain.
Within all sub‐techniques, both pole power and arm and trunk + leg power increased linearly with increasing WR.
However, their relative contributions were independent of WR, with pole (arm) contribution being approximately 40 (28)%, 58 (38)%, and 51 (38)% for G2, G3, and G4, respectively.
The effect of WR differed between TB and VL muscles, with a larger desaturation of VL with increasing WR.
Overall, the differences in WR‐induced responses across sub‐techniques highlight the need for a more nuanced view of exercise load and intensity, particularly at the local joint and muscle level, in XCS.
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
The authors would like to thank the skiers for their enthusiastic cooperation and participation in the study as well as Pål Haugnes, Marius Lyng Danielsson, Emma den Hartog, and Evy Paulussen for their contributions to data collection.
This study was supported by the AutoActive project (project number 270791), a research project in the IKTPLUSS program financed by the Norwegian Research Council.