Stool DNA testing based on methylated syndecan-2 (mSDC2) is a potential novel non-invasive screening test for colorectal cancer (CRC).
This study aimed to assess its positive predictive value (PPV) in real-world practice.
This study retrospectively recruited consecutive patients with positive stool DNA-based SDC2 methylation tests from 18 hospitals between November 2016 and July 2021.
Included patients were classified into the average-risk equivalent or increased-risk population and the previous-negative-colonoscopy or no-previous-colonoscopy groups.
Multivariate logistic regression was conducted to investigate the risk factors that affect the detection of advanced colorectal neoplasia (ACN) in patients with a positive mSDC2 test.
The primary outcome was the PPV for ACN.
The overall PPVs for ACN, CRC, and colorectal neoplasia were 28.5%, 12.8%, and 44.6%, respectively.
The PPV for ACN was higher in the no-previous-colonoscopy group than in the previous-negative-colonoscopy group (30.1% vs 18.5%,P= 0.008) and higher in the increased-risk population than in the average-risk equivalent population (41.1% vs 21.6%,P< 0.001).
However, the PPV (18.5%) was still high for patients with a previous negative colonoscopy.
For ACN detection in patients with a positive mSDC2 test, old age, increased risk, and smoking history were identified as independent risk factors; previous negative colonoscopy was identified as a protective factor.
The mSDC2 test, which has a high PPV for both ACN and CRC, is expected to be an alternative CRC screening strategy.
Patients with a positive mSDC2 test might require a colonoscopy as soon as possible, even if the previous colonoscopy was negative.
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is one of the most common cancers worldwide, ranking third in incidence and second in mortality among all cancers [1].
The incidence and mortality of CRC in China have continued to increase over the years [2].
Population-based screening has been proposed to reduce morbidity and mortality from CRC [3].
Colonoscopy is one of the most common examinations and serves as the gold standard for CRC screening [4], but its invasiveness and the discomfort associated with this procedure have led to low patient adherence.
Non-invasive screening methods play a vital role in improving the participation rate and screening efficiency.
The multi-target stool DNA (MT-sDNA) test is more sensitive for CRC and advanced precancerous lesions than the widely used fecal immunochemical test (FIT) within the limited threshold range of the traditional FIT [5] and lacks sensitivity in the identification of advanced adenoma (AA).
However, the MT-sDNA test consists of mutant KRAS, aberrant BMP3 and NDRG4 methylation, β-actin, and hemoglobin immunoassays [6]; thus, it is too complex to be widely performed in standard hospital laboratories and may result in a high technical failure rate [5,7].
In addition, >80% of positive estimations are attributed to the FIT in the MT-sDNA test [8] and, currently, a lack of high-quality evidence supports the superiority of MT-sDNA over the quantitative FIT with an improved cut-off value [9].
Notably, syndecan-2 (SDC2) has a high methylation frequency, even in early-stage CRC [10], and methylated syndecan-2 (mSDC2) has been identified as a new potential epigenetic biomarker for CRC detection, especially in East Asia [11].
Several case–control studies have demonstrated that mSDC2 has good diagnostic performance for CRC [10,12,13], but reports of its real-world applications are limited.
In this study, we aimed to evaluate the positive predictive value (PPV) of the sDNA-based SDC2 methylation test for advanced colorectal neoplasia (ACN) in real-world practice.
The effects of individual risk profiles and previous negative colonoscopy results on PPV were also investigated.
Between November 2016 and July 2021, a multicenter retrospective study recruited patients with a positive sDNA-based SDC2 methylation test from 18 hospitals in 9 provinces in China, including those screened for CRC and those who had symptoms but were less willing to undergo colonoscopy.
Furthermore, a real-world, multicenter prospective study of mSDC2 testing in a community-based screening population (NCT04786704) was conducted.
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Changhai Hospital (Shanghai, China) and informed consent was obtained from all patients.
During the study period, adult patients who had a positive mSDC2 test, underwent subsequent colonoscopy, and were willing to provide clinical data and informed consent were included.
The exclusion criteria were as follows: lack of patient information; history of colorectal neoplasia (CRN), gastrointestinal malignancy, or inflammatory bowel disease (IBD); and loss to follow-up.
Patients with one of the following alarming symptoms were classified as the increased-risk population: unexplained weight loss, rectal bleeding, iron‑deficiency anemia, or the presence of an abdominal mass; all others were classified as the average-risk equivalent population [14–16].
To record the anatomic locations of the lesions, the proximal colon was defined as the splenic flexure and all proximal segments, whereas the distal colon contained all of the colon segments distal to the splenic flexure and the rectum.
Due to the great variation in the pathological criteria, serrated lesions were not included.
Therefore, colorectal lesion includes CRN and non-adenomatous poly; CRN was defined as ACN or non-advanced adenoma; ACN was defined as CRC or AA (adenoma with at least one of the following characteristics: ≥1 cm in size, high-grade dysplasia, or ≥25% villous features).
The most severe lesion was selected for the final diagnosis when multiple lesions were detected in a patient.
The primary outcome measure was the PPV for ACN, which was analysed for the association with age, first-degree relatives (FDRs) with CRC, smoking history, previous negative colonoscopy, and increased risk.
The secondary outcome measures included the PPV for CRC and the participation rate for colonoscopy after a positive mSDC2 test.
Each center collected the patients’ clinical data, endoscopy reports, and pathology reports.
An independent auditor was responsible for monitoring and correcting the data.
The total number, size, morphology, and location of the lesions were extracted from the endoscopy reports and the histologic diagnoses of the lesions were obtained from the pathology reports.
For necessary but missing data, multiple telephone follow-ups were performed.
Sessile serrated lesions and traditional serrated adenomas were not included because of the high variation in the pathological criteria among centers [17].
The included patients were divided into the average-risk equivalent population or the increased-risk population and into the previous-negative-colonoscopy or no-previous-colonoscopy group.
Categorical data are presented as numbers and percentages, and were analysed by using the χ2test or Fisher’s exact test.
Continuous variables are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation and were compared by using the Student’st-test, while those expressed as the median ± interquartile range were compared by using the Mann–WhitneyUtest.
Independent risk factors for ACN were identified by using multivariate logistic analyses.
Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated as proxy indicators of the relative risk for all variables.
All statistical analyses were two-sided and performed by using SPSS software 22.0 (IBM Chicago, IL, USA).P-values of <0.05 were considered statistically significant unless stated otherwise.
Figure 1illustrates the flowchart of the enrollment.
Throughout the study period, 33,863 patients underwent the mSDC2 test, 2,174 (6.4%) of whom had positive results.
Among 1,150 patients (52.9%) who completed a follow-up diagnostic colonoscopy, 111 individuals did not authorize the research-related medical record review or had incomplete information and 1,039 patients had complete clinical information.
In all, 241 patients were excluded because of a history of CRN, digestive tract cancers, or IBD.
Finally, 798 patients were included in the current study.
In all, 518 patients (64.9%) were classified as the average-risk equivalent population and 280 patients (35.1%) were classified as the increased-risk population.
The baseline characteristics of the patients were comparable between the two populations (Table 1).
Among the 798 included patients, 4 without a history of CRC/IBD/CRN had no data about previous colonoscopy.
Moreover, 124 patients (15.6%) had a previous negative colonoscopy and 670 patients (84.4%) underwent colonoscopy for the first time.
The baseline characteristics did not significantly differ between patients with a previous negative colonoscopy and those who did not undergo previous colonoscopy (Supplementary Table S1).
IQR = interquartile range, AREP = average-risk equivalent population, IRP = increased-risk population, BMI = body mass index, APCS = Asia-Pacific Colorectal Screening, AR = average risk, MR = moderate risk.
Table 2presents the colonoscopy findings between the average-risk equivalent population and the increased-risk population.
Among the 798 individuals whose mSDC2 test was positive, 227 (PPV, 28.5%) had ACN, 102 (PPV, 12.8%) were diagnosed with CRC, and 356 (PPV, 44.6%) had CRN.
Among the 102 patients with CRC, 50 (49%) were diagnosed with early-stage CRC (stage 0–II).
In terms of the location of the CRC, 90 cases (88.2%) of CRC were detected in the distal colon.
AREP = average-risk equivalent population, IRP = increased-risk population, ACN = advanced colorectal neoplasia, AA = advanced adenoma.
The proportion of patients with ACN in the increased-risk population was significantly higher than that in the average-risk equivalent population (PPV, 41.1% vs 21.6%,P< 0.001).
CRC was more common in the increased-risk population than in the average-risk equivalent population (PPV, 24.6% vs 6.4%,P< 0.001) and a similar trend was observed for early-stage CRC (PPV, 11.1% vs 3.7%,P< 0.001).
Although the proportion of patients with adenomas was higher in the average-risk equivalent population than in the increased-risk population, there was no significant difference between the two groups (33.4% vs 28.9%,P= 0.196).
Small adenomas (≤0.5 cm) as well as flat and sessile adenomas were more common in the average-risk equivalent population than in the increased-risk population (P= 0.017 andP= 0.036, respectively).
Table 3presents the colonoscopy findings between the patients with previous negative colonoscopy results and those who did not undergo a previous colonoscopy.
Patients without a previous colonoscopy demonstrated higher proportions of ACN (PPV, 30.1% vs 18.5%,P= 0.008), CRN (PPV, 47% vs 30.6%,P= 0.001), adenomas (PPV, 33.6% vs 21.8%,P= 0.009), and AAs (PPV, 16.7% vs 9.7%,P= 0.047).
However, no significant differences were observed in the proportion of patients with CRC (PPV, 8.9% vs 13.4%,P= 0.161) regardless of whether they had a previous negative colonoscopy.
ACN = advanced colorectal neoplasia, AA = advanced adenoma.
Of the 798 included patients, 4 without history of CRC/IBD/CRN had no data about previous colonoscopy.
Older age (OR, 1.06; 95% CI, 1.04–1.08;P< 0.001), increased-risk population (OR, 2.85; 95% CI, 2.01–4.02;P< 0.001), previous negative colonoscopy (OR, 0.43; 95% CI, 0.25–0.74;P= 0.002), and smoking history (OR, 2.29; 95% CI, 1.29–4.06;P= 0.005) were independent risk/protective factors for the detection of ACN in patients with a positive mSDC2 test (Table 4).
BMI = body mass index, PNC = previous negative colonoscopy, APCS = Asia-Pacific Colorectal Screening.
This is a large study reporting the clinical application and high PPV of the sDNA-based methylated SDC2 test in real-world practice.
We found that the participation rate for colonoscopy after a positive mSDC2 test was high and the mSDC2 test had a high PPV for ACN and CRC, which was confirmed by a multicenter study [18].
Several independent risk factors were identified for the PPV of the mSDC2 test, including belonging to the increased-risk population, previous colonoscopy, older age, and smoking history, which might have value for further optimizing the application of the mSDC2 test.
The specimens used for the MT-sDNA test should be mailed back to the manufacturer’s laboratory within 24 hours [7], whereas the mSDC2 test targets single sDNA and has a simpler collection and diagnostic procedure, which can be conducted in a standard hospital laboratory, leading to better generalization and decentralized promotion.
In the present study, 6.4% of the patients who completed the mSDC2 test had positive results; of these patients, 52.9% subsequently underwent diagnostic colonoscopy.
The participation rate in the current study was higher than that reported in a previous Chinese nationwide screening study (52.9% vs 14%) [19], which indicated that a positive mSDC2 test may increase the participation rate for subsequent colonoscopy.
We then validated the >60% participation rate for follow-up colonoscopy after a positive mSDC2 test in our ongoing multicenter community-based screening study (NCT04786704).
Various studies from countries in the Asia-Pacific region have suggested that the prevalence of ACN in the general population ranges from 0.9% to 15.4% [20–22].
In the present study, the overall detection rate of ACN in patients with a positive mSDC2 test was high (28.5%).
Additionally, by using Bayes’ theorem, it can be inferred that the program screening probability of a positive mSDC2 test without ACN is ∼3.8% (5.3% × [100%−28.5%]) [23].
Thus, when being analysed by using the mSDC2 test, the false-positive rate of ACN was <5%.
Furthermore, the PPV for CRC was 12.8% across all patients and 6.4% for those in the average-risk equivalent population, which are higher than the PPVs reported in previous screening studies by using questionnaire surveys or FITs from China (0.23%–3.3%) [24–26], quantitative FITs from Europe (5.2%) [27], and MT-sDNA studies in the USA (1%–2%) [23,28].
Moreover, the overall PPV for early-stage CRC was high (6.3%), which indicated that the mSDC2 test may contribute to participation in the screening of both early-stage CRC and advanced CRC.
Unlike previous studies on the MT-sDNA test [23,29], most CRCs in this study were detected in the distal colon, partly because CRCs in the Chinese population are more likely to occur in the rectum [2].
Notably, the mSDC2 test also showed high diagnostic performance in both the proximal and distal colon; however, this finding warrants further validation in clinical practice [12].
Although both the average-risk equivalent and the increased-risk populations with a positive mSDC2 test yielded high PPVs for ACN and CRC, the PPVs were distinctly higher for the increased-risk population than for the average-risk equivalent population (41.1% vs 21.6%,P< 0.001; 24.6% vs 6.4%,P< 0.001), which is consistent with the findings from clinical practice [30,31].
This study also revealed that the PPV for ACN was higher for patients who had not undergone a previous colonoscopy.
However, the value (18.5%) was still high for patients with a previous negative colonoscopy and no differences were found in the PPV for CRC between patients with and without a previous negative colonoscopy (P= 0.161).
The CRC screening guidelines recommend a screening interval of 10 years for colonoscopy in average-risk individuals [32].
However, among the patients with a previous negative colonoscopy, all advanced neoplasia were detected during the screening interval (within 10 years) and included 15 (14.3%) ACNs and 4 (3.8%) CRCs (Supplementary Table S2).
This is consistent with our previous finding that adenomas and AAs are frequently missed [33] and a subsequent mSDC2 test might provide a remedial measure for interval cancers derived from missed lesions.
In addition to being in the increased-risk population and having a previous negative colonoscopy, we focused on two additional risk factors: older age and smoking history.
The results revealed a positive association between older age and ACN in patients with a positive mSDC2 test (P< 0.05,Supplementary Table S3).
Similarly, smoking history might be associated with a higher risk of ACN in patients with a positive mSDC2 test (P< 0.001,Supplementary Table S4).
Remarkably, no significant difference was observed in the incidence of ACN among patients with or without FDRs with CRC (P= 0.936,Supplementary Table S5).
One explanation could be that the mSDC2 test identified a difference in DNA methylation, which might reflect the underlying genetic cause of the family history of the disease.
The strengths of this study are its originality and considerable sample size, as it included individuals from 18 centers in 9 provinces in China; another strength is the implementation of multiple quality controls and follow-ups.
In addition, unlike previous studies [23,28,29,34,35], this study was designed to mimic clinical practice and to reflect the efficacy of the actual clinical application of the mSDC2 test, and demonstrated that the mSDC2 test had a high PPV for ACN and CRC.
The risk factors that affected the PPV of ACN were also analysed, which may reveal future clinical application of the mSDC2 test.
However, our study also has several limitations.
First, this was a retrospective study and therefore it was impossible to collect information on patients without a diagnostic colonoscopy and the quality of the colonoscopies could not be controlled; thus, other performance characteristics, such as sensitivity, specificity, and negative predictive values, along with test accuracy, could not be comprehensively evaluated.
Furthermore, sessile serrated lesions were not assessed in our study because of differences in the criteria for pathological analysis at each center.
Finally, this study included only Chinese patients and whether the results are generalizable to other populations remains to be confirmed.
In conclusion, the mSDC2 test has a high PPV for both ACN and CRC, and is expected to be a valuable CRC screening strategy.
Patients with a positive mSDC2 test might require a colonoscopy as soon as possible, even if the previous colonoscopy was negative.
Moreover, our further, real-world, multicenter prospective study of the mSDC2 test in a community-based screening population (NCT04786704) is ongoing and will validate and optimize the application of stool-based methylated SDC2 tests.
The authors would like to thank all study members and the patient.
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Changhai Hospital.
Xinxin Huang, Department of Gastroenterology/Digestive Endoscopy Center, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University/Naval Medical University, Shanghai, P. R. China.
Song Zhang, Department of Gastroenterology/Digestive Endoscopy Center, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University/Naval Medical University, Shanghai, P. R. China.
Yanmei Liu, Department of Laboratory Medicine, the Sixth School of Clinical Medicine, the Affiliated Qingyuan Hospital (Qingyuan People's Hospital), Guangzhou Medical University, Qingyuan, Guangdong, P. R. China.
Xiangyu Sui, Department of Gastroenterology/Digestive Endoscopy Center, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University/Naval Medical University, Shanghai, P. R. China.
Peng Pan, Department of Gastroenterology/Digestive Endoscopy Center, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University/Naval Medical University, Shanghai, P. R. China.
Youdong Zhao, Department of Gastroenterology/Digestive Endoscopy Center, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University/Naval Medical University, Shanghai, P. R. China.
Qiwen Fang, Department of Gastroenterology/Digestive Endoscopy Center, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University/Naval Medical University, Shanghai, P. R. China.
Yongjiang Cai, Center of Health Management, Peking University Shenzhen Hospital,Guangdong, P.R.
Yuesheng Gong, Department of Pathology, Zheng Zhou Anorectal Hospital, Zhenzhou, Henan, P. R. China.
Wang Li, Department of Gastroenterology, The First People’s Hospital of Xiushui County, Jiujiang, Jiangxi, P. R. China.
Haibo Lan, Department of Constipation, Chengdu Anorectal Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan, P. R. China.
Yunting Deng, Clinical Laboratory Center, Huizhou Municipal Central Hospital, Huizhou, Guangdong, P. R. China.
Yijin Xu, Department of Anorectal, Dongguan People's Hospital, Dongguan, Guangdong, P. R. China.
Zhen Cai, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, P. R. China.
Huiting Chen, Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Guangzhou Digestive Disease Center, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, Guangzhou, Guangdong, P. R. China.
Shaoyu Huang, Department of Health Management, Panyu Health Management Center (Panyu Rehabilitation Hospital), Guangdong, P. R. China.
Qianchi Zhou, Department of Health Management Center, BenQ Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, P. R. China.
Zhanmei Huang, Department of Health Management Center, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, P. R. China.
Bo Feng, Department of Gastroenterology, Songyuan Jilin Oilfield Hospital, Songyuan, Jilin, P. R. China.
Yinhui Li, General Surgery Department, Nanchang People's Hospital, Nanchang, Jiangxi, P. R. China.
Weiguo Yin, Department of Laboratory Medicine, the Sixth School of Clinical Medicine, the Affiliated Qingyuan Hospital (Qingyuan People's Hospital), Guangzhou Medical University, Qingyuan, Guangdong, P. R. China.
Zhaoshen Li, Department of Gastroenterology/Digestive Endoscopy Center, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University/Naval Medical University, Shanghai, P. R. China.
Xiaosheng He, Department of General Surgery (Colorectal Surgery), Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Colorectal and Pelvic Floor Diseases, The Sixh Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, P. R. China.
Shengbing Zhao, Department of Gastroenterology/Digestive Endoscopy Center, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University/Naval Medical University, Shanghai, P. R. China.
Yu Bai, National Clinical Research Center for Digestive Diseases, National Quality Control Center of Digestive Endoscopy, Shanghai, P. R. China.
Supplementary datais available atGastroenterology Reportonline.
Study concept and design (Z.S.L., Y.B., S.B.Z., X.S.H.
); acquisition of data (X.X.H., S.Z., X.Y.S., Y.M.L., P.P., Y.D.Z., Q.W.F., Y.J.C., Y.S.G., W.L., H.B.L., Y.T.D., Y.J.X., Z.C., H.T.C., S.Y.H., Q.C.Z., Z.M.H., B.F., W.G.Y., Y.H.L.
); analysis and interpretation of data (Y.B., S.B.Z., X.X.H.
); drafting of the manuscript (X.X.H., S.Z, X.Y.S., P.P.
); critical revision of the manuscript (X.X.H., S.Z., X.Y.S., Y.M.L., P.P.
); statistical analysis (X.X.H., S.Z., S.B.Z.
); administrative, technical, or material support (Z.S.L., Y.B., S.B.Z., X.S.H.
); study supervision (Y.B., S.B.Z.).
Yu Bai, MD, PhD.
is the guarantor of the article.
Noncommunicable Chronic Diseases-National Science and Technology Major Project (No. 2023ZD0501600), Changhai Hospital Special Foundation for Clinical Research Program (No. 2024LYB05), the China National Postdoctoral Program for Innovative Talents (No. BX20230482), Chenguang Program of Shanghai Education Development Foundation and Shanghai Municipal Education Commission (Grant No. 22CGA42), Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (No. 23ZR1478700), Shanghai Sailing Program (No. 23YF1458600), Shanghai Eastern Talent Youth Program (QNWS2024108), and Changfeng Guhai Project of Changying Youth Seedling Plan of Changhai Hospital.