While low-carbohydrate diet (LCD) patterns have been promoted to improve cardiometabolic risk factors, evidence from long-term studies on the impact of carbohydrate quality in these diets remains equivocal.
We examined long-term associations among LCD patterns varying in carbohydrate quality and changes in cardiometabolic risk factors.
Dietary, health and lifestyle data were collected from Framingham Offspring cohort participants (n= 3294) every 4 years over a median 16.4-year follow-up.
We assessed LCD patterns using 2 LCD scores (LCDSs) reflecting higher total fat and protein intake, and lower intake of (i) low-quality carbohydrates (high-quality LCDS, HQ-LCDS) and (ii) high-quality carbohydrates (low-quality LCDS, LQ-LCDS).
Adjusted means of annualized changes in cardiometabolic risk factors across quintiles of LCDSs were estimated using repeated measures linear models.
Baseline median age was 55 years, with 54% female participants.
Waist circumference annual gains (cm/y) increased across quintiles (mean for Quintile 1, Quintile 5; P-trend) for HQ-LCDS (0.58, 0.69; 0.004), and LQ-LCDS (0.56, 0.74; <0.001).
A slower annual increase in systolic blood pressure (mmHg/y) observed for HQ-LCDS (0.16, 0.00; 0.03), and LQ-LCDS (0.21, -0.05; 0.01).
Higher HQ-LCDS was associated with a greater annual increase in HDL cholesterol concentrations (mg/dL/y) (0.51, 0.68; 0.005) and greater annual decline in triglyceride concentrations (mg/dL/y) (-1.24, -1.99; <0.001).
Although both high- and low-quality LCD patterns were associated with greater increases in waist circumference, our findings support recommendations to preserve high-quality carbohydrate in the context of low-carbohydrate diets and to replace low-quality carbohydrate with more healthy energy sources.
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12937-025-01194-6.
Low carbohydrate diet (LCD) patterns that favor relatively high intakes of fat and/or protein have received considerable interest in recent decades because of their potential beneficial effects on cardiometabolic health.
While randomized controlled trials (RCTs) ranging from few days to 24 months reported such diets promoted weight loss [1–4] and improve cardiometabolic risk factors (CMRFs), including hyperglycemia and insulin resistance [5–7], dyslipidemia [1,2], hypertension [3,4], and systemic inflammation [8,9], this evidence is limited by the relatively short follow-up periods, providing little understanding of the long-term health effects of LCD patterns.
Moreover, the effect of the quality of the restricted carbohydrate on CMRFs is unclear.
While no prior prospective cohort studies examined the association between lower carbohydrate intakes and CMRFs, evidence relating lower carbohydrate intakes to type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease (CVD) and mortality remains equivocal [10–14].
The inconsistency may arise, in part, from the many variations in the macronutrient composition of LCD patterns, differences in the nature of the diet pattern (i.e., plant-based versus animal-based diet), and the quality of carbohydrate remaining in the diet (i.e., higher refined grains and added sugars versus higher dietary fiber).
Because of the differential health impacts of high-quality [15–22] and low-quality [16–20,23,24] carbohydrate sources, it is particularly important to consider carbohydrate quality when the absolute intake of carbohydrate is restricted.
Most previous observational studies that examined LCDs used “low-carbohydrates diet scores” (LCDS) to simultaneously consider the lower intakes of carbohydrates and higher intakes of fat and/or protein [10].
Multiple versions of the LCDS were created to capture different sources of protein and fat, and the quality of carbohydrates.
However, no prior LCDSs considered carbohydrates quality in LCD patterns, independent of types and sources of protein and fat.
To examine the importance of carbohydrate quality in the long-term relationship between LCD patterns and CMRFs, we created two new LCDSs that represent lower intakes of either high-quality carbohydrates or low-quality carbohydrates, and higher intakes of total fat and protein.
These scores were then used to determine if an LCDS that represents maintenance of high-quality carbohydrates in a lower carbohydrate diet pattern is associated with more favorable changes in CMRFs over a median of 16-year follow-up than an LCDS representing a pattern with lower intake of high-quality carbohydrate.
This prospective cohort study utilizes data from the Framingham Offspring Study (FOS) cohort [25], a longitudinal, community-based observational study initiated in 1971 that included 5,124 offspring of the original Framingham Heart Study (FHS, clinical trial numberNCT00005121) [26].
Approximately every 4 years, this cohort completes a series of questionnaires, and undergo standardized medical examinations, including a physical examination and laboratory tests.
Dietary intake assessment began at the fifth FOS study exam (1991–1995).
We used data from the FOS 5th, 6th (1995–1998), 7th (1998–2001), 8th (2005–2008), and 9th exam (2011–2014) study exams.
Participants who attended at least two exams between exams 5 and 9 (n= 3,789) were considered eligible for our study.
We excluded participants with no outcome data at consecutive exams or no exposure data at the beginning of the exam interval (n= 195), those with no valid dietary data (n= 13), and those with missing covariate data (n= 18).
We defined baseline as the first exam at which a participant had dietary and covariates data, and outcome data at that exam and a consecutive exam (n= 3,563).
This approach allowed us to assign baseline at exams 5 through 8, depending on when a participant first met the inclusion criteria.
This strategy maximized sample size by retaining eligible participants who may have missed earlier exams or had incomplete data at exam 5.
We further excluded participants with diabetes at baseline (n= 265) and those with statistically influential observations at baseline or follow-up (n= 4), defined as observations with studentized residuals beyond ± 3.
Therefore, 3,294 participants were included in the final analysis.
Among these, baseline was assigned at exam 5 for 2,846, exam 6 for 232, exam 7 for 164, and exam 8 for 52 participants (Fig.1).
As we have multiple outcomes, sample sizes varied based on the outcomes measured.
Participants could contribute to multiple observations if they had data from more than two consecutive exams.
Thus, participants included in the final analyses contributed 10,030 exam-interval observations.
Dietary intakes were assessed using the Harvard semi-quantitative food frequency questionnaire (FFQ), designed to capture the habitual dietary intake over the past 12 months [27].
Participants received FFQs by mail with instructions to complete them at home and bring them to their exam appointments.
Two different versions of FFQ were used to assess dietary intake: a 126 item FFQ used in exams 5 through 8 and an expanded 150 item FFQ used in exam 9.
The food list included standard serving sizes and a selection of nine frequency categories ranging from “never or < 1 serving/month” to “≥ 6 servings/day” [27].
Dietary information was considered valid if reported energy intakes were > 600 kcal/day for both men and women; < 4,000 kcal/day for women; and < 4,200 kcal/day for men; and if ≤ 12 food items were left blank.
Daily nutrient intakes were calculated by multiplying the frequency of intake of each food item by the nutrient content and summing across all food items.
The reproducibility and validity of the FFQ have been evaluated for nutrients intakes for both men [27] and women [28] in other cohorts.
The correlation coefficients between FFQ and multiple diet records for women and men, respectively, are 0.61 and 0.73 for total carbohydrate, 0.52 and 0.44 for protein, 0.54 and 0.67 for total fat.
Additionally, the correlation coefficients are 0.68 for dietary fiber in men [27] and 0.56 for crude fiber in women [28].
We created two new LCDSs to examine LCD patterns accounting for carbohydrate quality and maintaining the same fat and protein intakes to limit confounding by fat and protein sources.
Our scores are modified versions of the original Total LCDS (T-LCDS) developed by Halton et al. [10].
Briefly, the T-LCDS was created using estimates of total carbohydrate, fat, and protein intakes.
To calculate the score, the participants’ intakes of each macronutrient, expressed as a percentage of energy intake (%EI), were divided into 11 approximately equal-sized categories.
Participants with intakes in the lowest carbohydrate category were assigned a carbohydrate score of 10, while those in the highest category were assigned a score of 0.
The scoring is the opposite for the protein and fat, with those in the highest category of intakes being assigned scores of 10 and those in the lowest category assigned scores of 0.
The scores for each macronutrient were summed for a total score.
A higher T-LCDS reflects participants who had a lower energy intake from total carbohydrates and higher energy intakes from total fat and total protein, with a range of 0 to 30.
In our scores, we accounted for intake from either high or low carbohydrate quality sources rather than scoring carbohydrate as a total.
To assess the carbohydrate quality of all carbohydrate-containing foods in the FFQ (defined as foods with at least 1 g of carbohydrate per serving), we applied a validated metric based on a 10:1 carbohydrate: fiber ratio with values ≤ 10 indicating high-quality carbohydrate sources [29,30].
We named our scores based on the type of carbohydrate source that was not limited in the scoring as this indicates the type of carbohydrate retained in the diet.
In the high-quality LCDS (HQ-LCDS), only the percent energy intake from low-quality carbohydrates were scored.
Participants with intakes in the lowest category of low-quality carbohydrate (2.8–24.4%EI) were assigned a score of 10, while those in the highest category (44.4–78.2%EI) wee assigned a score of 0 (Supplemental Table 1).
A higher HQ-LCDS represents a healthier diet pattern where individuals consume less low-quality carbohydrate and more fat and protein, with no constraints on the amount of high-quality carbohydrate foods consumed.
For the low-quality LCDS (LQ-LCDS), only high-quality carbohydrates were scored.
Participants with intakes in the lowest category of high-quality carbohydrate (0.7–6.3%EI) wee assigned a score of 10 while those in the highest category (23.6–56.1%EI) were assigned a score of 0.
A higher LQ-LCDS represents a less healthier diet pattern where individuals consume less high-quality carbohydrate and more fat and protein, with no constraints on the amount of low-quality carbohydrate foods consumed.
In our study, we did not use a specific absolute cutoff to define a low-carbohydrate diet pattern.
Instead, the LCD scores reflect participants’ usual long-term LCD patterns, with higher scores indicating relatively lower carbohydrate intake compared to the higher intake among those with lower scores.
CMRFs measured at the 5th through 9th exams were included in these analyses: WC; fasting HDL and non-HDL cholesterol, triglyceride, and glucose concentrations; and systolic (SBP) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP).
WC was measured at the level of the umbilicus with the participant standing.
Fasting blood samples (≥ 8 h) were obtained.
Plasma HDL cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations were measured using enzymatic/colorimetric procedures (Roche Cobas Analyzer c501, Roche Diagnostics).
Non-HDL cholesterol concentration was calculated as total cholesterol minus HDL cholesterol concentration.
Serum glucose concentration was measured using a hexokinase reagent kit (A-Gent glucose test; Abbot).
Blood pressure was measured as an average of two readings for each participant in a sitting position after 5-minutes of rest using a random-zero sphygmomanometer.
Because the time interval between exams differed among participants, we characterized changes in our outcomes as annual changes by dividing the absolute change by the number of years between exams.
We identified one participant with biologically implausible values for triglyceride, HDL and non-HDL cholesterol in exam 6, which were excluded from the analysis for these outcomes.
To manage biologically plausible CMRF outliers, we applied a Winsorization approach to these observations by setting them to a value of 0.5 above the 99th percentile + (3 x interquartile range), or 0.5 below the 1 st percentile – (3 x interquartile range).
Then, we excluded observations with studentized residual that are beyond ± 3.
Final sample size varied by outcome [WC,n= 3,252 (9,709 observations), HDL cholesterol,n= 3,223 (9,485); non-HDL cholesterol,n= 3,227 (9,487); triglyceride,n= 3,228 (9,466); glucose,n= 3,211 (9,317); SBP,n= 3,290 (10,003); and DBP,n= 3,294 (10,030)].
Potential confounders of the association between LCD patterns and cardiometabolic risk factors were considered as covariates.
These include age (years); sex (female, male); body mass index (BMI); menopausal status (menstruation ceased > 1 year); lifestyle factors including current smoking status (yes, no), physical activity [measured by a physical activity index (PAI), a score based on the sum of sedentary, slight, moderate and vigorous activity expressed as metabolic equivalent of task (MET-hrs/d)] [31], alcohol intake (%energy/d), total energy intake (kcal/d), regular multivitamin supplement use (yes/no); and pharmacological treatment (yes/no) for hypertension, dyslipidemia and hyperglycemia.
In addition to adjustment for sex, we included age at the beginning of each exam interval and all other time varying covariates as an average over each exam interval only if these covariates data available at the beginning of each exam interval.
To minimize missing covariate data, we imputed the following covariates: height, BMI and PAI.
Height was imputed by bringing forward values from the previous exam, if previous exam value was not available, we brought backward values from the following exam.
Missing BMI data was calculated by using the available weight and imputed height data.
PAI was imputed by determining the median PAI score of the sample with available PAI data, stratified by age, sex, BMI and perceived health status, and applying these medians to subjects with missing PAI data.
Additionally, since PAI was not assessed in exam 6, exam 5 values were carried forward.
Repeated measures linear models (SAS PROC MIXED) with unstructured covariance matrix were used to examine the association between the LCDSs and annual changes in CMRFs.
The LCDSs were averaged over each exam interval (i.e., an average of two consecutive exams) conditional on the availability of baseline data of exam interval and categorized using baseline quintile values.
A test for linear trend across categories of LCDSs was applied by assigning the median value of LCDSs for each quintile category and treating these as a continuous variable.
The statistical models for the primary analyses were adjusted for sex, baseline of exam interval, periodic baseline CMRF value and age, and average values of total energy, alcohol intake, BMI (except for WC), menopausal status, smoking status and medications for hypertension, dyslipidemia, and hyperglycemia across the exam interval.
All statistical analyses were performed using SAS (version 9.4; SAS institute).
All reported P values are 2-sided and statistical significance was set atP< 0.05.
We did not correct for multiple testing since all the analyses were testing the common hypothesis that an LCDS that represents lower intake of low-quality carbohydrates is associated with more favorable measures of cardiometabolic health than an LCDS that represents lower intakes of high-quality carbohydrates.
We conducted several secondary analyses.
First, we investigated the association between the T-LCDS and annual changes in CMRFs.
Second, given that the association between LCDSs and CMRFs may depend on the underlying glycemic status, we tested interactions between LCDS quintile categories and impaired serum fasting glucose concentrations (normal: ≤ 99 mg/dL; impaired: ≥ 100 mg/dL).
Additionally, we tested interactions between LCDS quintile categories and sex for WC and HDL cholesterol outcomes since sex differences may affect these outcomes.
Interactions were evaluated by including cross-product terms in the models with statistical significance defined asP< 0.05.
When significant interactions were detected, stratified analyses were performed.
Further, we adjusted our main models for PAI and multivitamin use separately, as these factors were associated with either the exposures, outcomes, or both, and may serve as confounders.
We performed two sensitivity analyses to examine the consistency of the associations.
First, we adjusted our main models for change in WC, because of the known associations between WC and the other CMRFs.
Second, we included dairy foods, which are perceived to be a healthy source of carbohydrate but did not meet the definition of high-quality carbohydrate sources, as high-quality instead of low-quality carbohydrates.
A total of 10,030 observations from 3,294 participants were included in the present analysis.
The median (25th −75th percentile) baseline age of participants was 55 y (48 y − 62 y), and 54.2% were females (Table1).
Participants, on average, were overweight based on BMI and WC, moderately physically active, and reported a low prevalence of smoking and a high prevalence of hypertension.
Across increasing quintile categories of both HQ-LCDS and LQ-LCDS, participants were younger, more likely to be females, and less likely to take lipid-lowering medications.
Compared to participants in the lowest quintile of LQ-LCDS, those in the highest quintile were more likely to be smokers, have hypertension and poorer diet quality assessed by the Dietary Guidelines for Americans Adherence Index [32].
The median intakes, expressed as a percent of energy, were 51.2% for total carbohydrate, with 12.4% from high-quality carbohydrate sources and 35.8% from low-quality carbohydrate sources.
Total carbohydrates were approximately 18% EI lower in the highest vs. the lowest quintile categories for both LCDSs.
Low-quality carbohydrates were 17.6%EI lower in the highest quintile of HQ-LCDS compared to the lowest quintile, whereas high-quality carbohydrates were 12.5%EI lower in the highest quintile of LQ-LCDS compared to the lowest quintile (Table1).
Total fiber intake was approximately 10%EI lower in the lowest quintile of LQ-LCDS compared to the highest quintile, while it was similar among quintile categories of HQ-LCDS.
Total protein intake increased by 6.2%EI and 4.0%EI across quintiles categories of HQ-LCDS and LQ-LCDS, respectively.
Total and saturated fat intake increased by 10.9%EI and 4.1%EI across quintiles categories of HQ-LCDS and 13.4%EI and 5.7%EI across quintiles categories of LQ-LCDS, respectively.
The medians of the T-LCDS and LQ-LCDS were similar for women and men, whereas the medians of the HQ-LCDS were higher in women than men (Supplemental Table 2).
The percentage of participants taking multivitamin supplements were similar across quintiles categories of HQ-LCDS, while it was slightly lower in the highest quintile category of LQ-LCDS compared to the highest.
Micronutrients intakes were presented in Supplemental Table 3.
The median follow-up time was 16.4 y (interquartile range: 9.3 y, min: 1.2, max: 23.2).
We observed annual increases in the mean WC, SBP, and HDL cholesterol and glucose concentrations and annual decreases in the mean DBP, and non-HDL cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations during follow-up (Supplemental Table 4).
After adjustment for potential confounders, there was a greater mean annual increase in WC in those in the highest quintile of T-LCDS compared to the lowest quintile, and a slower increase in SBP across quintile categories of T-LCDS (Table2).
All associations remained significant after further adjustment for PAI or multivitamin use in the WC model, and for PAI, multivitamin use, or change in WC in the SBP model (Supplemental Table 5).
After adjustment for potential confounders, we observed a significant positive association between HQ-LCDS and annual change in WC, as well as a significant inverse association between HQ-LCDS and mean annual change in SBP, (Table3).
Higher HQ-LCDS was also significantly associated with a greater mean annual increase in HDL cholesterol and decrease in triglyceride concentrations.
All associations remained statistically significant after further adjustment for PAI, multivitamin use or change in WC (Supplemental Table 6).
These associations also remained significant after including dairy foods, which are perceived to be healthy but did not contain fiber, in the high-quality carbohydrate category instead of low-quality carbohydrate category (Supplemental Table 7).
As with the HQ-LCDS, after accounting for potential confounders, we observed a significant positive association between LQ-LCDS and mean annual increase in WC, as well as a significant inverse association with mean annual increase in SBP (Table4).
The associations with SBP remained significant after further adjustment for change in WC (Supplemental Table 8), and after including low-fat dairy foods in the high-quality carbohydrate category (Supplemental Table 9).
The association between LQ-LCDS and mean annual increase in glucose concentration showed a marginally significant positive association (Ptrend=0.05), which was unchanged after further adjustment for PAI, multivitamin use or change in WC.
However, this association was modestly attenuated after including low-fat dairy foods in the high-quality carbohydrate category in a sensitivity analysis.
We also observed significant interactions between HQ-LCDS and the presence of impaired fasting glucose in the glucose model (P= 0.008), and between LQ-LCDS and the presence of impaired fasting glucose in the non-HDL cholesterol model (P= 0.02) (Supplemental Table 10).
After the data were stratified by the presence of impaired fasting glucose concentration, no significant associations in either stratum were observed for either outcome measures.
We also examined the potential effect modification of the HDL cholesterol and WC by sex, but we observed no significant interactions.
In this prospective cohort study of U.S.
adults, we observed that a higher T-LCDS, characterized by lower intake of total carbohydrate and higher intakes of total fat and protein, was associated with a lower increase in SBP but an increased gain in WC over follow-up.
After accounting for carbohydrate quality, these associations remained consistent for both HQ-LCDS and LQ-LCDS.
However, further distinguishing carbohydrate quality revealed additional, distinct associations with other CMRFs.
Specifically, a higher HQ-LCDS, representing lower intake of low-quality carbohydrates and higher intakes of fat and protein, was associated with favorable changes in HDL cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations, whereas a higher LQ-LCDS, reflecting lower consumption of high-quality carbohydrates and similar higher fat and protein intake distributions as the HQ-LCDS, was associated with adverse changes in serum glucose concentration.
As far as we are aware, our analysis is the first to consider carbohydrate quality when examining the long-term impact of lower carbohydrate diets on CMRFs, highlighting carbohydrate quality as a critical determinant of these associations.
The observed positive association between LCDSs and a greater annual increase in WC contradicts evidence from longer-term RCTs (> 6 months–2 y), which reported equivalent [1,2,33–35], or greater [4,36–40] weight reduction in LCDs compared to low-fat diets.
The few RCTs that examined LCD interventions on abdominal adiposity demonstrated comparable or greater reductions for LCDs compared with isocaloric low-fat diets [41–44].
Our study is the first prospective cohort study to examine the role of lower-carbohydrate diet patterns and change in WC.
The basis of the larger increase in WC associated with higher LCDSs is unclear, but our observations are consistent with previous cohort studies that observed higher total fat or saturated fat intakes [45–47] in place of carbohydrates were associated with higher WC [47] or body weight [45,46].
We observed that participants in the highest LCDSs quintiles had mean total and saturated fat intakes ≥ 45% and ≥ 49% higher than those in the lowest quintiles.
LCDSs were favorably associated with SBP but not DBP.
While no RCTs have considered the effect of carbohydrate quality in LCDs on blood pressure, systematic reviews of RCTs comparing LCDs and low-fat diets on blood pressure in overweight or obese adults [38,39,48] showed no significant differences SBP or DBP, except for one reporting a significant decrease in DBP for the LCD [36].
No longitudinal observational studies examined the association between lower carbohydrate diet patterns and blood pressure.
Our observed beneficial association between lower carbohydrate diet patterns and SBP may be due to increased protein intake, as prior observational studies linked higher dietary protein intake to lower blood pressure [49–55].
A higher HQ-LCDS was associated with increased plasma HDL cholesterol concentration and decreased plasma triglyceride concentration, aligning with meta-analyses of RCTs reported that LCDs resulted in lower triglyceride and higher HDL cholesterol concentrations compared to low fat/high carbohydrate diet in adults with overweight and obesity [36,38,56].
Evidence from these RCTs suggests that LCDs may improve HDL cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations independent of weight loss, based on studies that showed improvements in blood lipids with no significant difference in weight loss between the low and higher carbohydrate diet interventions and/or during weight loss maintenance period [41,57–64].
The lower consumption of low-quality carbohydrate between participants in the highest and lowest HQ-LCDS quintiles maybe responsible for the improved plasma concentrations of HDL cholesterol and triglyceride as no association with blood lipids was seen for the LQ-LCDS based on a comparable difference in total carbohydrate intake.
Evidence from prospective cohort studies have shown that low-quality carbohydrates are associated with adverse changes in lipoprotein concentrations [20,23,65], incident dyslipidemia [23] and risk of CVD [66,67] and CVD mortality [68,69].
A higher LQ-LCDS was modestly associated with a greater increase in fasting serum glucose over time, perhaps due to lower fiber intake of participants with higher scores, as higher dietary fiber intake has established benefits on glycemic control [70,71].
While previous systematic reviews and meta-analyses of RCTs reported no significant differences in fasting glucose, insulin and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) concentrations between lower and higher carbohydrate diet groups among people without type 2 diabetes [1,38,48], LCDs resulted in a greater reduction in HbA1c concentration compared to higher carbohydrate diets in short-term studies (≤ 6 months) among those with type 2 diabetes [1,3,72].
Evidence suggests that LCDs may have more favorable effect on HbA1c than higher carbohydrate diets with similar weight reduction in people with type 2 diabetes [64,73–75].
However, none of the previous RCTs have considered carbohydrate quality in LCD interventions.
Earlier observational studies that examined the association between LCDSs and fasting blood glucose concentrations [76–78] or risk of type 2 diabetes reported mixed results [11,12,14], and did not assess carbohydrate quality within LCDSs.
Many of the observed differences in annual CMRFs changes across the quintile categories were modest, although some may still be relevant to cardiometabolic disease risk at the population level over time.
For example, over a median of 16.4 years of follow-up, our findings suggest that a decrease in the intake of low-quality carbohydrates (from 45.5%EI in the lowest HQ-LCDS quintile category to 27.9%EI in the highest category) while maintaining high-quality carbohydrates in an LCD could translate to clinically important cardiometabolic health benefits.
A 2.6 mg/dL increase in plasma HDL cholesterol concentrations between the highest and lowest quintile of HQ-LCDS seen in our analysis would translate to a potential 5% reduction in CVD mortality [79].
Also, a decrease in the mean intake of high-quality carbohydrates (from 20.2%EI in the lowest LQ-LCDS quintile category to 7.7%EI in the highest category) led to 2.1 mg/dL increase in fasting glucose over 16.4 years that could translate into an approximately 18% increase in type 2 diabetes [80].
This support recommendations from the American Diabetes Association and American Heart Association to maintain high-quality carbohydrates and decrease low-quality carbohydrate in moderate LCD patterns to reduce risk of T2D and CVD [81,82].
While our findings provide novel insights into how carbohydrate quality modifies the associations between LCD patterns and long-term changes in CMRFs, they should not be interpreted as endorsing the broad adoption of LCD patterns by the general population.
The T-LCDS used in our study reflects a general reduction in carbohydrate intake alongside increased fat and protein consumption, and our results showed both favorable and adverse associations depending on the quality of carbohydrates replaced.
Thus, our study emphasizes the importance of carbohydrate quality within lower carbohydrate patterns, rather than promoting LCDs as a universal dietary strategy for cardiometabolic health.
The strengths of the present study include the large sample size, prospective design, and 23-year follow-up with repeated measures of exposure, outcomes, and covariates, allowing to control for lifestyle and dietary factors that may confound the association between the LCDSs and CMRFs.
While there is substantial evidence supporting the cardiometabolic benefits of high-quality carbohydrate sources [17–20] and potential risks associated with higher intakes of animal sources of protein and fat [83], the existing literature linking lower carbohydrate diets to cardiometabolic risk has been largely confounded by how LCDSs have been constructed.
Specifically, previous LCDSs did not adequately control for differences in protein and fat sources, making it challenging to isolate the independent effects of carbohydrate quality.
To address this critical limitation, our study designed LCDSs with consistent distributions of protein and fat sources, enabling us to specifically examine the associations between carbohydrate quality within lower carbohydrate diets and longitudinal changes in CMRFs.
Thus, our findings provide novel evidence that clarifies the role of carbohydrate quality, independent of fat and protein sources, in relation to cardiometabolic risk during aging.
Despite these strengths, there were some limitations.
First, due to the relatively small proportion of the participants (~ 10%) who consumed < 40% of energy from carbohydrates, our findings cannot be translated to health benefit or risk associated with the popular versions of LCDs, such as the ketogenic diet.
Second, the use of FFQs to estimate dietary intake may be subject to recall and social desirability biases, but they provide good indication of relative intake and are appropriate for ranking individuals’ intakes.
Also, the modifications to the FFQ during the follow-up period may have led to misclassification of a few high- and low-quality carbohydrate foods, but this affected a small number of foods and would have resulted in weakening of associations.
Third, many of the observed differences in annual CMRFs changes across the quintile categories were modest, although some may still be relevant to cardiometabolic disease risk at the population level over time, as noted above.
Finally, the generalizability of our results to non-white European racial and ethnic groups is limited.
The intent of this research was to isolate the long-term relationships between lower carbohydrate diets based on their carbohydrate quality and changes in cardiometabolic risk factors.
Our results suggest that, over long follow-up periods, LCD patterns that consider carbohydrate quality independently of fat and protein sources have mixed and relatively modest associations with CMRFs.
Altogether, our findings support recommendations on preserving high-quality carbohydrates in the context of a lower carbohydrate diet and replacing low-quality carbohydrate with more healthy energy sources.
NMM, PFJ and GFA designed the study; GFA and GTR conducted research and performed statistical analysis; GFA drafted the paper and GTR, NMM, AHL, SKD, and PFJ made major contributions including interpretation of data and substantial additions and revisions to the manuscript; PFJ had primary responsibility for final content.
All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
The study was supported by the Institute for the Advancement of Food and Nutrition Sciences, the Saudi Arabia Ministry of Education, and with Federal funds from the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA; agreement No. 58-8050-9-004) and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, under Contract No. 75N92019D00031.
The funders had no role in study design, data collection, analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.