We have found that isotactic polypropylene (iPP) significantly increases its mechanical properties by the addition of boronic acid-cross-linked iPP.
The cross-linked iPP, bearing multiple boronic acids per polymer chain, was successfully prepared by the copolymerization of propylene and a boranediamine comonomer and the following treatment with acid.
The melting point and crystallinity of the iPP did not show any changes by blending the cross-linked PP, whereas the crystallization rate was significantly accelerated and the fraction ofb-axis oriented crystallite increased.
These tendencies were similar to the effect of polar nucleating agent, indicating that boroxine functionality in the cross-linked polymer acts as a nucleating agent.
SAXS measurement showed the presence of both lamellae of iPP crystal and network structure from the cross-linked PP, proposing that the presence of network structure contributed to the improvement of mechanical property.
Our developed cross-linked iPP shows great promise as an additive to restore the mechanical properties lost during PP recycling.
In the recent trends, various upcycling strategies, such as conversion to polyolefin vitrimers through polymer reactions,−and depolymerization into lower-carbon feedstocks using hydrogenolysis,−metathesis degradation,−or thermolysis,,are actively being explored.
On the other hand, the development of the recycling process to render similar or superior physical properties to the recycled iPP is underdeveloped.
One of the main challenges in recycling iPP is to reduce the degradation of the polymer chains during repeated mechanical or thermal processing.
The loss of molecular weight along with the radical-induced main chain scission derived from tertiary carbons generally causes the deterioration of the mechanical properties of iPP.,,Therefore, recovering the mechanical strength of recycled iPP to the original level or enhancing the mechanical property of virgin iPP remains a key focus in these efforts.
The physical properties of the iPP are mainly determined by the polymer morphology, including crystallinity, which is strongly influenced by the stereoregularity and molecular weight of the polymer.
As for the molecular weight, it has been previously revealed that a small amount of high molecular weight fraction greatly improves the mechanical properties of the polyolefins.
Kida demonstrated the impact of ultrahigh molecular weight fractions, which are synthesized by high-speed controlled polymerization, in high-density polyethylene.
Here, the addition of 5 wt % of high molecular weight polyethylene significantly improves the tensile strength to 1.5 times higher.
This would be because the long chain polymer can connect between the lamellae of the crystal phases.
It is also suggested that the high molecular weight component may have promoted molecular orientation developed in the processing.
From these results, it is plausible that a PP-based additive with a high molecular weight fraction would be effective for the enhancement of physical properties of iPP.
More recently, Lu and Men observed the established relationship between the weight-averaged molecular weight of iPP and the critical stress at a large cavitation start.
This tendency is likely due to long molecular chains acting as major load-bearing elements.
The mechanical property of iPP with a fixed primary structure and molecular weight distribution can further be improved by the appropriate crystallization.
The addition of nucleating reagents that can promote the growth of the most stable α-crystals is also important.
Some polar functionalized organic compounds such as phosphates, organosilicons, sugars, and metal carboxylates can promote the growth of the most stable α-crystal,−and then the increased ratio of α-crystal improves the tensile strength of the sample.
Recently, we have developed a new comonomer bearing boronic acid functionality protected by diaminonaphthalene, which is effective for copolymerization with various olefins using early transition-metal complexes.,These copolymers can be cross-linked by the acidic treatment, generating boronic acid functionalities and promoting the formation of boroxines via interpolymer reaction.
Here, we conceived that the boronic-acid cross-linked PP can improve the mechanical strength of iPP because the cross-linked network can be seen as an almost infinite molecular weight.
As expected, we successfully improved the mechanical strength of iPP by the addition of our boron-cross-linked PP without changing the melting temperature of the iPP.
Faster crystallization was also achieved, probably because of the presence of polar boroxine groups.
Here, the improved synthesis of boron-cross-linked PP and thermal, mechanical, and rheological behaviors of the iPP/boron-cross-linked PP blend are introduced.
Modified methylaluminoxane (MMAO, 2.1 M solution in toluene) was provided by Tosoh-Finechem Corporation (Japan).
Dry toluene and THF were purchased from Kanto Chemical Co. and purified by passing through a solvent purification column and stored over molecular sieves 3A.
Alkenylboranediamine monomer1was synthesized according to previously reported procedures.
Propylene gas (Sumitomo Seika Co., Ltd.) was used after passing through NIKKA SEIKO GC-RP and DC-A4 columns to remove trace amounts of O2and water prior to use.
The iPP (Mw= 223,000,Mw/Mn= 3.6,Tm= 167 °C) used in the mechanical test were provided by Japan Polypropylene Corporation.
Other materials were used as received.
All operations were performed under a nitrogen atmosphere by using standard Schlenk line techniques.1H and13C NMR spectra were recorded on a Varian system500 or a JEOL LA500 spectrometer in tetrachloroethane-d2or chloroform-d.
The chemical shifts of the obtained spectra were referenced to the signals of residual traces of partially protonated solvent [1H: δ = 5.91 ppm (C2HDCl4), 7.26 ppm (CHCl3)] or solvent [13C: δ = 74.4 ppm (C2D2Cl4), 77.1 ppm (CDCl3)].
The absolute molecular weights and molecular weight distributions of the polymers were determined by gel permeation chromatography (GPC) on a Malvern HT350GPC chromatograph equipping RI-visco-light scattering triple detectors (T= 140 °C, eluent:o-dichlorobenzene).
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analyses were performed using a Shimadzu DSC-60 Plus calorimeter under a nitrogen atmosphere at a temperature elevation rate of 10 °C/min.
Isothermal crystallization rate was measured by DSC after the sample was preheated at 200 °C for 5 min and cooled to a given temperature with a 10 °C/min cooling rate.
XRD measurement of the polymer was performed using a Rigaku Smart Lab spectrometer, utilizing Cu–Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å, 40 keV, 50 mA) in the range of 2θ = 5–80° at 2° min–1.
SAXS measurement was performed at the BL08W beamline in 3 GeV Synchrotron Radiation Facility (NanoTerasu, λ = 1.54 Å, 8 keV) or at BL-6A in Photon Factory of the High Energy Accelerator Research Organization in Tsukuba (λ = 1.50 Å, 8 keV).
The sample-to-detector distance (SDD) for SAXS was set to 1600 mm at BL08W and 2000 mm at BL-6A, respectively.
Tensile tests were performed using a A&D RTC-1210A universal testing machine at a temperature of 20 °C and a crosshead speed of 50 mm min–1by using dumbbell-shaped specimens with a gauge length of 12 mm and a width of 2 mm.
Viscoelastic analysis was performed on an Anton Paar MCR302 rheometer using an 8 and 12 mm φ stainless-steel parallel plate with about 1 mm thickness.
A frequency sweep was performed at (170, 180, 190, 200, and 210) °C in the range of (6.28× 10–2– 6.28 × 102) rad/s with an applied strain (γ) of 1%.
Master curves were generated by the superposition of these plots based on the WLF equation.
Alkenylboranediamine monomer1(200 mg, 0.67 mmol) and 2,6-di-tert-butyl-4-methylphenol (BHT, 0.24 g, 1.1 mmol) were weighed in a 100 mL round-bottomed flask and dissolved in toluene (36 mL).
To this solution, MMAO (2.1 M in toluene, 3.5 mL, 7.4 mmol) was added at 0 °C and stirred for 60 min.
The N2in the headspace of the flask was then evacuated and the flask was refilled with propylene until saturated at 0 °C.
Polymerization was initiated under a stream of propylene by adding Zr complex3(16.1 mg, 36 μmol) in toluene (1.0 mL).
After 30 min, the reaction mixture was poured into 200 mL of MeOH containing 4 mL of concentrated HCl to terminate the reaction.
The precipitated polymer was immediately collected by filtration, washed with methanol, and vacuum-dried at 60 °C for 6 h.
5.56 g of functionalized polypropylene was obtained as a colorless solid.
A mixture of commercially available iPP (Mw= 223000,Mw/Mn= 3.6, 1.9 g) and the boranediamine-incorporated PP (0.23 mol % boron incorporation,Mw= 230000,Mw/Mn= 1.6, 0.10 g) was dissolved in xylene (40 mL) at 135 °C.
The solution was poured into the acidic methanol and stirred overnight.
The resulting blended polymer was collected by filtration and dried under a vacuum.
Sample sheets for mechanical and rheological testing with a thickness of 1 mm were prepared by melt pressing at 190 °C and 20 MPa for 8 min and then cooled by a metal surface cooled with water at room temperature.
A mixture of commercially available iPP (Mw= 223000, 1.9 g) and the boranediamine-incorporated PP (0.23 mol % boron incorporation,Mw= 230000, 0.10 g) was blended for 5 min at 190 °C under the shear rate of 895 s–1using an original handmade mixing machine.
This small mixing machine consists of a cone-shaped rotating jig that can be manually raised and lowered and a vessel heated by a band heater.
It can mix samples by applying shear deformation at rotational speeds of up to 800 rpm (corresponding to 895 s–1) under temperatures ranging from room temperature to 250 °C.
The radius of the cone-shaped rotating fixture of this mixer is 27.0 mm, the gap between the side of the vessel and the cone-shaped rotating fixture side is 0.5 mm, the angle formed by the cone side and the bottom is 2 degrees, the cone tip and the bottom are 1.0 mm apart, and the volume between the bottom and the cone part is 2.3 cm3.
When a predetermined amount less than 2.3 cm3of the melted sample is introduced, it can provide almost uniform shear deformation.
The sample sheets for mechanical and rheological testing with a thickness of 1 mm were prepared by melt pressing at 190 °C and 20 MPa for 8 min and then cooled by a metal surface cooled with water at room temperature.
As mentioned in theIntroduction, we have previously succeeded in the incorporation of boronic acid-based cross-linking point into the crystalline iPP cross-linked by the copolymerization using zirconium bis-phenoxide complex2as a catalyst (Scheme).
However, the melting point of the copolymer obtained there was low for iPP (Table, run 4).
A higher melting point of the copolymer is desirable in order to utilize the high heat resistance of PP.
Therefore, we carried out the copolymerization of propylene and boranediamine comonomer1using commercially available zirconocene complex3, which shows higher stereospecificity in propylene polymerization than2.
In all the polymerizations, PP with a high melting point of around 150 °C and a high molecular weight of more than 100,000 was obtained (runs 1–3).
The molar incorporation of1increased in proportion to the comonomer feed, although lower than the copolymerization using2.
However, the number of boron functional groups per polymer chain, calculated from the comonomer incorporation and molecular weight of the copolymer, was comparable to that obtained from2and enough for cross-linking.
There was no significant change in the melting point and crystallization enthalpy when the incorporation of1increased, probably because the molar incorporation ratio was very low.
No significant loss of activity or solubility change of the resulting polymer is observed in the copolymerization with 5 g scale, showing this process can be performed at a larger scale, similar to the industrially applied metallocene-catalyzed homopolymerization of propylene.
Determined by the molar ratio of1and the molecular weight.
Data from ref , using complex2(20 μmol) as a catalyst.
The obtained cross-linkable PP copolymer was blended into commercially available iPP.
The blending is performed by the solution process in boiling xylenes.
At the initial state, the boron functional group in the copolymer is protected by diaminonaphthalene, and the reprecipitation of the polymer solution in acidic methanol can convert boranediamines to boronic acids, which can further condense into boroxines to form cross-linking points when pressed under heating conditions (Scheme).
The formation of boroxine incorporated into iPP along with the treatment with acidic methanol has previously been confirmed by NMR.
The melting temperature and enthalpy of the blended sample were almost the same as those of the pure iPP sample (Table), although theTmof the copolymer (148 °C) was much lower than that of pure iPP (168 °C).
This strongly indicates that the cross-linked copolymer was cocrystallized with iPP.
Mw= 230000,Đ= 1.6,Tm= 148 °C,ΔHm= 87 J/g, Boron incorporation = 0.23 mol %.
The mechanical properties of the blended PPs were evaluated by the tensile tests averaging the 2–8 measurements for each sample (Table,Figure).
When blending 5 wt % of the cross-linked PP containing 0.23 mol % of boron functionalities into iPP, the tensile strength became about 1.5 times higher than that of the original one (run 2).
However, the addition of more amount of cross-linked PP deteriorated the tensile strength (runs 3–5).
A blended sample containing 40 wt % of the cross-linked PP showed a large error in the physical property values, indicating that the blend was not uniformly mixed (Figure).
For stress–strain curves of the PPs containing less than 20 wt % of copolymer, the elastic region showed no significant difference with the composition, giving almost the same tensile modulus.
Neither elongation ratio was not influenced by the composition of iPP and cross-linked PP.
These characteristics are in contrast with the other conventional iPP-based composites such as liquid crystalline polymers, which give harder but more brittle materials due to the mixing of immiscible polymers.
A yielding region was observed in the original iPP and blended polymer containing more than 20 wt % of cross-linked fractions, whereas the samples containing 5–10 wt % of cross-linked PP showed no yielding region.
The toughness, which is determined by the integration of stress–strain curves, showed the same tendency with the tensile strength.
From these results, an addition of cross-linked PP with an appropriate amount successfully improved the tensile strength and toughness of the iPP.
The improvement of tensile strength was also observed when cross-linked PP was blended by melt blending (Figure; Tensile modulus, 1.08 ± 0.09 GPa; Tensile strength, 37 ± 2.4 MPa; Elongation, 7.4 ± 1.5%; Toughness, 2.2 ± 0.4 MJ/m3at 5 wt % of cross-linked PP addition).
This result demonstrated that the strategy of blending cross-linked PP is applicable for a large-scale process.
Representative stress–strain curves of the blended PP.
Relationship between the fraction of copolymer and tensile strength (black filled circle)/toughness (red cross) of the blended PP.
XRD diffraction patterns of the blended PP.
All the patterns are normalized with the intensity of the diffraction on the (110) plane.
In order to analyze the crystal structure of the blended PP on a longer periodic state, SAXS measurement was carried out (Figure).
All the samples showed a clear peak atq= 0.37 nm–1(d= 17 nm), which typically will be assigned to an interlayer distance of the lamellar crystal structure of the PP.
Besides, a small peak atq= 0.12 nm–1(d= 52 nm), which is about three times longer periodic structure than the lamella, was observed in the blended PP.
This peak is also observed when the measurement was performed at higher temperature, where the peak for lamellar crystal has mostly disappeared (Figures,S4).
Therefore, this higher-order structure would correspond to the network structure of cross-linked PP, which may cause the increase of tensile strength, and the structure size would represent the average distance between cross-linking points.
Relatively strong scattering intensity may suggest the aggregation of several boroxine units at the cross-link point because of their high polarity, which induces segregation against hydrophobic PP matrix.
SAXS profiles of the blended PP measured at 20 °C.
SAXS profiles of blended PP (10 wt % copolymer) measured at different temperatures.
The isothermal crystallization rate of the blended sample close to the melting temperature was evaluated by DSC measurement.
Around the temperature range from 131 °C – 137 °C, a single crystallization peak was observed until the amount of blended copolymer was 5 wt % (Figures S5–S7in theSupporting Information).
However, 10 wt % addition of the copolymer gave a bimodal crystallization peak, probably due to the inhomogeneity of the material.
The Avrami plot of the crystallization behavior in the range of 1–25% crystallinity showed linear relationships, and the slopes (Avrami index,n) were close to 3, showing that spherulite is growing in a diffusion-controlled manner, similarly with the pure PP (Figures S8–S10).
The crystallization rate of blended PP was significantly higher than that of pure PP (Figure).
The faster crystallization process was also observed in the crystallization at the constant cooling rate.
DSC measurement of the melt blended samples generally showed a higher onset temperature and a broader crystallization peak than those of the original PP (Figure S11).
The frequency dependences of storage (G′) and loss (G″) moduli were measured above the melting temperature (170 °C–210 °C) for both pure and blended PP to investigate the behavior of the melting state.
The time–temperature superposition according to the Williams–Landel–Ferry (WLF) equation can be applied in all frequency regions (Figure).
By blending the cross-linked PP, both the storage and loss moduli increased by the incorporation of the cross-linking point, and the relaxation modulus was almost saturated up to 2.6–2.8 times higher than that of neat PP above 10 wt % addition.
The crossover frequency (ω), below which the sample behaves as a viscous material, decreased logarithmically (Figure).
It might be indicating that the entanglement of PP chains is trapped and embedded between the cross-linking points loosely until less than 20 wt % addition.
When blending 20 wt %, there is a distinct phase originating from cross-linked PP, which is consistent with the heterogeneity observed in tensile tests.
The 40 wt % blended sample cannot be measured because the material became so hard that it cannot be molded.
The zero shear viscosities estimated by the frequency dependence of complex viscosities (Figure S12) were within the range of 102–103Pa·s when copolymer ratio was less than 10%, supporting the suitability for melt processing.
On the other hand, complex viscosity of the 20 wt % blended sample showed a significant increase at lower frequency, indicating the difficulty of the processing.
Quantification of the network density from the van Gurp-Palmen plot (Figure S13) showed a systematic increase until 10 wt % addition.
Master-curves of the frequency-viscoelasticity relationships of the blended PP (reference temperature: 190 °C).
Plots of the crossover frequencies (square) and the relaxation moduli (circle) toward the ratio of cross-linked PP in the blended PP.
Very recently, the crystallization behavior of long-chain branched polypropylene was observed, which only generates α-phase at high temperature with increasing crystallization rate at higher branching content.
According to this observation, one reason for the fast crystallization may be interpreted by the incorporation of branching derived from boroxine cross-linking points.
However, in this case, polar boroxine would mainly cause the fast crystallization and orientation of the crystallite, because the addition of various polar nucleating agents shows a similar effect, accelerating the crystal growth along with theb-axis of the α-phase and making tensile strength higher.−Besides, the cross-linked polymer can perform as load transmitters between lamellae, contributing to the improvement of tensile strength.
Here, a broad SAXS peak showing the long-period structure several times larger than the lamellae thickness indicates the presence of network structure in the cross-linked PP.
This study proposed a method for improving the mechanical properties of commercially available polypropylene by blending boronic acid-cross-linked polypropylene.
A high molecular weight and highly stereoregular boronic acid-containing iPP was successfully prepared by using Zr complex3.
A small amount of the cross-linked iPP enhanced the tensile strength up to 1.5 times without affecting the melting point and crystallinity.
Isothermal crystallization analyses and XRD measurements suggested that the fast growth of α-phase fromb-axis oriented crystallite occurred, suggesting that the boron-cross-linked iPP behaved as a nucleating reagent.
Although it is not clear which structure is essential for fast crystallization, these crystallization aspects are generally observed when polar nucleating agents are added.
Therefore, we hypothesize that polar boroxine would play an important role in accelerating the crystallization.
Additionally, a higher-order structure several times larger than a lamella is observed by SAXS measurement, which would be the network structure of boron-cross-linked PP.
The presence of such network structure can contribute to the improvement of tensile strength.
These findings in this study present a new approach to improving the properties of polyolefin-based plastics with significant potential for application in the recycling of a broad range of plastics.
The authors gratefully acknowledge the generous donation of methylaluminoxane from Tosoh Finechem Co. Ltd. The authors are also grateful to the Natural Science Center for Basic Research and Development (N-BARD) at Hiroshima University for high-temperature NMR.
The Supporting Information is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.macromol.5c00783.
This work was supported by JST, PRESTO grant number JPMJPR22N8, Japan.
The authors declare no competing financial interest.