This report describes opioid‐induced neurotoxicity (OIN) in two dogs with hydrocephalus undergoing the investigation of recurrent seizures; in both dogs, myoclonus occurred following premedication with butorphanol and remifentanil and resolved following the administration of midazolam.
Thorough clinical evaluation excluded underlying systemic disease and increased intracranial pressure as possible causes, and opioid‐induced modulation of gamma‐aminobutyric acid (GABA) inhibitory and dopaminergic interneurons was assumed.
Benzodiazepines, like midazolam, enhanced GABA and appeared to be effective in managing these symptoms.
The findings suggest that even at therapeutic doses, certain opioids can cause OIN in dogs.
Caution is advised when using opioids, particularly in dogs with pre‐existing central nervous system disorders, and further research is needed to better understand dosage effects and alternative treatment options for OIN prevention.
This case report presents the first documented case of opioid‐induced neurotoxicity in clinical veterinary medicine, with two cases of myoclonus symptoms following the administration of opioids (butorphanol and remifentanil).
It also outlines practical guidelines that emphasize the premedication with midazolam and the exclusion of opioids in dogs with a history of brain disorders.
The administration of opioids can lead to neurological signs in humans, including confusion, drowsiness, hallucinations, disorientation, myoclonus, and seizures.
This phenomenon, known as opioid‐induced neurotoxicity (OIN) (Matzo and Dawson2013), is particularly prevalent in individuals with pre‐existing neurological conditions or opioid overdosage (Sivanesan et al.2016).
In animals, neurotoxic symptoms can be challenging to interpret due to limited communication, and only dysphoria and excitement had been mentioned, resulting from excessive or rapid opioid administration in dogs (KuKanich et al.2015).
This report describes acute onset myoclonus in two dogs following the administration of therapeutic doses of opioids.
Both dogs had a history of recurrent seizures, and opioids had been administered as premedication prior to inhalational anaesthesia for brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
In keeping with the suspicion of gamma‐aminobutyric acid (GABA) modulation, the myoclonus resolved following treatment with benzodiazepines.
To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first report describing OIN after the administration of therapeutic doses of opioids in dogs.
A 13‐year‐old, 1.7 kg, castrated male Yorkshire Terrier with a history of seizures presented to the Internal Medicine Service of the Seoul National University (SNU) Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital (VMTH) for diagnosis of the cause of the seizures.
The first seizure was observed 5 days prior to presentation and was treated with antiepileptic medication (zonisamide, 5 mg kg−1per os, three times a day) without recurrence.
The preanesthetic physical examination was unremarkable.
Blood analysis revealed a normal complete blood count, blood chloride level of 123 mmol/L (reference range, 96–122 mmol/L), blood urea nitrogen level of 47.3 mg/L (reference range, 8–30 mg/L), blood creatinine level of 1.53 mg/L (reference range, 0.5–1.5 mg/L), blood gamma‐glutamyl transferase level of 4 IU/L (reference range, 5–14 IU/L), and blood ammonia level of 33 µg/L (reference range, 16–75 µg/L).
The dog was assessed as American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status of 4 and was presented to the anaesthesiology service for a brain MRI scan.
Butorphanol (0.2 mg/kg IV) was initially administered as a premedication, but sudden myoclonus occurred at 4 min after administration.
The myoclonus was immediately improved with midazolam (0.2 mg/kg IV) and naloxone (10 µg/kg IV).
The planned MRI scan was continued for diagnostic and treatment purposes.
Anaesthesia was induced with propofol (6 mg/kg IV) and maintained with isoflurane (end‐tidal isoflurane in percentage, FE´Iso, 0.7–1.2) in oxygen for 162 min.
Perianesthetic heart rate (HR, 70–150 beats/min), oxygen saturation (SpO2, 99%–100%), end‐tidal carbon dioxide (PE´CO2, 30–35 mmHg [3.99–4.66 kPa]) were acceptable, except for mean arterial pressure (MAP, 49–70 mmHg).
Hypotension (<60 mmHg, MAP) was treated with glycopyrrolate (5 µg/kg IV), dobutamine (5–20 µg/kg/h IV), and dopamine (5–10 µg/kg/h IV).
The MRI scan showed existing intracranial mass and hydrocephalus, but no other lesion associated with significant intracranial hypertension (Figure1).
The patient recovered without additional myoclonus.
Transverse T2‐weighted MRI images showing brain regions in dogs.
Panel (a) displays an intra‐axial lesion in the left frontal lobe of dog 1 (white asterisk), and panel (b) illustrates bilateral ventriculomegaly in the same dog (black asterisks, ventricle to brain height ratio; right 39%: left 36%).
Panel (c) shows dog 2 with bilateral ventriculomegaly (black asterisks, ventricle to brain height ratio; right 21%: left 16%).
These images were obtained post‐seizure stabilization, under anaesthesia, to accurately assess the extent of neurological damage.
A 6‐year‐old, 9.6 kg, castrated male Cavalier King Charles Spaniel with hydrocephalus diagnosed by MRI, with a 2‐year history of increasing seizure frequency and escalating doses of anticonvulsants (levetiracetam 10–20 mg/kg with the addition of gabapentin 10 mg/kg, per os, three times a day), presented to the Internal Medicine Service of the SNU‐VMTH for seizure follow‐up.
The preanesthetic physical examination yielded unremarkable results.
Blood analysis revealed a normal complete blood count, blood chloride level of 112.3 mmol/L (reference range, 113.2–122.9 mmol/L), blood sodium level of 142.5 mmol/L (reference range, 145.1–152.6 mmol/L), and blood alkaline phosphatase level of 114 IU/L (reference range, 0–97.9 IU/L).
The dog was assessed as ASA physical status of 4 and was presented to the anaesthesiology service for a brain MRI scan.
Remifentanil (loading dose, 2.4 µg/kg IV) was initially administered as a pre‐medication, but a sudden myoclonus occurred immediately.
The myoclonus improved with midazolam (0.2 mg/kg IV), and the planned MRI scan was continued.
Anaesthesia was induced with propofol (6 mg/kg IV) and maintained with isoflurane (FE´Iso 0.76–1.1) in oxygen for 140 min.
Perianesthetic HR (70–180 beats min−1) SpO2(95%–100%), and PE´CO2(30–45 mmHg [3.99–5.99 kPa]) were acceptable, except for MAP (55–110 mmHg).
Hypotension (<60 mmHg, MAP) was treated with ephedrine (50 µg/kg IV), dobutamine (5‐20 µg/kg/h IV), and dopamine (5–10 µg/kg/hour IV).
The MRI showed existing hydrocephalus, but no other abnormal findings (Figure1).
The patient recovered without additional seizures.
In humans and mice, OIN including myoclonus can be attributed to receptor modulation, including the suppression of GABA inhibitory interneurons and the activation of excitatory dopaminergic interneurons (Cunha‐Oliveira et al.2008; Saboory et al.2007).
Experimental studies in mice have confirmed that mu and kappa opioid receptor agonists increase spontaneous seizure activity in the brain (Saboory et al.2007).
The administration of remifentanil and butorphanol in those cases, acting as mu and kappa opioid receptor agonists, suggests the possibility of inducing modulation of receptors, that is, OIN, even at clinical doses.
Independent of OIN, opioids can synergistically induce serotonin syndrome in patients receiving serotonin reuptake inhibitors.
This has been reported in dogs (Thomas et al.2012), cats (Indrawirawan and McAlees2014), and humans (Hassamal et al.2018).
Notably, tramadol, a synthetic opioid containing mu agonist and serotonin/norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, can induce serotonin syndrome in dogs even when administered alone (KuKanich2013).
However, in the present cases, serotonin reuptake inhibitors or tramadol were absent from the medication history, and convulsion‐inducing drugs (e.g., ketamine) were not used during the anaesthesia process prior to the onset of convulsions.
Additionally, myoclonus can be triggered by various underlying conditions, including the intracranial hypertension (Sines2020) which is often triggered by nausea or coughing during the inhalational anesthetic process.
Despite confirming the presence of hydrocephalus and a mass on MRI, no lesion was identified that could be attributed to a significant increase in intracranial pressure (Figure1), and there was no evidence of Cushing's syndrome based on vital signs.
Moreover, metabolic imbalances, infection, and toxin exposure can trigger the myoclonus.
However, in the cases, the presented blood test did not indicate any significant abnormalities that would suggest electrolyte imbalances, metabolic disorders, or hepatic encephalopathy as contributing factors.
It is therefore considered unlikely that this was the cause of the myoclonus.
Thus, the administration of remifentanil (a mu agonist) and butorphanol (a mu antagonist and kappa agonist) prior to the onset of convulsions, and the absence of prodromal symptoms associated with convulsions prior to their administration, suggest that mu and kappa opioid receptor agonists can cause OIN in dogs, even at clinical doses.
In conclusion, these two cases suggest that caution for OIN is required when using opioid during premedication process for anaesthesia in dogs with pre‐existing brain disorders, and the OIN should be treated with benzodiazepines.
For prevention, excluding opioid from the aesthetic protocol or administering benzodiazepines prior to opioids in dogs with pre‐existing brain disorders is recommended.
Additionally, exploring the efficacy of other pharmacological agents, beyond benzodiazepines, in preventing and treating OIN will help optimize therapeutic strategies.
Experimental studies that investigate the mechanism of OIN in dogs can provide insight into whether these pathways mirror those observed in humans, thereby providing a more robust basis for clinical decision‐making in veterinary anaesthesia and analgesia.