Attrition from pediatric chronic pain clinics limits patients from receiving maximum benefit from evidence-based interventions, with likely persistence of chronic pain and﻿ functional and psychosocial impairments.
We aimed to determine attrition prevalence from interdisciplinary pediatric outpatient chronic pain clinics and identify any associated patient and caregiver factors.
A retrospective analysis was performed of longitudinal data from patients and caregivers attending 10 interdisciplinary pediatric outpatient chronic pain clinics in Australia or New Zealand contributing to the Paediatric electronic Persistent Pain Outcomes Collaboration (PaedePPOC) database.
Data were retrieved for patient attrition, patient, and caregiver factors at treatment commencement and subsequent documentation of the episode end for treatment completers and noncompleters.
Statistical associations with patient attrition were assessed using logistic regression analyses.
The prevalence of patient attrition was 19.3% in the PaedePPOC cohort (N=1051), occurring steadily over 11 months.
Patients ending their treatment prematurely presented with longer pain duration (>12 mo) [χ2(1, n=879)=8.23,P=0.004] than treatment completers.
In the regression model, only older patient age (P=0.010) and higher caregiver psychosocial burden (P=0.025) at treatment commencement were associated with attrition.
While pain intensity, patient physical and psychosocial functioning scores, and caregiver partner status were not.
One in 5 patients commencing an interdisciplinary pediatric outpatient chronic pain clinic intervention did not complete it.
Identifying patients at preintervention screening with longer pain duration, older in age, and from families with greater reported caregiver burden and providing tailored supports may minimize attrition, therefore optimizing efficiency of service provision.
A recent review of studies reporting attrition rates in pediatric outpatient chronic pain interventions found that attrition from interdisciplinary interventions ranged from 8% to 35%.31There was considerable variability in the patient samples, intervention types, and how attrition was operationalized.
Moreover, this literature is limited in identifying factors associated with patient attrition in this context.
One relatively small study found that patients who completed a pediatric cognitive-behavioal treatment intervention for pain management (n=40) were comparable to noncompleters (n=44) on age, sex, race, ethnicity, insurance status, and comorbid anxiety levels.32A second study found that completers of a manualized psychosocial intervention for adolescents with chronic pain (n=41) were comparable to noncompleters (n=25) on race, family composition, parental marital status, mother’s occupation, and family tensions/stressors.3Those who dropped out had more comorbid unexplained painful and fatiguing conditions, as well as differences in coping style, school functioning, and sleep relative to treatment completers.3Associations of attrition with patient pain intensity, disability, and pain duration have been explored in some adult studies,33but not pediatric; caregiver factors such as catastrophizing, burden, and work capacity have not previously been investigated.
Thus, the current study had 3 primary aims.
First, we sought to determine the prevalence and temporal patterns of attrition from a large, binational multicenter database of clinical interdisciplinary pediatric outpatient chronic pain clinics.
Second, we assessed differences in reported sociodemographic, patient and caregiver characteristics (at treatment commencement) between the attrition group and treatment completers.
Third, we aimed to determine the association of patient (eg, age, various pain variables, physical and psychosocial functioning) and caregiver factors (eg, partner status, caregiver burden, and work productivity) at treatment commencement with subsequent patient attrition versus completion status.
The available data were predetermined by the standardized questionnaires used in the PaedePPOC database.
There were no a priori hypotheses regarding impact of patient factors and caregiver factors on attrition from a chronic pediatric pain clinic.
This was a retrospective analysis of longitudinal data entered in an Australian and New Zealand multicentre Paediatric electronic Persistent Pain Outcomes Collaboration (PaedePPOC) database.34,35This database consists of predetermined standardized questionnaires completed by patients and caregivers attending 10 specialist chronic pediatric outpatient pain clinics across Australia and New Zealand.26These clinics are interdisciplinary, with professionals from several disciplines working interdependently in the same setting, interacting both formally and informally.
They comprise of a minimum of 4 disciplines, commonly pain physician or pediatrician, physical therapy, and psychology, some with child and adolescent psychiatry, occupational therapy, clinical nurse specialist, social work, music therapy, or a dietician.
Ethics approval was granted by Sydney Children’s Hospitals Network Human Research Ethics Committee (2022/ETH02682).
Patients/caregivers are made aware when completing the PaedePPOC questionnaires that their data will be deidentified and potentially used for future ethically approved research.
Consequently, patient/caregiver consent was waived for this study.
Patients were excluded from the study database if the: (1) patient’s pain duration was less than 3 months at the time of initial questionnaire completion, (2) data entry was for a second or subsequent clinical episode at a chronic pain clinic contributing to the PaedePPOC database to avoid duplicate entry, (3) pain was cancer related, (4) treatment modality was group intervention only, (5) patient was assessed at the pain clinic but treatment was provided remotely by an external provider, and (6) patient’s treatment episode duration exceeded 365 days—these patients were excluded from the attrition group, as this duration implied treatment was received and an incorrect end code entry was possible.
Data extraction from the PaedePPOC database included patient and caregiver information collected before treatment commencement, treatment episode start and end dates (to calculate treatment episode duration), and reason for end of treatment episode coded by clinicians as one of the 7 PaedePPOC predetermined codes.36Patients were categorized as treatment completers when the treatment episode end code was 1 of 2 codes of ‘treatment complete—self-management referral to primary care’ or ‘active treatment complete—ongoing review’.
Patients were categorized in the attrition group when the treatment episode end was coded as 1 of 2 codes of ‘patient discontinued by choice’ or ‘lost to contact not to follow up’.
End-of-treatment episode codes were entered by a clinician at the time of closing an episode of care.
Descriptive data were extracted from the questionnaire and consisted of youth/family demographics (age, sex, country of birth, socioeconomic status); caregiver characteristics of the caregiver completing the questionnaire (relationship to the patient, sex, partner status, employment status); patient clinical-status variables (presence of co-morbidities or disabilities, health service utilization, frequency of medication use); and pain-related variables reported by the patient and caregiver (duration, intensity, cause, frequency, sites of pain).
For the purposes of the current study, a BAP-PIQ total score was computed from the 8 subscales (total ranging 0 to 248).
Series mean imputation was used for missing data in the partner relationship subscale if caregivers did not have a partner.
The BAP-PIQ total score computed from the current cohort had satisfactory subscale consistency (αof 0.88).
Patient sociodemographic information for the full data set (N=1051) is shown in Table1.
The mean age of participants was 12.49 years (SD=2.98).
Half (50.4%) of the families belonged to the highest 4 socioeconomic deciles.
Caregiver burden and work impairment details are presented in Table1.
Sample sizes of different variables may be less than the total sample size due to missing responses to the respective questionnaire item.
Percentages are calculated using the total sample size for specific variables, which differs due to missing data for certain variables.
Patient clinical-status and pain-related variables are presented in Table2.
Over two thirds of patients had a pain duration longer than 12 months at the time of treatment commencement.
The median number of times that an outpatient health service was utilized regarding pediatric pain in the past 3 months was 9 service events (IQR: 4 to 15) and 11.2% of patients had previously engaged with another specialist pain service without commencing a treatment episode.
Median worst pain intensity rating was 8 out of 10 (IQR: 7 to 9).
The median number of pain sites was 5 (IQR: 3 to 11, range: 1 to 34).
Sample sizes of different variables may be less than the total sample size due to missing responses to the respective questionnaire item.
Percentages are calculated using the total sample size for specific variables, which differs due to missing data for certain variables.
The Kaplan-Meier survival curve (Fig.1) illustrates the duration for which attrition patients (defined as those who discontinued by choice, n=94) remained in their episode of care.
Theyaxis represents the proportion of patients still receiving treatment at any given time, whereas thexaxis tracks the time elapsed until treatment episodes were ended.
Attrition was gradual over an 11-month period, with ~20% of discontinuations occurring early in the first month.
Treatment episode “survival” curve reflecting the timing of attrition for those patients who terminated an episode of treatment before completion.
Comparative information for attrition and completion groups is presented in Table3.
The attrition group did not differ significantly from the completion group at the time of treatment commencement on sociodemographic, clinical-status, physical functioning, psychosocial functioning, and caregiver variables assessed as continuous variables (with Bonferroni correction applied).
There was a significant association between attrition and longer pain duration (>12 mo) [χ2(1, n=879)=8.23,P=0.004], where a greater proportion of participants in the attrition group (76%) relative to the completion group (65%) had a pain duration more than 12 months.
No other significant associations were found for other categorical variables including patient sex [χ2(1, n=1051)=2.33,P=0.127], socioeconomic status [χ2(9, n=947)=15.32,P=0.083], migration status [χ2(1, n=919)=1.169,P=0.280], caregiver employment status [χ2(1, n=813)=0.005,P=0.946], and frequency of medication use (never, rarely, sometimes, often, daily) [χ2(4, n=639)=1.321,P=0.250].
Sample sizes of different variables may be less than the total sample size due to missing responses to the respective questionnaire item.
Significance level has been adjusted toP≤0.005 using Bonferroni correction.
Test statistic using Mann-WhitneyUtest, conducted for nonparametric variables.
Logistic regression analyses were performed to assess the effect of patient factors (step 1) and caregiver factors (step 2) on subsequent attrition status (Table4).
The model was statistically significant in both steps [step 1:χ2(5, n=698)=12.320,P=0.031; step 2:χ2(7, n=698)=19.291,P=0.007], with significantly greater variability explained by the added caregiver factors.
In the complete regression model, older patient age (P=0.010), and increased caregiver psychosocial burden (P=0.025) emerged as the only 2 significant statistical predictors of attrition.
Holding all other variables constant, the odds of attrition increased by 11.6% for each 1-year increase in age and increased by 8% for each 10-point increase (out of a maximum 248 points) in caregiver burden score.
These values were derived from logistic regression analysis output.
Note that higher PedsQL scores reflect better health-related outcomes and higher BAP-PIQ scores are associated with poorer outcomes.
B indicates regression coefficient; ﻿Exp(B), exponentiation of the B coefficient (odds ratio); LL, lower Limit; SE, Standard Error; UL, upper Limit.
The current study is among only a few31to document attrition from pediatric chronic pain services, finding an attrition prevalence of 19.3% for interdisciplinary pediatric outpatient chronic pain clinics contributing to the PaedePPOC database.
This figure falls within the previously reported attrition range of 8% to 35% for interdisciplinary pediatric outpatient chronic pain programs, based on a combined sample size from 6 studies of 1790 patients.31The current study adds a further sample size of 1051 to the existing published body of knowledge, thereby providing greater confidence in our understanding of the prevalence of attrition from interdisciplinary pediatric outpatient chronic pain programs.
This is of importance as those patients not completing treatment are potentially not receiving the full benefits of a pediatric chronic pain clinic’s intervention, thus resulting in the inefficient use of finite resources in the context of limited availability24and considerable wait times25,26for pediatric interdisciplinary pain services.
Several limitations should be acknowledged.
The PaedePPOC database is not prescriptive about when data are entered, clinicians may be tardy in their documentation and may approximate rather than be accurate in entering the date that the treatment episode ended.
This may lead to interclinic variation potentially obscuring temporal patterns of attrition.
In addition, some patients who have not attended the clinic for an extended period may have effectively dropped out, but their drop-out status has not yet been recorded by the clinician.
As a result, the attrition group may be slightly underrepresented in the data set.
Nonetheless, any significant differences observed between groups are even more noteworthy, as they persist despite this potential under-representation.
A further issue is that clinics do not provide details in the PaedePPOC database regarding the number of patients referred to a pediatric pain clinic who decline the appointment, fail to attend or do not start treatment (nonstarters), leading to an underestimated denominator.
Notably, data are collected from patients and caregivers before their first assessment, without subsequent information regarding rapport, treatment experiences or intervention details.
Moreover, caregiver data is limited to the caregiver completing the questionnaires.
Thus, it is not possible to determine the impact other caregivers may have upon attrition.
The current study was limited by being retrospective and relying on the measures utilized in the PaedePPOC questionnaires and standardized clinician service provision and outcome coding.
Specific reasons for attrition were not documented, such as motivation, distance, transportation and access issues including appointment bookings procedures, scheduling clashes and suitability, or if the family has moved from the area.
The study’s strengths are that it draws from a moderately large sample, supplying additional much needed clinical data, providing a valuable contribution to the literature, and foundation for further work.
The data set is multicenter, with broad geographic and sociodemographic diversity, thus achieving good generalizability.
The mean socioeconomic (IRSD) index was found to be high, with no detailed information available regarding caregivers in the lower deciles, who may be more likely to be single parents, have limited access to assistance or childcare, or are balancing multiple jobs—factors that likely exacerbate their challenges in navigating the health care system to attend appointments.
Prior published attrition research31has primarily been conducted with self-selected and consequently more highly motivated participants, potentially limiting the generalizability.76,77Patient and caregiver participants in the PaedePPOC data set were aware that their deidentified data may be later used for research purposes; however, their engagement with questionnaire completion and treatment was voluntary and primarily clinically focused.
Greater accuracy and standardization in reporting the timing and reasons for ending a treatment episode would improve our understanding and reliability of clinical attrition estimates.
Also, more standardized use in the literature of terminology regarding premature treatment completion would facilitate more accurate comparison of treatment outcomes.
The current study highlights potential value in screening patients and families to identify those at greatest risk of subsequent attrition.
Prompt identification of urgent or complex family psychosocial issues that may hinder the family’s ability to engage might help determine their capacity to commit to their child’s pain treatment requirements and whether treatment plan modifications or further education regarding treatment rationale are required.
Pain science education is widely regarded as being an important part of pediatric pain management94–96; however, its benefits in terms of child chronic pain and functional outcomes have, to date, been variable.97Nevertheless, pain science education may enhance engagement with pain clinic programs.
For example, familiarity and understanding of a proposed pediatric chronic pain treatment recommendation have been associated with greater patient follow-through.85Optimizing education regarding the therapeutic model’s benefits before commencement and early-on in treatment may help patients and families to better engage or decide if they do not wish to commence with this management option.
Further research is needed to better understand the reasons why longer pain duration is associated with premature treatment termination.
This would likely involve consideration of psychosocial factors including pain-related cognitions,98motivational and self-regulatory factors,99family dynamics,100and neurophysiological and central nervous system changes.62,63Longitudinal research is needed to explore these factors’ effects on subsequent attrition.
Other areas of potential research interest include examination of critical turning-points when patients and families may consider “dropping out” versus factors that resulted in continuation with the intervention along with separate assessment of patient engagement, as attendance does not necessarily imply adherence to recommendations.85An improved understanding of patient and family engagement in this context would shed light upon treatment-enabling or resilience factors (eg, flexibility, optimism, and﻿ problem-solving59) contributing to patients completing treatment, providing avenues for support strategies.
Qualitative methodologies may provide rich and nuanced information about patient and family experiences, particularly regarding changes in engagement, before attrition.
This would be enhanced by exploring patient/caregiver perceptions and experience of service-related factors (eg, intervention complexity65,101and time commitment65,102), which have been associated with attrition from interdisciplinary pediatric weight-management interventions.
Finally, it has been questioned whether caregivers should be considered ‘co-therapists’ or ‘co-patients’ in the context of pediatric pain management.103The current results suggest that involving caregivers as co-therapists might not be enough; targeted support may be needed to address caregiver burden, better enabling caregivers to facilitate their child’s ongoing engagement with the chronic pain program.
This study sheds light on the complex issue of attrition from pediatric interdisciplinary chronic pain clinics.
Attrition was substantial, occurring for 1 in 5 patients who commenced treatment and associated with longer pain duration at presentation, older patient age and higher caregiver psychosocial burden.
These findings suggest potential value of clinical screening for these risk factors.
Moreover, the provision of additional holistic support to caregivers with higher psychosocial burden may be warranted.
Greater clarity regarding attrition is dependent on more standardized reporting practices across services and in the literature.
Further research is needed into patient understanding of the models of care, factors influencing critical turning-points, the patient and caregiver’s level of engagement, and their proposed explanations for dropping out, including economic and access barriers.
It is particularly important to identify any system issues that are not meeting their needs that can then be addressed.
Such information could further help guide strategy development to reduce attrition from pediatric chronic pain services, thus optimizing quality of life and health-related outcomes for affected children.
The authors acknowledge the pediatric pain services throughout Australia and New Zealand contributing to the PaedePPOC database.
The authors appreciate the support of Samuel Allingham for the provision of deidentified data from the PaedePPOC database in line with the research parameters.