To produce plausible estimates of the number of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people living with dementia within Australia disaggregated by state and territory to mid‐century.
The Wilson–Grossman variation of the Hamilton–Perry projection model was used to prepare state and territory projections of the Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander population, 2021–2051.
Data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics Census (2021) and Australian Institute of Health and Welfare 2021 were used to estimate the number of people living with dementia 2021–2051.
From 2021 to 2051, the Australian Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander population is projected to grow across all states and territories.
By 2051, there will be an increasing number and proportion of the population aged over 45, 65 and 80 years, with this increase varying by jurisdiction.
This pattern of ageing will see an increase in the number of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people living with dementia, regardless of assumptions about future dementia prevalence.
This increase will vary in magnitude by juristiction, doubling in the Northern Territory and increasing more than fivefold in the Australian Capital Terrritory, New South Wales, Tasmania and Queensland.
Sensitivity analyses of alternative dementia scenarios produce highly similar results.
Between 2021 and 2051, the estimated number of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people living with dementia is projected to increase.
Combined with regional demographic variations, this trend highlights the urgent need for targeted responses at both local and national levels.
This study found that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander population living with dementia will increase by mid‐century across all Australian states and territories.
Our findings highlight the importance of having spatial data at the regional level to effectively plan health, social and aged care for this diverse population.
Despite this recent research and the implications for service planning and provision, no study has considered the future ageing of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people living with dementia across Australia's states and territories.
A geographic understanding of dementia futures is important for health‐care provision, caring and planning.
Our paper seeks to address this gap by (i) examining structural and numeric ageing of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander population in Australian states and territories from 2021 to 2051, and (ii) understanding the growth of this population living with dementia under various prevalence scenarios.
Ethics approval for this study was granted by the University of Melbourne Human Research Ethics Committee (Approval number: 2023‐25631‐42542‐4).
Specifically, the Hamilton–Perry model projects a cohort population forward in 5‐year projection intervals by adding or subtracting cohort population change—using Cohort Change Ratios (CCRs) and Cohort Change Differences (CCDs).
Projection calculations are repeated for as many 5‐year projection intervals as required, with projected populations from one interval becoming the start‐of‐interval populations for the next interval.
Projections of the number of people living with dementia were calculated by applying dementia prevalence rates to projected populations by sex and age group.
Dementia prevalence rates for Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people were estimated from national prevalence rates for 2021 published by the AIHW5and 2021 Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) Census counts of people reporting dementia.17Due to uncertainty surrounding the true levels of dementia in the population, we estimated two sets of prevalence rates.
The first set is based on the national AIHW estimates, with the census data used to estimate ratios to national rates.
Because of noisy patterns in rates at young and middle adult ages due to relatively few people with dementia, the Census‐based ratios were only calculated from dementia amongst the population aged over 75 years.
The second set of prevalence rates is based on Census counts of dementia.
Smoothing over age was again applied due to small numbers.
We took the census‐based rates for the national Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander population and applied the ratio of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander state rates for ages over 75 years to the national Indigenous rates for ages over 75 years.
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Estimated Resident Populations (ERPs) by sex and 5‐year age group for 2011, 2016 and 2021 were obtained from the ABS.16,17,18,19,20Cohort Change Ratios and CCDs were calculated for both 2011–2016 and 2016–2021 periods, averaged over the two periods and smoothed across age to reduce noise.
Constant: Prevalence rates estimated for 2021 were assumed to remain unchanged.
Decreasing: Rates were assumed to decline by 1% per year.
Table1displays projected indices of numerical and structural population ageing to mid‐century, including a breakdown by age.
Baseline estimates for 2021 reveal that approximately one in five Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people living in Australia were aged over 45 years, with a majority of those living across the states of New South Wales (NSW) (35%), Queensland (QLD) (27%) and Western Australia (WA) (12%).
The age profile of the population varies by state, with Tasmania (TAS) having a slightly older population structure and the Australian Capital Territory (ACT) the youngest, while the Northern Territory (NT) had the smallest percentage of population over 80 years at 1%.
Nationally, only 5% of the Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander population was over 65 years and 1% over 80 years.
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander population count by state and territory, 2021–2051.
Note: G refers to the percentage growth rate over the time period 2021–2051.
Abbreviations: ACT, Australian Capital Territory; AUST, Australia (total across States and Territories); NSW, New South Wales; NT, Northern Territories; QLD, Queensland; SA, South Australia; TAS, Tasmania; VIC, Victoria; WA, Western Australia.
By 2051, there will be a threefold increase in the number of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people 45 years and older nationally, owing to numeric ageing of the population.
This proportional increase will see a 4.6‐fold increase in the population over 65 years and a 9.3‐fold increase in the population over 80 years.
The extent and pattern of ageing is projected to vary by region.
For example, although the NT and ACT are projected to have the greatest proportional increase in population aged over 45 years, for the NT, only 2% of the population will be over 80 years compared to 6% of the ACT population.
Table2provides estimates of the Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander population living with dementia in 2021 under two baseline prevalence rates considered for this study.
Results demonstrated that there is poor harmonisation between AIHW and Census models in estimating the number of people living with dementia (6520 vs. 4454), their age (98% over 45‐year vs. 91%) and gender (60% female vs. 54%).
However, both did show that the greatest proportion of people living with dementia was from NSW (33%) and QLD (31%).
There were also regional differences in sex ratios, with the NT estimating a far greater proportion of women living with dementia with a sex ratio of approximately 3:1.
Estimated Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander population living with dementia, 2021 (AIHW‐ and census‐adjusted scenario).
Abbreviations: ACT, Australian Capital Territory; AIHW, Australian Institute of Health and Welfare; AUST, Australia (total across States and Territories); NSW, New South Wales; NT, Northern Territories; QLD, Queensland; SA, South Australia; TAS, Tasmania; VIC, Victoria; WA, Western Australia.
Table3presents the projections for the Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander population living with dementia by 2051, using the AIHW‐adjusted prevalence rates assuming scenarios of a constant, high and low trend in prevalence rates.
In all three scenarios, the number of people living with dementia is expected to increase across all states and territories.
Under constant trends where the prevalence rates for dementia remain unchanged from 2021 to 2051, the number of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people living with dementia will increase 5.9‐fold nationally (from 6520 people to 38,285).
Similarly, for estimates under both low and high prevalence trends, there will be a 4.3‐fold and 7.9‐fold increase, respectively.
Table4replicated these analyses for the Census‐adjusted rates, again assuming a low, constant and high trend in prevalence rates.
Under these three scenarios, findings are consistent with AIHW‐adjusted rates projecting a 3.8‐fold, 5.1‐fold and 6.9‐fold increase in the number of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people living with dementia.
Projected Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander population living with dementia, 2051 (AIHW‐adjusted).
Abbreviations: ACT, Australian Capital Territory; AIHW, Australian Institute of Health and Welfare; AUST, Australia (total across States and Territories); NSW, New South Wales; NT, Northern Territories; QLD, Queensland; SA, South Australia; TAS, Tasmania; VIC, Victoria; WA, Western Australia.
Projected Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander population living with dementia, 2051 (Census‐adjusted).
Abbreviations: ACT, Australian Capital Territory; AUST, Australia (total across States and Territories); NSW, New South Wales; NT, Northern Territories; QLD, Queensland; SA, South Australia; TAS, Tasmania; VIC, Victoria; WA, Western Australia.
At the state and territory level, projections generated using both AIHW and Census‐adjusted prevalence rates reveal that the magnitude of increase in people living with dementia will vary by region, as will the age and sex profiles of the population.
Although both prevalence scenarios unanimously show a substantial increase in the number of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people living with dementia across all jurisdictions, the NT is expected to have the smallest proportional increase (although still expected to more than double), while the ACT, Victoria (VIC), NSW, TAS and QLD are all projected to have an increase higher than the national (greater than a fivefold increase).
Projections for both scenarios showed that by 2051, 70% of the Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander population living with dementia will be from NSW and QLD, up from 64% in 2021.
Disaggregation at the state and territory level showed that despite an overall increase in the age of the population living with dementia across jurisdictions, the structural age of the population living with dementia will differ by jurisdiction, with the ACT's population predominantly over 80 years, while the NT population living with dementia will mostly be younger than 80 years.
A study by Temple et al. (2022) shows there is expected to be considerable growth in the number of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people living with dementia in Australia by 2051.10However, this national aggregated data only provide a partial picture of dementia prevalence now and into the future for this culturally and geographically diverse population.
A key contribution of this study is that it provides a more detailed spatial description of ageing and the demographic drivers of dementia at a state and territory level, allowing for a more targeted approach to dementia prevention and management.
Data presented here show that regardless of assumptions made about future dementia prevalence, from 2021 to 2051, the number of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people living with dementia will more than double across all states and territories owing to the effects of numeric and structural ageing.
The magnitude of this increase is expected to vary by state and territory and appears to follow a pattern of life expectancy.
For example, the NT, the territory with the youngest age structure and known life expectancy (65.6 years for males and 69.4 years for females), is projected to have the smallest increase in dementia numbers.24Conversely, in the eastern states and territories of the ACT, VIC, QLD, TAS and NSW, where larger proportions of the populations are projected to be over 80 years, there will be a more than fivefold increase in the number of people living with dementia if prevalence rates remain constant.
The patterns and magnitude of structural and numeric ageing across all states and territories project an overall fourfold increase in the population over 65 years, and an eightfold increase in population over 80 years.
These demographic shifts mean that the needs of people living with dementia will place increasing pressure on an already overstretched health and aged care system.25We currently know that the Australian health, social, and aged care system is not meeting the current needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people with dementia and their families.26,27,28It is a system based on Eurocentric, individualistic and often privatised models of care that were not designed with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander populations in mind.27,29,30Given this, many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have a preference to use Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander community‐controlled organisations or specialist programs and services co‐designed or delivered in partnership with these organisations and communities.31,32The culturally safe, trauma‐informed and holistic model of care underpinning these services is appropriate and acceptable for Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people.33In recognising this preference, Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander community‐controlled organisations must be adequately resourced to meet needs projected here.
To realise a reduction in dementia prevalence requires targeted action to prevent and manage modifiable dementia risk factors specific to this population.
These include those outlined in the 2020 Lancet Commission on Dementia Prevention, Intervention and Care report39of obesity, physical inactivity, smoking, low education, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, depression, hearing impairment, alcohol consumption, social isolation and traumatic brain injury.
These World Health Organization identified risks have been found to attribute to 35% of dementia burden for a Torres Strait Islander population.40,41The evidence base on dementia prevention underscores the importance of responding to modifiable ‘risks’ across the life‐course, which in the Australian and international context includes consideration of the impacts of ongoing colonisation and structuralised racism.33,42,43However, it must be acknowledged that the biggest risk of ‘age’ is non‐modifiable, so a vast majority of dementia projected for this population just cannot be prevented.
Consequently, the coming years are expected to see an increasing demand for health, social and aged care services, and the Australian system must be prepared to meet the cultural, social and emotional well‐being needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander populations.
While the Hamilton–Perry model is simple to implement and frequently produces quality short‐term forecasts, it is important to note a few limitations.
These include: being unable to produce projections on births, deaths and migration and identify change, as these processes are not explicitly modelled; inability to formulate precise projection assumptions and scenarios based on those components; difficulties in constraining projections for higher geographies; and conceptual limitations due to demographic processes not being calculated as a function of populations‐at‐risk.
The 2021 Census allowed all respondents to select from three response options for the sex question: male, female and non‐binary sex.
A limitation of our analysis is that we report sex as a male/female binary owing to limitations relating to underlying ERP (estimated resident population) data used and cell size limitations from the census side.
Clearer projections of future dementia pathways for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander populations across the states and territories will come when the Australian data environment and collection improves.
Until then, this study provides us with population estimate scenarios of the number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people living with dementia at state and territory level for the years 2021–2051.
These scenarios reveal that regardless of dementia prevalence rates applied (AIHW or Census) or conditions (increasing, constant or decreasing prevalence), all scenarios universally project that there will be a substantial increase in the number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people across Australia living with dementia, and that this will vary in magnitude by region.
Consideration of these geographic patterns of dementia at a state and territory level will facilitate more targeted and co‐ordinated prevention and management approaches.
This research was supported by the Australian Research Council Centre for Excellence in Population Ageing Research (CE1101029) and the National Health and Medical Research Council Call for Research into Healthy Ageing of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples (grant no 1170403).
The authors have nothing to report.
Open access publishing facilitated by The University of Melbourne, as part of the Wiley ‐ The University of Melbourne agreement via the Council of Australian University Librarians.