Nonsuicidal self‐injury (NSSI) and borderline personality disorder (BPD) are serious mental health problems that may have common developmental pathways.
Adverse childhood environments coupled with trait impulsivity and emotion dysregulation purportedly increase the risk of NSSI and BPD.
The primary aim of this study was to examine the association of these risk factors with NSSI and BPD over a 1‐year period among young adults (N= 229; aged 18–35; 75.5% female).
Participants completed measures of relevant variables at baseline and every 3 months over 12 months.
Hypotheses were that emotion regulation difficulties would mediate the association of childhood maltreatment with NSSI and BPD and that impulsivity would moderate the association of childhood maltreatment with ERD.
Findings from multilevel modelling analyses indicated that emotion regulation difficulties mediated the association of childhood maltreatment with both NSSI and BPD.
Contrary to hypotheses, impulsivity did not moderate the association of childhood maltreatment with emotion regulation difficulties.
These findings highlight the importance of emotion regulation difficulties in NSSI and BPD among young adults.
This study examined the longitudinal associations of key developmental risk factors with nonsuicidal self‐injury (NSSI) and borderline personality disorder (BPD) among young adults.
Developmental models suggest similar pathways to the development of BPD and NSSI, with the transaction of personality traits (e.g., emotionality and impulsivity) and environmental factors (e.g., invalidation and childhood adversity) playing a role in both clinical problems.
We examined the mediating and moderating effects of individual risk factors on the association of childhood maltreatment (measured retrospectively during young adulthood) with BPD symptoms and NSSI over time among young adults.
NSSI and BPD are complex mental health problems.
Characterized by instability in emotions, behaviour and interpersonal relationships (American Psychiatric Association,2013), BPD often develops between early adolescence and early adulthood (Chanen,2015), with a median lifetime prevalence of between 1.6% and 5.9% (American Psychiatric Association,2013).
BPD is associated with the utilization of significant health‐care resources, suicide risk (American Psychiatric Association,2013; Black et al.,2004; DeShong & Tucker,2019), persistent hopelessness, impulsivity, anger, shame and social isolation (Brown et al.,2009; Zanarini et al.,2007).
NSSI is represented in one criterion for BPD and is a significant clinical problem area in its own right.
Defined as ‘the intentional infliction of immediate physical injury to oneself, without suicidal intent, that is not culturally or socially acceptable’ (ISSS,n.d.)
NSSI prevalence (a history of at least one previous act of NSSI) may be as high as 15% among adolescents, 10%–17% among young adults and 4% among adults (Beauchaine et al.,2019; Swannell et al.,2014; Whitlock et al.,2006).
Findings have suggested that NSSI is among the most robust predictors of suicide attempts (Franklin et al.,2017).
NSSI is associated with interpersonal dysfunction, shame and internalizing symptoms (Gratz,2006; VanDerhei et al.,2014).
Developmental models have suggested common pathways to the development of BPD and NSSI (Beauchaine et al.,2019; Chapman,2019; Crowell et al.,2009; Crowell et al.,2014; Martin et al.,2011).
The biosocial developmental model (Crowell et al.,2009; Crowell et al.,2014), for example, proposes that trait impulsivity makes individuals especially likely to develop emotion dysregulation in the context of childhood maltreatment or invalidation: People high in trait impulsivity are particularly susceptible to invalidating childhood experiences and coercive communication processes that reinforce the escalation of emotional expression (e.g., yelling, threats, aggression (Crowell et al.,2009; Crowell et al.,2014)).
Compared with those lower in impulsivity, youth who are high in trait impulsivity are purportedly more likely to develop problems with emotion regulation when raised in environments characterized by maltreatment or invalidation.
Emotion regulation problems, in turn, increase the risk that the child will resort to maladaptive coping strategies, such as NSSI or suicidal behaviour, which also predict the development of BPD features (Groschwitz et al.,2015).
Trait impulsivity is a highly heritable and biologically based personality trait consisting of difficulty inhibiting behaviour, a lack of forethought before action, discounting the value of delayed rewards (Beauchaine & McNulty,2013; Crowell et al.,2014; Lockwood et al.,2017).
Although trait impulsivity may increase vulnerability to the development of NSSI and BPD in the context of maltreatment, these relationships do not exist only in the presence of trait impulsivity.
The vulnerable individual also may be prone to easily cued, intense and persisting emotional responses (Linehan,1993).
Over time, the environment shapes and reinforces emotional escalation and dysregulation, leading to emotion regulation difficulties.
Such difficulties include difficulty modulating emotional responses in a manner that facilitates effective, valued or goal‐directed behaviour (Chapman,2019; Salsman & Linehan,2012).
In adolescence, as emotion regulation difficulties worsen, social‐cognitive demands increase and peers model dysfunctional coping, at‐risk youth begin to engage in harmful strategies (such as NSSI) to manage intense emotions.
Findings have shown greater levels of emotion dysregulation among individuals who self‐injure (Kim et al.,2020).
Further, emotion regulation difficulties are strongly associated with BPD (Chapman,2019; Dixon‐Gordon et al.,2017; Glenn & Klonsky,2009; Salsman & Linehan,2012; Turner et al.,2015).
While childhood maltreatment is associated with increased risk for both BPD and NSSI (Beauchaine et al.,2019; Brown et al.,2018; Guérin‐Marion et al.,2020; Swannell et al.,2012; Valencia‐Agudo et al.,2018), we propose that the research and theory in this area suggest a moderated‐mediation model, such that impulsivity heightens the effects of childhood maltreatment on emotion regulation difficulties.
In turn, emotion regulation difficulties account for, or mediate, the association of childhood maltreatment with downstream negative outcomes such as NSSI and BPD.
Young adulthood is a particularly important period in which to study factors associated with BPD symptoms and NSSI (Swannell et al.,2014).
The upper range of the age of NSSI onset is around 27 years (Ammerman et al.,2018), with some studies finding an average age of onset between 14 and 17 years (Ammerman et al.,2018; Turner et al.,2015).
Most people who engage in NSSI, therefore, will likely have begun this behaviour by young adulthood.
Further, NSSI is strongly associated with risk for suicidal behaviour and may operate as a ‘gateway’ behaviour for future suicide attempts (Whitlock et al.,2013).
As mentioned, NSSI is a strong predictor of the future development of BPD among adolescents and emerging adults (Beauchaine et al.,2019; Crowell et al.,2009; Crowell et al.,2014).
Therefore, understanding factors that increase or reduce risk of NSSI or BPD features among young adults could inform the prevention of a riskier, escalating pattern of behaviour.
Preventative or treatment efforts that improve emotion regulation could be particularly advantageous among younger adults, occurring at a time when NSSI behaviours and BPD symptoms often become entrenched.
The primary aim of the current study was to examine the association of childhood maltreatment, impulsivity and emotion regulation difficulties with BPD symptoms and NSSI severity longitudinally (see Figure1for a visual depiction of hypotheses).
As mentioned, our framework is best represented by a moderated‐mediation model, such that impulsivity moderates the effects of childhood maltreatment on emotion regulation difficulties, and, in turn, emotion regulation difficulties mediate the association of childhood maltreatment with NSSI and BPD features.
Accordingly, Hypothesis 1a was that emotion regulation difficulties would mediate the association between childhood maltreatment with NSSI over time (see Figure1, Pathway A and B).
Hypothesis 1b was that ERD would mediate the association between childhood maltreatment with BPD (see Figure1, Pathway A and B) over time.
Hypothesis 2 was that impulsivity will moderate the association of childhood maltreatment with ERD over time.
Specifically, we hypothesized that, among participants with higher impulsivity, the positive association of childhood maltreatment with ERD (longitudinally) would be stronger, compared with participants lower in impulsivity (see Figure1, Pathway ax).
Although the current study examined questions stemming from developmental psychopathology models, all measures were taken during adulthood, and as such the previous hypotheses address the relevance of key aspects of the biosocial developmental model during young adulthood.
Hypothesized moderated mediation of emotion regulation difficulties and impulsivity on the associations of childhood maltreatment with NSSI/BPD.
* Hypothesis 1a,1b ** Hypothesis 2.
Key: BPD, Borderline Personality Disorder Symptoms measured by the PAI‐BOR (0–50); ERD, Emotion Regulation Difficulties measured by the Difficulties with Emotion Regulation Scale (36–166); NSSI, Nonsuicidal Self Injury measured by the Deliberate Self‐Harm Inventory (0–202), Childhood Maltreatment measured by Childhood Trauma Questionnaire Short Form (25–92).
The current study used data from a larger, multisite prospective study on implicitly measured motivations for NSSI (Gratz et al.,2016), funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and conducted at both Simon Fraser University and the University of Mississippi Medical Center.
This longitudinal study was conducted over a 12‐month period and included five assessment time points 3 months apart, including the baseline assessment.
Details are provided below to explain how the authors determined sample size and determined data exclusions.
Data cannot be made publicly available as participants did not provide informed consent for this during data collection.
The study's design and its analyses were not pre‐registered.
Participants were recruited through online advertisements as well as community advertisements placed in clinics, stores, hospitals and other locations.
Participants wereN= 229 young adults (43.7% Caucasian, 75.5% female, age 18–35, mean age = 23.6 years SD = 4.85) reporting recent, recurrent NSSI at baseline (N= 74) or controls without NSSI (N= 153) recruited from community, treatment and university settings through advertisements and referrals.
Of this sample, 80.5% of the participants identified as heterosexual, 37% were employed and 33% were students.
Inclusion criteria were between ages 18 and 35, not colour blind (colours were presented in a separate laboratory task), not meeting criteria for current manic or hypomanic episodes, current psychosis, current substance dependence and not showing cognitive impairment.
Participants meeting criteria for BPD were included, but having BPD was not an inclusion criterion.
All study procedures at each site received approval from the appropriate institutional review boards.
Although the sample size was set because data collection had already occurred, we considered power and sample size for multilevel modelling (MLM) analyses.
Unfortunately, there is a lack of clarity regarding appropriate methods of power analysis for MLM approaches (Mathieu & Chen,2011).
Sample sizes for other studies examining similar variables with longitudinal or micro‐longitudinal designs have tended to range fromN= 60–240 (Johnson et al.,2016; Selby et al.,2013; Turner et al.,2019).
The present study's sample of 229 was in the upper portion of this range.
Prospective participants completed a brief screening either in‐person, online or by phone.
If participants consented to screening, they received several questionnaires about demographics as well as NSSI history including items from the Deliberate Self‐Harm Inventory (DSHI (Gratz,2001)), as well as the Personality Assessment Inventory‐Borderline scale (PAI‐BOR (Morey,1991)), and the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM‐IV Axis II Disorders (SCID‐II), Screening Questionnaire (First et al.,1997).
Following screening, potentially eligible participants (see criteria above) completed a diagnostic interview and several questionnaires (described below).
Participants also completed the SCID‐II interview for BPD symptoms.
All measures used are described below.
Among 332 potential participants who underwent the diagnostic interview, 261 completed a laboratory session for the larger study.
During this session, participants completed various self‐report measures, including the following, used in the present study: the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire Short Form (CTQ‐SF (Bernstein et al.2003)), the Barratt Impulsiveness Scale (BIS (Patton et al.1995)) and the Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale (DERS (Gratz & Roemer2004)), which was the measure of ERD.
Follow‐up assessments occurring every 3 months for 12 months included the PAI‐BOR, the DERS and the DSHI.
Participants not completing the lab session and follow‐up assessments were filtered out of all cross sectional and longitudinal analyses for the current study.
Of the 261 participants completing the laboratory session, 245 continued with the longitudinal portion of the study and completed at least 1 follow‐up assessment.
Of these participants, sample sizes were 229, 223, 221 and 212 for the 3‐, 6‐, 9‐ and 12‐month assessment points, respectively.
On average, participants completed 2.7 of the four follow‐ups, leading to a total of 1145 observations including the baseline session and follow‐ups.
Demographic information assessed in the current study included age, gender, ethnicity/race, marital status, highest educational attainment and income range.
The BIS‐11 is a 30‐item questionnaire, with items rated from 1 to 4 (1, rarely/never; 4, always).
The BIS‐11 measures attention, self‐control, motor, cognitive instability, cognitive complexity and perseverance with items such as ‘I do things without thinking’ (Patton et al.,1995).
These categories can be combined into second‐order factors of attentional impulsiveness, motor impulsiveness and non‐planning impulsiveness (Patton et al.,1995; Stanford et al.,2009).
Higher scores indicate a higher trait impulsivity.
Internal consistency has ranged from α = 0.79 to 0.83 in several different populations (Patton et al.,1995), andα= 0.864 in the current study.
The CTQ‐SF is a 28‐item measure of experiences of childhood physical or psychological maltreatment (Bernstein et al.,2003), with items rated on a 5‐point scale (1, never true; 5, often true).
Items asses various forms of physically and emotionally neglectful behaviour, physical abuse, emotional abuse and sexual abuse, for example: ‘When I was growing up, someone in my family yelled and screamed at me’ (Bernstein et al.,2003).
CTQ‐SF items were found to significantly predict therapist observations of the same constructs (Bernstein et al.,2003).
This measure is suitable for use across diverse populations and has good criterion validity (Bernstein et al.,2003).
Test–retest reliability has been found to range from 0.66–0.94 (Paivio & Cramer,2004).
Higher scores on the CTQ‐SF indicate more childhood maltreatment.
In the current study, this measure demonstrated internal consistency ofα= 0.942.
The DERS (Gratz & Roemer,2004) is a 36 item self‐report questionnaire designed to assess difficulties with emotion regulation in the following domains: nonacceptance of emotional responses, impulse control difficulties, difficulties engaging in goal‐directed behaviour, lack of emotional awareness, lack of emotional clarity and limited access to emotion regulation strategies.
Items are rated from 1 (almost never) to 5 (almost always), and most begin with ‘When I am upset’ and include statements like; ‘When I'm upset, I feel out of control’ (Gratz & Roemer,2004) or ‘When I'm upset, it takes me a long time to feel better’ (Gratz & Roemer,2004).
The DERS demonstrates adequate construct and predictive validity as well as internal consistency ofα= 0.93 (Gratz & Roemer,2004).
Higher scores on the DERS indicate greater difficulty with emotion regulation.
In the current study, the DERS demonstrated internal consistency ofα= 0.958.
The DSHI is a 17‐item questionnaire that assesses frequency (lifetime and past 4 month), type, severity and duration of self‐harm.
Items include: ‘Have you ever intentionally (i.e., on purpose) cut your wrist, arms, or other area(s) of your body (without intending to kill yourself)?’ (Gratz,2001) participants then report the frequency and severity of the behaviour.
Internal consistency ranges froma= 0.81 to 0.82.
Test–retest reliability ranges betweenf= 0.49 andf= 0.68.
The DSHI demonstrates construct validity (strong correlations with other NSSI measures), discriminate validity (small or non‐significant correlations with unrelated factors), and convergent validity (agreement with other measures of self‐harm; ICC = 0.79) among non‐clinical and clinical samples (Fliege et al.,2006; Gratz,2001; Gratz et al.,2014).
Higher scores indicate more occurrences of NSSI.
The PAI‐BOR contains 24 items rated on a 4‐point scale (Not at all truetoVery true).
One example of these items is ‘My relationships have been stormy’ (Morey,1991).
This measure assesses affective instability, negative relationships, identity problems and self‐harm (Morey & McCredie,2019).
Internal consistency isa= 0.88, and convergent validity with other BPD scales is indicated in clinical and non‐clinical groups (r= 0.77 andr= 0.63, respectively) (Morey,1991).
Both convergent and divergent validity are indicated by positive and significant correlations (0.58p< 0.01) with BPD diagnoses and low/non‐significant correlations with other Cluster B personality disorders (−0.08 to 0.3 non‐significant) (Jacobo et al.,2007).
Reliability estimates have been found to beα= 0.93 (Gardner & Qualter,2009).
Higher scores indicated more BPD features or symptoms.
PAI‐BOR internal consistency wasα= 0.923 in the current study.
Table1adisplays the means, standard deviations, skewness and kurtosis coefficients for study variables at baseline.
Table1bdisplays the means, standard deviations, skewness and kurtosis coefficients for study variables at baseline in the NSSI‐only population, included for transparency.
Data were analysed using SPSS version 27.
Note: Participants who completed less than three time points have been filtered out, and two outliers were removed; see text for more details.
Abbreviations: BIS, Barratt Impulsivity Scale (41–115); CTQ, Childhood Trauma Questionnaire Short Form (25–92); DERS, Difficulties with Emotion Regulation Scale (36–166); DSHI, Deliberate Self‐Harm Inventory (0–202); PAI‐BOR, Personality Assessment Inventory Borderline Scale (0–50).
Distribution properties predictors and outcomes in NSSI‐only population.
Note: Participants who completed less than three time points have been filtered out, and two outliers were removed; see text for more details.
Abbreviations: BIS, Barratt Impulsivity Scale (41–115); CTQ, Childhood Trauma Questionnaire Short Form (25–92); DERS, Difficulties with Emotion Regulation Scale (36–166); DSHI, Deliberate Self‐Harm Inventory (0–202); PAI‐BOR, Personality Assessment Inventory Borderline Scale (0–50).
The planned analyses required basic statistical assumptions of normality, homoscedasticity and multicollinearity.
To test for normality of dependent variables, a Shapiro–Wilk test was run on each outcome including emotion regulation difficulties (p< 0.000), NSSI (p< 0.000) and BPD (p< 0.000); these indicated the assumption of normality was not met, and QQ plots examined confirmed this.
Skewness coefficients indicated that BPD symptoms, and emotion regulation difficulties were not significantly skewed as they were between −1 and 1.
Kurtosis coefficients were <1 for both BPD and emotion regulation difficulties and as such were acceptable.
NSSI was found to be significantly positively skewed (skewness = 5.82), and kurtosis was 40.57; however, this is expected from NSSI data (see Table1a).
Regression‐based analyses are robust to normality violations (Allison,1999).
Two participants reporting unrealistically high frequencies of NSSI in the 4 months prior to the baseline assessment (400 and 2300 instances, which would involve an unrealistically high number of daily episodes of self‐injury: 13 and 76, respectively) were removed prior to any analyses.
In addition, participants who completed fewer than three time points were not included in the analyses.
After the current study was completed, analyses were re‐run with individuals who completed only two time points, the significance of the results did not change.
Given this, and the need for reliable longitudinal data, the analyses with at least three completed time points required were retained.
Preliminary analyses revealed that the correlation of NSSI and BPD wasr(229)= 0.224,p= 0.001 (see Table2a).
As such, NSSI and BPD were kept as separate outcomes in the models described below.
Table2adisplays the correlations between predictor and outcome variables of interest at baseline.
Table2bdisplays the correlations between predictor and outcome variables of interest at baseline in the NSSI‐only population.
Correlations at baseline between predictors and outcomes.
Note: Participants who completed less than three time points have been filtered out, and two outliers were removed; see text for more details.
Abbreviations: BIS, Barratt Impulsivity Scale (41–115); CTQ, Childhood Trauma Questionnaire Short Form (25–92), DERS, Difficulties with Emotion Regulation Scale (36–166); DSHI, Deliberate Self‐Harm Inventory (0–202); PAI‐BOR, Personality Assessment Inventory Borderline Scale (0–50).
Correlations at baseline between predictors and outcomes in NSSI‐only population.
Note: Participants who completed less than three time points have been filtered out, and two outliers were removed; see text for more details.
Abbreviations: BIS, Barratt Impulsivity Scale (41–115); CTQ, Childhood Trauma Questionnaire Short Form (25–92); DERS, Difficulties with Emotion Regulation Scale (36–166); DSHI, Deliberate Self‐Harm Inventory (0–202); PAI‐BOR, Personality Assessment Inventory Borderline Scale (0–50).
Given the dependence within this data (i.e., repeated measures across time nested within individuals), multilevel models tested the moderated‐mediation model illustrated in Figure1(Bolger & Laurenceau,2013).
Specifically, the MIXED function in SPSS Version 27 was used, and a first order autoregressive (AR1) covariance structure was specified for the repeated statement (Bolger & Laurenceau,2013).
First, to test Hypothesis 1a and 1b, two mediation models were tested to examine whether the association between CM and NSSI/BPD across time was mediated by ERD across time.
All predictors were grand mean centred.
Three pathways were examined in each mediation model.
Path C was the association between CM and NSSI or BPD.
Path A was the relationship between CM and ERD (this pathway remained the same in both mediation models).
Finally, path B and C′ examined CM and ERD predicting NSSI or BPD individually.
R Mediation (Tofighi & MacKinnon,2011) was used to test for mediation by calculating confidence intervals for the indirect effects of these mediation models.
Next, in order to test for the moderating effect of trait impulsivity (hypothesis 2), Path A of the mediation models were re‐run to include the main and interaction effects of trait impulsivity.
Because the PAI‐BOR, used to measure BPD symptoms, includes some items assessing self‐injury, each of the previously mentioned models was calculated for the PAI‐BOR total score without these items.
Before self‐injury items were removed, PAI‐BOR scores at baseline indicated that 54 individuals scored at or above the commonly used PAI cutoff score of 38 indicating 23.6% of the N‐229 individuals endorsed significant BPD features.
For this mediation model (Figure2), the total effect of CM on NSSI was non‐significant (Path C, b = 0.121,t(256.442)= 1.290p= 0.198, 95% CI = −0.064–0.306).
Path A indicating the effect of CM on ERD was significant (Path A, b = 0.794,t(229.73)= 8.058p< 0.001, 95% CI = 0.599–0.988): Individuals who reported greater levels of maltreatment also reported greater levels of ERD.
The effect of ERD on NSSI controlling for CM was also significant (Path B, b = 0.138,t(309.784)= 2.654p= 0.008, 95% CI = 0.036–0.241) indicating that individuals who experienced greater ERD endorsed more NSSI.
The direct effect of CM on NSSI was non‐significant (Path C′, b = 0.006,t(255.718)= 0.055p= 0.956, 95%CI = −0.196–0.207), indicating that childhood maltreatment alone was not significantly associated with the frequency of NSSI.
The indirect effect of CM on NSSI through the mediator ERD was significant (indirect effect = 0.11 95% CI = [0.028, 0.201]).
These findings supported Hypothesis 1a, suggesting that ERD fully mediated the association of CM with NSSI.
Analyses examining the potential mediation effect of emotion regulation difficulties on the association of childhood maltreatment and NSSI.
**Significant at a level ofp< 0.05.
Key: ERD, Emotion Regulation Difficulties measured by the Difficulties with Emotion Regulation Scale (36–166); NSSI, Nonsuicidal Self Injury measured by the Deliberate Self‐Harm Inventory (0–202), Childhood Maltreatment measured by Childhood Trauma Questionnaire Short Form (25–92).
The second mediation model included ERD as the mediator in the relationship between CM and BPD symptoms.
Path A indicating the effect of CM on ERD was significant (Path A, b = 0.794,t(229.736)= 8.058p< 0.001, 95% CI = 0.599–0.988): Individuals who reported greater levels of maltreatment also reported greater levels of ERD.
Path C indicating the total effect of CM on BPD was also significant (Path C, b = 0.378,t(229.048)= 8.814p< 0.001, 95% CI = 0.294–0.462), indicating that as levels of CM increased, so did levels of BPD symptoms.
Path C′, indicating the direct effect of CM on BPD also remained significant (Path C′, b = 0.203,t(234.316)= 6.69p< 0.001, 95% CI = 0.143–0.263).
Path B, the effect of ERD on BPD symptoms when controlling for CM, was significant (Path B, b = 0.218,t(892.494)= 18.72p< 0.001 95% CI = 0.195–0.240) indicating individuals who experienced more ERD endorsed more BPD symptoms (Figure3).
The indirect pathway through ERD also was significant (indirect effect = 0.173 95% CI is [0.128, 0.22]).
This pattern of findings suggests that ERD partially mediated the relationship between CM and BPD symptoms, partially supporting Hypotheses 1b.
Analyses examining the potential mediation effect of emotion regulation difficulties on the association of childhood maltreatment and BPD.
**Significant at a level ofp< 0.001.
Key: BPD, Borderline Personality Disorder Symptoms measured by the PAI‐BOR (0–50), Childhood Maltreatment measured by Childhood Trauma Questionnaire Short Form (25–92); ERD, Emotion Regulation Difficulties measured by the Difficulties with Emotion Regulation Scale (36–166).
Moderation analyses were also conducted using the MIXED function in SPSS and examined the role of impulsivity (Hypothesis 2).
This model examined the relationship between CM and ERD with trait impulsivity as the moderator (Hypothesis 2; Table3).
Although the main effects between CM and ERD and impulsivity and ERD were both significant (p< 0.001), the addition of the impulsivity x CM interaction term did not result in the model accounting for significantly more variance in ERD, (b = 0.006,t(224.573)= 0.95p= 0.346, 95% CI = −0.007–0.019).
The moderating effect of impulsivity on the association between childhood maltreatment and emotion regulation difficulties.
Note: Participants who completed less than three time points have been filtered out, and two outliers were removed; see text for more details.
Abbreviations: BIS, Barratt Impulsivity Scale (41–115); CM, Childhood Maltreatment measured by CTQ; CTQ, Childhood Trauma Questionnaire Short Form (25–92); DERS, Difficulties with Emotion Regulation Scale (36–166); DSHI, Deliberate Self‐Harm Inventory (0–202); PAI‐BOR, Personality Assessment Inventory Borderline Scale (0–50).
We investigated the longitudinal associations of environmental and individual risk factors with NSSI and BPD among young adults.
We hypothesized that impulsivity should play a moderating role and ERD a mediating role with respect to the association of childhood maltreatment with NSSI and BPD.
Findings were partially consistent with hypotheses: ERD mediated the association of CM with NSSI and partially mediated the association of CM with BPD, but the moderation effect of impulsivity was non‐significant.
The finding that ERD mediated the association of CM with NSSI supported biosocial developmental models of NSSI (Beauchaine et al.,2019) as well as other theories of NSSI and its emotion regulation function (Chapman et al.,2006; McKenzie & Gross,2014).
Findings have broadly suggested that NSSI often functions to regulate emotions that people experience as intolerable or overwhelming (Chapman et al.,2006; Klonsky,2007; McKenzie & Gross,2014; Nicolai et al.,2016) with the most common function or purpose people report for engaging in NSSI being to reduce, avoid or escape from emotions (Chapman et al.,2006; Klonsky,2007; McKenzie & Gross,2014; Nicolai et al.,2016).
Further, a recent review suggested that greater emotion dysregulation was significantly associated with greater NSSI risk (Wolff et al.,2019).
Therefore, our findings further suggest that ERD may play a crucial role in the association of CM with NSSI among young adults.
The lack of a significant direct effect of CM on NSSI was unexpected.
The CTQ assessed multiple types of childhood maltreatment, with an aggregate score including all types of abuse.
A recent meta‐analysis (Serafini et al.,2017) found that childhood sexual abuse seems to increase risk for NSSI and suicide in women when compared to other forms of maltreatment (that have more inconsistent associations with NSSI in the literature).
The current study, therefore, could have combined types of CM that are associated with NSSI (e.g., sexual abuse) with those that are not.
The CTQ also does not assess other aspects of invalidating environments, such as criticism, rejection, oversimplification or conflict escalation.
These aspects could be important in the development of ERD and NSSI.
Partially consistent with our hypothesis, ERD partially mediated the association of CM with BPD.
We have considered a few explanations for this result.
First, there is a strong and well‐established association of CM with BPD and BPD symptoms (Crowell et al.,2009; Crowell et al.,2014; Wilson et al.,2021).
Second, BPD criteria cover a range of difficulties, some of which are more directly related to ERD (e.g., affective instability, intense anger and difficulties controlling anger).
Other symptoms, such as frantic efforts to avoid abandonment and identity disturbance, are not as obviously related to emotion dysregulation and may be related more directly to trauma (Vonderlin et al.,2018).
Finally, unstable interpersonal relationships may be related to both ERD and past experiences with CM.
Therefore, CM on its own likely contributes more to some symptoms and presentations of symptoms than ERD, and vice versa.
Another postulate of biosocial developmental models is that impulsivity moderates the association of childhood maltreatment or invalidation with the development of NSSI and BPD (Crowell et al.,2009; Crowell et al.,2014).
Findings, however, did not support Hypothesis 2 that impulsivity would moderate the association of CM with ERD.
There may be a couple of key reasons for this.
First, the sample included a group of recently and repeatedly self‐injuring young adults, where ERD may have already become well‐established by young adulthood.
Some research indicates that sensation‐seeking increases during adolescence and decreases (particularly in females) in early adulthood, while at the same time, impulse control increases steadily (Shulman et al.,2015).
It is possible that impulsivity may moderate these associations primarily in adolescence.
Second, it is possible that perhaps CM alone is so strongly associated with ERD that impulsivity is not sufficient to affect this relationship despite being correlated with both the CM and ERD.
Several study limitations warrant discussion.
First, the majority of the sample identified as female, rendering possible comparisons between genders difficult.
Future research should aim to have more balanced samples in terms of gender and should also strive to examine these variables in more diverse samples with a range of gender identities.
Second, only a subset of theN= 229 participants self‐injured during the 4 months leading up to baseline (n= 74) or during any follow‐ups (n= 88).
A larger prevalence and range of NSSI behaviours occurring during the study period might have helped clarify relationships between emotion dysregulation, impulsivity and NSSI.
Third, the current study provides a limited 12‐month snapshot of the lives of young adults.
A longer measurement period or research examining transitions from adolescence to young adulthood might help to better illuminate the relationships among risk factors, BPD and NSSI.
Although there was a longitudinal component to the current study, analyses were not time‐lagged, and as such, we cannot establish or infer temporal precedence.
That said, we did not expect any particular temporal trajectory in BPD or NSSI over the duration of the study.
Finally, the measures used to examine hypotheses were all self‐report, potentially subject to biases and under‐ or over‐reporting.
In particular, the childhood maltreatment measure was retrospective and as such may be subject to biases and participant memory of events many years prior to the current study.
In addition, screening occurred in different formats by necessity, as the study occurred in a metropolitan area in Canada and a more rural area of Mississippi, where people might have had less access to transportation, computing or reliable Internet.
It is possible that differing screening formats influenced the screening data.
Mitigating this possibility, though, aside from format, all screening procedures were highly standardized.
Findings from the present study emphasize the potentially important role of ERD in the maintenance of BPD symptoms and the frequency of NSSI over time among young adults.
Emotion regulation oriented skills and related treatments (e.g., DBT (Linehan,1993; Linehan,2015)) delivered during this period could help forestall some of the ongoing functional impairments and difficulties associated with both NSSI and BPD as young adults transition into increasingly complex life roles (e.g., post‐secondary education, jobs, relationships and parenting).
One caveat to this suggestion, of course, is that our sample included young adults with a range of ages.
To date, treatments that address emotion regulation as a core mechanism of change have shown promise in the treatment of NSSI within and outside of BPD (Berk et al.,2020; Cook & Gorraiz,2016; Turner et al.,2014).
Findings also suggest that the potentially moderating role of impulsivity in the association of childhood factors with NSSI and BPD might vary depending on developmental period (e.g., be stronger in later childhood or adolescence).
Earlier preventative interventions to stem the negative effects of childhood maltreatment could include family‐based treatment focused on both improving effective parenting and attachment relationships and improving emotion regulation (Beauchaine et al.,2015; Chanen & McCutcheon,2013; Kuo et al.,2015; Moretti & Obsuth,2009).
Future research should examine moderators of the association of environmental risk factors with NSSI and BPD over various developmental periods.
As the present study examined participants' reports of past CM broadly, other studies might examine the role of more specific aspects of CM or emotional invalidation in NSSI and BPD features among young adults.
Given the mental health challenges and worldwide health significance of BPD and NSSI, further work to clarify and strengthen developmental models could have a potentially far‐reaching impact on health systems and personal well‐being.