Expression of immediate early genes (IEGs) is critical for memory formation and has been widely used to identify the neural substrate of memory traces, termed memory engram cells.
Functions of IEGs have been known to be different depending on their types.
However, there is limited knowledge about the extent to which different types of IEGs are selectively or concurrently involved in the formation of memory engram.
To address this question, we investigated the combinative expression of c‐Fos, Arc, and Npas4 proteins using immunohistochemistry following aversive and rewarding experiences across subregions in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), basolateral amygdala (BLA), hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG), and retrosplenial cortex (RSC).
Using an automated cell detection algorithm, we found that expression patterns of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc varied across different brain areas, with a higher increase of IEG expressing cells in the PFC and posterior BLA than in the DG.
The combinative expression patterns, along with their experience‐induced changes, also differed across brain areas; the co‐expression of IEGs increased in the PFC and BLA following experience, whereas the increase was less pronounced in the DG and RSC.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that different area‐to‐area functional connectivity networks were extracted by different IEGs.
These findings provide insights into how different IEGs and their combinations identify engram cells, which will contribute to a deeper understanding of the functional significance of IEG‐tagged memory engram cells.
Formation of long‐term memory requires transcription and protein synthesis (Asok et al.2019; Barondes and Jarvik1964; Dash et al.1990; Davis and Squire1984; Flexner et al.1963; Kandel2001; Silva et al.1998).
Immediate‐early genes (IEGs) have rapid and transient transcription upon extracellular stimulation (Greenberg and Ziff1984; Gu et al.2023; Sheng and Greenberg1990).
IEGs are involved in long‐term synaptic plasticity and memory, and are widely used as endogenous markers of neuronal activity, learning‐induced plasticity, and pharmacological activation (Barth et al.2004; Fuentes‐Ramos and Barco2024; Guzowski et al.1999; Hoffman et al.1993; Minatohara et al.2015; Okuno2011; Salery et al.2021; Yokose et al.2024; Yokose et al.2023).
Furthermore, IEGs have been utilized for the identification of memory engram cells, which are subpopulations of neurons that are activated by a salient experience and subsequently undergo biological changes to encode a specific memory episode (Josselyn et al.2015; Josselyn and Tonegawa2020; Kandel et al.2014; Liu, Ramirez, et al.2012; Silva et al.2009).
Transgenic approaches using IEGs have enabled the identification of memory engram cells by visualizing and optogenetically/chemogenetically manipulating IEG‐expressing cells, allowing the tracking of memory‐bearing cells and investigating their causal roles in learning and memory (Barth et al.2004; Choi et al.2018; Denny et al.2014; Kitamura et al.2017; Liu, Ramirez, et al.2012; Marks et al.2022; Ortega‐de San Luis and Ryan2022; Reijmers et al.2007; Tanaka et al.2018; Terranova et al.2022; Terranova et al.2023; Tonegawa et al.2015; Vetere et al.2019; Wang et al.2006; Yamamoto et al.2021).
Importantly, different types of IEG have different roles in synaptic plasticity and memory.
For example, c‐Fos, a transcription factor IEG (Morgan et al.1987; Sagar et al.1988; Yap and Greenberg2018), is essential for synaptic plasticity and memory consolidation (Fleischmann et al.2003; Katche et al.2010; Kemp et al.2013), with increased dendritic spine density in expressing cells (Choi et al.2018; Ryan et al.2015; but see Uytiepo et al.2025).
Activity‐regulated cytoskeletal protein (Arc), an effector IEG (Guzowski et al.1999; Nikolaienko et al.2018), influences long‐term memory (Plath et al.2006) by heterosynaptically weakening inactive synapses (El‐Boustani et al.2018; Minatohara et al.2015; Okuno et al.2012; Yap and Greenberg2018).
Neuronal PAS domain protein 4 (Npas4), another transcription factor IEG (Lin et al.2008), is crucial for memory consolidation (Ramamoorthi et al.2011; Weng et al.2018) and regulates excitatory‐inhibitory synaptic balance (Spiegel et al.2014; Sun and Lin2016).
However, the difference in the type of IEG has not been relatively considered in identifying memory engram cells because there remains limited knowledge about the extent to which different IEGs are selectively or concurrently involved in engram cell formation.
Several studies have reported the co‐expression (Gonzales et al.2020; Stone et al.2011) and segregation (Sun et al.2020; Ye et al.2016) of different IEGs after learning.
However, those investigations are limited to specific IEGs, behaviors, and brain regions.
The aim of this study is to address the extent to which different types of IEGs are selectively or concurrently expressed in individual cells in multiple brain regions simultaneously.
Using the automated cell detection method we previously proposed (Osanai et al.2025), we investigated the combinative protein expression of c‐Fos, Arc, and Npas4 with IHC after aversive and reward experience across the mPFC, basolateral amygdala (BLA), hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG), and retrosplenial cortex (RSC), which are implicated in aversive and appetitive memory (Giustino and Maren2015; Gore et al.2015; Gourley and Taylor2016; Kesner2018; Kheirbek et al.2013; Kirk et al.2017; Kitamura et al.2017; Kwapis et al.2015; Redondo et al.2014; Sierra‐Mercado et al.2011; Sun et al.2021; Terranova et al.2022; Vedder et al.2017).
All procedures relating to mouse care and experimental treatments conformed to NIH and Institutional guidelines, and were conducted with the approval of the UT Southwestern Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).
A total of 18 male C57BL/6J mice between 8 and 16 weeks old were used.
Mice were group housed with littermates (2–5 mice per cage) in a 12‐h light/dark cycle with light from 6 am to 6 pm until a day before experiments.
We prepared brain section samples with three different conditions: home cage (HC), contextual fear conditioning (CFC), and reward experience (RE) groups (n= 6 for each group, three to six sections per animal).
Mice had ad libitum access to food and water except for the RE group.
Mice were separated into individual cages 1 day before the sampling, and then deeply anesthetized with a ketamine (75 mg/kg)/dexmedetomidine (1 mg/kg) (K/D) cocktail for transcardial perfusion with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS.
Brains were removed and post‐fixed in 4% PFA in PBS at 4°C for 1–3 days.
Mice were separated into individual cages 1 day before CFC.
Foot‐shock stimulation was provided based on the previous reports (Osanai et al.2025; Osanai et al.2023; Terranova et al.2022).
In this study, a fear apparatus with a 24 cm W × 20 cm D × 20 cm H chamber (Med Associates) was used, and a mouse was placed in the fear stimulation chamber for a 3‐min habituation period and for a subsequent 3‐min shock period.
During the shock period, the mouse received three foot shocks (0.75 mA, 2‐s) with 58‐s inter‐shock intervals.
After the stimulation, the mouse was returned to its home cage for 1 h. The mouse was then immediately anesthetized deeply with a K/D cocktail and transcardially perfused with 4% PFA in PBS.
Brains were removed and post‐fixed in 4% PFA in PBS at 4°C for 1–3 days.
The shock chamber was cleaned before starting each experiment.
Freezing behavior during the fear conditioning experiments was recorded in the videos and analyzed by AnyMaze software (Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL).
The freezing ratio in each period (habituation‐ or shock‐period) was calculated as the total freezing time during each period divided by the total time of each period (3 min).
Mice were separated into individual cages and subjected to 1 week of food restriction with access to a small amount of food daily, resulting in a reduction of their body weight to ~85% of the initial weight.
The RE protocol was conducted in the same chamber as the CFC.
After the food restriction period, each mouse was allowed to explore the chamber with food pellets for 30 min.
Eating behavior during chamber exploration was confirmed through video recording and by measuring the weight reduction of the provided food pellets.
The mouse was then returned to its home cage for 1 h. Following this, the mouse was immediately anesthetized deeply with a K/D cocktail and transcardially perfused with 4% PFA.
Brains were removed and post‐fixed in 4% PFA in PBS at 4°C for 1–3 days.
The chamber was cleaned before starting each experiment.
Eating behavior was manually identified using recorded videos.
The ratio of eating duration was calculated by dividing the total duration of eating behavior by the total duration of the experiment (30 min).
The fixed brains were sectioned using a vibratome (Leica VT100S) with a thickness of 60 μm.
For immunohistochemistry (IHC), tissue sections were washed with PBS, blocked with 0.03% Triton‐X PBS (PBS‐T) with 5% normal donkey serum (NDS) (Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs; RRID: AB_2337258) for 30 min, and then incubated with primary antibodies diluted in the PBS‐T with 5% NDS for two nights at 4°C.
After washing with PBS (3 × 5 min), tissue sections were subsequently incubated with secondary antibodies in the PBS‐T with 5% NDS for 2 h at room temperature.
Primary antibodies were chicken anti‐NeuN (1/1000, Millipore Sigma, ABN91; RRID: AB_11205760), guinea pig anti‐Arc (1/500, synaptic systems, 156005; RRID: AB_2151848), rabbit anti‐Npas4 (1/1000, Activity signaling, AS‐AB18A‐300), and goat anti‐c‐Fos (1/1000, Santacruz, sc‐52‐G; RRID: AB_2629503).
Secondary antibodies were donkey anti‐chicken DyLight 405 (1/500, Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs; RRID: AB_2340373), donkey anti‐guinea pig AlexaFluor488 (1/500, Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs; RRID: AB_2340472), donkey anti‐rabbit AlexaFluor546 (1/500, ThermoFisher Scientific; RRID: AB_2534016), and donkey anti‐goat AlexaFluor633 (1/500, Jackson ImmunoResearch Labs; RRID: AB_2535739).
After incubating in the secondary antibody solution, the tissue sections were washed in PBS (2 × 5 min) and mounted in VECTASHIELD antifade mounting medium (Vector Laboratories) on glass slides.
All fluorescence images (0.624 μm/pixel) were acquired under the same imaging conditions using Zeiss LSM800, 10× objective lens (NA: 0.45), and Zen Blue software (Zeiss).
Details of the imaging conditions were described previously (Osanai et al.2025).
IEG‐ and NeuN‐positive cells were detected in the prelimbic (PL) and infralimbic (IL) regions of PFC, anterior and posterior BLA (aBLA and pBLA), granule cell layers of dorsal and ventral DG (dDG and vDG), and dorsal/ventral parts of anterior and posterior RSC (dorsal aRSC, ventral aRSC, dorsal pRSC, and ventral pRSC), whose boundaries were determined based on the Allen Brain Reference Atlas (Allen Institute for Brain Science2004).
From bregma, PL and IL were determined in the coronal sections at +1.845 to +1.42 mm, aBLA was at −1.255 to −1.655 mm, pBLA was at −2.355 to −2.78 mm, dDG was at −1.655 to −2.255 mm, vDG was at −3.28 to −3.455 mm, aRSC was at −1.255 to −2.255 mm, and pRSC was at −2.78 to −3.78 mm.
The regions of interest (ROI) for each brain region were manually drawn using ImageJ (Schindelin et al.2012).
The images of each channel (NeuN, c‐Fos, Npas4, Arc) and the ROI information were imported into MATLAB R2024b (Mathworks) for further analysis.
For the analysis in the PL and dDG, we included the data used in the previous report (Osanai et al.2025).
In this study, we used the newly developed method, automated cell detection after background assumption (ADABA) algorithm, written in MATLAB that we proposed previously (Osanai et al.2025).
Briefly, the algorithm subtracted the background of the image and then the background‐cleaned image was used for cell detection.
First, the images were converted into 8‐bit gray scale, and median filters were applied (c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc images: 11 × 11 pixels; NeuN image: 7 × 7 pixels).
For assuming background pattern, we first determined the intense signal pixels in the image by drawing 20 intensity contours using Otsu's method (Otsu1979) which is implemented in MATLAB Image Processing Toolbox (multithresh.m).
A contour which covers more than 80% (for Arc and NeuN images) or 95% (for c‐Fos and Npas4 images) of the image was selected for further calculation.
The inside contour areas were filled with the neighboring intensity, and the background pattern was assumed by filtering with a spatial moving average filter (31 × 31 pixels).
The assumed background was then subtracted from the median‐filtered image.
Then, thresholding was conducted on the background‐subtracted image withT=k×σ, whereTis the threshold,σis the standard deviation intensity of the background‐subtracted image, andkis the coefficient parameter;k= 5 for c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc, andk= 2 for NeuN positive cell detections.
The thresholded signals were denoised and smoothed by morphological operations of erosion‐reconstruction with five pixels distance and closing with two pixels distance.
Signals whose areas are smaller than 50 pixels were regarded as noise and removed for further processing.
The smoothed thresholded signals were then segmented with a watershed algorithm to detect c‐Fos, Npas4, Arc, and NeuN positive cells in the image.
IEGs were assessed as co‐localized within a cell if their detected areas share more than five pixels.
Cell densities were obtained by calculating the number of positive cells per areas of the ROI.
Expression levels of IEGs were measured by peak fluorescent intensity of each detected cell.
The ratio of IEG single‐, double‐, and triple‐positive cells was calculated by dividing the number of single‐, double‐, and triple‐positive cells by the total number of c‐Fos, Npas4, or Arc positive cells in Figures4,5,6,7, or by the total number of IEG‐positive cells in FigureS14.
Co‐expression of IEGs in PL and IL.
(A, E) Cell densities of each cell group with selective or combinative IEG expression in the PL (A) and IL (E).
(B, F) Ratio of cell densities per all c‐Fos cells (left), Npas4 cells (middle), and Arc cells (right), in the PL (B) and IL (F).
(C, G) Venn diagrams of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc positive cells in HC, CFC, and RE groups, in the PL (C) and IL (G).
The size of the circles corresponds to cell densities, normalized by Arc cell density.
(D, H) Average correlation of IEG expression in single cells, between c‐Fos versus Npas4 (left), c‐Fos versus Arc (middle), and Npas4 versus Arc (right), in the PL (D) and IL (H).
For each group of bars, the left bar indicates HC, the middle indicates CFC, and the right indicates RE.
Co‐expression of IEGs in anterior and posterior BLA.
(A, E) Cell densities of each cell group with selective or combinative IEG expression in aBLA (A) and pBLA (E).
(B, F) Ratio of cell densities per all c‐Fos cells (left), Npas4 cells (middle), and Arc cells (right), in the aBLA (B) and pBLA (F).
(C, G) Venn diagrams of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc positive cells in HC, CFC, and RE groups, in the aBLA (C) and pBLA (G).
The size of the circles corresponds to cell densities, normalized by Arc cell density.
(D, H) Average correlation of IEG expression in single cells, between c‐Fos versus Npas4 (left), c‐Fos versus Arc (middle), and Npas4 versus Arc (right), in the aBLA (D) and pBLA (H).
For each group of bars, the left bar indicates HC, the middle indicates CFC, and the right indicates RE.
Co‐expression of IEGs in dorsal and ventral DG.
(A, E) Cell densities of each cell group with selective or combinative IEG expression in the dDG (A) and vDG (E).
(B, F) Ratio of cell densities per all c‐Fos cells (left), Npas4 cells (middle), and Arc cells (right), in the dDG (B) and vDG (F).
(C, G) Venn diagrams of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc positive cells in HC, CFC, and RE groups, in the dDG (C) and vDG (G).
The size of the circles corresponds to cell densities, normalized by Arc cell density.
(D, H) Average correlation of IEG expression in single cells, between c‐Fos versus Npas4 (left), c‐Fos versus Arc (middle), and Npas4 versus Arc (right), in the dDG (D) and vDG (H).
For each group of bars, the left bar indicates HC, the middle indicates CFC, and the right indicates RE.
Co‐expression of IEGs in RSC.
(A, E, I, M) Cell densities of each cell group with selective or combinative IEG expression in the dorsal aRSC (A), ventral aRSC (E), dorsal pRSC (I), and ventral pRSC (M).
(B, F, J, N) Ratio of cell densities per all c‐Fos cells (left), Npas4 cells (middle), and Arc cells (right), in the dorsal aRSC (B), ventral aRSC (F), dorsal pRSC (J), and ventral pRSC (N).
(C, G, K, O) Venn diagrams of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc positive cells in HC, CFC, and RE groups, in the dorsal aRSC (C), ventral aRSC (G), dorsal pRSC (K), and ventral pRSC (O).
The size of the circles corresponds to cell densities, normalized by Arc cell density.
(D, H, L, P) Average correlation of IEG expression in single cells, between c‐Fos versus Npas4 (left), c‐Fos versus Arc (middle), and Npas4 versus Arc (right), in the dorsal aRSC (D), ventral aRSC (H), dorsal pRSC (L), and ventral pRSC (P).
For each group of bars, the left bar indicates HC, the middle indicates CFC, and the right indicates RE.
Similar to the previous report (Osanai et al.2025), to evaluate the accuracy of the automated cell detection, manual cell detection was performed by an experimenter that was blinded to the result of the automated cell detection using ImageJ (Schindelin et al.2012).
For manual detection of IEG‐positive cells, random 77 images of HC, 129 images of CFC, and 128 images of RE of the PL, IL, aBLA, pBLA, dDG, and vDG (total 334 images) from six animals per each experimental group were used.
Within these images, true positive and false positive were identified manually after the automated detection using random 7, 9, 7, and 9 images for NeuN, c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc, respectively.
Also, random 5 images were used for manual detection of NeuN‐positive cells.
The Precision, or false positive detection rate, was calculated as Precision = TP/(TP + FP), where true positive (TP) and false positive (FP) were manually checked after the automated detection.
To evaluate the ratio that cells detected manually were also detected in the automated algorithm, the Auto‐Manual match rate, or Sensitivity, was calculated as Match/(Match + Eye_Only), where Match indicates the number of cells detected both by the automated and manual approach and Eye_Only indicates the number of cells identified only by manually.
To evaluate the ratio of cells overlooked in manual identification but detected in the automated algorithm, the Sensitivity‐increase rate was calculated as Auto_Only/(Match + Auto_Only) where Auto_Only indicates the number of cells that were not identified manually but detected in the automated algorithm.
High sensitivity indicates that the automated method does not overlook manually detected cells, and high sensitivity‐increase rate indicates that the automated method detects more cells overlooked by manual detection.
The custom code used in this study is available athttps://github.com/HisayukiOsanai/CellDetection.
To calculate IEG‐based functional connectivity networks, correlation matrices were generated based on interregional correlations in the number of IEG‐positive cells (Silva et al.2019; Takeuchi et al.2022; Tanimizu et al.2017; Vetere et al.2017; Wheeler et al.2013).
Correlation matrices of Pearson r values were computed between all 10 brain regions with a vector of size 6 (i.e., 6 animals) within each experimental group (HC, CFC, RE) and each IEG group (c‐Fos, Npas4, Arc, and combinations of them).
Hierarchical clustering of the correlation matrix was visualized by average‐linkage hierarchical clustering with dissimilarity index, or distance, calculated by distance = 1 − |r| (Liu, Zhu, et al.2012; Takeuchi et al.2022).
Functional connectivity networks were constructed by thresholding the correlation matrices and visualized using MATLAB.
The graphs represent brain areas (nodes) and network connection lines (edges) which represent Pearson correlations |r| between brain areas.
A correlation of |r| > 0.7 was considered strong and used for thresholding the network connections.
Line thickness and node sizes are proportional to the |r| value between brain areas and to the number of connections each brain area has, individually.
Complexity of networks was evaluated by connectivity per brain area which indicates the number of connections (edges) per brain area (node), and by connectivity per effective node which indicates the number of connections (edges) per brain area that has at least one connection (effective node).
To evaluate dissimilarity between graphs, graph‐edit‐distance (GED) (Bai et al.2019; Tantardini et al.2019; Wills and Meyer2020) and Sum of Differences in Edge‐Weight Values (SDEWV) (Wang et al.2019) were calculated.
GED is a measurement of the minimum number of operations required to transform one graph into another, which we calculated by the sum of all elements of the difference between two graph adjacency matrices:GED=∑i,jDi,j, whereDi,jis the element of difference matrixD=A−A′, withAandA′being the adjacency matrices of the two graphGandG′.
SDEWV is the sum of absolute differences in edge weights between two graphs, which we calculated asSDEWV=∑i,j∣ei,j−ei,j′∣, whereeande′ are edge weight between nodesiandjin the two graphs.
Statistical analyses were performed using MATLAB withn= 6 animals for each experimental group except detection accuracy analysis in Figure1and intensity analyses in Figures3B,S8,S9, andS18–S20.
All bar plots and error bars represent mean ± standard error, and box plots in the violin plots display minimum, 25th percentile, median, 75th percentile, and maximum values.
One‐way ANOVA followed by post hoc Tukey test was used to analyze differences between groups.
For cell‐intensity analysis, we used the nonparametric Kruskal–Wallis test followed by the Dunn–Šidák test.
Effect sizes were calculated using Cohen's d, whered= 0.2, 0.5, 0.8, and < 0.2 are considered as small, medium, large, and negligible effects (Cohen1988; Thomas et al.1991).
For effect sizes in the cell‐intensity analysis, we calculated Cliff'sδ, whereδ= 0.147, 0.33, 0.474, and < 0.147 correspond to small, medium, large, and negligible effects (Cliff1993; Macbeth et al.2011; Meissel and Yao2024; Romano et al.2006).p< 0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.
*, **, and *** indicatep< 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001, respectively.
Due to the large sample size in the cell‐intensity analysis, we assessed a non‐negligible difference using effect size rather than relying solely onpvalues in the intensity analysis (Nakagawa and Cuthill2007).
#, ##, and ### indicateδ≥ 0.147, 0.33, and 0.474, respectively, with allp< 0.05.
Automated detection of IEG positive cells and the detection accuracy.
(A) Top: Original images of c‐Fos, Npas4, Arc, and NeuN expressed cells in aBLA.
Middle: Overlay of the manually detected positive cells (white “+” marks) on the original images.
Bottom: Auto‐detected cells (colored cells), overlay of the manually detected positive cells and manually verified false‐positive detections (red “×” marks).
Yellow “△” marks indicate cells overlooked in the manual detection but detected in the automated algorithm.
Scale bars, 100 μm.
(B) Evaluation of auto‐detection accuracy with Precision, Auto‐Manual match rate, and Sensitivity increase rate.
Precision indicates false positive ratio in the automated cell detection per total detected cells, that is Precision = TP/(TP + FP), where true positive (TP) and false positive (FP) were identified manually after the automated detection (n= 7, 9, 7, and 9 sections for NeuN, c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc).
Auto‐Manual match rate indicates the ratio of cells which were both manually and automatically detected, such that Auto‐Manual match rate = Match/(Match + Eye_Only), where Match indicates the number of cells which were both manually and automatically detected, and Eye_Only indicates the number of cells identified only by manual detection (n= 5 sections for NeuN,n= 334 sections for c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc).
Sensitivity increase rate indicates ratio that cells were not detected manually but detected automatically, that Sensitivity‐increase rate = Auto_Only/(Match + Auto_Only), where Auto_Only indicates the number of cells which were not identified manually but detected automatically (n= 5 sections for NeuN,n= 334 sections for c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc).
(C) Correlation of automatically and manually detected cell number, withRindicating Pearson correlation coefficient (p< 0.001 for all).
HC:N= 77, CFC:N= 129, RE:N= 128 sections.
The sections used for accuracy analysis were randomly selected from the PFC, BLA, and DG.
Total counted cells were, for manual‐ vs. auto‐detection, for c‐Fos positive cells, HC: 786 vs. 751 cells, CFC: 5914 vs. 5653 cells, and RE: 4604 vs. 4922 cells; for Npas4 positive cells, HC: 800 vs. 875 cells, CFC: 3548 vs. 3476 cells, and RE: 2713 vs. 2696 cells; for Arc positive cells, HC: 893 vs. 1965 cells, CFC: 4983 vs. 10,101 cells, and RE: 3415 vs. 9136 cells.
Changes of cell densities and expression levels of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc positive cells.
(A) Fold changes of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc positive cell densities by CFC and RE in each brain region, compared with HC group.
(B) Fold changes of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc expression levels of cells by CFC and RE in each brain region, compared with HC group.
Statistical tests were conducted between groups, as shown in FiguresS8andS9.
For the comprehensive investigation of IEG‐expressing cells in multiple brain regions, we used the automated cell detection method.
Brain slice images were captured using the confocal microscope following the IHC staining with c‐Fos‐, Npas4‐, and Arc‐antibodies (Figure1A).
Consistent with our previous results (Osanai et al.2025), the automated cell detection has high accuracy compared with manual detection; the false positive detection was lower than 5% (Precision > 0.96), and the automated detection identified more than 77% of the manually identified cells with increased sensitivity in the confocal images of the BLA, PFC, and DG (Figure1B).
Some IEG‐stained images contained both strongly and weakly labeled cells, making consistent manual cell counting difficult; cells with similar intensity were more likely to be counted manually in images with sparse cell distribution but were often overlooked in images with dense and variable‐intensity staining cells (Figure1Ayellow triangles) (Osanai et al.2025).
Such observation bias can be avoided by automated detection, resulting in higher sensitivity of Arc positive cell detection (Figure1B, right).
The number of detected cells was highly correlated withR> 0.7 between automated and manual cell detections for all c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc positive cells (Figures1CandS1).
The results indicate that our automated cell detection algorithm has high precision and helps reduce observation bias in the manual detection of IEG‐expressing cells.
Due to the reliability of automated cell detection, we applied this method to identify the positive cells for all following analyses.
The cell detections for c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc were performed in the prelimbic cortex (PL) (Figures2andS2A), infralimbic cortex (IL) (Figures2andS2B), anterior BLA (aBLA) (Figures2andS3A), posterior BLA (pBLA) (Figures2andS3B), dorsal DG (dDG) (Figures2andS4), ventral DG (vDG) (Figures2andS5), dorsal/ventral anterior RSC (aRSC) (Figures2andS6), and dorsal/ventral posterior RSC (pRSC) (Figures2andS7), individually 60 min following CFC or reward experience (RE) (see Section2).
After CFC, c‐Fos+cell density was significantly increased in all brain areas except the ventral aRSC compared with the home‐cage (HC) group.
On the other hand, Npas4+cell density was increased in the PL, IL, and pBLA.
The Arc+cell density was increased in the PL, IL, pBLA, vDG, ventral aRSC, and dorsal/ventral pRSC (Figures3A,S8,S9, andS10A).
After RE, the c‐Fos+cell densities were increased significantly in all brain areas; Npas4+cell densities were increased in the PL, IL, pBLA, and dorsal/ventral aRSC; Arc+cell densities were increased in the PL, IL, pBLA, dDG, dorsal aRSC, and dorsal/ventral pRSC (Figures3A,S8,S9, andS10A).
Furthermore, after CFC, the average expression level of c‐Fos was increased in the PL, IL, a/pBLA, d/vDG, and ventral pRSC; Npas4 expression level was increased in the aBLA and decreased in the dorsal aRSC and dorsal/ventral pRSC; Arc expression level increased in the PL, aBLA, and dDG and decreased in the ventral pRSC.
After RE, the average c‐Fos expression level was increased in all brain areas but the ventral aRSC; Npas4 expression level was increased in the PL and pBLA; Arc expression level increased in the aBLA, dDG, ventral aRSC, and ventral pRSC (Figures3B,S8,S9, andS10B).
The decrease of average expression level after stimulation in RSC may indicate that the number of cells with weak IEG expression were increased whereas the maximum expression level is strictly controlled compared with other brain areas once IEG is expressed.
In addition, the number of IEG positive cells was correlated with animal behaviors in several brain regions (FiguresS11andS12).
In CFC, the freezing duration was significantly correlated to IEG‐positive cell densities; with c‐Fos+cell density in the dDG and dorsal aRSC; with Npas4+cell density in the PL, pBLA, and dDG; with Arc+cell density in the PL (FigureS11E).
In RE, the eating duration was significantly correlated with Arc+cell density in the PL and IL (FigureS12E).
Thus, the expressions of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc are differently increased after the conditioning experience depending on the brain areas (Figure3A).
However, overall, brain areas with a greater increase in the expression of one IEG type tended to show higher expression of other types of IEGs with a correlation coefficient larger than 0.7 (FigureS13).
Expression of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc in multiple brain regions.
Images of c‐Fos (red), Npas4 (green), Arc (blue), merged, and auto‐detected cells in the prelimbic (PL), infralimbic (IL), anterior basolateral amygdala (aBLA), posterior BLA (pBLA), dorsal dentate gyrus (dDG), and ventral DG (vDG), dorsal anterior RSC (aRSC), ventral aRSC, dorsal posterior RSC (pRSC), and ventral pRSC.
Top: Home cage (HC); Middle: Contextual fear conditioning (CFC); Bottom: Reward experience (RE) groups.
Scale bars, 40 μm.
Larger field‐of‐view images are shown in FiguresS2–S7.
Next, we investigated the extent to which the different types of IEGs are selectively or co‐expressed in individual neurons.
In both PL and IL, cell densities of the double‐positive cells of different IEGs and c‐Fos/Npas4/Arc triple‐positive cells tended to be increased by mouse experience (Figure4A,E).
The ratio of IEG single‐positive cells was decreased in both PL and IL by CFC or RE, but instead the ratio of the c‐Fos/Npas4/Arc triple‐positive cells and double‐positive cells of c‐Fos/Arc and Npas4/Arc were increased (Figures4B,C,F,GandS14A,B).
The expression levels of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc in single cells in both PL and IL were not correlated in the HC group, but the correlation between c‐Fos and Npas4 and between Npas4 and Arc increased after CFC and RE (Figure4D,H).
These indicate that c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc tend to be independently expressed in the HC condition but become co‐expressed after CFC and RE in the PL and IL.
In the aBLA, cell densities of the c‐Fos/Npas4/Arc triple‐positive cells and c‐Fos/Arc double‐positive cells were increased by CFC and RE (Figure5A).
Also, the ratio of the c‐Fos/Npas4/Arc triple‐positive cells was increased by CFC and RE (Figures5B,CandS14C).
The expression levels of IEGs were correlated after CFC and RE but not in HC (Figure5D).
Similarly, in the pBLA, the cell density of the c‐Fos/Npas4/Arc triple‐positive cells was increased by CFC and RE, as well as c‐Fos/Npas4 and c‐Fos/Arc double‐positive cells and c‐Fos single‐positive cells (Figure5E).
The ratio of the c‐Fos/Npas4/Arc triple‐positive cells was increased by CFC and RE (Figures5F,GandS14D).
The correlation of the expression level between c‐Fos and Npas4 was significantly increased after CFC and RE compared with HC (Figure5H).
These results indicate that, similar to the results in the PFC, c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc tend to be co‐localized after CFC and RE in the BLA.
On the other hand, in the DG, the cell density of the c‐Fos/Npas4/Arc triple‐positive cells was increased by CFC and RE in the dDG, but the change was not observed in the vDG (Figure6A,E).
Unlike the PFC and BLA, where the proportion of the triple‐positive cells was < 3% of the whole population in the HC group (FigureS14A–D), both dDG and vDG had a higher ratio of triple‐positive cells in HC (26.7% ± 3.0% in dDG and 12.3% ± 1.7% in vDG; FigureS14E,F) as well as in the CFC and RE groups (Figures6B,C,F,GandS14E,F).
The increase of the triple‐positive cell ratio after CFC and RE was only observed within Npas4+cells but not within c‐Fos+and Arc+cells in the dDG (Figure6B), and the increase was not observed in the vDG (Figure6F,G).
Unlike the PFC and BLA, CFC and RE groups did not show increased correlations of expression level in any pair between c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc in the dDG and vDG compared with HC (Figure6D,H).
Thus, the combinative expression patterns of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc in the dDG and vDG were different from those in the PFC and BLA.
Finally, we investigated IEG colocalization in the aRSC and pRSC.
In the aRSC, the cell density of the c‐Fos/Npas4/Arc triple‐positive cells was significantly increased by RE but not clearly observed by CFC, both in the dorsal and ventral aRSC (Figure7A,E).
The increase in the ratio of the triple‐positive cells was not clear in the dorsal aRSC (Figures7B,CandS14G), and was only significant within Npas4+and Arc+cells in the ventral aRSC (Figures7F,GandS14H).
The increase in the correlation of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc expression levels was not clear in dorsal/ventral aRSC (Figure7D,H).
In the pRSC, the cell density of the c‐Fos/Npas4/Arc triple‐positive cells was significantly increased by CFC and RE in the dorsal pRSC (Figure7I), and by CFC in the ventral pRSC (Figure7M).
The increase in the ratio of the triple‐positive cells was not significant in the dorsal pRSC (Figures7J,KandS14I), and was significant within c‐Fos+and Npas4+cells in the ventral pRSC (Figures7N,OandS14J).
The increase of the correlation of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc expression levels was not clear in dorsal/ventral pRSC (Figure7L,P).
Therefore, the increase of the c‐Fos/Npas4/Arc triple‐positive cells in the aRSC/pRSC was less clear than in the PFC and BLA, but was distinct from the DG.
We have also investigated expression levels of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc in each c‐Fos/Npas4/Arc positive/negative cell group (FiguresS15–S17).
The increases or decreases in population expression levels were observed, but we could not find systematic tendencies (FiguresS18–S20).
Also, we could not find systematic tendencies in correlation changes of IEG expression levels in different cell groups (FiguresS21–S23).
In addition, we investigated the correlation between the cell densities of the different cell groups and freezing duration in CFC (FigureS24) or eating duration in RE (FigureS25), showing positive or negative significant correlations in several brain regions (FiguresS24BandS25B).
Altogether, we observed brain area‐specific changes of combinative expression of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc induced by CFC or RE (Tables1and2).
The degree of combinative IEGs expression increase varied across areas.
Interestingly, the DG did not show a clear increase in the c‐Fos/Npas4/Arc triple‐positive ratio after CFC and RE in contrast to the PFC, BLA, and RSC.
Note:Summary of changes in cell densities of each cell group and cell density ratio per each IEG type, induced by CFC and RE.
Arrows indicatep< 0.05.
Cohen'sdwere > 0.8 for all.
Changes in expression level correlation between IEGs.
Note:Summary of changes in expression level correlation between c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc in individual cells, induced by CFC and RE.
Arrows indicatep< 0.05.
Cohen'sdwere > 0.8 for all.
Since IEGs have also been employed to examine the functional connectivity between brain areas based on the correlation of IEG expression (Franceschini et al.2023; Silva et al.2019; Takeuchi et al.2022; Tanimizu et al.2017; Vetere et al.2017; Wheeler et al.2013), in this study, we investigated whether the connectivity varies depending on the expression of a given IEG.
We calculated Pearson's correlation coefficient of the expression density of c‐Fos, Npas4, Arc positive cells for the brain regions (see Section2) and generated correlated matrices (Figure8A–C, left).
The connectivity networks were then visualized by applying a threshold (|R| > 0.7) to the correlation matrix (Figure8A–C, right).
The connectivity per brain area, or the number of edges per node, was higher in RE than HC in the c‐Fos based network (Figure8D).
Also, the connectivity per effective node, or the number of edges per non‐zero node, was higher in RE and in CFC than HC in the c‐Fos and Npas4 based networks, respectively (Figure8E).
Overall, the connectivity network tended to be more complex by CFC and RE compared with HC (Figure8A–E).
The double−/triple‐IEG‐based networks showed a similar tendency (FigureS26); the connectivity per brain area was larger in CFC in c‐Fos+/Npas4+and in RE Npas4+/Arc+networks than HC (FigureS26E), and the connectivity per effective node was larger in CFC in c‐Fos+/Arc+and Npas4+/Arc+networks than HC (FigureS26F).
The significant increases in the average correlation were observed in Npas4 and c‐Fos+/Arc+based networks (FigureS26G).
Comparing the graphs obtained from each cell group, the networks were more dissimilar across each cell group in CFC and RE than HC (Figure8F,G).
Thus, networks of IEG‐based functional connectivity tended to become more complex after experience, but they were not identical between the types of IEG.
Functional connectivity network of each IEG.
(A, B, C) Left, inter‐regional correlation matrices for c‐Fos‐ (A), Npas4‐ (B), and Arc‐ (C) positive cell densities.
Dendrograms above the correlation matrices are calculated using dissimilarity index 1 − |r|, with colors indicating |r| > 0.7 (dissimilarity index < 0.3).
Right, connectivity network graphs of c‐Fos (A), Npas4 (B), and Arc (C) generated by connecting each brain region (node) based on the strong correlations (Pearson's |r| > 0.7) (right), for HC, CFC, and RE groups.
The size of node circles in the network graphs corresponds to the number of connections (edges) the node has.
(D, E) Quantification of network complexity.
(D) Average number of edges per node across the 10 brain regions.
(E) Average number of edges per effective node, the brain region which has at least one connection to another node, across brain regions.
(F, G) Quantification of network dissimilarity.
(F) Matrix of graph edit distance (GED) across the graphs of different IEG groups.
Bar plot indicates average GED within HC, CFC, and RE groups.
(G) Matrix of Sum of Differences in Edge‐Weight Values (SDEWV) across the graphs of different IEG groups.
Bar plot indicates average SDEWV within HC, CFC, and RE groups (n= 7 graphs for each).
In this study, we investigated the expression patterns of three IEGs, c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc, along with their experience‐induced changes in various brain areas (Figures2and3).
The pattern of the combinative expression of those IEGs and their experience‐induced changes was also evaluated (Figures4,5,6,7).
We also demonstrated that different IEG expressions provide different information on area‐area connectivity networks (Figure8).
We used the method of automated cell detection after background assumption (ADABA) that we proposed previously (Figure1) (Osanai et al.2025).
This method provides unbiased detection of the immunolabeled cells after reducing the effect of uneven background arising from biological structures in a brain tissue; for example, we often observed uneven background in the DG granule cell layer (FiguresS4andS5).
Consistent with our previous report (Osanai et al.2025), our method provided highly precise cell detection, which aided the subsequent IEG co‐expression analysis.
While several techniques for brain‐wide neural activity mapping using IEGs have been developed in recent years (DeNardo et al.2019; Franceschini et al.2025; Guenthner et al.2013; Nagahama et al.2025; Renier et al.2016; Roy et al.2022; Wheeler et al.2013; Ye et al.2016; Zhang and Roy2024), investigations of differences in IEG types are still limited (Chiaruttini et al.2025; Heroux et al.2018; Kawashima et al.2014; Ons et al.2004).
Also, IEG expression in brain subregions has rarely been investigated comprehensively.
In this study, we investigated c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc expressing cell densities in subregions of the PFC, BLA, DG, and RSC (Figures2and3).
In the PFC, PL and IL subregions have distinct functions on fear expression/extinction and reward‐seeking behaviors (Giustino and Maren2015; Gourley and Taylor2016; Sierra‐Mercado et al.2011).
The PL and IL have different c‐Fos protein expression during fear renewal and retrieval of extinguished fear memories (Knapska and Maren2009), and Arc RNA expression level is higher in the IL in the fear‐extinguished rats but not different in the PL in the fear renewal (Orsini et al.2013).
In contrast, both PL and IL show increased c‐Fos protein expression after fear conditioning (Herry and Mons2004) and cocaine conditioning (Zavala et al.2007) as well as increased Arc RNA expression after food conditioning (Schiltz et al.2007).
In this study, we found that the number of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc protein positive cells is similarly increased in both PL and IL in response to both fear and reward experience (Figures3andS7A,D).
In the BLA, c‐Fos expression is induced by both aversive and appetitive stimuli, which are critical for valence‐related behavior, observed using IHC and in situ hybridization (ISH) (Gore et al.2015; Redondo et al.2014).
The aBLA and pBLA have neurons with different molecular identities and projections encoding negative and positive valence, respectively (Beyeler et al.2018; Kim et al.2016; O'Neill et al.2018; Pi et al.2020; Yang and Wang2017; Zhang et al.2020,2021).
However, we did not observe such negative and positive valence differences in IEG expression changes between CFC and RE in the BLA, although there were anterior–posterior differences in the type of IEGs whose expression increased; after both CFC and RE, c‐Fos was significantly increased in the aBLA, whereas c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc were increased in the pBLA (Figures3andS7G,J).
It has a possibility that our behavior procedure could interfere with distinguishing the effects of aversive and appetitive experiences by novel context exposure.
Also, further cell‐type‐specific investigations (Zhang et al.2021, Zhang et al.2020) are needed to understand how valence‐specific learning induces multiple IEG expression.
In the DG, dDG supports spatial memory while vDG is involved in fear and reward related behaviors (Kesner2018; Kheirbek et al.2013; Kirk et al.2017).
c‐Fos in the DG has been shown to increase by conditioning to fear and reward in IHC (Beck and Fibiger1995; Rademacher et al.2006), as well as Arc is increased by fear conditioning in ISH and transgene approach (Bal et al.2025; Rao‐Ruiz et al.2019).
Also, an increase of Npas4 has been observed with the RAM system (Sun et al.2020) and RNA level (Bal et al.2025) after fear conditioning.
In this study, we observed an increase of c‐Fos+cells in both the dDG and vDG after fear conditioning and reward experience, and Arc increase in the dDG by reward experience and in the vDG by fear conditioning (Figures3AandS9A,C).
In contrast, we did not observe significant changes in the number of Npas4+cells, which is similar to previous reports exploring Npas4 protein expression using fear conditioning (Chiaruttini et al.2025; Ramamoorthi et al.2011) and social interaction (Coutellier et al.2012).
The discrepancy between our Npas4 expression results and the results from the RAM system and RNA level experiments implies that innate expression of Npas4 protein is strictly controlled unlike the RAM system or RNA level, but further investigations are needed.
Finally, the RSC has several subregions with distinct cytoarchitectures, projections, and functions for episodic memory (Alexander et al.2023; Burwell and Amaral1998; Cheng et al.2024; Sugar et al.2011; Sullivan et al.2023; Tsai et al.2022; Vann et al.2009; Vogt et al.2004).
For example, the anterior part of the RSC is needed for object (de Landeta et al.2020) and trace‐fear memory (Trask et al.2021), while the posterior RSC is important for spatial memory (de Landeta et al.2020; Trask et al.2021; Vann et al.2003).
Dorsal (dysgranular) and ventral (granular) RSC are suggested to differentially encode allocentric and egocentric information (Alexander and Nitz2015; Alexander et al.2023; Jacob et al.2017; Pothuizen et al.2009).
IEGs including c‐Fos and Arc are increased in the RSC after CFC in IHC (Robinson et al.2012).
In subregional studies, c‐Fos in both aRSC and pRSC is increased by acquisition of CFC memory and recall, whereas another IEG, zif268, is increased only in the aRSC during the recall phase in IHC (Trask and Helmstetter2022).
c‐Fos expression in both dorsal and ventral RSC is increased by fear conditioning in IHC (Radwanska et al.2010), but has differential expression in a spatial working memory task; c‐Fos increase is observed both in the dorsal (dysgranular) and ventral (granular) RSC with a visual cue, although more clearly in the posterior part, whereas the increase is observed only in the ventral RSC in the dark in IHC (Pothuizen et al.2009).
Supporting subregional differences of the RSC, we found IEG expression differences in the RSC subregions (Figures3andS9E,G,I,K).
For instance, while c‐Fos was increased by CFC in the dorsal aRSC and in the dorsal/ventral pRSC, the increase was not significant in the ventral aRSC.
Also, Npas4 was increased by RE in the dorsal/ventral aRSC, but it was not clear in the dorsal/ventral pRSC.
Our multi‐region multi‐IEG analysis supports that the induction of each IEG differs depending on the subregion and may contribute to the distinct memory functions.
We observed the brain region‐dependent enhancement of combinative expression of c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc following aversive or rewarding experiences (Figures4,5,6,7).
While there are several studies investigating colocalization of different IEGs (Chan et al.1993; Gonzales et al.2020; Guldenaar et al.1994; Guzowski et al.1999,2001; Hrvatin et al.2018; Lonergan et al.2010; Nakagami et al.2013; Sheng et al.1995; Stone et al.2011; Thompson et al.2010; Zuniga et al.2024), comprehensive analysis across brain areas has rarely been conducted.
Recently, Chiaruttini et al. developed a pipeline to investigate brain‐wide IEG expression and demonstrated the colocalization of c‐Fos/Npas4 and c‐Fos/Arc in HC, novel context, and CFC using IHC (Chiaruttini et al.2025).
They observed basal co‐expression level in HC varies across brain areas, with high abundance of c‐Fos/Arc colocalization in the DG.
They also observed co‐expression of c‐Fos/Arc increased in the DG, BLA, and some cortical areas by novel context exposure and CFC, which is consistent with our results.
In DG area analysis, we found that the ratio of triple co‐expressed neurons was different between the dorsal and ventral DG (Figures6andS14E,F).
In addition, we found that the increase of c‐Fos/Npas4/Arc triple‐expressing cell ratio was less clear in d/vDG compared with the PFC and in BLA unlike the increase of c‐Fos/Arc double co‐expression.
This indicates that correlation of different expression varies depending on the combination of co‐expression pattern of IEG types.
Thus, although different types of IEGs tend to express in a neuron collaboratively (Figures4,5,6,7), the degree of co‐expression might depend on the animal's states, brain areas, and IEG types.
Do engram cells tagged by different IEGs or co‐expressed IEGs play different roles in memory?
By viral vector approaches, Sun et al. recently found c‐Fos+and Npas4+cell populations labeled by the RAM system in DG have distinct roles in memory generalization and discrimination (Sun et al.2020).
Ye et al. found that Arc+/Npas4+cells in PFC are involved in positive‐valence experience but not the entire Arc+or Npas4+populations, as well as the involvement of c‐Fos+/Npas4+cells than the entire Fos+population using Npas4‐IHC and Arc‐dependent TRAP mouse or fosCreER virus (Ye et al.2016).
However, this question remains largely open.
Although neural activity and IEG expression are strongly coupled, the expression does not simply reflect the level of average neural activity.
During new context exploring, only fractions of CA1 place cells are tagged by c‐Fos (Tanaka et al.2018).
In hippocampal culture, c‐Fos expression is induced by synchronized input activity with a preference at 0.1 and 50 Hz, but not solely by raising cAMP, suggesting a relationship with sharp‐wave‐ripples and gamma oscillations (Anisimova et al.2023; Gee et al.2024; but see Yang et al.2024).
In contrast, Arc transcription peaks with 10 Hz stimulation, suggesting a relationship with theta oscillations (Kim et al.2024).
Also, the correlation between physiological neural activity and IEG expression is not constant across IEG types: using the FosGFP (Barth et al.2004) and EGFP‐Arc mice (Okuno et al.2012), the correlation of neural calcium activity with c‐Fos expression is higher than with Arc in the CA1 (Mahringer et al.2019) and visual cortex (Mahringer et al.2022).
These suggest that IEG expression may reflect cellular functions including synaptic plasticity than merely indicating neural activity, while c‐Fos and Arc are not always required for the induction of long‐term potentiation (Douglas et al.1988; Kyrke‐Smith et al.2021; Wisden et al.1990).
Given that different IEGs play different roles in synaptic plasticity, neurons expressing multiple IEGs could be influenced by the animal's experience more than neurons expressing a single IEG, which may play an important role in contributing to diverse forms of synaptic plasticity in learning.
In hippocampal culture, c‐Fos+/Arc+cells identified by IHC increase correlated cell firing following chemically induced long‐term potentiation, whereas c‐Fos−/Arc+cells decrease correlated cell firing, suggesting that different IEGs and their combination perform distinct functions (Jiang and VanDongen2021).
Neurons in CA1 with high c‐Fos induction show higher correlated activities than neurons with low c‐Fos induction during the spatial learning in the Fos‐GFP mouse (Pettit et al.2022).
Also, Arc positive cells are more likely to participate in sharp‐wave‐ripples than the negative cells in the CA1 acute slices of Arc‐dVenus mice (Norimoto et al.2018).
Conditional knockout of Scg2, the gene activated by c‐Fos, lowers fast‐gamma oscillation power and shifts the preferred theta phase of spikes in CA1 (Yap et al.2021).
Correspondingly, the spikes of CA1 c‐Fos+cells occur during fast gamma events than c‐Fos−cells, and the preferred theta phase of theta‐burst spikes of c‐Fos+cells differs from c‐Fos−spikes (Tanaka et al.2018).
The IEG‐expressing cell assembles form spatially defined clusters in the striatum in ISH (Gonzales et al.2020).
Together, IEG expression and their combinations may reflect ongoing synaptic plasticity which leads to local neural activity synchrony, with the specific form depending on the types of expressing IEGs.
Finally, we analyzed aspects of the functional connectivity network across brain regions based on different IEGs (Figure8).
Since a subpopulation of neurons activated in memory acquisition overlaps with those activated in recall (Josselyn and Tonegawa2020; Roy et al.2022), we considered the possibility that the area‐to‐area network between these subpopulations is critical for memory recall and such subnetwork can be visualized by the co‐expression of IEGs.
However, we did not observe such correspondence of subnetwork in the double/triple IEG‐based networks, compared with the c‐Fos, Npas4, and Arc single IEG‐based networks (Figures8A–CandS26A–D).
On the other hand, although our correlation analysis used a relatively small sample size (n= 6 animals for each group), we found systematic tendencies for the IEG‐based functional connectivity networks to become more complex and more dissimilar between IEGs.
It is reported that similar region‐ and IEG type‐dependency in IEG‐expression correlation was observed between the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and visual cortex, and between RNA levels of c‐Fos, Arc, and zif268 (Guzowski et al.2001).
These suggest the possibility that the different factors of functional connectivity are coded by the expression of different IEG or their co‐expression.
Consistent with our hypothesis, whisker association training does not alter c‐Fos expression in the barrel cortex of the FosGFP mouse, suggesting that the c‐Fos+cells in the sensory cortex can be involved in other functions (Lee et al.2021).
However, although IEG‐based functional connectivity between brain areas has often been estimated (Franceschini et al.2023; Silva et al.2019; Takeuchi et al.2022; Tanimizu et al.2017; Vetere et al.2017; Wheeler et al.2013), direct evidence that supports the link between physiological and IEG‐based connectivity remains scarce and requires a more detailed interpretation of IEG‐based networks, for example investigating whether a specific IEG‐expressing neuron preferentially connects to neurons expressing the same type of IEG.
In this study, we examined the differential or concurrent expression across three IEGs induced by differential experience (CFC or RE).
CFC and RE stimulation enhanced those IEG expressions and prompted their connectivity networks (Figures2,3,4,5,6,7,8).
We found that there were some differences in IEG expression after CFC or RE; for example, the increase in the number of Npas4‐positive cells was significant by RE but less clear by CFC in the dorsal and ventral aRSC (Figures3AandS8E,G), and the functional connectivity tended to be more complex after reward experience than fear conditioning, and the networks were more dissimilar across each cell group after reward experience (Figure8).
These results suggest that those effects are induced by different component stimuli which contain fear‐ or reward‐experience, individually.
On the other hand, we observed that the effects of CFC and RE on most IEG expressions and co‐expressions were similar in many cases.
We speculate this similarity may be due to the effects of novel environment exposure.
Since animals were exposed to a novel context and sensory cues during CFC and RE, the IEGs can be activated by not only aversive and reward stimulations but also exposure to a novel environment, which could interfere with distinguishing the effects of aversive and appetitive experiences.
Other behavioral paradigms, for example, novel context exposure or experiments in a familiar environment, are needed to dissociate context and emotional components (Chiaruttini et al.2025) when we discuss the change of IEGs based on pure fear or reward value.
Our one‐trial food rewarding experience procedure is different from previous reports showing rodents rapidly learn associations, for example, associations between context and food with two 30‐min training sessions (Stern et al.2020) and between flavor and water with one‐trial rewarding procedures (Ackroff et al.2009).
The intensity or type of unconditioned stimulus may also affect IEG expression because different IEGs have different transcription induction thresholds (Abraham et al.1993; Worley et al.1993).
Also, the co‐expression pattern can differ by observation time: the protein levels of c‐Fos and Arc peak at 60–90 min, and Npas4 peaks at 30–60 min after stimulation, while the mRNA levels of c‐Fos and Arc peak at 30 min and Npas4 peaks at 5 min (Guzowski et al.2001; Lonergan et al.2010; Ramamoorthi et al.2011; Skar et al.1994; Sun and Lin2016).
Time sensitivity and dynamics of IEG combinative expression need to be investigated.
It is also possible that the degree of observed IEG co‐expression rate varies by the sensitivity of antibody probes.
While we investigated the co‐expression patterns of IEGs in multiple brain areas in this study, it would be interesting to investigate whether cells expressing different IEGs in the same subregion have different anatomical long‐range projections because the transcriptions and neural projections can differ depending on emotional valence (Fuentes‐Ramos and Barco2024; Shpokayte et al.2022; Ye et al.2016).
In addition, we did not examine layer‐specificity of IEG co‐expression in the current study.
Recently, several tools were developed for automated brain atlas registration (Chiaruttini et al.2025; Franceschini et al.2025; Roy et al.2022; Terstege et al.2022).
Development of automated registration techniques based on cytoarchitectures to identify brain subregions and layer structures will accelerate understanding of brain‐wide IEG‐expression patterns.
Moreover, cell‐type dependencies for IEG‐expression have been reported (Gonzales et al.2020; Hochgerner et al.2023; Jaeger et al.2018; Lucas et al.2008; Yang et al.2022).
Single‐cell transcriptomes will help to reveal brain‐wide IEG co‐expression patterns with cell‐type specificity (Chen et al.2019; Hrvatin et al.2018; Jovic et al.2022; Moffitt et al.2018; Tyssowski et al.2018; Wu et al.2017; Yao et al.2023).
However, it should be noted that the levels of RNA and proteins can mismatch due to complex posttranscriptional processes (Alberini and Kandel2014; Buccitelli and Selbach2020; Guzowski2006; Li et al.2020).
These suggest that the IEG‐RNA expression is more relevant to neural activity, while protein expression is more relevant to cellular functions.
Further studies are needed to investigate simultaneous recording of neural activity and dynamics of IEG RNA (Lee et al.2022) and protein synthesis (Meenakshi et al.2021) to understand whether RNA and protein tag engram cells similarly or not.
Also, it is notable that IEG proteins have wide‐range functions beyond affecting synaptic plasticity, including lipid synthesis (Caputto et al.2014; Rodriguez‐Berdini et al.2020; Vaughen et al.2023), DNA repair (Pollina et al.2023), protection against neuronal death (Rawat et al.2016), and β‐amyloid generation (Wu et al.2011).
Given this background, it could be considered that various cellular functions can be interpreted from IEG‐tagged engram cells.
In conclusion, we found that basal and experience‐induced expression of c‐Fos, Npas4, Arc, and their combinations vary across different brain areas.
The results of IEG‐based connectivity analysis suggest that different functional connectivity is coded by the expression of different IEGs or their co‐expression.
These findings provide insights that engram cells also can be differently identified depending on the types and the combinations of IEGs.
Further investigations are needed to understand whether interactions between different IEGs contribute unique roles in memory, to gain a more detailed functional understanding and interpretation of IEG‐tagged engram cells.