Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is a psychiatric condition characterised by pervasive patterns of thinking and feeling, which can lead to social dysfunction and poor mental health.
BPD has a significant impact not just on individuals with the diagnosis but also on those around them.
Currently, no medication is licenced for BPD.
Despite this, it is common for people with BPD to be prescribed multiple psychotropics.
All psychotropic medications are associated with adverse events.
A systematic review was conducted to explore factors that influence prescribing in adult BPD patients.
Searches were conducted of EMBASE, PsycINFO, PubMed, EThOS and Web of Science.
One‐hundred and two unique studies were identified, of which 13 suitable studies with diverse methodologies were included in the final synthesis.
Of these, seven studies produced quantitative results, whereas the remaining six produced qualitative results.
The synthesis identified several demographic factors statistically associated with prescribing.
Most notably, prescribing was more likely in older patients and those with comorbid conditions.
In addition to demographic factors identified, two key themes were generated from analysis of qualitative data from both healthcare professionals (HCPs) and patients discussing drivers: that the patient‐HCP relationship and the care pathway are crucial to the prescribing process from both perspectives.
Prescribing medications for BPD is common, but there is limited data on the factors that affect this prescribing choice.
HCPs must be aware of their own roles and perceptions in their relationships with BPD patients so that patients receive the most suitable treatment.
Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is a psychiatric condition that falls under the category of personality disorders (World Health Organization2019).
Although we understand that labelling these complex presentations is controversial, we have used the termborderline personality disorderfor clarity, because it is widely accepted and used in National Institute of Health and Care Excellent (NICE) Clinical Guidelines.
It is characterised by pervasive patterns of thinking and feeling, which can lead to social dysfunction and poor mental health (Paton et al.2015).
Estimates of the prevalence of BPD in the general population vary, not only based on different diagnostic criteria and assessment processes but also across geographical locations (Shin et al.2023).
For instance, a 2006 review suggested that the weighted prevalence of the condition is 4.4% in the United Kingdom (Coid et al.2006), whereas a 2014 study, based on data from the United States National Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions, estimated the prevalence in the United States to be about half this, at 2.7% (ten Have et al.2016).
Overall, population‐based survey studies show a prevalence range between 0.7% and 5.9% (Shin et al.2023).
The condition can result in a high burden for patients, family members and healthcare systems (Bohus et al.2021).
One prospective follow‐up study found that four times as many patients with BPD die of suicide compared with the general population, with all‐cause mortality found to be three times higher in BPD patients (Temes et al.2019).
The economic impact of personality disorders is challenging to estimate, but the costs are significant and thought to be rising (Botham et al.2024).
In England, a 2008 King's Fund report estimated the annual service cost per patient for those in contact with primary care teams at £286 (McCrone and King's Fund2008).
The total estimated annual cost was £704 million in 2007, along with additional loss of employment costs amounting to £7.9 billion (McCrone and King's Fund2008).
These figures were projected to rise significantly to £1.1 billion by 2026, with an alarming loss of employment cost of £12.3 billion (McCrone and King's Fund2008).
A corresponding study in the Netherlands (with a population of about 15% of the UK's) estimated the societal costs of BPD to be around €2222 million yearly, only 22% of which were healthcare related.
Although this study consists of a relatively small number of participants (88), it does provide data over a substantial period (14 years) and provides further evidence of the societal costs of this condition (van Asselt et al.2007).
The evidence base for the use of medication in managing BPD is conflicted.
The validity of BPD as a diagnostic construct is still disputed, and this may help explain some of the challenges in generating robust evidence in regards to its treatment (Tedesco et al.2024).
Currently, no medication is licenced for BPD in the United Kingdom, Europe or America (Abel et al.2018; Silk2015).
It is also noteworthy that the American Association of Psychiatrists, the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia and NICE of England, among other major institutions, concur on the recommendation of psychotherapy as the primary treatment for BPD, over psychotropic medication, due to the lack of sufficient evidence on the clinical effectiveness of medication (Bridler et al.2015).
In particular, NICE's recommendation that psychotropic medication should not be used as a treatment for BPD draws upon the findings of an extensive, well‐structured 2010 Cochrane review (Lieb et al.2010), which examined 27 trials to evaluate the effectiveness of pharmacological therapy in BPD.
It concluded that mood stabilisers and second‐generation antipsychotics had the most beneficial effects.
However, the authors noted that this conclusion was based mostly on single, small studies and that treatment should be symptom specific.
A 2022 update to this review included a further 18 trials.
However, it once again found very low‐certainty evidence and concluded that medication most likely results in no difference in any primary outcome (Stoffers‐Winterling et al.2022).
Overall, the update supported the continued stance that no pharmacological therapy seems effective in treating BPD specifically (Stoffers‐Winterling et al.2022).
In practice, however, it is common for people with BPD to be prescribed psychotropic medications.
In 2014, the Prescribing Observatory for Mental Health (POMH‐UK) conducted a national audit in England, with all National Health Service organisations that provide specialist mental health services invited to report on prescribing in BPD.
Of the 60 applicable organisations, 41 submitted information on 2600 randomly selected patients.
The audit showed that over 70% of patients were prescribed an antipsychotic and more than 50% were prescribed a sedative, with these prescriptions overlapping in multiple cases (POMH‐UK2014).
A 2015 inpatient study across Europe supports this picture of high prescribing levels.
Of 2195 inpatients identified with BPD between 2001 and 2011, 70% were found to be prescribed antipsychotics, antidepressants or both, and 30% were prescribed benzodiazepines (Bridler et al.2015).
Perhaps most notably, over half of the patients received three or more psychotropic medications concomitantly (Bridler et al.2015).
There is a noticeable contrast between the national guidance based on the current evidence base and the observed real‐world practice.
To understand this discrepancy, it is essential to explore the factors that influence the prescribing of medication to patients with BPD.
The existing evidence regarding the prescribing influences indicates a large number of potential factors (Schumock et al.2004).
It is worth noting at this juncture that there are a number of potential reasons why prescribing in psychiatric conditions may differ from other specialities.
These reasons include, but are not limited to, diagnostic complexity, individualised treatment response and the subjective nature of psychiatric conditions.
This review's aim was to evaluate the current practices and identify the factors that impact the prescribing of medication to BPD patients.
This review was conducted in line with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses (PRISMA) guidelines (Page et al.2021) (compliance table AppendixA), and the protocol was registered on PROSPERO (Registration No. CRD42023422571).
Ethical approval was not required, as the study only involved secondary analysis of anonymised data.
The research question was constructed through an iterative review of the topic of prescribing in BPD.
The research team was comprised of four pharmacists with speciality, psychiatric and systematic review experience.
The review team developed a search strategy with input from a Health Sciences Librarian, which was subsequently peer‐reviewed by four supporting experts (AppendixB).
The following electronic information sources were searched: EMBASE (Elsevier), PsycINFO (EBSCOhost), PubMed (MEDLINE), Ethos (Grey Literature) and Web of Science.
Searches were conducted on 11 September 2023 and rerun on 23 September 2024.
Forward‐searching was conducted by manually reviewing the reference lists of included studies.
The criteria for study selection were generated based on mapping the research question, as described below.
were pieces of primary research of any design, published in full in English, conducted after the publication of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders IV (1994), due to changes in diagnostic criteria between DSM‐III and DSM‐IV criteria (with the addition of the ninth criterion, ‘transient, stress‐related paranoid ideation or severe dissociative symptoms’) (Silk2002).
After completing the searches, the data were imported into EndNote to remove duplicates.
Subsequently, the remaining data were imported into Rayyan (www.rayyan.ai) for further processing.
The study selection process consisted of two stages.
In Stage 1, all the studies' titles and abstracts were evaluated according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria.
In case of doubt, studies were included at this stage and progressed to the next stage.
In Stage 2, the full texts of the retained studies were obtained and evaluated according to the inclusion and exclusion criteria.
If the full text could not be obtained, the study was excluded.
Any excluded study was documented, along with the reason for exclusion (Figure1).
Two review team members (JC and SJ) made independent decisions regarding each study for both stages.
If there was disagreement, they discussed and tried to reach a consensus.
If a consensus could not be reached, a third member was consulted to make the final decision.
An electronic data extraction form was created on a standardised Microsoft Excel spreadsheet based on the review question and objectives in consultation with all team members (AppendixC), following the guidelines provided by PRISMA (Page et al.2021).
Data were extracted by a single reviewer (JC) and then reviewed by a second reviewer (SJ).
To assess the quality of each study selected for inclusion, the lead reviewer (JC) used the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool (MMAT) (Nha Hong et al.2018) to evaluate the risk of bias in each study.
Studies were grouped based on qualitative or quantitative results before being assessed based on their described methodology.
Following the completion of searches, it was determined that meta‐analysis was an unsuitable approach due to the significant heterogeneity in the studies selected for inclusion.
Therefore, the team summarised the findings through a narrative synthesis, focused on the prescribing processes.
This methodology allowed for a flexible approach, encompassing the range of methodologies, populations, and results reported in the identified studies (Ryan2016; Sukhera2022).
Findings from the included studies were analysed through results‐based, convergent synthesis design (Noyes et al.2019).
Quantitative studies with numerical results were analysed using numerical analysis; descriptive statistics were utilised, and the results were grouped according to prescribing factors.
Thematic data were analysed using a modified inductive thematic analysis approach based on Braun and Clarke's method (Byrne2022).
Qualitative outcome studies were reviewed to derive codes and subcodes representing information useful in addressing the research question by the lead reviewer (JC).
These codes were then developed into descriptive themes and grouped by the stakeholders' nature (healthcare professional [HCP] or patient/carer) with input from four members of the team (JC, SJ, IM and MJ).
Subsequently, these themes were defined and interpreted to develop a descriptive format.
Finally, the project team combined the results of both numerical and thematic analyses into the narrative discussion.
The ENTREQ reporting guidelines were used for this review (Tong et al.2012) (AppendixD).
The searches identified 133 records, from which 13 studies were selected for inclusion in the review (Figure1).
Table1presents an overview of the included studies.
The selected articles demonstrated significant variations in study design, including semistructured interviews, Delphi studies, quantitative cross‐sectional surveys and retrospective observational studies.
The included studies were predominantly conducted in the United Kingdom, with additional studies from Europe, Iran and the United States.
The number of participants varied widely, with sample sizes ranging from 9 to 550 participants (Table1).
Seven studies produced numerical results reporting on factors associated with prescribing, two of which also reported on the value of treatment adherence.
Table2provides a summary of these results.
Six studies produced thematic results reporting themes related to the prescribing process, as summarised in Table3.
Presence of comorbid condition is the biggest predictor of prescribing.
60% of respondents selected benzodiazepines for their anxiety‐reducing effects.
16% of respondents selected a benzodiazepine based on the shortness of its half‐life.
Abbreviations: AUC, area under curve; BPD, borderline personality disorder; CI, confidence interval; DIB‐R, Diagnostic Interview for Borderlines (Revised); OR, odds ratio; PACT, Personality and Complex Trauma team.
Note:Bracket words in themes have been added to provide context and clarity.
Abbreviations: GP, general practitioner; (H), health care professional; NICE, National Institute of Care and Clinical Excellence.
(P), patient.
The MMAT focuses on five sets of criteria for different study designs.
This enables the evaluation of methodological distinctions in studies within the review using a single tool (Nha Hong et al.2018).
Following evaluation, all 13 studies were included in the synthesis, with more weight given to more rigorous studies in the thematic analysis (AppendixE).
No randomised controlled studies were found, and the variation in the assessment of results and the definition of medication groups added complexity to the interpretation.
Most of the identified studies had relatively small sample sizes, and even the larger studies were often retrospective or observational, limiting the conclusions that could be drawn.
The overall robustness of the findings must be considered low, largely due to the scarcity of available data.
The section below describes quantitative data, regarding factors associated with prescribing in BPD.
Six patient demographics were associated with medication prescribing in BPD: comorbidity, age, hospitalisation, gender, presentation of risk and severity of presentation.
Only comorbidity and age were reported to be associated with prescribing regardless of medication class.
Comorbidity—here defined as the presence of an additional psychiatric condition—was associated, in two identified studies, with an increased probability of prescribing regardless of medication class utilised.
In both these studies, comorbid psychiatric conditions were identified as a significant predictor of prescribing (Crawford et al.2011; Pascual et al.2021).
A 2011 UK study found that comorbid depression was the most significant predictor of prescribing, with an odds ratio (OR) of 3.0 (95% confidence interval [CI] 1.4–6.5) (Crawford et al.2011).
This conclusion was further supported by a subsequent 2021 study of over 600 records, which found that individuals were more likely to be prescribed medication if they had a comorbid psychiatric condition (77.8% vs. 58.2%) (Pascual et al.2021).
However, certain comorbid conditions were associated with the prescribing of specific medication classes.
One study reported that antidepressant prescribing was more likely in the presence of comorbid conditions, particularly anxiety‐related disorders (OR 2.77, 95% CI 1.16–6.1) (Pascual et al.2010).
Comparatively, antipsychotic prescribing was found to be more common in the presence of psychosis symptomatology (OR 6.88, 95% CI 1.64–28.90) (Pascual et al.2007).
This study also found that benzodiazepine use was more common in those with anxiety (OR 3.77, 95% CI 2.52–5.66) (Pascual et al.2007).
Notably, some factors were associated with reduced incidence of prescribing.
A 2010 study found that patients prescribed benzodiazepines were less likely to have addiction issues than those who were not (OR 0.45, 95% CI 0.24–0.87) (Pascual et al.2010).
This is supported by an earlier study from 2007, which found that benzodiazepine use was more common in those with fewer drug problems (OR 0.58, CI 95% 0.38–0.88) (Pascual et al.2007).
This supports the idea that drug addiction problems may lower prescribing of benzodiazepines.
Mood stabilisers, which are an ill‐defined medication class with significant overlap with antipsychotics and anticonvulsants, were found in a 2010 study to be more commonly utilised in patients with comorbid anxiety disorders (OR 2.95, 95% CI 1.04–3.69) (Pascual et al.2010).
In this study, mood stabilisers were not defined by the author but were said to largely consist of topiramate (72% of these patients) and valproate (21%).
Overall, it appears that the presence of comorbid conditions, and perhaps anxiety in particular, is associated with increased levels of prescribing.
Age was the second variable associated with prescribing regardless of medication class, though this conclusion is based on limited data.
A 2021 study found that individuals were more likely to be prescribed medication, regardless of class, if they were older, with a mean age of 30.9 versus 27.3 years (p= 0.0002) (Pascual et al.2021).
In particular, mood stabilisers—which, as noted above, are a poorly defined group of medications—(Malhi et al.2018) were also found to be more commonly prescribed to older individuals, though specific statistics were not provided (Pascual et al.2010).
Again, the authors did not define mood stabilisers, but they were said to largely consist of topiramate (72% of these patients) and valproate (21%).
Although not associated with general increases in prescribing, a single 2010 study found an increased likelihood of antipsychotic prescribing (OR 1.89, 95% CI 1.01–3.54) in hospitalised patients (Pascual et al.2010).
Additionally, the same study found mood stabiliser prescribing was also more common in those with a history of previous hospitalisation (OR 2.82, 95% CI 1.48–5.36) (Pascual et al.2010).
Two studies found associations between gender and the prescribing of particular classes of medication.
Two separate studies conducted in Spain identified that antipsychotics were more frequently prescribed to male patients than to female patients (Pascual et al.2007,2010).
The 2007 study identified the prescribing of antipsychotics as less likely in female patients (female OR 0.63, CI 95% 0.43–09.4); the subsequent 2010 study concurred with this conclusion but did not provide specific statistics to support its findings.
The evidence around benzodiazepine usage and gender, however, appears conflicted.
The 2007 study found that benzodiazepine use was also more common among male patients than female patients (female OR 0.63, 95% CI 0.42–0.88) (Pascual et al.2007).
This conclusion is contradicted by the 2010 study, which suggested, from a multivariate analysis, that benzodiazepines were more common among older female patients than male patients, though specific statistics were again not provided (Pascual et al.2010).
This study, however, may have been biassed due to gender skew in the sample group, as 85.8% of the patients were female.
At best, ‘risk’ is ill‐defined as a term in clinical practice; however, two studies reported its correlation with prescribing.
One study found antipsychotic prescribing more likely in patients assessed as presenting a risk to others (OR 2.07, 95% CI 1.39–3.06) (Knappich et al.2014), whereas a second study found that benzodiazepine use was less common among patients presenting fewer self‐care issues (OR 0.61, CI 96% 0.42–0.88) (Pascual et al.2007).
Only one study reported on associations between severity of presentation and prescribing.
This 2010 study reported that higher impulsivity scores were associated with the use of antipsychotics (OR 1.77, 95% CI 1.09–2.87) (Pascual et al.2010), whereas the use of mood stabilisers was more common in those with less severe symptoms based on the Revised Diagnostic Interview for Borderlines (DIB‐R) scale (Pascual et al.2010).
The DIB‐R scale (Zanarini et al.1989) is a semistructured clinical interview used to diagnose BPD (Carcone et al.2020).
In addition to factors identified through the numerical analysis, the review identified two key themes associated with the prescribing of medication to patients with BPD: relationships and the care pathway.
Generally, across the identified literature, relationships were identified as an integral part of the prescribing of medication by both HCPs and patients.
These quotations suggest that some HCPs perceive patients with a diagnosis of BPD as challenging to engage with, particularly in the context of shared‐decision making.
The number of studies exploring patients' perspectives was limited to two studies (27 participants in total).
Although this represents a limited data pool, the analysis showed that the HCP–patient relationship is also a significant theme for patients.
The theme of ‘relationships’ differed for patients, focusing more on the ‘need’ for a strong relationship and less on the relational challenges.
Strong relationships were described using terms related to understanding, continuity of care, ease and degree of access to the HCP.
The included studies identified subthemes of ‘needing a relationship’ and the ‘desire to confront authority’.
HCPs do not act in a vacuum.
In modern healthcare, they are one of a number of professionals engaging with patients.
‘Integrated care’ or ‘disease‐management’ pathways detail the fundamental steps in patient care and outline patients' expected journey through the healthcare system (Campbell et al.1998).
They are long processes that involve initial contact, follow‐up, referral to and from specialists and often a return to primary care (Schrijvers2009).
It should, therefore, not come as a surprise that both HCPs and patients felt these pathways influenced patients' care and the prescribing of medication.
The review identified a recurrent theme of ‘helplessness’ on the part of HCPs for a multitude of reasons, from lack of access of services, difficulties implementing national guidelines and feeling unable to provide care for patients with BPD.
The implication here is that, fundamentally, HCPs are unsure or unable to address the needs of the patient despite the presence of guidelines.
Though it is not possible to determine from secondary analysis, it is worth considering how this ‘helplessness’ plays into the HCP–patient relationship.
Another key theme that emerged from the studies was that of ‘uncertainty’ on the part of HCPs, particularly around the management of BPD.
HCPs may find it difficult to manage ‘uncertainty’, as they might fear their patients' reactions and wish to avoid losing the trust of the patient; this may lead them to avoid expressing their uncertainty openly (van der Bles et al.2019).
Additionally, if they are ‘uncertain’ of the care pathway, they may find it difficult to manage the patient's expectations.
Moreover, a 2020 study into experiences in treating BPD reported that patients might become ‘angry and exhibit self‐destructive behaviours when they feel neglected by their doctor’ (Patel and Konstantinidou2020).
This indicates the importance of understanding patient expectations in any HCP‐patient relationship, highlighting a crossover between the two key themes identified across the studies.
Patients want to feel they can rely on or trust their care team, linking back to a relationship between the HCP and the patient.
Analysis of the included literature identified several demographic factors statistically associated with prescribing in BPD, such as comorbid conditions, older age and male gender, and two key themes were generated from the review of self‐reported factors associated with this prescribing: relationships and care pathways.
Although the primary studies identified were reasonably well‐designed, they are limited by two main issues.
First, the relatively small sample size of a large proportion of the studies, particularly regarding patient and carer perspectives (total patientsn= 27, total informal carersn= 0).
Second, even those quantitative studies with larger sample sizes must be interpreted cautiously due to the observational nature of the identified studies.
Many of these studies also relied on data from electronic health records, which could have introduced confounding variables due to unreported patient factors.
Despite identifying potential factors associated with prescribing in BPD, due to these limitations, this synthesis represents only a starting point in further exploring prescribing decisions in BPD.
Interestingly, patients and HCPs have reported similar beliefs surrounding the management of BPD.
Both parties identified ‘relationships’ as integral to the prescribing process, though their beliefs around those relationships differed.
What does emerge is the idea of a critical relationship between HCPs and their patients; the patient wants something and, to a lesser or greater degree, relies on the prescriber to obtain it.
This belief around the importance of, or need for, strong relationships has been reported in other studies about medication in patients with other serious mental illnesses (Green et al.2008; Howe et al.2023).
Some of the relationships most valued by patients were those where the HCP showed care and treated clinical appointments ‘like friendships’ (Green et al.2008), reflecting that often, patients seek more than medical treatment; they seek a sense of empathy and mutual trust (Maidment et al.2011) and understanding from HCPs (Kerasidou et al.2021).
In this review, multiple instances were found of patients referring to the importance of medication, treatment and validation and expecting these from interactions with HCPs.
Alongside this, multiple patients expressed frustration with limited access to treatment and therefore sought medication as an available treatment, due to limited access to longer term psychotherapy.
Thus, prescribing can be seen as an attempt to address an unmet treatment need.
This act, even if not entirely aligned with best practices, may serve to validate patients' experiences and convey a sense of acknowledgment and care.
A previous study that examined the experiences of patients with medication in BPD found that medication was seen positively by patients as they were able to exert control over prescribing decisions.
This was particularly noted in patients who transitioned to specialist services where they were given more autonomy around medication (Rogers and Acton2012).
The ability to exert influence may foster a sense of agency, which may improve outcomes in itself (Konstantinidou et al.2023).
Moreover, active involvement in decision‐making may serve as evidence of mutual trust, thereby strengthening the patient–HCP relationship.
Therefore, given the importance of the prescriber–patient relationship, the observed levels of prescribing may reflect an attempt to validate patients' needs, thereby reinforcing the relationship.
However, it is worth noting that being prescribed medication is not validating for all patients.
In some cases, patients felt that their concerns or other needs were rather dismissed through the act of prescribing (Rogers and Acton2012; Tennant et al.2023).
It is important to note that the results detailing patients' perspectives here are based on only two qualitative studies, one of which focused predominantly on clozapine prescribing, therefore limiting any conclusions around patients' needs or wants and how these influence prescribing.
Studies in other cohorts of SMI patients have indicated HCP–patient relationships can be improved through reducing ‘mistrust’ (Howe et al.2023).
This concept is in line with a 2011 study employing focus groups on a number of mental health conditions in multiple mental health settings in England, which identified ‘trust’ as a key and critical component in medication management (Maidment et al.2011) and therefore the care pathway as a whole.
Based on our findings, it may be that one factor in reducing mistrust may be in the open engagement of patients in prescribing decisions.
The treatment of BPD may present a unique challenge in patient engagement however, as many of the diagnostic criteria for BPD are indicative of difficulties in forming and maintaining well‐functioning relationships, and thus, the nature of the HCP‐patient relationship may differ in BPD.
Additionally, although not an identified theme, it is important to acknowledge that the diagnosis of BPD is one that can result in specific patterns of stigmatising behaviour by some HCPs (Baker and Beazley2022), potentially adding further complications to a strained HCP‐patient relationship.
This stigma will also need to be addressed when considering how a care pathway for BPD should be navigated, including prescribing decisions.
The idea that patients' expectations of being prescribed medication influence the decision to prescribe is neither a new phenomenon nor unique to BPD patients.
A 2014 survey found that 55% of GPs felt under pressure to prescribe antibiotics.
Furthermore, 44% of respondents disclosed that they had prescribed antibiotics to get a patient to leave the surgery, even if they did not believe them to be necessary (Cole2014).
Patients' influence on prescribing decisions is also not isolated to primary care.
A 2011 study of prescribing decisions in hospitals found that ‘pressure from patients, relatives, or carers was an uncomfortable influence on these hospital prescribers' prescribing decisions’.
This theme was reported by all specialities and grades of medical prescribers (Lewis and Tully2011).
When exploring the influence of the HCP–patient relationship in prescribing, it is also important to acknowledge the desires of prescribers.
This review found recurrent expressions of feelings of ‘helplessness’ or ‘frustration’ on the part of HCPs.
These feelings may lead to a dynamic where the use of medication aims to manage not only patients' needs but also the prescriber's emotions.
In essence the desire to help or resolve distress leads to prescribing, sometimes referred to as ‘countertransference prescribing’ (Shapiro‐Thompson and Fineberg2022).
This risk of countertransference prescribing may be exacerbated by the well‐documented challenges in accessing long‐term psychotherapy, recommended for the management of BPD, arising from a number of issues including a shortage of trained providers, stigmatisation and financial or commissioning barriers (Shapiro‐Thompson and Fineberg2022).
HCPs are therefore left in a difficult position, where they are unable to follow guidance to offer psychotherapy and, feeling there are no alterative options, are left with prescribing.
The challenges around accessing treatment are entwined in the second emergent theme of the ‘care pathway’, along with the impacts of guidelines, referrals and specialist input on prescribing decisions raised by HCPs.
Our findings identified several fundamental issues with the implementation of the guidelines.
These include a lack of flexibility or discretion within the guidelines, limited access to long‐term psychological therapies, and the prevailing belief among HCPs and patients that the symptoms of BPD can be effectively managed through medication.
A 2018 review of 33 studies concluded, among other findings, that national guidance is fundamental to the prescribing process (Davari et al.2018).
As previously noted, the current preeminent guidelines advise against the use of medication in BPD, outside of comorbid conditions.
Despite this clear position in the guidelines, repeated studies show high levels of prescribing in BPD (Bridler et al.2015).
A 2018 review suggests that guidelines that limit HCPs' discretion have ‘doubtful implementation’ (Davari et al.2018).
In the case of BPD guidelines, HCPs' discretion is almost entirely removed, except for the treatment of comorbid conditions.
This may be exacerbated by a lack of long‐term psychotherapy options and potential concerns around the strain on the HCP–patient relationship if something is not offered (Shapiro‐Thompson and Fineberg2022; Soler et al.2022).
This may go some way to explaining the divergence from guidance in prescribing in BPD.
It may be particularly difficult for HCPs to navigate the care pathway for BPD patients when, regardless of the evidence base upon which guidelines are produced, as previously discussed some patients believe that medication has or will help them (Patel and Konstantinidou2020).
As noted, the HCP–patient relationship appears, at times, to be complicated by feelings of ‘helplessness’ on the side of the HCP, who holds the perceived power.
Therefore, in instances where medication is not prescribed, despite a patient's desire for it, an already complicated HCP–patient relationship may be further strained, creating a gap between patient expectations and HCP duties to provide evidence‐based care.
This gap may be further influenced by the quality of the underlying evidence base.
A 2022 Cochrane review evaluated the evidence supporting trials as largely of low or very low quality and concluded with low certainty that medication may result in no difference in any primary outcome (Stoffers‐Winterling et al.2022).
However, the reviewers also reported inconclusive effects on secondary outcomes.
These secondary outcomes include, but are not limited to, chronic feelings of emptiness, affective instability and anger.
If it is the case that the outcomes measured in trials are not the most important to HCPs, this could help explain the observed dichotomy.
In cases where a decision to prescribe is made as part of the BPD care pathway, it is clear that there is an absence of guidance for HCPs.
Without this fundamental influence, HCPs are likely to defer back to personal experience, senior colleagues' advice and perhaps guidance for other mental health conditions.
In terms of personal experience and senior colleagues' advice, there are indications that HCPs prescribe for patients with BPD based on symptoms (Crawford et al.2011; Pascual et al.2010,2021).
As such, it would appear that, at least in part, some HCPs do not agree with the advice in the guidelines and feel that individual symptoms can be treated.
This may be due to HCPs' previous positive experiences of improvement in BPD patients prescribed medication.
It can therefore be hypothesised that in some cases, given the importance of guidelines, HCPs may resort to guidelines meant for other mental health conditions when treating the symptoms of BPD patients.
As the use of medications is especially common in BPD patients with comorbid conditions, HCPs may treat comorbid conditions or particular subthreshold symptoms of BPD itself.
Treating for particular symptoms assumes a shared aetiology for every presentation of a symptom, which may not be true.
For example, instances of low mood in patients with BPD are not explicitly indicative of depression and therefore should not be treated as such.
Furthermore, in cases where pharmacological treatments of BPD prove ineffective, which is not unlikely given the limited evidence for their efficacy (Stoffers‐Winterling et al.2022), HCPs may adjust or escalate treatment according to the guidelines in place for the symptom or perceived comorbid condition.
This hypothesis may explain the levels of prescribing in the treatment of patients with BPD, as patients can fail to respond to the initial treatment, potentially leading HCPs to explore augmentation and multiple medications to address patients' symptoms in line with guidelines for other mental health conditions.
This systematic review presents a comprehensive assessment of the current literature regarding the factors influencing prescribing in BPD patients.
It identified 13 papers with diverse methodologies and populations, limiting the scope for statistical analysis.
The included studies did, however, cover a range of practice settings, including primary, secondary and specialist care.
The review did not include studies not published in English, and excluded pre‐1994 literature, which may have led to a loss of some available data.
Despite some potential limitations, including the small number of primary studies and a limited review of grey literature, this review is the first—to our knowledge—to draw upon the available literature to explore factors influencing prescribing patterns in BPD.
The key finding is the lack of data and limited research in this area.
The review identified a lack of research into the factors influencing prescribing in patients with BPD.
Only two studies examining patient perspectives, which included 26 individuals, were found.
Replication studies of the existing literature, especially qualitative interviews with patients, would support the robustness of existing findings.
No studies exploring informal carers' views were identified, possibly due to the limited focus on patient perspectives in the existing literature.
Further studies exploring the opinions of carers would also add value.
Beyond this, further research is needed to explore how the relationship between professionals and patients, care pathways and patient demographics can impact prescribing.
In particular, further exploration and investigation of targeted interventions impacting the identified themes and any resulting changes in prescribing levels would be of particular interest and value.
Furthermore, research aimed at identifying the trial outcomes that are most valued by patients and HCPs could also be beneficial.
Such studies can provide critical insights into shared priorities, which are important for understanding prescribing decisions and ensuring that future trials align more closely with the needs and expectations of both patients and HCPs.
By highlighting the gaps in current research, this review provides a starting point for future investigations and interventions.
Findings from this review identify demographics that are potential influences on the prescribing of medication in BPD patients, including comorbidity, age and presenting symptoms.
One key conclusion is the limited research on factors affecting prescribing in this population.
Furthermore, the review indicates that the themes of the HCP–patient relationship, identified by both HCPs and patients, and the care pathway are also important influences on the prescribing process.
Within both themes, some potential challenges have been suggested, particularly ‘helplessness’ on the part of HCPs, the influence of guidelines and patients' expectations.
Addressing and strengthening the HCP–patient relationship seems integral to improving prescribing.
Although more research is required, these results indicate a promising starting point for future research and interventions.
There are indications that HCPs may be prescribing in BPD for symptoms they believe can be treated; to maintain therapeutic relationships; due to countertransference; and due to a lack of accessible long‐term psychotherapy.
However, this is based on a small number of studies, only two of which explored patients' opinions and none examining the perspectives of informal carers or family members.
Future research should seek to explore this further to provide HCPs with insight into the factors at play in prescribing for BPD patients.
Only through a better understanding of how people arrive at prescribing decisions can unnecessary prescribing be avoided or corrected.