The optimal transfusion threshold for patients undergoing venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) remains uncertain.
We used data from OBLEX (ClinicalTrials.gov:NCT03714048), an international, prospective, observational study conducted across 12 centres in Australia, Europe, and North America between 2019 and 2022.
The study collected information on patient demographics, bleeding risk factors, transfusion practices during the first seven days of ECMO, and in-hospital mortality.
Using these data, we emulated a target trial comparing the effects of liberal transfusion practice (transfusion initiated at Hb ≥ 90 g/L) and restrictive transfusion practice (transfusion initiated at Hb ≤ 70 g/L) on hospital mortality within seven days of ECMO initiation.
Sequential trials approach was used to estimate the causal contrast.
A total of 534 patients were included, with 46% dying during hospitalisation.
After accounting for potential confounders, the liberal transfusion practice demonstrated a modest survival benefit within the first two days of ECMO, with differences in survival probabilities of 12% (95% CI 3% to 21%) at day 2 and 13% (95% CI 2% to 25%) at day 3, corresponding to the number needed to treat (NNT) of 8 and 7 respectively.
No differences in survival benefit were found after day 3.
These results were consistent across sensitivity and exploratory analyses.
This target trial emulation study suggests that a liberal transfusion threshold may provide a modest survival benefit during the early course of VA-ECMO, but no benefit afterwards.
Prospective studies are needed to confirm these findings, assess clinical adoption, and investigate underlying mechanism.
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13054-025-05606-1.
Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation (ECMO) is an invasive and resource-intensive treatment used to support critically ill patients with refractory cardiac arrest, or severe cardiac or respiratory failure [1].
Red blood cell (RBC) transfusion is common in patients undergoing venoarterial ECMO (VA ECMO) due to underlying critical illness and high rates of bleeding in the setting of circuit-induced coagulopathy, the need for anticoagulation, as well as invasive procedures [2].
In a recent study of 419 patients from an international cohort, nearly 90% of all patients received at least one RBC transfusion during VA ECMO [3].
RBC transfusion increases the risk of complications such as transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI), transfusion-related circulatory overload (TACO) and transfusion-related immunomodulation (TRIM) [4,5].
It has been found to be associated with higher mortality rates in ECMO patients, although this relationship may be confounded by the severity of the underlying disease [6,7].
Identifying the optimal transfusion strategy is crucial for optimising patient outcomes and minimising transfusion-related risks.
Two primary transfusion strategies have been explored: restrictive transfusion (triggered by a haemoglobin (Hb) level of 70–90 g/L) and liberal transfusion (triggered by Hb level of 100–120 g/L).
Evidence from observational studies suggests that a restrictive strategy was associated with an acceptable outcome and no signal for harm compared with a liberal transfusion strategy [8–10].
However, the findings across the included studies were inconsistent and subject to a high level of bias [9].
Clinical trials in critically ill patients have shown lower RBC transfusion triggers to be non-inferior to higher triggers [11].
However, the certainty of evidence is low [12] and there are differences between these patients and those requiring VA ECMO.
Therefore, it remains unknown whether these trial results may be extrapolated to patients requiring VA ECMO.
Despite the high use of RBC transfusions and their potential impact on mortality, complications, and costs, as well as the resource limitations that exist for blood products, current knowledge is insufficient to provide strong evidence-based recommendations for transfusion triggers in this highly vulnerable patient group.
Large scale multicentre observational studies have only been published in patients on venovenous ECMO support [13] and no randomised controlled studies have been conducted [14].
To address this knowledge gap, we launched the International Observational Study on Blood Management for Mechanical Circulatory Support using Extracorporeal Membrane Oxygenation (OBLEX, ClinicalTrials.gov:NCT03714048).
Using data from the OBLEX study, we emulated a target trial designed to compare the effect of restrictive versus liberal transfusion thresholds on hospital mortality within 7 days following commencement of ECMO.
OBLEX was an international, prospective, observational study aiming to capture detailed information on current blood management in patients treated with VA ECMO at 12 participating centres from three continents (Australia, Europe and North America) (ClinicalTrials.gov IDNCT03714048).
OBLEX collected information on patient’s demographics, diagnosis classification, risk factors for bleeding 24 h prior to ECMO, bleeding and blood management information during the first 7 days of ECMO, and in-hospital mortality.
Data was collected from 2019 to 2022.
Full details of the study, data collection procedures, data definitions and case report form are described elsewhere [15].
To compare the effect of different transfusion strategies on mortality, we emulated a hypothetical randomised controlled trial (so-called “target trial”) using data from OBLEX.
Key components of the protocol for our target trial are outlined in Table1.
Patients were included in the trial if they were older than 18 years of age and received ECMO for mechanical circulatory support.
In the target trial, we compared two transfusion strategies (Table1): restrictive vs. liberal transfusion.
Under the restrictive transfusion strategy, one unit of RBC was transfused if a patient’s Hb concentration was recorded below 70 g/L.
Under the liberal transfusion strategy, one unit of RBC was transfused if a patient’s Hb concentration was recorded below 90 g/L.
The primary outcome of the trial was in-hospital mortality.
The estimand of interest was the difference in survival probability between the two randomisation arms in a per-protocol population where patients adhered to their assigned transfusion strategy throughout the entire duration of ECMO treatment.
In the emulated trial, we used observational data to mimic the target trial design while accounting for the characteristics of our data set (Table1).
Based on the original definitions, a patient could be eligible for multiple treatments at a single time point.
For example, a patient with a Hb concentration of 95 g/L who had not received a transfusion could theoretically be allocated to both the restrictive and liberal transfusion arms.
However, as we did not record Hb levels for those who did not receive a transfusion in the OBLEX study, we were unable to map all patients to the target trial’s specified transfusion strategies.
To address this, we redefined the transfusion strategies, using daily average Hb threshold values that triggered transfusions.
Specifically, the strategies were: no transfusion initiated during the first 7 days of ECMO (the reference level); transfusion initiated at Hb ≤ 70 g/L;transfusion initiated at 70 g/L < Hb < 90 g/L; and transfusion initiated at Hb ≥ 90 g/L.
These three transfusion practices mirrored a strategy of restrictive, intermediate and liberal transfusion pattern, respectively.
Including the no-transfusion arm as the reference allowed us to compute the contrast of interest.
Specifically, by first comparing each transfusion practice to the reference, we could then indirectly estimate the contrast between restrictive and liberal transfusion.
This was due to the transitive property of contrasts defined on the additive scale (i.e. survival probability difference).
To account for the lack of randomisation to transfusion strategies in the emulated trial, we used directed acyclic graphs (DAG) to show the assumed relationship between the initiation of transfusion and outcome, thereby informing which variables were potential confounders (see Figure S1).
We considered both time-fixed and time-varying confounders in our analysis: Baseline (i.e. time-fixed) confounders included age, gender, diagnosis group, renal replacement prior to ECMO, extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation (ECPR) and surgery; time-varying confounders included severe bleeding (Bleeding Academic Research Consortium (BARC)[16] score33), any mechanical support, and any renal replacement during ECMO.
Further details on how these variables were defined can be found in the Supplement.
With regards to the primary outcome, as the exact date of death was not recorded, if a patient died during hospitalisation, we assumed they died soon after their last ECMO episode.
This assumption is reasonable based on data from the national ECMO registry (EXCEL)[17], that is, the majority of hospital mortality (97/101, 96%) occurred during ICU stay.
If a patient was discharged from the hospital alive, we censored them at the last day of their ECMO or day 7, whichever occurred earlier.
Further assumptions we made in order to estimate the difference in marginal survival probability from the OBLEX data are: no interference, positivity, consistency, and no unmeasured confounding [18,19].
We employed the sequential trials approach [20,21] to estimate the causal effects of different transfusion practices while acknowledging the observational nature of the OBLEX data.
This method involves creating a sequence of nested trials (Figure S2).
Specifically, a new trial was “started” at each time (day) a patient had initiated a transfusion during ECMO.
Any individuals who meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria of the target trial and were still transfusion-naive at that time (i.e. had not yet received a transfusion while on ECMO) were included in the trial.
Within each trial, we artificially censored patients at the moment they deviated from their initial transfusion strategy, for example, when patients initially assigned to the restrictive transfusion received a liberal transfusion.
Transfusion-naïve patients could be included in multiple trials, but once transfusion was initiated for a patient, they could be included only in a single trial starting at that time.
Hence, uncensored patients within each trial were those who sustained their allocated transfusion strategies (Figure S3).
Data from all 7 trials (corresponding to the 7 days) were combined for the subsequent analysis.
As sustaining the initially allocated transfusion strategies (i.e. remaining uncensored in the trials) could plausibly be associated with factors related to survival, an unadjusted analysis of the sequential trials would have been prone to bias.
To address this selection bias due to censoring, we applied stabilized inverse probability of artificial-censoring weights (IPACW) [20].
These weights were derived from the probability of remaining uncensored at timet, given patient covariates.
Further details on weight calculation based on the assumed DAG are available in the Supplement.
We estimated survival difference between transfusion strategies by fitting a marginal structural model with stabilized IPACWs.
Assuming a consistent treatment effect across trials, we fitted the MSM to combined data from seven sequential trials using the Aalen additive hazards model [22], which accommodates time-varying hazard effects [23].
We adjusted for transfusion strategies, all time-fixed confounders, and time-varying confounders measured at the beginning of each trial.
Survival probabilities for each strategy were derived from the model’s time-varying hazards [20].
To capture overall uncertainty, we constructed percentile-based 95% confidence intervals via bootstrapping with 1000 samples.
In each sample, we repeated the construction of sequential trials, the estimation of weights, and MSM model to account for total uncertainty across all steps of the analysis.
Missing data were minimal.
We excluded 11 patients with missing baseline diagnosis groups and imputed missing values for 17 cases of renal replacement and one case of severe bleeding during ECMO using the last-observation-carried-forward method.
We performed the following sensitivity analyses: i) we refitted the MSM using truncated stabilized IPACWs at the 95th percentile; ii) we adjusted for massive transfusion before ECMO as a time-fixed confounder, and iii) we excluded patients with a massive transfusion before ECMO from the study population.
Additionally, we restricted the cohort to patients whose transfusion episodes fully aligned with one of the three transfusion strategies.
Specifically, patients were mapped to strategies based on individual transfusion trigger values rather than the daily average value.
All analyses were performed using R, version 4.4.0 [24].
Among 545 patients eligible for the target trial, we excluded 11 patients due to missing baseline diagnosis groups.
In total, 534 unique patients were included in the sequential trials analysis.
Of these, 243 (46%) died during hospitalization.
Baseline characteristics of patients by transfusion strategies in the first day of ECMO are presented in Table2.
There were 192/534 (36%) patients that received transfusion at an intermediate Hb threshold value, 48/534 (9.0%) at a restrictive threshold, and 51/534 (9.6%) at a liberal threshold.
Compared to the liberal transfusion arm, patients who received restrictive transfusions were slightly younger, and had undergone more surgery and renal replacement prior to ECMO.
The number of patients who received transfusions during the seven days of ECMO is presented in Table S1.
There were 54% of patients received at least one transfusion on day 1.
Among them, 60% received transfusions on two or more separate occasions.
Over the following days, approximately 40% of patients received at least one transfusion per day, with most patients receiving only one transfusion episode.
Patients changed their transfusion strategy over time.
Figure1A describes the flow of patients between transfusion strategies over the seven days of ECMO.
Most transfusions occurred at the intermediate level of Hb threshold.
The proportion of patients who received transfusion at the restrictive and liberal levels were smaller and very few of them maintained an assigned transfusion strategy throughout the course of ECMO.
Figure1B and Table S2 depict the number of patients enrolled in the emulated sequential trials analysis and their follow-up.
In the combined data across all seven sequential trials, 70/1109 (6.3%) patients were assigned to the restrictive arm, of those 20/70 (29%) died.
There were 71/1109 (6.4%) were assigned to the liberal arm, of those, 14/71 (20%) died (Table S2).
Median follow-up time for patients in the restrictive and liberal arms are respectively: 2.6 (interquartile range IQR: 1—4) and 3.0 (IQR: 1.2—4) days.
Estimated survival curves are presented in Fig.2A, and the difference in survival probability between the restrictive and liberal arms is presented in Fig.2B.
A positive difference indicates a favourable effect of the liberal transfusion.
Receiving a liberal transfusion practice appeared to improve survival in the first 3 days of ECMO, but showed no benefit in the following days.
Estimated differences in the survival probabilities at day 2 and 3 were 12% (95% CI 3%, 21%) and 13% (95% CI 2%, 25%), respectively.
These differences correspond to numbers needed to treat (NNTs) of 8.3 and 7.7 at the two time points.
This implies that treating approximately eight patients with the liberal transfusion practice instead of the restrictive transfusion would save one additional life by day 2 and 3.
The distribution of the original weights and the truncated weights are presented in Figure S4.
Using truncated weights did not change our conclusion about the difference in survival between the liberal and restricted transfusion practice (Figure S5A).
We observed the same result in sensitivity analyses where we handled massive transfusion as a confounder either by adjusting for it as a time-fixed variable or by excluding patients with massive transfusion prior to ECMO from the study population (Figure S5B and S5C).
In the additional analysis, we included 363 patients whose all daily transfusion triggers, rather than just the daily average Hb trigger, were fully consistent with the transfusion practices.
Of these, 149 (41%) died during hospitalisation.
In terms of the primary endpoint, we observed similar conclusions, with a slightly larger benefit of the liberal transfusion in the first two days (Figure S5C).
Specifically, estimated differences in the survival probabilities at day 2 and 3 were 16% (95% CI 5%, 27%) and 21% (95% CI 7%, 36%), respectively.
Using a large international cohort database, we evaluated the effects of restrictive versus liberal transfusion practices in VA ECMO patients.
Our target trial emulation suggested a potential advantage of a liberal transfusion practice (i.e. transfusion initiated at Hb ≥ 90 g/L) over a restrictive strategy (i.e. transfusion initiated at Hb £ 70 g/L) in the initial days of ECMO, with no apparent benefit beyond that period.
Evidence to guide transfusion strategies in this patient population is limited.
Previous studies have either focused on VV ECMO instead of VA ECMO [13], or been observational with a high risk of publication bias and moderate to severe heterogeneity [12].
Trials of restrictive vs. liberal red cell transfusion in general critical care populations have reported non-inferiority of restrictive transfusion strategy compared to liberal [11].
However, the recently published MINT trial [25] in patients with myocardial infarct and anaemia, found that a liberal transfusion target of 100 g/L may improve a composite outcome of survival and myocardial infarction at 30 days by 15% compared to a restrictive transfusion strategy (risk ratio: 1.15; 95% CI 0.99 − 1.34; P = 0.07).
Notably, this result did not reach the pre-specified statistical significance level and therefore does not support a definitive change in clinical practice.
About half of these patients were in ICU at the time of randomisation but only 14% were mechanically ventilated.
The European Society of Intensive Care Medicine has recently reviewed the evidence for transfusion strategies in critically ill patients and could not find enough evidence to extrapolate evidence from trials in other cohorts to ECMO patients and did not make a recommendation [12].
The underlying mechanism for our finding is unclear.
However, we propose a possible explanation.
Oxygen delivery is directly related to cardiac output, oxygen saturation and haemoglobin.
In VA ECMO patients, cardiac output includes both native cardiac blood flow and ECMO-delivered flow.
In the early phase of VA ECMO, if left ventricular ejection fraction is severely impaired, ECMO blood flows may not fully compensate for reduced native output, potentially leading to inadequate oxygen delivery.
Additionally, severe shock is common during this period, and may impair endothelial function and tissue oxygenation.
The absence of pulsatile flow may exacerbate these effects, further compromising oxygen delivery.
This may explain the benefit of liberal transfusion in early days.
The results of the target trial emulation should be interpreted with caution for several reasons.
First, we defined transfusion strategy based on the daily haemoglobin (Hb) threshold at which transfusion was initiated.
As a result, the analysis compares outcomes among patients transfused at liberal versus restrictive Hb thresholds.
This approach does not account for the potential effects of delayed or withheld transfusion, particularly among patients managed under a restrictive strategy.
Patients who did not receive any transfusion, in fact, could theoretically belong to either the restrictive or liberal strategy groups, depending on their Hb levels.
However, because Hb measurements were not collected on days when transfusion did not occur, we treated the “no transfusion” group as a common reference when comparing the liberal and restrictive thresholds.
Second, even though we employed a carefully designed observational study with the sequential trials approach to mitigate confounding factors, unmeasured confounding due to factors not captured in our analysis, such as baseline illness severity, remains a possibility.
This is a common limitation of observational studies and indeed, early bleeding events could have contributed to a more likely allocation to a restrictive transfusion strategy.
However, in a sensitivity analysis where we included massive transfusion as a time-fixed confounder, we found the same results.
Randomized controlled trials are needed to definitively establish causal effects of different transfusion strategies on mortality in ECMO patients.
Third, while the OBLEX study is one of the largest databases for this patient population, the number of patients who received transfusions at the restrictive and liberal thresholds was relatively small.
To maximise the efficient use of available data, we employed the sequential trials approach.
The limited sample size is reflected in the wide confidence intervals around the estimated survival differences day 2 (3–21%) and 3 (2–25%).
Finally, as we did not collect pre-ECMO Hb values for all patients, we cannot determine whether the observed differences in survival outcomes are due to relative changes in Hb within individual patients.
Our study has several strengths.
We applied modern causal inference methods to appropriately adjust for time-varying confounding after baseline in a setting where patients could switch treatment strategies over time.
Although not without limitations, our findings generate hypotheses that warrant further investigation in this understudied patient population.
In the absence of relevant RCTs in this patient population, our study also offers a framework to guide the design of future observational studies that aim to address similar clinical research questions.
In conclusion, our findings suggest that a liberal transfusion practice (transfusions initiated at Hb ≥ 90 g/L) might yield a small survival advantage in the initial days of VA-ECMO, with no apparent benefit beyond that period, compared to a restrictive transfusion practice (transfusions initiated at Hb £ 70 g/L).
These results should be interpreted as exploratory and hypothesis-generating, and do not support any immediate changes to clinical practice without further confirmatory research.