Trimethyltin (TMT), a type of organotin compound, induces neuronal loss in specific brain regions and cognitive impairments.
These changes are transient and followed by recovery, thereby indicating a model of transient brain damage.
Memantine (MEM) has neuroprotective properties.
However, its effects against neurodegeneration during brain injury are inconsistent.
The current study aimed to elucidate the effects of early MEM treatment on the outcomes of brain injury.
Memantine at a dose of 10 mg/kg was administered for three consecutive days starting immediately after the administration of TMT at a dose of 2.6 mg/kg.
We evaluated neuronal loss and cognitive function in the hippocampal dentate gyrus 3 or 7 days after TMT administration.
Results showed that MEM had no significant impact on working memory impairment 3 days after TMT administration.
However, it significantly worsened cognitive function 7 days after TMT administration.
Furthermore, Fluoro‐Jade B staining revealed that MEM exacerbated neuronal degeneration induced by TMT administration.
Based on these findings, early MEM treatment after TMT administration could exacerbate hippocampal neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment.
Therefore, at least in the early stages of brain injury, MEM administration can worsen the prognosis of transient neuronal degeneration.
Trimethyltin (TMT) induces transient neuronal loss and cognitive impairments, serving as a model for transient brain damage.
This study investigated the effects of early memantine (MEM) treatment on TMT‐induced brain injury.
Memantine worsened TMT‐induced cognitive impairment and neuronal degeneration in the hippocampus, suggesting that early MEM treatment could exacerbate neural degeneration and impair recovery of cognitive impairment in brain injury.
Brain injury, such as stroke and traumatic brain injury, is a major medical condition that can lead to significant neuronal function impairment.
Functional impairments caused by brain injury lead to physical, cognitive, and emotional issues, which can significantly affect the lives of patients [1].
Various drugs can be used for treating brain injury.
However, there is an increasing expectation regarding the development of newer therapeutic approaches aiming to restore and repair brain functions [2].
Patients with brain injury commonly experience cognitive impairment, including memory and executive dysfunctions [3].
Long‐term cognitive dysfunction is associated with reduced brain volume on MRI.
The inhibition of neuronal cell death is an important therapeutic target for improving the prognosis of post–brain injury cognitive impairments [4].
Therefore, it is important to identify methods that can effectively suppress neurodegeneration immediately after the event, which is considered a significant factor.
Trimethyltin (TMT) is an organic tin compound that causes neuronal cell death in multiple regions, including the hippocampus, after peripheral administration.
The loss of hippocampal dentate gyrus neurons caused by TMT administration is transient, and recovery can occur immediately by promoting neurogenesis [5].
Moreover, cognitive function impairment induced by TMT is observed with neuronal loss in the hippocampal dentate gyrus.
Meanwhile, the recovery of cognitive function is observed after reduced neuronal degeneration [6].
Based on these findings, TMT‐treated mice can be a valuable animal model reflecting transient neuronal loss and cognitive impairments induced by brain injury.
Excessive glutamate release and the overactivation of glutamate receptors can cause excitotoxicity, leading to neuronal cell death in brain injuries [7].
Consequently, NMDA receptor antagonists can be effective against neurodegeneration [8,9].
However, previous reports on the efficacy of NMDA receptor antagonists against neurodegeneration have conflicting results.
Further, some studies have shown that NMDA receptor antagonists are not effective or they can even worsen the condition [10,11].
In clinical studies, the administration of NMDA receptor antagonists cannot effectively relieve the symptoms of cerebral ischemia [1].
However, these studies were conducted at least 24 h after the onset of ischemic events.
The effects of NMDA receptor antagonists when administered immediately after the onset of an event remain unknown.
Considering that memantine (MEM) is an NMDA receptor antagonist used in clinical settings, the results of animal experiments have become easier to extrapolate to clinical settings.
Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the effects of MEM administration after the immediate onset of TMT‐induced transient hippocampal neuronal cell death and cognitive impairments in an animal model.
The protocol used in this study met The Japanese Society for Pharmacology guidelines.
All animal care and handling procedures were approved by the Committee for Ethical Use of Experimental Animals at Setsunan University.
Seven‐week‐old Std‐ddY mice were purchased from Shimizu Jikken Zairyou Co.Ltd. (Kyoto, Japan).
The mice were bred under the conditions, as previously reported, and were used after 1 week of habituation to the breeding room.
All drugs were administered at a dose of 10 mL/kg intraperitoneally.
Trimethyltin chloride (Strem Chemicals Inc., USA), MEM (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemicals, Japan), and MK‐801 (Sigma‐Aldrich) were dissolved in phosphate‐buffered saline (pH 7.4).
Trimethyltin (2.6 mg/kg), MEM (0.1, 1, or 10 mg/kg), or MK‐801 (0.2 mg/kg) was administered intraperitoneally.
Memantine or MK‐801 was administered at 30 min, 24, and 48 h after TMT administration.
The novel object recognition test (NORT) was performed, as described in a previous study [12].
Briefly, each mouse was individually habituated to the experimental apparatus, which comprised a Plexiglas box (25.5 × 40 × 30 cm3).
The floor of the box was covered with corncob bedding.
Habituation was performed once a day for three consecutive days.
On the next day of final habituation, two green rectangular prism blocks were symmetrically placed on the floor of the box.
Each animal was allowed to explore the box for 10 min during the training session.
At 24 h after the training session, the mice were returned to the same box, which contained one of the familiar objects from the training session and a blue triangular prism block, which was a novel object.
The mice were allowed to explore the objects for 5 min during the retention session.
The exploration behavior was calculated as the time spent sniffing each object.
Furthermore, the preference index was calculated as the ratio of the time spent exploring the novel object in the retention session to the total time spent exploring both objects.
On the first day of the acclimation session of the NORT, the behavior of each mouse was recorded.
Video recordings were processed using DeepLabCut (version 2.2.3), a deep learning–based software, to track the user‐defined center of the body for 10 min [13].
The spontaneous alternation in the T‐maze test was evaluated, as reported in a previous study [14].
Briefly, the apparatus comprised a one start arm (41 × 5 × 13 cm3) and two goal arms (35 × 5 × 13 cm3) with guillotine doors.
All guillotine doors were raised, and each mouse was placed at the starting point of the T‐maze facing away from the goal arms.
Then, the mice were allowed to select either the left or right arm.
Upon entering one of the arms, the mouse was confined by closing the guillotine door.
After 10 s, the animal was removed, and the guillotine door was raised.
Then, the animal was replaced in the starting area.
Eight trials were conducted, and the rate of alternative behavior was calculated.
Thirty minutes after the final MEM injection, the hippocampi were rapidly removed, homogenized, and diluted with a sample buffer, as described in a previous study [15].
After boiling for 10 min, the proteins were subjected to sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred onto the PVDF membranes, as described in a previous study [16].
The membranes were incubated with the primary antibodies anti‐αFodrin (1:1000, BML‐FG6090; Enzo Life Sciences, USA), anti‐cleaved caspase‐3 (1:1000, 9611S; Cell Signaling, USA), anti‐calpain‐1 (1:1000, 10 538‐1‐AP; Proteintech, USA), anti‐LC3 (1:1000, PM036; Enzo Life Sciences), anti‐p62 (1:1000, PM045; Enzo Life Sciences), anti‐4‐hydroxy‐2‐nonenal (4‐HNE) (1:1000, MHN‐100P; Japan Institute for the Control of Aging, Japan), anti‐superoxide dismutase (SOD1) (1:1000, ab16831; Abcam, Cambridge, UK), or anti‐β‐actin (1:10 000, 66009‐1‐lg; Proteintech).
Then, they were subsequently incubated with horseradish peroxidase–conjugated antibodies against mouse IgG and rabbit IgG.
Protein bands were visualized via western lightning plus the ECL reagent (PerkinElmer, USA) and were scanned using Luminograph I (WSE‐6100; ATTO, Japan).
Digitized images were analyzed quantitatively via densitometry with a CS analyzer (ATTO).
After correcting the band intensity of each protein using β‐actin as a reference, the relative expression levels of each protein were calculated.
Hippocampal slices were obtained, as described in a previous study [17].
Briefly, after post–fixed brains were embedded in paraffin, three sagittal sections of 10 μm thickness were cut into 0.7 mm (71.0 mm2/section), 0.95 mm (68.2 mm2/section), and 1.2 mm (65.5 mm2/section) from the midline with a microtome.
After deparaffinization, the obtained sections were subjected to histochemical procedures, as described in a previous study [18].
For immunostaining, the sections were heated for 15 min in 10‐mM sodium citrate buffer.
After washing with 0.03% TBST and blocking with Blocking One Histo (Nacalai Tesque, Japan), the sections were incubated with anti‐NeuN (1:100, MAB377; Millipore, USA), anti‐c‐Fos (1:500, ABE457; Millipore), anti‐Sox2 (1:400,PA116968; Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), anti‐GFAP (1:200, 3670S; Cell Signaling), and anti‐Iba1 antibodies (1:500, PDN2194; FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical Corporation, Japan) at 4°C overnight.
After washing with TBST, the sections were reacted with Alexa Fluor 568‐conjugated anti‐mouse IgG (1:100, A11031; Invitrogen, USA) for 1 h at room temperature.
Stained sections were visualized under the BX41 microscope (Olympus, Japan) equipped with the DS‐Ri1 camera (Nikon, Japan).
Statistical analysis was performed using JMP Pro (JMP Pro 15; SAS Institute, USA).
Differences between two groups were analyzed using the Student'st‐tests.
Differences between four groups were analyzed via two‐way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and the Dunnett's tests.
Apvalue of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
First, whether transient neuronal degeneration and cognitive impairment induced by TMT could be replicated was confirmed (Figure1).
Three days after the TMT administration, the number of FJB‐ or NeuN‐positive cells significantly increased or decreased, respectively (p< 0.001) (Figure1A).
After 7 days of administration, FJB‐positive cells, which increased due to TMT, significantly reduced (p< 0.001).
Hence, TMT transiently induced neuronal cell death, which is consistent with a previous report [6].
In addition, the novel object exploration ratio during the retention session of the NORT and the alternation ratio in the T‐maze test decreased after 3 days of TMT administration (Figure1B,C).
The reductions significantly improved after 7 days of TMT administration.
There was no change in the exploration ratio for one of the objects during the training session.
Therefore, cognitive impairment induced by TMT is transient, which is in accordance with a previous study [6].
Therefore, TMT‐treated mice can be a model for transient neuronal loss and cognitive impairment.
TMT induces transient neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment.
(A) Results of the Fluoro‐Jade B (FJB) staining and NeuN immunostaining on Days 3 and 7 after the TMT administration at a dose of 2.6 mg/kg (n= 3).
Scale bar = 100 μm.
(B) Performance in the NORT.
The training session was conducted on Day 2 or 6 after the administration of TMT at a dose of 2.6 mg/kg.
The retention session was performed on Day 3 or 7 after TMT administration (n= 10–12).
(C) The T‐maze test was conducted on Days 3 and 7 after the administration of TMT at a dose of 2.6 mg/kg (n= 7–12).
Data were presented as mean ± standard error.
**p< 0.01,#p< 0.05, analyzed using two‐way ANOVA, followed by the Dunnett's tests.
Next, the effect of MEM in reversing cognitive impairment after 3 days of TMT administration was analyzed (Figure2).
Herein, MEM was administered at 10 mg/kg, which is predominantly used for chronic treatment in disease mouse models [19,20].
Memantine did not improve cognitive dysfunction based on the NORT and T‐maze test induced by TMT (Figure2A,B).
Neither MEM nor TMT affected locomotor activity 3 days after the TMT administration (Figure2C).
Therefore, MEM cannot improve transient cognitive impairment caused by TMT, at least in this context.
MEM did not affect transient cognitive impairment induced by TMT.
After the intraperitoneal administration of TMT at a dose of 2.6 mg/kg, MEM was administered intraperitoneally at 10 mg/kg at 30 min, 24, and 48 h after TMT injection.
(A) The training session was conducted on Day 2 after the TMT administration.
The retention session was performed 24 h after the training session (n= 10).
(B) The T‐maze test was conducted 24 h after the last administration (n= 6–10).
(C) The spontaneous locomotor activity was evaluated 24 h after the last MEM administration (n= 9–10).
Data were presented as mean ± standard error.
*p< 0.05 analyzed using two‐way ANOVA, followed by the Dunnett's test.
N.S., not significant.
Cognitive impairment is induced by MEM at a dose showing neuroprotective effects [21].
Therefore, the impact of MEM on improving neurodegeneration and cognitive impairments induced by TMT was evaluated (Figure3).
Memantine significantly decreased in the preference of novel objects during the NORT after 7 days of TMT administration (Figure3Aright,p< 0.0001).
Memantine did not affect the preference for an object during the training session after 6 days of TMT administration (Figure3Aleft).
In addition, MEM was more likely to decrease the alternation behavior ratio during the T‐maze test (Figure3B,p= 0.066).
Thus, MEM can possibly inhibit the recovery of transient cognitive impairments caused by TMT.
MEM prolonged transient cognitive impairment induced by TMT.
After the intraperitoneal administration of TMT at a dose of 2.6 mg/kg, MEM at a dose of 10 mg/kg was administered intraperitoneally at 30 min, 24, and 48 h after TMT injection.
(A) The NORT was conducted on Days 6–7 after TMT administration (n= 9–10).
(B) The T‐maze test was performed on Day 7 after TMT administration (n= 7–10).
Data were presented as mean ± standard error.
***p< 0.001 analyzed using two‐way ANOVA, followed by the Dunnett's test.
To validate the effect of MEM in exacerbating neuronal cell death associated with the recovery of TMT‐induced cognitive impairments, FJB staining and NeuN immunostaining were conducted (Figure4).
Two‐way ANOVA revealed a significant difference in the effect of MEM administration and days after TMT administration on the number of FJB‐positive cells.
However, there was no association between MEM administration and days after TMT administration (Figure4A; MEM effectF(1, 19) = 4.53,p= 0.0493; day effectF(1, 19) = 59.9,p< 0.0001; MEM × day interactionF(1, 19) = 0.771,p= 0.771).
In the TMT and PBS administration groups, there was a time‐dependent decrease in the number of NeuN‐positive cells, which was not observed in the TMT and MEM administration group (Figure4B; MEM effectF(1, 19) = 2.12,p= 0.164; day effectF(1, 19) = 2.29,p= 0.150; MEM × day interactionF(1, 19) = 5.88,p= 0.0275).
Furthermore, 0.1 and 1 mg/kg MEM had no effect on TMT‐induced cell death (Figure4C).
MK‐801—an NMDA receptor antagonist—did not increase the number of TMT‐induced FJB‐positive cells at a dose of 0.2 mg/kg, which is known to induce behavioral changes similar to those observed in NR1 receptor knockout mice (Figure4D) [22].
These findings suggest that MEM can possibly worsen the acute loss of neurons after TMT administration.
MEM exacerbated and prolonged transient neurodegeneration induced by TMT.
After the intraperitoneal administration of TMT at a dose of 2.6 mg/kg, MEM at a dose of 10 mg/kg was administered intraperitoneally at 30 min, 24, and 48 h after TMT injection.
(A) Results of the FJB staining in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus on Days 3 and 7 after TMT administration (n= 5).
(B) NeuN immunostaining results in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus on Days 3 and 7 after TMT administration (n= 4–6).
(C) The dose‐dependent effect of MEM on the increase in TMT‐induced FJB‐positive cells observed on Day 3 after TMT administration (n= 4–5).
(D) The effect of 0.2 mg/kg MK‐801 on the increase in TMT‐induced FJB‐positive cells observed on Day 3 after TMT administration (n= 4–5).
Data were presented as mean ± standard error.
*p< 0.05, analyzed using two‐way ANOVA.
Scale bar = 100 μm.
To elucidate the effects of MEM on neuronal activity and neurogenesis, the number of c‐Fos‐ and Sox2‐positive cells in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus was evaluated 3 days after the TMT administration (Figure5A).
Memantine increased the number of c‐Fos‐positive cells induced by TMT.
Trimethyltin and MEM did not affect the expression of Sox2—a marker of neural stem cells involved in neurogenesis.
Hence, although MEM induces the activation of neurons on Day 3 after the TMT administration, it may not increase the number of neural stem cells.
MEM increased the activity of neurons and glia in TMT‐treated mice.
After the intraperitoneal administration of TMT at a dose of 2.6 mg/kg, MEM was intraperitoneally administered at 10 mg/kg at 30 min, 24, and 48 h after TMT injection.
(A) The c‐Fos and Sox2 immunostaining results in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus on Day 3 after the TMT administration (n= 3).
(B) The GFAP and Iba1 immunostaining results in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus on Day 3 after the TMT administration (n= 3).
Data were presented as mean ± standard error.
*p< 0.05, analyzed using two‐way ANOVA.
Scale bar = 100 μm.
Glial cells are activated in the hippocampus of mice that received TMT [23].
To elucidate the effects of MEM on glial cell activation induced by TMT, the expression of GFAP—an astrocyte marker—and Iba1—a microglial marker—in the hippocampus was examined 3 days after the TMT administration (Figure5B).
Memantine slightly increased the number of GFAP‐positive cells in the dentate gyrus of TMT‐treated mice (p= 0.087).
Memantine did not change the number of Iba1‐positive cells (p= 0.548).
Hence, MEM can promote the proliferation or activation of astrocytes induced by TMT.
To determine the effect of MEM in enhancing apoptosis signaling involved in TMT‐induced neurodegeneration, the expression level of cleaved αFodrin was analyzed.
αFodrin is a cytoskeletal protein that undergoes cleavage by calpain, which results in 150‐ and 145‐kDa fragments, and caspase‐3, which results in 120‐kDa fragments (Figure6A).
Two‐way ANOVA revealed that TMT significantly increased the expression levels of these fragments.
However, MEM did not affect the TMT‐induced increase in these fragments (150 kDa; TMT effectF(1, 34) = 29.7,p< 0.0001; MEM effectF(1,34) = 0.407,p= 0.528; TMT × MEM interactionF(1, 34) = 1.29,p= 0.265, 145 kDa; TMT effectF(1, 34) = 11.1,p< 0.05; MEM effectF(1, 34) = 1.23,p= 0.276; TMT × MEM interactionF(1, 34) = 0.517,p= 0.477, 120 kDa; TMT effectF(1, 34) = 10.1,p< 0.01; MEM effectF(1, 34) = 0.357,p= 0.555; TMT × MEM interactionF(1, 34) = 2.87,p= 0.100).
The expression levels of cleaved caspase‐3 and calpain‐1 were analyzed (Figure6B,C).
Trimethyltin or MEM did not alter the expression level of cleaved caspase‐3 or calpain‐1.
Therefore, MEM does not affect caspase‐3 or calpain‐related apoptosis in TMT‐induced neurodegeneration.
MEM did not improve the hippocampal apoptotic signaling induced by TMT.
After the intraperitoneal administration of TMT at a dose of 2.6 mg/kg, MEM at a dose of 10 mg/kg was administered intraperitoneally at 30 min, 24, and 48 h after TMT injection.
The protein samples were collected from the hippocampus 30 min after the final MEM administration.
Western blot analysis was conducted using the anti‐αFodrin antibodies (n= 8–9) (A), cleaved caspase‐3 (n= 6) (B), and calpain‐1 (n= 6) (C).
Data were expressed as mean ± standard error.
*p< 0.05, analyzed using two‐way ANOVA.
N.S., not significant.
Trimethyltin can promote autophagy in the hippocampus [24].
Meanwhile, MEM can suppress beta‐amyloid‐induced activation of autophagy [25].
To investigate the occurrence of abnormalities in the autophagy mechanism before MEM‐amplified neuronal cell death induced by TMT, the expression levels of autophagy‐related proteins were analyzed (Figure7).
Two‐way ANOVA revealed that TMT significantly increased the expression level of LC3‐II (Figure7A), indicating enhanced autophagy.
However, MEM had no significant impact on TMT‐induced changes (LC3‐II; TMT effectF(1, 34) = 66.36,p< 0.0001; MEM effectF(1, 34) = 0.4640,p= 0.5008; TMT × MEM interactionF(1, 34) = 0.151,p= 0.9029).
Hence, MEM does not influence the TMT‐induced promotion of autophagy.
MEM did not improve hippocampal autophagy signaling induced by TMT.
After the intraperitoneal administration of TMT at a dose of 2.6 mg/kg, MEM at a dose of 10 mg/kg was administered intraperitoneally at 30 min, 24, and 48 h after TMT injection.
Protein samples were collected from the hippocampus 30 min after the final MEM administration.
Western blot analysis was conducted using the anti‐LC3 antibody (A) and anti‐p62 antibody (B) (n= 8–9).
Data were presented as mean ± standard error.
***p< 0.001, analyzed using two‐way ANOVA.
N.S., not significant.
Trimethyltin induces significant oxidative stress that peaks at 24 h after administration [26].
Therefore, the effect of MEM on enhancing TMT‐induced oxidative stress was evaluated (Figure8).
Trimethyltin and MEM did not affect the expression levels of 4‐HNE protein adducts (Figure8A) and the antioxidative enzyme SOD1 (Figure8B).
Thus, MEM does not affect oxidative stress induced by TMT.
MEM did not affect hippocampal oxidative stress signaling.
After the intraperitoneal administration of TMT at a dose of 2.6 mg/kg, MEM at a dose of 10 mg/kg was administered intraperitoneally at 30 min, 24, and 48 h after TMT administration.
The protein samples were collected from the hippocampus 30 min after the final MEM administration.
Western blot analysis was conducted using the anti‐4‐HNE antibody (A) and anti‐SOD1 antibody (B) (n= 5–6).
Data were presented as mean ± standard error.
This study evaluated the effects of MEM administration immediately after TMT‐induced transient neurodegeneration and cognitive impairments.
Results showed that MEM did not improve cognitive impairment 3 days after TMT administration.
Rather, it delayed recovery 7 days after TMT administration.
In addition, MEM exacerbated TMT‐induced neurodegeneration in the hippocampal dentate gyrus, and this effect persisted at least until 7 days after TMT administration.
The apoptosis signal and autophagy activated by TMT were not suppressed by MEM.
Therefore, MEM can delay transient neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment induced by TMT.
Trimethyltin impairs long‐term and working memory, as evidenced by a decrease in the percentage of novel object exploration during the NORT retention session and a decrease in the alternation ratio during the T‐maze test, which is consistent with previous reports [27,28].
Trimethyltin and MEM did not affect spontaneous locomotor activity on the second day after administration.
Therefore, the observed changes in cognitive function assessment were not attributed to motor activity alterations.
A dose of 10 mg/kg MEM administered in this study could improve cognitive impairment in mild traumatic brain injury and Down syndrome mouse models [19,20].
In addition, pretreatment with a dose of 0.1 mg/kg MEM can suppress infarct expansion in a middle cerebral artery occlusion mouse model [29].
However, in this study, MEM exacerbated TMT‐induced neuronal loss in a dose‐dependent manner.
Therefore, MEM may not be an effective therapeutic agent for all types of neuronal loss.
This study showed that TMT increased the 145‐ and 150‐kDa fragments of αFodrin.
Further, MEM did not affect the expression of cleaved αFodrin, cleaved caspase‐3, and calpain‐1.
Therefore, MEM does not exacerbate apoptosis by activating calpain or caspases.
However, the FJB staining and NeuN immunostaining results revealed an increase in neuronal cell death, thereby indicating the possible occurrence of cell death via alternative pathways other than apoptosis.
Trimethyltin induces both apoptosis and necrosis.
Future investigations involving the analysis of inflammatory cytokine expression may shed light on the association between MEM‐mediated exacerbation of TMT‐induced neurodegeneration and increased necrosis.
TMT increases glutamate (Glu) concentrations in the brain [30,31].
However, neuronal cell death caused by TMT cannot be inhibited by MK‐801 and may be induced by factors other than Glu [26].
Furthermore, in the present study, MK‐801 had no effect on TMT‐induced neuronal cell death, suggesting that glutamate signaling does not play a major role in TMT‐induced neurodegeneration.
It has been suggested that MEM also possesses antagonistic actions on 5‐HT3 receptors and acetylcholine α7nACh receptors [32].
Given that glutamate excitotoxicity does not appear to be a primary cause of cell death in the TMT model, further studies are warranted to elucidate the mechanisms of TMT‐induced neuronal death and how MEM exacerbates this process.
The MEM treatment increased the c‐Fos expression in the dentate gyrus.
A sustained c‐Fos expression might induce cell death [33].
Hence, MEM can possibly sensitize neuronal toxicity by TMT in neural cells.
Previous studies have shown that in rats receiving TMT, the LC3‐II/LC3‐I levels increased prior to hippocampal neuronal cell death.
Therefore, autophagy can be involved in neurodegeneration [24].
The current study showed that the levels of autophagy‐related proteins increased due to TMT.
However, their expression remained unaffected by MEM.
Therefore, the exacerbation of TMT‐induced neurodegeneration by MEM is unlikely to be mediated by changes in the autophagy mechanism.
Trimethyltin also induces an increase in oxidative stress, peaking on the first day after administration [28].
In the current study, on the second day after TMT administration, neither TMT nor MEM altered the expression of 4‐HNE protein adducts or SOD1.
Therefore, MEM, at least, does not enhance the increase in oxidative stress caused by TMT.
Moreover, TMT elevates circulating corticosterone levels [34], and neurodegeneration induced by TMT is worsened by the suppression of glucocorticoid signaling [28].
Meanwhile, MEM can inhibit stress‐induced elevation of circulating corticosterone levels [35].
Based on these reports, MEM can exacerbate neurodegeneration induced by TMT by suppressing the increase in circulating glucocorticoid levels.
Future investigations validating this notion may contribute to a better understanding of the mechanism by which MEM exacerbates TMT‐induced neurodegeneration.
In this study, neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment induced by TMT were exacerbated by the subchronic administration of MEM starting immediately after TMT administration.
Hence, the efficacy of MEM immediately after severe brain damage is likely to be limited.
Memantine administration immediately after TMT was not effective in improving prognosis.
Nevertheless, the potential benefits of MEM during the recovery phase may be worth exploring.
Memantine promotes neurogenesis in the adult hippocampal dentate gyrus [36].
In the DG of TMT‐treated mice, neurogenesis was enhanced after transient neurodegeneration [37].
Therefore, investigating the effects of MEM on neurogenesis during the regenerative phase of DG neurons after TMT administration may improve prognosis after brain injury.
Trimethyltin‐induced neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment were aggravated by MEM administration immediately after TMT injection.
Consequently, the immediate administration of MEM after neurodegeneration may not be advisable for treating neuronal damage or cognitive dysfunctions.