To test the possibility that narratives regarding compassion as tiring (compassion fatigue) in health care represent a form of self‐fulfilling prophecy by experimentally testing whether perceptions of compassion can be manipulated and whether such manipulations change ratings of compassion toward hypothetical patients.
Preregistered experimental study of medical practitioners and trainee doctors conducted anonymously and online using a mixed between‐groups and repeated within‐person design.
New Zealand doctors and medical trainees were randomized to watch a video positioning compassion as positive or negative (or a control video).
Perceptions of compassion were rated before and after the manipulation, before participants rated standardized vignettes depicting patients who systematically varied in terms of presentation and responsibility for condition.
Data were analysed using factorial analysis of variance (ANOVA).
Factorial ANOVA revealed that perceptions of compassion were influenced by the video manipulation but group differences in ratings of care, compassion, and desire to help hypothetical patients were not found.
Patient presentation and responsibility manipulations showed large effects and there was evidence for the influence of social desirability.
This study provides ‘proof of principle’ that perceptions of compassion are malleable lending support to the possibility that a focus on compassion fatigue may be contributing to a self‐fulfilling prophecy.
Perceptions of compassion were readily altered following a short video intervention.
While group differences in responses to hypothetical patients were not seen, the findings (particularly the large effect of patient factors) support the view that multiple factors contribute to the emergence of compassion in health care.
Compassion, recognizing suffering and being motivated to alleviate it (Goetz & Simon‐Thomas,2017; Sinclair, Norris, et al.,2016), is an expectation among patients (Lown et al.,2011; Sinclair, Beamer, et al.,2017) and professional organizations (Americal Medical Association,2016; Australian Medical Association,2006; Gillie,1983; Royal New Zealand College of General Practitioners,2021) and is valued by doctors (Anandarajah & Roseman,2014).
Evidence is increasingly suggesting that compassion benefits patients (Beach et al.,2006; Canale et al.,2012; Fogarty et al.,1999; Hojat et al.,2011; Kahn et al.,2007; Meterko et al.,2010; Moss et al.,2019; Rakel et al.,2011; Rathert et al.,2013; Safran et al.,1998; Sinclair, McClement, et al.,2016; van der Cingel,2011; van Dulmen & van den Brink‐Muinen,2004), providers (Paterson,2011; Perry,2009; Shapiro et al.,1989; Sinclair, Norris, et al.,2016; Way & Tracy,2012) and health systems (Bertakis & Azari,2011; Epstein et al.,2005; Kinnersley et al.,1999; Redelmeier et al.,1995; Stewart et al.,2000).
However, it is not always present in health care.
Indeed, a lack of compassion is a frequent cause of complaints (Paterson,2011) and medical services lacking in compassion are linked to poorer health outcomes (Malenfant et al.,2022).
While multiple factors contribute to the emergence (or not) of compassion in health care (Pavlova et al.,2022),compassion fatigueis one enduring research focus.
Compassion fatigue is frequently seen as a ‘cost of caring’ (Boyle,2015; Hamilton et al.,2016; Sorenson et al.,2017) stemming from healthcare practitioners' professional work.
Broadly, compassion fatigue is a term used to describe a form of work‐related exhaustion and is purportedly accompanied by (or includes) a reduction in the ability to be compassionate (Baqeas et al.,2021; Gainsburg & Lee Cunningham,2023).
Problematically, compassion fatigue is variously considered both a cause and effect of distress.
Prevalence estimates vary but the picture is bleak, with rates of 15%–50% found across studies (El‐bar et al.,2013; Gribben, Kase, et al.,2019; Gribben, MacLean, et al.,2019; Huggard & Dixon,2011; Markwell & Wainer,2009; Sarosi et al.,2021; Weintraub et al.,2016).
It is unsurprising then that compassion fatigue remains a strong research focus (Noor et al.,2025).
According to work in this tradition, compassion fatigue has a wide range of negative effects on a clinician's well‐being and is seen by some as a key antecedent to the loss or reduction in the capacity to be compassionate (Coetzee & Klopper,2010; Jilou et al.,2021; Perry,2009; Peters,2018; Sinclair, Raffin‐Bouchal, et al.,2017; Sorenson et al.,2017; Summer Meranius et al.,2020).
However, while compassion fatigue research has highlighted the challenges facing health systems and clinician well‐being, the construct has come under increasing scrutiny (Fernando 3rd & Consedine,2014; Ledoux,2015; Sinclair, Raffin‐Bouchal, et al.,2017; Singer,2025).
Conceptually, compassion fatigue is problematically conflated with burnout, a recognized but distinct problem.
Linguistically, the term is emotive (Austin et al.,2009; Sinclair, Raffin‐Bouchal, et al.,2017), implying that (like physical energy)compassionis a finite resource, that the act of being compassionate is tiring, and that repeated acts of compassion (as occur in a health care setting where suffering is seen repeatedly) deplete ‘reserves’ of compassion (Sinclair,2017).
In this view, once the compassion tank empties, compassion fatigue ensues.
However, while burnout is clearly a problem in health care, it is unclear whether acts of compassion deplete resources in the manner implied by compassion fatigue research.
For one, recent neuroscientific evidence suggests compassion is not fatiguing and can actually be a buffer to burnout (Singer,2025).
Similarly, if compassionwasdepleted with use, we would expect compassion fatigue to increase with experience; evidence for this implied pattern is mixed (Cavanagh et al.,2020).
Perhaps most importantly, the compassion fatigue paradigm view has offered little in terms of solutions to the challenge of compassion in health care.
The origins of compassion are complex and incorporate a range of individual, patient, clinical, and environmental influences (Fernando 3rd & Consedine,2014).
However, while data are increasing, studies have concentrated on factors that may not be amenable to intervention (Pavlova et al.,2022) and/or are expensive/impractical to scale.
More promising is the suggestion that factors outside the provider may be important, with both qualitative (Rider et al.,2018) and quantitative (Pavlova et al.,2023) work implying that identifying contextual influences on compassion in health care holds promise.
In this light, the current study was designed to test whether the dominance of compassion fatigue research and a disciplinary narrative regarding compassion as inherently tiring may be creating a self‐fulfilling prophecy.
Specifically, we empirically test whether expectations regarding compassion for patients contribute to the experience of compassion as fatiguing or rewarding.
Although it has yet to be tested in doctors or the wider community of health care providers, the possibility that dominant narratives influence perceptions and experience is well established.
For example, both nocebo and placebo effects (the negative or positive effects on outcomes arising in large part as a result of expectations) are well documented in settings ranging from sports performance (Beedie et al.,2018; Hurst et al.,2020), to ageing (Levy et al.,2002; Robertson et al.,2015; Wurm et al.,2007), and health (Crichton, Chapman, Cundy, & Petrie,2014; Crichton & Petrie,2015; Das‐Munshi et al.,2006; Rubin et al.,2010).
Similarly, research intomindsetsprovides clear evidence that expectations can have powerful effects on outcomes (Crichton, Dodd, Schmid, Gamble, & Petrie,2014; Crum et al.,2013; Levy & Leifheit‐Limson,2009).
Of particular note, a recent study among US university students and online participant pools has shown that perceiving compassion as limited predicts reports of lower compassion and greater fatigue (Gainsburg & Lee Cunningham,2023).
However, while this is an important finding, it is unclear whether such an effect will replicate in health settings where caring for patients and compassion itself represent professional expectations/obligations and where compassion is needed repeatedly.
Testing whether expectations regarding compassion can be manipulated in healthcare populations, specifically doctors and trainee doctors, and whether compassion fatigue narratives might thus contribute to the experience of compassion as tiring is the focus of this work.
This pre‐registered (AsPredicted.org: 105438) online experimental study of doctors and trainee doctors was designed to test whether perceptions of compassion can be changed to be seen as either fatiguing or rewarding by manipulating expectations and, if so, whether such manipulations change ratings of compassion towards hypothetical patients.
An anonymous, mixed between‐groups and repeated within‐persons experimental study was conducted online.
In line with best practice, the study design, operationalisations, analyses and hypotheses were preregistered (AsPredicted.org: 105438).
The study received approval from the Auckland Health Research Ethics Committee on 1 August 2021 (Ref:AH23905).
This report follows the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CON‐SORT) guidelines.
Eligible participants were New Zealand practising (or recently retired) medical doctors or medical students studying at a New Zealand University.
Participants were aged 18 years or older, fluent in English and had internet access.
Of 349 people who clicked through to the study landing page, 279 agreed to participate; 35 exited before being randomized.
To maximize experimental effects, participants who watched less than 2/3 of the video manipulation (i.e. at least 180 s), did not make all patient vignette ratings, or were deemed to have been de‐blinded were excluded from final analyses.
As such, of 244 potentially eligible participants, 153 completed were included in the final analysis (Figure1).
A priori effect size estimates regarding whether manipulated expectations impact compassion were not available at the time of study design.
Anticipating effects in the small–to‐moderate range (partialη2in the .01–.06 range), a power calculation based on the pre‐registered 3 (group) × 2 (patient presentation) × 2 (patient responsibility) mixed model analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was undertaken using G*Power (Version 3.1.9.7) (Faul et al.,2007) (80% power,βof 20% and an alpha of .05).
A sample size of between 30 and 171 was required.
Participants were recruited to an anonymous online study described as examining ‘experiences of caring’.
Recruitment occurred via social media posts, snowballing emails via professional networks and student associations and via university and a medical college electronic notice.
Recruitment took place August–November 2022.
Entry into a prize draw for an iPad was offered to reward participation.
Information for this draw was collected separately to preserve data anonymity.
Following consent, the study took 20–25 min to complete.
Firstly, participants provided demographic and professional/student information, before completing baseline measures of relevant dispositional characteristics and rating baseline perceptions of compassion.
Participants were then gender block‐randomized to one of three experimental conditions (positive, negative or control) in which they watched a video specific to their experimental group.
Immediately after viewing the video, participants repeated the six items indexing perceptions of compassion.
Next, as a proxy for compassion in clinical settings, four gender‐matched (he/she/they) patient vignettes were presented.
Ratings assessed participants compassionate feelings and intentions towards patients, but importantly not actual behaviour.
Participants were asked to imagine they were the patient's doctor.
After reading each vignette, participants made five Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) ratings (the same questions in the same order were used for all four vignettes).
Vignette order was counterbalanced to one of two orders in which the first and last vignette reflected either the most likeable or least likeable patient.
Finally, participants responded to a question assessing potential de‐blinding and viewed a standardized debrief script.
Participants self‐reported demographic and professional or student‐related information (as appropriate) including age, gender identity, ethnicity, graduation year, general area of practice (primary care, secondary care or other) and experience or medical student training level.
Dispositional characteristics collected included burnout (Li‐Sauerwine et al.,2020), depression, anxiety and stress (Henry & Crawford,2005), the tendency to give socially desirable answers (Reynolds,1982), compassion to others (Chiesi et al.,2020), fear of expressing compassion for others (Gilbert et al.,2011) and professional quality of life (Galiana et al.,2020).
Only measures directly relevant to the questions tested here are presented.
To index perceptions of compassion before and after the video manipulation, three positive (rewarding, satisfying and pleasurable) and three negative (draining, tiring and exhausting) descriptors were rated using 100 mm VAS from 0 ‘not at all’ to 100 ‘highly’ Positive and negative perception items were aggregated to create composite positive (baselineα.84, post‐videoα.89) and negative (baselineα.93, post‐videoα.96) compassion perception indices.
Video mediums have been established as effectively manipulating expectations (Crichton, Dodd, Schmid, Gamble, Cundy, & Petrie,2014; Crum et al.,2013) and were utilized in this study.
Videos of similar length (270–280 s) were developed for each group, with each following the same format.
Part one featured a story based on one of the researchers' experiences as a junior doctor and was presented as a cartoon with a narrative voiceover.
The story narrative was the same across conditions except for small parts specifically framing compassion as either positive or negative (in the relevant conditions).
In the control video, the same base script was used but focused on a communication system.
Part two introduced a ‘compassion expert’ (Professor Consedine) who imparted information from published evidence regarding the benefits or risks of compassion for each of the positive and negative conditions and was followed by a reference list of supportive literature.
In the control condition, the same expert provided information about the importance of effective communication systems, and a reference list was displayed.
Accuracy of the presented information and face validity was confirmed via pilot testing and by review with a convenience group of graduate students studying compassion.
Four patient vignettes from prior research with established face and content validity were presented (Fernando et al.,2017; Pavlova et al.,2024).
Vignettes can assist in gaining understanding of decisions, behaviours, perceptions, beliefs, values and dispositions (Bradbury‐Jones et al.,2014; Evans et al.,2015) and have previously been used successfully in experimental studies (Evans et al.,2015; Fernando et al.,2017; Pavlova et al.,2024).
The four patients presented in the vignettes systematically varied in terms of ‘likeability/presentation’ and ‘perceived responsibility’, both factors previously identified as likely to facilitate or inhibit compassion (Fernando et al.,2017).
Participants then made 100 mm VAS ratings regarding the extent of care for, feel compassion for, desire to help, and how tiring it would be to care for the patient, for each vignette.
Each scale was anchored from ‘little’ at 0, to ‘highly’ at 100.
The face and convergent validity of the first three questions has been established and construct validity is enhanced because the ratings provide indices of the two main components of compassion in health care (an affective recognition and response to suffering and a desire to help).
The final question (how tiring) was included to quantify perceptions of compassion as fatiguing.
All analyses were conducted using SPSS v.
The analytic strategy and hypotheses were pre‐registered withAsPredicted.org(Ref: 105438) prior to recruitment and data collection.
In this plan, missing data were imputed where they met predefined thresholds.
Very few data were missing (<1%).
Outliers were identified by Tukey's fence method (George & Mallery,2021) and were managed using winsorization to the 5th and 95th percentiles.
To confirm randomisation, ANOVA or chi‐squared and Fisher's exact test (as appropriate) were conducted.
A multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) was conducted to test for an overall effect of vignette order on ratings.
To follow, a 3 (experimental condition) × 2 (pre‐ and post‐video) mixed model ANOVA on the composite positive and negative compassion perception scores was used to verify the manipulation of perceptions regarding compassion in health care;t‐tests (comparing pre‐video perception and post‐video perception for the positive and negative aggregated scores) were used to deconstruct any significant effects.
Although they were not pre‐registered, these tests were confirmed with Wilcoxon‐signed rank to ensure no undue outlier influence.
The pre‐registered primary analysis was a 3 (experimental condition) × 2 (patient presentation: positive versus negative) × 2 (patient responsibility: high versus low) mixed model ANCOVA where social desirability was covaried.
However, after initial analyses determined social desirability was significant (both alone and in interaction) the decision was made to include social desirability as a factor in a subsequent 3 (experimental condition) × 2 (patient presentation: positive and negative) × 2 (patient responsibility: high and low) × 2 (dichotomised social desirability) mixed model ANOVA.
The results present the model with social desirability as a factor.
However, the original ANCOVA findings are available as DataS1and, to facilitate comparison, a summary of both models is also presented.
Participants were aged between 20 and 73 years of age, with a mean of 35.5 years (SD= 12.7 years).
Ethnically, the study approximated the New Zealand medical and medical trainee workforces (Medical Council of New Zealand,2022), 1 8 Māori (11.8%), 4 Pacific Island (2.6%), 30 Asian (19.6%), 75 NZ European (49%) and 26 other (17%).
In terms of training, 95 were qualified physicians (62.1%) and 58 (37.9%) medical trainees.
Most were female (81.7%), with smaller proportions of male (17.6%) and gender diverse (.7%) participants.
Of the registered doctors in the sample, most worked in primary (n= 56, 58.9%) or secondary care (n= 36, 37.9%), with smaller numbers in other settings such as public health (n= 3, 3.2%).
The average years post training was 18.99 years (SD =11.06).
Medical students were mostly in the clinical years of training (Years 4, 5 and 6) (n= 49, 84.5%), with a small number of year 2 and 3 pre‐clinical trainees (n= 9, 15.5%).
There were no group differences in potential confounds indicating randomisation to condition was successful (Table1).
Baseline demographic, professional and measurement variables between conditions.
n= 95 (only applicable to the doctors in the study).
Similarly, a MANOVA suggested that vignette order did not systematically impact ratings: Pillai's TraceF(19, 133) = 1.57,p= .074 partialn2= .18.
Given the absence of effects, order was discounted as a confound and subsequent analyses collapsed across vignette orders.
As noted, a 3 (experimental condition) × 2 (time: pre versus post video perception ratings) mixed model ANOVA was used to test changes in compassion perceptions.
There were no main effects for time on either negative,F(1, 150) = 1.14,p= .288, partialη2= <.01, or positive perception scores,F(1, 150) = 3.56,p= .061, partialη2= .02.
Similarly, there was no main effect for experimental group on either negative,F(2, 150) = .08,p= .92, partialη2= <.01 or positive,F(2, 150) = .31,p= .734, partialη2= <.01, compassion perception scores.
As expected, however, there was an interaction between condition and time in predicting both negative,F(2, 150) = 10.11,p= <.001, partialη2= .12, and positive compassion perceptions,F(2, 150) = 7.6,p= <.001, partialη2= .09.
To confirm the expected direction of the effects, follow‐upt‐testing was performed.
As can be seen in Figure2, persons randomized to the positive condition reported an increase in positive perceptions (i.e., saw compassion as more satisfying, pleasurable, and rewarding) following the video manipulation and a decrease in negative perceptions (i.e., saw compassion as less tiring/draining/exhausting).
Conversely, those randomized to the negative condition reported an increase in negative perceptions (i.e., saw compassion as more tiring, draining, and exhausting) after the video manipulation.
However, they did not report a parallel decrease in positive perceptions.
Testament to the suitability of the control condition, positive and negative perceptions did not change in the control condition.
Results were unchanged when using tests that are less sensitive to possible outliers.
Mean positive and negative perceptions regarding compassion pre–post video as a function of experimental group.
Mean rating of perception with standard error bars, *Denotes significant differences.
The pre‐registered primary analysis was a 3 (experimental condition) × 2 (patient presentation: positive and negative) × 2 (patient responsibility: high and low) mixed ANCOVA where social desirability was covaried.
As noted, however, pervasive social desirability effects led to the use of a 3 (experimental condition) × 2 (lower/higher social desirability) × 2 (presentation: positive and negative) × 2 (patient responsibility: high and low) mixed model ANOVA.
Given similarities in the overall pattern and limitations of space, only the ANOVA is fully presented and interpreted.
A summary of both models is presented in Table2below, but only the mixed model ANOVA is interpreted.
For all results, Wilks lambda is reported.
The ANCOVA materials are available as a DataS1.
Effects of experimental condition (group), patient presentation (positive, negative), patient responsibility (high, low) and social desirability (SD) on self‐assessed ratings of compassion, care, desire to help, and perception of tiringness.
There was no overall main effect for group,F(2, 147) = .48,p= .622, partialη2= .01, but greater social desirability predicted reports of greater compassionate feelings for others,F(1, 147) = 6.26,p= .013, partialη2= .04.
Self‐assessed compassion was greater for positive versus negative patients,F(1, 147) = 154.53,p= < .001, partialη2= .51, and for patients with lower (vs. greater) responsibility for their condition,F(1, 147) = 10.37,p= .002, partialη2= .07.
In addition, several variables interacted to predict reports of compassionate feelings for others.
There was an interaction between presentation and social desirability,F(1, 147) = 4.50,p= .035, partialη2= .03.
Plot inspection indicated that negative patients had a greater impact on compassionate feelings at lower social desirability (Figure3a).
Consistent with this interpretation,t‐tests contrasting ratings for lower versus higher social desirability were different for the negative patient (p= .002) but not the positive patient (p= .125).
Differences in self‐assessed compassionate feelings ratings as a function of (a) presentation and social desirability, (b) responsibility for condition and social desirability, (c) presentation and responsibility for condition and (d) positive and negative patients by social desirability in each group.
Mean self‐assessed compassionate feelings with standard error bars.
*Denotes significant differences.
Furthermore, patient responsibility also interacted with social desirability,F(1, 147) = 4.02,p= .047, partialη2= .03; plot inspection suggested a pattern in which compassionate feelings for high responsibility patients were lower when social desirability was low but did not vary at higher levels of social desirability (Figure3b).
In line with this interpretation,t‐testing indicated differences as a function of desirability for the high (p =.003) but not the low responsibility vignette (p= .07).
However, while patient factors had less impact on self‐assessed compassionate feelings among persons reporting greater social desirability, the two patient factors also interacted to predict compassionate feelings,F(1, 147) = 58.38,p≤ .001, partialη2= .28.
Plot inspection (see Figure3c) suggested that the effect of patient responsibility was only evident among the positive patients.
In positive patients, self‐assessed compassionate feelings were lower for high responsibility patients but greater for low responsibility patients.
Interpretation was not further aided by conductingt‐tests as these indicated ratings for negative versus positive presentation were different for both low (p= <.001) and high (p= <.001) levels of responsibility for condition.
Finally, the earlier effect in which the difference between positive and negative patients was reduced when social desirability was higher was qualified by an additional interaction between presentation, social desirability, and group,F(2, 147) = 5.11,p= .007, partialη2= .07.
Plot inspection suggested that greater social desirability predicted greater self‐assessed compassionate feelings across conditions for negative patients; it only impacted this for positive patients in the control condition (Figure3d).
There was no overall effect of group on care ratings,F(2, 147) = 1.23,p =.296, partialη2= .02.
However, care ratings were greater for positive patients,F(1, 147) = 123.04,p= <.001, partialη2= .46.
Also consistent with the reports of compassionate feelings ratings data (above), there was an interaction between presentation and social desirability,F(1, 147) = 5.35,p= .022, partialη2= .04.
As in the reported feelings of compassion ratings, plot inspection showed that negative presentation had a greater impact on care ratings when social desirability was lower (Figure4a).
Care ratings at lower versus higher social desirability differed for negative (p= .03) but not positive patients (p= .675).
Differences in patient care ratings as a function of (a) presentation and social desirability, (b) presentation and responsibility for condition.
Mean patient care ratings with standard error bars.
*Denotes significant differences.
As with the reported feelings of compassion ratings, the two patient factors also interacted in predicting ratings of care.
There was an interaction between presentation and responsibilityF(1, 147) = 48.71,p= < .001, partialη2= .25, although the pattern was distinct.
Specifically, for care ratings, responsibility made more of a difference to care ratings among the negatively presenting patients, with high responsibility predicting greater care.
Conversely, when rating care for positive patients the reverse was seen; reported care was greater among patients with low responsibility (Figure4b).
Interpretation was not aided byt‐tests which indicated ratings for negative vs. positive presentation were different for both low (p= <.001) and high (p= <.001) levels of responsibility.
Again, a main effect of group was not present for the ‘desire to help’ variable,F(2,147) = 1.85,p= .161, partialη2= .03.
However, as with ‘reported feelings of compassion’ and ‘patient care’ variables, ratings of desire to help were greater for the positive patient,F(1, 147) = 96.61,p= < .001, partialη2= .40.
However, presentation also interacted with desirability, with plot inspection again suggesting negative presentation had a greater impact when desirability was lower,F(1, 147) = 5.49,p= .02, partialη2= .04 (Figure5a).
As with ‘reported feelings of compassion’ and ‘patient care’,t‐tests contrasting ratings for lower versus higher social desirability were different for the negative patient (p= .012) but not the positive patient (p= .555).
Differences in desire to help ratings as a function of (a) presentation and social desirability, (b) responsibility for condition and social desirability and (c) presentation and responsibility for condition.
Mean desire to help ratings with standard error bars.
*Denotes significant differences.
In addition, despite an absence of a main effect for patient responsibility, there was an interaction between responsibility and desirability,F(1, 147) = 11.39,p= <.001, partialη2= .07.
Again, when patient responsibility was low, there were no differences in desire to help as a function of social desirability.
However, when patient responsibility was high, desire to help ratings were lower when social desirability was lower (Figure5b).T‐tests showed differences between high and low desirability groups were present for high responsibility (p≤ .001) but not for low responsibility patients (p= .689).
Lastly, the two patient factors (presentation and responsibility) again interacted in predicting ratings of desire to help,F(1, 147) = 81.04,p= <.001, partialη2= 36.
Plot inspection showed a pattern similar to that seen with care ratings; high responsibility predicted ratings of a greater desire to help in the negatively presenting patients while the obverse was seen for the positive patients, with low responsibility predicting a greater desire to help (Figure5c).
Interpretation was not enhanced byt‐tests as these indicated ratings for negative vs. positive patients were different for both low (p= < .001) and high (p= < .002) levels of responsibility for condition.
There was no group main effect,F(2, 147) = .37,p= .694, partialη2= .01 on ratings of how tiring participants would find it to care for the patient.
Following the established pattern of patient factors predicting ratings, anticipated tiringness was greater for negatively presenting,F(1, 147) = 18.75,p< .001, partialη2= .11 and low responsibility patients,F(1, 147) = 101.16,p< .001, partialη2= .41.
Patient presentation and responsibility also interacted to predict this outcomeF(1, 147) = 10.18,p= .002, partialη2= .07.
Plot inspection suggested that differences in patient responsibility made little difference for positive patients, but low responsibility predicted greater anticipated tiringness for negative patients (Figure6a).T‐tests did not add to the interpretation as ratings for negative vs. positive presentation were different for both low (p≤ .001) and high (p≤ .001) responsibility.
Differences in the experience of compassion as tiring ratings as a function of (a) presentation and responsibility and (b) positive and negative patients by social desirability in each group.
Mean care ratings with standard error bars.
*Denotes significant differences.
Finally, despite no second order interaction between patient presentation (positive, negative) and desirability, experimental group interacted with these two factors in predicting ratings of how tiring care for the patient would be,F(2, 147) = 3.15,p= .046, partialη2= .04.
Plot inspection suggested that for the positive and negative groups greater social desirability predicted less anticipated tiredness for the negative patient but more anticipated tiredness for the positive patient, whereas in the control group the opposite was seen (Figure6b).
Consistent with expectations, this pre‐registered study of medical doctors and trainee doctors provides experimental data consistent with the suggestion that perceptions of compassion may be influenced by the expectations communicated in compassion fatigue narratives in which compassion is positioned as inherently tiring.
Specifically, the study demonstrates that perceptions of compassion are malleable and can be made either more positive or more negative; participants randomized to a positive condition rated compassion as more satisfying and pleasurable and less draining and exhausting, while those randomized to the negative condition rated compassion as more draining and exhausting.
Changes were not seen in a control group.
Such a pattern is in keeping with works in other areas of health demonstrating that expectations can be manipulated (Bräscher et al.,2020; Crichton, Dodd, Schmid, Gamble, Cundy, & Petrie,2014; Crichton, Dodd, Schmid, Gamble, & Petrie,2014; Verrender et al.,2018; Witthöft & Rubin,2013) as well as with recent work specifically manipulating compassion ‘mindsets’ in a non‐healthcare practitioner sample (Gainsburg & Lee Cunningham,2023).
Importantly, given professional obligations in health care, however, the successful manipulation of perceptions was not accompanied by systematic differences in ratings of the desire to help, care for, feel compassion or report fatigue in response to hypothetical patients.
Other findings echo prior studies (Fernando et al.,2017; Reynolds et al.,2019) in highlighting the significance of patient factors in compassionate responding in health care and the need to include assessments of social desirability bias when conducting studies in this area.
Below, these results are more fully considered in light of prior studies and preliminary interpretations for the apparent discrepancy between the clear manipulation of expectations in the absence of effects during the vignette‐rating task are given before limitations and implications for research, policy and clinical practice are given.
When considering why perceptions of compassion may be influenced by a simple manipulation (an experimental proxy for a possible compassion fatigue narrative), theoretical support is found in nocebo and mindset research.
The nocebo phenomenon describes how negative expectations (broadly characterized as perceptions, cognitions and predictions regarding the likelihood of a future event (Laferton et al.,2017)) lead to negative outcomes.
Expectations similarly underpin the formation of mindsets.
Following a short‐video manipulation designed to manipulate expectations of compassion as either rewarding and pleasurable or fatiguing and draining, this study demonstrated that perceptions regarding compassion can be readily changed among doctors and trainee doctors; as with other phenomena, compassion appears to be subject to expectations.
Considered in relation to studies demonstrating that symptoms (including fatigue) are readily manipulated, the possibility that fatigue is being misattributed to being compassionate is disturbing.
Symptoms are common (McAteer et al.,2011; Petrie et al.,2014) and fatigue particularly so in both medical and non‐medical samples (Reidenberg et al.,1968).
In the view we put forth here, a background of enduring fatigue among health care providers provides ripe soil in which the seeds of negative expectation may flourish.
Indeed, broad disciplinary narratives regarding compassion as inherently fatiguing may well create a process in which common (background) symptoms are interpreted by providers as resulting from the process of caring for patients.
Importantly, however, while perceptions regarding compassion were readily changed via positive and negative expectancy manipulations, reports of compassion towards patients depicted in vignettes were not impacted by these manipulations.
The lack of difference in response to hypothetical vignette patients (despite a change in perceptions following the video manipulation), is not altogether surprising.
Prior writings have alluded to the ‘special place’ of compassion in health care and the professional, personal and patient expectations that providers will practice with compassion (Cruess & Cruess,2016; Dharamsi et al.,2011; Silbaugh & Winchester‐Silbaugh,1998).
In other words, providers may opt to ‘do it anyway’ despite a perception of compassion as fatiguing (Pavlova et al.,2025).
Whether there is ultimately a cost for those who perceive compassion as tiring or finite is unclear at this time.
Finally, as seen in prior work, patient factors were a key predictor of compassion ratings.
As delineated in the Transactional Model of Physician Compassion (Fernando 3rd & Consedine,2014), multiple factors contribute to compassion in health care interactions, with provider factors representing only one part (Fernando 3rd & Consedine,2014).
While much prior scholarship has focused on factors within the provider, an emerging body of work signals that other factors including environmental/contextual, clinical and patient factors are important (Pavlova et al.,2022).
In particular, patient factors have been increasingly shown to have a role, with ‘agreeable’ patients having positive associations with compassion and ‘disagreeable’ patients having negative associations (Pavlova et al.,2022).
In the current work, patient factors (positive and negative presentation and low or high responsibility for condition) exerted moderate to large effect sizes on ratings of compassion, care, desire to help and tiredness.
Indeed, it is possible that the strength of these factors may have obscured any expectancy effect created by the 5‐min video manipulations.
This pattern, whereby the effect of a manipulation on reported compassion towards patients in hypothetical vignettes was small in magnitude, has also been seen in other experimental studies of compassion (Fernando et al.,2017; Reynolds et al.,2019).
To the best of our knowledge, the current report represents the first experimental test of the important possibility that perceptions of compassion can be manipulated in doctors and trainee doctors.
In accordance with best practice, the study and analytic approach were pre‐registered and the study sample included both medical trainees and registered medical doctors.
These strengths noted, the study clearly has some important limitations.
Most obviously, the anonymous online design (which is important in terms of mitigating self‐selection and desirability biases) required the use of self‐reported compassion and standardized patient vignettes rather than assessing compassionate behaviour with respect to actors or actual patients.
Although the use of vignettes offers a high degree of control (and the testing of questions regarding how patient factors impact compassion), they are inevitably a microcosm in which highly complex phenomena are simplified.
A second limitation reflects the fact that while a range of recruitment strategies were employed, we cannot know how many of New Zealand's ~20,000 doctors or ~3500 trainee doctors viewed advertising material.
Ultimately, most respondents were contacted via social media advertising.
Although study aims and hypotheses were carefully obscured in advertising, such a method may nonetheless lead to the acquisition of a differentially prosocial group; it is unknown whether a broader sampling would produce the same pattern of findings.
Similarly, the high proportion of women in this report may have important implications for generalisability.
Although such considerations imply interpretative caution is warranted, the findings are nonetheless important.
Compassion is of crucial importance in medical care, is mandated by codes of practice, and appears to have benefits to patients, providers, and health care systems.
Historically, however, most research into compassion has been conducted within the framework offered by compassion fatigue, a construct that is seen as theoretically problematic (Pavlova et al.,2025; Sinclair, Beamer, et al.,2017), conflated with burnout and fatigue (Fernando 3rd & Consedine,2014; Zhang et al.,2018) and inconsistent with data showing compassion fatigue is lower with clinical experience (Zhang et al.,2018).
In this light, demonstrating the ease with which perceptions regarding compassion can be manipulated is important for it suggests that the ongoing discussions and research in which compassion is positioned as inherently finite or fatiguing may well be contributing to the very dynamic in which compassion isexperiencedas fatiguing – the narrative or discourse surrounding compassion fatigue gives every appearance of being a self‐fulfilling prophecy.
Consistent with this possibility, recent data suggest that thebeliefthat compassion is draining is a robust predictor of lower compassion, lower care, and a lower desire to help (Pavlova et al.,2025).
Given compassion is a required aspect of medical practice (Americal Medical Association,2016; Australian Medical Association,2006; Gillie,1983; Royal Australian College of General Practitioners,2023; Royal New Zealand College of General Practitioners,2021) and a key motivator for careers in medicine (Goel et al.,2018), the possibility that we are inadvertently creating an additional barrier to compassion is concerning.
At the very least then, the data presented here provide ample grounds for caution.
Although the findings of this report need replication, it seems clear that we need to begin the process of changing the narrative regarding compassion in health care.
The ability to be compassionate represents a major source of job satisfaction for providers (Pavlova et al.,2023) and recent evidence has tied the experience of compassion satisfaction to important buffering outcomes such as resilience (Unjai et al.,2022).
Rather than implicitly train our workforce into the belief that compassion itself is fatiguing, our sense here is that we should (a) acknowledge that working in health care is demanding but (b) that compassion per se is not inherently fatiguing.
Put another way, rather than implicitly discuss compassion as if it required the deployment of resources that ultimately drain some non‐specific reservoir of care, we should educate the healthcare workforce in an empirically informed way that both acknowledges the challenges and gains associated with compassion but ultimately treats it as a key professional competency that can be nurtured, sustained (Baguley et al.,2020), and trained (Sinclair et al.,2021; Weng et al.,2013).
Compassion is a critical to safe and effective patient care, but being compassionate is frequently portrayed as draining and tiring, putting doctors and healthcare practitioners at risk of compassion fatigue and further challenging compassion.
Informed by theory from nocebo and mindset research, this study demonstrated perceptions of compassion are malleable in a doctor and trainee doctor sample, raising the possibility that the narrative of compassion fatigue may be contributing to a self‐fulfilling prophecy.