Nursing students' practice experiences in the intensive care unit will greatly influence their acquisition of professional skills and the development of their future nursing roles.
This study aimed to determine nursing students' first clinical practice experiences in the intensive care unit.
The type of research is qualitative research.
The study data were collected from 14 students who were doing clinical practice in the anaesthesia intensive care unit of a university hospital.
Face‐to‐face individual interviews were conducted with each student.
A semi‐structured interview guide was used in the interviews.
Data were analysed with MAXQDA Analytics Pro 2020.
This study adhered to the COREQ checklist for reporting.
Four main themes were reached: ‘First Emotions in the Intensive Care Unit’, ‘Experiences Related to the Perception of Profession’, ‘Experiences Related to Patient Care’ and ‘Experiences Related to Personal Development’.
It was determined that the most prominent feelings in these clinical practice experiences of the students were fear in patient care, satisfaction and professional image in professional acquisition, and making life more meaningful in their perspective on life.
Students evaluated the intensive care clinical practice as beneficial in terms of professional and personal development.
It is recommended that an orientation program be organized for students before intensive care clinical practice.
Qualified critical care nurses of the future are a product of a qualified nursing clinical education today.
Due to the complexity of patients receiving treatment and care, nursing experiences in the intensive care unit are different compared with other clinical areas.
Nursing clinical education aims to close the knowledge–practice gap.
Understanding the experiences of nursing students in the intensive care unit will help to organize and improve nursing curricula.
In particular, it can be stated that experiencing clinical practice in intensive care settings from the first years of the educational process can significantly contribute to increased commitment to the profession and the development of the caregiver role.
Clinical practice in the intensive care unit makes significant contributions to the professional and personal development of students.
Intensive care units (ICUs) are one of the most important practice areas that support the development of nursing knowledge and experience.7Therefore, it is meaningful to understand the experiences of ICU nursing students in developing appropriate nursing interventions to maximize the effectiveness of clinical practice education, as the stress experienced by students may be at a level that may interfere with their learning and affect the patient care provided.
In the literature, there are few qualitative studies in which the experiences of senior nursing students performing clinical practice in the ICU have been reflected.2,8,9,10The results of this research mostly cover the positive feelings of the students, such as learning opportunity, development, and satisfaction in the ICU, and the negative feelings, such as stress, fear and difficulty related to patient care.
While a few qualitative studies that address this issue and are similar to our study highlight students' intensive care experiences, our study provides an original contribution to the literature as a distinctive finding in the contribution of intensive care experiences to their individual and professional development.
Park et al.3stated that ICUs have a different and complex structure than other units and emphasized that the effectiveness of clinical practice education in intensive care can be increased by effectively managing the experiences of nursing students during clinical practice education.
Therefore, it can be said that more research findings are needed on this subject.
Indeed, nursing students' expectations and experiences regarding clinical practice are considered an important part of nursing education.12In this context, this study aimed to determine nursing students' first clinical practice experiences in the ICU.
The findings of the study are predicted to significantly contribute to the literature in determining the current shortcomings in clinical education, developing curriculum programs based on students' needs, shaping future clinical practices in this field, understanding students' feelings and thoughts, and strengthening their ability to cope with stress.
This study aimed to determine nursing students' first clinical practice experiences in the ICU.
This qualitative study was conducted between 2 May and 14 June 2024.
The study population consisted of students studying in the final year of the nursing department of a university in the 2023–2024 academic year.
The phenomenological approach is a form of qualitative research that analyzes the nature of phenomena by investigating the subjective experiences of individuals who experience them.13,14Therefore, in this study, a phenomenological approach was adopted to investigate the actual experiences and perceptions of senior nursing students during their internship in the ICU.
The sample was selected from the students who met the inclusion criteria using the homogeneous sampling method, which is one of the purposive sampling methods.
Students who volunteered to participate in the study, who were senior nursing students, and who had their first clinical practice in the ICU were included in the study.
Fourteen nursing students were included in the study.
This study adhered to the COREQ checklist for reporting.
After the research questions were created by the first author (EY) and the second author (ZG), they were presented to the third author, professor (SK), for expert opinion.
Data for this study was collected using a descriptive personal information form and a semi‐structured interview guide using a face‐to‐face interview method.
Students were interviewed in the study, demographic data were obtained by asking questions about age, choosing the nursing profession willingly, loving the nursing profession, and previous clinical practice in intensive care in accordance with the personal information form.
The semi‐structured interview guide consisted of 5 open‐ended questions.
‘What did you feel before you started clinical practice in the ICU, which feelings did you intensively experience?’, ‘How did you feel while giving care to a patient in the ICU?’, ‘Can you share your thoughts and emotions after the clinical practice experience in the ICU?’, ‘Has your perspective on life changed after the clinical practice experience in the ICU?’, ‘Can you share your perceptions of the nursing profession after the clinical practice experience in the ICU?’, and in order to obtain details in the answers and maintain the depth of the discussion, the additional question ‘Can you give more information about this topic?’ was asked.
A pilot study was conducted with 1 student and since the questions were found to be understandable, no updates were made to the form.
All of the interviews were conducted by the researcher (ZG), who had a doctoral degree in the department of nursing, received consultancy from experts experienced in qualitative research, and had 27 years of experience in the ICU.
The interviews were conducted face‐to‐face with the students who participated in the study voluntarily and met the inclusion criteria on a day and time specified mutually in a quiet room in the ICU of the Department of Anesthesiology.
The purpose of the study was explained to the students prior to the research.
All interviews were audio‐recorded.
Interviews lasted 20–30 min.
Each participant was given a pseudonym, such as S1, S2 and S3.
Prior to the study, necessary permissions were taken from Sivas Cumhuriyet University Ethics Committee (decision no: 2024–02/25; Date: 22.02.2024).
Informed consent was obtained from individuals.
Each participant gave their consent for the audio recording of the interview.
Permission was obtained from the institution where the research was conducted.
The thematic analysis method was used in the analysis of the data obtained.
The qualitative data transcribed in a Word document were analysed through MAXQDA Analytics Pro 2020 software.
Familiarization, code generation, searching for themes, reviewing themes, defining and naming themes, and report writing were the six processes in this study's thematic analysis of qualitative data.15These steps were taken into account in this study.
Before the analysis, the first author (EY) transcribed the data.
EY first listened to the audio recordings and transcribed them.
Data analysis began with coding.
In this stage, the researchers (EY, ZG) carefully examined the text and created ‘codes’ that defined important concepts, ideas or expressions.
The researchers marked each code in the appropriate places in the expressions in the text.
The data that were found to be similar and related to each other were brought together and interpreted within the framework of certain codes and themes.
Themes were created by combining the codes.16,17During the creation of the coding list and themes, the opinions of the third author (SK), who is a professor in this field, were received.
Then, the consistency of the codes was checked.
In qualitative research, sample sizes are often explained with the concept of ‘saturation’ which is the point at which no new information or themes are observed in the data.18In studies where data obtained from documents are analysed, it is terminated when it is understood that analysing more data will not help develop a new code and theme.19,20,21In this study, data saturation was reached with 14 students.
To ensure the trustworthiness of the study, four criteria were taken into consideration throughout the study process: credibility, conformability, dependability and transferability.17To ensure rigor, member checking, moderation and probing were performed to guarantee that each participant's voice was captured.
Data collection and analysis methods were explained in detail.
Coding and post‐theme consistency checks were performed.
Sociodemographic information of the participants was clearly included.
The collected data was presented with direct quotes without comment.
The obtained statements were read to the students again to confirm their accuracy.
The interview guide was taken into consideration in the questions.
Audio recordings and transcripts were stored by creating files.
Transferability was ensured by presenting the explanations given by the participants.
The mean age of the students interviewed in the study was 22.35 ± 0.84 years.
Of the students, 71.4% (n= 10) were female; 85.7% (n= 12) stated that they chose the profession willingly; 71.4% (n = 10) stated that they wanted to be an intensive care nurse.
Table1shows the demographic characteristics of the students.
The themes and codes are visualized in Figure1.
Themes and codes related to students' feelings and experiences.
Within the scope of the research questions, four main themes were identified in the qualitative dimension of the study: ‘First Emotions in the Intensive Care Unit’, ‘Experiences Related to the Perception of Profession’, ‘Experiences Related to Patient Care’, and ‘Experiences Related to Personal Development’.
According to the student statements, the codes of fear and stress/anxiety had the highest frequency in the theme of First Emotions in the Intensive Care Unit.
In the theme of Experiences Related to the Perception of Profession, the codes of achieving professional satisfaction and professional image development/professional necessity had the highest frequency.
In the theme of Experiences Related to Patient Care, the codes of fear and empathy had the highest frequency.
In the theme of Intensive Care Acquisitions, the codes of the meaning of life and knowledge‐experience had the highest frequency.
According to the students' statements, the most intense emotions experienced in the theme of ‘First Emotions in the ICU’ were fear (11) and anxiety (7), followed by excitement (4), happiness (3), curiosity (3), uneasiness (3), confusion (1) and sadness (1). Students stated that they experienced positive emotions as well as negative emotions.
Students expressed that they generally experienced fear and anxiety due to providing complex care to a critically ill patient and the workload in the ICU.
Students stated that they experienced positive emotions as well as negative emotions.
Nursing students stated that they felt curious, uneasy and surprised because many things in the ICU were different from the services they had seen before.
It was observed that the code with the highest frequency in the theme of Experiences Related to the Perception of Profession was achieving professional satisfaction.
The other codes of the theme included professional image development/professional necessity (6), professional autonomy (5), professional affection/increased respect (4), importance of care (3) and critical thinking (1).
The majority of students stated that being involved in patient care processes in the intensive care environment gave them professional satisfaction.
Students stated that their perspective on the profession changed positively after this clinical practice.
Students expressed that nursing is an autonomous and strong profession in line with the nursing services provided in the ICU.
Students stated that they liked and respected the nursing profession more in line with the nursing services provided in the ICU.
Students emphasized that the nursing care provided in the ICU has an indispensable place in health services and that care is the basic paradigm that makes nursing a profession.
Students stated that their critical thinking and problem‐solving skills improved while providing care in the ICU.
The codes of fear (8), empathy (6), sadness (4), disgust (4), communication (4), distress (3), conscience (3), embarrassment (1), respect (1) and happiness (1) were determined in the theme of Experiences Related to Patient Care.
Students generally viewed patients in ICUs as unconscious, in poor general condition, in need of care and unable to communicate.
Therefore, they expressed their fear of providing incorrect care to the patient or of not being able to provide effective care to the patient.
Empathy is one of the important elements in care practices.
Students also emphasized that they approach the patient with a sense of empathy while providing care.
Students emphasized that intensive care nurses need to be more careful, conscious and alert because they cannot communicate with an unconscious patient.
Students expressed their sadness at patients' inability to meet their own self‐care needs.
Students stated that they experienced feelings of disgust during care interventions such as giving bed baths, applying suction and providing oral care to intubated patients.
Students stated that they had difficulty caring for unconscious, critical and complex patients in intensive care.
Students emphasized the importance of being conscientious in providing care to intensive care patients.
One student in our study stated that he felt embarrassed while providing care to a female patient.
One student in our study emphasized that the intensive care patient is worthy of respect as a human being.
One of the students in our study stated that caring for an intensive care patient made him or her happy.
In our study, the most frequently expressed code by the students under the theme of Intensive Care Acquisitions was the meaning of life (12), followed by knowledge and experience (8), confidence (6), the value of time (4), conscience (3), feeling courageous (1) and maturation (1). Students stated that they gained some personal gains during clinical practice.
Students' testimonies showed that the loss of a patient affected them emotionally.
Students emphasized that with this clinical practice, they understood that death is present at all times and that life is precious.
Students stated that the clinical practice they received in the anaesthesia ICU was effective in transferring theoretical knowledge to practice and that their professional knowledge increased.
Students stated that their self‐confidence increased with intensive care clinical practice.
Students encountered the death of patients in this clinical practice and stated that death is instantaneous and time is precious.
One student also stated that she developed as a personality through intensive care clinical practice.
Student nurses can improve their professional knowledge by practicing and gaining care skills.
Experiences in the clinical practice process can affect students' moods and change their professional perceptions positively or negatively.
Therefore, it is important and necessary to determine students' opinions about their clinical experiences during the education process to be able to guide them.
In this context, this study was carried out to determine the first clinical practice experiences of nursing students in the ICU.
In line with student statements, the fact that the most intense emotions experienced in the first theme were fear and anxiety may be attributed to the fact that the students had not previously provided care to a patient in the ICU and had not taken responsibility for a critical patient and to the perception that intensive care nurses undertake great responsibilities.
According to the participants' statements in our study, it was observed that various positive emotions such as happiness, excitement, and curiosity, and negative emotions such as fear, sadness, worry and uneasiness were experienced during the practical education in the ICU.
Oner and Karabudak22found that nursing students experienced many positive or negative emotions as a result of their clinical practice experiences.22Likewise, in a meta‐synthesis study conducted by Liu et al.23it was determined that the most basic difficulty encountered by nursing students when they experienced the ICU for the first time was uncertainty and that this situation led to psychological problems such as fear and anxiety.
In our study, the statements of the students such as ‘I don't want to be an intensive care nurse.
I am emotionally affected a lot.
I empathize a lot.
I think it exhausts me.
(S7)’ revealed the complex and uncertain structure of ICUs; therefore, it is important for educators to make sense of students' emotions and thoughts and develop methods for coping with stress.
The statements of the students in our study such as ‘I was surprised that it was a big unit.
(S9)’ and ‘I had uneasiness due to the unknown because I had not seen an ICU before.
(S13)’ revealed that an orientation program before the clinical practice in intensive care and psychological support to students during the clinical practice process are very important.
In addition, the statement of the students who heard that they would have clinical practice in ICUs, ‘I thought I would see different applications from other services.
I was very happy.
(S13)’ was evaluated as a reflection of the student's curiosity and effort to increase their professional competence.
Indeed, in addition to the negative emotions that nursing students experience in ICUs, many positive emotions can also be experienced.24,25In fact, students may experience the happiness of having the opportunity to transform their theoretical knowledge into practice and gain advanced nursing skills in ICUs, where complex diseases and conditions are managed.
Interventions performed on critically ill patients can increase students' professional satisfaction by strengthening their sense of direct contribution to human life.
When Theme 2 is examined it can be stated that intensive care environments provide very important achievements in developing and strengthening positive professional perceptions in nursing students.
In student statements, it was determined that the intensive care practice created the perception that the nursing profession is very important to society.
The fact that nurses are more autonomous in ICUs compared with other clinics and collaborate with health professionals from different disciplines in ICUs may contribute to the development of communication and teamwork skills in nursing students.
In addition, the possibility of encountering rare diseases and conditions in intensive care settings and observing the resolution of complex problems in team collaboration can be considered important opportunities for students to improve their ability to cope with stress and make quick decisions, and enhance personal and professional self‐confidence.
It can be concluded that all these opportunities strengthen students' professional perception and sense of respect and belonging and increase professional satisfaction.
In the study, the statement ‘I really felt that I was a nurse during the intensive care clinical practice.
(S4)’ under the code of achieving professional satisfaction suggests that the professional practices taught at school are adequately performed in ICUs.
In line with the students' statements, it can be suggested that the clinical practice in the ICU contributed greatly to the increase in the knowledge and experience of the students in our study.
In the study, the statements of the students, ‘When I first came to the hospital, I thought I would never be an intensive care nurse.
Here, the nursing profession has become more valuable to me.
(S4)’, ‘I would like to work in the intensive care service when I start my career.
(S6)’ also demonstrated that the desire to work in the ICU after graduation increases as professional satisfaction is achieved in clinical practice and professional values are strengthened.
When the student statements in Theme 3 are evaluated, the high level of fear experienced by the students who had never been in an intensive care environment and only heard that they would go on clinical practice in intensive care may be associated with the students' prejudices about intensive care, their lack of knowledge and skills in the care of a critical patient, difficulty in adapting to the intensive care environment, and the thoughts of incorrect practice and harming the patient rather than the physical structure of ICUs.
In the literature, there are other studies that support our opinion.9,26,27,28In the studies conducted by Ching et al.,11Costa et al.26and Lim et al.,27it was reported that students experienced high levels of fear and anxiety during their adaptation to the new environment due to the concern of making mistakes and being blamed by different professionals in the clinic.
Akin et al.28stated that students' experiences while providing care to palliative care patients included fear, hopelessness, despair and helplessness.
Although the results of the study by Akin et al.28support our findings in terms of the emotions experienced, the study differs in terms of the fact that the sample consisted of first‐year students and it was their first clinical practice.
However, the fact that the clinical conditions, dependency status and prognoses of the patients hospitalized in intensive care and palliative care clinics were similar and that it was the first clinical practice of the students with these patient groups minimizes this difference.
Among the findings of our study were that some practices such as aspiration, perineal care and faecal cleansing in ICUs caused students to be disgusted and that they did not want to perform these practices.
Saglam et al.2found that students experienced nausea and disgust while performing secretion aspiration, tracheostomy application and wound care.
However, these practices are necessary for the patient's health, improvement of quality of life, prevention of infections, hygiene and recovery, and should be performed with a professional approach and ethical sensitivity in patient care.
These practices, which are seen as disgusting, are an important part of patient care, and they must be perceived as a basic human need by both the caregiver and the patient.
In this context, it can be suggested that clinical nurses and educators have important responsibilities for students to have a more humanitarian and positive approach towards these practices during practice.
In the study conducted by Deng et al.29with student nurses serving intensive care internships, it was suggested that nurses and educators working in the clinic should make arrangements in line with the individual characteristics of students during the clinical learning process.
This recommendation supports our opinion.
In the study by Yuksel and Altun Ugras,32it was revealed that students had difficulty in communicating with an unconscious patient.
In contrast to this study, in our study, students stated that they did not have difficulty in communication in intensive care practice and that they tried to communicate with the thought that the patient could hear them even if they were unconscious.
It can also be stated that the perception that working with patients who cannot express themselves in intensive care settings strengthens the nurse's observation and analytical thinking skills is an important acquisition for students.
When the student statements in Theme 4 are evaluated, it can be said that the risky clinical conditions of patients in intensive care environments and the high probability of losing their lives, along with frequently having to face death, lead students to think analytically, question the meaning of life and provide spiritual care.
However, our research has determined that intensive care clinical practice provides courage, confidence and maturity in students.
Akin et al.28also stated that students experienced deep thinking about the sensitivity of the treatment and care process that patients are in palliative care practice, in parallel with our study findings.
Saglam et al.2stated that students who face death experience feelings of hopelessness and grief.
It was determined that students are emotionally affected and feel lonely in these events.
In our study, on the contrary, it was determined that students make life more meaningful with death and find time valuable.
The personal development of nursing students' intensive care experience can increase students' commitment to the nursing profession and make them feel like an integral part of the nursing profession.
These positive experiences can increase students' professional motivation and help them make a strong start to their nursing careers.
Deng et al.29stated that clinical practices carried out in the ICU contribute to the personal development of students.
It is recommended that more research be conducted on the personal gains of students in intensive care clinical practices.
This study was conducted only with nursing students studying at one university.
This study is one of the few studies examining nursing students' first clinical practice experiences in the ICU.
While a few qualitative studies that address this issue and are similar to our study highlight students' intensive care experiences, our study provides an original contribution to the literature as a distinctive finding in the contribution of intensive care experiences to their individual and professional development.
Being in an intensive care environment has a special importance for both professional nurses and students.
In fact, ICUs are environments where the distance between the patient and the nurse is minimized and one‐on‐one interaction is experienced.
In this context, students' observations and experiences in ICUs are of key importance in becoming professional nurses in the future.
Therefore, it is recommended that students' experiences in ICUs be monitored and curriculum programs be revised within the scope of requirements.
It can be suggested that orientation programmes to be organized for students before clinical practice in intensive care can significantly contribute to their adaptation to the clinic.
In particular, it can be stated that experiencing clinical practice in intensive care settings from the first years of the education process can significantly contribute to increased commitment to the profession and the development of the caregiver role.
In this context, it is important to provide more support, psychological empowerment and safe learning environments for students to overcome the problems encountered during their learning processes regarding ICUs.
Four main themes were identified within the scope of the research questions: ‘First Emotions in the ICU’, ‘Experiences Related to the Perception of Profession’, ‘Experiences Related to Patient Care’ and ‘Experiences Related to Personal Development’.
It was determined that the most prominent feelings in these clinical practice experiences of the students were fear in patient care, satisfaction and professional image in professional acquisition, and making life more meaningful in their perspective on life.
Intensive care clinical practice provides professional and personal development in students.
Overall, students evaluated doing their internship in the ICU as a positive practice despite the challenges of the ICU.
With the results of this study, it can be said that students need more support and guidance to cope with the difficulties in the ICU.
The nursing student participating in the study was informed in accordance with the principle of informed consent and subsequently their consent was obtained.
The study was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.
We thank the nursing students who participated in the study.