Friends are influential relationships during adolescence (Laursen & Veenstra, 2021), but little research has considered the role of close friends on the development of adolescents' emotion regulation (ER).
The current study considered the roles of contagion of ER between friends, friends' modeling of ER (as perceived by the adolescent), and friends' direct feedback for negative emotions on adolescents' ER over a 2‐year period.
Participants were 202 adolescents (Mage= 12.66, 53% girls, 77% White, 18% Black, largely middle class) who participated with a same‐gender close friend (101 dyads).
Adolescents and their friends reported on their ER (i.e., inhibition, constructive regulation, dysregulation) at an initial assessment (T1) and 2 years later (T2).
At T1, adolescents also reported on their perceptions of their friends' ER and their supportive and unsupportive responses to negative emotions.
Actor‐Partner Interdependence Models tested whether friends' ER (i.e., contagion effect), adolescents' perceptions of friends' ER (i.e., modeling effect), and friends' expected responses to negative emotions (i.e., direct feedback) predicted adolescents' T2 ER.
Results supported the presence of contagion effects such that friends' ER was positively related to adolescents' ER over time for all ER facets.
Modeling effects (i.e., perceptions of friends' ER) significantly predicted adolescents' T2 emotion dysregulation.
Supportive responses to negative emotion were associated with greater T2 emotion dysregulation.
Unsupportive responses to negative emotion were associated with lower constructive regulation and greater dysregulation at T2.
Results have implications for the influential nature of close friends during adolescence and the distinct ways that friends influence adolescents' emotional development.
Within predominantly White, middle‐class families in Western hemisphere countries, close friendships have been demonstrated to be critical relationships that shape adolescents' adjustment and development, including their emotional development (Furman & Rose,2015; Miller‐Slough & Dunsmore,2016).
Research in the peer relations literature has long recognized that friends demonstrate peer influence effects, such that one friend's outcomes are longitudinally linked to the other friend's outcomes, including for behavioral (e.g., alcohol use; Hiatt et al.,2017) and psychological (e.g., depressive symptoms; Conway et al.,2011) outcomes (for reviews, see Giletta et al.,2021; Laursen & Veenstra,2021).
Although historically focused on parental influences, the emotion socialization literature provides a growing body of evidence based on White, middle‐class samples for the influential role of peers, primarily close friends, in adolescents' evolving emotion regulation (ER) competencies (e.g., Cui et al.,2020; Klimes‐Dougan et al.,2014; Miller‐Slough & Dunsmore,2019,2020).
Conceptual models emphasize peer influence effects as stemming, in part, from multiple processes that occur during social interactions between adolescents and their close friends (Laursen,2018).
Research has sometimes referred to these effects ascontagion effectsbetween friends (e.g., Schwartz‐Mette & Smith,2018).
Moreover, conceptual models of peer influence emphasize social learning principles (Bandura,1977).
By observing their peers' behaviors, adolescents' peers serve asmodelsfor behavioral norms in the peer group.
Adolescents are especially prone to conforming to perceived peer group norms, to demonstrate compatibility with peers and avoid rejection (Laursen,2018; Laursen & Veenstra,2021).
In addition, adolescents may receivedirect feedbackthrough social interactions in which peers reward (e.g., through laughter or encouragement) or punish (e.g., through teasing or rejection) their behaviors (Laursen,2018).
Similar processes have been proposed in conceptual models of emotion socialization.
In particular, the Tripartite Model of family socialization of children's ER (Morris et al.,2007,2017) posits three primary processes through which children's ER development is shaped within the family context; two of these processes include observation and modeling of parental ER practices.
Through exposure to emotional expression in the family, children may mirror similar ways of managing and expressing emotions.
Moreover, youth engage in social referencing by observing family members, as well as peers, asmodelsfor how to appropriately manage emotions within different social contexts (Morris et al.,2007,2017).
In terms of parenting practices, providing supportive and unsupportive responses to emotional expressivity are ways in which parents and other socialization agents providedirect feedbackthat shapes youth's ER (Dixon‐Gordon et al.,2020; Eisenberg,2020; Morris et al.,2017).
The current study examines three ways that close friends may influence adolescents' ER over a 2‐year period.
First, we examine whether friends demonstrate positive interrelations in their ER strategies over time which we refer to ascontagion of ERbetween close friends.
Second, we examine adolescents' perceptions of their friends' ER as a predictor of their own ER over time which may reflect a social learning process ofmodelingbetween friends.
Third, we examine adolescents' perceptions of their friends'direct feedbackto negative emotions by investigating their supportive and unsupportive responses in relation to their ER over time.
Emotion regulation is the monitoring, evaluation, and modification of emotional experiences and expressions to accomplish one's interpersonal goals (Thompson,1994).
Some research has investigated ER along the dimension of controllability of emotion spanning from the over control of emotion through constructive control to the under control of emotion (Zeman et al.,2001,2010).
Considering specific dimensions of ER is a useful approach as each aspect of the controllability dimension is associated with both common and specific outcomes (e.g., Compas et al.,2017; Suveg et al.,2009).
Specifically, the over control of emotion (i.e., inhibition or suppression) has been linked to numerous negative outcomes including increased peer victimization for boys (Morelen et al.,2016) and increased internalizing symptoms (e.g., Folk et al.,2014; Yap et al.,2011).
Constructive ER (i.e., effective management of emotional arousal and expressivity) has been linked to stronger psychological and social functioning (e.g., Fombouchet et al.,2023; Zeman et al.,2006).
Finally, poor control or inappropriate, overt expression of negative emotions (i.e., dysregulation) is a transdiagnostic factor implicated in internalizing and externalizing symptomatology (e.g., Aldao et al.,2016; Beauchaine & Cicchetti,2019) and in difficulties in peer relationships (e.g., von Salisch et al.,2014).
In Western predominantly White, middle‐class contexts, adolescence is a critical developmental stage for youth to further refine ER skills as they navigate increasingly complicated social interactions and experience increased emotional volatility (Zeman et al.,2013).
Although children in Western contexts are thought to have mastered basic ER skills (e.g., dissemblance of emotion in response to social context cues) by around age 10 years (Saarni,1999), adolescence poses unique challenges to effective ER because more sophisticated, nuanced skills are required.
Specifically, adolescence is characterized by an intensification of emotional arousal, lability, and reactivity (Bailen et al.,2019), an exponential growth in the focus on friendships where exposure to emotionally evocative incidents increases (Furman & Rose,2015), and also an increase in specific types of psychopathology (e.g., depression, Costello et al.,2011; Twenge & Nolen‐Hoeksema,2002).
Further, adolescence represents a vulnerable period when a shift toward using maladaptive ER strategies has been noted (Cracco et al.,2017; Zimmermann & Iwanski,2014) that may potentially amplify the effects associated with normative developmental events and transitions.
Thus, research examining how close friends may be able to contribute to the continuing refinement of adolescents' constructive ER is needed.
In the peer relations literature, interrelations between relationship partners' characteristics over time are referred to as peer influence effects.
A large body of research provides evidence for the presence of peer influence effects between friends (Brechwald & Prinstein,2011; Giletta et al.,2021; Laursen,2018; Laursen & Veenstra,2021).
As noted, some researchers have referred to peer influence processes between friends as contagion effects because they contribute to similarity between friends.
Importantly, multiple factors are thought to contribute to the presence of contagion effects.
Conceptual theories of peer influence (Laursen,2018) and emotion socialization (Morris et al.,2007,2017) suggest that in‐the‐moment synchronization of affective responses is one process through which a friend might influence the other friend's characteristics or behaviors.
Synchrony in friends' affective responses promotes harmony, cooperation, and closeness in the close friendship (Hatfield et al.,1993; Laursen & Veenstra,2021) and may occur without conscious awareness when friends interact and mirror one another's behaviors and feelings (Hatfield et al.,1993; Laursen,2018).
Contagion effects may also occur because close friends are often in similar environments and are exposed to similar emotionally evocative stimuli (Elfenbein,2014).
Processes such as modeling and direct feedback (described below) are also posited to contribute to the presence of contagion effects between friends.
To date, only one study (Reindl et al.,2016) has directly assessed contagion of ER between friends and found that early adolescent best friends' adaptive ER strategies (e.g., cognitive reappraisal) were associated with increases in adolescents' adaptive ER strategies over 1 year but did not find evidence for peer influence between friends in maladaptive ER strategies (e.g., withdrawal, aggression).
Social learning theories have long recognized that observing others' behaviors can shape an individual's own behaviors (Bandura,1977).
Theories of peer influence (e.g., compatibility‐influence model) suggest that in response to perceptions of peers, adolescents may change their behaviors to increase compatibility with peers and avoid potential rejection (Laursen & Veenstra,2021).
Moreover, assessments of others' behaviors are highly influenced by one's own behaviors such that youth perceive others to be more similar to themselves than they actually are (i.e., false‐consensus and projection bias; Rebellon & Modecki,2014) and these inflated perceptions of peers, in turn, shape their own behaviors (e.g., Cox et al.,2019; Helms et al.,2014).
Similarly, theories of emotion socialization (i.e., the tripartite model; Morris et al.,2007,2017) point to social referencing as a key process in which youth learn norms for managing emotions.
Friends' modeling of ER in the peer context may, thus, signal peer group norms for emotional expressivity.
Accordingly, adolescents may alter their responses to their emotional arousal over time to be more compatible with their friends and peer group norms (Laursen & Veenstra,2021).
Direct feedback for behaviors is another important process through which peers influence adolescents' development.
Peers in particular are proposed to shape youths' ER through direct feedback mechanisms that might involve bullying and ostracism as well as support and validation to enforce norms for emotional expression (Saarni,1999; Zeman et al.,2013).
When adolescents violate social norms, peer rejection and victimization are powerful deterrents that promote conformity (e.g., Bass et al.,2022).
Peers and close friends also reinforce behaviors through positive feedback.
A classic example is deviancy training, in which friends respond to discussions of deviant behaviors (e.g., rule‐breaking) with positive affect (e.g., laughter).
Deviancy training within friendships is linked to youths' later delinquent behaviors (Dishion et al.,1996; Snyder et al.,2012).
Research examining friend emotion socialization (for reviews, see Delios et al.,2023; Miller‐Slough & Dunsmore,2016) has asked youth how they expect their friends to respond to their emotional expressivity (Klimes‐Dougan et al.,2014).
As described in Klimes‐Dougan et al. (2014), three peer responses are typically perceived as supportive and empathetic (i.e., reward, override, magnify), whereas three responses are considered unsupportive (e.g., teasing, aggression, ignoring).
Adolescents' expectations of supportive responses have been linked to more positive psychosocial functioning, whereas expected unsupportive responses have been linked to poorer ER (Borowski et al.,2018; Miller‐Slough & Dunsmore,2019).
The current study examines friend emotion socialization by considering multiple means (i.e., contagion, modeling, direct feedback) through which friends shape adolescents' ER over time among predominantly White and middle‐class families in United States (U.S.).
Specifically, the roles of contagion of ER within friendships, perceptions of friends' ER, and friends' responses to negative emotions were examined in relation to adolescents' ER over a 2‐year period.
Given the distinct implications for psychopathology and relationship functioning (e.g., Morelen et al.,2016; von Salisch et al.,2014; Zeman et al.,2006), three aspects of one dimension of ER (i.e., degree of controllability) were considered: emotion inhibition, constructive regulation, and emotion dysregulation.
The period of early to middle adolescence was selected for the study as it is a time when youth may increase in their use of maladaptive ER strategies in response to the more frequent, intense, and complex emotionally eliciting events in their social lives (Cracco et al.,2017; Zimmermann & Iwanski,2014).
We used a dyadic design that allows for the consideration of both friends' perspectives (Bagwell et al.,2021; Kenny et al.,2006).
As such, both actor and partner effects can be tested.
Partner effects tested contagion of ER (i.e., the extent that the friends' ER is associated with the adolescents' ER).
Actor effects tested modeling (i.e., the extent that an adolescent's perception of their friend is associated with their own ER) and direct feedback (i.e., the extent that an adolescent's report of their friends' supportive and unsupportive responses were associated with their own ER).
Three sets of models were tested (see Figure1).
In Model 1, we examinedcontagion of ERbetween friends, which is represented by the partner effect.
As found in prior work with different behavioral constructs (Giletta et al.,2021), we expected that friends' ER would be positively associated with the adolescents' ER over time, while accounting for prior levels of the adolescents' ER (H1).
Model 2 consideredmodeling of ERbetween friends.
Consistent with empirical research examining peer perceptions (e.g., Helms et al.,2014) and theoretical work regarding friendship compatibility (Laursen & Veenstra,2021), adolescents' perceptions of their friends' ER were expected to be positively associated with their own ER over time (H2).
In Model 3, friends'direct feedbackwas considered by examining adolescents' expectations of how their friend would respond to negative emotions.
Based on prior findings (Cui et al.,2020; Miller‐Slough & Dunsmore,2019), we hypothesized that friends' expected responses to negative emotions would be associated with specific aspects of ER over time.
That is, supportive responses to emotions were expected to be associated with lower emotion inhibition (H3a), greater constructive regulation (H3b), and lower emotion dysregulation (H3c).
Unsupportive responses to emotions were expected to be associated with greater emotion inhibition (H4a), lower constructive regulation (H4b), and greater emotion dysregulation (H4c).
In Models 2 and 3, actor effects are hypothesized, but partner effects are included to account for both friends' perspectives.
The partner effects in Models 2 and 3 are considered exploratory in nature.
Conceptual models tested using Actor Partner Interdependence Modeling.
ER, emotion regulation.
Separate models were tested for each facet of ER (inhibition, constructive regulation, dysregulation).
The hypothesized paths are labeled and represented by bolded lines.
In Model 1, the unlabeled paths represent the actor effect, which accounts for stability in adolescent ER.
In Models 2 and 3, the unlabeled paths represent the exploratory partner effects.
Participants were 202 early adolescents between the ages of 11 and 16 years (101 friend dyads;M= 12.66 years, SD = 1.01, 53% girls).
Regarding race, 77% of participants were White or European American, 18% were Black or African American, 2% were Asian or Asian American, and 2% reported other racial background.
In terms of ethnicity, 2% of adolescents reported that they were Hispanic or Latinx.
The majority of the sample was middle‐ to upper‐middle class (Hollingshead IndexM= 49.63, SD = 9.80; Hollingshead,2011).
Adolescents participated with a close friend who was their same gender.
Participants were recruited from the community in a mid‐Atlantic U.S.
suburban area through notices to the community, within public schools, and snowball efforts which yielded a relatively homogenous sample.
Data were collected prior to the onset of the COVID‐19 pandemic with the initial visit (T1) occurring in 2013–2015.
Adolescents were eligible for participation if they were in the sixth, seventh, or eighth grade (U.S.
middle school) and if they had a same‐gender friend within 1 year of their age who could participate with them.
The study received approval from the Institutional Review Board at William & Mary.
Parents provided written consent for their child's participation.
Researchers provided an overview of the study to each participant and adolescents provided verbal assent.
For T1, adolescents chose a same‐gender close friend to participate with them.
All adolescents indicated that they were participating with someone they identified as a friend and the majority of participants (89.1%) identified the friend as a very best or best friend.
Most adolescents (87%) also participated with a friend who was of the same race.
Adolescents reported on the length of their friendship (M= 5.14 years;SD= 1.04).
At the initial assessment, participants completed the study in their homes (63%), in the university laboratory (30%), or at a public location (e.g., library; 7%).
Adolescents were paired with a trained research assistant to complete questionnaire measures.
Participants completed a follow‐up visit (T2) individually approximately 2 years after the initial visit (M= 23.54 months,SD= 4.14).
At T2, 84% of the original sample participated (n= 169;M= 14.70 years,SD= 1.05, 52% girls; 76% White).
Of the 101 dyads, 72% had data for both friends at T2.
Youth with complete data did not differ from youth with missing data on demographic variables such as gender (χ2[1] = 0.01,p= .95), race (χ2[5] = 2.59,p= .76), or age at initial visit (t[200] = 1.19,p= .24).
At both time points, participants completed the 33‐item Children's Emotion Management Scale (CEMS; Zeman et al.,2001,2010) in which they respond to questions on a 3‐point scale (1 =hardly ever, 2 =sometimes, 3 =often) that ask how they manage their sad, angry, and worried emotions.
As in previous studies (e.g., Borowski et al.,2018; Feng et al.,2009), scores were averaged across sadness, worry, and anger for each scale.
The emotion inhibition scale assesses suppression of emotional expressions (12 items; e.g., “I hold my sad feelings in”).
The constructive regulation scale assesses adaptive ways of managing negative emotions (12 items; “I try to calmly deal with the problem when I feel worried”).
The emotion dysregulation scale assesses uncontrolled emotional expressions (9 items; e.g., “I do things like slam doors when I'm angry”).
Internal consistencies were acceptable at T1 (inhibition:α= .74; constructive regulation:α= .76; dysregulation:α= .64) and T2 (inhibition:α= .76; constructive regulation:α= .73; dysregulation:α= .56).
At T1, participants completed a parallel version of the Children's Emotion Management Scales (CEMS; Zeman et al.,2001,2010) that assessed their perceptions of their friends' emotion inhibition, constructive regulation, and emotion dysregulation.
Each item was modified such that the friend's name was inserted in the sentence (e.g., “[My friend] does things like slam doors when she's angry”).
The internal consistencies were acceptable (inhibition:α= .75, constructive regulation:α= .81, dysregulation:α= .68).
At T1, youth completed the You and Your Friends questionnaire (YYF; Klimes‐Dougan et al.,2014).
Adolescents were asked to report how they expected the friend who participated with them would respond to their expression of negative emotions (i.e., sadness, worry, anger) using a 5‐point scale (1 =definitely would NOT do this; 5 =definitely WOULD do this) on six, 9‐item subscales.
Emotion socialization responses included: reward (e.g., “Help you to deal with what made you worried”), override (e.g., “Try to get you to do something else to take your mind off of feeling sad”), magnify (e.g., “Get upset too”), neglect (e.g., “Not say or do anything about it”), relational aggression (e.g., “Leave you out of group activities for a while”), and overt aggression (e.g., “Say he doesn't like it when you act this way”).
Klimes‐Dougan et al. (2014) indicate that the reward, override, and magnify subscales can be considered to reflect supportive socialization responses whereas the unsupportive socialization composite scale is based on the neglect, relational aggression, and overt aggression subscales.
Consistent with this approach, in our study, composite scores for supportive (r's = .44–.64) and unsupportive (r's = .44–.72) emotion socialization were computed as averages across the items from each of the subscales.
Items from each emotion type (sadness, anger, worry) were included in each composite scale.
The resulting internal consistencies were strong (supportive:α= .90; unsupportive:α= .89).
Analyses were conducted using Actor‐Partner Interdependence Models tested with mixed effects modeling in SPSS (version 29).
Adolescents were nested in close friend dyads and interdependence was modeled using compound symmetry, as is appropriate for indistinguishable dyads (Kenny et al.,2006).
The conceptual models tested are displayed in Figure1.
Separate models were tested for emotion inhibition, constructive regulation, and emotion dysregulation.
Each model included gender, age, and length of friendship as covariates.
Adolescents' T1 ER was included in all models to account for prior levels of ER when predicting T2 ER.
Adolescents' T2 ER was the dependent variable in all models.
For Model 1, predictors were adolescents' T1 self‐reported ER (actor effect) and the friends' T1 self‐reported ER (partner effect).
Model 2 predictors included adolescent's perceptions of the friend's ER (actor effect) and the friend's perception of the adolescent's ER (partner effect).
In Model 3, actor effects were the adolescent's expectations of supportive responses from the friend and the adolescent's expectations of unsupportive responses from the friend.
The parallel partner effects were the friend's expectations of supportive responses from the adolescent and the friend's expectation of unsupportive responses from the adolescent.
As noted, data were missing at T2 for 16% of the sample.
Little's test of missingness indicated that the data were missing completely at random,χ2(39) = 53.10,p= .07.
Data were imputed using multiple imputation.
The iterative Markov chain Monte Carlo method was used to generate five imputed data sets, and pooled estimates are reported in results.
All estimates are reported as standardized parameter estimates (SPEs).
Table1displays intrapersonal correlations (i.e., correlations among adolescents' own scores), interpersonal correlations (i.e., correlations between adolescents' scores and their friends' scores), and intraclass correlations (i.e., correlations between friends' scores on the same variable).
In terms of associations with demographic variables, several mean‐level gender differences were observed.
Compared to girls, boys reported greater T1 emotion inhibition and also perceived their friends to have greater T1 emotion inhibition.
Compared to boys, girls expected greater supportive and fewer unsupportive responses to negative emotions from friends.
There were no significant associations between age and any of the study variables.
Intrapersonal, interpersonal, and intraclass correlations among study variables and descriptive statistics.
Note: Intrapersonal correlations (within actor effects; i.e., among adolescents' own scores) are presented below the diagonal.
Interpersonal effects (between actor and partner effects; i.e., between adolescents' and their friends' scores) are presented above the diagonal.
Intraclass correlations between friends on the same variable are bolded along the diagonal.
Abbreviations: ER, emotion regulation; ES, emotion socialization.
Estimates for Model 1 are displayed in Table2.
The partner effects (H1) were significant in the models examining emotion inhibition (SPE = 0.14,p< .001), constructive regulation (SPE = 0.40,p< .001), and emotion dysregulation (SPE = 0.08,p= .001).
These effects indicate that the greater friends' emotion inhibition, constructive regulation, and emotion dysregulation are at T1, the greater the adolescents' emotion inhibition, constructive regulation, and emotion dysregulation are at T2.
The actor effect representing stability of adolescents' ER over time was significant in the models examining emotion inhibition (SPE = 0.12,p< .001) and constructive regulation (SPE = 0.22,p= .01), but not in the model examining emotion dysregulation (SPE = 0.04,p= .11).
Note: For each model, the T2 dimension of ER was matched to its T1 predictor.
Adolescents' self‐reports of their own ER were used in Model 1.
The actor effect assesses stability of ER from T1 to T2.
The partner effect tests H2 that friends' ER would be interrelated over time.
Estimates are pooled effects from multiple imputation.
Pseudo‐R2is computed using the covariance and residual variances from the tested models and the null model (with only the intercept included) rather than using sums of squares (Kenny et al.,2006).
Abbreviations: ER, emotion regulation; SPE, standardized parameter estimate.
Estimates for Model 2 are displayed in Table3.
The actor effect representing adolescents' perceptions of their friends' ER was not significant in the models examining emotion inhibition (SPE = 0.01,p= .72) or constructive regulation (SPE = 0.08,p= .34).
The actor effect was significant, however, in the model examining emotion dysregulation (SPE = 0.06,p= .01) such that the more adolescents perceived their friend to engage in emotion dysregulation at T1, the more the adolescent reported emotion dysregulation at T2.
Note: For each model, the T2 dimension of emotion regulation was matched to its T1 covariate and predictor.
The actor effect tests H2 that adolescents' perceptions of their friends' ER would be related to their T2 ER.
The partner effects were considered exploratory.
Estimates are pooled effects from multiple imputation.
Pseudo‐R2is computed using the covariance and residual variances from the tested models and the null model (with only the intercept included) rather than using sums of squares (Kenny et al.,2006).
Abbreviations: ER, emotion regulation; SPE, standardized parameter estimate.
The partner effects were significant in the models examining emotion inhibition (SPE = 0.12,p< .001) and constructive regulation (SPE = 0.30,p< .001).
These effects indicate that friends' perceptions of adolescents' ER at T1 were positively related to adolescents' ER at T2 for emotion inhibition and constructive regulation.
Estimates for Model 3 are displayed in Table4.
The actor effects testing whether adolescents' expected supportive responses from their friends were associated with their later ER (H3) were not significant in the models examining emotion inhibition (SPE = −0.01,p= .84) and constructive regulation responses (SPE = −0.13,p= .14).
The actor effect was significant in the model examining emotion dysregulation (SPE = 0.07,p= .01).
Contrary to hypotheses, the more that adolescents expected supportive responses for negative emotions from their friends at T1, the greater their emotion dysregulation at T2.
Model 3: Expected supportive and unsupportive responses to negative emotions.
Note: For each model, the T2 dimension of ER was matched to its T1 covariate and predictor.
The actor effects tests: (1) H3 that expectations of supportive responses to negative emotions from their friends would be associated with lower emotion inhibition (H3a), greater constructive regulation (H3b), and lower emotion dysregulation (H3c) and (2) H4 that expectations of unsupportive responses to emotions from friends would be associated with greater emotion inhibition (H4a), lower constructive regulation (H4b), and greater emotion dysregulation (H4c).
The partner effects were considered exploratory.
Estimates are pooled effects from multiple imputation.
Pseudo‐R2is computed using the covariance and residual variances from the tested models and the null model (with only the intercept included) rather than using sums of squares (Kenny et al.,2006).
Abbreviations: ER, emotion regulation; SPE, standardized parameter estimate.
The actor effects testing whether adolescents' expected unsupportive responses from their friends were associated with their later ER were next considered.
The effect was not significant in the model examining emotion inhibition (SPE = −0.04,p= .22).
The effects were significant in the models examining constructive regulation (SPE = −0.23,p= .005) and emotion dysregulation (SPE = 0.05,p= .04).
In support of hypotheses, when adolescents expected their friends would respond to their emotions in unsupportive ways, adolescents reported lower constructive regulation and greater emotion dysregulation at T2.
The partner effects, representing the extent that friends expected adolescents to provide supportive and unsupportive responses for negative emotions, were also tested.
One effect was significant.
In the model examining constructive regulation, the partner effect was significant for supportive responses (SPE = 0.23,p= .003) such that the more friends expected adolescents to provide supportive responses to negative emotions at T1, the greater the adolescents' constructive regulation at T2.
Supplementary analyses tested whether the findings were robust to the inclusion of friendship characteristics that might act as moderators.
These analyses considered friendship length, friendship quality, stability of friendship from T1 to T2, and ethnic composition of the friend dyad.
Results did not provide evidence that relationship characteristics affected the findings (see TablesS1–S3).
In addition, the interaction between supportive and unsupportive responses to negative emotions was tested in the models for H3.
The interaction was only significant in the model for constructive regulation and indicated that unsupportive responses predicted lower constructive regulation at low levels of supportive responses (see TableS4).
The current study provided insights into the role of close friends in adolescents' emotional development by considering the roles of contagion between friends, modeling of ER by friends, and friends' direct feedback for negative emotions in adolescents' continued development and refinement of ER over time.
Particularly strong support was found for contagion of ER between friends such that there were longitudinal interrelations among friends' emotion inhibition, constructive regulation, and emotion dysregulation over time.
Limited support emerged for the role of modeling of ER such that significant effects were found only for adolescents' perceptions of their friends' emotion dysregulation.
Regarding friends' direct feedback for negative emotions, supportive responses were associated withgreateremotion dysregulation.
Finally, expected unsupportive responses from friends were associated with lower constructive regulation and greater emotion dysregulation at T2 but were not associated with emotion inhibition.
As hypothesized, friends' ER was interrelated over time.
For each of the three facets of ER considered (i.e., inhibition, constructive regulation, dysregulation), friends' ER at T1 was positively and significantly associated with adolescents' ER at T2.
The findings are consistent with the only other study to examine interrelations between friends' ER over time (Reindl et al.,2016) and also with the broader peer influence literature that has primarily used White, middle‐class, Western samples (e.g., Giletta et al.,2021).
Although past work had considered peer influence effects in depressive symptoms between friends (Giletta et al.,2021), there has been limited work directly assessing adolescents' emotional expressivity (for an exception, see Reindl et al.,2016).
Contagion between friends' ER could be an explanatory mechanism for peer influence effects in both internalizing and externalizing symptoms.
Indeed, Reindl et al. (2016) found that friends' adaptive ER was associated with increases in adolescents' adaptive ER and decreases in maladaptive ER strategies.
In turn, changes in adolescents' ER were related to changes in their depressive symptoms over time (Reindl et al.,2016).
Additional research is needed to replicate our findings and to link contagion effects of friends' dysfunctional or maladaptive ER to psychopathology.
An important question for future work is to delineate the processes that explainwhyclose friends exhibit contagion of ER over time.
Peer influence theories suggest that multiple processes may contribute to friendship homophily (i.e., similarity between friends; Laursen & Veenstra,2021).
As noted, synchronization of affect during friendship interactions wherein social partners mirror one another (e.g., Hatfield et al.,1993) could be one process that contributes to contagion of ER between friends.
Future research using observational and/or physiological assessment would be able to test the possibility that friends are engaging in similar behavioral and physiological patterns when interacting together (Feldman,2012; e.g., McKillop & Connell,2018).
It is also important to note that contagion effects may emerge through relationship partners' shared environment and exposure to similar situations that evoke emotions (Elfenbein,2014).
Throughout adolescence, youth gain more autonomy to choose environments that fit with their individual characteristics (Knafo & Jaffee,2013) and also increasingly spend time with peers, such as close friends (Furman & Rose,2015) in which they are exposed to similar social contexts and emotional stimuli.
Over the 2‐year period of this study, it is possible that the adolescents developed ER strategies that were similar to their friends' due to the increased time spent together in shared environments.
Future work is needed that considers the role of shared environment in the development of adolescent friends' ER over time.
Past theoretical work also suggests that both modeling and direct feedback might contribute to contagion effects between friends (Laursen & Veenstra,2021).
Although not a primary focus of the current study, an examination of the bivariate correlations does not support that modeling effects (i.e., adolescents' perceptions of the friends) or direct feedback effects (i.e., the friends' responses to negative emotions) mediate the influence of one friend's ER on the other friend's ER.
That is, with a few exceptions, the friends' ER at T1 was largely unrelated to modeling and direct feedback.
Nonetheless, future work is needed to disentangle how processes of friend emotion socialization are interrelated and work together to influence the development of ER during adolescence.
In the current study, results do indicate that modeling and direct feedback contributed to adolescents' ER in unique ways.
Results provided limited support for hypotheses that adolescents' modeling of their friends' ER (through adolescents' perceptions of their friends' ER) would influence adolescents' later ER.
Perceptions of friends' ER were associated with adolescents' emotion dysregulation over time but were unrelated to emotion inhibition or constructive regulation.
Studies considering adolescents' peer perceptions primarily focus on highly visible behaviors (e.g., alcohol consumption; Helms et al.,2014).
Of the three ER facets assessed, emotion dysregulation is the only one that is comprised of primarily observable behaviors that reflect internal emotional states (e.g., slamming doors when angry; Zeman et al.,2001,2010).
In contrast, the emotion inhibition and constructive regulation scales include items depicting internal processes of which friends may not always be aware (e.g., hiding anger; Zeman et al.,2001,2010).
As such, adolescents' perceptions of their friends' emotion dysregulation may be formed and reinforced by their friends' modeling of externalized emotional expressions, strengthening their influence on adolescents' own emotion dysregulation.
Importantly, it should be noted that adolescents' perceptions of their friends were correlated more strongly with their self‐reported ER than their friends' self‐reported ER.
Past research notes that when assessing perceptions of peers, adolescents demonstrate a false‐consensus effect in which they perceive their peers to be more similar to themselves than they actually are (Prinstein & Wang,2005).
Although adolescents' perceptions of their peers can vary drastically from their peers' actual behaviors (Helms et al.,2014), these perceptions can be powerful predictors of adolescents' own behaviors (Cox et al.,2019).
By perceiving a false‐consensus between themselves and their peers, adolescents may justify their continued engagement in potentially negative behaviors because they believe them to be consistent with peer group norms (Prinstein & Wang,2005).
In the current study, if adolescents believe their friends cry, slam doors, and say mean things to others, this perception may validate their own engagement in emotionally dysregulated expression.
Two significant effects emerged in exploratory analyses.
Friends' perceptions of adolescents' emotion inhibition and constructive regulation were significantly related to adolescents' later emotion inhibition and constructive regulation.
Friends' reports of each other's ER are likely based on their experiences with the adolescents' ER in the peer context over time (De Los Reyes,2011).
This finding may reflect the effect of adolescents' growing history of experiences regulating emotions in the peer context that then exerts influence on their subsequent emotional development.
The current study found mixed support for hypotheses regarding the effects of adolescents' expectations of receiving supportive and unsupportive responses to negative emotions from friends on adolescents' later ER.
Findings suggest that expected supportive responses from friends didnotencourage adolescents' more adaptive ER (i.e., lower inhibition and dysregulation; greater constructive regulation).
Rather, expected supportive responses from friends were associated withgreateremotion dysregulation and were unrelated to emotion inhibition and constructive regulation.
Findings for expected unsupportive responses were more consistent with hypotheses in that they were associated with lower constructive regulation and greater emotion dysregulation.
Findings for expected supportive responses were inconsistent with hypotheses and prior findings demonstrating that supportive emotion socialization responses in parents (Cui et al.,2020; Trevethan et al.,2021) and in friends (Klimes‐Dougan et al.,2014; Miller‐Slough & Dunsmore,2019) are linked to better adjustment.
However, these results may speak to the distinctions between parental and friend emotion socialization.
Whereas parents might provide greater guidance through emotion coaching that might lead to lower emotion dysregulation, friends' support for negative emotional expressivity may lack such skill‐building behaviors and include behaviors that exacerbate negative emotions, such as co‐rumination (Miller‐Slough & Dunsmore,2016,2020), leading to increased emotion dysregulation.
Adolescents' expectations that friends would respond to negative emotions in supportive ways might also reflect their broader emotional schemas regarding the appropriateness of negative emotional expressivity in the context of close friendships (Crick & Dodge,1994; Dunsmore & Halberstadt,1997).
Adolescents may expect friends to be more tolerant of dramatic, unregulated emotional displays than are parents, and such displays are acceptable ways of expressing negative emotion within close friendships, particularly if the emotion is not only directly related to the friendship but also to another source or topic.
Further, supportive responses from friends may be reinforcing of overt displays of negative emotions, similar to how corumination in friendships promotes depressive symptoms (Rose,2021).
More research needs to delve into the acceptability among friends of emotional “drama” and whether this type of apparent exaggerated emotional displays (e.g., slamming doors, crying) is consistently associated with poorer adaptation.
Further, it is important to note that we did not employ a person‐centered approach in this study.
Therefore, our results do provide information regarding whether the links between supportive responses and unsupportive responses with emotional dysregulation are occurring within the same friendship.
Although results largely suggest that expected support for negative emotions from friends doesnotconfer benefits for the development of adaptive regulation in adolescence, one significant, nonhypothesized effect emerged in the exploratory partner effects.
Specifically, friends' expectations that adolescents would provide them with supportive responses to negative emotions were positively associated with adolescents' later constructive regulation.
This finding coincides with other work that providing support to friends, but not receiving support from friends, was associated with adolescents' daily positive mood (Schacter & Margolin,2019).
Additional research is needed to determine the relative benefits of providing versus receiving support for negative emotions within friendships for adolescents' ER.
Consistent with previous research (Borowski et al.,2018; Klimes‐Dougan et al.,2014; Miller‐Slough & Dunsmore,2019), expected unsupportive emotion response to negative emotions were associated with poorer constructive regulation and greater emotion dysregulation.
Whereas ostracism and bullying are powerful tools for enforcing norms in the broader peer group, including norms for emotional expression (e.g., Laursen,2018; Zeman et al.,2013), friendships differ from broader peer group relationships in their intimacy (Furman & Rose,2015).
Accordingly, friendships are a unique context for emotion socialization in which youth are able to practice skills such as disclosure of vulnerable emotions as well as conflict resolution (Miller‐Slough & Dunsmore,2016; Zeman et al.,2013).
Friendship that are characterized by punitive responses to vulnerable emotions may deprive adolescents of critical socialization experiences, resulting in ER deficits.
Moreover, experiencing relational or overt aggression in the context of peer relationships evokes strong negative emotions and is linked to poorer ER (Adrian et al.,2019; Morelen et al.,2016).
It is important to note that the links between ER and unsupportive responses to negative emotions are likely bidirectional.
Adolescents who lack positive ER skills may also experience greater punitive responses to negative emotions within their friendships, which in turn contributes to poorer ER, eliciting greater unsupportive responses, and so on.
Indeed, other work indicates transactional associations among ER difficulties and maladaptive behaviors within friendships (Schwartz‐Mette et al.,2021).
Coupled with contagion between friends' ER, it may be that the friendships of youth with poorer ER could foster increasingly maladaptive contexts for emotional development if they are maintained over time.
The current study had several limitations that could be addressed in future work.
First, the study had methodological limitations.
Although the longitudinal, dyadic design of the study was a strength, additional time points would allow researchers to determine to what extent friends contribute to changes in ER.
In the current study is not possible to determine, for example, whether contagion of friends' dysregulation contributed to increasing dysregulation, convergence between friends, or decreasing dysregulation (e.g., Kiuru et al.,2012).
In addition, we relied on self‐reports of ER and expected responses to negative emotions within the friendship.
In future research, observational methodologies should be considered alongside self‐report as they have been demonstrated to be an effective approach to examining adolescent friends' expressed emotions and responses to one another (Legerski et al.,2015; Miller‐Slough & Dunsmore,2020).
Finally, regardless of the reporter, the dysregulation scale consistently had lower reliability than the inhibition and constructive regulation scales, suggesting that adolescents may vary in the ways that they externalize their displays of negative emotion.
Additional limitations pertain to the sample.
The sample was recruited from the community and nearly all adolescents were very best or best friends (89%).
These friendships may have had limited variability in their friendship quality and the amount of negative (relative to positive) responses to negative emotions in the relationships.
Further, the sample may not be representative of all youth given the requirement for adolescents to participate with a close friend thereby precluding those adolescents who did not have a close or best friend or a friend who was interested and available to participate.
The sample also lacked socioeconomic and ethnic diversity.
Emotion socialization is contextually bound and it is important to consider identity‐specific processes alongside emotion socialization, including experiences of discrimination and ethnic socialization (Dunbar et al.,2017; Lozada et al.,2022).
Moreover, research indicates that same‐ and other‐ethnicity relationships can serve distinct socialization functions (Wang & Lin,2023), but the current study was limited in its ability to examine differences given that only 13% of friend pairs were composed of adolescents with different ethnic identities.
Additional research is needed to understand peer processes that contribute to emotional development in clinical samples as well as research that examines the role of close friendships in the emotional development of ethnically and socioeconomically diverse youth.
Finally, it is important to note that all data for this study were collected from youth prior to the COVID‐19 pandemic, and that there have also likely been changes in adolescents' social media usage during this time period; together, these factors may have resulted in changes in the context for emotion socialization and ER (Hollenstein & Faulkner,2024).
The current study provides insight into the influential role of close friends in adolescents' emotional development over time.
In considering the ways that friends contribute to adolescents' ER (i.e., emotional contagion, modeling of ER, direct feedback for negative emotions), the current study provides a window into emotional processes that are operating within friendships.
Results provide strong evidence for contagion of ER between friends and that friends' unsupportive responses to negative emotions contribute to poorer ER.
Future work, using multimethod designs that incorporate observations of close friends' interactions, will be important for evaluating in‐the‐moment processes within friendships that lead to longer‐term changes in adolescents' ER.
This research was supported through Arts & Sciences Research Grants and Charles Center Research Grants at William & Mary.
Funding supported participant incentives.
We would like to thank all the graduate students and undergraduate research assistants in the Social and Emotional Development Lab at William & Mary for their assistance with data collection for this study as well as the families who participated.