Efforts to characterize regulatory elements in plant genomes traditionally rely on evolutionary conservation and chromatin accessibility.
Recently, intergenic bi-directional nascent transcript has emerged as a putative hallmark of active enhancers.
Here, we integrate these approaches to better define thecis-regulatory landscape of the rice genome.
In juvenile leaf tissues of the Azucena rice variety, we analyze conserved noncoding sequences, intergenic bi-directional transcripts, and regions of open chromatin.
These three features highlight distinct classes of regulatory targets, each exhibiting complexity and regulatory roles.
Conserved noncoding sequences are associated with more complex regulatory interactions, while regions marked by chromatin accessibility or bi-directional nascent transcription tend to promote more stable regulatory activity.
Some transcribed regulatory sites harbor elements linked to transposable element silencing, whereas others correlate with increased expression of nearby genes, pointing to candidate transcribed regulatory elements.
We further identified molecular interactions between genic regions and intergenic transcribed regulatory elements using 3-dimensional chromatin contact data, we identify physical interactions between transcribed intergenic regions and genic regions.
These interactions often co-localize with expression quantitative trait loci and coincide with increased transcription, further supporting a regulatory role.
Our integrative analysis reveals multiple distinct classes of regulatory elements in the rice genome, with overlapping but non-identical targets and signatures.
Many candidate elements share features consistent with transcriptional enhancement, though the specific criteria for defining active enhancers in plants require further characterization.
These findings underscore the importance of using complementary genomic signals to discover and characterize functionally diverse regulatory elements in plant genomes.
The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13059-025-03715-2.
Cis-regulatory elements (CREs) are noncoding DNA sequences that contribute to the regulation of gene expression, dictating the precise timing, location, and level of gene transcription [1,2].
These elements can be positioned near genes, e.g., promoter elements that are typically a few hundred base pairs upstream of transcription start sites (TSSs), to tens of thousands of base pairs away from the genes they regulate, e.g., enhancers and silencers.
Although CREs are estimated to be more numerous than protein-coding genes, their characterization remains challenging due to our incomplete knowledge of the genomic characteristics that define these elements.
A common approach to identifying CREs relies on analyzing the presence or absence of various genomic features, often in combination.
In plants, these include the presence of known transcription factor (TF) binding motifs, chromatin accessibility, specific histone modifications, levels of DNA methylation, and evidence for transient or stable looping into target genes [3,4].
Integrating these signatures has increased our ability to differentiate between types of CREs, e.g., distal enhancers, silencers and insulators, and proximal regions such as promoter elements, TSSs, and cryptic upstream open reading frames (uORFs) [3,5–10].
Combining these signatures with massively parallel reporter assays has enabled widespread functional characterization of many CREs [6,11,12]; for example, a significant proportion of active CREs exhibit lower DNA methylation [13–17], while the presence of specific histone modifications can signal the state of active CREs (e.g., H3K27ac, H3K18ac) [18,19], and CREs with paused polymerases are often enriched for H3K27me3 and low levels of active histone marks like acetylation [6,20,21].
Repressed CREs meanwhile often exhibit both low chromatin accessibility and H3K27me3 levels [22,23].
Several approaches to identifying CREs de novo and subsequently validating these have been developed.
In Oryza, for example, weakly conserved enhancer-like CREs often show a correlation with nearby gene expression.
In Arabidopsis, enhancer-like examples were also seen in a loss or gain in conserved noncoding sequence (CNS), which was often associated with lower expression and higher expression, respectively [24], which would be enhancer-like, while a gain in CNS skewed the expression towards higher expression.
Similarly in maize and cassava, these sequences show low interspecies conservation but weak negative selection withinOryza sativapopulations.
This weak interspecies selection in rice was determined using the greenINSIGHT approach, which combines the determination of an ancestral base probability from comparative alignments, with polymorphism data to infer selection [25].
The presence of enhancer RNAs (eRNAs) has not yet been widely used to identify plant CREs but shows promise.
Enhancer RNAs are short, bidirectionally transcribed, largely unspliced and unpolyadenylated RNAs typically less than 150 nucleotides long (although some may be up to 2 kbase (kb)) [26,27], which are transcribed from CREs.
In Animalia, eRNAs are predominantly localized in the nucleus and are chromatin-bound [28,29] serving to mark active enhancers and may act as a proxy for their spatio-temporal activity.
Enhancer transcription is likely important for gene expression, potentially maintaining chromatin accessibility for TF binding, stimulating chromatin remodelers, regulating TF occupancy, and promoting RNA polymerase (Pol) II activity [30–34].
However, the instability of eRNAs makes them difficult to detect with standard RNA-sequencing, necessitating nascent RNA sequencing technologies [35–37] such as precision nuclear run-on sequencing (PRO-seq) [38,39].
Many of these elements inO.
sativaappear to have emerged recently, as evidenced by recent changes in selection, aligning with their frequently transient and species-specific characteristics [25,40,41].
Understanding this class of regulatory elements in plants remains a challenge, but methods that associate specific genetic variants with quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for agronomic traits can help differentiate functional from dormant noncoding elements [42,43].
In plants, our understanding of eRNAs is still limited, with reports of their transcription in maize (Zea mays) [36], cassava (Manihot esculenta) [44], and rice (Oryza sativa) [25,36], but they appear less common in other genomes such as Arabidopsis [36,45].
In maize and cassava, intergenic regulatory elements identified through PRO-seq data are enriched for expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) identified in kernels and exhibit low levels of conservation, again suggesting many of the elements undergo a rapid turnover [44].
Despite the analysis of the various genomic and epigenomic features associated with plant CREs, the presence of eRNAs has, up till now, not generally been considered and was even recently suggested to be rare in plants [36].
Other notable approaches to identify plant CREs include open chromatin assays that have been used in many studies to detect accessible chromatin regions (ACRs) formed by the active displacement of nucleosomes by transcription factor binding [46–48].
Another approach is phylogenetic footprinting, which identifies CSNs by detecting deviations from neutral levels of constraint.
CNSs are generally thought to fine-tune complex transcriptional patterns, particularly in heavily regulated genes particularly [49].
In this study, we explored DNA sequence composition at these different sites, their chromosomal environment, and evolutionary constraint, building on previous work in rice [25] and detailed regulatory element characterization in maize [6].
We describe the regulatory landscape of Asian rice (O. sativa japonia sspAzucena) using comparative data, nascent transcription, chromatin accessibility, and complementary functional genomic sequence features (DNA methylation profiles, histone modification profiles, transcriptomic profiles), and 3D genome architecture.
We find that regulatory elements identified using conservation, accessible chromatin, and nascent bi-directional transcription appear to contain sequences with likely different regulatory functions and gene target genes.
We also find that while many intergenic eRNAs may be related to transposable element silencing, others share features of enhancers, suggesting they harbor transcribed regulatory elements associated with gene regulation andcis-expression e-QTLs.
Overall, this work advances our understanding of regulatory noncoding elements and is motivated by the need to develop improved, informed systematic pipelines for characterizingcis-regulatory elements in different spatio-temporal contexts [50].
We considered comparative genomics alongside several functional genomics approaches to determine if integrated approaches could enhance the specificity of searches for different types ofcis-regulatory elements.
Chromatin accessibility from Assay for Transposes-Accessible Chromatin sequencing (ATAC-seq), nascent transcription from Precision Nuclear Run-On sequencing (PRO-seq), and sequence conservation in genomic regions at conserved noncoding sites (CNSs) were considered jointly usingO.
sativajaponica cultivar Azucena as a reference genome.
A set of 96,570 CNS were identified from a 14-way alignment of Oryzeae species (Additional file 1: Figs.
S1-S2, Additional file 2).
These 96,570O.
sativaCNSs had a total length of 3.98 megabases (Mb) (~ 1.0% of the assembled genome) and a mean (median) length of 40 nucleotides (nts) (36 nts).
The total length is similar to, and the median length almost identical to, that observed in the smaller crucifer genomesArabidopsis lyrata(N= 92,421 CNSs) andA.
thaliana(N= 90,060 CNSs (~ 4.5 Mb or 3.8% of the genome)), where both sets of CNSs had a median length of 37 nts [49].
This also closely matches the size distribution of a set of CNSs identified across several Solanaceae species using a similar comparative approach (unpublished data) and may suggest that given similar levels of phylogenetic support, CNS length as a proxy for TFBS-cluster length is relatively conserved across plants.
Of the 96,570 CNSs identified, 30,587 were intronic CNSs (32%, 0.44/kb), 9635 3'UTR CNSs (10%, 1.4/kb), 3799 5'UTR CNSs (4%, 1.1/kb), 31,192 distal intergenic CNSs (32%, 0.15/kb), 11,634 upstream gene CNSs (12%, 0.35/kb), and 9855 downstream gene CNSs (10%, 0.32/kb) (where upstream and downstream is determined as within 1 kb of a transcript start/end) (Additional file 1: Fig. S3).
To examine genome-wide nascent transcription, particularly intergenic transcription including eRNAs, PRO-seq data was generated from Azucena leaf tissues grown under optimal conditions.
We combined the newly generated PRO-seq data with previously published PRO-seq data that was also generated from Azucena grown under similar growth conditions [25], but these two replicates originated from two independent experiments.
Therefore, these PRO-seq sequence features were processed individually (Additional file 3: Table S1).
Correlation analysis between replicates at genic and promoter regions showed high correlation for genic (r= 0.91,p< 2.2 × 10⁻1⁶), while promoter correlations were slightly lower (r= 0.80,p< 2.2 × 10⁻1⁶), in line with typical expectations (Additional file 1: Fig. S4).
As expected, the number of PRO-seq reads aligned with annotated exonic regions compared to introns (Additional file 1: Fig. S5).
Because of the bidirectional nature of the most well studied eRNAs (2-D eRNAs compared to 1-D eRNAs) [51,52] based on previous nascent transcription studies in animals [53–57], we used the dREG (discriminative Regulatory Element detection) tool [55,58] to identify bidirectional dual-stranded transcription activity relative to a training set of human regulatory elements as a first criterion for identifying candidate transcribed intergenic regions in the genome [28,59].
While human and plant regulatory signatures can vary [60], the ability of this tool to discriminate regions with enhancer characteristics in a subset of candidates in rice, maize, and cassava has previously been demonstrated [25,44].
Sites with bidirectional transcription, which we refer to as discriminative regulatory-element detection sites (dREGs) were identified in each replicate and the subset with an intersection +/− 100 bp in both replicates were considered for downstream analysis.
As expected, dREG locations showed an enrichment of PRO-seq reads in both DNA strands, with dREG scores increasing with the PRO-seq signal (counts per million) (Fig.1a).
The bi-directional distribution of PRO-seq signal within and around dREG peaks presented as the typical shifted juxtaposition of the plus and minus strand signal in genic regions compared to intergenic regions (Additional file 1: Fig. S5).
In total we detected 32,424 dREG locations across the genome, with dREG scores ranging from 0.33 and 1.46 (Additional file 1: Fig. S6).
The genome-wide median size of a dREG site was 420 base pairs (bp).
This falls within the expected size range for bidirectional eRNAs in animals (50–2000 bp) (Additional file 1: Fig. S6) and is similar to the average length of 460 nucleotides observed in humans [61].
Approximately 60% of dREG sites were in intergenic regions (based on the Azucena annotation; see “Methods”).
This proportion is similar to that previously reported for the cassava genome [44].
We divided the intergenic dREG sites into two classes depending on their distance to genic sequences: (i) proximal dREG locations (dREGproximal), which are intergenic dREG locations that are < 1 kb to predicted transcription start or end sites, and (ii) distal dREG locations (dREGdistal), which are > 1 kb away from predicted transcription start or end sites.
Within the intergenic regions, we found approximately equal proportions of dREGproximaland dREGdistallocations (Fig.1b).
In contrast to genic regions, dREG locations found in intergenic regions, whether proximal or distal, had a similar distribution of dREG scores.
Here, the highest ratio of score by number of dREG locations between 0.4 and 0.6, particularly in distal dREG (Additional file 1: Fig. S6).
Manycis-regulatory elements (CREs) that are presumed to be actively engaged have been shown to coincide with accessible chromatin regions [6,62].
We inferred open chromatin from high-resolution ATAC-seq data from a similarly matched stage of leaf development as used for PRO-seq (see "Methods").
Following MACS2 processing of the ATAC-seq data, as well as a signal cutoff and a conservative overlap of minimum 50% in all three replicates (see "Methods"), we obtained a set of 27,772 annotated open chromatin peaks (22.22 Mb, median length 621 nts).
Increased ATAC-seq signal was observed for genes with increased expression (based on RNA-seq data) (Additional file 1: Fig. S7).
15,566 of these peaks were found in intergenic regions (Additional file 1: Fig. S7 Additional file 3: Table S2).
While these three relatively orthogonal predictors of regulatory sequences could, in principle, fully overlap, in practice, their coverage and location vary significantly.
This variation arises from a variety of factors, including the spatio-temporal specificity of regulatory sequences.
We first looked at the overlap of combinations of the classes of sequence features and found that many were distinct and did not overlap in the rice genome (Additional file 1: Fig. S8).
The difference in overlap may in part be attributed to the ATAC peaks being longer (median of 621 bp vs. 420 bp for dREG and 36 bp for CNS) causing a greater proportion of ATAC peaks to overlap with the two sequence features but not the other way around.
To account for biases in the size or distribution of features, we performed a co-occurrence enrichment analysis relative to IID expectation for individual feature and in combination.
dREG locations were enriched for ATAC peaks (1.75x) and vice versa for dREG locations enriched in ATAC peaks (Fig.1c).
CNS locations were either very slightly enriched for dREG (1.05x) or depleted for ATAC (0.88x).
CNS enrichment with ATAC and dREG varied little between all regions and specifically intergenic regions, whereas intergenic dREG ATAC locations were less enriched for each other (1.12x) (Fig.1c).
Altogether, this suggests that these features identified based on distinct metrics, whether it was conservation, chromatin accessibility or nascent transcription, would appear to underlie a level of different categories of regulatory sites in the rice genome.
However, this raises the question as to whether these categories share similarities in function if not location or whether they are functionally distinct.
To assess potential functional differences among regulatory sequences identified through distinct methods, we compared the genomic locations of regions identified by three different sequence features—conserved noncoding sequences (CNSs), PRO-seq, and ATAC-seq—in terms of their distance from genes and the functions of those genes.
We began by examining the distribution of these three sequence classes relative to all annotated genes, as well as in intergenic regions relative to an IID model (Fig.2a).
Within intergenic regions, we detected a strong polarity in enrichment for all three types of elements towards the 5’ start of annotated genes (Fig.2a; Additional file 1: Fig. S9).
While they display similar distributions relative to TSS (Additional file 1: Fig. S9), the degree to which CNS, ATAC, and dREG sites collocated within the promoter was close to zero, suggesting again that their regulatory roles may be somewhat differentiated.
A gene ontology (GO) analysis revealed that genes enriched for large amounts of conserved sequences were enriched for roles in transcription factor activity (FDR-adjustedp= 1.1 × 10−15) and cellular differentiation/development processes (e.g., cell wall biogenesis, FDR-adjustedp= 1.
× 10−3) as previously reported in Arabidopsis (Additional file 1: Fig. S10, Additional file 4) [49].
In contrast, genes enriched for extended open chromatin regions (> 1274 bp ATAC) had weaker ontology associations and were involved more in translation pathways that are ubiquitously active, such as forming the structural constituents of ribosomes (Benjamini-adjustedp= 3.6 × 10−5) (Additional file 1: Fig. S11, Additional file 5).
The pathways tend to indicate that these regions involve regulatory stability (mostly open) rather than regulatory dynamism.
Of the three sequence features, genes in proximity to a detected dREG location had the weakest ontology associations, with no significant biological process (Additional file 1: Fig. S12, Additional file 6).
It is possible that this indicates that dREG sites are more ubiquitously distributed across many types of genes and not biased towards any specific functional categories.
As distinct genomic locations for CNSs, accessible chromatin and transcribed intergenic regions suggest a potential bias in underlying sequences, we investigated whether there are specific sequence characteristics that distinguish them.
Homer [63] was used to characterize the enriched sequence content of CNSs, ATAC, and dREG sequences in a range of genic and intergenic regions (Fig.2; Additional file 1: Figs.
Motif complexity was notably higher in CNSs (average 3.3 different bases per collapsed-Position weight matrix (PWM)) than ATAC and dREG sequences (average 2.6 different bases per collapsed-PWM) in upstream promoter regions.
ATAC regions were frequently enriched in simple tandem repeated sequences (e.g., GAGAGAGA).
In contrast, enriched motifs in CNS sequences were observed with a lower associatedp-value (Additional file 1: Fig. S13) likely because they consist of a heterogeneous mix of longer more complex sequences, e.g., the G-box motif.
ATAC motifs would be more characteristic of housekeeping sequences in which tandem repetitiveness provides redundancy against mutations that could otherwise impact fitness [64].
For dREG motifs, a feature that stood out was the number and enrichment of TATA-like sequences (Fig.2b; Additional file 1: Fig. S14), suggesting that these sites may provide alternative promoter TSS locations.
The upstream proximal promoter and first intron have long been recognized as regulatory hot-spots, raising questions around the sequence distinctiveness of CREs located within them relative to other regions.
We investigated the complexity of CNSs motif enrichment in distal promoter and intergenic regions to explore potential differences compared with proximal promoter motifs.
We noted that intergenic and distal promoter CNSs were highly similar (Pearson correlation in enriched motif frequencyr= 0.995) while intergenic and proximal promoter CNSs differed the most (correlationr= 0.981).
Therefore, while enriched motifs in CNSs are broadly similar (Fig.2c), there is a notable divergence in the sequences of CNSs located in promoter proximal regions relative to more distal CNSs.
For example, the motif GCGACG is found at twice the rate in proximal CNS relative to distal and intergenic CNSs.
These may suggest different functional roles and regulatory mechanisms of CNSs in these distinct genomic regions.
The detection of evolutionary constraint across species [65–67] can contribute to an improved understanding of the evolutionary trajectory of different regulatory elements.
For example, while an inter-species conservation approach was used to identify the CNSs, other elements, such as enhancers tend to show more sequence diversification and be more species specific [68,69], and therefore less amenable to be detected by conservation-based methods.
To address the question as to whether the conservation levels of CNS compare between genomic regions (proximal and distal regions) of genes and among different elements, we estimated the level of evolutionary constraint occurring within these peak regions using phyloP [70].
Selection within dREG and ATAC sequence features were compared to selection in CNS, coding sequences, and neutral intergenic regions of the genome (control) (Fig.2d).
The results showed that compared to neutral regions (modal value 0; mean − 0.049), we found CNSs displaying the highest evolutionary constrain, followed by CDSs.
This is to be expected as CNSs are defined by their constraint (see "Methods"), while annotated CDSs are defined by their coding potential.
Among annotated CDSs, many are not necessarily in active site and therefore are less constrained while others can be highly constrained.
Both ATAC peaks and dREG sites displayed levels of selection near comparable to neutral control whether they would be in promoter regions or distal intergenic regions (Fig.2d).
The distinct asymmetry between the density of dREG sites around genes may be in part driven by roles in Pol-II initiation of transcription upstream and Pol-IV/Pol-V silencing of elements downstream of the focal gene.
However, the epigenetic context here with respect to methylation of nearby TEs may also be associated with a separate noncoding transcription pathway in which a subset of apparently highly expressed genes, particularly in grasses, have notable CHH islands in nearby repetitive elements [17].
Although it is beyond the scope of this work, it would likely be valuable to use Pol-IV and Pol-V antibodies to separate dREG elements linked to silencing associated with these CHH elements (Supplementary file 1: Fig. S15) from distal enhancers or proximal activating elements.
A similar trend in dREG locations was previously observed in rice [5] and human populations [71]; in these cases, there was an excess of sites under weak negative selection was observed, suggesting selection since the most recent common ancestor.
Taken together, these results suggest dREG sequence features display some level of conservation that is stronger in proximal peaks than distal locations, although this distinction may be due to the increased occurrence of repetitive elements with the latter.
To further explore the limited intergenic co-occurrence observed among the three regulatory sequence classes, we investigated whether they exhibited distinct patterns of chromatin features.
We compared the chromatin features associated with intergenic CNSs, dREGs, and ATAC-seq sites using previously generated genome-wide maps of histone modifications and cytosine methylation [22].
This comparison involved correlation analyses and assessments of signal distribution within and 1kb upstream and downstream of each intergenic dataset.
DNA methylation is often found in inactive regulatory elements, where their target genes are repressed, and as in other plants different methyltransferases target three types of sites: CpG, CHG, and CHH [72].
We found that CNSs had at most only a slightly negative correlation with methylation in all contexts and a depletion in DNA methylation compared to nearby locations (Fig.3).
Histone-tail modifications are also associated with regulatory elements, and we found an enrichment for H3 lysine 18 acetylation (H3K18ac) commonly associated with DNA demethylation.
CNSs were also enriched for the common repressive mark H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3); however, when we parsed CNSs by genomic regions, the enrichment for H3K27me3 varied, for example by being depleted in CNSs located downstream 500 bp from TSS (Additional file 1: Fig. S16, Additional file 3: Table S3).
This suggests thatOryzaCNS are not ubiquitously active in the way that ATAC and dREG sites may be, but experience context-dependent activation in accessible and closed configurations (Fig.3b).
In contrast, ATAC sites frequently colocalized with histone H3K4me3, as well as H3K27 acetylation, both marks being suggestive of transcriptional activity (Fig.3).
DNA cytosine methylation was also enriched in ATAC peaks.
Intergenic dREG sequences displayed distinct chromatin patterns, notably a depletion of H3K27me3 histone marks at dREG locations.
This was coupled with an enrichment for H3K18ac within and asymmetrically around these regions, despite also being enriched in cytosine methylation and not strongly correlating with accessible chromatin.
These observations raise questions on whether these sequence categories, despite differences in their genomic locations as well as their identification methods, do share functional similarities, or are instead functionally distinct.
For example, while both CNSs and dREG sequence features contained regions enriched for DNA methylation that are often positively correlated with accessible chromatin, the CNS elements are less targeted by cytosine methylation, whereas dREG elements tend to be more targeted by this repressive mechanism.
A stronger correlation with cytosine methylation, particularly in the CHH context, might suggest an overlap with other types of genomic features whose expressions are more ubiquitously repressed, such as transposable elements (TEs).
To address the question of whether dREG locations and ATAC peaks show a different epigenomic landscape from regulatory elements (such as CNSs that are depleted for TEs), we first focused on intergenic regions and looked for enrichment of annotated TEs in all three sequence features.
The annotated TE dataset in the Azucena reference was generated for this study (see "Methods") and the methylation patterns within all annotated TEs that overlapped with our sequence features agreed with patterns detected in plants—that is, the CpG context being predominant and the CHH context having the lowest occurrence (Additional file 1: Fig. S17 and S18) [16,17,73].
We find that ATAC and dREG locations were similarly enriched for TEs, while CNSs were largely depleted of TEs (Fig.4a).
This depletion in CNS was not necessarily surprising given that the requirement for TEs to be constrained over evolutionary time would be rarer and potentially imply novel function (TE exaptation[74,75]).
This also highlights the potential different roles these regions are bearing.
dREG locations were particularly prone to overlap with TEs, with most intergenic dREG locations overlapping partially with repetitive elements (10% or more with an annotated TE), while a small proportion (5.04%) overlapped entirely with a TE (Fig.1b; Additional file 3: Table S4).
An increase in percentage overlap led, as expected, to higher levels of methylation across all three cytosine contexts.
Surprisingly, we noted that the highest methylation level for CHH was found in dREG locations with 30% or more overlap with TEs (and not 100% overlap) (Additional file 1: Fig. S19).
When we mapped the dREG locations spanning 30% of TEs onto each respective TE, we found that the overlap coincided with TE termini as well as some domains in the middle.
As TE termini are more readily targeted by siRNA [76], this could potentially explain the increase we detect.
To see whether proximity to genes influenced the silencing mechanisms due to the presence of TEs, we compared dREG locations with ATAC peaks based on their proximity to genes – proximal (< 1 kb from genes) versus distal (> 1 kb away).
Methylation was significantly higher in dREGproximalsites than dREGdistallocations, particularly in the CHG and CHH context (Fig.4b).
The CHH context, previously associated with TE silencing [16,77–79] would suggest higher pressure to keep TEs silenced in regions proximal to genes, but this would have an impact on the activity of nearbycis-regulatory elements.
To test this, we considered the dREG score and ATAC signal as proxy to higher bi-directional transcriptional activity and accessible chromatin activity, respectively (Fig.1a, Additional file 1: Fig. S7).
Since a higher dREG score was associated with higher bi-directional transcriptional activity, we plotted dREG location score and methylation for both dREGproximaland dREGdistallocations.
We did the same with ATAC peaks by using an increase in signal as the detection of a more robust location or a region more accessible.
We found that while overall methylation levels were negatively correlated with dREG scores (p< 1 × 10−4) (Additional file 1: Fig. S20), but CHH methylation, had a slight but significant positive correlation (p< 7 × 10−3) with dREG scores in dREGproximallocations whereas no correlation for dREGdistallocations (p< 0.8) was detected (Fig.4c).
For ATAC peaks and CHH methylation, we detected a stronger positive correction in proximal versus distal ATAC peak (Fig.4d).
This suggests that promoter regions can be accessible for mediating transcription while maintaining low TE activity.
The presence of TEs and their associated epigenetic patterns could impact the genomic location of elements that are depleted for it, such as the CNSs.
Indeed, in our Azucena leaf tissue, we see low enrichment of co-occurrence between intergenic CNSs and ATAC and dREG (Fig.1c).
To test this, we removed all CNSs, ATAC, and dREG sites that overlapped with at least 1 bp of an annotated TE and performed an enrichment analysis for dREG and ATAC in CNSs.
We found that dREGs were 3.1 × enriched in CNSs and ATAC sites were 3.7 × enriched in CNSs, compared to the presence of TEs.
This could support the idea that TE could physically impact co-occurrence accessibility of CNSs.
Given the observed overlap of dREG and ATAC sequence features with transposable elements, we wanted to address the question of how might small RNAs, known to be involved in silencing transposable elements, contribute to the regulation of nascent transcripts, and how to parse the signal to retain transcribed regulatory elements potentially involved in enhancing gene expression.
The output of nascent transcription assays such as PRO-seq provides a measure of the activity of all RNA polymerases, not only RNA Pol II.
We therefore expected to detect both regions that could potentially activate but also be involved in signaling mechanisms.
The strong overlap with TEs and the enrichment for cytosine methylation among our dREG locations points to this direction and this is what we observe.
In plants, the RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) pathway is crucial for de novo methylation, wherein transcribed noncoding RNA molecules direct the addition of DNA methylation to specific DNA sequences that are largely associated with transcription repression [80,81]; thus, the PRO-seq data in intergenic regions is likely, in part, be detecting silencing-related transcription.
To investigate this, we first complemented a small RNA (sRNA) dataset previously published [25] with two replicates in the same cultivar background to generate an Azucena annotation database of small RNAs (Additional file 1: Fig. S21; Additional file 3: Table S5; Additional file 7).
We found that dREG locations were fairly enriched (3.07x) in sRNAs (Fig.4a) with a small asymmetry in the sRNA enrichment between regions upstream of TSS (2.97x) versus downstream of stop codons (3.17x).
This is a contrast to CNSs and even ATAC peaks that are about three times less enriched (Fig.4a).
dREG sites with higher scores had less small RNAs but the abundance of TEs remained unchanged whether dREG sites had lower or higher scores (Additional file 1: Figs.
S17 and S21).
ATAC peaks had the opposite trend on dREG scores, where higher dREG scores had higher ATAC enrichment (Additional file 1: Fig. S21).
This finding suggests that we are detecting numerous transcripts likely produced by RNA polymerases IV and V and that these small RNAs target TEs that overlap with dREG locations.
It also suggests that dREG score may not be a reliable indicator to solely consider in plants when trying to parse silencing mechanism from an active role in enhancing transcription, as is commonly done with dREG analysis in humans [61].
One of the goals for this study was to identify potential regulatory elements that are transcribed, such as enhancers.
To determine whether we may have candidate eRNA enhancer sequences in our dREG dataset, we needed to parse the elements that had likely functions in silencing mechanisms.
To do this, we first established a threshold for the level of overlap with TEs that would be permitted.
We analyzed dREG locations with varying degrees of overlap with TEs and observed compared based on patterns of levels of methylation in all contexts in dREG locations and 1 kb around (Additional file 1: Figs.
S19 and S22).
For the methylation profile, particularly in the CHH context, we saw that the profile was distinct for dREG locations with less versus more than 20% overlap with TEs (Fig.5a).
Based on this, we focused on dREG locations having less than 20% overlap and performed enrichment analysis of these dREG locations for sRNAs, accessible chromatin, and the common histone modification associated with enhancers (H3K27ac).
An overlap of 10% or more with TEs led to noticeable changes with a marked increase of sRNAs and a decrease in chromatin accessibility (Fig.5b).
The dREG locations with more than 10% overlap also lost some of the asymmetrically co-located H3K27ac marks that were previously detected for candidate enhancers determined by dREG locations [25] (Fig.5a).
dREG sites with a signal of less than 0.4 were the most enriched for sRNAs, and while they appeared to be more accessible than locations with higher scores, many regions may be actively silenced (Additional file 1: Fig. S21).
Based on these observations the following filtering steps were applied.
We focused on (i) dREG locations with less than 10% overlap with TEs, (ii) removed dREG locations that overlapped with sRNAs, and (iii) removed dREG locations with a score of less than 0.4.
Following these filtering steps, we obtained a dataset of 1068 post-filtered dREG locations (herein dREGpostfilter) (Additional file 8).
Next, we investigated whether dREGpostfilterregions were more likely to function as enhancers.
It is known that regulatory elements located in proximal promoter regions typically contain binding sites that influence the expression of downstream nearby genes.
We explored whether the predicted dREG regulatory elements could correlate with increased nearby gene expression patterns.
This could support a potential role of these elements in transcription regulation.
To do so, we took dREG locations detected in the promoter region of all annotated genes (dREGproximal) and examined how their activity associated with expression of nearby genes obtained from an Azucena leaf transcriptome.
The results showed that genes with a dREGproximalelement in its promoter region had significantly higher gene expression (Mann WhitneyUtest with Bonferroni correctionp< 0.0001; Fig.5c).
We also detected a significant increase in nearby gene expression when considering dREGfiltered+proximalelements (Mann WhitneyUtest with Bonferroni correctionp< 0.0001).
The distribution of transcript expression varied in complexity in the presence of a dREG element and while dREGproximalprefilter and post filter were similar, we could see a marked distribution towards higher transcript expression with lower variability (Fig.5c; Additional file 1: Fig. S23).
In plants, the only dREG threshold that has been explicitly used to characterize these regulatory elements was a dREG score of > 1.0 in the rice genome [25].
Based on this, we examined the relationship between dREG score and functional genomic activity by comparing the relationship between gene expression levels and dREGproximalscores.
Results showed no significant difference in expression in dREGproximalbased on score, whether they would be pre or post filtering scores (Additional file 1: Fig. S24).
Altogether, this suggests that predicted dREG elements, at least in proximal regions, may have an activating role in gene expression.
Also, dREG score, which relies training on a robust set of eRNAs in human, may not be a primary metric to identify putative active transcribed regulatory elements (Additional file 1: Fig. S21).
In contrast to proximal regulatory elements, distal elements associated with CNS, ATAC, or dREGdistalsequence features that may contribute to gene expression regulation are more challenging to link to gene(s).
Distal transcribed regulatory elements associated with dREGdistalsites may signal RNA-producing enhancers, producing unstable transcripts in both directions [82].
Indeed, in animals, genomic coordinates of distal transcribed regulatory elements have often overlapped with enhancers that actively produce eRNAs, although in plants there is no evidence that these are indeed associated with enhancer activity.
In addition, accessible chromatin is also used as a proxy for bearing active transcriptional elements [6,22].
While some level of redundant activity might be expected for conserved elements like CNSs within a given tissue and developmental context, others would likely exhibit distinct patterns linked to their specific spatio-temporal functions.
To further characterize rice dREGpostfilter+distallocations, distal ATAC peaks and distal CNSs, and identify potential functional roles in the rice genome, we examined long-range chromosomal contact interactions between genes and our candidatecis-regulatory elements using the Pore-C sequencing method [83].
Pore-C couples chromatin conformation capture with long-read nanopore sequencing to detect genome-wide multi-way chromatin contacts.
It has been shown to be highly effective at sequencing through repeat regions of the genome and is able to detect increased contact intensity with less sequencing reads than conventional Hi-C sequencing [83].
Using Pore-C sequencing on rice leaves, we generated 104 million concatamer reads that correspond to 290 million contacts across the rice genome (Additional file 3: Table S6).
Since Pore-C sequencing has not been applied in the rice genome to profile chromatin activity (only in Arabidopsis [84], we first examined the functionality of the 3D genome architecture detected by this method.
Using the Pore-C method, we detected 3261 distinct topologically associated domains (TADs) which are localized chromosomal regions of high physical contact [85].
TADs had a median size of 80 kb, and the TAD boundaries were enriched for transcription and active chromatin marks (Fig.6a; Additional file 1: Fig. S25).
These results were consistent with previousOryzaHi-C sequencing results [86] indicating that Pore-C sequencing was able to detect functional 3D contacts across theOryzachromosome.
To determine whether distal elements in our three sequence features could represent distal regulatory elements of one or multiple target genes in juvenile leaf tissues, we used the Pore-C sequencing data to detect the formation of chromatin loops at 5 kb resolution.
Using the FitHiC2 algorithm [87], we detected 33,779 chromatin loops, where 42% (14,325) of those loops involved a gene (where the coding window had to contain more than 100 bp of coding sequences) and a noncoding region (Fig.6b).
These represent candidate gene-regulatory element loop interactions.
We then visualized this loop interaction by conducting aggregate peak analysis (APA), which measures the enrichment of chromatin contacts at loop positions relative to the local background signal (Fig.6c).
When we compared the APA plots for all chromatin loops and candidate gene-regulatory element loops, the latter loops had strong enrichment of signals centered at the contact point.
Specifically for the candidate gene-regulatory element loops, the central window (i.e., the contact point) had ~ 3.5 fold increased in contacts compared to the lower left windows (i.e., background contact levels) (Fig.6c).
Next, we examined the potential functionality of candidate gene-regulatory element loops.
We analyzed gene-regulatory element loops where the noncoding anchor had only an ATAC peak, only a dREG location, only a CNS, or combinations of elements in a loop (Fig.6d).
These loops were then compared to loops where the noncoding anchor had no detected element and represented control gene-noncoding sequence interactions (Additional file 1: Fig. S26).
We found that for all gene-noncoding sequence loops, and regardless of the annotation within the noncoding anchor, the majority of genes had contact with a single noncoding region (Additional file 1: Fig. S26).
Furthermore, the median distance between the gene and the noncoding region was 128 kb to the dREG only peak, 163 kb to the ATAC only peak, and 35 kb the CNS only peak.
Focusing on loops that contacted only one genic window (7386 loops contacting one genic window) to ease interpretation of the results, we looked at the gene expression profile of genes that contacted one of our candidate regulatory regions.
There were 2123 genes that had contact with a CNS region, 165 genes with dREGpostfilter+distal, and 2284 with ATAC.
We found that the presence of either a CNS, ATAC, or dREGpostfilter+distalsequence features led to significantly higher gene expression than those that contacted a noncoding anchor with no annotation (Mann WhitneyUtest CNSp< 0.0001, ATACp< 0.001, dREGfilteredp< 0.01, and Fig.6d).
Loops with an ATAC site had the lowest median gene expression among the sequence features analyzed.
In contrast, the presence of dREG-filtered locations was associated with the highest median gene expression.
However, it is important to note that the number of loops analyzed for dREG-filtered regions was more than ten times lower due to the filtering steps applied to retain likely enhancer-like candidates.
Gene ontology enrichment analysis highlighted more similarities in pathways or function for genes in contact loops with all three classes of regulatory sites, than what we saw with gene in proximity to these sites, particularly regarding metabolic processes (Additional files 4–6).
However, we still detected an enrichment for biological processes related to response to stress and response to stimulus for ATAC-gene loops, while CNS-gene loops were enriched for development and reproduction.
Interestingly, genes in loops in contact with dREGpostfilter+distalsites appear to have functions related to hormone regulation and chromatin organization, although the limited number of genes impacted the significance of some of the terms (Additional files 4–6).
As expected, fewer loops contained a combination of sequence features, with 27 loops having all three classes of sequences (Supplementary file 1: Fig. S27).
As an orthogonal approach to investigate the gene regulatory functions of dREG peaks, we identified expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) associated with gene expression across a panel of rice varieties and intersected those eQTLs with dREG, CNSs, and ATAC sequence features.
Using gene expression and SNP data from 84 japonica rice accessions grown in well-watered field conditions [88] we detected 489,248 eQTLs after an FDR of 5%.
We intersected the significant eQTLs with our sequence features and found an overlap of 1169 eQTLs with dREGfiltered, 11,656 with ATAC, and 886 with intergenic CNS.
To test the significance of the observed overlap, we generated a distribution by randomly sampling the potentially non-functional regions of the genome, which were matched for size and total number of CNS, ATAC, and dREG locations.
We first examined these three types of genomic classes that were limited to those forming loops with genes and potentially involved in transcription (identified and analyzed in Fig.6d).
Results showed that the observed number of overlaps between eQTLs and dREGpostfilter+distalsite was higher than the maximum number of overlaps in the distribution across random regions, indicating dREGpostfilter+distalsites are enriched for eQTLs (Fig.6e).
eQTLs in ATAC locations were not significantly represented, while the trend being towards an underrepresentation compared to random regions.
CNS regions were significantly underrepresented for this given eQTL panel (Fig.6e).
We note that the dREGpostfilter+distalsites were close to α=0.05, but the sample size (i.e., number of dREG sites in loops) was much smaller than ATAC and CNS.
We expanded our eQTLs analysis by considering overlap with all dREGpostfilter, CNS intergenic and ATAC intergenic, regardless of loops, and found a similar trend, with the increased sample size increasing the significant.
For example, ATAC peaks were now significantly underrepresented for eQTLs, while eQTLs in dREGpostfiltersites were more significantly overrepresented (Additional file 1: Figs.
Taken together, these results suggest that a number of elements, including dREGpostfiltersites, could be valuable candidate transcribed regulatory elements that could impact gene activity by promoting transcription.
The rice genome encodes a large number of transcripts that require spatio-temporal regulation and for which many of thec-CREs remain to be characterized.
In this study, we explored conservation and complementary functional genomics sequence features in the rice (O. sativa) cultivar Azucena to characterize CREssthat have emerged at genomic sites.
Azucena is a tropical japonica landrace often used as a parent line in rice breeding programs, and its regulatory diversity has likely not been affected by repeated artificial selection during modern rice breeding [43].
We found that the three sequence features used in this study—a set of CNSs conserved across theOryzagenus, accessible chromatin regions specific to the Azucena genome, and elements detected from bi-directional transcription (dREG sites), likely have distinct regulatory functions, as summarized in Fig.7.
These sites do not overlap significantly more than may be expected by chance alone and are not enriched for similar motifs.
One hypothesis for this would be that they may not share converging evolutionary trajectories with respect to emerging and established constraint.
A lack of spatial co-enrichment would not necessarily preclude different types of sites from sharing similar functions, as it would still be possible for these different types of sites to share binding-motif similarities; we did not, however, observe similarly enriched sequences or even similar levels of sequence complexity between these site classes.
Consequently, the hypothesis that these elements are proto-CNS sequences whose novelty or translocation precludes alignment between species, may be tentatively rejected due to the uniqueness of motif profiles to each regulatory class (Fig.2).
Similarly, the tandem reiteration of short simple sequences in open chromatin sites that were not CNSs suggests considerable robustness to mutations, and hence low constraint.
In contrast, more complex CNS sequences that may be present in one or two copies in a promoter are more likely to result in phenotypic change after disruption, leading in turn to their higher levels of constraint.
Studies have frequently focused on the characterization of regulatory elements in regions at or immediately upstream of TSS [89].
But even given the difficulty of precisely predicting TSS sites for plant genes, we wished to examine potential upstream sites to potential regulatory elements downstream of the TSS (Fig.2), as well as much more distal elements.
This suggests that CNSs and dREG sites were not only enriched upstream, but also downstream of TSS (500 bp), particularly in genes with high density of CNSs.
However, the frequency of motifs enriched, such as GAGC, were subtly shifted between these two locations.
This is consistent with recent findings (Voichek et al. [89]) that also show an asymmetric impact of position with respect to TSS for binding sites such as those similar to the GATC motif in populations ofA.
Further analysis of such position-dependent enhancers could help better understand regulatory element movement and activity (from proximal to distal, or from downstream/upstream regions).
One of the observations made in this study that distinguished CNSs from dREG and ATAC regions is the impact of the presence of repetitive elements enriched in the detected dREG locations and ATAC peaks (Fig.4).
For dREG and ATAC peaks that partially or entirely overlapped with annotated repetitive elements, we detected a higher percentage of methylation across all three cytosine contexts.
Interestingly, we observed an increase in CHH methylation, which occurs predominantly at TEs, and has been shown to be involved in the prevention of transposon jumping during development in Arabidopsis [17,104]; this methylation occurs through the plant-specific RdDM pathway that operates via noncoding RNA [105].
The fact that DNA methylation can positively or negatively impact transcriptional activity, for example by modulating binding affinity of TFs, makes it a confounding factor when characterizing candidate transcribed regulatory elements.
In plants, we argue that methylation profiles should always be considered with PRO-seq sequence features to characterize the intergenic transcription signal.
Finally, further characterization eRNA producing regions using alternative methods to detect eRNAs, even at low level, will help us better understand whether assumptions derived from mammalian studies hold true in plants.
Recently, McDonald et al. [36] used capped small (cs)RNA sequencing to study the stability of detected bi-directional transcripts inA.
thaliana, rice and other plants.
They suggest that unstable transcripts, often a feature of 2D-eRNAs in mammals, are rare in plants and found low overlap with published self-transcribing active regulatory region (STARR) sequencing, another method used to identify candidate enhancers [12].
Instead, they propose that the bi-directional signal correspond to elements generating stable RNAs (likely promoters).
Integrating evolutionary constraint, chromatin accessibility, and intergenic bidirectional nascent transcription, we reveal complementary layers ofcis‑regulation in rice.
TE‑poor conserved noncoding and bidirectionally transcribed accessible regions loop to gene promoters, co‑localize with eQTLs and coincide with elevated expression, which suggests an enhancer‑like activity.
Future work focusing on better understand the line between promoters, enhancers, and regulation incisversustrans, due to the relative instability of eRNAS [29,106], in plants, could help us detect plant-specific hallmarks of enhancers, in addition to eRNAs.
Seeds ofO.
sativalandrace Azucena (PI 439017; tropical Japonica) were provided by the U.S.
National Plant Germplasm (USDA) and were used to generate ATAC-seq libraries.
Seeds were sown on soil supplemented with Fe2SO4 and Jack’s Fertilizer solution.
Plants were grown for 15 days in growth chambers (12-h days; 30 °C/20 °C day/night; 300–500 μmol quanta m − 2 s − 1; relative humidity: 50–70%).
Leaf tissue for library construction was collected from 17-day-old, young plants.
ATAC-seq was performed according to the protocol of Buenrostro et al. and Zhang & Jiang [107,108].
Libraries were prepared from frozen plant tissue.
0.2–0.3 g flash frozen plant material was ground to a fine powder and completely dissolved in ice-cold nuclei isolation buffer (NIB; 10 mM Tris–HCL, 80 mM KCl, 10 mM EDTA, 1 mM spermidine, 1 mM spermine, 0.15% 2-mercaptoethanol, 0.5 M sucrose pH 9.5).
The mixture was filtered through Miracloth (Millopore Sigma, Cat.
# 475,855) and pelleted by centrifugation at 1100 ×gfor 10 min at 4 °C.
The pellet was washed twice in 10 ml nuclei washing buffer [NWB; NIB with 0.5% Triton X-100 (Sigma, Cat.
# T8787)] and again pelleted by centrifugation (1100 ×gfor 10 min at 4 °C).
The nuclei were equilibrated in 10 ml nuclei digestion buffer (NDB; 10 mM Tris–HCl, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2pH 7.4) and centrifuged at 1100 ×gfor 10 min at 4 °C.
The nuclei were resuspended in resuspension buffer (RSB; 20 mM Tris–HCl, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2pH 7.4), stained using the nucleic acid intercalator propidium iodide, and counted using the BD FACSJazz cell sorter.
Afterwards, the nuclei were pelleted via centrifugation at 1100 ×gfor 10 min at 4 °C.
A total of 50,000 nuclei were resuspended in a transposition reaction mix [Tagment DNA (TD) buffer, Tagment DNA Enzyme (TDE1) (Illumina, Cat.
# 20,034,210), H2O] and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min while being gently shaken.
The samples were purified using the QIAgen MinElute PCR Purification Kit (Cat.
# 28,004) and eluted in ten µl elution buffer.
The tagmented samples were amplified and tagged with custom sequencing primer.
The resulting libraries were purified a second time using the QIAgen MinElute PCR Purification Kit and size-selected with AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter, Cat.
# A63880).
Libraries were sequenced using Illumina protocol for 2 × 100 bp on an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 with configuration S4.
Sequenced reads were quality checked using the FASTQC tool (https://github.com/s-andrews/FastQC).
The reads were 3’ trimmed to cut the adapters and parts of the reads with low quality (q > 20) using Trimmomatic (v.
0.39) [109] with the options -headcrop:10 -minlen:16 and -slidingwondow:5:20.
The reads were then aligned with the reference genome ofOryza sativajaponica Azucena (https://ftp.ensemblgenomes.ebi.ac.uk/pub/plants/release-57/fasta/oryza_sativa_azucena/dna/) using the Bowtie2 (v.
2.4.4) [110] tool with the options -very-sensitive -X 1000.
The Azucena reference genome included the chloroplast sequence (genbank ID:GU592207.1) to allow chloroplast originating ATAC-seq reads and were subsequently removed using Samtools (v.
1.17) [111].
The duplicates were removed using Markduplicates (Picard v.
2.26.3https://broadinstitute.github.io/picard/command-line-overview.html#MarkDuplicates) followed by a shift of the reads of 4 bp on the positive strand and 5 bp on the negative strand due to the transposase binding using Deeptools (v.
ATAC peaks were called using MACS2 (v.
[113] peak calling function using genome size of Azucena rice and the options recommended for ATAC peak calling (-q 0.01 -g 379,627,553 –nomodel —shift 37 —extsize 73).
FRIP scores for quality check were obtained using FeatureCounts tool (subreadv.
2.0.6https://github.com/ShiLab-Bioinformatics/subread) An informed cutoff signal of 350 was determined to retain high-confidence ATAC peaks.
At 350, we observed a gradual enrichment of ATAC peaks for dREG sites and a decrease in peak coverage for regions 500 bp upstream of TSS (see Additional file 1: Fig. S6).
Access to the chromatin accessibility track is available via genome browser screenshots for visualization (see Additional file 1: Figs.
Sequencing libraries for small RNA-seq were prepared as described in Joly-Lopez et al. [25].
First reads were trimmed for quality (q < 20) and adapter sequence (Trimmomatic v.
0.39) [109] and only reads longer than 10 bp and shorter than 40 bp were retained (-m 10 -M 40) (Cutadapt 1.11) [114].
Azucena and Nipponbare chloroplast genomes were indexed using bowtie-build and reads were aligned using Bowtie 2.2.9 [110] with the options -n 0 and -k 10.
Reads were then counted using FeatureCounts (subread 2.0.3) [115].
sRNA localizations were identified in bam files with fasta sequence of small RNA found in Nipponbare genome and stacked against the genome of Azucena using Shortstack (https://github.com/MikeAxtell/ShortStack).
ChIP-seq libraries were prepared as described in Joly-Lopez et al. [25].
Libraries were sequenced as 2 × 50-bp reads on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 instrument.
Two biological replicates were generated, and a third replicate, generated under the same conditions and used in a previous study [25], was used (SRA: SRX7082158 H3K4me3; SRX7082157 H3K18Ac; SRX7082156 H3K27Ac; SRX7082153 H3K27me3; Bioproject: PRJNA586887).
Sequencing reads were adapter trimmed and QC controlled using the script bbduk.sh ver.
38.90 (https://sourceforge.net/projects/bbmap/) with parameters: minlen = 16 qtrim = rl trimq = 20 ktrim = r k = 19 mink = 10 hdist = 1 tpe tbo.
Trimmed reads were aligned to the Azucena reference genome [44] (Bioproject PRJNA424001) using Bowtie 2 version 2.4.2.
[110] under option very-sensitive and with the parameter -X 1000.
ChIP-Seq peak calling was performed using MACS2, with input DNA used as a control and with the parameters -g 4.0e8 –bw 200 -B -m 3 50.
Access to the histone modification track is available via genome browser screenshots for visualization (see Additional file 1: Figs.
Bisulfite sequencing libraries to measure DNA methylation were prepared as described in Joly-Lopez et al. [25].
One biological replicate was generated and a second replicate, generated under the same conditions and used in a previous study [25], was used (SRA: SRX7082155; Bioproject: PRJNA586887).
Libraries were sequenced using Illumina protocols for 2 × 100-bp reads on an Illumina HiSeq 2500.
Raw bisulfite sequencing (BS-seq) reads quality controlled using the program trim galore Ver.
0.6.6 (http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/trim_galore/) with default parameters.
We used bismark version 0.16.3 [116] for mapping the Bisulfite-seq reads and deduplicating reads and methylation percentage were calculated as done in Choi and Purugganan [117] where methylation was determined using a binomial distribution test.
Cytosine sites withp-values less than 0.001 were then considered as sites with significant evidence of methylation.
PRO-seq libraries were prepared as described in Joly-Lopez et al. [25].
The two replicates used in this study were generated as two independent experiments but growth in similar conditions.
The raw reads were then used on the Proseq2.0 (https://github.com/Danko-Lab/proseq2.0) pipeline that automatically pre-processes the reads, aligns to the reference genome, and generates output bigWig files for downstream PRO-seq peak calling analysis.
Theqvalue was adjusted to 20.
To identify peaks of divergent transcription activity we used the bigwig file generated from the previous step as an input for the cloud computing version of the dREG algorithm (https://dreg.dnasequence.org/).
dREG peaks were then obtained from two replicates.
An enrichment analysis of dREG peak locations identified in each replicate shows an enrichment of 13.32 × compared to an equal number of randomly positioned peaks of identical size.
To select dREG peaks candidates, regions that overlapped in both replicates as well as candidates that were located within 100 bp from one another in both replicates were selected for the following steps.
Access to the PRO-seq tracks is available via genome browser screenshots for visualization (see Additional file 1: Fig. S31-S39).
We generated Pore-C libraries following the protocol of Choi et al. [118], and sequencing library was prepared using the Oxford Nanopore Technologies standard ligation sequencing kit SQK-LSK109.
Sequencing was conducted on a GridION X5 and PromethION sequencer and the raw data were base-called by Oxford Nanopore Technologies basecaller Guppy version 4.4.0 (available onhttps://community.nanoporetech.com/) on high-accuracy mode.
The Pore-C data analysis was conducted using the Pore-C snakemake workflow developed by Oxford Nanopore Technologies (https://github.com/nanoporetech/Pore-C-Snakemake).
Briefly, the pipeline first aligns the nanopore Pore-C chromosome contact sequence reads to the Azucena genome using bwa-sw version 0.7.17-r1188 [52] with parameters -b 5 -q 2 -r 1 -T 15 -z 10.
The alignment BAM file was processed with Pore-C tools (https://github.com/nanoporetech/pore-c) to filter spurious alignments, detect ligation junctions, and assign fragments that originated from the same chromosomal contacts.
The workflow also generates cool and hic files that can be used for downstream analysis.
The Pore-C contact matrix generated from the previous analysis was normalized using the KR algorithm [119] with the computational suite HiCExplorer version 3.4 [120].
Using the normalized contact matrix the algorithm topdom [121] was used to call TADs as the method was shown recently to be a highly efficient and accurate method for detecting TADs.
The topdom analysis was conducted using a 5 kb resolution contact matrix.
Pore-C contact matrix was also used to statistically determine the significant chromatin contacts using the program FitHiC2 [87].
Using the genomic distance between windows and their contact probability, FitHiC2 applies a spline fit to model an empirical null distribution and detect chromatin contacts as outliers to this null distribution.
FitHiC2 was run with default parameters using the 5kbp resolution contact matrix, while setting the lower bound on the intra-chromosomal distance range (parameter -L) as 10 kb and upper bound (parameter -U) as 1 Mb.
Candidate chromosome loops were filtered by selecting for window pairs that had a Benjamini–Hochberg procedure based false discovery rate threshold q-value < 0.05.
Window pairs that had significant evidence of contact were then classified as whether it was a coding or noncoding window by defining a coding window as those that contained more than 100 bp (i.e., greater than 2% of the window) of coding sequences.
As the released Azucena reference on ENSEMBL [122,123] lacked some gene annotations, we lifted coordinates from the well annotated rice cultivar Nipponbare to supplement the annotation; both Azucena and Nipponbare are members of the rice subspecies japonica.
Azucena and Nipponbare syntenic alignments showed that both have similar levels of completeness and contiguity and thus provided confidence in our analyses using annotation in Azucena (Additional file 1: Figs.
The small regions that mapped between different chromosomes in Azucena and Nipponbare do not represent evidence of reorganization but rather retained regions from an ancient grass tetraploidy event [124].
Coordinate translation used chain alignments from the comparative genomic analysis and the liftOver program from Kent tools UCSC [125] to complement the Azucena annotations with translated Nipponbare annotations.
Repeat sequences were identified using a combination of a de novo consensus library generated by RepeatModeler pipeline [126] and a collection of transposable elements classified within the Poales order from dFAM database [127].
Consensus library was created using three closely related rice genomes:O. sativa cv.Azucena,O.
sativa cv.Nipponbare, andO.
sativa subsp.
The final annotation of transposable element coordinates in Azucena genome was then performed by running RepeatMasker program [http://www.repeatmasker.org] with "slow search" parameter and the previously combined library.
Enrichment between genomic features was achieved using featureBits (Kent tools: UCSC) [125], with genomic data regions as input.
The optional enrichment parameter was included to calculate coverage and enrichment relative to an independent and identically distributed assumption.
Association analysis of genomic regions was conducted using regioneR package [128] with overlapPermTest function to evaluate associations between feature classes and eQTLs sets with 1000 permutation tests each.
Parameters included keeping random regions into the same chromosome, avoiding overlap, and restricting them to intergenic regions.
Classification of dREG peak regions according to their genomic annotation was performed using Bedtools [129] with the intersect command, requiring at least 1 bp of overlap.
The results were visualized with an Upset plot using UpsetR package [130].
Overlaps between peaks from different annotations are indicated by connected nodes, and the number of overlapping peaks is displayed in the bar chart above.
Profile of functional genomic reads around peaks of interest was generated using the program computeMatrix from DeepTools [112] with scale-regions mode selected.
Graphs were then plot with plotProfile function.
For each genomic annotated region, signals between chromatin marks were summed and normalized by site length.
Correlation plot matrix was then calculated using the Pearson correlation method.
The Lastz/PHAST approach previously described [25] for identifying conserved noncoding sequences under selection based on a 14-way alignment of species in the grass tribe Oryzeae was used with a minor change—theLeersia perrierigenome that aligned only weakly to the japonica reference was substituted by the recent high-quality genome,Oryza granulata(GG genome type) [131].
This helped to improve multiple alignment completeness in more distal genomes and consequently the updated analysis generated 95,670 CNS sequences, about 4% more than previously detected.
Applying the same PhastCons constraint threshold as used to define CNSs (≥ 0.82) identified a total of 24,290,806 constrained bases in the Azucena reference genome.
This is highly consistent with what was reported by Haudry et al. [49] forArabidopsis lyrata, where approximately 22 million bases were under selective constraint, with ~ 89% located in CDSs and ~ 11% in noncoding regions.
Furthermore, Haudry et al. noted thatA.
lyrataexhibited a lower proportion of constrained noncoding bases compared toA.
thaliana, potentially due to challenges associated with aligning TE-rich genomic regions.
This trend, where larger, more repetitive genomes show a reduced fraction of identifiable constrained noncoding elements, is also observed in our Azucena dataset.
Additional file 1: Fig S1.
Circos plot for synteny links and gene density.
Synmap dotplot about syntenic links.
Distribution CNS.
Correlation between PRO-seq replicates.
PRO-seq signal within and around annotated regions.
dREG characteristics.
Overlap analysis between dREG locations, ATAC peaks and CNSs.
Percentage coverage of CNS, ATAC-seq and dREG peaks.
Gene ontology analysis for annotated rice genes with top 1,000 CNS content.
Gene ontology analysis for annotated rice genes with top 1,000 ATAC content.
Gene ontology analysis for annotated rice genes with top 709 dREG content.
Fig S13.De novomotif analysis for the top enriched 6-8 bp motifs found in CNSs.
Fig S14.De novomotif analysis for the top enriched 6-8 bp motifs found in dREG locations and ATAC peaks.
CHH methylation within and around of dREG sites.
H3K27me3 signal profile within and around CNS based on their locations.
Methylation profile through the selection of dREG candidates.
Epigenetic marks for coding and repetitive sequences in the rice genome.
Percentage methylation by context within and around intergenic dREG locations and their percentage of overlap with TEs.
Correlation of the percentage of cytosine methylation in all three contexts.
sRNA and ATAC enrichment analysis in dREG sites by bin score.
Enrichment analysis for dREG sites with TE overlap.
Chromatin marks within and around dREG post-filtering.
Gene expression analysis based on the proximity of dREG sites.
Epigenetic marks surrounding TAD boundaries.
Distribution of loops detected by Pore-C for dREGdistalpeaks.
Expression levels analysis of genes present in genic loops with a contact of a noncoding region.
Association analysis between eQTLs regions and dREGpostfiltersites.
Association analysis between eQTLs regions and ATAC intergenic regions.
Association analysis between eQTLs regions and CNS intergenic regions.
Genome Browser view of an Azucena locus (GAPDH).
Genome Browser view of the Azucena locus (WRKY5).
Genome Browser view of an Azucena intergenic region.
Genome Browser view of an Azucena intergenic region with three types of regulatory elements.
Genome Browser view of the Azucena genome #1.
Genome Browser view of the Azucena genome #2.
Genome Browser view of the Azucena genome #3.
Genome Browser view of the Azucena genome #4.
Genome Browser view of the Azucena genome #5.
Additional file 3: Table S1.
PRO-seq summary statistics.
ATAC-seq summary statistics.
ChIP-seq summary statistics.
Transposable elements percentage overlap by annotation Summary.
sRNA-seq summary statistics.
Table S6: Pore-C summary statistics.
Additional file 8: Total and postfilter dREG genomic coordinates.
We would like to thank David Xiaoguang Dai, Priyesh Rughani, Scott Hickey, Eoghan Harrington, and Sissel Juul from Oxford Nanopore Technologies for their assistance on the Pore-C data generation.
We thank the New York University Center for Genomics and Systems Biology GenCore Facility for sequencing support.
We also thank the CERMO-FC for sequencing support.
This research was enabled in part by support provided by Calcul Québec (https://www.calculquebec.ca) and the Digital Research Alliance of Canada (alliancecan.ca).