Quality improvement (QI) training and experience is increasingly being recognised as a mandatory core area of residency training.
This was a QI initiative to develop and evaluate a QI Fundamentals teaching curriculum for psychiatry residents, in an effective and time‐efficient manner.
Using principles from the bookTeaching QI in Residency Education, we developed and evaluated a workshop for first year psychiatry residents.
Educational material on QI methods and tools was emailed to the residents a week prior to the 3.5‐h workshop, which entailed a 50‐min didactic session followed by two interactive sessions of 60 min each with both small group and large group components.
Effectiveness was assessed using the Self‐Assessment Program (SAP), a standardised, validated tool for assessing QI competencies, over 3 consecutive academic year cohorts.
The SAP evaluates the trainee's comfort level in 10 domains, regarding their current skills with various aspects of quality improvement.
Twenty‐three residents completed the pre‐ and post‐SAP.
There was a significant improvement in post‐SAP versus pre‐SAP scores in each of the 3 years in all of the 10 domains.
The results suggest that this interactive QI workshop may be an effective and time‐efficient model for imparting fundamental QI education to junior psychiatry residents and may be easily replicated by other programmes in psychiatry or other medical specialties, in particular where there are constraints in terms of time, funding and expertise in QI.
This interactive QI workshop may be an effective and time‐efficient model for imparting fundamental QI education to junior psychiatry residents.
Quality improvement (QI) and patient safety (PS) training is now an essential requirement in residency training across the world.
In Canada, the CanMEDS framework and the 2020 Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada (RCPSC) Psychiatry Competencies document require several competencies specific to QI [1].
Similar requirements have been implemented by the US Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME) [2].
A few psychiatry residency programmes in Canada and the United States have implemented extensive QI curricula, combining a series of interactive teaching sessions with a longitudinal QI project, demonstrating improvement in residents' knowledge and skills using validated assessment tools.
These involve multiple seminars and experiential engagement in the designing, implementation and presentation of a QI project, requiring significant formal teaching (~10–15 h over the year) and supervision commitments [3,4,5].
Practical experience in QI is optimal to understand the methodology and develop related skills, but not all residency programmes currently have the resources (funding, practical support and expertise) for this; there are also time constraints due to multiple other essential training requirements during residency [6,7,8,9,10].
These were barriers in our programme as well, so we explored an educational model that would be both effective and time efficient.
In this report, we share our experience of developing and evaluating a 3.5‐h workshop for teaching QI to first‐year psychiatry residents, as a QI initiative in its own right.
In order to meet the QI training requirements of the updated 2020 RCPSC psychiatry competency document [1], a QI initiative was undertaken to update our QI curriculum in the psychiatry residency program.
Until 2019–2020, our QI curriculum consisted of only an introductory 90‐min session on QI in the first postgraduate year (PGY1).
The lecturer who delivered the session as well as feedback from the residents highlighted that there was insufficient time to cover the topic adequately.
The following curriculum changes were introduced starting the 2020–2021 academic year: (a) a 3.5‐h interactive workshop on the fundamentals of QI in the PGY1 year; (b) a 2‐h workshop in PGY3, with a didactic component and two interactive problems for review of QI skills; and (c) Two reflective exercises related to PS/QI incidents, completed by all residents using a standardised template, on the basis of their clinical encounters.
Additionally, our residents are encouraged to consider a QI project as their mandatory scholarly project depending upon their interest and availability of supervisors.
For the purpose of this report, we will focus specifically on the development and evaluation of the 3.5‐h workshop introduced in the PGY1 curriculum.
The guiding principles from the book released by the RCPSC on ‘teaching QI in residency education’ [11] were used to develop and evaluate a fundamental level of QI curriculum locally.
Key principles are that QI competencies: need to be measurable, for assessment purposes; should conform to external validated criteria, such as national and local accreditation standards for health facilities; should reflect best practices, both now and in the future; should be amenable to iterative changes; and use plain language and avoid jargon to ensure that both the teacher and the learner understand what is required in a competency.
The workshop was developed and facilitated by one of the authors, a psychiatrist‐clinician with training in QI.
Educational material on QI methods and tools was emailed to the residents a week before the workshop, and they were encouraged to study the material in preparation for the workshop.
This included a copy of the Health Quality Ontario QI guide [12].
This 55‐page document provides an introduction to the concept of QI, describes QI case studies and details the model for improvement and QI methods/tools.
The topics covered in the PGY1 workshop are summarised in Table1.
The workshop (see Table2) involves a variety of educational methods, held virtually beginning with a didactic session with opportunities for interactive learning followed by brief question‐and‐answer time.
Then two interactive sessions take place, involving breakout groups of 3–4 (using the virtual break‐out rooms) to look at a specific problem and answer structured questions followed by large group discussion.
The theme of the two problems is based on real projects that have been conducted locally: (1) reducing wait times and ‘no show’ rates in an urgent consultation service and (2) improving physical health monitoring of patients receiving antipsychotic medications.
The workshop ends with reviewing the template that residents should use while completing two structured reflective exercises subsequently during their residency, providing a list of potential QI projects/supervisors available locally and receiving any verbal feedback on the workshop.
We mapped the topics (Table1) onto the Self‐Assessment Program (SAP) domains by aligning each objective with specific QI concepts: Start with defining a problem statement and aim using the IHI model [13].
Apply professional knowledge by discussing evidence‐based practices.
We guided students in developing appropriate measures and studying care processes using QI tools like fishbone diagrams.
We covered data collection and analysis within the PDSA cycle [14], introducing statistical process control.
Lastly, we discussed the roles of healthcare professionals and implementing a structured change plan to ensure practical QI application.
This workshop integrates the flipped classroom format by providing residents with QI materials in advance, allowing in‐session time to focus on application rather than passive learning [15].
Active learning is emphasised through small group problem‐solving exercises based on real clinical scenarios [15].
The structured discussions promote engagement, which is also self‐directed and problem‐centred, consistent with adult learning theory [16,17].
Moreover, the group work supports collaborative learning, in keeping with social constructivist theory [18,19].
As a quality improvement initiative, this project was exempted from research ethics board (REB) approval.
The effectiveness of this QI workshop was assessed using the SAP, a standardised, validated tool for assessing QI competencies [11,20].
The SAP consists of 10 standard questions and assesses the comfort level of the trainee regarding their current skills with various aspects of quality improvement in the context of a QI project, ranging from developing an initial aim, establishing a plan, measuring and evaluating the results and sustaining the changes achieved (see Figure1for the complete skills list).
The trainees may mark the answer from 1 to 4 (1not at all comfortable; 2slightly; 3moderately; 4extremely comfortable).
Paired two‐tailedt‐tests were used to calculate the difference in overall scores from baseline, as well as for the individual domain scores of the SAP.
Comparison of residents' pre‐ and post‐test self‐assessment scores.
1 =not at all comfortableto 4 =extremely comfortable.
In total, 25 residents attended the PGY1 workshop over the period of 3 years, and 23 residents completed the pre/post (n= 8 in 2020–21,n= 7 in 2021–22,n= 8 in 2022–23).
There was a significant improvement in post‐SAP versus pre‐SAP scores each year as summarised in Table3.
Collectively, residents went from initially having an average pre‐workshop individual domain score of 2.2 to a post‐workshop score of 3.1; essentially overall moving from slightly to moderately comfortable in their self‐assessment of QI competencies after the 3.5‐h workshop.
Ratings in each of the 10 domains improved significantly at thep< 0.001 level after the workshop, except for the data analysis topic being at thep< 0.05 level (Figure1).
The comparison of pre‐ and post‐workshop SAP scores suggests that this PGY1 interactive workshop on QI involving a variety of educational methods may be an effective time and resource‐efficient model for imparting fundamental QI education to psychiatry residents.
We believe that this model could be replicated by other programmes in psychiatry or other medical specialties, in particular where there are constraints in terms of time, funding and expertise in QI.
Although we chose to focus on the topics relevant to our hospital, any programme could pick local problematic areas to enliven the discussion over the utility of a QI approach to real‐life situations.
We believe that this model could be replicated by other programmes in psychiatry or other medical specialties.
A limitation of our report is though SAP is a simple self‐assessment tool for QI that can be used recurrently, it only reflects a subjective sense of QI learning and thus may not correlate with objective improvements in QI knowledge and skills.
Additionally using a tool such as the Quality Improvement Knowledge Application Tool Revised [21] could objectively measure such outcomes.
Although this new learning experience format was not designed to measure which specific components most contributed to its success (as shown by SAP score improvement), we are of the impression that a time‐limited intensive workshop incorporating a variety of learning methods is likely key.
Future workshop iterations and investigations could be designed to address this question.
Additionally, the longer‐term impact of this PGY1 workshop on residents' ability and motivation to conduct CQI projects may be assessed by measuring how many of our residents participate in QI projects (as their longitudinal scholarly project, which is a mandatory requirement in our programme) prior to the end of their training.