Cancer treatment for adolescents and young adults (AYA) can be highly challenging and interferes with optimal nutrition, which is vital for healthy development, physical growth, and well-being.
Cancer malnutrition and associated negative outcomes are well-studied in adult and paediatric populations, but the specific nutrition complications and requirements for AYA with cancer are poorly understood.
This study aims to explore and describe the nutritional status, needs and outcomes of AYA after a diagnosis of cancer.
The AYCANN-study (adolescent and young adult cancer nutrition project) adopts a mixed-methods study design, conducted over three inter-related studies; (1) Prospective observational study of AYA between 15 and 25 years, following diagnosis of any cancer type, to quantitatively assess changes in body weight, muscle mass/function, nutritional status, and health related quality of life (HRQoL).
Study assessments will be undertaken at four time-points (recruitment, and 2- 4- and 6-months post-recruitment) and will include screening for nutrition risk (PNST or MST); assessment of nutritional status (PG-SGA, mid-upper arm circumference); assessment of muscle strength (hand-grip strength); frequency of dietitian referral, nutrition support and symptoms; and assessment of health-related quality of life (AQoL-6D); (2) Qualitative study using focus groups with AYA to assess access to nutrition related care and preference for nutrition services; (3) Qualitative study, utilising focus groups with oncology healthcare professionals (OHP) to explore and assess current access to nutrition-related care for AYA following a cancer diagnosis along with OHP nutrition education needs, service delivery and research priority areas.
For study 1, statistical analysis will be primarily descriptive, and effect size estimates (Cohen’s d) will be used to characterise any differences between nutritional status groups at follow-up assessments.
Thematic analysis will be undertaken for study 2 and 3 to understand patients and OHP access to and experience of nutrition-related care.
This multi-site longitudinal study will explore and describe the nutritional status, needs and nutrition-related outcomes of AYA after a cancer diagnosis.
Results will inform future clinical practice guidelines and interventional nutrition research targeting patients identified at greater risk of nutritional complications.
Adolescents and young adults (AYA) aged 15 to 25, experience cancer and its treatment at a time of significant developmental transition.
The myriad of impacts across biological, psychological, and social domains influence physical development, mental health, educational and vocational achievement and the transition to independence and autonomy [1,2].
While cancer in young people is rare, the intersection of development, cancer and its treatment can have a significant impact on their immediate and long-term health and wellbeing [3,4].
Optimal diet and nutrition play an integral role in cancer care by enhancing the ability for an individual to manage treatment, promoting recovery during and post-treatment and supporting patients suffering from sarcopenia or cancer related malnutrition [5,6].
Cancer malnutrition is prevalent with significant consequences for patients and health services [7–10].
Cancer and its treatments can cause various symptoms such as taste changes, appetite loss, weight loss, pain, nausea, mucositis and bowel disturbance/malabsorption impacting an individuals’ ability to eat well and receive optimal nutrition for recovery and quality of life [11,12].
The occurrence of malnutrition during cancer treatment is associated with increased toxicity, reduced treatment response, longer hospitalizations, reduced quality of life and increased mortality [9,10,13].
Malnutrition and unfavourable clinical outcomes have been extensively researched in both older adult and paediatric (< 16 years) cancer populations [8,14,15].
Similarly, for both adult and paediatric populations there is strong evidence for early and regular nutrition screening and subsequent nutrition assessment, treatment and support to people following a cancer diagnosis and as they transition into survivorship [7,8,10,16–18].
For example, the COSA position statement on cancer-related malnutrition and sarcopenia recommends using validated screening tools such as the Malnutrition Screening Tool and validated malnutrition assessment tools such as the Patient-Generated Subjective Global Assessment (PG-SGA), which are critical to identify malnutrition and enable early intervention in order to optimise the nutritional status of cancer patients [10].
While evidence-based nutrition screening practices and interventions used in paediatric and adult populations may be appropriate for the AYA setting, this remains an area yet to be extensively studied, and therefore, such interventions may require adaptation to suit the specific needs of individuals aged 15–25 years.
Evidence specifically for the AYA population and their needs requires further investigation [19].
There is limited published data on the prevalence of nutrition disorders such as malnutrition and sarcopenia in this age group, as well as the nutrition-related experiences, needs and services required for the AYA population after a cancer diagnosis.
Guidelines for the clinical management of AYA with cancer highlight the importance of nutrition-related education and interventions for this population [20].
Preparing AYA for their long-term health and well-being is a central component of comprehensive cancer care.
Nutrition assessment is essential both during acute treatment, where it can boost therapy effectiveness and lower morbidity and mortality, and after treatment, where it promotes long-term health and well-being.
Early investment in enhancing dietary habits for AYA can lead to substantial long-term benefits [21].
However, whilst previous research shows AYA consider information on nutrition, diet and exercise as important and of high priority during cancer treatment, for many this remains an unmet need after cancer diagnosis [22–25].
This study aims to provide detailed information on the nutritional impact of cancer on AYA and their outcomes.
Specifically, it seeks to address the gaps in knowledge and establish evidence for the specific nutrition needs of AYA undergoing cancer treatment, including the optimal timing and mode of delivery for nutrition care in young people with cancer.
Furthermore, we aim to investigate the prevalence of nutrition disorders and nutrition-related outcomes of AYA undergoing treatment.
Study findings will generate evidence to inform future research, nutrition screening procedures and contribute to the development of an evidence-based nutrition intervention program for AYA.
The purpose of this manuscript is to describe the AYCANN study and its methodological design over the three interrelated studies and provide an overview of the study objectives.
This study will use a mixed-methods design, to investigate the nutritional status, nutrition-related outcomes and needs of AYA following a cancer diagnosis.
The study will employ Embedded Design in which the qualitative component (Study 2 and Study 3) will be conducted concurrently with the quantitative data collection (Fig.1) [26].
This methodology will provide additional rich data on the nutritional needs and priorities of this population, which cannot be examined using quantitative methods alone.
Study 2 (focus groups/interviews with AYA) will be conducted during the prospective longitudinal (quantitative) study period, with a sub-group of participants from Study 1 (via an opt-in approach) and additional recruitment of AYA in the later stages of their cancer treatment (eligible patients will be within 6 months of treatment completion), to capture experiences throughout treatment.
Study 3 will commence towards the end of the data collection period of Study 1 and will target oncology healthcare professionals (OHP).
The study will be conducted across paediatric and adult hospitals in metropolitan Melbourne, Australia [Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre (PMCC), Royal Melbourne Hospital (RMH), Royal Children’s Hospital (RCH), Monash Health (MH), and Monash Children’s Hospital (MCH)].
The study includes two groups: AYA with cancer and healthcare professionals delivering cancer care to the AYA population.
To be eligible to participate in this study (Study 1), the following criteria must be met; aged between 15 and 25 years of age; have a histologically confirmed diagnosis of cancer and recruited to study within 6 weeks of new diagnosis or relapsed diagnosis (and are ≥ 6 months since previous treatment completion), able to give informed consent and participate in the research project (i.e. no psychiatric/cognitive condition impairing their ability to provide consent or actively participate, deterioration in medical condition, i.e. admitted to ICU/Palliative care); and undergoing or planned for treatment at study sites.
AYA participants for focus groups/interviews (Study 2) must meet the eligibility criteria outlined above, but they are not required to have been recruited within 6 weeks of diagnosis.
To be eligible to participate in this study, healthcare professionals must be working at one of the study sites.
Oncology healthcare professionals (OHP) may include oncologists/radiation oncologists (adult and paediatric), nurses, dietitians, other allied health and psychosocial healthcare professionals who have worked with AYA cancer patients for a minimum of 2 years.
For Study 1, hospital clinic lists will be screened by the local research team.
AYA who meet the eligibility criteria will be approached by a member of the research team (research assistant (RA) or study investigator) and be provided with verbal and written information on the project, including study requirements and Participant Information and Consent Form (PICF).
Written informed consent will be obtained prior to participants undertaking any assessment measures or data collection by the RA.
Participants under the age of 18 will need parental/carer consent, in addition to their own consent.
Study 1 participants will be invited to join Study 2 (focus groups) on an opt-in basis (tick box on PICF).
To capture participants longer after a cancer diagnosis, an additional cohort of participants for Study 2 will also be approached by a member of the research team at study sites as per methods above.
Multidisciplinary healthcare professionals with experience in managing AYA patients, and working across recruitment sites, will be invited to participate in a focus group.
Eligible healthcare professionals will be identified by the study team at each recruitment site and an invitation to participate in Study 3 will be circulated to them via email, including the Participant Information Form (PIF).
Healthcare professionals will be required to read the PIF and provide verbal consent at commencement of the focus groups.
Study measures for Study 1 and the timing of assessments are summarised in Table1.
If weight loss or malnutrition is identified through nutritional assessments at any time during the study, and the participant has not been referred to a dietitian, the treating medical team will be notified.
A referral to the dietitian at the participant’s treatment site will then be arranged according to the standard hospital procedures for each site.
The RA will gather socio-demographic and baseline clinical data from either the medical record or directly from the participant (see Table1, data collected).
The MST is a validated screening tool for adult patients 18 years and older and commonly used in cancer patients to identify risk of malnutrition [27,28].
The MST will be completed by the RA for participants 18 years and older at each site in consultation with the patient and consists of two questions; change in appetite and unintentional loss of weight.
Participants who undergo the MST will be categorised as either ‘at malnutrition risk’ (MST score ≥ 2) or ‘not at risk of malnutrition’ (MST score 0–1).
The MST will be undertaken at all time points (T0, T2, T4, T6).
The PNST has been specifically developed to identify patients at risk of malnutrition up to the age of 18 years and will be utilised in this study for all participants under this age [29].
The PNST comprises of four questions; unintentional weight loss, occurrence of poor weight gain, reduced eating, and whether the child is underweight [30].
Participants will be classified as either ‘nutritional risk’ (PNST score≥2), or ‘no nutritional risk’ (PNST score 0–1).
The PNST will be undertaken at all time points (T0, T2, T4, T6).
The scored PG-SGA tool will be used to assess nutritional status and the presence of malnutrition [31].
The PG-SGA has been validated for use in adult (≥18 years) oncology patients and has high sensitivity and specificity in identifying the presence of malnutrition compared to other validated tools [32].
The PG-SGA will be undertaken at all time points (T0, T2, T4, T6) and administered to all participants in this study (15–25 years).
There is currently no validated instrument available for assessing nutritional status (presence of malnutrition) in people under 18 years of age.
The utilisation of the PG-SGA in all participants serves two objectives: (1) to establish a standardised methodology for assessing nutritional status among all participants, and (2) to assess potential clinical utility of the PG-SGA in young people with cancer between 15 and 18 years of age.
Clinical utility (specifically the ‘functional’ and ‘suitable’ domains informed by Smart et al., (2006) will be assessed via questionnaires completed by RAs after the administration of the PG-SGA to participants under 18 years [33].
The scored PG-SGA comprises of two sections: a patient completed history section, and a clinician completed section.
Each component of the PG-SGA is assigned a continuous score, and a global assessment category is assigned using these scores.
The potential global assessment ratings in the PG-SGA are as follows: SGA A (well-nourished), SGA B (suspected/moderate malnutrition), SGA C (severe malnutrition).
Global PG-SGA category will be calculated to enable description of the prevalence of malnutrition.
Participants will be classified into one of two categories: well-nourished (SGA score A) or malnourished (SGA score B or C).
The total numerical score of the PG-SGA will also be recorded as it is a more sensitive measure of subtle changes in nutritional status.
Height will be assessed to the nearest 0.1 cm using a wall-mounted stadiometer with participant barefoot.
Height measurement will be conducted at all time-points in participants 18 years and younger as it is anticipated that due to growth this measurement may change.
For participants ≥ 18 years height will be recorded once at baseline.
Body weight will be determined using a digital scale [SECA 813].
Participants will be weighed lightly clothed, barefoot, with weight measured to the nearest 0.1 kg.
Percent weight change (gain or loss) between baseline and each follow-up time-point will be calculated for each participant and the proportion of participants that experienced weight change (gain or loss) or weight stability during the study period will be calculated.
Weight stable over the study period will be classified as a weight loss or gain of less than 0.8% body weight [34].
Body weight will be collected at each timepoint (T0, T2, T4, T6).
BMI category will be calculated and recorded at each timepoint (T0, T2, T4, T6) for all participants 18 years and older.
BMI is a calculated as body weight/body mass (kg) divided by height square (m2).
It is a simple measure to classify whether body weight is within a healthy range and comprises of the following categories; less than 18.5 underweight, 18.5–24.9 healthy weight, 25-29.9 overweight, 30-34.9 obese class I, 35-39.9 obese class II, 40 or more obese class III [35].
For participants below the age of 18 years, BMI z-scores for age will be calculated using the United States Centre for Disease Control 2000 reference population for patients 2–20 years of age [36].
Malnutrition will be defined as z-scores <−2 for BMI for age [37].
Classification of overweight and obesity in participants under 18 years of age will be defined according to Cole’s internationally agreed standard cut-off points for overweight and obesity [38].
HGS is used as a measure of muscle strength and predictor of physical frailty.
It also has been used to aid in identifying the presence of sarcopenia in cancer patients [37,39,40].
HGS is quantified by measuring the amount of static force that a hand can generate via squeezing the dynamometer [41].
All sites will use a calibrated JAMAR dynamometer to assess HGS using a standardised protocol, with the highest score from three measurements recorded [41].
HGS will be used to examine muscle strength changes over-time and after a cancer diagnosis, with results compared to that of a healthy population [39].
HGS will be collected at each timepoint (T0, T2, T4, T6).
MUAC is simple anthropometric measurement used to aid in screening for nutritional status and will be recorded at all time-points (T0, T2, T4, T6).
MUAC indicates the degree of muscle and subcutaneous fat of the person’s arm and is correlated with BMI and risk of malnutrition in both adult and adolescent populations [42,43].
Cut-off scores for MUAC, indicating low muscle mass, will be < 22 cm and < 20 cm for adolescent (15–17 year old) male and female participants respectively; and < 23 cm for young adult (18–25 year old) participants [44,45].
The RA at each site will review participants’ medical records and document the following at each time point (T0, T2, T4, T6); contact with a dietitian and reason (e.g. automatic, patient request, treating team for loss of weight, study participation); nutrition support received (oral, enteral-tube, parenteral); occurrence of treatment delay (and reasons); planned/unplanned hospital admissions (length of stay); and medication use (anti-emetics, anti-diarrhoeal medication, pain medication, pancreatic enzyme replacement therapy, medications for anxiety/depression, appetite stimulants and steroids).
Participants will also be asked to self-report any contact with a dietitian or nutritional support outside the hospital, declare any vitamin/mineral supplementation and use of any alternative/complementary medications at all time-points (T0, T2, T4, T6), using a self-report questionnaire.
The presence in the previous 2 weeks of the following nutrition-impact symptoms will be recorded using data collected as part of the PG-SGA (recorded in PG-SGA box 3); no appetite, nausea, constipation, mouth sores, taste changes, problems swallowing, pain, vomiting, diarrhoea, dry mouth, aversion to smells, early satiety and fatigue.
Nutrition-impact symptoms are being recorded to provide descriptive data and explore whether participants who are malnourished/at nutrition risk, also have the presence of nutrition-impact symptoms.
HRQoL will be recorded at all time-points (T0, T2, T4, T6) using the AQoL-6D.
The AQoL-6D is a simple questionnaire used as a psychometric measure of a person’s quality of life and has been utilised with adolescents in various health care settings [46,47].
The AQoL-6D is a multi-attribute utility instrument of 20 items organized into scales assessing the 6 domains of independent living, relationships, mental health, coping, pain and senses with higher scores indicating better overall quality of life [24,46].
Participant scores will be compared to age-matched general population normative data (16–24 years) [47].
Participants recruited to Study 1 along with other patients that meet study eligibility criteria, will be provided the opportunity to take part in a focus group to gather further information from the patient perspective about their experience of living with and undergoing treatment for cancer and the impact on nutrition.
The focus of the questioning will be to elicit information about (1) the current nutrition information and support patients receive while undergoing cancer treatment, (2) any identified unmet nutrition information or support needs, and (3) the types of nutrition services and information provision that are needed to best support them during this time.
Multidisciplinary OHP with experience in managing AYA from all sites will be invited to participate in a focus group.
These sessions aim to gather insights from healthcare professionals about their experiences and perspectives on appropriate access to nutrition-related care for AYA patients undergoing treatment at their respective institution.
The focus groups will also explore the nutritional education and research priorities for AYA with cancer.
The focus groups will follow a semi-structured interview guide, with flexibility to explore areas and content as themes emerge.
In cases where participants are unable or unwilling to join a focus group, individual interviews will be conducted using a similar interview guide.
These questions have been crafted following a thorough review of published literature and insights gathered from members of the research team who are specialist clinicians in the field.
Tables2and3illustrate examples of the questions and themes that will be explored during the focus groups.
The questions will predominantly be open-ended to encourage discussion and ensure comprehensive data collection.
The focus groups or interviews will be conducted via Zoom and moderated by a qualified researcher, with a second member of the research team observing and supporting co-facilitation.
All sessions will be recorded using Zoom and transcribed verbatim.
Identifiable participant data will be removed or replaced with aliases during transcription to maintain confidentiality.
The number of focus group sessions with AYA and OHP will be determined based on the adequacy and richness of the data collected, and to ensure adequate representation with a heterogeneous sample (varying cancer diagnosis, age, sex, profession).
For Study 1, the target sample is 50–60 participants across all sites.
This target is pragmatic, based on available funds, study timeframes (i.e., a 6-month recruitment period) and clinical throughput across all sites.
Recruitment estimates are based on previous projects undertaken with this population at the PMCC, with similar inclusion criteria [48].
For the qualitative studies, the target sample will be approximately 15–20 participants for both AYA (Study 2) and OHP (Study 3) [49].
Each focus group will aim to include 3–5 participants, therefore a minimum of 4 focus groups will be planned with a focus group scheduled for each site.
Interviews will be undertaken if required to capture participants who are unable to attend a focus group.
The optimal size of focus groups is informed by prior research in this area [49–51].
Data analysis and recruitment will occur concurrently, and the final sample size will be informed by the data.
Recruitment for focus groups will cease when the research team have assessed the data to have reached saturation [50,51].
Analysis will include all available data and be performed in R (reference index version 4.3.0 or higher) [52].
Nutritional measures and the AQoL-6D will be scored according to author guidelines.
Standard recodes using recommended cut-off scores will be applied, as required, for analysis and reporting purposes.
Missing data will not be imputed.
Counts and percentages will be used to summarise missing data, including missing items and forms on nutritional risk and patient-reported outcome measures, at baseline and follow-up assessments.
Descriptive statistics (means and SD, counts and percentages or medians and interquartile ranges as appropriate) will be used to summarise patient demographic/social and clinical characteristics, including nutritional measures and responses to patient-reported outcome measures (PG-SGA, AQoL-6D).
Descriptive statistics will also be used to summarise patients’ responses to customised items on surveys, including medication use, dietitian contact, dietary habits and hospital admissions.
Effect size estimates (Cohen’s d) will be used to characterise any differences between nutritional status groups at follow-up assessments.
If the sample size permits, patient-reported outcomes will be compared between subgroups of patients (e.g. adults and paediatrics) defined by nutritional outcomes (e.g. malnutrition status as determined by the PG-SGA) and disease and treatment-related characteristics (e.g. disease type and stage) at recruitment and at six months post-recruitment using t-tests or analysis of variance with post hoc testing as required.
Descriptive statistics (counts and percentages; means and standard deviations; or medians and interquartile ranges, as appropriate) will be used to summarise demographic information recorded from AYA and OHP.
Following data collection, an inductive thematic content analysis approach will be employed to analyse the data [53,54].
Transcript will be imported into NVivo (QSR International Pty Ltd), and initial coding will be conducted by the Principal Investigator (CPI).
A selection of focus groups will be cross coded by another member of the research team to establish intercoder reliability.
Final codes will be analysed to explore patterns and similarities in meaning, then grouped together to develop themes.
Due to differences in participant samples, the qualitative and quantitative data will be analyzed separately.
Findings from both components will be considered together at the interpretation stage to provide a deeper understanding of study results.
This study, protocol, and all measures, including the informed consent document, have been approved by the Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC/97751/PMCC-2023; local project number 23/74L).
Study recruitment and data collection have commenced.
In this paper, we outline the methodological design of AYCANN and detail how both qualitative and quantitative data will be collected and analysed within this mixed-methods approach.
This multicentre study represents, to our knowledge, the first longitudinal investigation into the prevalence of nutrition disorders and nutrition-related outcomes among AYA undergoing cancer treatment.
It uniquely combines quantitative measurements taken longitudinally with qualitative insights that provide in-depth context to quantitative results.
To date, it remains unclear whether nutrition disorders, such as malnutrition, are more prevalent in AYA cancer patients compared to paediatric (< 14 years) and adult populations (18 years and over).
Additionally, there is limited data regarding optimal screening methods and tailored nutritional interventions, both during and after treatment, for this specific group.
This mixed methods study will specifically examine quantitative changes in body weight, muscle strength and function, and the prevalence of nutrition disorders among young people undergoing cancer treatment.
It will also explore their experiences related to nutrition information and support, including identifying any unmet needs they may have.
Furthermore, the study will investigate how multidisciplinary healthcare professionals approach nutrition, share their knowledge, and apply practices when caring for AYA after they have been diagnosed with cancer.
Where possible (if sample size allows), differences in presence of nutritional disorders and nutrition-related outcomes will be compared between AYA treated at paediatric and adult health services.
OHP focus groups aim to explore differences in models of care within these settings also.
The findings from this study are expected to provide valuable insights for healthcare professionals and researchers, enhancing understanding of the nutritional needs of AYA during cancer treatment.
This knowledge will support the development of tailored interventions and resources aimed at mitigating the effects of cancer therapy and improving care delivery in acute settings for AYA, who have been demonstrated to have distinct and unique needs for cancer-related information and support.
Additionally, it is hoped that the results will contribute to the formulation of future clinical practice guidelines and drive further research into nutritional interventions for patients at heightened risk of nutritional complications.
We would like to thank the Victorian Department of Health for funding this project.
We would also like to acknowledge the contribution of the Victorian and Tasmanian Youth Cancer Action Board for its input, guidance, and support throughout the project.
AM, EL, BS, KT drafted the manuscript and all authors read and provided revisions to the clinical and intellectual content.
All authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript.
The project was funded by the Victorian Department of Health.