Hemophagocytic lympho‐histiocytosis (HLH) is a life‐threatening disease, only occasionally presenting as acute liver failure (ALF) in adults.
HLH is challenging to diagnose.
We reviewed the ALF Study Group (ALFSG) registry for suspected HLH subjects, as well as 184 with other ALF etiologies for cases that might have been missed, assessing standard laboratory tests, as well as interleukin‐18 (IL‐18) and soluble interleukin‐2 receptor (sIL‐2r), to determine the diagnostic utility of these biomarkers.
We also calculated standard diagnostic algorithms (H score, HLH‐2004 diagnostic criteria) to assess their value.
Within 3364 ALF subjects, only 14 were initially cited as HLH.
Upon thorough review by an adjudication committee, 5/14 (35.7%) were considered definite, five probable, two possible, and two unlikely.
Definite HLH patients had significantly higher ferritin (p= 0.047), IL‐18 (p= 0.003) and s‐IL2r (p= 0.005) levels, H scores (p< 0.001) and HLH scores (p< 0.001).
Other etiologies (APAP, DILI and viral) showed lower IL‐18 and sIL2r levels and scores, but overlapping ferritins.
Several probable/possible HLH cases lacked complete data for scoring.
No additional (missed) HLH cases were identified.
HLH remains a rare cause of ALF.
Biomarkers, particularly IL‐18 and sIL‐2r, appear of value.
HLH and H scores were also helpful but limited when data was missing.
Hemophagocytic lympho‐histiocytosis is a rare and life‐threatening hyperinflammatory syndrome that is more prevalent in children than adults, and occasionally leads to acute liver failure (ALF) [1].
The disease is triggered by the uncontrolled activation of cytotoxic T‐lymphocytes and macrophages resulting in fever, organomegaly (lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, or splenomegaly), cytopenias, altered mental status, dermatologic manifestations and liver dysfunction [2,3,4].
The mortality rate in adults exceeds 50% [5], with an ICU‐HLH mortality rate of 57% [6].
Given the acuity and severity of HLH as well as ALF, the association between the two presentations is infrequent and limited to case reports [7,8,9].
The diagnosis of HLH in adults is exceedingly challenging, since HLH is primarily described in children [1].
Several combinations of features have been proposed as HLH diagnostic criteria.
The HLH‐2004 diagnostic criteria developed in the paediatric population define a positive diagnosis by a specific molecular assessment or, lacking that, if a patient meets 5 of 8 criteria: fever, splenomegaly, bicytopenias, hypertriglyceridemia and/or hypofibrinogenemia, hemophagocytosis in bone marrow or lymph nodes, low or no natural killer cell activity, ferritin ≥ 500 ng/mL, or soluble IL‐2 receptor ≥ 2400 IU/mL (considered equivalent to 20,000 pg/mL) [10].
Another alternate scoring system for adults is the H score [11], where varying points are given for known immunosuppression, fever, organomegaly (splenomegaly and/or hepatomegaly) and specific levels of cytopenia, anaemia, thrombocytopenia, ferritin, triglycerides, fibrinogen, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (U/L) and hemophagocytosis on biopsy.
A composite score of ≥ 169 is considered diagnostic of HLH with reported sensitivity 93%, specificity 86% and accurate classification in 90% of patients [11].
The two diagnostic modalities have been compared and found to be comparable [12].
Although ferritin has been considered a biomarker for HLH, more specific biomarkers have been proposed, primarily interleukin 18 (IL‐18) or soluble interleukin‐2 receptor (sIL‐2r) [11,13,14].
Ferritin, actively secreted by macrophages but also present in hepatocytes and thus released into the circulation in liver injury, is a non‐specific marker in HLH patients [15,16].
Another possible prognostic tool is the optimised HLH identification (OHI) index, identifying sIL‐2r > 3900 IU/mL and ferritin > 1000 ng/mL as highly predictive of mortality.
OHI is limited to malignancy‐driven HLH cases [14].
sIL‐2r is also referred to as sCD25 or sIL‐2r‐alpha.
A prior study identified levels of sCD25 > 2400 U/mL (the cutoff for HLH‐2004 diagnostic criteria) as highly sensitive in adults and values of > 10,000 U/mL as highly specific, but this has not been evaluated in an ALF population [17].
IL‐18, recently reviewed by Canna et al. [18], was measured in the present study as Total IL‐18 rather than free IL‐18 or IL‐18 binding protein.
Confusion abounds in the measurement of sIL2r/sCD25, as units vary from pg/mL to arbitrary units/mL, with 20,000 pg/mL thought to be comparable to 2400 U/mL as the diagnostic threshold, but these have not been carefully cross‐validated [19].
Given the difficulty of HLH diagnosis, the rarity and severity of the disease and its possible clinical overlap with ALF, we collected all possible cases of HLH within a large ALF cohort, assessing the value of the following biomarkers or scores: ferritin, IL‐18, sIL‐2r, HLH‐2004 diagnostic criteria and H score.
The Acute Liver Failure Study Group (ALFSG) Registry was initiated in 1998 and has enrolled more than 3300 patients among 28 participating clinical centres in North America [13].
The database comprises patients admitted with a clinical diagnosis of ALF, meeting the following criteria: duration of symptoms of jaundice or hepatic illness less than 26 weeks prior to admission, altered mental status in the absence of the previous use of sedatives, and INR ≥ 1.5.
Patients with previously recognised cirrhosis and superimposed acute chronic liver failure were excluded.
Exceptions to the requirement of exclusion of cirrhosis were made for patients who presented with acute Wilson disease with liver failure and those with first presentation of autoimmune‐related ALF.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patients' legal next of kin to collect detailed information on medical history and management data during the first 7 days of enrolment, which was then documented on a standardised case report form.
Case report forms were required to be completed by 21 days following study admission and outcomes at 21 days analysed.
CRP was not able to be measured in the present study [20].
Between 1 January 1998, and 31 December 2016, 2999 patients with ALI or ALF, aged 18 years old and above, with known 21‐day outcomes were enrolled and included in this retrospective analysis.
To identify as many possible HLH cases, all patients with the following diagnostic terms were reviewed: ‘hemophagocytosis’, ‘hemo‐phagocytic lympho‐histiocytosis’ (HLH), ‘macrophage activation syndrome’ (MAS) and ‘drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms’ (DRESS).
76 patients with other diagnoses were included based on having very high ferritin levels (≥ 10,000 ng/mL).
The etiologic diagnoses for these 76 were as follows: APAPn= 36, AIHn= 2, DILIn= 8, HAVn= 2, HBVn= 7, Indeterminaten= 11, Other (Cancer)n= 1, Other viruses (HSV)n= 1, Shock/Ischemian= 8.
19 with drug induced liver injury‐related ALF (DILI‐ALF).
47 with acetaminophen induced ALF (APAP‐ALF) after 2 were withdrawn (not APAP).
Thus, a selection of 184 from the ALFSG was included in the final analysis (Figure1).
We reviewed demographics, standard labs including CBC, differential labs, platelets, ferritin, fibrinogen, triglycerides, albumin, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alkaline phosphatase (ALKP), bilirubin, immunoglobulins and viral hepatitis studies.
Flow chart showing the patients included in this study stratified by aetiology.
ALF, acute liver failure; APAP, acetaminophen toxicity; DILI, drug induced liver injury; DRESS, drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HLH, hemophagocytic lympho‐histiocytosis.
sIL‐2r: R&D Systems Quantikine ELISA Human CD25/IL‐2Rα Immunoassay for the quantitative determination of human Interleukin 2 Receptor alpha (IL‐2Rα) concentrations in serum, plasma, and cell culture super‐nates, R&D System Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA.
Total IL‐18: R&D Systems Quantikine ELISA Human Total IL‐18/IL‐IF4 Immunoassay for the quantitative determination of human free and complexed Interleukin 18 (Total IL‐18) concentrations in serum, plasma, urine, saliva, and cell culture super‐nates, R&D Systems Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA.
Ferritin: Abcam Ferritin Human ELISA Kit, an immune‐enzymatic assay for the quantitative measurement of ferritin in serum and plasma was used, Abcam Limited, Cambridge, England, UK.
All samples were tested according to package insert instructions.
If the sample result was greater than the highest standard, the sample was diluted and repeated if additional sample was available.
If there was not enough sample, the result was listed as greater than the concentration of the highest standard (or the dilution factor of that standard).
Those patients with either HLH scores ≥ 5–8 or H‐scores ≥ 169 were considered definite HLH cases [14].
The remaining subjects were labelled either as HLH possible or unlikely based on the clinical history and labs available to the authors.
HLH score and H score were primary outcomes and their association with patient outcomes was assessed.
We used SPSS (version 25.0, IBM, Armonk, NY) and Python for data analysis.
The continuous variables are presented as mean ± standard deviation.
The categorical variables are presented as frequencies and percentages.
At the bivariate level, we used Chi square and Fisher's exact test (as applicable) for the categorical variables, and one‐way ANOVA and Kruskal‐Wallis test for continuous variables.
Run tests were performed for all variables to assess the null hypothesis.
Significance was interpreted atp< 0.05.
The area under the curve (AUC), sensitivity, specificity and optimal cutoff levels were calculated by using receiver–operating curves (ROC) for ferritin, IL‐18, sIL‐2r, HLH and H score.
During the 19‐year study period, 14 cases were given an initial diagnosis of HLH‐related ALF by the site investigator.
Of the 14 cases, five were later adjudicated by the committee as definite HLH, five as probable HLH, two as possible, and two unlikely (Table1).
Among the final 184, when the ferritin group was distributed to their etiologic diagnoses, there were 82 acetaminophen toxicity (APAP) cases, 29 drug‐induced liver injury (DILI) cases, seven DRESS, seven with ischaemia/shock, 30 viral hepatitis (hepatitis A (N= 2) and B (N= 28)) and 12 indeterminate cases; all were assessed in parallel with the HLH cases (Figure1).
Clinical and laboratory results, H and HLH scores and final adjudication for the 14 subjects initially considered to have HLH.
sIL‐2 and Total IL‐18 assays are investigational use only and the reference ranges were determined on small samples of apparently healthy volunteers (not population‐based reference ranges).
The categorical variables of ten Definite/Probable HLH cases when compared to all other etiologies showed no significant differences between sex or ethnicity.
However, a difference was detected in patient outcomes between HLH cases (poorer) and all other etiologies.
HLH cases had demonstrated more frequent organomegaly (hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or both) (Tables1and2).
Clinical and laboratory features of the various patient groups.
HLH group is limited here to the definite/probable subjects.
Prognostic Index—percent probability of spontaneous survival.
When comparing definite HLH cases with other groups, there were different ‘model for end stage liver disease’ (MELD) scores, lower haemoglobin levels and lower white blood counts and platelet counts.
HLH cases had significantly higher ferritin levels and total IL‐18 (Tables2and3; Figure2).
H score, HLH score and parameters for HLH definite/probable group compared to others.
sIL‐2 and Total IL‐18 assays are investigational use only and the reference ranges were determined on small samples of apparently healthy volunteers (not population‐based reference ranges).
Range of values given for groups with only 1–3 results available.
Box and whisker/violin plots comparing all quantitative variables (log Ferritin, Total IL‐18, sIL2r, HLH 2004 diagnostic criteria, and H score) between the ten definite/probable HLH ALF cases and all other aetiologies.
ALF, acute liver failure; HLH, hemophagocytic lympho‐histiocytosis; IL18, interleukin 18; sIL2r, serum interleukin 2 receptor.
We then focused on comparing the five HLH definite, five HLH possible and four HLH possible/unlikely with the DRESS cases in Table4.
There were no significant demographic differences among the four groups.
HLH definite cases had the lowest WBC counts and had the highest H and HLH scores, as expected.
In addition, for the five definite HLH's, sIL2r and ferritin levels, total IL‐18 and presence of hemophagocytosis on biopsy all appeared to differ from other patient groups (Table4).
Details of the seven DRESS cases are outlined in TableS1.
We have not calculatedpvalues, given the small patient group numbers.
For completeness, we provide TableS2resembling Table2, but with all HLH original diagnosis patients compared with the other groupings.
HLH & DRESS groups – Demographic, clinical and biochemical values.
sIL‐2r and Total IL‐18 assays are investigational use only and the reference ranges were determined on small samples of apparently healthy volunteers (not population‐based reference ranges).
Range of values given for groups with only 1–3 results available.
Plotting the sIL‐2r, IL‐18, ferritin, HLH and H score specifically for HLH definite cases in ROC curves resulted in all three variables having an area under the curve greater (AUC) than 0.5 (Ferritin: 0.55, IL‐18: 0.94, sIL‐2r: 0.82, H score: 0.96 and HLH: 0.99) (Figure3).
Among the definite HLH cases, the sensitivity and specificity of various diagnostic criteria were as follows: ferritin > 15,663 ng/mL had a sensitivity of 50% and a specificity of 82%.
For sIL‐2r, a level of ≥ 9903 pg/mL displayed a sensitivity of 67%, and a specificity of 88%.
For IL‐18, a level of ≥ 2120 pg/mL had a sensitivity of 100%, and a specificity of 78.0% (Figure3).
ROC curves for ferritin (ng/mL), sIL‐2Ra (pg/mL), Total IL‐18, H score, and HLH 2004 diagnostic criteria for definite HLH cases.
HLH, hemophagocytic lympho‐histiocytosis; IL18, interleukin 18; sIL2r, serum interleukin 2 receptor.
HLH is an uncommon disease, particularly among adults.
In evaluating the validity of various scores and biomarkers for determining an HLH diagnosis in a population of adult ALF patients, we identified only 14 cases where HLH was entertained as the initial diagnosis and only 5 of these were considered definite cases of HLH over a span of 16 years in this large multi‐site study.
HLH cases present with protean symptoms and signs, increasing the challenges in diagnosis.
Of note, however, we did not add any additional cases despite our thorough review of possible additional subjects that might have been missed by the initial clinical team.
That included patients with DRESS, many others with very high ferritins, as well as those with diagnoses that would be unlikely to qualify as HLH, given their well‐characterised other etiologies.
Among HLH cases in our study, several unique clinical‐demographic features were observed: most HLH patients exhibited hepatomegaly and splenomegaly, despite reporting of organomegaly among patients with ALF in general being somewhat limited.
More often, the liver may be diminished in size, not enlarged and not appreciated as such.
Our study revealed that HLH cases also typically exhibited the lowest haemoglobin levels, white blood cell counts, and platelet counts, compared to other ALF etiologies during the study period.
The presence of anaemia in ALF patients with HLH is attributed to the hemolytic nature of the disease [21,22].
These severe cytopenias can be explained by the consumptive process of secondary HLH that develops during a pro‐inflammatory state, triggering the activation of specific cytokines such as IFN‐γ, TNF‐α, IL‐10 and IL‐18.
Cytokine activation leads to the cytopenic state of all cell lines, which is closely associated with diffuse hemophagocytosis [23].
Furthermore, HLH cases were significantly more likely to have underlying immunosuppression compared to other ALF etiologies.
Patients with acquired HLH are often immunosuppressed, making them unable to cope with infectious triggers such as EBV.
This results in unregulated, non‐antigen‐specific stimulation of innate immunity, ultimately leading to the development of HLH [24].
Ferritin has been incorporated into the HLH and H scoring systems, as contributing to the diagnosis of HLH [10,11].
However, ferritin levels are also elevated greatly in a variety of conditions, although its precise role in inflammation remains incompletely understood [25].
Although hyper‐ferritinemia has been strongly associated with HLH, it is not specific to HLH and cannot be solely relied upon as a standalone diagnostic tool [10].
Moreover, our study showed that ferritin had a low AUC and sensitivity in detecting HLH cases on its own.
Nonetheless, as ferritin levels increase, its sensitivity and specificity in diagnosing HLH in adults increases [26,27].
On the other hand, ferritin levels have been shown to correlate with patient outcomes, with higher levels indicating poorer prognosis [28].
Our study within ALF cases reaffirms that ferritin should not be used as a standalone diagnostic test –even in combination with other variables, it is of uncertain diagnostic value.
Nevertheless, cytokine assays are not as readily available and CRP, which we were not able to measure, might be a suitable and more readily available substitute when other assays are not at hand [20].
In diagnosing HLH, two key biomarkers, sIL‐2r and IL‐18, demonstrated impressive elevations compared to other etiologies, indicating their greater importance in diagnosing adult HLH.
The high AUC values from the ROC curves highlight this; sIL‐2r levels were found to be elevated more in the HLH group than in any other group, although only two of our five definite patients had values above 20,000 pg/mL.
This truncated protein serves as a surrogate marker for T cell activation [29].
sIL‐2r elevation has been a notable feature in cases of HLH since 1989, with recorded levels ranging from 23,600 to 75,200 U/mL prior to treatment.
As patients are treated, sIL‐2r levels decrease and eventually normalise with successful management [30,31].
Therefore, sIL‐2r appears to be a sensitive biomarker for active HLH [32,33].
However, sIL‐2r's sensitivity to HLH is limited, as elevated levels are also observed in other conditions such as cancers, autoimmune disorders, HIV, autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome and hyper‐eosinophilic syndromes, many of which may mimic or overlap with hemophagocytic syndromes [34,35,36,37,38].
Despite these limitations, the use of sIL‐2r in HLH and its potential to aid in diagnosing the disease account for the results observed in the ROC analysis.
Numerous studies have demonstrated that IL‐18 levels in HLH or macrophage activation syndrome (MAS) patients are significantly elevated, ranging from 3 to 900 times higher than in healthy individuals [39,40,41,42,43].
When compared to other inflammatory etiologies, such as Kawasaki disease, EBV infection and unspecified inflammatory, infectious, or malignant disorders, HLH consistently exhibited substantially increased IL‐18 levels, often surpassing 1000 pg/mL [41,42,43,44,45,46,47,48].
Moreover, IL‐18 levels are significantly elevated in HLH/MAS patients, often even exceeding 1000 pg/mL, with MAS cases frequently surpassing 10,000 pg/mL.
This marked elevation differentiates HLH/MAS from other inflammatory conditions and correlates with disease activity, making IL‐18 a reasonably specific diagnostic tool [49].
Its persistent elevation even after other markers normalise underscores its utility in monitoring HLH/MAS progression.
The rise in IL‐18 during liver injury can be attributed to its vital role in regulating hepatocyte apoptosis—as liver injury occurs, IL‐18 levels surge [50].
In our study, the elevations in IL‐18 among HLH cases were much higher when compared to all other etiologies, making it perhaps the best diagnostic indicator for HLH in the context of ALF.
Presence of hemophagocytosis in the bone marrow would seem to be a convincing diagnostic observation, found in 6 of 8 (all where histology was available) of the definite/probable patients.
That said, HLH histological findings in bone marrow can also be seen after frequent transfusions, Castleman disease and other condtions [51,52,53].
There are some clear limitations in the present study.
First, the study's small sample size, due to the rarity of HLH in adults, led to limited statistical power and generalisability of the findings.
Second, being retrospective in nature, the study may have encountered data accuracy issues and missing information, impacting its validity.
This becomes most apparent when considering the categories of HLH ‘possible’ and ‘unlikely’, as they did not fully meet the criteria for HLH, in large part because of certain variables being missing.
Third, reliance on medical records for data collection might have introduced information bias or incomplete data.
To some extent, development of scoring systems and their testing involves creating self‐fulfilling schemas, since the criteria determine the validity of the score itself and the results obtained.
In conclusion, the distinctive clinical and laboratory characteristics we observed in adult HLH ALF cases highlight the challenges in early recognition and accurate diagnosis.
Among the key findings, HLH patients exhibited significantly greater organomegaly, with significantly more severe cytopenias (anaemia, thrombocytopenia and leukopenia) indicative of severe liver impairment and a hyperinflammatory response.
Moreover, elevated levels of IL‐18 and particularly sIL‐2r in HLH cases served as sensitive and specific biomarkers in diagnosing HLH, especially when used in combination.