To: (1) compare the effectiveness of the ‘Usual iSupport’ and ‘Tailored iSupport’ programs on carers' quality of life (QoL); self‐efficacy; and their care recipients' QoL; and (2) explore carers' acceptance of and adherence to the programs, satisfaction with the support, recruitment and retention rates, and staff training rate in a 6‐month trial.
An internal pilot randomised controlled trial nested in a large effectiveness implementation trial.
In total, 78 carers enrolled in the trial.
Most carers were female (66% or 85%), with a mean age of 65.6 years.
We detected a statistically significant difference of mean score in mental health‐related QoL (3.44 [95% CI: .53, 6.35];p= .02); self‐efficacy for responding to changed behaviours (9.02 [95% CI: 1.24, 16.81],p= .02); and self‐efficacy for controlling upsetting thoughts (8.83 [95% CI: 1.14, 16.51];p= .03) between the ‘Usual iSupport’ group and the ‘Tailored iSupport’ group at 6 months post‐intervention.
The recruitment and retention rates were 17% and 100%, respectively.
Carers in the ‘Tailored iSupport’ group completed 16.5 iSupport units, attended 4.5 peer support meetings and rated their satisfaction with the support highly.
The staff training rate was 36%.
This internal pilot study identified improved mental health‐related QoL, self‐efficacy for controlling upsetting thoughts, and for responding to changed behaviours in the ‘Tailored iSupport’ group.
The recruitment rate was low, but the retention rate was high, and carers showed adherence to the intervention.
This feasibility study identified an excellent retention rate of Chinese carers in the trial.
However, the recruitment rate was low; thus, future trial needs to allocate a sufficient time to achieve a sample size.
The intervention effects identified in the trial need to be confirmed in a fully‐powered study.
On the completion of the Chinese iSupport program RCT in Australia, stakeholders recommended the need to embed the evidence‐based ‘Tailored iSupport’ program in aged care services.2Access the Chinese iSupport program to perform self‐guided learning (hereafter: The ‘Usual iSupport’ program) was expected.2Chinese carers' expectations for different iSupport program interventions reflect their diverse needs in dementia care.
The ‘Usual iSupport’ program has been implemented in most WHO member countries as a single component intervention.7,8,9The intervention lasted 3 months7,8or 6 months9and the outcomes were measured at baseline, 3 and 6 months post‐baseline.
However, a full powered RCT using the ‘Usual iSupport’ program in the UK showed no effects on carers' mental health, quality of the caregiving relationship, dementia knowledge and the QoL of people with dementia compared with usual care.9The results were attributed to carers' low‐level engagement in the iSupport program, as evidenced by an average of four login times during the 6‐month intervention period.
A similar finding was also reported in iSupport RCTs conducted in India and Portugal.7,8In contrast, one study identified that facilitator‐enabled needs assessment using the ‘Risk Appraisal Measure’ could enable carers to identify their care needs and motivate them to take action to meet their needs.10Furthermore, peer support was viewed as an effective strategy to connect carers with peers to overcome social isolation and support each other.11Randomised control trials to compare the ‘Usual iSupport’ program and the ‘Tailored iSupport’ program are much needed to generate evidence‐informed support for carers.
The aims of the study were to: (1) compare the effectiveness of the ‘Usual iSupport’ program and ‘Tailored iSupport’ program on carers' QoL (primary outcome); self‐efficacy; and their care recipients' QoL (secondary outcomes); and (2) explore carer recruitment rate, carers' acceptance of and adherence to the programs, satisfaction with the support and staff training rate in a 6‐month trial.
Ethics approval was obtained from Flinders University Human Ethics Committee (project number: 5819).
This trial was undertaken in three Chinese‐ethno‐specific aged care organisations in two states in Australia, which distributed a carer recruitment flyer via regular newsletters to their clients, carer support groups and their organisations' websites.
Carers who were interested in the programs were directed to contact a researcher to assess their eligibility and sign written informed consent before baseline data collection.
By the end of the project, each participant received $100 as appreciation for their commitment to the trial.
Carers were included in the trial if they were aged 18 years or older and cared for a relative with dementia at home at least twice a week.
We also included caregivers who cared for relatives without a formal diagnosis of dementia if their care recipients had cognitive impairment using the AD8 Dementia Screening Interview.18Carers were excluded if they self‐reported severe mental health conditions, terminal illness, or were involved in other research projects.
Carers in the ‘Tailored iSupport’ group were assigned to a trained iSupport facilitator appointed by the participating organisations through an internal selection process.
We worked with these organisations to develop selection criteria and a job description for the facilitators.
In general, they were staff employed by the participating organisations, expressed interest in supporting carers of people with dementia, held a bachelor's degree (or higher) in nursing or social care areas, and had at least 2 years of experience in the care of people with dementia.
The selection process ensured that the facilitators could deliver the intervention to carers to achieve the expected outcomes.
Carers participated in the following activities remotely for 6 months: (1) The facilitator supported carers in using the Chinese version of the ‘Risk Appraisal Measure’10to assess their individualised care needs and gain advice on learning modules/units or care services that would meet their care needs; (2) Carers engaged in self‐study using the iSupport Manual; (3) The facilitator organised monthly meetings with carers using WhatsApp or WeChat, lasting 45–60 min; (4) The facilitator sent weekly text messages extracted from the iSupport manual via WeChat or WhatsApp to engage carers in the program; and (5) The facilitator encouraged carers to contact them to gain need‐based support.
The direct care staff was trained by the iSupport facilitator to introduce the iSupport manuals and resources to carers who were assigned to the ‘Usual iSupport’ group, using an ‘Introduction to iSupport leaflet’ developed by the project team.
Carers in the group engaged in self‐guided dementia skill training using either the simplified Chinese language iSupport manual or the traditional Chinese language iSupport manual without facilitator support and without carer peer support activities.
We used the Chinese language version of the 12‐Item Short‐Form Health Survey (SF‐12)19to measure mental and physical health‐related QoL.
We used the Revised Scale for Caregiving Self‐Efficacy to measure self‐efficacy.20This instrument has three domains: self‐efficacy for obtaining respite, responding to changed behaviours and controlling upsetting thoughts about caregiving.
We measured the recruitment rate using the proportion of carers enrolled and the estimated total number of carers of people with dementia or cognitive impairment in the three participating organisations.
We monitored the retention of carers in the trial as evidence of their acceptance of the two programs.
We collected carers' self‐reported completion of iSupport units and their attendance at peer support meetings in a 3‐ and 6‐month survey as their adherence to the programs.
We employed a self‐developed ‘Carer's satisfaction with support questionnaire’ which included 10 statements about activities delivered by the facilitator.
The questionnaire was co‐developed with and agreed upon by representatives of industry partners and carers to audit intervention fidelity.
We measured the proportion of direct care staff who participated in the training sessions provided by the iSupport facilitators among the total number of direct care staff in the participating organisations.
Carers were randomly assigned to the ‘Usual iSupport’ program or the ‘Tailored iSupport’ program after the baseline data collection.
We used block randomisation to ensure equivalent conditions of the two groups in spouse carers versus non‐spouse carers and people with similar stages of dementia in each group.
The group assignment was performed by a researcher who had no knowledge of or contact with the carers in the trial.
We applied an intention‐to‐treat method based on group assignments.
We filled missing values using multiple imputations.
We entered the data into IBM SPSS version 29 for data analysis.
A biostatistician who was blind to the group assignments performed data analysis.
Descriptive statistics were used to summarise the demographic information of carers and people with dementia.
We applied a multivariate mixed‐effects linear regression model to compare the primary and secondary outcomes between the two groups.
This data analysis method enabled us to capture both fixed effects, including group effect, time effect and group × time interaction.
The random effects estimated the variability in the intercept to measure repeated outcomes across the three time points of data collection.
We applied the two‐sided test for all analyses.
We set the level of significance atp< .05.
A total of 78 carers met our inclusion criteria and were enrolled in the trial.
The recruitment took 6 months between May and October 2023.
We randomly assigned carer participants to the ‘Usual iSupport’ group (n= 38) or the ‘Tailored iSupport’ group (n= 40).
All carers completed the 6‐month follow‐up (Figure1) in April 2024.
Most carers were female (n= 66, 85%) and spouse carers (n= 56, 72%) and the mean age was 65.6 years.
Most carer participants were in the less than 65 years age group (53%).
Seven carers (9%) were in the 85 years and older group.
The demographic characteristics of carers are detailed in Table1.
Just over half of people with dementia were females (n= 44, 56%), with a mean age of 82 years, half of whom were in the early or moderate stages of dementia.
Demographic characteristics of carers and people with dementia.
Note: Mild dementia was based on MMSE score 24–21; Moderate dementia was based on MMSE score 10–20; Due to missing data, the total percentage was not 100% in some variables.
We detected a statistically significant difference of mean score in mental health‐related QoL (3.44 [95% CI: .53, 6.35];p= .02); self‐efficacy for responding to changed behaviours (9.02 [95% CI: 1.24, 16.81],p= .02); and self‐efficacy for controlling upsetting thoughts about caregiving (8.83 [95% CI: 1.14, 16.51];p= .03) between the ‘Usual iSupport’ group and the ‘Tailored iSupport’ group at 6 months post‐intervention (Table2).
Effectiveness of the two iSupport programs on carers and people with dementia at 3 and 6 months.
Note: Adjusted for confounding variables, including gender, age, relationship with people with dementia, marital status (yes or no), living in the same household with people with dementia or not, religion, employment status (yes or no), education level (12 year or above), financial pressure and family members' help (yes or no).
Abbreviations: CSE, caregiver self‐efficacy; IG, tailored iSupport group; M, months; MCS, mental composite summary score; PCS, physical composite summary score; QoL, quality of Life; UG, usual iSupport group.
The mean difference is statistically significant in the mixed‐effect linear regression model.
We did not identify a statistically significant difference in the mean score of carers' physical health‐related QoL, their self‐efficacy for obtaining respite and the QoL of people with dementia between the ‘Usual iSupport’ group and the ‘Tailored iSupport’ group at 6 months post‐intervention (Table2).
We did not identify any statistically significant differences in outcome measures between the two groups at 3 months post‐intervention (Table2).
We did not identify any unintended consequences.
The three organisations provided care services to 470 older people living with dementia or cognitive impairment, and all of them had nominated family carers (Table3).
However, only 135 (29%) carers were interested in the trial, and 78 carers met the eligibility criteria and were enrolled in the trial.
Thus, the recruitment rate was 17%.
All carers completed the 6‐month follow‐up, a 100% retention rate.
The three organisations employed over 400 direct care staff members.
Of those, 144 attended one of the 11 training sessions provided by the five iSupport facilitators to enable them to introduce the ‘Usual iSupport’ program to carers.
Thus, the training rate was 36% over a 6‐month period (Table3).
The training sessions were flexible, lasting 15–30 min.
Carers in the ‘Tailored iSupport’ group completed an average of 16.5 units, while carers in the ‘Usual iSupport’ group completed an average of 10 units at 6 months post‐intervention.
The mean difference between the two groups was statistically significant (6.35 [95% CI: 1.17, 11.52];p= .02) (Table4).
Furthermore, they attended an average of two peer support meetings at 3 months and 2.5 at 6 months post‐intervention.
The mean difference between three and 6 months was statistically significant (.52 [95% CI: .27, .78];p< .001).
In addition, they rated their satisfaction with support as 4.8 out of 5 at 3 months and 4.7 out of 5 at 6 months post‐intervention (Table4).
Carers' adherence to and satisfaction with care services in the two iSupport programs at 3 and 6 months.
The mean difference is statistically significant in the mixed‐effect linear regression model.
We found improved carers' mental health‐related QoL at 6 months post‐intervention in the ‘Tailored iSupport’ group compared to the ‘Usual iSupport’ group.
This finding supports our previous RCT that tested the effects of the ‘Tailored iSupport’ program in comparison with a usual care group.6Our finding differs from feasibility iSupport RCTs in India and Portugal, where researchers reported no effects on the QoL of carers.7,8The low adherence to studying the iSupport manual, as reported in these RCTs, might have contributed to the lack of intervention effects on carers' QoL.7,8Our findings align with two systematic reviews which reported intervention effects of psychoeducation on carers' well‐being and mental health.23,24Our findings also support a systematic review and meta‐analysis by Sun et al.25that reported intervention effects of peer support groups on carers' QoL.
While the absolute differences in mental health‐related QoL, self‐efficacy for responding to changed behaviours and controlling upsetting thoughts may appear modest, they are clinically meaningful in the context of caregiving for people with dementia.27These changes were observed in an at‐risk population, primarily older carers with high caregiving demands, where even small improvements can translate into better coping, reduced distress and sustained caregiving capacity.
Importantly, these gains were achieved over a 6‐month period using a relatively low‐resource intervention embedded in existing aged care services.
The improvements in self‐efficacy are particularly relevant, as previous research has linked caregiver self‐efficacy to improved positive appraisal and QoL of carers.28The findings on improved QoL for carers will inform policymakers, dementia and aged care organisations, and clinicians to adapt the evidence‐based iSupport program in routine care services for the benefits of carers of people with dementia.
We did not detect any improvement in self‐efficacy for obtaining respite.
This finding aligns with that of our previous RCT.6The lack of availability and accessibility of respites for people with dementia from CALD communities, as reported in a recent consultation with stakeholders in Australia, may have contributed to this finding.29Moreover, we did not identify any intervention effects on QoL in people with dementia.
This finding aligns with those of the UK iSupport RCT.9and may be attributed to the lack of interventions for people with dementia in our RCT.
A recent longitudinal RCT that tested dyadic intervention on people with dementia and carers in the United States reported improved QoL of people with dementia, which underscores the need to add this intervention on people with dementia to optimise outcomes.
Our recruitment rate is lower than those in the Indian and Portuguese RCTs, but close to the UK RCT.7,8,9However, our retention rate was higher than those in India, Portugal and the UK iSupport RCTs.
This may be due to the trust relationships between carers and staff in the three Chinese‐ethno‐specific aged care organisations, which were reported in a previous study.2Our finding aligns with the Portuguese iSupport study, in which all carers referred by health or social care professionals at Alzheimer's Associations completed a 6‐month follow‐up.8In contrast, carers recruited online had a 58% retention rate.8Previous studies have reported that the lack of digital literacy in carers hinders them from completing the iSupport program.8,9We trained facilitators and direct care staff to support carers in accessing the iSupport program online, which may have contributed to the high retention rate.
This internal pilot study embedded in a large implementation RCT has demonstrated some benefits.
First, it showed improved QoL for carers of people with dementia.
Second, it demonstrated improved carers' confidence in dementia care (or self‐efficacy) by which they are more likely to sustain home‐based care for their loved ones living with dementia.
Third, the feasibility of training strategies for direct staff to deliver the ‘Usual iSupport’ program to carers will enable the ‘Usual iSupport’ intervention to be embedded in routine care services for the benefits of people with dementia who use aged care services.
Fourth, the study enabled the team to test the fidelity of the intervention as per the study protocol and act accordingly.
In addition, the internal pilot study enabled the inclusion of the data in the main study.
This study also had some limitations.
First, as an internal pilot study, the RCT did not achieve an adequate sample size; thus, the intervention effects reported in the trial need to be tested in a fully powered RCT.
Second, the trial was undertaken in a few Chinese‐ethno‐specific aged care organisations in Australia.
Therefore, the findings on the feasibility of the trial may not be generalisable to other aged care organisations.
Future implementation trials need to be extended to a wider CALD community to test and modify the feasibility of the implementation strategies based on the real situation in these communities.
This internal pilot study identified improved mental health‐related QoL, self‐efficacy for controlling upsetting thoughts about caregiving, and self‐efficacy for responding to changed behaviours in the ‘Tailored iSupport’ group compared with carers in the ‘Usual iSupport’ group.
Moreover, we found a relatively lower recruitment rate but a higher retention rate of carers in our study compared with other iSupport RCTs.
In addition, carers and facilitators in the study adhered to the intervention protocol.
The findings have implications for policy‐makers, dementia care organisations and clinicians working with people with dementia and their carers to embed the evidence‐based ‘Tailored iSupport’ program in dementia care services to optimise the benefits for people with dementia and their carers.
The findings on the feasibility of strategies to deliver the ‘Usual iSupport’ program and the ‘Tailored iSupport’ program will inform future implementation studies to scale up multiple language iSupport programs in other CALD communities in Australia and thus address equitable support for all carers of people with dementia from CALD communities.
This study is funded by the Aged Care Research & Industry Innovation Australia (ARIIA), the Australian Government (grant number: R2GAP00032), the Australian Nursing Home Foundation, Chinese Australian Services Society and Chinese Welfare Services of SA.
We would like to acknowledge carers and Aged Care Research & Industry Innovation Australia (ARIIA) staff who contributed to the study.
Open access publishing facilitated by Flinders University, as part of the Wiley ‐ Flinders University agreement via the Council of Australian University Librarians.