Relationships between ultraprocessed food (UPF) intakes and health have been well described in adults, but evidence of these relationships in older adults is rather limited.
Demographic shifts in aging emphasize the importance of understanding the role of diet in maintaining health during later life.
The aim of this systematic review was to identify health outcomes associated with UPF consumption in those aged ≥60 years.
The Medline, Web of Science, Scopus, and Embase databases were searched from inception until June 2023, using search terms representing UPF and any health outcome.
Observational studies restricted to individuals aged ≥60 years using the Nova food classification were included.
Articles were screened independently by 2 researchers using PECOS inclusion criteria.
Two-thirds of the studies in the present review were prospective cohort studies (n = 4) and the rest were cross-sectional (n = 2).
The number of participants ranged from 652 to 2713 across the 6 studies.
The mean age of participants ranged between 67 and 73 years.
In the prospective cohort studies, the highest consumption of UPF was associated with incident frailty, incident dyslipidemia, renal function decline, and abdominal obesity.
For cross-sectional studies, the highest intake of UPF was associated with negative outcomes similar to young and middle-aged cohorts, with the addition of nutritional frailty and worse cognitive performance.
Currently, the limited understanding of how high UPF intakes could be associated with negative health outcomes for older adults influences the ability to inform policy and practice recommendations.
More research is required owing to the very limited number of studies, specifically in older adults.
Over the past decade, the consumption of UPFs has received particular attention with regard to links to their high consumption by and poor health outcomes in adults.15–22Previous meta-analyses and epidemiological studies, encompassing >10 million participants, have extensively examined the relationship between UPF consumption and a wide spectrum of adverse health outcomes and death.24,25It is important to note that the nature of this research is predominantly observational, relying on secondary analyses of cohort and cross-sectional studies.
These investigations typically involve comparisons between groups with varying levels of UPF consumption within populations and their respective associations with health outcomes.
Although these findings offer valuable insight into the association between UPFs and health, it is important to acknowledge the inherent limitations of such studies.
These limitations include a scarcity of direct evidence establishing a causal relationship between UPF intake and adverse health outcomes, as well as the inclusion of diverse age groups within study cohorts.
An important feature of healthy aging deserving further investigation is the impact of UPFs on the health of older adults.
Given the limited evidence on and the potential advantages and disadvantages of reducing UPF intake, the research evidence from older adults remains ambiguous, particularly considering the contribution of subgroups of UPFs to energy and nutrient intakes.29–31This includes “staple foods” such as breads, cereals, and dairy products, which provide essential nutrients and fiber.
Furthermore, studies involving older adults should include relevant outcomes such as disability, frailty, and other geriatric syndromes, because many existing studies that include some older adults do not have these age-specific outcomes.
Therefore, the objective of this systematic review was to evaluate the association between UPF consumption and health outcomes among older adults aged ≥60 years.
Reporting of this systematic review adhered to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA),32as shown inTable S1.
The protocol was registered with the PROSPERO database (identifier CRD42023442783); however, we have made amendments to our PROSPERO-registered protocol to reflect updates based on emerging literature.
A systematic literature search was performed in the MEDLINE, Web of Science, Scopus, and Embase databases from inception until June 2023.
The search strategy included the following keywords: (“ultra processed foods*” OR “ultra-processed foods” OR (“ultra processed foods*” OR “ultra-processed foods” OR “Nova classification*” AND (aged OR adult* OR “elderly” OR senior* OR geriatric* OR old* OR pension* OR retire*)).
Records were downloaded to Covidence, and duplicates were removed.
Covidence is a web-based software platform that simplifies the assembly of a systematic review.33All languages were included, and corresponding authors were contacted to request extra data where applicable.
Two investigators (A.W.W.
and F.A.S.)
independently assessed articles that were initially eligible.
Studies that included a measure of correlation of UPF consumption and any health outcome were included.
The title, abstract, and full-text screening of the articles were used to determine eligibility.Table 1shows the inclusion criteria using the PECOS (population, exposure, comparison, outcome, study design) framework.
Studies were considered eligible if they satisfied the inclusion requirements of participants (adults aged ≥60 years), exposure (highest UPF intake), comparators (lowest UPF intake), outcome (any health outcome), and study design (case-control studies, cross-sectional studies, and prospective cohort studies).
Studies that included adults and, specifically, older adults and did not undergo a subgroup analysis by age were excluded.
Studies included observational studies such as longitudinal, cross-sectional, and case-control studies.
No language or date restriction was included when searching databases.
Studies that interpreted results of high ultraprocessed foods as household availabilities instead of intakes were excluded.
Studies that included adults and older adults and did not conduct a subgroup analysis by age were excluded.
We contacted 40 authors for data on any subgroup analyses of older adults, because they had published a study that included both adults and older adults but adjusted for age in the analysis.
Of these, 15 authors replied but were not able to provide a subgroup analysis of older adults.
Review articles, letters to the editor, comments, conference proceedings and articles reporting on randomized controlled trials were also excluded.
Disagreements were resolved through consensus with a third investigator (A.F.
Data extraction was carried out by 1 investigator (F.A.S.).
Conflicts were resolved through discussion with 2 investigators (A.F.
and T.R.H.).
The data were extracted from the full-text articles and consisted of the following: first author, year of publication, participants’ age, cohort, country of population, follow-up length in years, assessment of UPF, comparison, exposure variables, health outcome, and main results, including adjustments in statistical analysis.
An appraisal of methodological quality of the included articles was conducted using the Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (NOS) tool for observational studies34and the adapted NOS for cohort studies.35The NOS and adapted NOS consist of 8 questions across 3 domains: selection, comparability, and outcomes, and each question is rated up to 1 star, with the question about comparability rated by up to 2 stars.
The NOS score can reach a maximum of 9 stars and the adapted NOS score can reach a maximum of 8 stars.
A study with a score <7 was considered of lower quality and studies with a score >7 stars were considered to reflect higher quality, consistent with previous systematic reviews.17,36,37Two investigators (F.A.S.
independently evaluated the methodological quality of each included study.
Disagreements were resolved by consensus, and a third researcher (A.W.W.)
was consulted.
A narrative synthesis approach was used to systematically synthesize data within included studies.
A meta-analysis was not conducted, because of the minimal number of studies and differing outcome measures.
The available evidence was systematically reviewed and interpreted to generate new knowledge and insights on the association of high UPF intake and health outcomes in older adults.
Figure 1displays the process of selecting studies according to PRISMA.
The search identified 3509 articles, and after excluding duplicates, 1416 studies remained.
After abstract and title screening, 205 articles were identified.
Of these, 15 studies were assessed for eligibility after full-text screening, and 6 articles were included in the analysis after the selection process.
Flowchart of the selection process for the articles included in the systematic review.
Abbreviation: UPF, ultraprocessed food.
Abbreviations: ENRICA, Seniors-Study on Nutrition and Cardiovascular Risk in Spain; FFQ, food frequency questionnaire; NHANES, National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey; Q, quintile; T, tertile; UPF, ultra-processed foods; %TE, percentage of total energy.
The number of participants ranged from 652 to 2713 across the 6 studies.
The mean age of participants was 68.7 years (range, 67-73 years).
Two studies had a cross-sectional design and 4 were prospective cohort studies.
The duration of the cohort studies was between 3.5 and 8 years.
Nutritional frailty prevalence was 27%, more frequent in men.
↑ intake of unprocessed or minimally processed foods was inversely related to nutritional frailty.
↑ % of nutritional frailty phenotypes were in high UPF category.
Individuals in the high UPF category had a 1.26 times higher probability of nutritional frailty than those in the very low UPF category (OR = 1.26; 95% CI, 0.86-1.85).
↑ UPF intake was inversely associated with worse performance in animal fluency test score (OR = −1.37 [95% CI, −2.72 to −0.03];P.049 for trend) in individuals without preexisting chronic health conditions.
No significant associations were observed for those with preexisting chronic health conditions.
↑ UPF intake was associated with more than twice the odds of developing hypertriglyceridemia (OR = 2.66 [95% CI, 1.20-5.90];P.011 for trend), and low HDL cholesterol level (OR = 2.23 [95% CI, 1.22-4.05];P.012 for trend).
UPF consumption was not associated with high LDL cholesterol plasma concentration.
For each 10% increase in energy intake from UPF, the odds of developing hypertriglyceridemia is 25% higher (OR = 1.25; 95% CI, 0.94-1.66) and 20% higher for low HDL cholesterol (OR = 1.20; 95% CI, 0.97-1.49).
UPF energy intake was lower in men (17.7%) than women (20.7%).
As UPF increases, frailty risk increases when expressed as %TE (OR = 3.67 [95% CI, 2.00-6.73];P< .001 for trend).
As UPF increases, frailty risk increases when expressed as g kg–1(OR = 2.57 [95% CI, 1.41 to 4.70];P.004 for trend).
↑ UPF intake increased risk of renal function decline by 74% when expressed as %TE (OR = 1.74 [95% CI, 1.14-2.66];P.026 for trend).
↑ UPF intake increased risk of renal function decline by 62% when expressed as g kg–1d–1(OR = 1.62 [95% CI, 1.06-2.49];P.043 for trend).
Abbreviations: AO, abdominal obesity; BMI.
body mass index; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; g kg−1, gram per kilogram body weight; MET, metabolic equivalent; OR, odds ratio; TG, triglyceride; UPF, ultraprocessed food; %TE, percentage of total energy intake; ↑, increased.
All 6 studies presented in this review observed a specific adverse health outcome associated with increased UPF consumption.
Two studies examined the relationship between UPF consumption and frailty (Table 3).30,41A cohort study by Sandoval-Insausti et al,41from the Seniors-Study on Nutrition and Cardiovascular Risk in Spain (ENRICA) cohort, focused on incident frailty.
The authors found that the highest quartile of PTE of UPF was significantly associated with 3.47 times higher likelihood of experiencing unintentional weight loss, a frailty measure (odds ratio [OR] = 3.47 [95% CI, 1.95-6.17];P< .001 for trend).
Associations were found for other frailty components, including little physical activity and slowness (OR = 0.18 [95% CI, 0.14-0.21];P= .048 for trend) and (OR = 0.20 [95% CI, 0.16-0.23];P< .001 for trend), respectively.
Similar results were found when measuring UPF in gram per kilogram of body weight, suggesting that increased UPF food intake increases overall risk of frailty.41A cross-sectional study by Zupo et al30had a different method of measuring nutritional frailty, defined in their study as the coexistence of physical frailty as well as a nutritional imbalance.
The proportion of older adults with nutritional frailty phenotypes decreased steadily from the highest to the lowest quintiles; the percentage dropped from 21.66% (OR = 1.26; SE = 0.25; 95% CI, 0.86-1.85) to 0.87% (OR = 0.87; SE = 0.15; 95% CI, 0.61-1.22), respectively, indicating that increased consumption of unprocessed or minimally processed foods may protect against nutritional frailty.30When adjusting for confounders such as total protein to energy ratio and alcohol consumption, however, the protective effect of low UPF consumption became less pronounced in nutritional frailty, with decreasing odd ratios across quintiles ([Q1], OR = 0.82; [Q2], OR = 0.82; [Q3], OR = 0.89; [Q4], OR = 1.6; [Q5], OR = 4.06).
A systematic review of data from individuals aged 10-64 years (n= 10 studies) provided evidence that high UPF intake significantly increased the risk of being overweight and obese by 2% and 26%, respectively.71Conversely, a cross-sectional study of data on individuals (mean age, 70 years) from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey observed that with every 10% increase in UPF energy contribution, there was an increase of prefrailty and frailty risk in both underweight-normal and overweight groups by 2% and 6%, respectively.74However, neither the highest proportion of UPFs by food type consumed nor the exact frailty phenotype was declared in that study.
Although poor diet may contribute to increasing risk of frailty, it is important to acknowledge that weakening of muscles and frailty could affect older adults’ physical performance and thereby influence dietary intakes toward more UPF choices for convenience and ease of preparation.75For instance, a study of adults aged ≥65 years highlighted that frailty is linked to lower energy intakes (<21 kcal kg−1) and low nutrient intake of protein and vitamins D, C, E, and folate after adjusting for TE.76There is further research evidence that frail adults aged ≥60 years had insufficient dietary intakes when compared with older adults who do not suffer from frailty.77Therefore, older adults living with frailty may be a vulnerable at-risk group for poor nutritional status, and ensuring adequate energy and nutritional intake is imperative for this population group.
An association between high UPF intakes and adverse negative health outcomes, including abdominal obesity, frailty, renal function decline, dyslipidemia, and cognitive function, were identified in this review.
However, it is essential to note that UPFs encompass a range of foods that could be favored by older adults, including fortified CCPs.
Especially because ultraprocessed CCPs were the most consumed UPF by the very old (aged >85 years) and were the source of the highest amounts of fiber, folate, iron, and selenium.14,23Additionally, UPF sources in the studies included in this review are mostly from foods of low nutritional quality, and some results differ among cohorts including adults aged ≥18 years (high UPF intake and unintentional weight loss).30Therefore, the conclusions drawn from this review are limited due to the lack of available studies (n= 6) to elucidate the specific association between high UPF intakes and health outcomes among older adults.
Stronger evidence with a broader range of intakes of UPF sources is important.
This systematic review has several strengths.
To our knowledge, it is the first systematic review to examine the association between high amounts of UPF consumption and health outcomes specifically in older adults.
A robust methodology was followed that adhered to PRISMA guidelines.
Also, all included studies had a satisfactory participation rate as well as adequate follow-up rates, where appropriate, which resulted in satisfactory scores when using the risk-of-bias tool for all included studies.
Conversely, there are limitations that should be considered when interpreting the results.
First, some of the included studies measured dietary intake using a food frequency questionnaire and self-reported dietary history tools (ie, computer-based dietary history and self-administered food frequency questionnaire), which could initiate dietary recall bias.78These tools can also results in miscalculated UPF intake values because they are not explicitly designed to gather UPF data.
In addition, 3 of the 6 studies solely used higher PTE values to quantify UPF intake,38,39,42neglecting a grams-per-day measurement.
This approach could be susceptible to bias from TE consumption because it could fail to capture true UPF quantity.
For example, a participant with a lower overall energy intake might have a higher PTE of UPF intake even if the actual amount of UPF consumed is relatively low.
Therefore, measuring UPF as both grams per day and energy per day offers a clearer picture of absolute UPF intake.79Second, the number of studies included are limited (n= 6), which reduces the strengths of the findings.
Third, in 2 of the 6 included studies, multivariable models were adjusted for TE intakes,39,42physical activity, and chronic illnesses, which can be a potential limitation, because a sedentary lifestyle can be a habit of those who consume a large amount of unhealthy foods, which also can be associated with negative health status.80Fourth, because this review included data from observational studies, we are unable to provide conclusive evidence directly establishing causality between high UPF intake and health outcomes.
Last, 4 of the included studies were from the same cohort (ENRICA),39–42which could indicate biased results because participants share the same characteristics, which limits the application of this reviews findings to a broader population.
On the basis of current knowledge, we have reported the first systematic review, to our knowledge, focused on UPF and health status specifically in adults aged ≥60 years.
Higher consumption of UPF was associated with incident dyslipidemia, renal function decline, abdominal obesity, frailty, and poorer cognitive performance in the studies included in this review.
Four of the 6 studies included in this review were from the same cohort, which highlights the lack of diversity in studies in which adults aged ≥60 years were assessed independently of other age groups.
In line with the recent UK Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition statement on nutrition and older adults, emphasizes the need to evaluate the efficacy of dietary interventions to improve health outcomes for older adults,13further research is required that acknowledges the health effects of UPFs on specific age groups throughout the life course, rather than adults as a homogenous group.
This includes properly controlled studies with diet-reporting outcomes designed to assess UPFs, including sensitive subgroup analysis, and physiological, social, and psychological parameters relevant to health outcomes in older adults.
Fay A Shahatah, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Population Health Sciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom.
Tom R Hill, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Population Health Sciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom.
Andrea Fairley, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Population Health Sciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom; Faculty of Medical Sciences, School of Biomedical, Nutritional and Sports Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom.
Anthony W Watson, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Population Health Sciences Institute, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom; Faculty of Medical Sciences, School of Biomedical, Nutritional and Sports Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, United Kingdom.
Supplementary Materialis available atNutrition Reviewsonline.