Workplace and educational discrimination remain institutional issues, particularly for minoritised individuals, and can negatively affect performance and opportunity.
This study sought to investigate the experience of discrimination and identity disclosure (being ‘out’) of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and others (LGBT+) members of the UK veterinary professions and students.
A mixed‐method approach was utilised to analyse 130 survey responses and examine associations between respondents’ identity disclosure (being ‘out’ or not) and other variables.
Reflexive thematic analysis was conducted, based within minority stress theory, to generate themes to explain findings.
Over half the respondents reported having experienced or witnessed a range of discriminatory behaviours, and over half were not ‘out’ to all.
When considering people's decisions around identity disclosure negative associations were detected for those who had witnessed discrimination and those who were unsure about antidiscrimination policy, and positive associations for those who felt supported at their place of work or study and by veterinary community in general.
Three themes were generated that begin to explain respondents’ experiences.
Further research is required for institutions to know how our findings relate to their settings and to obtain additional in‐depth understanding of individuals exposure to discrimination.
Our findings indicate that LGBT+ discrimination remains an issue for some veterinary professionals and students in the UK.
For the profession to move towards a more equitable future, we suggest that a multifaceted approach is needed to bolster institutional support and the active promotion of equality, diversity and inclusion initiatives.
In recent years, research has evidenced discrimination among veterinary professionals, including students identifying as lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and others*(LGBT+).
The British Veterinary LGBT+ (BVLGBT+) society found that 20% of students and 15% of professionals reported discrimination regarding their sexual orientation or gender identity.5Similarly, experiences of discrimination were higher in non‐heterosexual individuals in the BVA surveys.3These findings echo experiences of other students and professionals in the UK,6,7,8including those in the UK medical profession,9suggesting that while veterinary professions may be faring no worse, discrimination is still an area of concern.
Individual identity disclosure also has broader implications for organisations.
A meta‐analysis of disclosure by Wax et al. found a positive correlation with employees being ‘out’ and job satisfaction and organisational commitment.19Similarly, Tejeda found that the presence of non‐discrimination policies supported better relationships between management and teams.15Conversely, workplace environments that are unsupportive of LGBT+ people have higher rates of staff turnover.19Given the challenges currently facing recruitment in veterinary sectors,20,21it is prudent to consider how the profession can be as inclusive as possible, including understanding the experiences of LGBT+ individuals.
The aim of this study was to further investigate exposure to discrimination of LGBT+ members of the UK veterinary professions (including students), explore the consequence of such discrimination, and explain how this relates to identity disclosure.
The survey was modelled on two previous studies3,5to allow a degree of temporal comparison and contained questions regarding the participants demographics, ‘out’ status, exposure to discrimination (witnessing or experiencing), experience of support within the workplace and veterinary community and an opportunity to discuss anything else (Appendix1).
Participants were asked to report on their gender rather than their sex to more accurately capture their lived experiences and self‐identified identities, which are central to understanding the dynamics of LGBT+ discrimination and disclosure.
There were 20 multiple‐choice questions and seven free‐text questions.
Some questions were nested and only available to those that chose a particular answer.
Eligible participants were those people working or studying in a related veterinary profession, based in the UK, over the age of 18 years and identified as LGBT+.
Participants were recruited using convenience sampling.
The survey, hosted on the online survey platform from the Joint Information Systems Committee (2025), was distributed through veterinary organisations, including BVA and BVLGBT+ via email communications to members and social media posts between 27 February 2023 and 31 March 2023.22Participants were invited to enter a prize draw to win one of five £100 Amazon vouchers using a separate survey link at the end of the main survey where they could leave an email while maintaining anonymity of their answers.
Survey responses were extracted into MS Excel, after which text from the open‐ended questions (Q9, 10, 11, 16, 17 and 18) was copied into MS Word for data familiarisation and further analysis.
The 172 survey responses were assessed using our eligibility criteria and to examine data for fraudulent responses at the level of the questionnaire using criteria described by Teitcher et al. for inconsistent and improper answers.23Consequently, 130 responses were used in the final analysis (Table1).
Exclusion criteria for responses not used in analysis.
Abbreviation: LGBT+, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and others.
Fisher's exact test24was used to assess the difference in ‘out’ status between groups within the sexual orientation and gender identity variables reported in the survey.
A Kruskal‒Wallis test25was used to examine associations between participant's reported identity disclosure status and their responses to several variables reported in the survey.
These variables were (1) respondent's exposure to discrimination (witnessing or experiencing), (2) their sense of support in the workplace or place of study, (3) their awareness of anti‐discrimination policies, and (4) their sense of feeling supported by the veterinary community.
The Kruskal‒Wallis test was selected because the data were non‐parametric and the categorical response variables could classified as ordinal for the analysis.
A significance level of 0.05 was used to determine statistical significance.
All statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS (v.29).
Here, Meyer describes stressors as distal (or external) and proximal (or internal) (Figure1).
External stressors due to marginalisation are those that are observable to a person, objective, and may include physical or verbal abuse or employment discrimination.
Internal stressors include fears about discrimination and rejection and extend the internalisation of societal phobias.
Conceptual framework for analysing lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and others (LGBT+) related stress (adapted from Meyer, 2003).
To explain our findings, we conducted reflexive thematic analysis, as described by Braun and Clark27and Hennessey and Barnett28on free‐text responses.
Here, data were coded (by M.H.)
in NVivo (v.11) using a deductive approach based on a relativist ontological and constructivist epistemological position†.
Themes generated were refined during discussion between the first (M.H.)
and last authors (C.M.
A total of 130 responses met the inclusion criteria.
Respondents’ roles were veterinary surgeons (33.8%), veterinary medical students (30.0%), veterinary nurses (16.2%) and nursing students (7.7%).
Other categories included academics, veterinary paraprofessionals, those working in industry (such as for pharmaceutical companies), practice management, client services and insurance (Figure2A).
Respondent genders were female (48.5%), male (43.8%), non‐binary (5.4%) and gender fluid (2.3%).
Almost one in eight of respondents reported that their gender did not match that assigned at birth either all or some of the time.
Survey respondents professions (a) and sexual orientation (b).
Reported sexual orientations were gay/lesbian (54.6%) and bisexual (28.5%), with others identifying as asexual, pansexual, queer, demisexual and heterosexual (trans) (Figure2Band Table2).
Respondents ‘out’ status differentiated by sexual orientation and gender identity for students and non‐students.
Almost half of respondents (48.5%) said they were ‘out’ to all people, 20% said they were ‘out’ to most people, 23.8% were only ‘out’ to close friends and colleagues, while 7.7% said they were ‘out’ to no‐one.
Table2provides a summary of people's ‘out’ status differentiated by sexual orientation and whether their gender matches that assigned at birth.
The survey also included an open‐ended question to provide an opportunity for respondents to explain decisions around their identity disclosure, which we explore further in the second part of our analysis.
The characteristics described across Table2were reduced to binary variables for sexual identity (gay/lesbian or other) and ‘out’ status (‘out’ to most/all or not) to allow a Fisher's exact test to be performed.
These results indicate that there was a significant difference between identifying as gay/lesbian or another sexual orientation and being ‘out’ to most or all people (p= 0.0001).
Here, there were fewer respondents with a sexual orientation different from gay/lesbian being ‘out’ to all or most than those identifying as gay/lesbian.
Similarly, for gender identity, there was a significant difference between people who reported having a gender that matches that assigned at birth (cis‐gendered) and those who did not (trans‐gendered) and being ‘out’ to all or most people (p= 0.0408).
Here, there were fewer respondents who said that their gender did not always match that assigned at birth being ‘out’ to all or most people rather than cis‐gendered people.
Overall, 55.4% of respondents reported having experienced or witnessed behaviour, which could be considered discriminatory related to sexual orientation and/or gender identity.
Incidents reported by students occurred at similar frequencies across places of study, work or placement, while incidents reported by non‐students primarily occurred at their place of work.
Of those people who reported exposure to discriminatory behaviour, most (72.2%) provided a description of the event in the survey, the analysis of which we provide in the subsequent part of our analysis.
When respondents’ ‘out’ status was examined against reports of discrimination (Table3), a significant difference was detected for those people who reported witnessing discrimination (p= 0.014).
There was a greater proportion of people who reported only being ‘out’ to close friends or colleagues or not ‘out’ at all selecting ‘witnessed’ to the question ‘have you experienced or witnessed any discriminatory behaviour?’.
Association of sexual orientation and/or gender identity‐based discrimination with ‘out’ status.
Examining respondents ‘out’ status against their sense of being supported in their place or work or study (Table4), a significant difference was detected for those people who reported that they always felt supported (p= 0.02).
Here, there was a greater proportion of people who reported being ‘out’ to all selecting ‘yes always’ to the question ‘Do you feel you get informal support from your place of work or study in terms of your sexual orientation and/or gender identity?’.
Association of feeling informally supported by workplace or place of study with ‘out’ status.
When examining respondents’ awareness of formal discrimination policies (Table5), a significant difference was detected for those people who were unsure.
There was a greater proportion of people who reported not being ‘out’ at all or only ‘out’ to close friends and colleagues selecting ‘not sure’ when asked if they were aware of a workplace discrimination policy.
Association of awareness of formal workplace support policies with ‘out’ status.
Examining respondents ‘out’ status against their sense of being supported by the veterinary community (Table6), a statistical difference was detected for those who reported feeling always supported.
Here, there was a greater proportion of people who were ‘out’ to all selecting ‘yes always’ when asked if they felt supported by the veterinary community.
Association of feeling supported by the veterinary community with ‘out’ status.
In this section, we explore what exposure to discrimination means for LGBT+ professionals and students and how people navigate decisions around identity disclosure.
In addition to concerns around pronoun use, several people reported exposure to anti‐trans comments.
Two respondents mentioned how colleagues made comments on the appearance of trans clients, while two others described how colleagues talked negatively about trans people in the context of inclusion within sport.
Colleagues or clients using the word ‘gay’ in a negative manner were also reported by several people.
Exposure (witnessing or experiencing) to this ranged from colleagues using phrases such as ‘that's so gay’ to describe a negative event (ref. 107997232) to clients describing their dog as gay during a clinical consultation because the animal showed fearful behaviour.
However, as one respondent acknowledged, this perceived fear of a negative identity reaction could be due to stereotypical views of older farmers rather than an actual reality.
We generated three key themes which begin to explore how LGBT+ individuals respond to minority stress in the veterinary profession.
When commenting on their decision whether to be ‘out’ in their place or work or study, most people mentioned the need to feel safe, comfortable and to be in a supportive environment.
However, two people did comment that their reason for not being ‘out’ was that it ‘had never come up in conversation’ (ref. 108085029) or that their ‘sexual orientation is not relevant’ to their work (ref. 106847517).
This theme indicates that some veterinary professionals and students have to collect data from their surroundings on an ongoing basis before making a decision about identity disclosure.
This theme highlights the challenge faced by individuals experiencing degrees of perceived environment safety and are thus required to temper behaviour and hide their identity away.
As mentioned in the first theme, one of the factors used by survey respondents to judge whether an environment was safe of not was the presence of other LGBT+ people.
Thus, having individuals fulfilling a duty to be visible appears an important aspect of creating a supportive environment for those who may be less confident about identity disclosure.
The findings of this mixed‐methods study highlight the experience of discrimination faced by LGBT+ veterinary professionals and students in the UK and how this discrimination can influence identity disclosure.
The survey shows a snapshot of perspectives, demonstrating how a proportion of LGBT+ individuals within the veterinary professions have experienced or witnessed discrimination.
The types of LGBT+ discrimination were similar to experiences of veterinary professionals and students in the United States and the UK,29which included various types of microaggressions, people being outed, and in the extreme, threats of violence.
Our finding that 55.4% of respondents reported exposure to discrimination is much higher than previously reported in the UK veterinary professions and students by BVLGBT+ in 20175and in a study by Witte et al. who describe how one‐third of veterinarians and veterinary students, from the United States and UK, reported exposure to discrimination related to their LGBT+ identity.11This difference could reflect a concerning increase in exposure to discrimination.
Indeed, in England and Wales, records of hate crimes related to sexual orientation or gender identity increased by 107% between 2017 and 2023.30However, the increased exposure to discrimination in our survey may be partially explained by the previous BVLGBT+ survey only asking people if they had experienced discrimination and not witnessed it.5Either way, our findings underscore an ongoing presence of discriminatory behaviour in professional and educational settings.
The qualitative data further enrich this understanding by illustrating the range and nature of discriminatory experiences.
The diversity of these experiences suggests that discrimination is not confined to overt hostility but also encompasses subtler forms of exclusion and marginalisation.
Our survey found around one‐third of participants were either not ‘out’ or only ‘out’ to close colleagues or friends.
This finding is similar to that previously reported for members of the veterinary professions in the UK in 2017 (23% of people not ‘out’ or only ‘out’ to close colleagues or friends5), veterinarians and veterinary students in the United States and the UK,29and consistent with reports in wider UK society.6These findings suggest that there remains significant hesitancy to be fully open in professional veterinary settings which our quantitative and qualitative analyses provide further insight into.
Considering sexual orientation and gender identity within the context of identity disclosure, our finding that people were more likely to be ‘out’ to most or all people if they were either cis‐gendered or identified as gay or lesbian reflects wider trends.
In the UK, the LGBT+ organisation, Stonewall reports that 38% of bisexual people are not ‘out’ to anyone at work, compared to 7% of gay men and 4% of lesbians.32Similarly, a report of trans people's experiences at work in the UK found that only 41% of respondents felt that their workplace was trans inclusive.33This indicates that additional resources may need to be directed towards specific marginalised groups within the broader LGBT+ community.
Results from our analyses provide further context for patterns of identify disclosure.
The themes we generated illustrate the tension between the need for safety and the desire for representation.
Many LGBT+ individuals actively seek out safe spaces where they can be authentic without fear of discrimination.
Mink et al. describe the potential negative health outcome of such ‘hypervigilance’ with LGBT+ individuals in a predominately heteronormative settings experiencing elevated and chronic stress.34Conversely, others choose to conceal their identity.
Indeed, one of the results from our statistical analysis indicates that a greater proportion of people who are ‘out’ to only close colleagues or to no one reported witnessing more discrimination than those who are ‘out’ to most or all.
This may be due to those individuals seeking to hide their identity being hypervigilant to the experiences of others as they monitor the perceived safety of their environment.
While it is possible that some people may not disclose their identity, despite a perception of a safe environment, due to being more private or not seeing this as relevant, this was generally not reflected across the responses from our study.
Our findings indicate that people want to be ‘out’ and those who do not disclose their identity make this choice because they perceive their professional environment as unwelcoming and want to avoid potential negative repercussions.
This aligns with existing models of identity management, such as the concept of ‘covering’ described by Yoshino, where individuals downplay aspects of their identity to fit in.35However, despite this being a strategy to fit in, our findings indicate one consequence of not being ‘out’ can be the avoidance of personal conversations with colleagues.
Consequently, this avoidance may act as a barrier for colleagues to get to know each other and form the type of peer relationships deemed necessary for an environment to be considered safe, as we describe in theme one ‘searching for a haven’.
Conversely, some individuals feel a responsibility to represent the community and advocate for change, despite the potential risks associated with doing so.
In their study on the effects of discrimination, Kramper et al. noted the need and desire of those LGBT+ veterinarians and veterinary students who strive to build a community and work with those like‐minded individuals to create an inclusive environment.29On a positive note, our findings that a greater proportion of those people who are ‘out’ to all or most felt a sense of being supported by their place or work or study, or by the veterinary community than those who are not out, indicates that the decision to disclose an LGBT+ identity can be worthwhile for many people.
Thus, our study highlights the complex and ongoing negotiations people may experience that engage with issues such as personal safety and collective progress, and where LGBT+ visibility can contribute to increased acceptance but also expose individuals to uncertainty.
Creating a more supportive and inclusive environment requires structural and cultural changes.
While EDI policies and initiatives are important, their effectiveness is contingent on effective communication, as well as implementation and enforcement.
Recent research suggests that additional work is needed to improve education and training regarding anti‐discrimination legislation in the veterinary community.4Our finding that a greater proportion of respondents who were only ‘out’ to close colleagues or not ‘out’ at all being unsure of discrimination policies than those who are ‘out’ to most or all, indicates a need for institutions to always be open and transparent about such policies, not just when someone of a minoritised identity is present.
In the UK, the RCVS provides guidance on veterinary employers’ obligations under the Equality Act (2013), setting expectations on how veterinary professionals and students should be treated.
We suggest that resources and training on LGBT+ inclusivity, such as the BVA's ‘good workplace resources’ and microaggression posters,36should be integrated into both veterinary education and workplace policies.
Furthermore, mentorship programmes could be developed and LGBT+ networks within the profession, such as BVLGBT+,37signposted to provide support for individuals navigating identity disclosure and discrimination.
Furthermore, we argue there is a need to move beyond equality and engage with the concept of equity to recognise variation in individual needs and circumstances to allocate resources accordingly and ensure fair outcomes and equal access to opportunity.
These debates are now particularly salient given that institutional efforts to undermine EDI work taking place in certain parts of the world, such as the current anti‐EDI agenda in the United States,38and bans on gender studies and Pride marches by the Hungarian government, for example.39,40We also note that additional action to support trans members of veterinary professions in the UK is now needed given the 2025 Supreme Court ruling that ‘sex’ means biological sex41to ensure that the Equality Act prevents unlawful discrimination based on gender reassignment.
By generating data through a survey, the lack of interaction between researchers and respondents removes the opportunity for deeper probing of lines of enquiry.
However, survey data have the advantage that people can respond anonymously and in their own time, and potentially a greater number of people can participate.
Given this, we suggest that, first, institutions should seek to know whether their people have similar experiences to what we describe.
Second, further qualitative studies, such as in‐depth interviews or life history accounts, are needed to examine more complex areas of enquiry, such as the effect of internalisation of phobias26and self‐stigma on mental health,42how LGBT+ lived experiences intersect with other marginalised identities (such as race, ethnicity, neurodiversity), and to probe into the institutional and contextual factors that impact people's decisions regarding identity disclosure.
The findings from this study indicate that discrimination remains an issue within the UK veterinary profession, affecting some LGBT+ individuals’ willingness to disclose a marginalised identity and their overall sense of support.
The themes we have generated illustrate ways in which many individuals manage their identity when faced with an uncertain environment and their responses to potential risk of disclosure.
We suggest that addressing such issues requires a multifaceted approach that includes institutional support, cultural change and the active promotion of inclusivity.
By fostering an environment where LGBT+ veterinary professionals and students feel safe, supported and valued, the profession can move towards a more equitable and diverse future.