Following a request from the European Commission, EFSA was asked to deliver a scientific opinion on the assessment of the application for renewal of the authorisation ofSaccharomyces cerevisiaeNCYC R404 as a zootechnical additive (functional group: gut flora stabilisers) for dairy cows.
The applicant has provided evidence that the additive currently on the market complies with the existing conditions of authorisation.
There was no new evidence that would lead the EFSA Panel on Additives and Products or Substances used in Animal Feed (FEEDAP) to reconsider its previous conclusions on the safety of the product for the target species, consumers and the environment, for which the additive is considered to remain safe.
Regarding user safety, the Panel reiterates its previous conclusions that the additive is not irritant to eyes and skin but should be considered a potential skin and respiratory sensitiser, and any exposure through skin and respiratory tract is considered a risk.
There is no need for assessing the efficacy of the additive in the context of renewal of the authorisation.
Regulation (EC) No 1831/20031establishes the rules governing the Community authorisation of additives for use in animal nutrition.
In particular, Article 14(1) of that Regulation lays down that an application for renewal shall be sent to the Commission at the latest 1 year before the expiry date of the authorisation.
The European Commission received a request from Volac International Ltd, represented in the EU by Volac Feeds Ltd.2for the renewal of the authorisation of the additive consisting ofSaccharomyces cerevisiaeNCYC R404, when used as a feed additive for dairy cows (category: zootechnical additives; functional group: gut flora stabilisers).
According to Article 7(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003, the Commission forwarded the application to the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) as an application under Article 14(1) (renewal of the authorisation).
The dossier was received on 18 April 2024 and the general information and supporting documentation are available athttps://open.efsa.europa.eu/questions/EFSA‐Q‐2024‐00260.
The particulars and documents in support of the application were considered valid by EFSA as of 25 July 2024.
According to Article 8 of Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003, EFSA, after verifying the particulars and documents submitted by the applicant, shall undertake an assessment in order to determine whether the feed additive complies with the conditions laid down in Article 5.
EFSA shall deliver an opinion on the safety for the target animals, consumer, user and the environment and on the efficacy of the feed additive consisting of S.cerevisiaeNCYC R404, when used under the proposed conditions of use (seeSection3.1.3).
The additive is a preparation containing S.cerevisiaeNCYC R404 and is currently authorised for use in feed for dairy cows (4b1871).3EFSA issued two opinions on the safety and efficacy of this product when used in feed for dairy cows (EFSA FEEDAP Panel,2009,2014).
The present assessment is based on data submitted by the applicant in the form of a technical dossier4in support of the authorisation request for the use ofS.
cerevisiaeNCYC R404 as a feed additive.
In accordance with Article 38 of the Regulation (EC) No 178/20025and taking into account the protection of confidential information and of personal data in accordance with Articles 39 to 39e of the same Regulation, and of the Decision of EFSA's Executive Director laying down practical arrangements concerning transparency and confidentiality,6a non‐confidential version of the dossier has been published on Open.EFSA.
According to Article 32c(2) of Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and to the Decision of EFSA's Executive Director laying down the practical arrangements on pre‐submission phase and public consultations, EFSA carried out a public consultation on the non‐confidential version of the technical dossier from 29 November 2024 to 20 December 2024 for which no comments were received.
The confidential version of the technical dossier was subject to a target consultation of the interested Member States from 7 August 2024 to 7 November 2024; the comments received were considered for the assessment.
The approach followed by the FEEDAP Panel to assess the safety and the efficacy ofS.
cerevisiaeNCYC R404 is in line with the principles laid down in Regulation (EC) No 429/20088and the relevant guidance documents: Guidance on the renewal of the authorisation of feed additives (EFSA FEEDAP Panel,2021).
The additive S.cerevisiaeNCYC R404 is currently authorised as a zootechnical additive (functional group: gut flora stabilisers) for use in feed for dairy cows.
The assessment regards the renewal of the authorisation.
The additive currently authorised is a solid preparation containingS.
cerevisiaeNCYC R404 at a minimum concentration of 1 × 1010colony forming units (CFU)/g additive.
The active agent is grown by fermentation and concentrated by centrifugation.
Excipients are added and the resulting mixture is dried and milled.
The final product contains about 1% dextrose, 1% sorbitan monostearate, used as stabiliser and 98% yeast cells.10Sorbitan monostearate is authorised in the EU as food additive.
Its safety is assessed in the AppendixA.
The FEEDAP Panel considers that the microbial contamination and the amounts of the detected impurities do not raise safety concerns.
Considering that no changes have been introduced in the manufacturing process and composition, the data on stability and homogeneity described in the previous opinion (EFSA FEEDAP Panel,2014) are still valid.
The active agent was isolated from silage, and it is deposited in the National Collection of Yeast Cultures (NCYC) with the accession number R404.20According to the applicant it has not been genetically modified.
The taxonomical identification was confirmed by a bioinformatic analysis of the whole genome sequence (WGS) data.21This was based on a phylogenomic analysis (using 98 single‐copy orthogroups) on publicly available genomes ofS.
cerevisiaestrains, including the reference strain S.cerevisiaeS288C and the nomenclature type S.cerevisiaeNRRL Y‐12632, and representatives of 10 otherSaccharomycesspecies and of theKazachstania,NaumovozymaandTorulasporagenera.
The analysis showed that S.cerevisiaeNCYC R404 clustered with S.cerevisiaestrains, including the reference strain S.cerevisiaeS288C and the nomenclature type S.cerevisiaeNRRL Y‐12632.
The active agent was tested for antifungal susceptibility using a broth microdilution method.22The minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values obtained for anidulafungin (0.12 mg/L), amphotericin B (0.5 mg/L), micafungin (0.12 mg/L), caspofungin (0.5 mg/L), 5‐flucytosine (< 0.06 mg/L), posaconazole (1 mg/L), voriconazole (0.12 mg/L), itraconazole (0.25 mg/L) and fluconazole (4 mg/L) were considered low.
In the directions for use of the additive and premixture, indicate the storage conditions and stability to pelleting.
Recommended dose of the additive: 1 × 1010CFU/head/day.
For safety: breathing and skin protection shall be used during handling.
In the previous opinion, the Panel concluded that following the qualified presumption of safety (QPS) approach to safety assessment,S.cerevisiaeNCYC R404 is considered safe for target species, consumers and the environment (EFSA FEEDAP Panel,2014).
Regarding user safety, the Panel concluded that the additive was not irritant to the skin or eyes and was a skin sensitiser.
Considering that the product had no dusting potential, exposure via the respiratory route was of no concern.
In the context of the current application, the active agent was confirmed to belong to S.cerevisiae, a species suitable to the QPS approach (EFSA BIOHAZ Panel,2023).
Consequently, the conclusions already reached are still valid and the FEEDAP Panel considers that the strainS.
cerevisiaeNCYC R404 remains safe for target species, consumers and the environment.
Furthermore, in the current dossier the applicant performed a literature search in order to provide evidence that in the light of the current knowledge the additive remains safe under the approved conditions for target species, consumers, users and the environment.25The search was conducted in Medline (OVID), Scopus, Web of Science, SciFinder, ProQuest and EBSCOhost Academic Search Premier covering the period from 2014 to 2024.
None of the hits retrieved were further considered relevant for the safety assessment related to the additive.
The additive contains sorbitan monostearate used as stabiliser.
Its safety at the proposed concentration of the additive was assessed and is reported in detail in AppendixA.
The Panel concludes that sorbitan monostearate does not raise concerns for the safety for the target species, consumer and environment.
The Panel considers that the additive S.cerevisiaeNCYC R404 remains safe for target species, consumer and environment.
Regarding the safety for the users, no new data have been provided.
Based on the highest dusting potential measured value (6.25 mg/m3), the FEEDAP Panel considered that the exposure of users through inhalation is possible.
The Panel reiterates its previous conclusions that the additive is not irritant to eye and skin.
The additive consists of a microorganism, and therefore should be considered a potential skin and respiratory sensitiser, and any inhalation and dermal exposure is considered a risk.
The present application for renewal of the authorisation does not include a proposal for amending or supplementing the conditions of the original authorisation that would have an impact on the efficacy of the additive.
Therefore, there is no need for assessing the efficacy of the additive in the context of the renewal of the authorisation.
The FEEDAP Panel considers that there is no need for specific requirements for a post‐market monitoring plan other than those established in the Feed Hygiene Regulation26and Good Manufacturing Practice.
The applicant has provided evidence that the additive currently on the market complies with the terms of the authorisation.
The Panel concludes that the additive S.cerevisiaeNCYC R404 remains safe for dairy cows, consumers and the environment under the current approved conditions of the authorisation.
Regarding user safety, the additive is not irritant to skin or eyes, and it should be considered a potential skin and respiratory sensitiser, and any exposure through skin and respiratory tract is considered a risk.
There is no need for assessing the efficacy of the additive in the context of the renewal of the authorisation.
EFSA may include images or other content for which it does not hold copyright.
In such cases, EFSA indicates the copyrightholder and users should seek permission to reproduce the content from the original source.
Roberto Edoardo Villa, Giovanna Azimonti, Eleftherios Bonos, Henrik Christensen, Mojca Durjava, Birgit Dusemund, Ronette Gehring, Boet Glandorf, Maryline Kouba, Marta López‐Alonso, Francesca Marcon, Carlo Nebbia, Alena Pechová, Miguel Prieto‐Maradona, Ilen Röhe and Katerina Theodoridou.
The Panel wishes to thank the following for the support provided to this scientific output: Jaume Galobart.
The additive contains approximately 1% sorbitan monostearate, which is used as stabiliser.
Sorbitan monostearate is authorised in the EU as a food additive but it is not a feed material and is not authorised as a feed additive.
The applicant provided data to support the safety of the above‐mentioned stabiliser for the target species and the environment.
The safety for the consumers is also evaluated in this appendix.
To estimate the amount of sorbitan monostearate to which the target species could be exposed, the following data/assumptions were considered: (i)S. cerevisiaeNCYC R404 is present in the additive at the concentrations analysed in the batch to batch analysis (see section3.1.1), resulting in an average of 1.32 × 1010CFU/g additive (range 1.20–1.40 × 1010CFU/g); (ii) the additive is added to the feed at the proposed minimum concentration of 4.4 × 108CFU/kg complete feeding stuff; (iii) sorbitan monostearate is added to the feed additive at about 1%.
Therefore, the concentration of sorbitan monostearate in compete feed would correspond to approximately 0.31 mg sorbitan monostearate/kg complete feed.
Based on the NOAEL of 2600 mg/kg BW and applying an uncertainty factor of 100, the maximum safe concentration of sorbitan monostearate in feed was calculated following the methodology described in the Guidance on the assessment of the safety of feed additives for the target species (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2017), and thus the maximum safe feed concentration was calculated for dairy cows.
The maximum safe concentration was 743.60 mg sorbitan monostearate/kg complete feed and is higher than the estimated maximum concentration in complete feed (0.31 mg/kg).
Therefore, the Panel concludes that the use of sorbitan monostearate as stabiliser in the additive under assessment at the proposed inclusion levels is of no concern for the safety for the target species.
Sorbitan monostearate is authorised as a food additive, to be used in several food commodities, at concentrations varying from 500 to 10,000 mg/kg.
Even if no data on the potential deposition of residues of sorbitan monostearate in animal food products were available, the Panel considers that the use of this compound as a stabiliser in the additive will not significantly contribute to the exposure of consumers to sorbitan monostearate.
Therefore, its use at the proposed inclusion levels is of no concern for the consumers.
The concentration of sorbitan monostearate in the additive ranges 0.8 to 1.4%.
Using the FERA calculation tool (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2019), it gives a PECsoil below the trigger value of 10 μg/kg soil dry weight.
Sorbitan monostearate is not soluble in water and will remain adsorbed in the soil rather than in the aquatic compartment.
Considering its negligible water solubility and the characteristics of the substance, a concern for groundwater is not expected.
The use of sorbitan monostearate as stabiliser of the additive is considered of no concern for the environment.
Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003 of the European Parliament and of the council of 22 September 2003 on the additives for use in animal nutrition.
OJ L 268, 18.10.2003, p. 29.
Volac House, 50 Fishers Lane, Orwell, Royston, Herts – the United Kingdom (represented in the EU by Volac Feeds Ltd., Feagh, Mullagh, Kells‐ Ireland).
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2015/502 of 24 March 2015 concerning the authorisation of the preparation ofSaccharomyces cerevisiaeNCYC R404 as a feed additive for dairy cows (holder of the authorisation Micro Bio‐System Ltd).
OJ L 79, 25.3.2015, p. 57.
Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January 2002 laying down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety.
OJ L 31, 1.2.2002, pp.1–48.
Decision available at:https://www.efsa.europa.eu/en/corporate‐pubs/transparency‐regulation‐practical‐arrangements.
Evaluation report available on the EU Science Hubhttps://joint‐research‐centre.ec.europa.eu/eurl‐fa‐eurl‐feed‐additives/eurl‐fa‐authorisation/eurl‐fa‐evaluation‐reports_en.
Commission Regulation (EC) No 429/2008 of 25 April 2008 on detailed rules for the implementation of Regulation (EC) No 1831/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the preparation and the presentation of applications and the assessment and the authorisation of feed additives.
OJ L 133, 22.5.2008, p. 1.
Annex 2‐1‐5 Batch to Batch Variation S.cerevisiaeNCYC R404.
Annex 2‐1‐9 Relevant impurities_Heavy metals.
LOQ: 0.01 mg/kg for arsenic, 0.05 mg/kg for lead, 0.005 mg/kg for mercury, 6 mg/kg for fluoride.
Annex 2‐1‐11 Purity analysis_Dioxins_PCBS.
Upper bound concentrations are calculated on the assumption that all values of the different congeners below the limit of quantification are equal to the limit of quantification.
TEQ = toxic equivalency factors for PCDD/Fs and DL‐PCBs established by WHO in 2005 (van den Berg et al.,2006).
Annex 2‐1‐10 Purity analysis_Mycotoxins.
LOD: 2 μg/L for aflatoxins (B1, B2, G1, G2); 20 μg/L for ochratoxin A, deoxynivalenol, T2 and HT2 toxins, diacetoxyscirpenol, fumonisins (B1 and B2), zearalenone; 8 μg/L for citrinin, mycophenolic acid, penicillic acid and roquefortine C; 40 μg/L for cyclopiazonic acid and patulin.
Annex 2‐1‐12 Purity analysis_Pesticides and list.
LOQ: 0.05–0.50 mg/kg for the listed parameters.
Annex 2‐1‐8 Purity Microbial contamination_Salmonella_E.coliand Annex 2‐1‐7 Purity analysis_microbial internal.
Annex 2‐1‐14 IFF Report No. 4.035_Particle size and dusting potential.
Annex 2‐2‐3 Certificate of Deposition_R404 and Source of isolation Declaration.
Annex 2‐2‐5 MIC Report S.cerevisiaeNCYC R404 and Annex 2‐2‐7 MICs EUCAST.
EFSA Declaration – Safety for the consumer, EFSA Declaration – Safety for the environment, EFSA Declaration – Safety for the target species and 3.Section_Safety.
Regulation (EC) No 183/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 January 2005 laying down requirements for feed hygiene.OJ L 35, 8.2.2005, p. 1.
Sorbitan Monostearate_EFSA RFI_Target Animal Safety and RFI Target Animal Safety_Annex S‐2_Toxicity Study Summaries.
Sorbitan_Monostearate_EFSA RFI_Environmental Safety, RFI Environmental Safety_Annex S‐1_Literature Search and RFI Environmental Safety_Annex S‐2_FERA Tool.