Early midlife bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy (BSO) is associated with greater Alzheimer's disease risk compared to spontaneous/natural menopause.
Previously, we found that participants with BSO had lower volume in the hippocampal dentate gyrus and cornu ammonis 2/3 composite subfield (DG‐CA2/3).
We sought to extend those hippocampal subfield findings by assessing whether BSO affected volumes along the anteroposterior hippocampal axis, anterolateral entorhinal cortex, and perirhinal cortex subregions (Brodmann area (BA) 35 and 36).
We also correlated volumes with key demographic and wellbeing‐related factors (age, depressive mood, education), hormone therapy characteristics, and recognition memory performance.
Early midlife participants with BSO (with and without 17β‐estradiol therapy (ET)) and age‐matched control participants with intact ovaries (AMC) completed high‐resolution T2‐weighted structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Medial temporal lobe volumes and Remember‐Know task recognition memory performance were compared between groups—BSO (n= 23), BSO + ET (n= 28), AMC (n= 34) using univariate analyses.
Multivariate Partial Least Squares (PLS) analyses were used to examine how volumes related to demographic and wellbeing‐related factors, as well as hormone therapy characteristics.
Relative to BSO + ET, BSO had lower posterior hippocampal and DG‐CA2/3 volumes but greater perirhinal BA 36 volumes.
Compared to age, depressive mood, and education, ET was the strongest positive predictor of hippocampal volumes and negative predictor of perirhinal BA 36 volumes.
For BSO + ET, hippocampal volumes were negatively related to ET duration and positively related to concurrent progestogen therapy.
Relative to AMC, BSO had greater anterolateral entorhinal cortex and perirhinal BA 35 and BA 36 volumes.
BSO groups (with and without ET) relied more on familiarity than recollection for successful recognition memory.
BSO and ET may have distinct effects on medial temporal lobe volumes, with potential implications for memory processes affected by Alzheimer's disease risk.
Early midlife bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy (BSO), defined as BSO occurring before spontaneous/natural menopause, results in early, abrupt, and complete loss of ovarian function, including reduced levels of the most bioactive estrogen, 17β‐estradiol.
BSO has been associated with elevated risk of various conditions: all‐cause dementia including late‐life Alzheimer's disease (ad) (with ovarian removal before age 48), mild cognitive impairment (with ovarian removal before age 46), Parkinson's disease (with ovarian removal before age 45), and multimorbidity (with ovarian removal before age 43) (Georgakis et al.2019; Rocca et al.2006,2007,2021,2022).
Risks may also include accelerated cognitive decline and greaterad‐related neuropathy associated with earlier age of ovarian removal (Bove et al.2014).
However, among women with early midlife BSO, the structures of brain regions known to be affected byad—and their potential relationships to cognition—remain understudied.
The earliest stages ofadhave been characterized predominantly using mixed‐sex research.
These studies suggestadprogression begins with medial temporal lobe atrophy, including neurofibrillary tangle pathology and volume decline in the transentorhinal cortex, which includes the anterolateral entorhinal cortex and Brodmann area 35 (BA 35) of the perirhinal cortex, followed by hippocampal subfields cornu ammonis (CA) 1 and subiculum (Braak and Braak1991; Braak and Del Tredici2020; Coughlin et al.2020; Wolk et al.2017).
Although in vivo high‐resolution imaging has been increasingly used to understand subfield‐specificadatrophy, hippocampal changes along the anteroposterior axis also vary withadprogression (Przeździk et al.2019).
Mixed‐sex research on aging points to a posterior‐to‐anterior shift in hippocampal function, with aging first affecting the posterior hippocampus (Damoiseaux et al.2016; Langnes et al.2020).
Conversely, studies ofadindicate more pronounced atrophy in anterior hippocampal regions (Maruszak and Thuret2014; Raji et al.2009), with anterior atrophy being predictive ofadconversion (Costafreda et al.2011; Csernansky et al.2005).
However, most of these studies did not investigate women explicitly, nor did they consider the effects of endogenous and exogenous ovarian hormone changes, despite their importance in understanding dementia progression.
There is overlap between the medial temporal lobe regions influenced early inadprogression and by ovarian hormones in rodents (Galea et al.2017).
In ovariectomized rodents, 17β‐estradiol enhances hippocampal neural plasticity, including increased CA1 dendritic spine density (especially mature mushroom‐shaped spines), synapse connections, as well as dentate gyrus (DG) granule cell dendritic spine density and survival of newly generated neurons (Baumgartner et al.2021; Gould et al.1990; Li et al.2004; McClure et al.2013; Miranda et al.1999; Wallace et al.2006; Woolley et al.1996).
On the other hand, 17β‐estradiol administration reduces perirhinal BA 35 dendritic spine density (Gervais et al.2015).
These changes implicate 17β‐estradiol in medial temporal lobe neural plasticity.
There is also overlap between the medial temporal lobe regions influenced early inadprogression and by 17β‐estradiol therapy (ET) in humans.
In spontaneously menopausal participants, 17β‐estradiol or estrone‐based hormone therapy is associated with larger anterior (Eberling et al.2003; Erickson et al.2005) and posterior (Albert et al.2017) hippocampal volume.
In concordance with their elevatedadrisk relative to age‐matched women, older women with BSO predominantly taking conjugated equine estrogens have thinner entorhinal‐parahippocampal cortices and reduced amygdala volume, but no significant changes in total hippocampal volume (Zeydan et al.2019).
In studies from our lab, participants with BSO who were not taking ET have lower hippocampal activation during learning (Brown et al.2023) and volume loss specific to the bilateral DG‐CA2/3 composite subfield (Gervais et al.2022).
Given that the DG constitutes a larger proportion of the posterior hippocampus than it does the anterior hippocampus (Malykhin et al.2010), DG‐CA2/3 atrophy raises the question of whether BSO might differentially affect the anterior versus posterior hippocampus.
Recent evidence from our lab suggests that the reduced hippocampal activation associated with BSO is localized to the posterior hippocampus (Brown et al.2024).
To date, no studies have examined the effects of BSO on anteroposterior hippocampal volumes.
Some of the earliest cognitive declines related to BSO involve recognition memory (Farrag et al.2002; Gervais et al.2020; Phillips and Sherwin1992; Sherwin1988).
Successful recognition memory is thought to be supported by two distinct processes: recollection and familiarity.
Recollection involves remembering specific details from episodic memory regarding a past event.
In contrast, familiarity gives rise to recognition without the recovery of contextual episodic detail.
Mixed‐sex studies show that while recollection processes, reliant on the hippocampus, decline significantly inad, familiarity processes, supported by the perirhinal cortex, often remain relatively preserved in earlyadstages (Anderson et al.2008; Westerberg et al.2006).
This dissociation is supported by research using the Remember‐Know task, where participants indicate whether they recollect specific contextual details of an event (Remember) or simply know the event occurred without recalling details (Know) (Tulving1985).adrisk is associated with fewer Remember responses but comparable or increased Know responses, reflecting impaired recollection but intact familiarity (Hudon et al.2009; Rauchs et al.2007).
These findings underscore the potential utility of recognition tasks that distinguish between recollection and familiarity processes as sensitive tools for identifying early cognitive changes associated withadrisk.
Although previous work demonstrated that BSO is not associated with significant differences in whole perirhinal cortical volumes, subregional distinctions between BA 35 and BA 36 were not examined (Gervais et al.2022).
Furthermore, relationships between familiarity and perirhinal cortex volumes in women with BSO have not been assessed.
It is possible that ET haslong‐termpositive effects on hippocampal structure and function in women with spontaneous menopause and those with oophorectomy.
Earlier age at oophorectomy is associated with accelerated global cognitive decline, especially for hippocampal‐dependent episodic and semantic memory.Previous useof hormone therapy attenuates this cognitive decline, suggesting this therapy may have enduring cognitive benefits (Bove et al.2014).
Supporting this idea, spontaneously menopausal women whopreviously tookET have greater hippocampal volume than those who were currently taking and who had never taken ET (Boccardi et al.2006; Lord et al.2008).
Thus, it is possible that ET after loss of ovarian function can improve or maintain hippocampal structure and hippocampal‐dependent cognition long after ET administration has ended.
In the current study, previous and current ET users were combined into a single group to underscore the potential for ET to confer lasting benefits on hippocampal structure, even after discontinuation.
In addition to ET, there are various key variables that may influence medial temporal lobe structure across the lifespan that have not been studied in women with BSO.
For example, structural hippocampal changes have been related to factors such as aging (Nobis et al.2019), depressive symptoms (Sheline2011), and education attainment (Noble et al.2012).
However, it is challenging to disentangle the distinct effects of these variables on medial temporal lobe structure, given their complex interrelationships across the lifespan.
Here, we expand on previous work to delineate how early midlife BSO, ET, and key demographic and wellbeing‐related factors simultaneously relate to medial temporal lobe structure.
How medial temporal lobe volumes correlate with demographic and wellbeing‐related factors as well as hormone therapy characteristics.
This study was carried out in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki.
Approval was granted by the Research Ethics Committees of the University of Toronto and McGill University.
Informed consent was obtained from all participants included in the study.
Participants with BSO had their ovaries removed prior to spontaneous menopause for cancer risk reduction (Eisen et al.2005).
They were recruited from familial breast and ovarian cancer clinics in Toronto and Montreal, Canada.
Age‐matched controls (AMC) were recruited from the general community in the same cities.
Exclusion criteria for all participant groups included: being younger than 35 or older than 55 years, contraindications for MRI safety, perimenopause, BSO after spontaneous menopause, pregnancy, breastfeeding, chemo/radiation/adjuvant therapies within 6 months of testing, unmanaged health/psychiatric conditions, and endocrine disorders.
There were two additional exclusion criteria for women in the AMC group, which included irregular menstrual cycling and taking hormonal contraceptives within 6 months prior to entering the study.
Participant demographic characteristics are summarized in Table1.
Note:For previous or current hormonal contraceptive treatment, four participants in the BSO + ET group hadcurrenthormonal intrauterine device treatment while no other participants hadcurrenttreatment.
Abbreviations: AMC, age‐matched controls; BMI, body mass index; BSO + ET, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy with previous/discontinued or current use of 17β‐estradiol therapy with or without progestogen therapy; BSO, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy; CES‐D, Center for Epidemiological Studies‐Depression Scale; CES‐D Score ≥ 16, depressive mood; E1G, estrone‐3‐glucuronide; History of cancer treatment, history of cancer treatment including chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and/or adjuvant therapy; NA, not applicable; PdG, pregnanediol‐3‐glucuronide; PSS, Perceived Stress Scale; SD, standard deviation.
Significantpost hocDunn's test, E1G: BSO and BSO + ET<AMC.
Significant Fisher's exact test, History of cancer treatment: BSO>BSO + ET and AMC.
Data included in this study are a subset of a larger longitudinal dataset addressing neuropsychological performance, brain structure, and brain function of participants with BSO (Brown et al.2023,2024; Gervais et al.2020,2022).
A previous study in a subset of participants from the same cohort focused on scene memory and brain structure among participants with BSO using manual segmentation of the medial temporal lobe (Gervais et al.2022).
Of the 85 participants included in the current study, 44 (51.8%) were also included in Gervais et al. (2022) and 41 (48.2%) were newly added, increasing the cohort size significantly.
Twenty‐nine participants were new, with their data collected, processed, and analyzed after publication of the previous study.
Twelve other participants were also included in the current study due to differences in inclusion criteria between studies; we included participants with treated diabetes, those scanned between 6 months and 1 year since BSO, and those with past use of ET.
By incorporating a larger and more diverse cohort, the current study builds upon prior work, enhancing statistical power and ecological validity while preserving foundational insights from earlier analyses.
Participants completed a neuropsychological task session during which they provided demographic information and completed various tasks and questionnaires.
Mood measures included the Centre for Epidemiological Studies‐Depression Scale (CES‐D) (Radloff1977), which assessed depressive mood, and the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS) (Cohen et al.1983), which assessed stress symptoms.
A CES‐D score of ≥ 16 represented depressive mood (Lewinsohn et al.1997).
Participants also completed an MRI session including structural and functional scans and provided urine samples for ovarian hormone level assessment.
Levels of estrone‐3‐glucuronide (E1G; 17β‐estradiol urinary metabolite) and pregnanediol‐3‐glucuronide (PdG; progesterone urinary metabolite) were analyzed in urine using enzyme‐linked immunoassays at the Women's Health and Exercise Laboratory at Pennsylvania State University.
Although scanning data collection at the same time of day for all participants would have been ideal to account for potential circadian fluctuations in hormone metabolite excretion (Rahman et al.2019), to ensure participation, scheduling was based on participants' availability, resulting in variability in scan times.
The Remember‐Know task, originally introduced by Tulving (1985), is a recognition memory paradigm that distinguishes between two cognitive processes contributing to recognition memory: recollection and familiarity.
For this task, participants make judgments about whether recognition of previously studied words is accompanied by specific recollection of contextual details (Remember) or based on a sense of familiarity without explicit contextual recall (Know).
A subset of participants (BSOn= 18, BSO + ETn= 24, AMCn= 26) completed the Remember‐Know task in two phases.
During the study phase, 60 words were sequentially presented on a computer screen at five‐second intervals.
Participants were asked to rate the pleasantness of each word on a scale of 1 (least pleasant) to 5 (most pleasant).
They were not informed that they would later be asked to recall the words, ensuring incidental encoding.
During the test phase, participants were presented with 120 words, comprising the 60 words from the study phase (old) and 60 new words (new).
For each word, participants judged whether it was “old” (i.e., recognized from the study phase) or “new”.
If a participant responded “old,” they were then prompted to indicate whether they remembered the word (i.e., had a conscious recollection of contextual details associated with the word during the study phase) or simply knew it was presented without recalling specific details.
Scans were collected at two sites using a Siemens 3 T MAGNETOM Prisma scanner (Toronto Neuroimaging Institute at the University of Toronto) and a Siemens 3 T MAGNETOM Prisma‐Fit scanner (Douglas Hospital Research Institute Brain Imaging Center), each with a 32‐channel head coil.
Whole‐brain T1‐weighted magnetization‐prepared, rapid acquisition with gradient echo (MPRAGE) scans (repetition time (TR) = 2000 ms, echo time (TE) = 2.6 ms, flip angle = 9°, 160 sagittal slices, 1 mm3isometric voxels, filed‐of‐view (FOV) = 256 mm2) were obtained perpendicular to the anterior commissure–posterior commissure line.
This T1‐weighted scan was used to obtain estimated intracranial volume (ICV; Section2.8.
Head size adjustment: Intracranial volume) using Automatic Segmentation of Hippocampal Subfields (ASHS; Yushkevich, Pluta, et al.2015) and to determine slice placement during the subsequent high‐resolution, T2‐weighted scan taken along an oblique–coronal plane perpendicular to the hippocampal long axis (TR = 3000 ms, TE = 66 ms, 28 slices, voxel size = 0.4 × 0.4 × 3.0 mm, no skip, FOV = 220 mm).
We created a custom medial temporal lobe segmentation atlas using high‐resolution T2‐weighted MRI scans from a subset of high‐quality scans from midlife participants included in Gervais et al.2022(n= 20; age range = 38–60 years; BSOn= 7, BSO + ETn= 5, AMCn= 3, spontaneous menopausen= 5).
Manual segmentation of medial temporal lobe gray matter was implemented using steps previously reported by our group (Gervais et al.2022).
Regions included in our atlas were three hippocampal subfields (CA1, subiculum, and the DG‐CA2/3 composite subfield), which were traced according to the Olsen‐Amaral‐Palombo protocol (Olsen et al.2009,2013; Palombo et al.2013; Yushkevich, Amaral, et al.2015).
Five cortical structures (medial perirhinal cortex (BA 35), lateral perirhinal cortex (BA 36), parahippocampal cortex, anterolateral entorhinal cortex, and posteromedial entorhinal cortex) were also included in the atlas.
In addition to the subfield‐based analyses, the hippocampus as a whole (collapsed across subfields) was subdivided into anterior and posterior sections based on the location of the uncal apex (Poppenk 2012; Olsen et al.2013).
The anterior hippocampus region‐of‐interest (ROI) was defined as the portion of the hippocampal head falling anterior to the most anterior appearance of the dentate gyrus as well as the posterior region of the hippocampal head in which the hippocampal subfields were segmented separately.
Thus, the anterior hippocampus ROI also contained cornu ammonis and subiculum.
The posterior hippocampus ROI was defined as the hippocampal body subfields and tail, beginning at the disappearance of the lamina quadrigemina.
The subfields were not segmented in the tail of the hippocampus (Figure1).
Landmarks for segmentation of anteroposterior hippocampal axis distinction, hippocampal subfields, and medial temporal cortex.
Figure is adapted from (Mazloum‐Farzaghi et al.2024) and depicts the extent along the anteroposterior axis (A‐P in the figure) of the different anatomical labels included in the Olsen‐Amaral‐Palombo atlas.
Dashed black vertical lines outline MRI slices (the number of slices is variable from participant to participant).
alERC, anterolateral entorhinal cortex; CA1, cornu ammonis 1; DG‐CA2/3, dentate gyrus and cornu ammonis 2/3 composite subfield; FTJ, frontal temporal junction; PHC, parahippocampal cortex; pmERC, posteromedial entorhinal cortex; PRC, perirhinal cortex; SUB, subiculum.
The two entorhinal cortex subregions (anterolateral and posteromedial) as well as the medial and lateral borders of the perirhinal cortex were traced in accordance with our previous work (Gervais et al.2022; Olsen et al.2017).
The perirhinal cortex was then divided into BA 35 and BA 36 sections according to (Kivisaari et al.2013and Berron et al.2017).
The definition of these boundaries varied based on the depth of the collateral sulcus.
If the collateral sulcus length was defined as “regular” (≤ 1.5 cm), the lateral border of BA 35 was the fundus of the collateral sulcus (Figure2B(Kivisaari et al.2013)).
If the collateral sulcus was defined as “deep” (> 1.5 cm), the lateral border of BA 35 was the midpoint between (i) the shoulder of the medial bank of the collateral sulcus and (ii) the midpoint of the lateral bank of the collateral sulcus (Figure2C(Kivisaari et al.2013)).
If the collateral sulcus was defined as “shallow” (≤ 1 cm), the lateral border of BA 35 was the fundus of the collateral sulcus (Figure2A(Berron et al.2017)).
Custom atlas manual segmentation examples for medial temporal cortex structures based on the depth of the collateral sulcus.
(A) “Shallow” collateral sulcus segmentation example.
(B) “Regular” collateral sulcus segmentation example.
(C) “Deep” collateral sulcus segmentation example.
Orange = hippocampal head, light pink = lateral perirhinal cortex (BA 36), dark pink = medial perirhinal cortex (BA 35), light blue = anterolateral entorhinal cortex, purple = posteromedial entorhinal cortex, red = subiculum, green = cornu ammonis 1 (CA1), dark blue = dentate gyrus and cornu ammonis 2/3 composite subfield (DG‐CA2/3).
Reliability values for manual segmentations from the custom atlas have been previously reported (Gervais et al.2022).
However, some of these manual segmentations were edited so the perirhinal cortex could be divided into BA 35 and BA 36.
Thus, inter‐ and intra‐rater reliability on the raw volumes of each ROI were calculated for structures that were manually altered by two raters (AB and AM).
Inter‐and intra‐rater reliability on these raw volumes were evaluated using intra‐class correlations for 20% of the atlas scans (n= 4).
For intra‐rater reliability, raw volumes were compared for scans adjusted twice by the same rater on separate days.
Reliability coefficients for each ROI are presented separately by hemisphere (Table2).
Custom atlas: Reliability measurements for manually segmented medial temporal cortex regions.
Note:Inter: ICC2, k.2‐way random, absolute agreement, average measure.
Intra: ICC3, k.2‐way mixed, consistency.
Abbreviations: alERC, anterolateral entorhinal cortex; BA 35, Brodmann area 35; BA 36, Brodmann area 36; ICC, intra‐class coefficient; pmERC, posteromedial entorhinal cortex.
All scans were automatically segmented using ASHS and visually examined for quality using the T2‐weighted structural scans (voxel size = 0.4 × 0.4 × 3.0 mm) with ITK‐SNAP (v.4.0.0) (Yushkevich et al.2006; Yushkevich, Pluta, et al.2015).
Automatic segmentation output quality was assessed by one rater (AB) for each hemisphere separately for the hippocampus and medial temporal cortex.
Quality scores ranging from 0 to 1 were given using a five‐point scale to quantify the severity of segmentation errors (Table3).
Quality scores for the segmentation output for the hippocampus were highly rated, ranging from 0.5 to 0.75, with the majority of scores rated at 0.75 (Table4).
Thus, hippocampal segmentations were not manually adjusted.
Quality scores for the segmentation output for medial temporal cortex structures showed a broader range, from 0 to 0.75, with the majority of scores rated at 0.25.
To address these differences, we performed manual adjustments only for the medial temporal cortex.
Thus, BA 35, BA 36, anterolateral entorhinal cortex, and posteromedial entorhinal cortex were manually adjusted by one rater (AB).
Medial temporal cortex segmentation errors corresponding to a quality control rating of 0.5 involved minimal manual adjustment compared to those with quality control ratings of 0 or 0.25.
Given the small impact of the moderate errors associated with a 0.5 quality score, we determined that the hippocampal regions were of sufficiently high quality to retain in our final analysis without manual adjustment.
For the medial temporal cortex, in cases where automatic segmentation did not accurately represent the underlying neuroanatomy—such as when a specific label excluded a substantial number of gray matter voxels—manual adjustments were made following the same segmentation protocol used to inform the automated atlas.
These adjustments involved adding or removing voxels as needed.
Intra‐rater reliability was calculated on the raw volumes for scans adjusted twice by the same rater on separate days (n= 4).
Reliability coefficients for each ROI are presented separately by hemisphere (Table5).
Summary of automatic segmentation output quality control scores for hippocampus and medial temporal cortex.
Reliability measurements for edited segmentation output of medial temporal cortex regions.
Abbreviations: alERC, anterolateral entorhinal cortex; BA 35, Brodmann area 35; BA 36, Brodmann area 36; ICC, intra‐class coefficient; pmERC, posteromedial entorhinal cortex.
Due to the novelty of combining various segmentation protocols, segmenting medial temporal cortex regions presented unique challenges.
Prior research documents the variability in segmentation of the medial temporal cortex and identifies these regions as particularly challenging to delineate due to complex anatomical boundaries.
This variability in segmentation quality aligns with the notion that the medial temporal cortex is more variable than the hippocampus across participants.
Experts have demonstrated some disagreement on the boundary between hippocampal CA1 and subiculum (Olsen et al.2019).
However, variability in the medial temporal cortex may be even more pronounced, particularly in “transitional” zones between structures like perirhinal BA 35 and BA 36 (Wuestefeld et al.2024).
In our study, we attended closely to this variability, necessitating our manual adjustments.
For each medial temporal lobe ROI, relative volume was calculated to account for head size variation; these relative volumes were used in all analyses.
Estimated ICV was accounted for in each ROI using a regression‐based technique.
Each ROI was regressed on ICV (collapsed across groups), and the residual value was accounted for in each ROI for each participant (Free et al.1995): Volumerelative= Volumeraw‐Grad * (ICVindividual‐ICVmean) where Volumerelativewas the corrected relative ROI volume, Volumerawwas the original raw ROI volume, Grad was the gradient of the regression line between the ROI volume and ICV, ICVindividualwas the ICV measurement for that participant, and ICVmeanwas the mean ICV for all participants.
Statistical analyses were conducted in R version 4.2.0 (R Core Team, 2019).
Using univariate analyses, we assessed whether hippocampal, anterolateral entorhinal, and perirhinal cortex volumes differed between groups.
Two repeated‐measures analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) models were run to investigate whether effects of BSO and ET on volumes differed between anterolateral entorhinal cortex, perirhinal cortex, and: (1) anterior and posterior hippocampus, and (2) hippocampal subfields.
Two models were run due to overlap between volumes represented by anterior and posterior hippocampal ROIs (which encompass all the subfields combined) and distinct hippocampal subfields.
For all ANCOVAs, ROI and hemisphere (right, left) were treated as within‐participant factors, and group (BSO, BSO + ET, AMC) and scanner site (Toronto, Montreal) as between‐participant factors.
Exploratory ANCOVAs were also conducted to rule out menstrual phase (E1G level variation), hormonal contraceptive use, and past cancer treatment history as sources of influence on group differences in the outcome measures (Supporting Information).
Model 1: Two hippocampal (anterior, posterior), one anterolateral entorhinal cortex, and two perirhinal cortex (BA 35, BA 36) ROIs were entered into a single repeated‐measures ANCOVA model to test for main effects of group, group × ROI, and group × ROI × hemisphere interactions while controlling for scanner site (Turner et al.2013); significant interactions were followed up with independent samplest‐tests.
Model 2: Three hippocampal subfields (CA1, DG‐CA2/3, subiculum), one anterolateral entorhinal cortex, and two perirhinal cortex (BA 35, BA 36) ROIs were entered into another repeated‐measures ANCOVA model to test for main effects of group, group × ROI, and group × ROI × hemisphere interactions while controlling for scanner site; significant interactions were followed up with independent samplesttests.
Using univariate analyses, we assessed whether Remember‐Know task performance (proportion of trials for which participants responded “yes” to old items) differed between groups.
One repeated‐measures ANCOVA model was run to investigate whether the effects of group (BSO, BSO + ET, AMC) on performance differed between conditions, with (1) the Remember condition corresponding to the proportion of trials for which participants responded “yes” to old items and claimed they remembered/recollected the word, and (2) the Know condition corresponding to the proportion of trials for which participants responded “yes” to old items and claimed the word was familiar but not recollected.
Importantly, previous work has shown that analyzing the proportion of Know responses alone can lead to an underestimation of the familiarity process (Yonelinas2002).
Thus, to best isolate familiarity processes in the absence of recollection, Know performance was adjusted to account for the likelihood that words receiving a Remember response were familiar to some extent.
An adjusted estimate of Know responses was derived using the following formula: Adjusted Know performance = Know performance / (1 − Remember performance).
Condition was treated as a within‐participant factor, and group (BSO, BSO + ET, AMC) as a between‐participant factor.
Remember‐Know task conditions (Remember, Know) were entered into a single repeated‐measures ANCOVA model to test for main effects of group and a group × condition interaction on performance; a significant interaction was followed up with independent samplest‐tests.
Given the importance of the perirhinal cortex for familiarity‐based recognition memory performance (Bowles et al.2007), we also used Pearson correlations to explore the potential mechanism underlying group differences in Remember‐Know task performance by correlating the proportion of Know responses on hits with perirhinal BA 35 and 36 volumes.
For all tests, statistical assumptions were tested, including sphericity, normality, and homogeneity of variance.
When violated, we either Winsorized data to the value of the 90th or 10th percentile of the distribution or used nonparametric tests.
False discovery rate (FDR) was used to correct for multiple comparisons for allpost hocindependent samplest‐tests.
Analysis of variance (ANOVA), Kruskal‐Wallis, or Fisher's exact tests were conducted to compare groups on demographic characteristics.
Effect size estimates (η2or Cohen'sd) were calculated for all parametric analyses.
We conducted a Partial Least Squares (PLS) correlation analysis inRusing data4PCCAR and TExPosition.
PLS was selected to address the complexity of the dataset and identify patterns of associations that may not be detectable through traditional univariate approaches.
This multivariate approach allowed us to model the relationship between demographic and wellbeing‐related variables (including group status (BSO, BSO + ET, AMC), age, CES‐D score, number of years of education) and volume in medial temporal lobe ROIs (including anterior and posterior hippocampus, hippocampal subfields CA1, subiculum, and DG‐CA2/3, anterolateral entorhinal cortex, and perirhinal cortex subregions BA 35 and BA 36).
Data were centered and standardized prior to analysis using the preProcess function fromcaret.
Data were organized into two matrices, one of demographic and wellbeing‐related variables, and another of medial temporal lobe volume variables.
PLS was used to generate a correlation matrix that captured associations between the variables in each matrix (Figure3, Step #1).
The resulting matrix was then subjected to singular value decomposition, a matrix factorization technique that decomposes the correlation matrix into three matrices (left singular vectors, right singular vectors, and singular values) to aid in the identification of latent variables (LVs) that indicate which variables from Matrix 1 are most strongly correlated with variables from Matrix 2 (Figure3, Step #2).
The left singular vectors capture the linear relationships between variables in Matrix 1, while the right singular vectors do so for Matrix 2.
Singular values are measures of the strength of these associations and define the LVs that summarize the shared variance between the two matrices.
Singular value decomposition is a data reduction technique that circumvents the need for multiple comparison corrections because it is conducted in one step.
Consequently, compared to univariate analyses, multivariate PLS offers heightened sensitivity and robustness and is a good approach for handling datasets with smaller cohort sizes (Lukic et al.2002; Willaby et al.2015).
Unlike univariate analyses, PLS does not require meeting assumptions of normality, independence of observations, and linearity, and allows all variables to be modeled simultaneously (Van Roon et al.2014).
Depiction of Partial Least Squares analysis steps.
AMC, age‐matched controls; BA 35, Brodmann area 35; BA 36, Brodmann area 36; BSO + ET, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy with previous/discontinued or current use of 17β‐estradiol therapy with or without progestogen therapy; BSO, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy; CA1, cornu ammonis 1; CES‐D=Center for Epidemiological Studies–Depression Scale; CI, confidence interval; DG‐CA2/3, dentate gyrus and cornu ammonis 2/3 composite subfield.
Two resampling methods were used to identify which LVs weresignificant(permutation tests with 1000 iterations), and which variables were the mostreliablecontributors to each LV (1000 bootstrap samples) (Figure3, Step #3) (Beaton et al.2014; Berry et al.2011; Efron and Tibshirani1986; Hesterberg2011; Peres‐Neto et al.2005).
Permutation testing was conducted by resampling without replacement to create a randomized distribution of the test statistic, against which the observed statistic was compared.
Bootstrapping was conducted by resampling with replacement to estimate confidence intervals for each variable's contribution to the LVs.
Given the heterogeneity of hormone therapy characteristics in the BSO + ET group, we also conducted a PLS analysis to model the relationships between hormone therapy characteristics (including ET duration, interval between BSO and ET initiation, ET route of administration (gel, patch, oral, and vaginal), concurrent progestogen therapy, previous/discontinued ET) and volume in medial temporal lobe ROIs (including anterior and posterior hippocampus, subfields CA1, subiculum, and DG‐CA2/3, anterolateral entorhinal cortex, and perirhinal cortex subregions BA 35 and BA 36).
As expected, BSO, BSO + ET, and AMC did not differ significantly in age (χ2= 2.86,p= 0.24).
BSO and BSO + ET also did not differ in age of BSO (t(49) = 0.87,p= 0.39,d= 0.24).
All participants with BSO had their surgery prior to spontaneous menopause.
All but three participants with BSO had their surgery prior to the age of 48.
Two participants with BSO had their surgery at age 50, and one participant had their surgery at age 49.
There was a significant effect of group on cancer treatment history (chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and/or adjuvant therapy;p< 0.0001), with more women in the BSO group having a history of cancer treatment compared to the BSO + ET (p= 0.0001) and AMC (p< 0.0001) groups.
There was no significant group difference on cancer treatment history between BSO + ET and AMC groups (p= 0.20).
A total of 16 participants reported a cancer treatment history (BSOn= 14, BSO + ETn= 2).
The average duration between the final cancer treatment session and study date was approximately 6.09 years (standard deviation = 5.37; between 7 months and 5 years for 9 participants and between six and 19 years for 7 participants).
Hormone therapy characteristics for the BSO + ET group are summarized in Tables6,7,8.
Notably, nearly all participants from the BSO + ET group began taking ET within 1 year of their BSO (n= 26).
Two participants in this group began ET later, specifically 4.5 and 9 years post‐BSO.
Participants from the BSO + ET group who had previously taken ET stopped the therapy between 0.75 and 9 years prior to the scan date.
Hormone therapy characteristics (previous and current) for BSO + ET group.
Note:Details regarding hormone therapy duration and the interval between BSO and ET initiation were missing for one participant.
Abbreviations: BSO, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy; ET, 17β‐estradiol therapy; SD, standard deviation.
17β‐estradiol therapy (previous and current) details for BSO + ET group.
Abbreviation: BSO + ET, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy with previous/discontinued or current use of 17β‐estradiol therapy with or without progestogen therapy.
Progestogen therapy (previous and current) details for BSO + ET group.
Abbreviation: BSO + ET, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy with previous/discontinued or current use of 17β‐estradiol therapy with or without progestogen therapy.
Data regarding urinary ovarian hormone levels were not available for a small subset of participants (E1G: BSOn= 5, BSO + ETn= 4, AMCn= 5; PdG: BSOn= 5, BSO + ETn= 5, AMCn= 6).
For participants for whom these data were available, there was a significant effect of group on urinary E1G levels (χ2= 10.01,p= 0.01): BSO (Z= 2.91,p= 0.01) and BSO + ET (Z= 2.33,p= 0.03) had significantly lower E1G levels than AMC.
E1G levels did not significantly differ between BSO and BSO + ET (Z= −0.74,p= 0.46).
There were no significant group differences for PdG levels (χ2= 4.53,p= 0.10) or any other demographic measures (Table1).
Model 1: Mauchly's test indicated that the assumption of sphericity had been violated for ROI (W= 0.04,p< 0.001), the group × ROI interaction (W= 0.04,p< 0.001), the ROI × hemisphere interaction (W= 0.03,p< 0.001), and the group × ROI × hemisphere interaction (W= 0.03,p< 0.001).
Therefore, degrees of freedom were corrected using Greenhouse–Geisser estimates of sphericity for ROI (ε= 0.40), the group × ROI interaction (ε= 0.40), the ROI × hemisphere interaction (ε= 0.36), and the group × ROI × hemisphere interaction (ε= 0.36).
There were significant main effects for ROI (F(1.60,129.64)= 888.29,p< 0.001, partialη2= 0.86) and hemisphere (F(1,81)= 14.40,p< 0.001, partialη2= 0.01), as well as significant ROI × hemisphere (F(1.43,115.49)= 52.83,p< 0.001, partialη2= 0.17) and ROI × group (F(3.20,129.64)= 7.42,p< 0.001, partialη2= 0.10) interactions.
The group × ROI × hemisphere interaction effect was not significant; therefore, reported analyses were run on left and right hemispheres averaged.
To interrogate the significant ROI × group interaction, we performed follow‐up independent samplest‐tests.
Follow‐upt‐tests showed there were no significant group differences in anterior hippocampus volume.
The posterior hippocampus was significantly smaller in BSO versus BSO + ET (t(81) = 2.88,pFDR= 0.04,d= 0.82).
BA 36 was significantly larger in BSO versus BSO + ET (t(81) = −4.19,pFDR= 0.002,d= −1.20) and BSO versus AMC (t(81) = −2.91,pFDR= 0.04,d= −0.81).
There were no other significant group differences in posterior hippocampal, anterior hippocampal, anterolateral entorhinal cortex, BA 35, or BA 36 volumes (Figure4; Table9).
Thus, the significant ROI × group interaction was driven by opposing significant effects of group on posterior hippocampal and BA 36 volume.
Group comparisons of medial temporal lobe gray matter volume.
Effect of group on relative volume of average volume of anterior hippocampus, posterior hippocampus, hippocampal cornu ammonis 1 (CA1) subfield, hippocampal subiculum subfield, dentate gyrus and cornu ammonis 2/3 (DG‐CA2/3) composite subfield, anterolateral entorhinal cortex (ERC), and perirhinal Brodmann areas 35 (BA 35) and 36 (BA 36).
Error bars represent standard error of the mean; * =p< 0.05, ~ =p< 0.08 (FDR‐corrected).
AMC, age‐matched controls; BSO, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy; BSO + ET, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy with previous/discontinued or current use of 17β‐estradiol therapy with or without progestogen therapy.
Medial temporal lobe volume independent samplest‐test group contrast results.
Abbreviations: AMC, age‐matched controls; BA 35, Brodmann area 35; BA 36, Brodmann area 36; BSO + ET, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy with previous/discontinued or current use of 17β‐estradiol therapy with or without progestogen therapy; BSO, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy; CA1, cornu ammonis 1; DG‐CA2/3, dentate gyrus and cornu ammonis 2/3 composite subfield; ERC, entorhinal cortex.
Model 2: Mauchly's test indicated that the assumption of sphericity had been violated for ROI (W= 0.001,p< 0.001), the group × ROI interaction (W= 0.001,p< 0.001), the ROI × hemisphere interaction (W= 0.001,p< 0.001), and the group × ROI × hemisphere interaction (W= 0.001,p< 0.001).
Therefore, degrees of freedom were corrected using Greenhouse–Geisser estimates of sphericity for ROI (ε= 0.26), the group × ROI interaction (ε= 0.26), the ROI × hemisphere interaction (ε= 0.26), and the group × ROI × hemisphere interaction (ε= 0.26).
There was a significant main effect of ROI (F(1.29,104.71)= 948.35,p< 0.001, partialη2= 0.88) and hemisphere (F(1,81)= 31.60,p< 0.001, partialη2= 0.02), as well as significant ROI × hemisphere (F(1.30,105.13)= 42.74,p< 0.001, partialη2= 0.10) and ROI × group (F(2.59,104.71)= 37.75,p= 0.0002, partialη2= 0.10) interactions.
The group × ROI × hemisphere interaction effect was not significant; therefore, reported analyses were run on left and right hemispheres averaged.
To interrogate the significant ROI × group interaction, we performed follow‐up independent samplest‐tests.
Follow‐upt‐tests showed there were no significant group differences in CA1 or subiculum volume.
DG‐CA2/3 was trending toward being significantly smaller in BSO versus BSO + ET (t(81) = 2.63,pFDR= 0.06,d= 0.75).
There were no significant group differences in anterolateral entorhinal cortex and BA 35 volumes.
BA 36 was significantly larger in BSO versus BSO + ET (t(81) = −4.19,pFDR= 0.002,d= −1.20) and BSO versus AMC (t(81) = −2.91,pFDR= 0.04,d= −0.81).
There were no other significant group differences in BA 35 or BA 36 volumes (Figure4; Table9).
Thus, the significant ROI × group interaction was driven by opposing effects of group on hippocampal DG‐CA2/3 and BA 36 volume.
The main effects for group and condition on performance were not significant, suggesting all groups performed similarly overall and that performance was not significantly related to whether participants responded Remember or Know to hits.
There was a significant condition × group interaction (F(2,65)= 4.87,p= 0.01, partialη2= 0.10).
To interrogate the interaction, we performed follow‐up independent samplest‐tests.
Follow‐upt‐tests showed that Remember responses on hits did not differ between BSO and AMC (t(65) = 0.09,pFDR= 0.93,d= 0.03) but were significantly less frequent for BSO + ET relative to BSO (t(65) = 2.25,pFDR= 0.048,d= 0.70) and AMC (t(65) = 2.57,pFDR= 0.04,d= 0.73).
Know responses on hits did not differ between BSO and BSO + ET (t(65) = −0.29,pFDR= 0.93,d= −0.09) but were less frequent for AMC relative to BSO (t(65) = −2.20,pFDR= 0.048,d= −0.67) and BSO + ET (t(65) = −2.69,pFDR= 0.04,d= −0.76) (Figure5A).
Group comparisons of Remember‐Know task performance and correlations with perirhinal BA 35 volume.
(A) Effect of group on proportion of hits for the Remember and Know conditions of the Remember‐Know task.
(B) Pearson correlation between perirhinal BA 35 volume and proportion of hits for the Know condition of the Remember‐Know task.
Error bars represent standard error of the mean; * =p< 0.05 (FDR‐corrected).
AMC, age‐matched controls; BA 35, Brodmann area 35; BSO, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy; BSO + ET, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy with previous/discontinued or current use of 17β‐estradiol therapy with or without progestogen therapy.
Across groups, there was not a significant relationship between perirhinal BA 36 volume and the proportion of Know responses on hits (r(66) = 0.12,p= 0.34).
However, there was a significant moderate positive relationship between perirhinal BA 35 volume and the proportion of Know responses on hits (r(66) = 0.33,p= 0.006, Figure5B).
Multivariate PLS recognized two significant latent variables (LV1 and LV2) that explained 55.01% and 35.26% of the variance (LV1:p= 0.046, LV2:p= 0.002).
LV1 indicated that BSO without ET was associated with significantly lower volume in the posterior hippocampus, CA1, and DG‐CA2/3 composite subfields, as well as greater volume in perirhinal BA 36.
BSO + ET was associated with significantly greater volume in the posterior hippocampus, CA1, and DG‐CA2/3 composite subfields, as well as lower volume in perirhinal BA 36 (Figure6A,B).
Partial Least Squares variable factor loadings for latent variable 1 depicting how demographic and wellbeing‐related variables correlated with gray matter volume in medial temporal lobe regions‐of‐interest.
Latent variable 1 results for PLS analysis (p= 0.046: Percent covariance accounted for 55.01%) with 95% confidence intervals.
(A) Demographic and wellbeing‐related factor loadings and (B) Medial temporal lobe region‐of‐interest relative gray matter volume factor loadings.
In both plots, significant items are plotted in green when the factor loading is negative and purple when it is positive; non‐significant items are plotted in gray.
The red dashed line represents the critical value which matches ap< 0.05 significance level.
A variable is considered a significant contributor to the latent variable if its contribution to the latent variable exceeds what would be expected by chance, as illustrated by a factor loading surpassing the red dashed line.
AMC, age‐matched controls; BA 35, Brodmann area 35; BA 36, Brodmann area 36; BSO + ET, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy with previous/discontinued or current use of 17β‐estradiol therapy with or without progestogen therapy; BSO, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy; CA1, cornu ammonis 1; CES‐D=Center for Epidemiological Studies–Depression Scale; DG‐CA2/3, dentate gyrus and cornu ammonis 2/3 composite subfield; ERC, entorhinal cortex.
No other demographic and wellbeing variables were significantly related to ROI volume.
All hippocampal ROIs (anterior hippocampus, posterior hippocampus, CA1, subiculum, DG‐CA2/3) were in the same direction, with BSO + ET being the strongest positive contributor and BSO being the strongest negative predictor of volume in these ROIs.
Perirhinal BA 36 was in the opposite direction of the hippocampal ROIs, with BSO being the strongest positive contributor and BSO + ET being the strongest negative predictor of volume in perirhinal BA 36.
Age, depressive mood, and educational attainment were not reliable contributors to LV1.
LV2 indicated that BSO without ET was associated with significantly greater volumes in the anterolateral entorhinal cortex and perirhinal BA 35.
AMC was associated with significantly lower volumes in these regions (Figure7A,B).
No other demographic and wellbeing variables were significantly related to ROI volumes.
Partial Least Squares variable factor loadings for latent variable 2 depicting how demographic and wellbeing‐related variables correlated with gray matter volume in medial temporal lobe regions‐of‐interest.
Latent variable 2 results for PLS analysis (p= 0.002: Percent covariance accounted for 35.26%) with 95% confidence intervals.
(A) Demographic and wellbeing‐related factor loadings and (B) Medial temporal lobe region‐of‐interest relative gray matter volume factor loadings.
In both plots, significant items are plotted in green when the factor loading is negative and purple when it is positive; non‐significant items are plotted in gray.
The red dashed line represents the critical value which matches ap< 0.05 significance level.
A variable is considered a significant contributor to the latent variable if its contribution to the latent variable exceeds what would be expected by chance, as illustrated by a factor loading surpassing the red dashed line.
AMC, age‐matched controls; BA 35, Brodmann area 35; BA 36, Brodmann area 36; BSO + ET, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy with previous/discontinued or current use of 17β‐estradiol therapy with or without progestogen therapy; BSO, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy; CA1, cornu ammonis 1; CES‐D=Center for Epidemiological Studies–Depression Scale; DG‐CA2/3, dentate gyrus and cornu ammonis 2/3 composite subfield; ERC, entorhinal cortex.
Exploratory PLS recognized one significant latent variable (LV1) that explained 62.61% of the variance (p= 0.02).
LV1 indicated that ET duration was associated with lower volume in the anterior hippocampus, posterior hippocampus, CA1, and DG‐CA2/3 composite subfields.
Concurrent progestogen therapy was associated with greater volume in these regions (Figure8A,B).
No other hormone therapy characteristics were significantly related to ROI volumes.
Partial Least Squares variable factor loadings for latent variable 1 depicting how hormone therapy characteristics correlated with gray matter volume in medial temporal lobe regions‐of‐interest for the BSO + ET group.
Latent variable 1 results for PLS analysis (p= 0.02: Percent covariance accounted for 62.61%) with 95% confidence intervals.
(A) Hormone therapy characteristic factor loadings and (B) Medial temporal lobe region‐of‐interest relative gray matter volume factor loadings.
In both plots, significant items are plotted in green when the factor loading is negative and purple when it is positive; non‐significant items are plotted in gray.
The red dashed line represents the critical value which matches ap< 0.05 significance level.
A variable is considered a significant contributor to the latent variable if its contribution to the latent variable exceeds what would be expected by chance, as illustrated by a factor loading surpassing the red dashed line.
BA 35, Brodmann area 35; BA 36, Brodmann area 36; BSO, bilateral salpingo‐oophorectomy; CA1, cornu ammonis 1; DG‐CA2/3, dentate gyrus and cornu ammonis 2/3 composite subfield; ERC, entorhinal cortex; ET, 17β‐estradiol therapy.
We explored how early BSO affects medial temporal lobe volumes and recognition memory performance in midlife women, comparing them to age‐matched women with intact ovaries while acknowledging key hormone therapy, demographic, and wellbeing‐related variables.
Women with BSO who had never taken ET had lower posterior hippocampal and hippocampal DG‐CA2/3 volumes but greater perirhinal BA 36 volumes compared to those who had previously taken or were currently taking ET.
Relative to AMC, women with BSO who had never taken ET had greater anterolateral entorhinal cortex and perirhinal BA 35 and BA 36 volumes.
Women with BSO (with and without ET) also relied more on familiarity than recollection for successful recognition memory.
Using a larger cohort, this study extends previous results (Gervais et al.2022), with particular focus on the anteroposterior hippocampal axis, subregions of the perirhinal cortex, and perirhinal cortex‐dependent familiarity processes.
This is also the first study to show that among an array of important factors (including ET, age, depressive mood, and education), ET had the strongest effect on medial temporal lobe structure in midlife women with BSO, which may have been driven by ET duration and concurrent progestogen therapy.
Results suggest that ET after BSO is associated with greater posterior hippocampal volume.
Importantly, contrary to our past work, no significant hippocampal gray matter volume differences were noted between BSO and AMC groups (Gervais et al.2022).
Medial temporal lobe structure is sensitive to ovarian fluctuation across the menstrual cycle (Protopopescu et al.2008; Taylor et al.2020).
Menstrual phase was not controlled for in the AMC group; thus, it is possible that menstrual phase contributed to the lack of significant hippocampal volumetric group differences.
However, exploratory analyses controlling for E1G level fluctuation across the menstrual cycle did not significantly affect the results.
17β‐estradiol fluctuation across the menstrual cycle may more strongly relate to anterior hippocampal volume, which could explain the lack of significant volume differences between AMC and BSO in the posterior hippocampus (Protopopescu et al.2008).
Interestingly, total hippocampal volume of older participants with BSO (~65 years) does not significantly vary compared to age‐matched women with intact ovaries (Zeydan et al.2019).
However, the commonly used structural image resolution of approximately 1mm3may be insufficient for visualizing internal hippocampal structures, particularly the stratum radiatum lacunosum moleculare, which is crucial for valid and reliable subfield segmentation (Wisse et al.2021).
This lack of significant group difference in total hippocampal volume underscores the importance of using high‐resolution MRI to tease apart subtle subfield‐specific volumetric changes in midlife women with BSO.
Results from the current study support previous functional and high‐resolution structural MRI work from our lab demonstrating lower posterior hippocampal function and DG‐CA2/3 volume related to BSO (Brown et al.2023,2024; Gervais et al.2022).
Hippocampal volume has been shown to decrease (particularly in CA1 and subiculum subfields) across the healthy adult lifespan, with significant acceleration in the rate of hippocampal volume loss in midlife being more pronounced in women than men (Nobis et al.2019).
Thus, chronological aging may be compounded with endocrine aging after menopause, and ET may ameliorate these compounding effects.
Greater posterior hippocampal volume for the BSO + ET group is consistent with studies of ovariectomized rodents.
In these rodents, 17β‐estradiol administration is associated with enhanced hippocampal DG granule cell dendritic spine density (McClure et al.2013).
17β‐estradiol administration into the dorsal hippocampus increases CA1 dendritic spine density (Tuscher et al.2016).
17β‐estradiol administration even facilitates dorsal but not ventral hippocampal seizure acquisition in a rodent epilepsy model, suggesting seizure‐induced plasticity in thedorsalhippocampus is particularly responsive to 17β‐estradiol (Buterbaugh and Hudson1991).
The current study also aligns with results showing that in spontaneously menopausal women, ET is associated with larger posterior hippocampal volume (Albert et al.2017).
However, it may contrast with studies showing increased anterior hippocampal volume with the use of hormone therapy in women who predominantly took estrone‐based therapy (Erickson et al.2005).
This discrepancy suggests significant decreases in 17β‐estradiol (and not estrone) may primarily affect the posterior hippocampus in women after either surgical or spontaneous menopause.
Hormone therapy type is a critical consideration when assessing hippocampal changes, especially considering previous work showing conjugated equine estrogen hormone therapy may detrimentally affect hippocampal volume in older menopausal women (hysterectomized or with a uterus, aged 65+ years) (Resnick et al.2009).
Thus, it is critical for future work to discern whether results pertain to estrone‐ or 17β‐estradiol‐based hormone therapy.
For women with BSO, ET may also positively influence DG‐CA2/3 volume.
The observation of lower DG‐CA2/3 volumes in women with BSO without ET aligns closely with our prior research employing fully manual segmentation methods and supports the reliability of our automated hippocampal segmentation methods (Gervais et al.2022).
Thus, it is possible that this subfield is particularly sensitive to ovarian hormone loss after early BSO.
PLS results suggest that, compared to other important variables such as age, depressive mood, and educational attainment, the only significant positive predictor of posterior hippocampal, CA1, and DG‐CA2/3 volumes among women with BSO is having ever taken ET.
Unlike univariate analyses, PLS allows for modeling of the simultaneous contribution of multiple predictors, including demographic and wellbeing‐related variables.
This multivariate approach highlights the relative importance of ET compared to other predictors.
Notably, PLS results varied slightly from the ANCOVA results, as PLS also revealed that hippocampal CA1 volume was positively related to ET.
Both analysis types consistently showed broader effects of BSO and ET on the posterior hippocampus, suggesting that posterior hippocampal structural changes in women with BSO may reflect more widespread volumetric alterations along the posterior end of the hippocampal axis.
Even though manual or automated methods generate subfield estimates that align well with those of anatomical studies, subfield boundaries are difficult to discern in vivo (Winterburn et al.2013; Wisse et al.2012).
Although a coarser metric than subfield analyses, there may be practical benefits to assessing total hippocampal volume along its anteroposterior axis, including ease of segmentation and more widespread comparison across studies.
There is robust evidence for anteroposterior hippocampal axis differentiation in memory processing, which may have implications for the changes in memory performance seen throughout healthy aging and dementia development.
Understanding how the anteroposterior hippocampal axis changes in women at increased dementia risk could be critical for selecting cognitive tasks that are most sensitive to this risk for potential early detection.
Future studies can further advance our understanding of how these subtle volumetric changes affect function by choosing tasks that are more sensitive to the relevant ROIs, such as the Mnemonic Similarity Task, which taxes DG‐dependent pattern separation processes (Stark et al.2019), or a task involving highly detailed spatial representations, which taxes posterior hippocampus‐dependent processes (Grady2020; Xu et al.2010).
Further, no research has yet used high‐resolution functional MRI to evaluate how BSO and ET correlate with task‐related hippocampal subfield activation; assessing BSO‐related changes in DG‐CA2/3 and CA1 subfield activation during associative encoding and retrieval, respectively, might provide more information about how these subtle structural fluctuations affect memory function (Chen et al.2011).
Exploratory PLS results revealed that, for the BSO + ET group, hippocampal volumes across anterior and posterior sections, including CA1 and DG‐CA2/3 subfields, were negatively associated with ET duration but positively associated with concurrent progestogen therapy.
The negative association between volume and ET duration aligns with prior findings that for spontaneously menopausal women, prolonged hormone therapy duration is linked to reduced hippocampal volume (Erickson et al.2007).
This result may also reflect the intertwined effects of age and cumulative ET exposure, as women with longer ET durations are typically older than those with shorter ET durations.
It is also possible that the effects of ET on brain structure are most beneficial in younger brains, with prolonged ET exposure in the context of aging or neuropathology being detrimental, potentially contributing to the observed decline in hippocampal volume with extended ET use (Brinton2008).
Most participants in the BSO + ET group had ET durations shorter than 5 years; therefore, future work should aim to capture a wider range of ET durations.
The positive association between volume and concurrent progestogen therapy contrasts with work showing that, in hippocampal CA1 of ovariectomized non‐human primates and rodents, 17β‐estradiol administration alone increases synaptogenesis and spine density, while concurrent 17β‐estradiol and progesterone administration has the opposite effect (Choi et al.2003; Woolley and McEwen1993).
However, other research has suggested that progesterone blocks the ability of estrogens to upregulate growth factors (including brain derived neurotrophic factor) in the entorhinal cortexbut not in the hippocampus(Bimonte‐Nelson et al.2004).
Thus, progesterone may exert positive effects on hippocampal structure in certain contexts.
A dense‐sampling study of one menstrual cycling participant identified a positive relationship between endogenous progesterone levels and gray matter volume in hippocampal CA2/3 (Taylor et al.2020).
These findings underscore the complexity of progesterone's role in hippocampal function and structure.
Given the exploratory nature of our analysis, future research should focus on larger, longitudinal studies to determine whether observed effects differ across reproductive states and menopause types.
Consistent with rodent research showing negative effects of 17β‐estradiol on perirhinal BA 35, this is the first study to show that for early midlife women with BSO, ET is associated with reduced perirhinal BA 36 volume (Gervais et al.2015).
Additionally, relative to BSO, AMC is associated with reduced anterolateral entorhinal cortex and perirhinal BA 35 volumes.
Most studies of the anterolateral entorhinal cortex and perirhinal BA 35 suggest that these regions correspond to where atrophy tends to occur during the earliestadstages (Braak and Braak1991).
Thus, as early as midlife, BSO may contribute to distinct patterns of structural change in medial temporal lobe regions most susceptible toad.
These findings emphasize the need to investigate whether such changes reflect early sex‐specific pathways foradrisk.
Greater perirhinal cortex volume among women with BSO appeared to be subregion‐specific, with BA 36 volume differing in comparison to BSO + ET and BA 35 volume differing in comparison to AMC.
Although speculative, this pattern may reflect distinct influences of exogenous versus endogenous ovarian hormone levels on perirhinal subregions.
Specifically, BA 36 may be more sensitive to the effects of exogenous hormone therapy, while BA 35 may be more sensitive to the effects of endogenous ovarian hormone level fluctuation associated with the menstrual cycle.
Past research demonstrates mixed relationships between endogenous ovarian hormone levels and perirhinal cortex volumes (Taylor et al.2020; Zsido et al.2023).
Longitudinal studies examining both exogenous and endogenous hormone influences on perirhinal subregions could clarify the mechanistic basis of these observations and their implications for cognitive outcomes.
For participants with BSO, hippocampus and perirhinal cortex volumes may be differentially affected by 17β‐estradiol loss via separate molecular mechanisms.
17β‐estradiol has been shown to potentiate excitatory glutamatergic synaptic transmission (Oberlander and Woolley2016) and reduce inhibitory γ‐aminobutyric acid (GABA) synaptic transmission (Mukherjee et al.2017).
The perirhinal cortex is often considered a gateway directing information to and from the hippocampus via GABAergic transmissions (Biella et al.2002).
Although speculative, 17β‐estradiol may enhance hippocampal volume via excitatory mechanisms and reduce entorhinal and perirhinal cortex volumes via disruption of important inhibitory mechanisms.
Future work should consider the effects of BSO on performance for tasks thought to be highly perirhinal cortex‐dependent, such as those involving complex object perception (Barense et al.2010).
It is also possible that greater medial temporal cortex volume is a compensatory response to reduced hippocampal volume.
Examination of developmental amnesia in a 22‐year‐old woman, H.C., revealed decreased hippocampal volume alongside increased parahippocampal cortex volume, suggesting a potential compensatory mechanism within medial temporal cortical structures in response to hippocampal volume loss (Olsen et al.2013).
A parallel pattern of worse recollection than familiarity of recognized items was demonstrated on episodic memory tasks, which could represent compensatory reliance on familiarity over recollection memory processes (Rosenbaum et al.2011).
This is the first study to show that BSO (with and without ET) is associated with greater reliance on familiarity versus recollection for successful recognition memory.
This greater reliance on familiarity also correlated significantly with perirhinal BA 35 volume.
These results suggest a shift in memory processing style, where individuals prioritize gist‐based familiarity judgments over detailed episodic recollection, a pattern that has been noted in mixed‐sex studies of amnesic mild cognitive impairment (Hudon et al.2009).
The shift from recollection to familiarity could represent an adaptive mechanism where the perirhinal cortex takes on a more prominent role in recognition memory tasks, enabling participants with BSO to maintain memory performance despite hippocampal‐dependent recollection process deficits.
Such compensation could allow individuals with BSO to maintain overall memory performance in the short‐term.
However, the long‐term implications of this shift warrant further investigation.
While increased reliance on familiarity may serve as a short‐term compensatory strategy, it may not be sustainable over time, which could lead to poorer memory outcomes as neurodegenerative processes progress.
Our study focused on using high‐resolution neuroimaging to understand the interaction between early midlife events and medial temporal lobe volume while acknowledging key demographic and wellbeing‐related factors such as age, depressive mood, and education.
Findings emphasize that structural hippocampal changes associated with early BSO without ET vary along the anteroposterior axis, with significantly lower volume in the posterior hippocampus and higher volume in perirhinal BA 36.
Incorporating E1G level as a covariate to control for menstrual cycling in the AMC group did not significantly affect primary findings (Supporting Information).
While these results should be replicated in larger cohorts with longitudinal designs that carefully categorize participants based on menstrual phase and hormone therapy (current or past use, dose, timing, and duration), they may delineate some of the earliest medial temporal lobe changes in women with elevated dementia risk.
Additionally, cancer treatment history and hormonal contraceptive use were not significantly associated with medial temporal lobe volumes in our cohort (Supporting Information).
However, these analyses were limited by the small number of participants without a history of hormonal contraceptive use and, although more than half of the BSO group had a history of cancer treatment, participants varied in their treatment combinations, dosages, and durations.
These factors should be considered further in future research.
This study does not include data pertaining to dementia diagnosis and thus cannot be interpreted as predictive of dementia trajectories.
However, it provides valuable insights into early midlife memory processes and potential compensatory mechanisms associated with ovarian hormone loss, which may inform future research on dementia risk in women.
This study extends findings from past work by examining how BSO relates to medial temporal lobe volumes.
In addition to lower posterior hippocampal volumes, women with BSO had greater volumes in regions known to atrophy earliest inadprogression, including anterolateral entorhinal and perirhinal cortices.
This greater medial temporal cortex volume was also related to heightened dependence on familiarity‐related processes for successful recognition memory.
These findings underscore the critical role of ovarian hormones in shaping medial temporal lobe structure and highlight the importance of considering these effects in earlyaddetection efforts.
