A 4‐year‐old female‐spayed French bulldog presented with symptoms of anorexia, lethargy and vomiting.
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed multiple coalescing hyperechoic nodules in the liver.
Single‐phase contrast‐enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed heterogeneous liver lobes with hyperattenuating parenchyma and multiple hypoattenuating lesions in the post‐contrast phase.
No other primary neoplastic lesions were observed.
Laparoscopic liver biopsy, histopathology and immunohistochemistry confirmed primary hepatic neuroendocrine carcinoma (PHNEC).
Consequently, in cases where multiple hyperechoic nodules on ultrasound and hypoattenuating nodules on post‐contrast CT are observed in the liver, PHNEC should be considered as a differential diagnosis.
A 4‐year‐old female‐spayed French bulldog presented with symptoms of anorexia, lethargy, 22 and vomiting.
Abdominal ultrasonography revealed multiple coalescing hyperechoic nodules 23 in the liver.
Single‐phase contrast‐enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed 24 heterogeneous liver lobes with hyperattenuating parenchyma and multiple hypoattenuating 25 lesions in the post‐contrast phase.
No other primary neoplastic lesions were observed.
A total of 26 laparoscopic liver biopsy, histopathology and immunohistochemistry confirmed primary 27 hepatic neuroendocrine carcinoma.
Consequently, in cases where multiple hyperechoic nodules 28 on ultrasound and hypoattenuating nodules on post‐contrast CT are observed in the liver.
Primary hepatic neuroendocrine carcinoma (PHNEC), a tumour arising from neuroendocrine cells lying within hepatic parenchyma and the intra‐ and extrahepatic biliary epithelium, is a rare primary liver tumour, accounting for approximately 2%–14% of canine primary hepatobiliary neoplasms (Patnaik et al.1981; Patnaik, Newman, et al.2005; Tan and Xiao2013).
Patients with PHNEC typically present with nonspecific clinical symptoms, and neither physical examination nor laboratory tests are pathognomonic (Patnaik et al.1980; Patnaik et al.1981; Patnaik, Newman, et al.2005; Wypij et al.2006; Bellamy et al.2023).
A histopathologic examination, especially additional immunohistochemical staining analysis, is required for an accurate diagnosis (Charles et al.2006).
Moreover, imaging studies are useful in assessing the tumour (Hirata et al.2002).
Abdominal ultrasound (AUS) is a rapid, non‐invasive modality that may be the initial choice for screening patients with suspected liver disease (Hirata et al.2002).
However, contrast‐enhanced computed tomography (CT) offers more detailed information, including tumour haemodynamics and the presence of various changes, such as suspected internal necrosis, haemorrhage and calcification, and facilitates systemic organ evaluation and metastasis assessment (Jin et al.2018; Kim et al.2011; Sun et al.2018).
We posit that a combination of multiple imaging diagnostic modalities provides a comprehensive evaluation approach.
Few studies have reported the CT features of PHNEC in dogs and lack an explanation for the observed imaging findings (Ichimata et al.2021).
Here, we present the specific CT imaging features of PHNEC.
A 4‐year‐old female‐spayed French bulldog (weight, 8.95 kg) with a body condition score of 5 out of 9 presented with anorexia and lethargy for about 10 days and vomiting for 2 days.
Physical examination revealed subcutaneous oedema in the lower abdomen and mild jaundice in both conjunctiva.
Complete blood count findings indicated mild non‐regenerative or pre‐regenerative anaemia.
Chemistry findings showed elevated alkaline phosphatase (567 U/L; reference, 23–212 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (336 U/L; reference, 10–125 U/L), gamma‐glutamyl transferase (20 U/L; reference, 0–10 U/L) and aspartate aminotransferase (432 U/L; reference, 0–50 U/L) levels.
Thoracic plain radiography (R‐400‐125, VETTER‐DR9, Korea; 62 kVp; 200 mA) showed no specific findings.
Abdominal ultrasonography (AUS; Aplio i700, Canon Medical Systems, Tustin, CA with 12 MHz, linear i18LX5 probe) revealed multifocal coalescing, hyperechoic, amorphous‐shaped nodules of various sizes (up to 2 cm in height and 3 cm in width) with well‐defined, irregular margins scattered throughout the liver (Figure1).
Extratumoral hepatic parenchyma was rarely observed, with most appearing hypoechoic to isoechoic.
Subsequently, a single‐phase CT scan was performed with the patient in sternal recumbency under general anaesthesia with propofol and isoflurane.
A 16‐slice helical CT scanner (General Electric Brivo CT 385, Milwaukee, WI, USA) was utilized (settings: 120 kV; 75–120 mA; 2.5 mm slice thickness; and 1.196 s tube rotation).
Post‐contrast series were acquired after 2 min of a manual intravenous injection of 2.5 mL/kg iohexol (Omnipaque 300 mg iodine/ml, GE Healthcare, Shanghai, China).
Hounsfield units (HU) were determined by measuring three circular regions of interest, each 1 mm in diameter, and calculating the mean value.
Transverse ultrasonography images depicting the gallbladder (A) and the right (B) and left (C) lobes of the liver.
(A) The gallbladder wall (white arrowheads) appears compressed by adjacent hepatic nodules; (B and C) multiple hepatic nodules and masses of varying sizes and shapes are evident throughout the lobes.
Hepatic lesions with hyperechoic centres (white asterisks) surrounded by hypoechoic rims (arrows).
In the pre‐contrast phase, the liver parenchyma displayed overall isoattenuation (47.0 ± 1.0 HU) interspersed with some poorly defined hypoattenuating areas (18.0 ± 0.0 HU) (Figure2A).
Generalized hepatomegaly with irregular contours was observed.
In the post‐contrast phase, liver parenchyma without mass lesions showed homogeneous, intense enhancement (144.0 ± 4.6 HU).
However, multifocal, coalescing hepatic masses with well‐defined, irregular shapes revealed mild contrast enhancement (59.3 ± 2.5 HU) relative to the surrounding hepatic parenchyma, resulting in an overall heterogeneous liver appearance (Figure2B,C).
These masses appeared interconnected and diffusely dispersed throughout the liver, making determining their sizes challenging.
Hypoattenuating areas observed within the hepatic masses in the pre‐phase showed no obvious enhancement (18.7 ± 3.2 HU), and these were suspected to be necrosis or haemorrhage within the hepatic lesion.
Multiple fluid‐attenuated areas were observed between the liver lobes, and extensive fat‐stranding, indicating peritonitis, was observed around the liver (Figure2C).
A filling defect (length, 30.0 mm; width, 6.7 mm) suggestive of thrombosis was identified within the cranial mesenteric vein (Figure2C).
Pre‐ (A) and post‐contrast (B) transverse CT images of the liver at the same level (400 window width, 40 window level).
(A) Homogeneous, isoattenuating liver parenchyma (white asterisks) is observed with some hypoattenuating areas (yellow upward arrows); (B) multiple liver nodules and masses (black asterisks) exhibiting mild enhancement scattered throughout all liver lobes.
Areas of hepatic parenchyma outside the lesions appear hyperattenuating with strong contrast enhancement (black daggers).
Hypoattenuating areas in A (yellow upward arrows) remain unenhanced and less attenuated than liver nodules and masses (black asterisks) in the post‐contrast phase; (C) filling defects (yellow downward arrow) in the cranial mesenteric vein and fat stranding sign (white circle) around the liver.
To minimize the duration of anaesthesia, a laparoscopic liver biopsy was promptly performed after the CT scan.
A two‐port laparoscopy was executed using a ventral midline approach while the patient was in dorsal recumbency.
Tissue samples were collected from the quadratic lobe of the liver (Figure3).
An initial cytology examination (NEODIN BioVet Laboratory Co., Seoul, South Korea) was performed.
Several individual and clustered epithelial cells were identified, along with clusters of hepatocytes with a low degree of cytologic atypia, and the possibility of an epithelial cell tumour with intermediate malignancy was considered.
The cell population had a moderate to high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, with a plate‐like structure with indistinct intercellular boundaries.
Some cells appeared to be in a spindle or tubular arrangement.
The cells were 2–3.5 times the diameter of red blood cells with low to moderate size disparity, and nuclei were 1.5–3 times the diameter of the erythrocyte, with low to moderate anisokaryosis; 1–3 nucleoli were observed.
No other findings suggestive of inflammation or infection were noted.
Subsequently, histopathology and immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining (IDEXX Laboratories Inc., Westbrook, ME) were performed.
Tissue sections, embedded at a thickness of 3–4 mm, underwent histologic evaluation on routinely processed formalin‐fixed, paraffin‐embedded tissue sections (4 µm) stained with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E).
The histomorphologic features of the liver mass and parenchyma of the incisional samples revealed a neoplastic epithelial cell population effacing hepatocellular parenchyma.
Neoplastic epithelial cells were cuboidal to polygonal and were frequently arranged in tubules and islands, showing rare rosettes on a moderate collagenous stroma (Figure4A).
Cells had variably distinct cell borders, moderate cytoplasm, and irregularly round to oval nuclei with fine chromatin and small magenta nucleoli.
Mild to moderate anisocytosis and anisokaryosis were observed.
There were 18 mitotic figures in 2.37 mm2(10 consecutive × 400 fields) area.
Neoplastic tubules occasionally infiltrated throughout the dense fibrotic stroma.
Large areas of coagulative and liquefactive necrosis with haemorrhage were observed (Figure4B).
IHC staining was performed, utilizing synaptophysin (rabbit polyclonal; Bio SB, Santa Barbara, CA), chromogranin A (rabbit polyclonal; Abcam, Waltham, MA), and AE1/AE3 (mouse monoclonal; Bio SB, Santa Barbara, CA) as immunohistochemical markers.
IHC staining showed positivity for AE1/AE3, with disseminated (99%) moderate‐to‐strong intracytoplasmic staining of neoplastic cells and positivity for chromogranin A, with regionally extensive mild‐to‐moderate (40%) intracytoplasmic staining of neoplastic cells.
In contrast, synaptophysin did not highlight neoplastic cells.
Consequently, a final diagnosis of PHNEC was made.
Approximately 8 h after anaesthesia recovery, the patient died of sudden hypotension (systolic blood pressure, 80 mmHg; detected via ultrasonic Doppler flow detector) and respiratory arrest.
Laparoscopic views of the liver surface.
(A) Extensive haemorrhagic and proliferative lesions spread widely along the liver surfaces.
(B) Multifocal haemorrhagic nodules at the diaphragm and peritoneum, which were not identified on imaging, were found (circle).
(C) A small amount of red ascites was noted in the abdominal cavity (asterisk).
Histopathologic features of hepatic tissue stained with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E).
(A) (×800, scale bar 20 µm) Neoplastic epithelial cells arranged in islands and rosettes (arrow).
(B) (×200; scale bar 50 µm) Hepatocellular parenchyma is effaced by neoplastic epithelial cells (two arrows).
In human medicine, the term ‘neuroendocrine tumour’ (NET) has been replaced by ‘neuroendocrine neoplasm’ (NEN) following the WHO classification (Rindi et al.2022).
Histopathologically, NENs are categorized into well‐differentiated NETs, also known as carcinoid tumours, and poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas (NECs).
However, in veterinary medicine, hepatic NET is not classified the same as in humans, and terms such as NET, NEC and carcinoids are used interchangeably (World Health Organization1994).
Therefore, ‘NEC’ was considered more suitable for the present case.
NECs (carcinoids) are uncommon in humans and animals.
NECs can arise from the neuroendocrine system along the mucosa of various organs, but more commonly the stomach and intestine and less commonly the gallbladder, pancreas, liver and lung.
NECs have been reported in dogs, cats, cows, horses and bearded dragons (Head et al.2002,2003; Patnaik, Lieberman, et al.2005; Ritter et al.2009).
In dogs, there are reports of NETs in the gastrointestinal tract and hepatic and pulmonary systems.
Carcinoids are reported in both sexes, several different breeds and over an age range of 9–13 years.
Hepatic NECs can affect any liver lobe with occasional associated carcinomatosis and regional lymph node metastasis.
This behaviour demonstrates that hepatic NECs are malignant and potentially can exhibit aggressive behaviour (Charles et al.2006; Head et al.2003; Patnaik, Lieberman, et al.2005; Patnaik, Newman, et al.2005).
This is the first case report to describe the single‐phase CT imaging features of a multifocal coalescing form of PHNEC in a French bulldog.
PHNECs are commonly found in either diffuse or nodular distribution patterns (Morgan et al.2019; Patnaik et al.1980,1981).
In this case, multifocal and coalescing nodules showed a diffuse tumour distribution.
Tumours such as hepatocellular carcinoma or bile duct carcinoma and inflammatory lesions, such as pyogranulomatous hepatitis, are also known to show coalescing nodules with diffuse distribution (Ladak2020; Liptak et al.2004; Vail et al.2019).
In one case report of canine PHNEC, multifocal hepatic lesions were observed as a hyperechoic centre with a surrounding hypoechoic ring, similar to our case (Morgan et al.2019).
However, another case of canine PHNEC showed a large mass, approximately 6.7 cm in diameter, which differs from the present case (Ichimata et al.2021).
Thus, PHNECs can exhibit variable distribution patterns.
Consequently, when multifocal coalescing nodules are detected in the liver, as in this case, a NET should be considered.
Although specific CT features for canine PHNEC have not previously been reported, PHNEC demonstrates early wash‐in and wash‐out, showing isoattenuation with the surrounding liver parenchyma in the equilibrium phase (Ichimata et al.2021).
In contrast, the PHNEC in this study was hypoattenuated in the equilibrium phase.
In human medicine, contrast enhancement of hepatic NECs is considered to depend on a balance between vasogenic and fibrogenic tumour activity (Kim et al.2011).
In particular, fibrogenic activity is considered to correlate with tumour size (Ulusan et al.2005).
Human PHNECs similar to cystic masses have been confirmed to be haemorrhagic lesions upon histopathologic examination (Kehagias et al.1999; Kim et al.2021).
Given the relatively large size and scope of the tumour in our case, high fibrogenic activity was anticipated.
However, the presence of multiple unenhanced lesions and mild contrast enhancement of the tumour lesion itself suggested a more vasogenic nature, with multiple blood pools comprising the lesion.
Moreover, a tumour lesion with weak enhancement on CT was observed to be hyperechoic on AUS, suggesting the presence of old blood rather than necrotic or cellular infiltrate.
Extratumoral hepatic parenchyma in this case exhibited hyperattenuating enhancement.
The pre‐contrast HU values of the areas were lower than those in normal dogs but not within the range indicative of hepatic lipidosis (Bertolini2017).
The post‐contrast HU values of the areas were slightly higher than those observed in patients with focal malignant or benign liver lesions (Leela‐Arporn et al.2019).
However, the post‐contrast phase acquisition time differed, raising the possibility of a time‐lapse after contrast injection or neoplastic infiltration.
In dogs, PHNEC is most likely to metastasize to the lymph nodes and peritoneum, and metastases have also been identified in the lungs, spleen, adrenal glands, heart base and pancreas (Bertolini2017; Patnaik et al.1980,1981; Wypij et al.2006).
In the present case, although no evidence of metastasis to extrahepatic organs was observed on imaging, laparoscopy revealed the presence of suspected metastatic peritoneal nodules.
However, an autopsy and further histopathological examinations were not performed after the patient's death.
Consequently, the exact extent of the PHNEC metastasis and invasion could not be definitively determined.
During recovery from anaesthesia, the patient developed sudden hypotension and died of respiratory arrest.
The patient's sudden respiratory arrest was initially attributed to possible bleeding or haemostasis disorders that may have occurred after the laparoscopic liver biopsy.
However, as prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time were found to be within the reference range in the pre‐anaesthesia stage, this possibility is considered unlikely but cannot be ruled out, as multiple blood pools were suspected at the site of the liver lesion.
At the time of the CT scan and laparoscopic liver biopsy, the patient showed anorexia, depression and weight loss, which worsened compared to that on the first day of presentation.
In addition, laboratory findings showed that the levels of several liver enzymes had worsened, indicating a rapid decline in liver function.
A marked elevation of symmetric dimethylarginine and elevation of urine protein to creatinine ratio were observed, and renal function decline with glomerular diseases was considered.
The patient also had a history of vomiting; this, in combination with the elevated canine pancreatic lipase level, increased suspicion for possible pancreatitis.
Persistent elevation of white blood cell count and C‐reactive protein was observed.
Overall, the possibility of progression to sepsis with systemic inflammatory response syndrome and subsequent sudden death after anaesthesia was considered.
However, due to the owner's refusal, necropsy was not performed on the patient, making it difficult to determine the definitive cause of death.
The histopathological features of the incisional samples from the hepatocellular parenchyma confirmed the presence of carcinoma.
The primary differential diagnoses considered were NEC and carcinoma of biliary origin.
Neuroendocrine‐origin carcinoma was definitively confirmed through positive cytoplasmic highlighting of minimal neoplastic cells using the chromogranin A immunohistochemical marker (Charles et al.2006).
Histologically, hepatic NECs (carcinoids) comprise cuboidal‐to‐polygonal epithelial cells often arranged in rosettes, cords, ribbons and/or islands.
Meanwhile, neoplastic cells typically possess round to oval nuclei with distinct cell borders, moderate eosinophilic cytoplasm, round oval nuclei with fine chromatin and occasional magenta nucleoli.
Granular cytoplasm may occasionally be observed.
Mild‐to‐moderate anisocytosis and anisokaryosis are present, increasing the number of mitotic figures.
Haemorrhage and necrosis are common features, and local intrahepatic metastasis and lymphovascular invasion are frequently observed (Charles et al.2006; Head et al.2003).
Immunohistochemical detection of neuron‐specific enolase (NSE) or specific neurosecretory products, such as chromogranin, assists in making a definitive diagnosis and differentiating NETs from carcinoma of biliary epithelial origin (Charles et al.2006).
Chromogranin A, synaptophysin, protein gene product 9.5, and NSE are recommended immunohistochemical markers to confirm NETs.
Chromogranin A and synaptophysin were selected as primary neuroendocrine markers in our case owing to their suitability for minimal tissue and neoplasms.
AE1/AE3 is a pan‐cytokeratin marker that binds to intracellular cytoplasmic keratin and intermediate filaments, thus confirming an epithelial neoplasm.
However, some NETs may not be highlighted using this particular pan‐cytokeratin immunohistochemical marker.
Chromogranin A exhibits cytoplasmic reactivity and high specificity but low sensitivity.
On the other hand, synaptophysin demonstrates cytoplasmic reactivity and can identify neurosecretory granules with high sensitivity but low specificity.
Thus, chromogranin A and synaptophysin are commonly used in conjunction to assist in identifying if a tumour has a neuroendocrine origin.
At times, and in this case, the synaptophysin antibody did not highlight the neoplastic cells.
The cause for lack of antibody attachment in this case is unknown but may be due to the limited population of neoplastic cells in this sample or there was decreased immunoreactivity in the minimal neoplastic cells.
These findings do highlight the importance of a panel of immunohistochemical markers in cases suspected of NEC, as these tumours will not always be positive for all specified antibodies (Patnaik, Newman, et al.2005).
In this study, multiphase CT and sonographic colour Doppler evaluation of the tumours were not performed; thus, the tumour's haemodynamics, including the tumour's enhancement pattern and internal vascular nature, remain unknown.
Nevertheless, a combination of multimodal diagnostics, including AUS, CT and laparoscopy, facilitated the characterization of the tumour, and subsequent histological and IHC staining confirmed the presence of PHNEC.
However, further treatment and follow‐up were impossible because the patient died.
Given that this report was based on CT features in a single dog diagnosed with PHNEC, future studies on the imaging features of PHNEC across multiple collections would be valuable for diagnostic purposes.
This report is the first to describe the single‐phase CT imaging features of a multifocal coalescing form of PHNEC in a French bulldog.
In conclusion, PHNEC should be considered when multiple hyperechoic nodules or masses covering the entire liver lobes are detected on AUS, and multifocal coalescing hypoattenuating nodules or masses are observed on post‐contrast CT images, especially in the absence of other suspicious findings in systemic organs.