To explore an Advanced Practice Nurse's contributions to the health care of hospitalised polysubstance‐dependent patients undergoing opioid agonist therapy from the perspective of patients and involved professionals.
A single‐case study was conducted using Interpretive Description methodology.
The Advanced Practice Nurse's service served as the case examined from the perspectives of the patients and the involved health care professionals.
We conducted five guided individual interviews (patientn= 4, professionaln= 1) and two focus group interviews (hospital‐internaln= 4, −externaln= 5 professionals).
Overall, seven themes were identified.
Of these, five involve the Advanced Practice Nurse's activities: ‘use specialised knowledge and experience’; ‘act as a leading and coordinating reference person’; ‘mediate between worlds’; ‘build relationships and trust’ and ‘embody solution‐oriented support’.
The two remaining themes—‘provide relaxation’ and ‘effectively improve patient care’—describe the impact of the APN's activities.
The APN service improves clinical practice and closes a healthcare gap for polysubstance dependent patients in acute hospitals.
We recommend developing similar services in other acute somatic hospitals and conducting quantitative research on the service's effectiveness.
In addition, we suggest that the education of the treatment teams should be supported by continuous active learning processes in the workplace in order to promote transformation towards a person‐centred culture.
Substance dependencies increase the risk of acute somatic hospital treatments.
Especially for patients with opioid dependence and the common polysubstance use in this case [1,2,3].
Hospital stays are often associated with challenges for these patients and for the professionals involved in their care [4,5,6,7].
One possible solution is the inclusion of addiction disorder‐specialised Advanced Practice Nurses (APNs) as part of an interprofessional care model.
In 2020, 1.2% of the world's 15–64‐year‐old population used opioids for non‐medical reasons [8].
In Switzerland, the number of opioid dependents is estimated at 25,000 [9].
The internationally recommended primary treatment for opioid dependence is opioid agonist therapy (OAT).
This involves replacing the addictive opioid with a legal medication that has a similar effect.
The treatment approach aims to reduce mortality, illicit opioid use, and associated crime, while improving patients' health, quality of life, social integration, and minimising drug‐related harm [9,10].
In Switzerland, 70%–80% of people with opioid dependence receive OAT [8,9].
Despite advances in treatment, hospitalisations are often associated with negative consequences for patients with polysubstance dependence.
Those affected often feel they are at the mercy of professionals who do not take them seriously and stigmatise them.
They often receive delayed and superficial care [4,5,11].
Furthermore, discontinued or inadequately administered OAT and inadequate pain medication lead patients to experience withdrawal symptoms and severe pain [4,5,6].
This often results in conflicts between patients and staff, and the treatment may be discontinued [5,6,11].
According to a systematic review, 25%–30% of hospitalised patients with substance use disorders leave hospitals against medical advice [12].
One result of such experiences is that many patients delay returning to hospital.
And if they renew hospital treatment, they are commonly suspicious, do not disclose their substance use, acquire and use their non‐prescribed substances secretly [4,5].
Professionals in hospitals also find the treatment and care of patients with substance use disorders challenging.
Study results show that nurses and physicians have too little specialist knowledge [6,7].
Stereotypical attitudes are widespread among healthcare professionals and fear of patients is also common [6,13].
In addition, conflicts with patients or even knowledge of their misfortunes can lead to frustration and emotional exhaustion among staff [6,7,13].
To improve the care of acute care inpatients with substance use disorders, interprofessional addiction medicine consult services (iACS) have emerged in the United States, Canada, and Australia, which usually include APNs [14,15].
These teams aim to improve the inpatient care of this population to form a solid basis for trust and to enable ongoing post‐discharge OAT [14].
One benefit of their use is that patients are more willing to complete therapies [15].
They report improved pain, withdrawal symptoms, and mental health [16].
Hospital professionals also feel better prepared and supported [15].
A comparable service has existed at a Swiss university hospital since 2017.
An APN is responsible for the specific care needs of patients with substance use disorders in the acute hospital who are hospitalised due to reasons other than their primary addiction.
She works closely with the hospital's internal treatment teams and services, as well as with external treatment and care institutions.
The APN is thus attempting to close the remaining gaps in hospital care for polysubstance‐dependent patients.
Although numerous studies have confirmed the benefits of specialised interprofessional care models for opioid‐dependent inpatients, APNs' specific contributions have not yet been investigated in our context [14,15,16].
This study investigated the APN's contributions to the health care of hospitalised polysubstance‐dependent patients undergoing OAT from the perspective of patients and professionals.
We conducted a qualitative descriptive single‐case study [17] using Thorne's interpretive description methodology [18].
We treated the APN service, delivered by one APN, as the case.
An APN is a nurse with a master's degree and advanced clinical competencies within a clinical population focus, as outlined in Hamric's model [19].
To gain a comprehensive understanding of the APN service and its interaction with the study context, we explored the perspectives of the patients and the professionals involved.
The philosophical origins of interpretive description lie in constructivism.
This assumes that every individual constructs their own reality through their experience.
As an inductive approach developed for applied science, it takes up the basic idea of qualitative research and can be applied pragmatically and systematically.
Therefore, the approach is particularly suitable for achieving our objectives and informed our decisions regarding study design, data collection, and analysis [18].
To ensure full and accurate reporting, we used the “Consolidated Criteria for Reporting qualitative Studies” (COREQ) checklist [20].
The current study took place in one of Switzerland's five university hospitals, where the Person‐Centred Practice Framework (PCPF) serves as the theoretical underpinning for nursing practice and informs our vision of nursing [21].
The study hospital recorded 40,144 inpatient admissions in 2021, including 345 patients with opioid dependence.
In that hospital, OAT is either continued if it has already been set up by an outpatient addiction treatment centre or is started upon admission.
The APN cares with this person‐centred approach [21,22] for patients with substance dependency from admission to discharge, while supporting the hospital's internal treatment teams (Figure1).
Description of the advanced practice nurse service at the University Hospital based on the patient pathway.
The study population consisted of patients as well as professionals employed both inside and outside the hospital.
To ensure a heterogeneous study population, we used purposive sampling.
For the recruitment of inpatients and professionals, the second author contacted potential participants, confirmed their eligibility, and included those who were interested [18].
We included patients who were adults, spoke German, were suffering from polysubstance dependence, were receiving care from the APN and were undergoing OAT.
For the professionals, the inclusion criterion was that they had been working with the APN for at least six months.
We collected data from the patients and professionals via individual and focus group interviews, respectively [23].
All interviews were conducted by the first author, who was not a member of the treatment team.
Patients were asked about their experiences of care in the acute hospital and of the APN service, and professionals about their experiences with the APN service and shared patient care.
We audio‐recorded, transcribed, and anonymised all interviews [24].
The patients' socio‐demographic and clinical data (professional and social situation, substance use, as well as previous hospitalizations) were extracted from the patients' records.
The professionals' socio‐demographic data (gender, age, profession and experience) were collected during the interview.
We analysed the data using Thorne's Interpretive Description methodology as a guide to support inductive reasoning and as a structure for coding and pattern finding to make informed decisions [18].
To familiarise herself with the data, the first author read the transcripts multiple times, exploring their content.
With an attitude as open as possible, she coded the transcripts of the individual and focus group interviews from the outset using common codes.
Thereafter, these codes were organised into themes.
We repeatedly checked the created codes and themes against the original data for consistency, adjusting them as necessary.
Through description and interpretation, we visualised the meaning as well as individual similarities, differences, and correlations between the themes and illustrated them with original quotes [18].
The result was an interpretive description of the APN service that represented both the subjective realities of the people involved and the overarching phenomenon of the study [18].
For the qualitative data analysis, we used the MAXQDA software package [25].
All study participants took part voluntarily and signed informed consent.
Participating patients were informed of the risk that talking about past experiences might eventually recall negative feelings.
Given that the benefit of optimising the service offering outweighs the potential risk, we assessed this risk as low.
The Northwestern and Central Switzerland Ethics Committee approved this research project (EKNW–2021‐01495).
The study was part of the first author's thesis for her Master of Science in Nursing degree.
The research group was supplemented by the second and last authors.
The APN (i.e., third author) was not involved in data collection, had no access to the interview content and analysis steps at any time during the study.
We conducted our interviews from September to December 2021.
All participants' socio‐demographic and clinical data are presented in Tables1and2.
Nursing services, medical service, case management, social services.
Case management city, residential home, OAT‐treatment center.
The individual interviews lasted between 22 and 46 min.
The two focus group interviews took 98 and 104 min.
We identified seven themes describing the APN's contributions to the healthcare of the investigated patient population.
Five depict APN activities, while two capture their impact.
The themes are detailed below and illustrated in Figure2.
Results: Seven themes describe the contributions of the Advanced Practice Nurse service.
When you talk to her, you can already tell she really understands (P2).
She just looked at me when I was in withdrawal.
She saw it right away, that I still needed a little something.
And it's good when someone comes from that background and has dealt with the issue a lot.
This can also be helpful for the doctors (P2).
From the professionals' perspective, the APN was familiar with the patient population's main problems, equipped with techniques to deal with these patients and a clear knowledge of addiction‐specific medications and current guidelines.
Her input helped the treatment team to assess patient situations and prescribe substitution, pain and reserve medication.
She also helps us communicate with the patient because she is knowledgeable about substance‐dependent individuals (F10).
All interviewees appreciated that her holistic approach included support for the patients' mental health.
She also involved their social environment and was familiar with various specific support services regarding housing for people with substance use disorders.
With her work, the APN actively promoted the development of relationships both with the patients and with the involved professionals.
This resulted in intensive bonds of trust with both groups.
She doesn't make me feel less worthy because of my background.
She treats me […] like a normal person and takes me seriously when I say something (P1).
By providing continuous support, the APN further developed the trust of patients and professionals alike.
Often, she had been in contact with patients and external professionals even before the patients' hospital stay or that she was at least known to them due to previous hospital stays or her regular participation in outreach street work.
The interviewees explained that the APN often cared for the same people during re‐hospitalizations.
Therefore, when patients were admitted they often already knew her.
The level of trust is so deep; the patients rely on her and know that she stands by them through thick and thin (F2).
She has a completely different relationship with them than we do.
When we [nursing professionals] come in, there is always a certain distance.
With her, it's less, because she already knows them.
You can feel much more familiarity; they open up much more than with us (F9).
The APN was perceived as both a reference and contact person, assuming a leading and coordinating role as acknowledged by both patients and professionals.
I know that if I have any problem, I have someone in the hospital to turn to (P1).
According to the professionals, the APN had an overview of the patients' situations and took responsibility for them.
As the APN influenced the care situation in a targeted manner through her interventions, she was perceived as the leading reference person.
I have a child.
It's about what I do afterwards, what comes next.
… I have to think about it until next time.
… Maybe go through withdrawal again, just rethink it (P3).
I can tell the patient, but it just doesn't work.
When I go out, the same thing starts again.
When she goes in, the point is clear (F10).
If necessary, the APN could also be authoritative towards either professionals or patients.
According to the professionals, this was apparent when she acted consistently in spite of persistently difficult patient behaviour.
In such situations, the professionals observed that the APN might draw up rules with the patients and implement the consequences if these rules were not adhered to.
The patients and professionals interviewed described that possibilities in improving hospital care of this patient population are limited even to the APN due to the general conditions in acute care hospitals.
Now you have a contact person who tells you what is planned for the future, so you know (F1).
She also took on coordinating tasks in the cross‐hospital patient pathway, organising transfers, supporting patients with stressful everyday matters such as finding accommodation.
With the APN's open internal exchanges and prompt documentation, internal hospital professionals also felt well informed about patients' current status.
Patients confirmed the benefit of her communicative approach, noting that agreements made with the APN were implemented within the interprofessional team and that she was well informed about their treatment progress.
In some cases though, professionals reported that, regarding these patients' care, the division of responsibilities between the APN and internal hospital professionals was unclear.
They were concerned that this lack of regulation could lead to duplication.
These clients think differently than other patients, have different wishes and demands.
… Normal nursing professionals may not understand why it's so important for them or why they want to leave as soon as possible, even though the wound is still bad.
And that's where we experience her as a mediator (F8).
I said I'm slowly becoming paranoid, I feel like I'm being watched and controlled by the staff.
Then she explained to me that it wasn't necessarily like I thought, but that maybe they just come to check if I'm okay or if everything is fine (P1).
Several professionals perceived that, as the APN sometimes viewed partly strong the situation from the patients' perspectives, she could convey the hospital internal professionals' viewpoints to a greater extent.
The APN also mediated between the priorities of the external institutions and those of the hospital by recognising both and taking them into account, for example, in discharge planning.
Not all healthcare professionals felt that the APN involved them in all relevant decisions.
However, the majority did not find this annoying, trusting her to act in the interests of good patient care.
I have a person I can turn to if something is wrong.
And I'm sure that she will take care of it.
That she will take me seriously and try to find a solution that is good for everyone (P1).
When she talks to the patient, we usually have some kind of solution afterward.
It's not always optimal, but there's usually a solution (F9).
Some of her solutions involved making exceptions to previous rules.
For example, she arranged for patients to be allowed to divide their prescribed substitution independently, rather than having to take it under supervision.
I'd always been rather afraid.
So, she took away that fear.
I can also accept help….
I always thought the [social services] would stab me in the back eventually.
And that's not the case (P3).
The APN's activities led to “relaxation”.
The professionals explained that her work resulted in fewer difficult situations with this patient population.
As the APN's input led to the medication usually being issued early and adequately, fewer negotiations were necessary between patients and hospital staff.
You can lie peacefully in bed without having to worry too much (P1).
She's actually doing the whole thing with these patients.
Removes a lot from our workload (F10).
A good backup to have.
And a feeling of security that you can rely on another person (F4).
External hospital professionals spoke of safety because with the APN contributing care, they knew not only that their patients were in good hands, but that the risk of those patients discontinuing treatment was greatly reduced.
An additional improvement in the quality of treatment for the patient (F10).
This significantly contributes to my feeling that our patients' stay is much longer than before [i.e., that far more patients are staying for the recommended period] (F1).
I think that patients no longer resist as much when you recommend going to the university hospital.
[…] The time until they go has become shorter.
It's still sometimes difficult, but they have a reference point there that gives them security, and they know there's a person there who already knows them and who they know (6F).
Respondents also reported that treatment team members have developed more expertise concerning substance use disorder and a better understanding of this patient population.
I have to say, I am perceived as a woman, as a patient, and not in any stereotypical way.
Not at all.
They [the nursing professionals] look me in the eyes.
There is no talk about it [opioid dependence].
No subtle remarks, nothing at all (P3).
I believe from the attitude, I already feel that something has happened (6F).
In contrast, patients on another nursing ward reported about a different and rather stigmatising treatment in the university hospital, where the APN is less present, as well as corresponding experiences in other hospitals.
I am extremely glad that I have her [the APN].
I think I would have despaired long ago if she wasn't there (P1).
The importance of the APN's activities was particularly clear during her absences.
We saw it a few weeks ago; when she wasn't there, it didn't work.
She's gone, and suddenly everything goes wrong.
Not everything, but with my patient, it went wrong.
One hundred percent, if she had been there, less would have happened (F9).
Especially while she was on vacation, several professionals reported excessive demands, additional workload, inadequate medications prescriptions and conflicts with patients.
This study's results show an APN's contributions to the care of polysubstance‐dependent people in an acute somatic hospital and complement existing research on iACS.
Five themes describe the activities of the APN service and two others their impact.
High levels of expertise and experience are prerequisites for the observed APN service.
These go beyond medication and treatment options.
They also include the ability to deal adequately with those affected and recognise their specific needs.
Research on the experience of acute somatic hospitalisation in patients with substance use disorders shows that without specialised care, they often experience inadequate treatment during hospital stays [4,5,6,11].
Studies of intra‐institutional iACS confirm our findings on the positive effects of adding specialised professionals to these patients' care teams.
According to Hyshka and Morris [16], such specialists are better able to treat withdrawal symptoms and pain.
Furthermore, patients found that specialised professionals are more understanding of their needs and take psychological aspects into account.
Such reports underscore the importance of integrating addiction‐specific expertise into inpatient care [6,13].
Our results show that the APN's strong engagement in relationship building led to trustful relationships.
It is remarkable that not only the patients, but also professionals indicated strong confidence in the APN.
Hyshka and Morris [16] also observed that patients with substance use disorders feel a sense of trust towards iACS.
Moreover, our results confirm that nursing care is strongly based on interpersonal relationships, a fact that is generally often underestimated.
However, it is precisely this aspect—prioritising health‐promoting relationships—that is emphasised by the authors of the PCPF [21].
Thus, our findings illustrate how the APN service contributes to person‐centred practice by fostering trustful relationships.
We interpret this as a result of our work with the PCPF, which influences our strategic decisions.
Our results highlight how the APN's role as a leader, coordinator, and reference person in bridging care gaps for this patient population during hospitalisation.
While previous iACS studies placed less emphasis on the reference person role [14,15,16], our findings align with Hyshka and Morris [16] in underlining the importance of care coordination.
It is notable that coordination and collaboration extend beyond the hospital walls.
Regarding the iACS evaluations produced by Weimer and Morford [15], Priest and McCarty [14] and Hyshka and Morris [16], our results expand on those findings concerning the experiences of non‐hospital providers.
Thanks to the studied APN's clear competence, including ensuring the timely flow of information, her input also eased the work of hospital external professionals, increasing their sense of security.
Our results add to the previous knowledge regarding the importance of continuity of care.
This central element of continuity that runs through our results is also reflected, in the World Health Organisation's “Continuity and Coordination of Care” framework [26].
It describes continuity across four domains: “interpersonal”, “longitudinal”, “management” and “informational.” All four of these domains are reflected in our study results.
As a continuity‐reinforcing factor, we consider it positive that in the studied APN service many roles were carried out by a single person.
This ensured consistency of care over each patient's hospital stay.
Another aspect of continuity was this APN's cooperation across hospital boundaries.
The APN's ability and willingness to “mediate between worlds” and “embody solution‐oriented support” characterise the uniqueness of the explored service.
Both promote clear understanding between patients and professionals.
Dealing with patients as equals, acknowledging their values and beliefs and working with them to set and achieve goals all exemplify key principles of PCPF [21].
This shows that, as in the setting studied, working with people's values and beliefs is a feasible and effective strategy in everyday clinical practice.
Recent studies on iACS show similar effects [14,15].
Weimer and Morford [15] found that iACS can positively influence professionals' attitudes towards substance‐dependent patients, contributing to cultural change.
Similarly, Priest and McCarty [14] noted that most iACS aim to foster such change through education.
The studied APN service also “effectively improved patient care.” These effects were reflected in the patients' positive reports of their hospital experiences.
Additionally, other professionals noticed that the incidence of discharges against medical advice fell.
This suggests that the APN's approach encouraged patients to stay in treatment long enough to receive the full benefit.
Weimer and Morford [15] support this interpretation, observing that patients with access to an iACS are more likely to complete their treatment, and that re‐admissions are significantly reduced compared to patients without access to such a service, thereby saving costs.
Our results suggest that, by promoting low‐threshold and timely access to hospital care, the studied APN service could further impact the health of those affected.
The positive outcome of the APN's service can be explained not only by the strong person‐centeredness of the APN, but also by the addiction‐specific approach that the APN brings to the acute hospital.
The success of the service is heavily dependent on the APN as a person, but at the same time should be detached from a single person.
Quality setbacks during the APN's vacation absences indicate that no other individual could provide the service.
Priest and McCarty [14] also found that, on weekends, in the absence of specialised professionals, patients were less likely to receive addiction‐specific medication [14].
One of this study's strengths is its case study design, which allows for the investigated care model's various perspectives.
However, the samples of the perspectives involved were small.
Another strength is the carefully planned recruitment process.
As far as possible, this was carried out by neutral specialists who were not involved in the treatment process.
However, as patients and professionals who have had positive experiences may be more likely to participate, there may be a selection bias.
In addition, as the interviews took place during hospitalisation, there was a risk of social desirability.
The study results must also be viewed in the context of current Swiss addiction policy.
The studied APN's contributions close a healthcare gap affecting acute somatic hospital patients with polysubstance dependency and improve clinical practice.
We recommend that similar services be developed for opioid‐dependent patients in other acute somatic hospitals.
For this, it is important to use participatory approaches and respect the individual institutional context [27].
In addition, we suggest that the education of the treatment teams should be supported by continuous active learning processes in the workplace in order to promote transformation towards a person‐centred culture [27,28].
For further research, it would be appropriate to use other research designs to obtain quantitative data on the APN service effectiveness.