To present a therapeutic tool that combines group and individual therapy, and evaluate its effects on the reduction of substance use, the improvement of negative psychological symptoms, and decrease in conflict among inmates with dual diagnosis.
This is a pre-experimental mixed-methods study, conducted in the Mental Health Module of Topas Prison (Salamanca) between 2017 and 2023, involving a total of 54 male inmates, with a maximum of 8 subjects a year.
The intervention included 20 group sessions and 5 individual sessions per period.
Data were collected through initial evaluation records, individual and group session information, and a final questionnaire.
Data from all clinical sessions supporting the results were analyzed using qualitative and quantitative analysis software.
The results showed a significant correlation (r= 0.656,P<0.001) between mental health problems and substance use.
The most frequent codes in the sessions were “motivational interviewing,” “social isolation,” and “relapse prevention”.
Qualitative and quantitative analyses indicated significant improvements in substance use reduction, relief of negative psychological symptoms, and a decrease in conflict within the module.
The intervention proved to be effective, highlighting the importance of adapting and integrating treatments for inmates with dual diagnosis.
Consistency in the methodology and the customization of topics according to the needs of the inmates were key factors for the success of the treatment.
It is suggested that prison staff receive specific training to work with dual diagnosis, and as a future line of research, to evaluate the effect of combining this psychotherapy model with pharmacological treatment.
The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Salamanca (CEISH).
Presentar una herramienta terapéutica que combina terapia grupal e individual, y evaluar sus efectos en la reducción del consumo de sustancias, la mejora de los síntomas psicológicos negativos y la disminución de la conflictividad en reclusos con diagnóstico dual.
Estudio preexperimental mixto, realizado en el Módulo de Enfermedad Mental del Centro Penitenciario de Topas (Salamanca) entre 2017 y 2023, aplicando tratamiento a un total de 54 internos varones, con un máximo de ocho su- jetos por año.
La intervención incluyó 20 sesiones grupales y cinco individuales por periodo.
Se recogió información mediante registros de evaluación inicial, información de sesiones individuales y grupales, y un cuestionario final.
Los datos procedentes de todas las sesiones clínicas que sustentan los resultados fueron analizados utilizando unsoftwarede análisis cualitativo y cuantitativo.
Los resultados mostraron una correlación significativa (r= 0,656, p <0,001) entre los problemas de salud mental y el consumo de sustancias.
Los códigos más frecuentes en las sesiones fueron “entrevista motivacional”, “aislamiento social” y “prevención de recaídas”.
Los análisis cualitativos y cuantitativos indicaron mejoras significativas en la reducción del consumo de sustancias, alivio de los síntomas psicológicos negativos y la disminución de la conflictividad en el módulo.
La intervención demostró ser efectiva, subrayando la importancia de adaptar e integrar los tratamientos para in- ternos con diagnóstico dual.
La constancia en la metodología y la personalización de los temas según las necesidades de los internos fueron factores clave para el éxito del tratamiento.
Se sugiere la capacitación específica del personal penitenciario para trabajar el diagnóstico dual y, como futura línea de investigación, evaluar el efecto de combinar este modelo de psicoterapia con tratamiento farmacológico.
El estudio fue aprobado por el Comité de Ética de la Universidad de Salamanca (CEISH).
Dual diagnosis, characterised by the coexistence of a mental illness and substance use disorder, is particularly complex in the prison setting.
This condition not only aggravates the difficulties in treatment due to interactions between both disorders, it also makes inmates’ rehabilitation a more complicated process1.
Recent studies in Spanish prisons have shown that over 80% of inmates present some kind of dual disorder, underlining the need for effective interventions that are adapted to this setting2.
This high prevalence is not limited to Spain; a sizeable proportion of the prison population in the UK also struggles with dual diagnoses, which highlights the importance of tackling this problem with comprehensive solutions3.
Dual diagnoses in the prison setting often present a number of unique challenges.
Inmates with dual diagnoses often have higher rates of recidivism and problematic and hostile behaviours, which imposes the need for a more specialised therapeutic approach4.
Such individuals also frequently face significant difficulties in treatment and social rehabilitation outside prison, perpetuating a cycle of recidivism and inadequate treatment5.
In comparison to the general public, inmates with dual diagnosis are more likely to experience social isolation, severe mental health problems and a more complex history of substance abuse, all of which make treatment and rehabilitation even more complicated6.
Treating dual diagnosis in prisons includes a combination of psychological and pharmaceutical therapies.
Cognitive-behavioural therapy and motivational interviewing have been shown to be effective in reducing symptoms and improving behaviour in individuals with dual diagnosis7.
One study found that the combination of CBT and motivational interviewing improved self-efficacy and completion of treatment amongst patients with dual diagnosis8.
Cognitive-behavioural therapy focuses on changing dysfunctional patterns of thought and behaviour, while motivational interviewing sets out to increase a patient’s intrinsic motivation to change.
The use of both therapies makes for a powerful combination in treating patients of this type9.
Integrated treatment of dual diagnosis, which includes motivational interviewing as a key component, leads to a significant reduction in substance use amongst patients with severe mental disorders10.
Therapies for dual diagnosis in the community have also taken an integrative approach, combining psychological interventions and adequate pharmacological treatment.
Results indicate that such an approach has a positive long-term effect on patients11.
The literature suggests that programs that integrated psychological and pharmacological therapies are more effective in reducing symptoms and improving overall functioning of patients with dual diagnosis5.
Our approach also combines issues of addiction and mental health in group and individual sessions, which enables an integrated approach to be taken to substance use and concomitant mental disorders7.
These findings underline the importance of a integrative therapeutic approach that includes both psychosocial and pharmacological interventions in the management of complex psychiatric problems.
The aim of this study is to evaluate the effectiveness of a therapeutic intervention that combines group and individual sessions in reducing substance consumption, the improvement of negative psychological symptoms and reduced levels of conflict amongst prison inmates.
This study is pre-experimental, longitudinal with a mixed-method approach.
Analysis was based mainly on a qualitative approach, using codification of group and individual sessions, complemented by quantitative analyses from structured questionnaires to evaluate the aspects mentioned above.
The study was carried out at the Mental Health Module of Topas Prison between 2017 and 2023, which included 54 inmates, all of whom were male, in an age range between 22 and 62 years, with an average age of 34 years and a standard deviation of between 5.86 and 12.02 years.
The participants were selected by the module’s technical team, who applied the following inclusion criteria: confirmed dual diagnosis, which included the presence of a mental disorder and a substance use disorder, degree of motivation to participate in the treatment program, and prison sentences that were longer than the duration of the intervention, to ensure that the participant was present throughout the treatment process.
Inmates that were excluded included those who presented highly disruptive behaviours that could affect the group dynamic, or who had severe communication difficulties that could impede effective participation in the sessions.
The maximum number of participants per period was eight.
Significant differences in family and social support were observed, with some inmates receiving minimal support while others had more stable support networks.
External support dropped considerably during the COVID-19 (2020-2022) pandemic due to institutional restrictions.
The profile of the inmates participating in the study was characterised by a combination of serious mental problems and substance use disorders, which adds a high degree of complexity to treatment approaches.
Many of them presented a long history of recidivism in imprisonment and relapses in substance abuse, which makes specially adapted and ongoing therapeutic interventions a necessity.
Other factors such as social isolation, conflictive behaviour in the module and variable access to family support further increase the complexity of treatment, and can have a direct impact on treatment adherence.
The participants received a combination of medical-psychiatric and psychotherapeutic treatments.
The pharmacological interventions, administered by the prison medical team, included antipsychotics, antidepressants, antiepileptics and anxiolytics, individually adjusted in line with clinical guides.
The psychotherapeutic modalities included individual and group therapies, while sessions by videoconference were held during the pandemic.
The psychotherapeutic interventions were specifically designed to include psychiatric symptoms and the social and personal dynamics that play a part in inmates’ behaviour.
The inmates signed an informed consent prior to participating in the study, which was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Salamanca (reg.no. 1.144).
Data confidentiality was guaranteed under the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).
The study was authorised by the Spanish General Secretary for Prisons (21 March 2024).
The initial evaluation record for inmates is a tool designed to provide a comprehensive evaluation of inmates’ initial state when they start this treatment.
The record covers a wide range of critical features, including substance use, medical conditions, legal problems, employment, psychological state and social support.
The aim with this record is to identify problematic areas that require immediate or ongoing attention.
The methodology used in the questionnaire is based on an index of severity of addiction, with a score for the severity of the problems in each area drawn from a scale of 1 to 9, where 1 means “not problematic at all” and 9 denotes a “very serious” situacion12.
This procedure allows for precise quantification and makes it easier to identify each inmate’s most pressing needs, while also effectively guiding treatment planning.
The second process consisted of gathering information from individual sessions.
This tool is used to collect qualitative information made up of phrases, expressions and comments made by the interviewee.
The clinician records the following aspects in note form: needs posed by the participant, development of a therapeutic alliance, personal aspects explored, motivational interview techniques used, clinician’s observations, inmate’s feedback and additional notes.
The third set of data came from group session information.
A document was completed at the end of each session.
It included the following: main subject covered, activities, key interactions, clinician’s observations, participants’ comments and additional relevant notes.
The program was structured around a total of 25 sessions per period.
It began with an evaluation phase that consisted of two individual sessions per participant.
Then the 20 group sessions were held.
The three individual sessions for each inmate were also interspersed throughout the process.
The group sessions lasted for a maximum of 70 minutes.
Participants were encouraged to share information and offer mutual support to each other in the sessions.
We emphasised group cohesion and collaborative learning, in line with the guidelines established by Burlingameet al.13.
The sessions always followed the same sequence: the initial greeting was used to establish a safe, welcoming setting where participants shared their current personal experiences.
Then the subject set for exploration was presented using methods based on experiential learning for therapy14.
The next phase was a group discussion, in which open and constructive participation based on current research on group dynamics was encouraged13.
We then continued with practical activities, such as interactive exercises, role playing and real-playing, backed up by recent studies on their effectiveness in group therapy15.
The sessions ended with conclusions about the sessions, which consisted of comments and remarks on the learning acquired and proposed subjects for the next session.
The session contents of the interventions are shown inTable 1.
All the subjects were selected according to the needs expressed by the inmates in the initial evaluation, emphasising the importance of personalising treatment for addictions.
This personalised approach was maintained through constant reviews, enabling the subject matters to be constantly adapted according to the changing needs of the group.
Efforts were also made to encourage the expression of items related to the interaction between addiction and mental illness, given that we regard this to be a priority feature in treating dual diagnosis, as does the National Institute on Drug Abuse16.
To enable the treatment to offer mid-term and long-term recovery and wellbeing, we included subjects on relapse prevention, effective stress management and techniques to improve control, such as anticipation, planning and decision-making.
Research on relapse prevention and stress management has shown that these factors are very important in addiction recovery17.
Over the course of the sessions, we paid particular attention to making the language used clear and accessible.
From the introduction to the program to the final evaluation and considerations, every subject was presented in clear and accessible language to facilitate connection and understanding.
The individual sessions were used to strengthen the therapeutic alliance and explore personal aspects.
Two key points were reviewed in these sessions: firstly, to observe to what extent the therapeutic objectives were being achieved, with adaptations of the treatment where necessary; and secondly, to deal with challenges based on the guidelines set by Burlingameet al.13, focusing on difficulties that arise in the group session and adapting intervention strategies to each patient.
A final objective of these sessions was to strengthen motivation by using micro-skills within the motivational interview setting, with the aim being to encourage change, deal with ambivalence and boost the patient’s commitment to the therapeutic process.
To process the documents taken from the individual and group sessions and the final questionnaire, we used the ATLAS.ti application, version 918and the AI tool incorporated into this software for synthesis.
This tool includes an analytical method that prepares the scientific interpretation of qualitative data.
The statistical analysis was carried out using the IBM Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 2819for the quantitative data taken from the initial evaluation and final questionnaires.
The aim of the qualitative information analysis was to verify that the therapy used met the set objectives.
We used inductive-deductive reasoning as a theoretical basis for interpreting the results.
We applied a process on the documentation that consisted of codifying and analysing co-occurrences assisted by artificial intelligence, generating “top codes”, “best co-occurrent codes” and “best documents analysed”, to discover patterns and relationships between words or concepts that are shown as being linked.
The findings drawn from these analyses enabled us to prepare reports with a coherent narrative.
To reinforce the validity and credibility of the results, qualitative relationships from statistical descriptors were also studied.
Comparisons of the results obtained with both qualitative and quantitative techniques improved and enriched the conclusions.
Evidence that the participants in this study were individuals that suffered from an addictive disorder and one or more mental illnesses was made plain in the association presented by the two key items of the initial evaluation questionnaire (“mental health and drug problems”), given the Pearson correlation coefficient was 0.656 (p<0.001).
We found inTable 2that in the information from the individual sessions, the most frequently applied top codes were “motivational interview”, followed by “social isolation” and “relapse prevention”.
These three codes were at the top of the list in terms of frequency, which indicates that they are central areas of focus during the sessions.
Note.
*Frequency: number of times that each code appears in the individual sessions.†Motivational interviewing: intervention technique that sets out to increase the patient’s intrinsic motivation to change.‡Relaxation techniques: activities to reduce stress and anxiety.§Stress management: strategies to effectively manage stress.||Consumption: addictive substance use.¶Planning for the future: strategies to establish objectives and long-term planning.
**Strategies to prevent relapses: specific techniques to prevent relapses in addictive behaviours.††Family support: importance of support from the family in the recovery process.
The high frequency with which “motivational interview” appeared suggests a strategic therapy geared towards increasing patients’ intrinsic motivation towards change.
This matches the first objective of reducing substance use, since encouraging motivation is a well-known precursor to behavioural change in treating addictions.
The second most frequent code, “social isolation”, highlights the importance of dealing with patient’s social dynamics.
Isolation can be as much a consequence as a factor that perpetuates substance use, and managing it is a crucial factor for rehabilitation and alleviating negative psychological symptoms.
“Relapse prevention” is a critical component in addiction treatment and matches the objective of maintaining abstinence and reducing consumption.
The frequency of this code suggests a robust preventive focus as part of the sessions, probably incorporating cognitive-behavioural strategies to manage high-risk situations.
The “addiction “ code itself was less frequent than the others, but continues to be a central subject, implying an ongoing exploration of the nature of addiction and its impact on a patient’s life, which is essential for managing the therapeutic objectives.
Subjects such as “stress management”, “coping strategies” and “family support” also indicate a holistic approach, if one considers that stress is a powerful trigger for relapses and social support is a key protective factor.
This concurs with the need to relieve negative psychological symptoms and encourage a supportive setting to reduce conflicts in the module.
The “co-occurrent codes” provided a more detailed perspective of how the different subjects in the sessions are interlinked.
The co-occurrence of codes such as “relaxation techniques”-”stress management”, “addiction”-”social isolation” and “planning for the future”-”strategies to prevent relapses”, suggest that there is an integrated whole that covers personal management techniques and contextual and relational support.
Analysis of the “most codified documents” showed that there was a level of consistency in applying these codes throughout the periods.
The predominating presence of recent documents (2022 period) in the list implies that the interventions continue to be constantly reviewed and adapted to the emerging needs of the prison population.
Table 3shows the analysis of the group sessions.
The most common “applied top code” was “participation: recovery”, which suggests that there was a strong focus on active involvement of patients in their own recovery process.
This matches the aim of reducing substance consumption, since participation is vital for any sustainable change in behaviour.
Note.
*Frequency: number of times each code appears in the group sessions.†Participation: recover: degree of involvement in the recovery process.‡Mental health: evaluation of general mental health.§Participation: sexuality: participation in subjects related to sexuality.||Mental health: anxiety: management and treatment of anxiety.¶Personal recovery: social support: importance of social support in recovery.
**Family relationships: affective relationships: quality of family and affective relationships.††Planning and resources: conflict resolution: strategies for resolving conflicts.‡‡Personal development: personal growth: promotion of personal growth and development.§§Mental health: emotional wellbeing: level of general emotional wellbeing.||||Records of sessions: documents recording the sessions in different periods.
The codes related to “mental health”, especially “mental health: anxiety”, show that significant attention was paid to psychological symptoms.
The co-occurrence of “mental health” with “participation: sexuality” and “family relationships: family support” indicates that mental health is tackled from an integrated perspective that considers the participants’ social and affective life, an essential factor in reducing negative psychological symptoms.
The presence of codes such as “self-awareness: self-esteem” and “planning and resources: conflict resolution” highlights a focus in the development of self-management and conflict resolution skills, contributing towards the reduction of conflicts in the module.
The most codified documents, which generally correspond to more recent periods, may indicate that the intervention strategies have been refined over time, reinforcing the effectiveness of group sessions in achieving the established therapeutic objectives.
Table 4shows the analysis of the final questionnaire data where the codes are linked to strategies and skills: tope codes such as “relapse prevention” and “impulse control” stand out, together with “motivational interview” and “addiction”.
The best co-occurrent codes are “planning for the future” and “relaxation techniques”, associated with “stress management” and “reduction of consumption”, which may reflect strategies focused on long term rehabilitation and stress management.
The presence of “reducing consumption” and “resolution of problems” reinforce the focus on the objectives of reducing substance use and improving conflict resolution.
Note.
*Frequency: number of times that each code appears in the individual sessions.†Relapse prevention: strategies for preventing repeated substance use.‡Planning for the future: establishing goals and long-term planning.§Strategies to prevent relapses: techniques to avoid relapses.||Impulse control: methods to improve impulse regulation.¶Relaxation techniques: practices to reduce stress and anxiety.
**Stress management: strategies to effectively manage stress.††Motivational interview: intervention technique to increase patient’s intrinsic motivation to change.‡‡Reducing consumption: reducing use of addictive substances.§§Action plan: concrete strategies to deal with specific problems.||||Problem solving: methods to effectively identify and solve problems.¶¶Consumption: use of addictive substances.
***Family support: importance of family support in the recovery process.†††The best document analysed: document with the largest number of applied codes.‡‡‡Final questionnaire of 2023 period: data compiled in the final questionnaire of the 2023 period.
The co-occurrences highlighted inTables 2,3and4show a strong interconnection between addiction, mental and emotional wellbeing, social and family support, and the implementation of strategies for stress management and relapse prevention.
These subjects are essential for achieving the objectives of the study and suggest that the interventions should be comprehensive in scope, covering not only addiction itself, but also the complex interactions with mental health and social relationships both inside and outside the prison setting.
Table 5shows the correlations between the variables “reduction of substance use”, “relieving negative psychological symptoms”, “reduction of conflicts in module”, and “global satisfaction with the therapy”.
These correlations are all statistically significant, with “reduction of substance use” and “global satisfaction” showing the highest correlation (0.687;p<0.001).
Note.
Abbreviations: Substance reduction: Reducing substance consumption; Relief: Relief of negative psychological symptoms.
Conflict reduction: Reduction of conflicts in module.
Global satisfaction: Global satisfaction with therapy.
*The correlation is significant at level 0.01 (bilateral).
†The correlation is significant at level 0.05 (bilateral).
This data supports the qualitative information from our study, and makes plain that reduced substance use is strongly linked to improvements of general perception or “global satisfaction”.
Furthermore, relief of negative psychological symptoms and reduced conflict are also significantly correlated, which suggests that such factors are important components in recovery and general wellbeing in the context of dual diagnosis in prison settings.
We propose an innovative intervention that integrates individual and group therapy, combined with motivational interviewing techniques, which has been shown to be effective in treating dual diagnosis in the prison setting.
Unlike previous interventions, our results show not just a significant reduction in substance use and an improvement in negative psychological symptoms, but also a reduction in conflictive behaviour and hostility.
This highlights the importance of an integrated and ongoing approach.
When compared to theManual of intervention dynamics in dual pathology with drug addiction in prisons: ActualizaT Program20and theActualizaT Guide21, which focus on humanising treatment and training professionals to improve quality of life and combat stigma in dual pathology, what our study does is to make further advances in the practical implementation of these principles, with concrete and measurable changes in the study population.
While the previous studies highlighted the importance of the setting and a biopsychosocial perspective, our approach is notable for its direct and effective application in the prison setting, which means a significant difference in the therapeutic approach.
Research by Casares-Lópezet al.22highlighted the prevalence and need for a precise diagnosis and adequate treatment for antisocial personality disorders and the risk of suicide in prison settings.
Our study complements these findings, showing that a well-structured intervention that takes into account the complexity of the inmates’ profiles and is adapted to the specific needs can give rise to tangible improvements.
We bore in mind the observations made by Garrido and Dorado23about the complexity of integrating inmates with profiles of antisocial personality disorder to work in group therapies and, despite the challenges posed by their inclusion, developing a parallel individual therapy enabled a climate favourable to positive learning to be created, ensuring the participation of all the inmates.
This meticulous and carefully planned approach stands out as a significant contribution to the field, and offers ways to for effective inclusion of individuals with complex therapeutic needs.
A constant and coherent style of intervention, combined with a strategy of interspersed subject matter in session given over to addictions and to other mental disorders, were found to be crucial factors in the success of the treatment.
The careful balance between variety of subject matter and methodological coherence offers a replicable and effective model for similar contexts.
The existing literature has established important foundations for understanding and approaching dual diagnosis, but our study provides empirical evidence of an integrated and adapted strategy that significantly improves inmates’ quality of life.
It offers a novel and effective intervention model for future research and for possible future applications.
Although the program was implemented solely in a male population due to the setting of the prison where it took place, it would be interesting in future research to apply such interventions in mixed of exclusively feminine groups.
A comparative analysis between men, women and mixed groups would enable the therapeutic approach to be more finely tuned and the treatment to be planned with greater precision in different prison contexts.
The above comments lead us to suggest specific training for prison personnel, including healthcare staff, social workers, educators and officers.
It would be important for the training to focus on basic aspects of dual diagnosis and in techniques of support to reinforce the effects of the group therapy program, such as training in motivational interviewing.
Finally, it is necessary to reinforce reduced substance use via techniques deriving from relapse prevention to improve adverse psychological symptomatology.
The module where the study took place was exclusively male, and this bias therefore restricts any understanding of gender differences in treatment efficacy.
The qualitative date analysis supported by cutting edge software made it possible to gain a deeper understanding of the processes, but it may miss important information that was not analysed.
The codes, categories, conceptual maps, quotes and opinion mining are extraordinary in terms of quality and quantity, but they can be reiterative due to the repetitive nature of the documents and subject matter that was considered.
To mitigate this limitation, triangulation and cross-validation techniques were used to ensure that the findings were robust.
Although the sample for our study was carefully selected, which favoured treatment continuity, the duration of sentences may alter the long-term positive impact of the treatment.
This variable inherent to the prison context adds additional complexity when evaluating the sustained effects of the treatment and highlights the importance of taking into account the duration of the sentences in results analyses.
Future studies should include a longitudinal follow-up to evaluate the long-term impact of the treatment in different sentencing contexts.
Another opportunity for improvement and a potential line of research would be to evaluate the impact of psychotropics on the evolution of treatment with psychotherapy.
Although our study focused on psychosocial interventions, incorporating a detailed analysis on how pharmacological treatments affect the efficacy of the therapies may provide a more holistic and robust understanding of the factors that contribute towards therapeutic successes amongst inmates with dual diagnosis.
We would like to express our sincerest thanks to Cáritas Diocesana de Zamora, for their initiative and constant support for projects related to mental illness.
Their commitment and efforts have been a vital part of making this study a reality.
Our special thanks to Topas Prison and to all the persons who actively participated in this study.
Their collaboration and participation were highly important in the development and completion of our research.
We also remember with respect and gratitude the participants who formed part of our study and who, sadly, are no longer with us.