To evaluate the relationship between total lesion PSMA (PSMATL), serum PSA, histopathological findings and biochemical recurrence (BCR) in patients with localised prostate cancer (PCa).
This retrospective study assessed men undergoing68Ga‐PSMA‐11 PET/CT for newly diagnosed or treatment‐naïve PCa localised to the prostate gland.
Volumes of interest were manually mapped to derive SUVmax, SUVmean, PSMA‐avid tumour volume and PSMATL.
PSMATLwas defined as the product of PSMA‐avid primary tumour volume and SUVmean.
Spearman correlation tests evaluated associations between PET parameters and PSA, ISUP GG and radical prostatectomy (RP) histopathological outcomes.
Associations between PET parameters and clinical outcomes were determined using Cox proportional hazards regression with results presented as HR and 95% CI.
A total of 200 patients were included, with a median age of 68 (IQR 62–73) years, PSA of 9.5 (6.6–13.0) ng/ml and follow‐up of 41 (25–60) months.
Median PSMATLwas 29.6 (14.8–54.8) and SUVmax11.0 (6.8–17.9).
PSMATLand SUVmaxdemonstrated a weak correlation with baseline PSA (ρ = 0.334, p < 0.001 and ρ = 0.343, p < 0.001), and PSMATLshowed a weak correlation with PSA density in the RP subgroup (ρ = 0.242, p = 0.021).
Among 109 (54.5%) patients undergoing RP, PSMATLand SUVmaxshowed a weak correlation with ISUP GG (ρ = 0.233, p = 0.015 and ρ = 0.340, p < 0.001).
There was a weak correlation between PSMATLand primary tumour stage (ρ = 0.244, p = 0.010) and lymph node stage (ρ = 0.259, p = 0.007).
PSMATLwas significantly higher in those with seminal vesicle involvement (p = 0.011), perineural invasion (p = 0.025) and lymphovascular invasion (p = 0.002).
BCR occurred in 46 patients (42%), with a 1% increased risk of BCR per unit increase in PSMATL(HR 1.01, 95% CI 1.00–1.02, p = 0.011).
PSMATLcorrelates with PSA, PSA density, ISUP GG, RP histopathological findings and BCR.
As an adjunct to SUVmax, PSMATLhas the potential to be a useful prognostic tool.
Further research is needed to assess its clinical utility.
A significant limitation of SUVmax, however, is that it is only a measure of the most intense voxel of activity within a particular region of interest (e.g. the prostate gland) and does not convey any information regarding the total volume of abnormally increased PSMA PET activity.
The primary aim of the present study, therefore, was to evaluate the relationship between68Ga‐PSMA PET/CT PSMATLand serum PSA levels as well as prostatectomy histopathological and clinical outcomes in patients with PCa localised to the prostate gland only.
This retrospective study analysed68Ga‐PSMA‐11 PET/CT imaging performed at a single, tertiary hospital in Australia between 2015 and 2022.
Patients had PET/CT demonstrating disease localised to the prostate gland only and were included if they had either newly diagnosed primary PCa or treatment naïve PCa previously on active surveillance (AS).
All patients had transperineal ultrasound‐guided (TP) biopsy‐proven PCa.
Patients were excluded if PET/CT was suggestive of locoregional or distant metastases, or if they had received prior treatment for PCa.
Data retrospectively recorded and analysed included serial serum PSA levels and PSA subgroups, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and PET/CT findings, TP biopsy and radical prostatectomy (RP) pathology findings such as ISUP GG, subsequent treatment and re‐treatment and clinical outcomes such as biochemical recurrence (BCR) and recurrence on repeat PET/CT or conventional staging.
The research was conducted in adherence with the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the institutional ethics committee (133/16).
All patients underwent68Ga‐PSMA imaging on a GE Discovery 710 PET/CT scanner (GE Healthcare, Milwaukee WI, United States).
Images were acquired from the skull base to the upper thighs following intravenous administration of68Ga‐PSMA‐11.
Median injected activity was 163.5 (interquartile range [IQR] 145–182) MBq.
The median radiotracer uptake time was 68.5 (60–79) minutes.
Low‐dose, non‐contrast‐enhanced CT was performed at 100–140 kVp depending on patient weight, auto‐tube modulation (20–80 mAs) and with a slice thickness of 3.75 mm.
68Ga‐PSMA PET/CT images were analysed with MIM software (MIM software Inc, Ohio, United States).
Investigators including two experienced nuclear medicine physicians manually mapped volumes of interest (VOI) that encompassed the prostate gland using the co‐registered CT for anatomical correlation.
The site of the tumour on TP biopsy was not known to investigators.
PET‐derived measurements calculated were SUVmax, SUVmean, PSMA‐avid tumour volume and PSMATL.
PSMATLwas defined as the product of the PSMA‐avid primary tumour volume and SUVmean.
All analyses were performed using SAS software version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary NC, United States).
Baseline demographic, histopathological and treatment characteristics of patients were summarised using medians and interquartile ranges or counts and percentages as appropriate.
Comparisons of PSMATL/SUVmaxacross PSA subgroups and RP outcomes were performed using Wilcoxon rank‐sum tests for two‐group comparisons and Kruskal‐Wallis tests for comparisons involving more than two groups.
Relationships between PET parameters and PSA, PSA density, ISUP GG and certain RP histopathological outcomes were assessed using Spearman rank correlations.
Associations between PET parameters and clinical outcomes (time to biochemical recurrence, disease recurrence on imaging, local recurrence and metastatic recurrence) were determined using Cox proportional hazards regression with results presented as hazard ratios (HR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI).
All calculated p values were two‐tailed and a p < 0.05 indicated statistical significance.
Table1.
Baseline patient, histopathological and treatment characteristics (n = 200).
Baseline patient, histopathological and treatment characteristics (n = 200).
IQR, interquartile range; PET/CT, positron emission tomography/computed tomography; PSA, prostate‐specific antigen; ISUP, International Society of Urological Pathology; GG, grade group; PSMA, prostate‐specific membrane antigen; SUVmax, maximum standardised uptake value; SUVmean, mean standardised uptake value; PSMATL, total lesion PSMA; TNM, tumour/node/metastasis.
7/7 deaths not primarily related to prostate cancer.
Table2.
Correlations between PSMATL, SUVmaxand PSA, PSA density, ISUP GG, tumour stage and lymph node stage.
Correlations between PSMATL, SUVmaxand PSA, PSA density, ISUP GG, tumour stage, and lymph node stage.
PSA, prostate‐specific antigen; ISUP, International Society of Urological Pathology; GG, grade group; RP, radical prostatectomy; PSMATL, total lesion PSMA; SUVmax, maximum standardised uptake value.
Table3.
Difference in PSMATL, SUVmaxbetween PSA subgroups and prostatectomy outcomes.
Difference in PSMATL, SUVmaxbetween PSA subgroups and prostatectomy outcomes.
PSMATL, total lesion PSMA; SUVmax, maximum standardised uptake value; PSA, prostate‐specific antigen.
Table4.
Risk of clinical outcome occurrence based on PSMATLand SUVmax.
Risk of clinical outcome occurrence based on PSMATLand SUVmax.
HR, hazard ratio; CI, confidence interval; BCR, biochemical recurrence; imaging recurrence, evidence of disease recurrence on PSMA PET/CT or conventional staging; local recurrence, evidence of disease recurrence in the prostate bed; metastatic recurrence, evidence of disease recurrence outside the prostate bed; PSMATL, total lesion PSMA; SUVmax, maximum standardised uptake value; RP, radical prostatectomy.
A HR of 1.01 represents a 1% increase in the risk of BCR per unit increase in PSMATL.
Baseline patient, histopathological and treatment characteristics are detailed in Table1.
A total of 200 patients underwent68Ga‐PSMA PET/CT, with a median age of 68 (62–73) years and follow‐up of 41 (25–60) months from the time of PET/CT.
Just over half of patients had a serum PSA ≤ 10 (54%).
ISUP GG 3 was most common (45%) followed by GG 2 (20.5%) and GG 4 (18.5%).
Median SUVmaxwas 11.0 (6.8–17.9) and median PSMATLwas 29.6 (14.8–54.8).
A total of 109 patients (54.5%) underwent RP, with the majority (68.8%) undergoing pelvic lymph node dissection.
As illustrated in Table2, both PSMATLand SUVmaxdemonstrated a weak correlation with baseline PSA (Spearman ρ = 0.334, p < 0.001 and ρ = 0.343, p < 0.001, respectively).
This was also the case in the RP subgroup (ρ = 0.397, p < 0.001 and ρ = 0.325, p = 0.001, respectively).
Similarly, there was a weak correlation between PSMATLand PSA density in the RP subgroup (ρ = 0.242, p = 0.021), but not in the overall cohort.
There was a statistically significant but weak correlation between SUVmaxand biopsy ISUP GG (ρ = 0.155, p = 0.028), but not with PSMATL.
Whilst these correlations reached statistical significance, they are generally considered ‘weak’ associations; therefore, the correlation coefficient alone does not necessarily translate to a meaningful clinical implication.
There was a significant difference in both PSMATLand SUVmaxacross PSA subgroups ≤10 vs > 10 and ≤10 vs 10–20 vs ≥ 20, as detailed in Table3.
In the RP subgroup, both PSMATLand SUVmaxdemonstrated a weak correlation with RP specimen ISUP GG (ρ = 0.233, p = 0.015 and ρ = 0.340, p < 0.001, respectively).
There was also a weak correlation between PSMATLand both the primary tumour stage (ρ = 0.244, p = 0.010) and lymph node stage (ρ = 0.259, p = 0.007).
As detailed in Table3, a significant difference in median PSMATLwas observed between the presence or absence of seminal vesicle involvement (SVI) (p = 0.011), perineural invasion (PNI) (p = 0.025) and lymphovascular invasion (LVI) (p = 0.002), but not extraprostatic extension (EPE) (p = 0.102) or positive surgical margins (PSM) (p = 0.059).
There was no association between SUVmaxand any other histopathological outcomes aside from ISUP GG.
After a median follow‐up of 40 (20–62) months post‐RP, BCR was observed in a total of 46 patients (42%).
There was a 1% increased risk of BCR per unit increase in PSMATL(HR 1.01, 95% CI 1.00–1.02, p = 0.011).
Furthermore, there was a significant difference in PSMATLbetween patients who had BCR compared to those who did not (44.9 ± 35.1 vs 36.4 ± 30.1, respectively, p = 0.046).
Aside from this, there were no other significant associations between PSMATLor SUVmaxand BCR, disease recurrence on imaging, local disease recurrence or metastatic recurrence in either the overall cohort or RP subgroup (Table4).
There was also no significant difference in PSMATLor SUVmaxin patients who did or did not have complete biochemical response post‐RP (Table3).
Given that PSMATLis a composite function of both SUVmeanand total PSMA‐avid tumour volume, we expected PSMATLmay have similar utility compared to SUVmaxalone.
Our retrospective study demonstrated that PSMATLis a promising PET/CT parameter with potential for important clinical applications.
Similar to SUVmax, PSMATLappears to correlate with serum PSA and PSA density and may be used to help predict PSA subgroup and thus assist in risk stratification of localised PCa.
Furthermore, we demonstrated a significant relationship between PSMATLand important RP histopathological features such as SVI, PNI and LVI, that may have a substantial impact on clinical outcomes.19This is ultimately reflected by the fact that PSMATLmay play a role in predicting BCR following RP.
SUVmaxhas previously been shown to correlate with serum PSA.8,11,12In a retrospective analysis of 201 patients with newly diagnosed PCa, Onal et al. demonstrated a ‘moderate’ correlation between SUVmaxand PSA.11Uprimny et al. reported a significantly higher SUVmaxin 90 patients with PSA ≥ 10.0 ng/ml compared to <10 ng/ml.12This was in a similar population to ours, with patients undergoing primary staging68Ga‐PSMA PET/CT and a comparable median serum PSA of 9.7 ng/ml (compared to 9.5 ng/ml in our study).
Our study demonstrated similar relationships between PSA and SUVmaxand more notably PSA and PSMATL.
Compared to our analysis, both these studies included patients with locoregional disease on PET/CT (with Uprimny et al. also including metastatic disease), and the median PSA was significantly higher in the study performed by Onal et al (20.3 ng/ml).
Similar volumetric PET parameters have been explored with other PET‐derived biomarkers such as total metabolic tumour volume (TMTV) in other PET tracers.
Fragkiadaki et al. demonstrated positive correlations between TMTV and SUVmaxwith PSA levels in their study of 104 patients with BCR who underwent both18F‐PSMA‐1007 and18F‐choline PET/CT.20Despite these differences, our results suggest that similar to SUVmax, PSMATLmay be used to predict PSA levels and subgroups in patients with localised PCa, and similar to above, potentially may be extrapolated to those with locoregional and metastatic disease, as well as in patients with BCR.
PSMATLmay correlate with or help predict important RP histopathological outcomes following prostatectomy.
We demonstrated a ‘weak’ correlation between both PSMATLand SUVmaxwith prostatectomy ISUP GG.
Although this reached statistical significance, the clinical relevance of a ‘weak’ association needs further evaluation, as statistical significance does not necessarily translate to a clinically significant result.
Future studies are required to further explore the strength of this correlation, and therefore, also its potential clinical utility.
Similarly, Demirci et al. reported a ‘strong’ correlation between SUVmaxand ISUP GG in their study of 141 patients with localised disease, with a Pearson ρ coefficient of 0.66.9This difference in magnitude of correlation may be partially accounted for by the fact that our data were heavily skewed towards ISUP GG 2 and 3 disease (24% and 49%, respectively), whilst patients in the above study were relatively more evenly spread across all Grade Groups.
Wang et al. explored the role of PSMATLin predicting RP outcomes in a retrospective analysis of 186 patients with D'Amico intermediate to high‐risk primary PCa.21They reported a significant association between positive surgical margins and PSMATL(odds ratio [OR] 1.007, p = 0.021) as well as with SUVmax(OR 1.026, p = 0.039).
There was, however, no significant association between PSMATLand ISUP GG, and they did not explore other histopathological features such as PNI, SVI, LVI or EPE.
To our knowledge, this is the only other study exploring the role of PSMATLin predicting RP histopathological outcomes and reflects the promising findings from our analysis.
Similar studies have otherwise only explored SUVmax, with Roberts et al. reporting a significant association with Gleason Score, T‐stage and positive surgical margins.22Due to the composite nature of PSMATL, we expect that future studies would demonstrate a similar, if not more substantial, relationship with histopathological outcomes when compared to SUVmaxalone.
In a prospective trial by Li et al. comparing 18F‐DCFPyL PSMA PET with limited MRI to multiparametric MRI alone, PSMA PET showed higher specificity in detecting EPE and higher sensitivity in detecting lymph node involvement.23This suggests the potential to further improve the staging accuracy of PSMA PET by combining radiomic measures such as PSMATLwith the anatomical detail provided by MRI.
To the best of our knowledge, no previous study has shown PSMATLto be a predictor of clinical outcomes post‐RP.
Wang et al. explored the role of PSMATLin predicting BCR‐free survival after a median follow‐up of 38 months post‐RP, but found no significant relationship.21Instead, SUVmaxalone was a significant predictor of BCR‐free survival (HR 1.015, 95% CI 1.004–1.026, p = 0.008).
Similarly, de Bie et al. reported SUVmaxas a predictor for BCR in 238 patients post‐robot‐assisted RP, with SUVmax> 10 a significant cut‐off value.13Roberts et al. also found SUVmaxto be a predictor of progression‐free survival.22As a prognostic tool, PSMATLhas otherwise only been explored in patients with metastatic disease receiving Lutetium radioligand therapy and has been shown to be a predictor for overall survival.16,17Our study is the first to demonstrate the potential use of PSMATLin localised PCa as a predictor of clinical outcomes post‐RP, in the form of BCR.
Although we did not show a significant association with other outcome measures (such as disease recurrence, local or metastatic recurrence), it is worth noting that the aforementioned studies similarly demonstrated a significant relationship between SUVmaxand only one clinical outcome each.
This suggests that whilst the evidence of both PSMATLand SUVmaxin predicting clinical outcomes post‐BCR is evolving, perhaps one outcome could be used as a surrogate for another whilst data continues to mature.
A major limitation of this study is the retrospective nature of the analysis.
This, coupled with being a single‐centred study, could potentially have led to bias.
However, findings are consistent with that already published in the literature.
Despite having an overall sample size comparable to the existing literature, there was also a relative predominance towards intermediate‐risk factors, with the majority of patients having PSA < 10 ng/ml (54%) and ISUP GG ≤ 3 disease (67%).
As a result, this could limit the generalisability of our findings in other patient cohorts.
Prospective studies, at other institutions, with different patient populations, are required to assess the applicability and utility of PSMATLin other patient cohorts.
Furthermore, we excluded patients with locoregional disease on68Ga‐PSMA PET/CT.
This could potentially have led to sampling bias, particularly in patients with N1 disease on lymph node dissection despite no evidence on PET/CT.
A major strength of this study is the long follow‐up time.
The median post‐RP follow‐up of 40 (20–62) months was longer than all the aforementioned studies exploring clinical outcomes (19.5, 32 and 38 months).13,21,22Furthermore, patients were closely followed up, with a median of seven (5–11) post‐RP serum PSA levels performed.
As a result, a considerable number of BCR incidents and imaging recurrences were detected, strengthening the analysis of PSMATLas a predictor of clinical outcomes.
In conclusion, we demonstrate that68Ga‐PSMA‐11 PET/CT PSMATLis a promising parameter that, similar to SUVmax, may correlate with PSA levels, PSA density and ISUP GG.
PSMATLalso showed an association with both prostatectomy histopathological findings and clinical outcomes.
Utilised as an adjunct to SUVmax, PSMATLhas the potential to be a useful prognostic tool.
These initial results from a single‐centred study should be further explored in prospective studies to assess the potential application of PSMATLin routine clinical practice.