Aqueous electrolyte solutions are central to many natural phenomena and industrial applications leading to continuous development of increasingly complex analytical models.
These are based on an atomistic description of electrostatic interactions between ions, along with mean-field approaches for the dielectric response of water.
Despite many achievements, such concepts often fall short in quantitatively describing scenarios where ion–ion correlations and specific solvation effects become relevant, particularly in concentrated electrolyte solutions.
Here, we propose a shift in perspective, by introducing a statistical, coarse-grained approach to describe the average thermodynamic properties of aqueous electrolyte solutions.
This method eliminates the need to define ion pairs or ion complexes and does not require any prior knowledge on specific solvation.
We base our concept on separating the solution into a spherical observation volume whose size and average composition are uniquely determined by the solution parameters, and its environment, which consists of the remaining solution.
This separation allows us to express the volume–environment interaction in terms of a generalized multipole expansion,i.e.in a convenient, additive way.
We applied this approach to 135 electrolytes including some notoriously complex species, such as LiCl or ZnCl2over their full solubility ranges.
This paves the road toward understanding super-saturated and water-in-salt solutions and electrolyte nucleation.
Concentrated electrolyte solutions present challenges for scientific research and technical applications.
Here, we demonstrate that a small set of physically defined parameters can fully describe electrolyte and water activity.
From a physicochemical perspective, the osmotic and average activity coefficients of electrolytes,ϕand lnγ±, respectively, determine the excess thermodynamic functions of the corresponding aqueous and non-aqueous solutions.13,14Debye and Hückel were the first to describe electrolyte and water properties in dilute electrolyte solutions as a function of ion concentration and electrolyte composition.15The theory has later been extended to higher concentrations by Bjerrum, Glueckauf, McMillan, and Mayer (see review by Vaslow16).
Friedman, Pitzer, and coworkers extended the description to more complex electrolyte mixtures such as seawater.17A special issue of the Journal of Fluid Phase Equilibria18celebrates the 100th anniversary of the findings by Debye and Hückel and provides a summary of recent developments on the topic.
In that issue, Simonin and Bernard19compare several simple activity models including Debye–Hückel, the mean spherical approximation, and the Pitzer approach.
Earlier, Khanet al.20compared four physical descriptions of lnγ±.
While the Pitzer and Bromley approach accurately describes the activity coefficients of 1 : 1 electrolytes, the method fails for several important 1 : 2 electrolytes, such as CaCl2and MgCl2.
A recent review by Held12provides a critical comparison of the different excess Gibbs energy parametrizations up to high electrolyte concentrations.
Common to all these descriptions is a series expansion of lnγ±in the molality, the molarity, or the ionic strength framework starting from the limit of infinite dilution.
In most cases, the dilute limit is described by a Debye–Hückel term.
Each series expansion takes into account individual ion–ion interactions over the full volume in the configuration integral.
The behavior at high molalities is in general derived by assuming ion-specific (hydrated) ion radii which are fitted to reproduce the experimental activity coefficients.17,19The ability of ions to form different types of ion pairs or, more general, ion complexes makes an evaluation at high concentrations difficult.
Recently, a combined X-ray and simulation approach21–23showed that at high concentrations, beyond the so-called Kirkwood-transition, ion–ion-correlations increase due to clustering, and the Debye length is no longer the characteristic length-scale.
The critical concentration for the Kirkwood transition depends strongly on the electrolyte composition.
In spite of these complexities, it is very surprising that many experimental observables of aqueous electrolyte solutions, such as the effective molar extinction coefficients24or the average apparent molar volume, show a nearly linear mol fraction dependency.25This simple behavior suggests that, on a macroscopic level, most of the water-mediated ion–ion interactions partially compensate and lead to average interactions that can be described by simple analytical functions.
In the following, we focus on two-component solutions composed of a single electrolyte and water.
We demonstrate that the separation of the solution into a well-chosen, uniquely defined, probe volume and its environment leads to a generalized multipole description of the excess interaction energy of electrolyte solutions.
The number of required expansion orders is small: even for complex electrolytes such as ZnCl2and LiCl three components are sufficient to describe the experimental data.
When integrated, the resulting equation yields an analytical form of the osmotic coefficientϕand, thus, the water activityaw.
The set of equations is applied to a total number of 135 electrolytes.
The dependency of the fit parameters on electrolyte composition is discussed.
wherexBandxware the electrolyte and water mol fractions, respectively.
This definition is uniquely determined by the molality of the solution and its density.
The spherical shape is adopted due to the isotropic nature of bulk electrolyte solutions.
This observation volume is illustrated inFig.
The left scheme pictures a hypothetical solution without ion–ion interactions, where the charge distribution inside and outside the probe volume is uniform.
In the low concentration limit (center frame), the presence of ion–ion interactions causes a non-homogeneous charge distribution that polarizes the surrounding environment.
As discussed thereafter, this is well described by dipolar interactions (seeFig.
With increasing concentration, the radius of the probe volume decreases due to its stoichiometric definition, while the charge distribution inside and outside the volume becomes increasingly complex and requires higher-order multipole interactions.
It is important to note that our observation volume is a purely statistical entity, defined to be charge neutral and containing on average the smallest possible, stoichiometric number of water and ions.
Hence, its size, charge, and average composition are unrelated to the important spatial features, such as inhomogeneities in ion distribution and ion pairing, and the consequences of these on the water network observed,e.g., from simulations or diffraction experiments.
However, the heterogeneity in the distribution of such configurations contributes, in our approach, to the instantaneous charge distribution inside the observation volume, due to both ions and water.
This is a key feature of our approach, since water actively contributes to the charge distribution within the volume.
This contribution is expected to be essential at high concentration, where specific ion solvation and water network arrangements dominate the free energy changes.
These effects are, hence, naturally included in our charge distributions, which can be complex for strongly interacting ions where long-range ion–ion correlations and ion-clustering become important (seeFig.
The resulting charge distribution generates an electrostatic potential in the environment of our observation volume.
The average interaction of this potential with the charge distributions outside the observation volume (which also depends on both ions and water), averaged over all possible configurations explored by the system, determines the interaction energyUde.
We choose to describe such an electrostatic potential at a distance,R, outside the volume as a multipole expansion in spherical coordinates.
We express this distance,R=nRRh, in units of the hydration radius,Rh, of the electrolyte.
It is determined by the composition of the solution, its density at constant temperature and pressure, and an effective numberNhof hydration water that depends on the electrolyte and the expansion order (see Appendix for details).
This choice allows us to conveniently express the interactions in terms of a dimensionless distance unit,nR, removing the dependence on concentration and molar volume.
Please note that the integration starts at the volume boundary (nd=Rd/Rh), which is solely determined by the composition of the solution and the hydration shell size of the electrolyte and is always positive.
defines a ratio of the mol fraction of the hydrated electrolyte,xhandxB.
This quantity is inversely proportional to the ratio of the observation volume and volume of the hydrated electrolyte, and, thus, to their mol fraction ratios (see Appendix for details).Dl,xlh, andλlare electrolyte dependent fit parameters.Dlcharacterizes the depth of thelth order interaction energy profile.
The parameterxlhdescribes the crossover from the dilute to concentrated solutions.
ForxB>xlh, thelth order contribution becomes positive, indicating unfavorable (endothermic) interaction.
We found in our analysis (see figures below andTables 1 and 2) that solely the dipolar (l= 1) contribution requires in some casesx1h< 1.
In all fits where quadrupole and octupole contributions become relevant,xl>1h= 1 leads to a satisfying description of the experimental data.
Fig. 2shows example fits of individual electrolytes.
For CsBr, which does not display strong cation–anion interactions, the dipole expansion represents the activity coefficient sufficiently well over the full data range.
When increasing the cation–anion interaction strength, such as for the cases of LiCl and ZnCl2, complex ion–ion correlations occur in the solution.
In previous molecular dynamics and X-ray studies, these were shown to result in spatial inhomogeneities due to ion clustering.21–23In our framework, the effect of these spatial inhomogeneities is encoded in the charge distributions within and outside the probe volume.
With increasing ion clustering, the charge distributions become more complex, resulting in larger contributions from quadrupolar and octupolar terms in our model (seeeqn (4)).
Accordingly, the quadrupole and octupole terms of our statistical model capture the more complex behavior of LiCl and ZnCl2solutions over the whole mole fraction range.
The number of contributing multipole components provides a quantification of the impact of (multi-body) ion–ion correlations: complex ion–ion correlations require stronger contributions from an increased number of higher-order multipole expansion terms.
Summarizing the results above, we have demonstrated that a multipole expansion of the interaction between the central observation volume and the surrounding solution is suitable to represent lnγ±(seeeqn (4)).
Each expansion exponent,λl, reflects the combination of the thermally averaged interaction between the multipole inside the observation volume and the charge distribution in its environment (Fig. 3).
The interaction spatially decays as.
The dipole–dipole interaction term (l= 1 ineqn (4)) compares well with the simplest form of the Debye–Hückel law (lnγ±∝mB1/2) for dilute solutions wherex∝mBwhen choosingλDipole= 0.5 (seeFig.
Fig. 3shows the results of the dipolar contribution for 135 electrolytes.
(See fit parameters inTables 1 and 2and the classification of the investigated electrolytes inTable 3in the Appendix.)
In panel (A), we show the dipolar contribution to lnγ±for four electrolytes with increasing interaction strength from CsI to LiCl.
The crossover pointxDipoleh(dashed vertical line) marks a boundary: dipole–dipole interaction becomes unfavorable,i.e., endothermic, for higher concentrations, and complex (i.e., quadrupole and octupole) interactions become more important.
The radius of the observation volume where this happens is determined by 1/xDipoleh.
With increasing ion–ion and ion–water interactions, the crossover shifts toward lower concentrations.
This is in qualitative agreement with findings from a combined SAXS and simulation study (Fig. 3 in (ref.22)) showing that a crossover from Debye–Hückel to more complex behavior occurs at lower concentrations for more strongly interacting ions.
Panel (B) shows the depth of the dipolar contribution to lnγ±versusits exponent for the different 1 : 1 to 3 : 2 electrolytes.
We display electrolytes withxDipoleh= 1,i.e., where no crossover is observed, with open markers.
This class contains both electrolytes that are well-described by the dipolar term, only, as well as special cases such as many guanidinium and sulfate salts for which quadrupolar contributions are important, despite no crossover being observed in the dipolar term.
The vertical line atλDipole= 0.5 marks the value corresponding to the Debye–Hückel (DH) law.
Electrolytes with largeDDipoletypically show exponents close to the DH-value.
A comparison to panels (A) and (C) shows thatDDipoleis determined by both the strength of the electrolyte and the limiting concentration, where higher-order terms become more prominent.
A larger exponent indicates an increased importance of thermal averaging effects (remember that thermal averaging changes the 1/R3-interaction of close dipoles to a 1/R6-dependency, when the effective interaction strength is much smaller thankT).
Panel (C) supports this picture.
Here, we observe that (a) electrolytes with smaller 1/xDipolehand (b) electrolytes with higher charge show exponents closer to the DH value.
Electrolytes where higher order contributions dominate at low concentrations (i.e.,xDipolehis small) or which only weakly interact with each other and with water (e.g., 1 : 1, blue,vs.2 : 1 and 1 : 2, yellow) tend to have larger exponents.
Panel (D) inFig.
3shows the interaction strength,DDipole, as function of 1/xhfor 97 electrolytes.
We observe a power law of the formDDipole=D0Im(1/xDipoleh)−κwithD0= 2.81(8) andκ= 0.42(1), whereis the ionic strength of the electrolyte in our molecular frame.
The proportionality of the interaction strength toImis in agreement with the ionic strength dependency of the interaction energy as described by Debye and Hückel (see Appendix for a detailed comparison).
We noticed a few exceptional cases which are, however, beyond the scope of our discussion.
so thatλlandUldetermine the general shape and the sharpness of the partition function, respectively.
Fig. 4A, top shows the contributions to the partition function for LiCl usingUl= 1 for better comparability.
The long-range interaction shows a gradual transition when hitting the crossover (dashed blue), where dipole–dipole interaction is replaced by higher-order, more complex interactions.
In contrast, the quadrupole (yellow) and octupole (green) terms show a sharp decay atnR= 1.
The corresponding osmotic pressures are shown in the bottom part ofFig.
The dipole contribution is weak and only attractive (i.e., negative) at long distances.
In contrast, the quadrupole and octupole terms are short-range and still attractive at the highest possible concentrations.
for thelth order contribution to the osmotic coefficient.
Here,BxB(1 +λl, 0) is the incomplete Euler Beta function28andΦ(xB, 2, 1 +λl) is the Lerch transcendent29(see Appendix for details on the integration procedure and the special functions).
Finally, we tested if the generalized multipole expansion approach applies to “water in salt (WISE)” electrolytes such as lithium-bis-(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)-imide (LiTFSI), seeFig.
Water activity data for this compound were reported recently by Zhigalenoket al.32for intermediate to high LiTFSI concentrations.
Due to a lack of low-concentration data, we fixed the dipolar set of parameters to those of LiCl to obtain a numerically stable fit.
As shown by the residuals (black dots) inFig.
5, our model is well suited to represent the water activity of LiTFSI over the full concentration range.
As expected for systems with strongly inhomogeneous charge distributions,2we must include the dipole plus quadrupole plus octupole terms.
We have demonstrated above a novel statistical approach to model and understand the excess thermodynamic functions,i.e., (lnγ±, osmotic coefficient,ϕ, and water activity,aw) of aqueous electrolyte solutions and applied it to 135 electrolytes.
The foundation of our coarse-grained approach is a generalized multipole expansion which describes the interaction of all charges outside a purely statistical, stoichiometrically defined observation volume with the potential originating from the charge distribution inside.
A key feature is that charge distributions inside and outside the observation volume depend both on ions and water.
This allows us to take into account the properties of the hydration water network as a function of concentration beyond continuum model descriptions that reduce water's influence to the dielectric constant.
We summarize the key features of our description inFig.
6: with increasing concentration, the charge distribution within our observation volume captures the emergence of spatial inhomogeneities, such as ion clustering.
This becomes more complex with increasing concentration from panel (A) to (B), while still obeying, on average, the constraints of being charge-neutral by containing one electrolyte unit and the stoichiometric amount of water.
The increased complexity of the charge distribution results in larger higher-order contributions to our multipole expansion.
Even for the most complex studied electrolyte solutions, the 3rd-order expansion, including dipole, quadrupole, and octupole contributions, is found sufficient to describe the full set of thermodynamic properties in the whole solubility range.
This is a substantial simplification compared to existing heuristic descriptions.
In addition, as summarized inFig.
6, our statistical perspective allows us to collapse the effect of the complex structural heterogeneity found in experimental data and simulations for strongly interacting ions and concentrated solutions into the quadrupolar and octupolar terms of our thermodynamic functions.
For example, recent studies suggest that a Kirkwood transition,i.e., the concentration at which the Debye length is no longer the characteristic length scale in an electrolyte solution, happens at lower concentrations for strongly interacting electrolytes due to ion clustering.22,23This observation is in qualitative agreement with our findings inFig.
2and 8A, where quadrupole and octupole terms start to contribute significantly at lower concentrations for strongly interacting electrolytes.
Our universal approach is not restricted to binary electrolyte solutions but is generalizable to electrolyte mixtures and solutions in general.
This process requires an additional summation over all possible (neutral) solute combinations in the observation volume and their interaction with the solute mixture in the environment.
The change of perspective, we propose, offers new insights into the average thermodynamic properties of electrolyte solutions and their connection to local structural heterogeneity and ion complexes as they are characterized by state-of-the-art spectroscopic and simulation techniques.
We hope these findings will contribute to the understanding of concentrated electrolyte solutions, which are relevant in many biological and electrochemical applications in today's society.