This short communication illustrates how the 2024 movieOut of My Mind, starring a protagonist (Melody) with cerebral palsy, embodies the ‘F‐words’ for child development—the paediatric adaptation of the World Health Organization International Classification of Functioning Disability and Health (ICF).
The ‘F‐words’ provide a strengths‐based and holistic framework to view childhood development, disability and functioning that can benefit service providers, researchers and families alike.
If we want the world to adopt the values of the ‘F‐words’, we must bring these values to the world by applying them outside of academia.
This short communication outlines howOut of My Mindillustrates and exemplifies each ‘F‐words’ domain, as well as the interconnectedness with other domains, from the perspective of a speech‐language pathologist and PhD student in Rehabilitation Science.
Key reflections include the impact of social, attitudinal and physical environments on the protagonist's participation and howFunandFunctioningare shown in the movie's first‐person perspective.
This short communication also highlights the impact of attitudinal, physical and system‐level barriers on participation and can inspire us all to change the way we think to shape the society we aspire towards.
The F‐words for child development are a valuable framework for viewing childhood disability in a strengths‐based manner and should be applied to examples of childhood disability in daily life, beyond academia.
Media that includes disability representation (e.g., movies, television and novels) is a valuable and accessible method of demonstrating how frameworks such as the ‘F‐words’ can be used as a lens to view the world and childhood disability specifically.
Out of My Mindillustrates many examples of how environmental and personal factors (i.e., ‘F‐words’Family&Fun) impact the participation of children with disabilities and provides many thought‐provoking opportunities for discussion.
Illustrating examples of ‘F‐words’ ways of thinking in the media is a valuable method of knowledge translation and changing perspectives on childhood disability and therefore may be of interest to clinicians and researchers in rehabilitation, education, medicine or other fields looking for examples of strengths‐based portrayals of childhood disability.
Disability representation in media, including movies and television, has varied widely across decades and genres (Leduc2000).
As a speech‐language pathologist and Rehabilitation Science doctoral student, I am drawn to media related to disability and cannot help but think about what I study while watching a movie or reading a book.
I recently watchedOut of My Mind(Sealey2024), a movie based upon the best‐selling novel of the same name by Sharon Draper (Draper2010).
The movie stars Phoebe Rae Taylor, an actress with Cerebral Palsy (CP), who plays the protagonist Melody, a preteen with CP (Sealey2024; Draper2010).
In addition to the incredible acting, script and story, what stood out to me was how the movie perfectly illustrates the World Health Organization's (WHO) International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) (WHO2001) and the paediatric adaptation: The ‘F‐words’ for Child Development (previously the ‘F‐words’ for Childhood Disability) (Rosenbaum and Gorter2012).
To borrow from Rosenbaum and Gorter's clever subtitle, I swear the F‐words were how the book author, producers, directors and actors were thinking.
The ‘F‐words’ for Child Development (Rosenbaum and Gorter2012) is an interpretation and adaptation of the ICF (see Figure1).
The F‐words build upon the strengths‐based, family‐centred and holistic lens of the ICF and describe five interconnected domains to consider in child development and disability:Fitness(physical and mental),Functioning(what people can do),Friends(opportunities to participate),Family(as the prime example of an environmental factor) andFun(focusing on personally relevant, fun activities).
Rosenbaum and Gorter (2012) added the domain,Future, not present in the ICF, referring to the importance of considering a child's (and family's) continuing development each step of the way.
Both the ICF and F‐words emphasize how a child's participation and functioning are impacted by their context, includingFamily, built environment, attitudes and technology.
CanChild's (n.d.) ICF Framework and the ‘F‐words’ (reprinted with permission).
The purpose of this perspectives piece is twofold.
First, it discusses howOut of My Mindillustrates the F‐words (Rosenbaum and Gorter2012) and thus may be of interest to researchers and clinicians in rehabilitation, education, medicine or other fields looking for examples of strengths‐based portrayals of childhood disability.
Second, and more importantly in my opinion, if we want children, families, policy makers and service providers to adopt the values of the ICF and ‘F‐words’, we must bring these values to the world rather than expecting the world to study the ICF explicitly.
Highlighting examples of movies and other media that espouse the strengths‐based, function‐focused and holistic values of the ICF and F‐words is a valuable method of knowledge translation.
Out of My Mindcontains hundreds of ‘F‐words’ examples.
I have focused on how a few examples in the movie prompt F‐words ways of thinking and relate to broader topics in childhood disability research.
Although each section is organized by specific ‘F‐words’ domains, all domains are inextricably interconnected.
Given the movie's focus on childhood disability, ‘F‐words’ language is used with the ICF domains in brackets.
Through Melody's first‐person perspective, the movie focuses on what shecando.
When the environment is accessible, Melody's body and wheelchair navigate the world seamlessly.
Melody's abilities are illustrated when, without access to a speech‐generating augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) device, she points to a photo of a leaf to answer ‘Leif Erikson’ as the first European in America.
When Melody is given access to a speech‐generating AAC device, she self‐advocates to correct a peer's description of her: ‘I'm not suffering’, she says, explaining how shehas, but does notsuffer from, CP.
Throughout the movie, Melody does whatever she enjoys when the environment meets her needs.
When people view Melody's fitness from a deficits‐focused, medical lens, her strengths and functioning usually go unrecognized.
School administrators and teachers describe Melody as having many ‘limitations’—she is nonspeaking and cannot navigate her environment without a power wheelchair or coordinate many fine motor tasks.
The movie juxtaposes these perspectives with Melody's own self‐perceptions, illustrating how the views of others are often what limit children with disabilities rather than anything inherent to theirFitness(Schiariti et al.2014; Shikako‐Thomas et al.2009).
Melody shares her many interests throughout the movie: playing, reading novels, learning about space and more.
What stood out as an example ofFunctioningwas Melody's journey to accessing AAC.
On a surface level, Melody's communication functioning improves as she progresses from low‐tech AAC options (e.g., spelling, pointing and using symbols) to accessing a speech‐generating device with which she can create sentences.
The movie culminates with Melody self‐advocating to her teacher and communicating independently.
Despite the feel‐good trajectory of Melody's communication, what struck me was how little any of it mattered for Melody in the absence of a supportive environment.
Before Melody used her speech‐generating device, she communicated by spelling, gestures and symbols—yet most people did not listen.
Melody spelled I‐C‐E‐L‐A‐N‐D to answer a teacher's question but was interrupted by him before she could finish her thought.
Melody's parents put her breakfast on top of her communication board and did not take the time to listen to her message when they were in a rush.
This is not to villainize her parents, who were strong and loving advocates for Melody, but to point out that often Melody's communication was not prioritized if others were too busy or overwhelmed to wait.
These examples, and more, illustrate the inextricable interaction between contextual factors and the functioning domains of the ICF and F‐words.
Focusing on functioning and activities is important, but it will fall short if we fail to consider how environmental factors like attitudes, physical environment, services, systems, policies and relationships (WHO2001) impact participation (van der Kemp et al.2021; Anaby et al.2013).
Families and service providers must be equipped with tools and resources to consider environmental factors and make modifications to help children with disabilities thrive.
Melody's ability to participate and make friends is also impacted by her environment.
Melody longs to form friendships with children her own age yet is limited when they choose activities that are inaccessible, ignore or tease her.
When Melody does develop a friendship with a classmate, it unfortunately crumbles when the classmate shares that she only befriended Melody because her mother promised her a gift.
Although Melody's integration into sixth grade is positive in many ways, it is also clear that Melody's most genuine friendships are with peers in her special education classroom.
Melody happily and authentically races down the street on Halloween with her friend Maria, a classmate with Down syndrome, and speaks of her as her close friend.
In addition to promoting inclusion, service providers cannot overlook clients' personal factors regarding who they would like to befriend or the impact of environmental factors onFriendships(Salmon2012).
We must embrace our roles as advocates to promote attitude changes in classrooms, workplaces and extracurricular activities to help create the conditions for participation andFriendshipto flourish.
The movie's first‐person narrative weaves Melody's personal factors into every scene to share her inner thoughts, preferences and motivations.
Melody certainly has a lot ofFun—she races down the street with her friends, splashes in the tub with her mom and plays dress up with her sister.
Yet, Melody's ability to haveFunand realize her personal goals is dependent upon the actions of others throughout the movie.
One example is Melody's desire to have a pair of sparkly, ‘cool’ shoes like her classmate.
When she goes to the shoe store with her father, she is limited to looking at orthopaedic shoes which only come in black.
It is evident that Melody's father and the store clerk were well intentioned, aiming to prioritize what Melody ‘needs’ from a medical perspective.
Yet, in doing so, they fail to prioritize what she wants and what isFun.
Do orthopaedic shoes matter more than Melody's choosing her own personal style?
How often do we select clothing that is easy to put on, rather than what a child wants to wear?
Both the F‐words andOut of My Mindare written from the child's perspective, challenging us to see the world through a child's eyes and considerFunjust as much as other ‘clinical’ goals.
Melody'sFamily's advocacy is what supports her to be integrated in a sixth‐grade classroom, join the trivia team, and advocate to have a communication assessment repeated.
The movie also does an excellent job of illustratingFamilydynamics, and how various perspectives shape parents' decision‐making (e.g., wanting Melody to gain independence, fear of judgement from others and fear of losing hard‐fought resources).
The impact of environmental factors on participation is again illustrated when Melody travels for her national trivia competition.
This scene takes place during the climax of the movie where Melody appears to be included after she wow's her classmates by winning a trivia competition and is ready to compete nationally.
In many children's movies, this positive moment would carry us through to the end, where Melody would win the national championship and be embraced by her classmates.
Yet the movie takes a different turn and instead paints a realistic picture of the environmental barriers that continue to limit (and ‘disable’) participation for Melody and children like her.
Melody finds out that the flight is cancelled and struggles to navigate physical barriers in the airport to reach her gate on time, missing her flight (e.g., out‐of‐order elevators and needing to be carried through security because her wheelchair is not permitted).
Melody was excluded from the all‐team airport breakfast due to her messy (yet functional) way of eating, which prevented her from travelling with everyone else.
When she returns to school, she learns that her school cut the piloted inclusion programme and that she is not permitted to join the sixth‐grade classroom anymore as they cannot provide the support she requires.
Despite Melody's strong motivation and capabilities, environmental barriers ultimately dictate Melody's participation andFuture.
Out of My Mindculminates with Melody self‐advocating to her teacher and demanding to be included in her sixth‐grade classroom, leaving viewers feeling excited for her advocacy‐filledFuture.
Although the movie ends on a positive note, I was left feeling worried about Melody'sFuture.
Without changes to school systems, the attitudes of peers and the support Melody receives, her ability to participate and reach her goals will remain limited.
The ‘F‐words’ focuses on strengths but does not view disability through rose‐coloured glasses.
No amount of self‐advocacy can ensure that Melody can get a job if employers hold prejudiced beliefs or if workplaces are physically inaccessible.
However, if enough people watch movies likeOut of My Mindand think using an ‘F‐words’ lens, we can create a different society—one in which children like Melody are included and appreciated for what that they add to the world.
If we continue to bring ‘F‐words’ ways of thinking to rehabilitation, medicine, education, social policies and more, we can create aFuturewhere all children reach their full potential.
I challenge everyone reading this reflection, whether you are an academic, clinician, parent, person with a disability or policy maker, to consider how you think to create the world we all deserve to live in.