Client satisfaction surveys present a chance to find out which services offered by a provider meet or exceed the expectations of clients, and therefore should be maintained, while services that fall short of expectations are identified for improvement.
The aims were to determine if correlations existed between dimensions of service quality (tangibles, reliability, responsiveness, assurance and empathy) and client satisfaction, find out which of 15 selected indicators of service delivery performance were significantly associated with client satisfaction and serve as predictors for satisfaction and determine client satisfaction indices for services rendered at a companion animal hospital.
A questionnaire, covering background information and indicators and dimensions of satisfaction, was administered to 208 respondents.
Data analyses involved proportions, mean scores, Cronbach reliability test, relative importance indices, correlations, multiple regressions and client satisfaction indices.
For indicators, the prediction equation was as follows: Overall satisfaction = −44.1 + 15.3 × Drugs availability.
For dimensions, the equation was as follows: Overall satisfaction (mean score) = 2.39 + 0.19 × Reliability mean score.
The customer satisfaction score was 97.5%, and the mean satisfaction rate was 84.3%.
The composite customer satisfaction score was also 84.3%.
The customer satisfaction index was 81.5%.
The study provides, for the first time, attributes considered by clients as contributing to satisfaction with veterinary services delivery for pets in Accra, Ghana.
Regression analyses revealed that for dimensions, the reliability mean score, and for indicators, the availability of drugs were the main predictors of overall satisfaction with services delivery.
Client satisfaction indices were very high.
The study reported on satisfaction indices and prediction models for dimensions and indicators of service quality for clients accessing services in a companion animal hospital in Ghana.
In general, client satisfaction indices were very high indicating good delivery performance.
Client satisfaction is critical if service providers are to attract new clients, retain existing clients and pursue and ensure clients’ loyalty (Rasyida et al.2016).
Client satisfaction may result in repeat use, loyalty and customer retention (Zairi2000).
Positive attitude towards a service is enhanced by customer satisfaction, resulting in a greater likelihood of further use (White2010), while dissatisfaction elicits negative attitudes towards a brand and less likelihood of continued use (Zhou2004).
A major factor identified as distinguishing between services and building competitive advantage in healthcare is service quality (Byju and Srinivasulu2014).
Poor quality of healthcare delivery by providers in health facilities may result in loss of clients, lives, revenue, material resources, morale, staff, recognition, trust and/or respect (Bannerman et al.2002), leading to dissatisfaction and apathy towards services affecting effectiveness and efficiency (Turkson 2008/2009).
Service quality had a positive effect on customer loyalty in veterinary clinics in San Miguel, Peru (Mathos2023).
Satisfaction surveys have been used to collect clients’ opinions, experiences and needs for services.
Client's perception of service quality needs to be identified to allow management to direct marketing efforts to ensure that expectations of clients are met (Rasyida et al.2016).
This entails identifying, prioritizing and improving weak service areas and ensuring that valuable resources are allocated to most effective areas.
Satisfaction is, often, a measure of client's perception of quality (Moreau2003).
Client satisfaction is defined as the level of satisfaction experienced by clients who used a service, and it reflects the gap between the expected service and the experience of the service from the client's point of view (Smith and Engelbrecht2001).
Measuring client satisfaction can help in ensuring a more stable satisfied clientele in a practice (Moreau2003).
Further, highly satisfied clients tend to feel that they have received high‐quality service, while disappointment with the quality of services results in dissatisfied clients (Moreau2003).
There are many ways of assessing client satisfaction.
One is SERVPERF, which is a modification of the SERVQUAL instrument.
SERVPERF is said to be effective in measuring the performance of service facilities, pointing out deficiencies needed to be improved (Chase et al.2001).
SERVPERF is reportedly a better scale than SERVQUAL (Babakus and Boller1992; Cronin and Taylor1992).
It is more efficient and explains greater variance in overall service quality (S. K. Jain and Gupta2004).
There is very little published information on satisfaction with delivery of pet veterinary services in Ghana.
Previous work had reported on satisfaction with delivery of veterinary services to mainly livestock owners including poultry in peri‐urban areas in Ghana (Turkson2008a,2008b,2009a,2009b,2010,2011).
This study fills in the gap by providing information on how clients perceive services rendered in a companion animal hospital in Accra, Ghana.
An objective of the study was to determine whether or not correlations existed between dimensions of service quality (tangibles, reliability, responsiveness, assurance and empathy) and client satisfaction and the extent and significance of such relationships.
A second objective was to find out which of 15 selected indicators of service delivery performance were significantly associated with client satisfaction and could be used in predicting overall client satisfaction with services delivered.
A third objective was to determine client satisfaction indices for services rendered at a companion animal hospital in Accra.
The study was done in the Small Animal Teaching Hospital in Accra, Ghana, used for clinical training of students in the School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Ghana.
It is the largest veterinary teaching and referral hospital in Ghana.
A questionnaire, similar to one used by Turkson (2008b) with slight modifications, was adopted.
The targeted respondents were clients accessing services provided by the hospital.
The inclusion criterion was clients who had attended the facility at least once before the date of the interview.
The exclusion criterion was all new clients of the facility; that is, clients who were coming to the facility for the very first time on the day of encounter.
The questionnaire administration, done by the second author only to ensure consistency, was from March to October 2023, but no data were collected in August 2023.
The total number of eligible clients was 564, out of which 208 (36.9%) were interviewed.
An electronic version of the questionnaire in Google Forms was administered to respondents in person who agreed to be interviewed during hospital visits with their animals.
Questionnaire administration took between 10 and 16 min (average 12 min).
Data were exported to Microsoft Excel sheets and analyzed using SPSS version 25.
Analyses involved proportions, percentages and mean scores (with standard deviations) and multiple regressions.
SERVPERF, a modification of SERVQUAL (a satisfaction survey instrument), was adopted for use (Byju and Srinivasulu2014; Dassanayake and Weerasiri2015; Rasyida et al.2016).
SERVPERF measures service quality.
Following A. Jain (2012), reliability was defined as the ability to deliver promises on time; responsiveness was the degree to which customers perceived service provider's readiness to assist promptly, and assurance was the degree of courtesy of service provider's workers and ability to communicate trust to customers.
Empathy was defined as care and importance given by the service provider to an individual customer, while tangibles was the evidence of facilities, personnel and communication materials used by the service provider in offering services to customers.
The unweighted SERVPERF was calculated as indicated inTurkson (2008/2009).
Cronbach's reliability test was used to check whether or not the respondents’ scores on any item statement were related to their scores on the others (Rasyida et al.2016).
The Cronbach alpha test was done using SPSS version 25 software to measure reliability or internal consistency within the dimensions and indicators tested.
The Relative Importance Index (RII) is a statistical measure used to determine the relative importance or contribution of independent variables in predicting a dependent variable (Rangith n.d.).
The RII is defined as a ‘non‐parametric technique used for analyzing structured questionnaire responses for data involving ordinal measurement of attitudes’ (Sakhare and Patil2019).
The RII was used to identify which dimensions or indicators were to be prioritized to achieve client satisfaction.
The performance of the veterinary service provider on each of the attributes or indicators as assessed by the clients was derived by transforming the Likert scale scores into the RII calculated as ∑W/(A×N), whereWwas weighting assigned to each variable by respondent,Awas the highest weight andNwas total number of respondents (Nuvey et al.2023).
The higher the RII value, the more important was the criterion.
The interpretation was as follows: High: 0.8<RII<1.0; High‐Medium: 0.6<RII<0.8; Medium: 0.4<RII<0.6; Medium‐Low: 0.2<RII<0.4 and Low: 0.0<RII<0.2 (Tarek et al.2022).
The RII was calculated in Excel.
To find the correlation between five dimensions of service quality (tangibles, reliability, responsiveness, assurance and empathy) and overall satisfaction, Spearman's rho test was used in SPSS.
The test was also done with the following 15 indicators: affordability of services, staff attitude, staff technical competence, quality of services, staff efficiency, staff effectiveness, accessibility of services, needs met, total time spent in facility, timeliness, service availability, availability of pet vaccinations, availability of drugs, charges for services and cost of drugs.
Cross tabulations were done for the dependent variable (Overall satisfaction) and the 15 independent variables.
Binomial logistic regression was used in SPSS to find a predictive formula for the dependent variable from the independent variables.
For this, the indicators were reclassified as follows: Service effectiveness/efficiency/quality/Staff attitude/competence: very poor/poor = 0; fair/good/very good = 1; Accessibility: very difficult/difficult = 0; fair/easy/very easy = 1; Timeliness: long/too long = 0; short/acceptable = 1; Service charges/Drug cost: expensive/very expensive = 0; fair/reasonable = 1; Service/drug/vaccination availability: unavailable/sometimes available = 0; available/always available = 1; Service affordability: unaffordable = 0; fairly affordable/affordable = 1; Meeting needs: poorly met/somehow met = 0; fairly met/met/very much met = 1; Total time spent: too long/long = 0; fair/reasonable = 1; Overall satisfaction: very dissatisfied/dissatisfied/somewhat satisfied = 0 and satisfied/very satisfied = 1.
Differences between satisfied and dissatisfied respondents were tested for significance by χ2test atα= 0.05.
To check for collinearity, pairs of the independent indicators were cross tabulated, and odds ratios (ORs) were calculated in SPSS version 25.
ORs above 10 were interpreted as showing strong collinearity; therefore, one of the pairs had to be dropped (Turkson2011).
Fishers’ exact test, Kappa statistic test and Mantel–Haenszelχ2test were used for statistical inferences.
Multiple regression analyses in stepwise mode were done in SPSS for the relationship between five independent dimensions of service quality and the dependent variable (overall satisfaction).
The average perception score of each dimension was used.
Similarly, stepwise Binomial logistic regressions were done for the dependent variable and the 15 independent indicators mentioned earlier.
Various satisfaction indices were calculated.
Client satisfaction rate (%), based on overall satisfaction, used the formula {(Customer's score/highest possible score) × 100} (Taylor2023).
The mean was calculated and reported.
Customer Satisfaction Score (CSAT) (%) was {(Total number of very satisfied or satisfied respondents/Total number of respondents) × 100}; and composite customer satisfaction score (proportion of satisfied customers) (%) = [(Sum of all scores/Total number of respondents) × 100] (Bishop2024).
Customer satisfaction index was calculated as [(Sum of each identified attribute/Total number of attributes) × 100] (Process Street n.d.).
CSI interpretations were as follows: 0%–40% = Very dissatisfied—extreme customer dissatisfaction; 40%–60% = Dissatisfied—customer dissatisfaction; 60%–75% = Hesitation—some problems in customer satisfaction; 75%–90% = Satisfied—few problems in customer satisfaction and 90%–100% = very satisfied—customer satisfaction (Wolniack and Skotnicka,2008).
Informed verbal consent was obtained from each respondent before the questionnaire was administered.
The questionnaire assured anonymity by not having any personal identifiers traceable to individuals apart from gender and age categories.
Permission for the study was obtained from the coordinator of the companion animal hospital.
No sampling frame was available, so purposive sampling technique was adopted which could have introduced some bias.
Some clients did not participate because they were in a hurry to leave, thereby reducing the number interviewed.
Clients attending only one veterinary facility, the Small Animal Teaching Hospital, School of Veterinary Medicine, were sampled, thereby limiting the generalizability of the findings from the study.
This hospital was chosen because it is the largest veterinary clinical facility for pets in Ghana and also because of time and resource constraints.
The sociodemographic characteristics of respondents were as follows: males 131 (63%), females 77 (37%); species brought: dogs 188 (90.4%) and cats 20 (9.6%).
The age groups were as follows: less than 20 years (n = 2, 1.0%); 20–29 years (n = 50, 24.0%); 30–39 years (n = 73, 35.1%); 40–49 years (n = 51, 24.5%); 50–59 years (n = 21, 10.1%) and 60 and above years (n = 11, 5.3%).
No significant differences were seen in overall satisfaction (satisfied vs. dissatisfied) on basis of gender of respondent (p= 0.39), species of animals brought (p= 0.60) or age group range of respondents (p= 0.87).
The results of the various analyses for the dimensions (tangibles, reliability, responsiveness, empathy and assurance) are presented in this section.
Table1provides the mean scores and RII for the parameters within the dimensions used.
Descriptive statistics and relative importance indices for various dimensions.
Abbreviations: RII, Relative Importance Index; SD, standard deviation.
The Unweighted SERVPERF was calculated to be 818.6, while the Average Weighted SERVPERF was 3.9 (out of 5).
Table2presents the mean scores, Cronbach's alpha values and the RII for the dimensions.
Abbreviations: RII, Relative Importance Index; SD, standard deviation.
The ANOVA results for the models generated are shown in Appendix1.
Table4shows the coefficients for the model equation.
Overall satisfaction (mean score) = 2.39 + 0.19 × Reliability mean score.
Overall satisfaction (mean score) = 2.88 + 1.00 × Reliability mean score–0.85 × Empathy mean score.
The second model had a variance inflation factor (VIF) of 11.68 for both reliability and empathy (Appendix2), indicating high collinearity, so one had to be dropped.
Appendix2provides the collinearity diagnostics for the two models.
The correlations between the various dimensions are shown in Appendix3.
The results of the various analyses involving the 15 indicators are presented in this section.
Table5gives the various proportions for the categories stated.
Proportions of respondents according to categories of response.
Table6gives the mean scores and RII for indicators evaluated.
Descriptive statistics and RII for indicators used (from highest to lowest RII).
Abbreviations: RII, Relative Importance Index; SD, standard deviation.
• Service affordability: Ability to pay for services.
• Staff attitude: Interpersonal relations shown by staff.
• Service quality: The degree to which service meets the client's expectations.
• Staff competence: Technical competence of staff (Knowledge, skills, and actual performance).
• Meeting needs: Meeting the needs of clients for veterinary services.
• Total time spent: Time from arrival to leaving the facility.
• Service availability: Services are provided when needed.
• Vaccinations availability: Availability of pet vaccinations.
• Drugs availability: Availability of veterinary drugs in hospital for sale to clients.
Table7provides values for comparison between satisfied and dissatisfied respondents using the various indicators.
Statistical values comparing satisfied and dissatisfied groups for various indicators tested.
The model summary was as follows: Cox and R square was 0.119 and Nagelkerke R Square was 0.584.
Table8provides information on logistic regression modelling done from the data collected.
Variable(s) entered on step 1: Gender, EffectP, EfficP, AccessP, CompetenceP, TimelyP, ChargesP, DrugsAvailP, DrugCostP, VaccinationP, AffordP, ServicesP, NeedsP and TimeSpentP.
The prediction model equation was as follows: Overall satisfaction = −44.1 + 15.3 × Drugs availability.
The CSAT was calculated as ((151 + 52)/208) × 100) to give 97.5%.
The mean satisfaction rate (calculated as stated in Section 2) was 84.3%.
The Composite Customer Satisfaction Score calculated as ((877/(5×208)) ×100) was also 84.3%.
The Customer Satisfaction Index was calculated to be 81.5%.
The major species seen at the hospital was dogs (90%), supporting an earlier finding (Turkson2023).
There were no differences in respondents’ satisfaction on the basis of gender, age group of respondents or the pet species kept, suggesting that these may have no influence on client satisfaction with delivery of pet services.
The Cronbach alpha value of 0.8 obtained for the dimensions portion (Table2) was above the threshold of 0.6 (Nagpal et al.2010), indicating that the questionnaire was reliable.
The lowest Cronbach's alpha value was for tangibles (0.537) and the highest was for assurance (0.984) (Table2).
In contrast, the lowest alpha value in a study in Sri Lanka was for assurance, while the highest was for empathy (Dassanayake and Weerasiri2015).
Apart from tangibles, all the other alpha values were above 0.7 (Table2), which is the threshold value for internal consistency (Dassanayake and Weerasiri2015).
Our results showed that tangibles had the lowest perception mean score (3.7), compared to the other factors (Table2).
Tangibles have been identified as one factor lacking in developing countries (Byju and Srinivasulu2014), requiring improvement.
Generally, the respondents in this study were satisfied with the other factors of service quality.
In a Sri Lankan veterinary hospital, the most important dimension for customer satisfaction was empathy, followed by responsiveness and assurance (Dassanayake and Weerasiri2015).
In our study, reliability, assurance and empathy had the highest RII (0.80), with tangibles having the least value (0.74) (Table2).
According to Ali et al. (2021), customers perceive reliability as the dominant service quality and suggested that improvements here could lead to customer loyalty.
Our study found reliability to be the only dimension in the prediction equation generated.
Reliability is reported to have a direct positive effect on customer satisfaction (Ngaliman, Mika Giofani Eka, and Suharto2019) and could create satisfaction for customers (Ahmed et al.2017; Rehman2012).
Responsiveness, empathy and tangibility had a significant impact on customer satisfaction in the health sector in India (Byju and Srinivasulu2014).
A regression model for overall satisfaction used only the reliability average perception score with tolerance and VIF both being 1 (Table4).
The reliability score explained 46% of the total variance in overall satisfaction.
The regression analysis suggested that the most important service dimension for significant changes in customer satisfaction was reliability.
A second regression model had reliability average perception score and empathy average perception score with tolerance and VIF being 0.086 and 11.683, respectively (Table4).
Tolerance and VIF values are used to check for multicollinearity (Dassanayake and Weerasiri2015).
Both reliability and empathy had VIF value above 5 (the threshold), indicating that the variables were highly correlated (Independent Media Associates Inc.,2024).
In such cases, the model's predictive power is not reduced, but the coefficients may not be significant statistically with a Type II error (CFI,2024).
Where VIF is above 10 or tolerance is lower than 0.1, there is significant multicollinearity that needs correction (CFI,2024).
The independent variables had tolerance values lower than the threshold value, and VIF was also above the threshold of 10.
These provided ample evidence of multicollinearity, leading to the rejection of the second model.
Table5shows a trend where the positive portions of the scales used had dominant proportions implying a positive skew.
Table6shows service affordability as the indicator with the highest RII (0.94), with drug costs and availability having the lowest, pointing to indicators that should be prioritized and targeted for client satisfaction.
Significant differences were seen in the proportions for satisfied and dissatisfied groups for effectiveness, efficiency and time spent in the Fisher, Spearman and Mantel–Haenzel tests (Table7).
In addition, there were significant differences in proportions for timeliness, drugs availability, pet vaccinations availability and meeting the needs of clients in the two groups in the Spearman test (Table7).
In the Mantel–Haenzel test, additional differences were seen in service accessibility, staff competence and service affordability (Table7).
These may serve as pointers to areas for improvement in client satisfaction.
Customer satisfaction produces a positive attitude, resulting in a greater likelihood of further use (White2010).
There were very high and significant correlations between the 15 indicators, implying strong multicollinearity.
The model correctly classified 98.6% of cases overall.
The regression model had only drug availability as the independent variable.
It was difficult to assign reasons for this finding.
The omnibus test of model coefficient had alpha value of 0.024, implying the model was significant.
Likewise, the Cox and Snell R square and the Nagelkerke R square values suggested that between 11.9% and 58.4% of the variance in the dependent variable was explained by the model.
The client satisfaction indices calculated in this study were very high (84%–98%), which is highly commendable.
A CSI score of 80% and above is said to be good (Process Street n.d.).
Factors affecting CSI include quality of the service, customer service, price and value and brand reputation (Process Street n.d.).
The hospital should take these into consideration, making every effort to improve and maintain these scores.
The study provides attributes considered by clients as contributing to satisfaction with veterinary services delivery for pets in Accra, Ghana.
Service affordability had the highest RII.
Client satisfaction was very high.
Regression analyses revealed reliability mean score for dimensions and availability of drugs for indicators as predictors of overall satisfaction with services delivery.
Future research directions should replicate the study in other veterinary facilities in Ghana and elsewhere in Africa, since this is the first published study of its kind, as far as the authors are aware.