Since research on the pathophysiology of psychiatric disorders diagnosed by symptoms has not succeeded, a data‐driven analysis incorporating biological and cross‐disease perspectives has been proposed.
We have reported a new subgroup of psychiatric disorders by a data‐driven analysis of subcortical volumes of brain MRI in 5602 subjects, including patients with psychiatric disorders and controls.
This subgroup of patients is characterized by enlarged ventricle and cognitive impairment (EVCI) with a high proportion of schizophrenia, electroencephalography abnormalities, and rare pathological copy number variations.
Of the nine patients with EVCI, eight patients had schizophrenia, and one patient had autism spectrum disorder.
Early onset of age was observed in eight patients with schizophrenia.
Treatment responses were poor in seven patients with schizophrenia, and two of three treatment‐resistant schizophrenia patients responded to clozapine.
Four patients showed ischemic changes in cerebral white matter.
In electroencephalography, abnormal findings were observed in five patients, borderline findings in two patients, and normal findings in two patients.
Rare pathogenic copy number variations were found in three patients (22q11.21 deletion, 7q11.23 duplication, and 7q36.2 deletion).
The results of this case series showed additional clinical features of treatment response and ischemic changes in cerebral white matter, which could be a clue to the treatment and diagnosis of EVCI.
This case series might help elucidate the pathophysiology of EVCI.
EVCI is a novel diagnosis of psychiatric disorders clearly defined by enlarged ventricles and cognitive impairment.
We report new clinical features.
EVCI revealed ischemic changes in cerebral white matter; treatment‐resistant schizophrenia patients responded to clozapine.
Diagnosis of psychiatric disorders has been conducted based on clinical symptoms diagnosed by interview.
However, one of the issues is that the results of biological and neuroscientific studies have not been reflected in the diagnostic criteria.
Therefore, data‐driven analyses incorporating biological and cross‐disease perspectives have recently been proposed, regardless of diagnostic category [1].
Through a data‐driven clustering study based on subcortical volumes of 5602 subjects, we found that patients with psychiatric disorders, including healthy subjects, can be classified into four brain biotypes related to cognitive/social functioning [2].
Subsequently, we stratified brain biotype one again by brain imaging (enlarged lateral ventricles: EV) and clinical features (cognitive impairment: CI) and found a new candidate diagnostic classification, EVCI, which includes a high proportion of patients with psychotic symptoms such as hallucinations and delusions, electroencephalography (EEG) abnormalities, and rare pathological gene copy number variations (CNV) [3].
The association between EV and CI has been reported in schizophrenia [4,5,6,7], and more recently, it was reported in the first episode of schizophrenia [8], which is gaining attention regarding EVCI.
This report presents a detailed case report of these nine patients with EVCI.
All the subjects were recruited at Osaka University Hospital.
In our previous work, we reported details of methods such as neuroimaging data analysis, definition of EVCI, evaluation of EEG, and CNV analysis [3].
For detailed clinical information, medical records were retrospectively examined.
The Table1summarizes the clinical features of patients with EVCI, such as age, gender, diagnosis, response to medication, ischemic changes in cerebral white matter, EEG findings, and rare pathogenic CNV.
Other detailed clinical features are shown in the TableS1.
Clinical history was described in each patient as follows.
Clinical features of patients with enlarged ventricles and cognitive impairment (EVCI).
Patient 1 was a 52‐year‐old woman with schizophrenia.
She has no specific developmental abnormalities.
She had typical characteristics of schizophrenia with hallucinations and delusions at the age of 19 and had been hospitalized 10 times.
She was diagnosed with treatment‐resistant schizophrenia (TRS) and was treated with clozapine.
During clozapine treatment, she had convulsive seizures.
Patient 2 was a 29‐year‐old male with schizophrenia.
He has no specific developmental abnormalities.
He dropped out of college and never held a job.
When he was 19 years old, he developed hallucinations and delusions, which were typical characteristics of schizophrenia, and he had been hospitalized eight times.
He was diagnosed with TRS and was treated with clozapine.
Patient 3 was a 46‐year‐old woman with schizophrenia.
She had no specific developmental abnormalities.
After graduating from high school, she worked for 18 years as a part‐time worker.
She was diagnosed at the age of 24 with hallucinations and delusions, typical characteristics of schizophrenia, and has been hospitalized three times.
She has a history of emergency hospitalization for a pelvic fracture sustained when she jumped off a building following an auditory hallucination that she was going to die.
She was diagnosed with TRS but was not treated with clozapine.
Patient 4 was a 23‐year‐old female with schizophrenia.
She had no specific developmental abnormalities.
She has a cleft palate and had surgery at age 10.
She has typical characteristics of schizophrenia with hallucinations and delusions at the age of 18 and has no history of hospitalization.
Patient 5 was a 24‐year‐old female with schizophrenia.
She had language delays and did not do well in school.
She was diagnosed at the age of 21 with hallucinations and delusions, with typical features of schizophrenia and no history of hospitalization.
Patient 6 was a 30‐year‐old male with schizophrenia.
He was born as a fraternal twin with no specific developmental abnormalities.
He was diagnosed at the age of 23 with hallucinations and delusions, which are typical of schizophrenia, and has been hospitalized once for 6 months.
Patient 7 was a 20‐year‐old male with schizophrenia.
There are no specific abnormalities in his development.
He did not attend school from the eighth grade to the first year of high school and then transferred to a distance‐learning high school to graduate from the second year of high school.
He has never worked.
When he was 13 years old, he was diagnosed with paranoia and has been hospitalized three times.
He was treated with 20 mg/day of olanzapine.
Patient 8 was a 21‐year‐old male with schizophrenia.
At age 10, he had epileptiform seizures, which resulted in tremors of the hands and difficulty breathing.
Six months later, convulsive seizures also appeared when he sat on the toilet due to diarrhea and abdominal pain.
EEG and brain MRI showed no abnormalities, and epilepsy was not finally diagnosed.
He had been working for 6 months after graduating from high school, stopped going to school at age 15, was diagnosed with depression, and visited the hospital intermittently.
At 18 years old, he had a similar seizure.
When he was tapped on the shoulder at age 19, he had a convulsive seizure for 1–2 min with rigidity of the whole body, followed by a hyperventilation attack for 1–2 min.
He also felt breathlessness when he awoke in the middle of the night.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and EEG showed no abnormality.
At the same time, he felt dizzy in the morning, always had a heavy head, felt tired, had difficulty motivating himself, had insomnia, and had short‐term amnesia.
He forgot what he had forgotten.
He also complained of anxiety, fear, auditory hallucinations, stiffness, and twitching around the lips and was hospitalized.
Even when preparing overdue rent and utility bills, he would forget them; sometimes, they were not in his consciousness.
Forgetfulness became noticeable.
Patient 9 was a 39‐year‐old male with autism spectrum disorder.
His maternal aunt committed suicide.
Since childhood, he has been obsessive, collectivistic, unable to understand the feelings and intentions of others, and has recognized social communication difficulties.
When he was 15 years old, he was placed in a foster home for 1 year and 3 months after being placed in the care of a child welfare center for 1 month after a dispute with his family.
After entering high school 1 year late, he graduated from college and started working.
From the age of 31, he began to collect newspaper articles about baseball, turning his room into a garbage dump.
At the age of 38, he was first examined by a psychiatrist after he was caught by the police stealing newspapers from a newsstand.
He was diagnosed and treated for schizophrenia, but the diagnosis was changed to autism spectrum disorder after he visited our clinic.
We first reported details of the clinical characteristics of individual patients with EVCI.
Four of the nine patients observed ischemic changes in the cerebral white matter, such as white matter hyperintensities.
The 52‐year‐old woman (Patient 1) had diabetes mellitus, and the 43‐year‐old woman (Patient 3) had hypertension and hyperlipidemia, which were risk factors for white matter hyperintensities [9].
On the other hand, the 29‐year‐old man (Patient 2) and the 23‐year‐old woman (Patient 4) had none of the risk factors.
White matter hyperintensities might suggest a high incidence in EVCI, which is in line with the contribution of white matter hyperintensities to lateral ventricle volume growth [9].
Eight cases were clinically inadequate responses to medication.
Three cases that were able to evaluate treatment resistance were TRS, and two cases that were treated with clozapine responded.
The other four patients with schizophrenia had inadequate responses to antipsychotic medication and could not evaluate the treatment resistance from the history of medication in their medical records.
One patient with schizophrenia had a good response to olanzapine.
TRS is reported to account for about 30% of schizophrenia [10], and TRS has a higher response rate when clozapine is initiated early in the treatment process [11].
These findings might suggest that EVCI includes a high proportion of highly clozapine‐responsive TRS, as EVCI might be helpful as a biological marker of clozapine response.
A new biomarker, like EVCI, is warranted to guide patient selection, evaluate target engagement in clinical trials, and improve understanding of the mechanisms underlying different psychiatric symptom domains.
It will provide insight into the transdiagnostic nature of their neurobiology and, thus, the potential for overlapping treatments [12].
Cognitive dysfunction is observed in EVCI, with particularly poor delayed recall of the Wechsler Memory Scale, and Patient 8 had subjective memory complaints.
Genetic model mice of 22q11.21 deletions found in Patient 4 and 7q36.2 (DPP6) deletions found in Patient 8 showed memory impairments [13,14].
These two different mouse models showed a common feature of synaptic abnormality related to memory dysfunction, indicating the possibility of synaptic pathology in EVCI.
Other features of EVCI include relatively early onset (13–24 years of age) of hallucinations/delusions.
However, few cases had a clear family history or developmental abnormalities and no common comorbidities.
The high prevalence of pathogenic rare CNV in EVCI suggests a background of de novo pathogenic rare variants that begin to form in adolescence.
Other than the clinical features of enlarged ventricles and cognitive impairment, we did not find any common clinical features across the cohort.
Because the number of patients with EVCI in this report is minimal, the results may change as the number of patients increases.
This case series might help elucidate the pathophysiology of EVCI.