Keloids, benign skin tumors due to connective tissue overgrowth, can be exacerbated by ubiquitin-proteasome system abnormalities through uncontrolled inflammation.
This study aimed to use Mendelian randomization (MR) analysis to explore keloid pathogenesis and identify target drugs for treatment.
The single-nucleotide polymorphism identifiers of keloid were obtained from the Open Genome-Wide Association Study database, and ubiquitin-related genes from GeneCards database.
Five techniques were used for MR analysis during the research, with the accuracy of MR results evaluated by sensitivity analysis.
Then, the R software package coloc was used for colocalization analysis of ubiquitin-related genes and keloid.
Subsequently, the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database was used to predict skin complications related to keloid-associated target genes.
Also, the Drug-Gene Interaction Database was used to study potential target drugs for target genes, and the mechanism of drug inhibition of keloid formation was explored using the DrugBank, Therapeutic Target Database, and STRING databases.
IFNGR1 and RNF187 were significant risk factors for keloid formation.
A causal relationship exists between IFNGR1 and chronic skin ulcers (a keloid complication).
Moreover, indole-3-carbinol, interferon gamma-1b, and pretomanid (targeting IFNGR1) are potential keloid treatments.
Tretinoin can affect the IFNGR1 protein via the AKT1 pathway, inhibiting keloid proliferation.
IFNGR1 was associated with the pathogenesis of keloids.
Interferon gamma-1b targeting IFNGR1 might be a potential strategy for the treatment of keloids, and this discovery opened up a new direction for the treatment of keloids.
Findings:The ubiquitination gene IFNGR1 is associated with the pathogenesis of keloids, and interferon gamma-1b targeting IFNGR1 may serve as a potential therapeutic approach for keloid treatment, warranting further in-depth investigation.
Meaning:Currently, treatment for keloids mainly includes options such as surgery, laser therapy, and corticosteroid injections.
However, an exciting possibility for future treatments is the use of oral medications that can help adjust the immune system to prevent keloid formation.
A keloid is a benign fibrous disease caused by excessive proliferation of fibroblasts and excessive precipitation of extracellular matrix during wound healing.1Despite the emergence of novel pathogenesis hypotheses in recent years, there remains a paucity of Mendelian randomization (MR) studies investigating the etiology of keloids.
Furthermore, the current treatment strategies for keloids are limited.
For instance, fluorouracil is contraindicated for pregnant women and children, and there is a high likelihood of scar recurrence following simple surgical resection.2,3In addition, the mechanism of hormone therapy for keloid is still uncertain, and the general view is that it inhibits scar hyperplasia by inhibiting the inflammatory response mechanism.4However, whether there are target molecules in keloid is one of the issues that needs further discussion.
The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is the principal pathway for intracellular protein degradation, involving ubiquitin, ubiquitin-activating enzyme, ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, ubiquitin ligase, proteasome, and their substrate proteins, and it plays a crucial role in the degradation of more than 80% of cellular proteins.5–7However, despite its established functions, the involvement of UPS in keloid formation remains unexplored.
Based on current research findings, we hypothesize that the UPS may be implicated during wound healing processes, leading to excessive ubiquitination of nonessential proteins.
This could promote fibrosis and extracellular matrix accumulation, ultimately resulting in keloid formation.8,9Furthermore, given the pivotal role of inflammatory response in skin wound healing processes, it is plausible that UPS may be closely associated with this aspect as well.10,11Any abnormalities within the UPS might lead to uncontrolled inflammatory responses, further exacerbating keloid formation.
In the investigation of disease causation through randomized controlled studies, a significant challenge lies in distinguishing a genuine causal variable from one that may have side effects on both the variable and the outcome, potentially leading to erroneous conclusions.
Although randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are widely regarded as the benchmark for establishing causal relationships, practical limitations such as resource constraints and ethical complexities make RCT execution extremely demanding.
In this context, Mendelian studies using Mendel’s second law of independent assortment present an alternative approach for clinical RCT investigations.
MR is a genetic instrumental variable (IV) analysis that usually uses single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from a genome-wide association study (GWAS) as genetic instruments to estimate the causal effect of an exposure on an outcome.12This study will use MR analysis to explore the causal relationship of UPS-related genes to keloids and search for potential drugs for keloid treatment.
The flow of this study is shown in Supplemental Digital Content 1.
(See table, Supplemental Digital Content 1, which displays a flowchart for exploring the pathogenesis of keloids and identifying therapeutic target drugs,https://links.lww.com/PRSGO/E236.)
The GWAS IDs for keloid bbj-a-131 (East Asian population) and ebi-a-GCST90018874 (European population) were sourced from the Integrative Epidemiology Unit Open GWAS database (https://gwas.mrcieu.ac.uk/).
The dataset of bbj-a-131 had 8,885,805 SNPs from 212,453 samples.
The dataset of ebi-a-GCST90018874 contained 481,912 samples with 241,972,210 SNPs.
With “ubiquitin proteasome system” as the search keyword and a relevance score greater than 10 as the filtering criterion, the GeneCards database (http://www.genecards.org/) yielded 2494 ubiquitin-proteasome system genes (UPSGs), which were then analyzed as the exposure factors of MR analysis.
Subsequently, the two-sample MR (TSMR) method using extract_instruments (v 0.5.6)13was implemented to identify SNPs (IVs) strongly associated with exposure factors (P< 5 × 10−8).
TSMR was applied to remove IVs with linkage disequilibrium (clump = TRUE,r2= 0.001, and kb = 10000).
The 3 underlying hypotheses that formed the basis of the MR investigation were as follows: (1) exposure factors and IVs have a significant and noteworthy relationship; (2) confounders have no effect on IVs; and (3) IVs can only affect outcomes through exposure factors.
To investigate the association between UPSGs and keloids, we used TSMR analysis.
Harmonization of effect alleles and effect sizes was performed using the harmonise-data function from the R package TwoSampleMR (v 0.5.7).
There were 5 strategies used to investigate TSMR (inverse variance weighted [IVW],14weighted median,15MR Egger,16simple mode, and weighted mode).
ThePvalue for IVW was less than 0.05, demonstrating that UPSGs and keloids have a substantial causal association.
The odds ratios (ORs) were calculated, with values greater than 1 denoting risk factors and values less than 1 representing safety factors.
Scattered plots, forest plots, and funnel plots were created to display the results.
Sensitivity analysis was carried out via tests for heterogeneity,17horizontal pleiotropy,18and leave-one-out (LOO) to evaluate the reliability of MR analysis results.
Steiger analysis was used to determine whether IVs were influencing outcomes through exposure factors.
First, the variance explained by IVs was computed independently against significant UPSGs and keloids, and the direction was considered correct if the variance explained for keloids was less than that for significant UPSGs.
Afterward, we used the directionality_test and harmonise_data functions from the R package TwoSampleMR to run the Steiger directionality test on the UPSGs that were causally connected to keloids.
If the correct causal direction of UPSGs was true and the SteigerPvalue was less than 0.05, the IVs passed the Steiger test.
Taking similar keloid datasets (hypertrophic scar [finn-b-L12_HYPETROPHICSCAR], scar conditions and fibrosis of skin [ukb-d-L12_SCARCONDITIONS], and diagnoses (main ICD10: L90.5 scar conditions and fibrosis of skin [ukb-b-11403]) as an outcome, IFNGR1 (eqtl-a-ENSG00000027697) and RNF187 (eqtl-a-ENSG00000168159) as exposure factors, through the R package TwoSampleMR function harmonise-data, harmonize the effect allele and effect size.
At the same time, we used the MR function combined with 5 algorithms for the analysis of TSMR to verify the feasibility of positive targets in the rest of the dataset.
Validation was also performed using the ebi-a-GCST90018874 dataset.
To uncover possible drugs for the treatment of keloids that act, we integrated the Drug-Gene Interaction Database (DGIDB,https://dgidb.org/) and the GeneCard database (https://www.genecards.org/) to predict drugs associated with positive targets.
The mechanism of triamcinolone inhibiting keloid formation was explored using the DrugBank database (https://go.drugbank.com/), Therapeutic Target Database (https://db.idrblab.net/ttd/), and STRING database (https://cn.string-db.org/).
Simultaneously, we also used the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (https://ctdbase.org/) to investigate the skin disorders linked to the positive targets.
Finally, the predicted diseases were searched in the GWAS database, and MR analysis was carried out with positive targets as exposure factors and the predicted diseases as outcomes.
The GeneCards database was searched using the keyword “ubiquitin-proteasome system” to identify exposure factors with a relevance score greater than 10 to retrieve 2494 genes associated with the UPS for this study.
We conducted MR analysis of the ubiquitination genes (exposure factor) and keloids (outcome) to find out if there is a causal relationship between them.
Upon completing MR analysis on UPSGs and keloids independently, we found that 75 UPSGs had a substantial causal relationship with keloids (IVW,P< 0.05).
(See table, Supplemental Digital Content 2, which displays 75 UPSGs (exposure) that had a substantial causal relationship with keloids (outcome),https://links.lww.com/PRSGO/E237.)
Then, we used the R package to perform Steiger analysis on 75 genes with a causal association with keloids.
The IVs of all 75 UPSGs impacted gene expression before keloids, according to reverse validation by Steiger analysis.
(See table, Supplemental Digital Content 3, which displays the Steiger analysis of the IVs of all 75 UPSGs,https://links.lww.com/PRSGO/E238.)
The results indicate that IVs first affect gene expression and then affect the occurrence of keloids.
The results of Mendelian analysis of IFNGR1 and RNF187 in relation to keloids.
Colocalization analysis results indicated that IFNGR1 and RNF187 were significantly correlated with the chained intervals of chromosome 6 137450000-137600000 (A) and chromosome 1 228500000-228650000 (B), respectively.
The SNP effect map shows that IFNGR1 (C) and RNF187 (D) are risk factors for keloids.
The IVW method shows that IFNGR1 (E) and RNF187 (F) are harmful factors for keloids.
The randomness of IFNGR1 and RNF187 was judged by funnel plots (G and H).
LOO analysis.
All IFNGR1 (A) and RNF187 (B) SNPS are on the right, indicating that after excluding a single SNP, the overall error line does not change much, and the results are reliable.
Association of IFNGR1 and RNF187 with dermatologic pathologies and therapeutic agents.
A, A total of 11 skin disease types (including skin tumors, skin abnormalities, skin ulcers, and skin infections) related to the IFNGR1 and RNF187 were searched.
B, Three IFNGR1 target drugs (indole-3-carbindol, interferon gamma-1b, and pretomanid) verified by wet experiments.
We have previously performed immune cell sequencing for keloids, and the results suggest that T immune cells are activated abnormally in keloid patients.22Therefore, developing drugs to regulate immune function may be one of the future treatment directions for keloids.
We predicted potential drug targets for keloids by using the DGIDB (https://dgidb.org/) and the GeneCard database (https://www.genecards.org/) to find potential drugs for treating keloids.
We found 3 gene targets with wet laboratory validation for IFNGR1.
Three medications, including indole-3-carbindol, interferon gamma-1b, and pretomanid, were identified as potential treatments targeting IFNGR1 (Fig.3B).
After identifying potential new therapeutic drugs, we aim to investigate the relationship between IFNGR1 and current mainstream treatment methods for keloids.
Currently, steroid-based drugs such as triamcinolone are the primary treatment for keloids, with widely recognized effectiveness.
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the significant therapeutic effect of glucocorticoids in keloid treatment require further exploration.
The association between IFNGR1 and keloid glucocorticoid treatment was explored.
The main functional pathways of triamcinolone include regulation of nuclear SMAD2/3 signaling, signaling events mediated by HDAC Class II, FOXA2 and FOXA3 transcription factor networks, glucocorticoid receptor regulatory network, regulation of androgen receptor activity, and the AP-1 transcription factor network.
Combining the information on IFNGR1 from the GeneCard database, we believe that the success of triamcinolone acetonide in inhibiting the excessive proliferation of keloid fibroblasts may also be due to its effect on the keloid pathogenesis gene IFNGR1 through the AKT signaling pathway.
In this study, we propose the following hypothesis: Do ubiquitinated proteins involved in inflammation and immune regulation contribute to the pathogenesis of keloids?
Through the MR analysis, we found that IFNGR1 not only has a causal relationship with keloids, but also has a causal relationship with chronic skin ulcers and scar formation.
Considering the correlation between scar formation and keloid, and the fact that repeatedly ruptured keloid scars would also form persistent skin ulcers in the later stages, we suggest that IFNGR1 may not only be related to the pathogenesis of keloids, but also play a role in the development of keloids.
Interferon (IFN) has been demonstrated to play a promotive role in pulmonary fibrosis and liver fibrosis, and has been confirmed to enhance fibroblast proliferation and increase the expression of the key fibrotic protein α-SMA in the skin fibrosis disease, multiple sclerosis.23Previous studies have proved that IFN-γ can inhibit the proliferation of keloid fibroblasts.24Further, clinical trials of IFN- γ injections for keloid lesion by Broker et al25showed a decrease in keloid lesion size.
This suggests that IFN-γ has the potential to become an established treatment for keloids.
However, based on our Mendelian study, we hypothesize that further investigation into therapeutic strategies targeting the IFN-γ receptor IFNGR1 molecule, which is believed to be implicated in keloid formation, may offer a more promising outlook.
IFNGR1 functions as a signal receptor for IFN-γ.
The biological activity of interferon-gamma depends on the IFN receptor complex, composed of the ligand-binding chain (IFNGR1) and the accessory chain (IFNGR2).
Upon ligand binding, phosphorylation occurs at the IFNG receptor, leading to the opening of its intracellular domain and activation of downstream signaling pathways such as JAK1/JAK2 and STAT1/STAT2.26,27No reports have been found in the literature regarding the relationship between IFNGR1 and keloid formation.
This article is also the first to propose that IFNGR1 may be a pathogenic factor in keloids.
Given the essential role of IFNGR1 in IFNG function, we hypothesize that their roles are interconnected in driving the excessive proliferation of keloid fibroblasts.
Combined with DGIDB and previous literature reports, we have found that interferon gamma-1b targeting IFNGR1 is the most promising drug for keloid treatment, and interferon gamma-1b is a clinically established treatment for pulmonary fibrosis.28Triamcinolone is one of the common treatments for keloids, and its mechanism involves inhibiting the formation of keloids by inhibiting inflammatory cell infiltration in keloids,4but whether there is a specific biological target of triamcinolone in the process of inhibiting keloid formation remains unclear.
As more studies focus on the role of protein molecules in the pathogenesis of keloids, molecularly targeted treatments for keloids are expected to emerge, which can effectively avoid the side effects caused by the use of hormones.
In this study, we conducted data mining through various databases and predicted that triamcinolone may affect keloid inflammatory cell infiltration by mediating the JAK1 pathway, thus inhibiting keloid proliferation.
Additionally, we found the ubiquitination-related protein RNF187.
However, the conclusion of this study based on MR still needs to be further verified by molecular biology experiments.
The conclusions of MR can be influenced by various factors,29,30so it is important to acknowledge that the association between IFNGR1 and keloid pathogenesis may be affected by biological complexity.
Therefore, further validation of this conclusion is necessary.
Furthermore, Mendelian studies should meticulously take into account potential biases such as population stratification that might result in unreliable conclusions.31In this study, the GWAS data primarily came from Asian and European populations; therefore, caution is required when generalizing these findings to a broader population due to variations in genetic backgrounds.
The authors have no financial interest to declare in relation to the content of this article.
This work was supported by the Upper Respiratory Disease Innovation and Transformation Platform Construction Project of Guangdong Province and the High-level Construction Project of Guangzhou Medical University.