Genomic selection (GS) models that include trait markers as covariates enhance predictive abilities for cooking and edible quality in rice.
Multi‐trait genomic selection models improved predictive abilities for grain milling, cooking, and edible quality in rice.
Rice quality is evaluated based on both extrinsic and intrinsic characteristics such as appearance, cooking, and sensory attributes (Cuevas et al.,2016).
FLAR's Grain Quality Lab has created and applied methods to assess grain quality, focusing on three key components: shape and appearance, milling efficiency, and cooking and eating qualities.
Grain shape and appearance, determined by length and width, are key breeding targets, as they play a crucial role in classifying rice into the market categories “short,” “medium,” and “long” types (Webb,1991).
Slender or “long” types have a length‐to‐width ratio of three and above and are preferred by most consumers worldwide (Calingacion et al.,2014).
Due to its importance, a substantial body of research has been done to underpin and characterize the genetic factors contributing to grain length and width.
The locusGS3(Grain Size 3) is a major gene for grain size in rice, which has also been under strong selection pressure during domestication.
It is a major grain length (GL) and weight gene that explains 80%–90% of the variation (Fan et al.,2006).
WhileGW2andGW5(where GW is grain width) are major genes controlling GW (Song et al.,2007; Weng et al.,2008).GS3is also a minor gene for width and thickness (Fan et al.,2006).
BothGS3andGW2are negative regulators and have been well characterized (Rasheed et al.,2022).
Functional markers are developed for theseGS3,GW2, andGW5genes for marker‐assisted selection for grain size (C. Wang et al.,2011; L. Zhang et al.,2020).
In addition to molecular markers, recent advancements in imaging technologies have enabled high‐throughput methods for measuring morphological traits in rice grains, including length/width ratio, perimeter, and area, among others (Santos et al.,2019; F. Zhu et al.,2021).
Milling efficiency refers to the rice grain's capacity to endure the dehulling and polishing processes without breaking.
Head rice recovery (HRR) or the percentage of unbroken milled rice to unhulled rice is a crucial component in rice's final yield and value (Samantara et al.,2023).
The evaluation of HRR is labor‐intensive, destructive, and requires a large number of grains.
HRR is negatively correlated with GL and positively correlated with GW (Cruz et al.,2021; L. Zhou et al.,2015).
HRR is also negatively affected by grain chalkiness (Y. Li et al.,2014).
Chalkiness is the opaque portions found in an otherwise translucent rice endosperm due to incomplete accumulation of starch and protein (Lin et al.,2016).
The proportion of chalkiness found in the grain's belly is known as white‐belly rice kernel (WBRK) (Y. Li et al.,2014).
High WBRK results in more broken polished grains, reducing HRR values (L. Zhou et al.,2015).
Environmental factors like high humidity and temperature during grain filling and maturity, often associated with delayed rice harvest, can worsen WBRK and lower milling quality (X. Zhang et al.,2014).
Various automated image‐based methods for quantifying WBRK proportions in rice have been developed, offering higher accuracy and lower labor costs compared to manual inspection techniques (Santos et al.,2019; Wang et al.,2022).
Rice's physical and chemical characteristics help determine its cooking and eating qualities.
Amylose content (AC) and gelatinization temperature (GT) are the most common traits used by rice breeding programs to ascertain rice texture and cooking properties (Pang et al.,2016).
AC is the primary factor influencing the texture of cooked rice, determining whether it will be soft, firm, or in‐between.
Rice varieties with high AC are firm, dry, and fluffy when cooked, while low AC varieties result in a soft, moist, and sticky texture (Karim et al.,2024).
Due to its importance, AC has long been determined in breeding programs using the colorimetric iodine method.
Recently, near‐infrared (NIR) spectroscopy has emerged as a non‐destructive, cost‐effective, and efficient method for estimating AC in rice (Lino et al.,2024).
Additionally, great progress has been achieved in understanding the genetic factors underlying AC.
TheWaxy(Wx) gene on chromosome six encodes granule‐bound starch synthase, responsible for the synthesis of amylose in the endosperm (Sano,1984).Wxgenes have been cloned and studied in cultivated subspeciesjaponicaandindica(Z. Wang et al.,1990; Z.‐Y.
Wang et al.,1994), and wild riceOryza glaberrima(Umeda et al.,1991) andO.
sativaL.f.
spontaneaDongxiang (Z.‐Y.
Wang et al.,1994).
AC is influenced by the post‐transcriptional regulation of theWxgene (Z. Wang et al.,1995).
Thus, quantitative trait (QTL) mapping and GWAS studies across different genetic backgrounds have often identifiedWxgenes or genomic regions closely linked with AC and affecting overall rice cooking and eating quality (Amarawathi et al.,2008; Huang et al.,2010; Tan et al.,1999; Tian et al.,2005).
TheWxlocus is highly diverse, and at least eightWxalleles have been identified that affect AC (L. Zhang et al.,2021).
Major genetic factors influencing AC are well understood, with different haplotypes of theWxgene accounting for the majority of the phenotypic variation in AC (Chen et al.,2008; Cruz et al.,2021; Z. Li et al.,2003).
TheseWxhaplotypes are commonly utilized in marker‐assisted selection strategies across multiple rice breeding programs (Chen et al.,2010; Cruz et al.,2021; Jeazet Dongho Epse Mackon et al.,2022).
GT dictates the cooking time for rice and is defined as the temperature at which rice absorbs water and starch granules undergo irreversible swelling.
Based on GT, rice cultivars are categorized as “low,” “intermediate,” and “high.” Rice with a “low” GT requires less cooking time compared to “high” GT varieties (Waters et al.,2006).
GT in rice is controlled by alkali degenerate locus in chromosome 6, encodingstarch synthase IIa(SSIIa) gene (Bao et al.,2004; Umemoto & Aoki,2005; Umemoto et al.,2002).
Substitution in the coding sequence ofSSIIaaltered GT (Gao et al.,2003).
Different isoforms of starch synthase (SSgenes) have been identified and cloned in rice (Jiang et al.,2004).
Functional markers are commonly employed in marker‐assisted selection to distinguish between “low” and “high” GT rice genotypes.
(Bao et al.,2006; Cruz et al.,2021; Lu et al.,2010).
“Rice with low,” “intermediate,” and “high” GT shows complete, partial, and no disintegration or alkali‐spread when treated with an alkali solution of 1.7% potassium hydroxide, KOH.
The alkali‐spread method is commonly used to indirectly assess GT, as it is easily quantifiable and strongly correlated with GT (Mariotti et al.,2010).
Along with AC and GT, the pasting properties of starch, which reflect the transition of the starch granules from swelling to breakdown during cooking, are closely linked to the eating quality of cooked rice (L. Zhu et al.,2020).
Rapid visco analyzer (RVA) instruments are cooking stirring viscometer with ramped temperature and variable shear profiles optimized for testing starch pasting properties such as breakdown viscosity (BDv), final viscosity (FV), setback viscosity (SBv), peak time viscosity (PkT), and pasting temperature (PsT).
These properties reflect the stability of the rice during cooking.
For example, BDv and SBv are strongly correlated with gel consistency, softness, and favorable sensory qualities of cooked rice (Pang et al.,2016).
Typically, high BDv values indicate better gel consistency, while low SBv values are associated with softness and improved sensory qualities (Pang et al.,2016).
Creating RVA profiles is time‐intensive, expensive, and necessitates specialized equipment.
Several studies have found strong phenotypic and genetic correlations between pasting properties, AC, and GT (Cruz et al.,2021; Pang et al.,2016).
Genomic selection (GS) models that include trait markers as covariates enhance predictive abilities for cooking and edible quality in rice.
Multi‐trait genomic selection models improved predictive abilities for grain milling, cooking, and edible quality in rice.
To date, breeding for grain quality attributes has primarily depended on phenotypic selection.
However, molecular‐based approaches like marker‐assisted selection (MAS) and genomic selection (GS) present opportunities to enhance breeding efficiency, increase selection intensity, and reduce the duration of breeding cycles for grain quality (Hayes et al.,2017; Liu et al.,2019).
In our previous study, Cruz et al. (2021), identified four functional markers, three located in theWxand one in theSSIIagene, that were significantly associated with seven grain cooking quality and viscosity traits, including AC, GT, BDv, FV, SBv, PkT, and PsT.
These functional markers were validated in FLAR's breeding germplasm, and we developed an MAS strategy to be integrated during the rapid generation advancement stages of FLAR's breeding programs.
Additionally, we conducted cross‐validation analyses to evaluate the predictive abilities of four different univariate GS models for 10 quality traits, laying the groundwork for effective GS strategies for grain quality in breeding programs across Latin America and the Caribbean.
In this study, our goal was to build upon our previous findings and improve our initial GS predictive abilities by incorporating trait marker covariates (MC) and highly heritable, high‐throughput secondary traits in multi‐trait genomic selection (MT‐GS) strategies (Jia & Jannink,2012).
In recent years, MT‐GS approaches have been recognized as an effective method to improve the predictive ability for key primary traits (Arojju et al.,2020).
Multi‐trait genomic selection has been applied in rice breeding to improve grain yield (Anilkumar et al.,2024), trace grain nutrient content (Muvunyi et al.,2022), arsenic tolerance (Ahmadi et al.,2021), wheat breeding to improve yield GS predictive abilities using high‐throughput phenotyping vegetation indices as secondary traits (Rutkoski et al.,2016; Sun et al.,2017) and enhance end‐use quality traits using nuclear magnetic resonance as correlated traits (Hayes et al.,2017); and more recently to improve milling quality traits in oats using secondary morphological grain traits (Dhakal et al.,2024).
To achieve our goal, the specific objectives of this study were to (i) integrate easy‐to‐phenotype, routinely measure grain quality traits into MT‐GS schemes for cooking and milling quality attributes, and compare their predictive ability with single‐trait (ST) models; (ii) incorporate marker traits as covariates in GS for cooking quality attributes and assess their predictive ability against ST models; and (iii) combine easy‐to‐phenotype grain quality traits with MC in MT‐GS schemes for cooking quality attributes and evaluate their predictive ability in comparison to ST models.
For this study, we utilized a set of 295 rice lines that were phenotyped and genotyped in our previous research by Cruz et al. (2021). This germplasm includes 17 years (1999–2015) of breeding materials from the FLAR.
These lines were selected to capture the phenotypic diversity in early vigor, flowering time, resistance to blast and “hoja‐blanca‐virus,” WBRK, AC, head‐rice‐recovery, and yield within the indica rice germplasm from Latin America and the Caribbean.
More information on these lines is provided in Supporting Information1.
The 295 rice accessions were evaluated at two field stations managed by the Alliance Bioversity International—CIAT (International Center for Tropical Agriculture) (https://alliancebioversityciat.org/) and the Colombian National Rice Federation (FEDEARROZ).
The stations were located at Palmira and Santa Rosa, Colombia.
Detailed information on the field stations can be found in Cruz et al. (2021). Trials at Palmira were grown during two seasons: the first, from March to the end of June, and the second semester, from August to the end of November, of 2016.
The trials were managed under fully irrigated conditions, with rows established through transplantation using five plants or hills per linear meter.
Palmira is considered an optimal site to evaluate rice lines' yield potential, milling, and cooking quality.
Trials conducted in Santa Rosa were planted in the first semesters of 2016 and 2017 under upland conditions, with rows established using direct seeding.
Santa Rosa is a “hot‐spot” site to evaluate disease resistance and abiotic stresses for rice production and WBRK due to its high humidity and temperature.
Trials in Palmira were used to measure the quality traits AC, GT expressed as alkali‐spread values GT, BDv, FV, SBv, PkT, PsT, GL, GW, grain length‐to‐width ratio (GLWR), and head‐rice‐recovery when harvested at optimal and delayed dates (optimal head rice recovery [OHRR] and delayed head rice recovery [DHRR]).
Trials conducted in Santa Rosa were used to measure WBRK.
In all trials, an Alpha Lattice experimental design with three replications was used to evaluate rice lines (Patterson et al.,1978).
In Palmira, plots had three rows spaced 0.3 m from each other with 10 hills on each row spaced 0.2 m, for a total plot area of two m2.
Grains from each plot were harvested at between 20% and 24% moisture content from eight hills located in the mid‐row to avoid border effect.
Harvested paddy grains were dehulled and polished using a small Satake rice mill (https://satake‐usa.com/).
The traits GL, GW, GLWR, and WBRK were determined using milled grain images and the software ImageJ (https://imagej.net/ij/).
Photographs were taken on 1.3 g of milled whole grains over a blue background in homogeneous light conditions (Santos et al.,2019).
ImageJ was used to process the images and estimate GL on the major axis and GW on the minor axis of each grain and then averaged to generate a single GL and GW value scaled in mm (Santos et al.,2019).
The composed trait GLWR was calculated as:GLWR=GLGW.
Grain WBRK is the presence of non‐translucent areas in the belly of the grain endosperm.
To calculate WBRK from milled grain images, the total grain area (TGA) and the grain total translucent area (TTA) were estimated and used in the equationWBRK=1−TTATGA, with WBRK as the percentage of the TGA that is not translucent.
The apparent AC in grain was evaluated using a near‐infrared spectroscopy (NIR) protocol.
Samples were prepared by drying them to 13% moisture content with an SKS‐480 Grain Dryer (Suncue Company Ltd.,https://suncue.en.taiwantrade.com/).
About 6 g of milled rice from each sample was ground using a Cyclotec CT 293 mill (https://www.fishersci.com/shop/products/ct‐293‐cyclotec‐115v‐60hz/12053116) to obtain powder particle sizes <0.05 mm.
The NIR system FOSS NIR 6500 (https://www.fossanalytics.com/en) was used to measure AC.
The equipment was calibrated according to the apparent AC method, AACC Method 61‐03.01 (http://methods.aaccnet.org/summaries/61‐03‐01.aspx).
As described in Cruz et al. (2021), the NIR chemometric model was developed using 1793 rice samples ranging from 13% to 33% AC.
The calibration curve was built by regressing AC values determined using the potassium iodine colorimetric protocol (Graham,2002) with the NIR reference values scanned in rice flour.
The final NIR model for AC was described asY= 0.9732,X− 0.00015 and showed a coefficient of correlation (RSQ) = 0.97, standard error of calibration (SEC) = 0.95, standard error of cross validation (SECV) = 0.96, coefficient of determination (1 − VR) = 0.94, and standard deviation (SD) = 6.3.
Finally, the standard error prediction (SEP) of the calibration model was estimated to be 1.57.
This methodology has been routinely used to estimate AC in FLAR's Grain Quality Lab.
For each sample, 5 g of flour was loaded in a circular sample cup and pressed slightly to obtain a similar packing density.
Sample spectra were collected continuously over a wavelength range between 400 and 2500 nm using the software ISIScan.
Spectra data were converted into a percentage of AC in rice starch for each sample.
The rice starch quality trait GT was measured using the proxy methodology by alkali spreading or digestion test reported by Graham (2002) and routinely used by the rice breeding program (Butardo et al.,2019).
The degree of spreading value (called the alkali spreading value) of individual milled rice kernels in a weak alkali solution (1.7% KOH) is highly inversely correlated with GT.
Rice with low GT disintegrates completely, showing higher spreading values, whereas rice with an intermediate GT shows partial disintegration, and rice with high GT remains largely unaffected in the alkali solution with low spreading values.
A duplicate set of six whole‐milled kernels was selected and treated with 10 mL of 1.7% KOH solution.
The samples were then arranged to provide enough space between kernels to allow for spreading.
Samples were incubated for 23 h in a 30°C oven.
Treated rice samples were scored visually using a scale of 1–7, with 1 representing high and 7, low, GT.
Standard low, intermediate, and high GT check varieties are included in every test (Graham,2002).
The starch pasting properties BDv, FV, SBv, PkT, and PsT were measured using a Perten's RVA 4500‐instrument (https://www.perkinelmer.com/corporate/perten).
For each analyzed sample, 3 g of rice flour using a 0.5 mm screen was diluted in 25 g of distilled water.
The AACC Method 61‐02.01 (https://www.cerealsgrains.org/resources/Methods/Pages/61Rice.aspx) was used to determine gelatinization and paste viscosity properties in rice flour.
Each sample was mixed at 960 RPM for 10 s to make a homogeneous solution.
After 10 s, the RPM was reduced to 160, which was maintained until the end of the run.
In each run the sample slurry was heated from 50°C to 95°C at a heating rate of 12°C/min.
The hot paste was held at 95°C for 2.5 min and then cooled down to 50°C at a cooling rate of 12°C/min.
RVA curves were registered, and the values for BDv, FV, Sbv, PkT, and PsT of starch measured in Rapid Viscosity Centipoise Units (cP) were extracted from curves using Thermocline for Windows v11.2 software.
The milling quality traits OHRR and DHRR were determined using the protocol developed by Berrío et al. (2002). First, rice paddy from each sample was harvested at around 18% moisture content for each genotype and was dried down to 13%.
Two subsamples were taken from dried paddy rice to measure OHRR and DHRR, respectively.
For OHRR, 100 g of paddy rice were dehulled and polished using a small Satake rice mill and McGill #2 Mill polisher (Rapsco, Brookshire).
Whole grains were separated using the rice milled and weighed in grams.
The percentage in weight of whole grains recovered from the original paddy sample was used to determine the head‐rice‐recovery values.
To determine DHRR, delayed harvesting conditions were recreated using a modified tub that contains 72 samples, water, and airflow compartments that simulate field conditions where the grains undergo rewetting after optimal drying (Berrío et al.,2002).
In each simulation batch, 72 samples of 115 g of paddy rice were placed in individual sample chambers.
The samples were then submerged in 0.4 m3of water at a constant temperature of 25°C for 2 h. Water was drained, and the air is pumped with a fan for 18.75 h at a temperature of 26°C.
After this treatment, the air temperature was raised using a heating system to 29°C for 2.25 h to decrease samples moisture content to 12%.
Samples were then transferred into paper envelopes and stored at room temperature for 10–12 days.
After this time, 100 g of each sample was used to determine HRR values and expressed as DHRR.
All 295 lines were genotyped using the 1K‐rice custom amplicon (1k‐RiCA) assay, as described in Arbelaez et al. (2019). Genomic DNA was obtained from the leaf tissue of single plants collected at CIAT.
DNA extraction, genotyping, and single‐nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) calling were done using the genotyping services of AgriPlex GENOMICS (https://agriplexgenomics.com/) at Cleveland, OH.
Their proprietary platform PlexSeqTM was adapted to create the 1k‐RiCA.v2.
A custom SNP‐calling pipeline developed by AgriPlex GENOMICS was used to assign variants on the 1k‐RiCA amplicons through alignment to the Nipponbare rice genome MSU7 version (Kawahara et al.,2013).
The original set of 975 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) was filters and SNPs with minor allele frequency ≤ 0.01, heterozygous calls ≥ 10%, and call rate ≤ 75% were removed using custom scripts written in R (R Core Team) and deposited in GitHub (https://github.com/jdavelez/1k‐RiCA‐geno‐filters/blob/master/jdavelez_1k‐RiCA.R) (Arbelaez et al.,2019).
The final filtered SNP data of 955 markers was formatted in a single data frame with markers in rows and samples in columns (Cruz et al.,2021).
To prepare the marker data for all GS cross validations, the genotypic data set coded as dinucleotide genotypes was formatted to numerical genotypes reflecting allele dosage either as 0, 1, and 2, using the R function “geno_to_allelecnt”.
The formatted numerical genotypes can be found in the Supporting Information1.
Here,yi,j,kis the phenotype observations,μis the overall mean,giis the effect of a genotype considered random with a normal distributionsN(0,σG2)without considering the additive relationship matrix as the variance‐covariance matrix andivarying from 1 to 295 for 295 genotypes,βjis the fixed effect of season, withjranging from 1 to 2 for two different seasons,sj(i)is the random effect of the genotype by season interaction effect with a normal distributionN(0,σS2),rk(i,j)is the random effect of the replication (or block) within a season for each genotype, withkranging from 1 to 3 for three different replications and a normal distributionN(0,σR2), andεi,j,kis the residual considered as random and following a normal distributionN(0,σE2).
Normality on residuals was visually checked for each trait using histograms andQ–Q‐plots (Supporting Information2).
Broad sense heritability,H2, was calculated for each trait using the formula of Hallauer et al. (2010):H2=σg2σg2+σe2.
Genotypes were assumed independent and identical distributed for estimatingH2.
Variance components were calculated from the previously described linear mixed model usingasremlusing the residual maximum likelihood estimation, or RMEL, method.
Every cross‐validation analysis for AC, GT, BDv, FV, PkT, PsT, SDv, GL, GW, GLWR, WBRK, OHRR, and DHRR was done using BLUEs effects calculated for all grain quality traits on each line (Supporting Information1).
The BLUE values were estimated using the same model described to calculate broad‐sense heritability, but instead of treating genotypes as random, they were treated as a fixed effect.
Phenotypic correlations between traits were estimated using BLUEs and the r functioncor()and their significance with the functioncor.test().
Genetic correlations between grain quality traits were estimated using a multivariate mixed model analysis inasreml(ASReml‐R Version 4 ASReml; Butler et al.,2023).
Each multivariate mixed model was defined in the function’asreml()by specifying a matrix of traits as the fixed effects formula's response.
Internallyasremlexpands the data frame by repeating each row by the number of traits such that the traits are nested within each experimental unit as described by ASReml‐R‐Reference‐Manual‐4 (https://asreml.kb.vsni.co.uk/).
The modely=Xβ+Zu+e, wherey=(y′1,y′2,…,y′d)′,u=(u′1,u′2,…,u′d)′, ande=(e′1,e′2,…,e′d)′, andyis the response vector ofdtraits (grain quality traits described above),Xis a design matrix for fixed effectsβthat included the grand mean and the trial‐season for each trait, andZis a design matrix for random genetic effectsu.
Following a multivariate normal distribution(Nm), the marginal density ofyis:(y|β,R,G)∼Nm(Xβ,V),andV=Z(G⊗K)ZT+(R⊗I).
The matricesGandRaredxdsymmetric unstructured genomic error covariance matrices respectively,Iis an identity matrix,Kremains the additive genomic relationship matrix calculated using the numerical genotype matrix for the VIOFLAR Informative Panel lines and the functionA.matfrom the R packagerrBLUP(Endelman,2011), andeis the residual withe∼N(0,σe2I).
The error structure was specified as two‐dimensional, with independent units and unstructured variance.
The results from each analysis were visualized using the R packageggplot2(Wickham,2016).
Single or MT GS models were performed using BLUEs and genome‐wide marker information.
The software ASReml‐R version 4 (Butler et al.,2023) in R (R Core Team, 2022) was used for the single‐ and MT GS models with and without MC.
Each model performance was evaluated using a fivefold cross‐validation approach independently replicated five times.k‐folds and replications used in this study were saved in Supporting Information1.
where,yis vector of BLUEs for a single trait,μis the vector of overall mean for trait,Zis the incidence matrix for the genotypic effect,gis the vector of additive genotypic effect∼N(0,Kσg2),ris the residual error vectors∼N(0,Iσe2),Kis the relationship matrix among the lines,σg2is the additive genotypic variance,Iis the identity matrix, andσe2is the error variance.
When MC were included, we used the following model:y=μ+βm+Zg+e, withβmrepresenting the trait markers as fixed effects.
As a marker covariate, we used either WX‐set, a group of three functional markers (WX‐INT, WX‐A‐GROUP, and WX‐A‐RC222) targetingWxgenes in chromosome 6 or SSIIa‐3B that targets the geneSSIIain chromosome 6.
The following model was used in the MT‐GS (MT):y=μ+Zg+ewhere y is a vector of BLUEs for traits (n×t;ngenotypes andttraits),μis the means of traits (vector of lengthn × t), Z is the incidence matrix for the genomic effect of the lines,gis the a vector of predicted genetic values of the individuals for all traits with𝐠 ∼ MVN(𝟎, 𝚺 ⊗ 𝐊), e is a vector of residuals with 𝐞 ∼ MVN(0, 𝐑 ⊗ 𝐼), K is the realized additive relationship matrix among individuals estimated from the markers, ⊗ is Kronecker product of two matrices, Σ and R are the unstructured variance—covariance matrices for the genetic and residual effects between traits, respectively, andIis the identity matrix.
When we incorporated marker as covariates (MC‐MT), we included them as fixed effects like previously defined in Section2.4.3.1.
After eachk‐fold was run in either ST, MC, MT, or MC‐MT models, predictivity ability was calculated as the Pearson correlation between the genomic estimated breeding values (GEBVs) and respective BLUEs (Supporting Information1).
The percentage increase or decrease in predictive ability between models was calculated as:%Increase=((TestModel)−ST)ST×100.
WithTest Modelbeing either the average predictive ability of MC, MT, or MC‐MT and ST the average predictive ability of the ST model.
A phenotypic summary and distribution for each trait analyzed in this study were presented in Table1and Figure1.
All traits except for gelatinization temperature (GT) showed normal distributions (Figure 1).
GT showed a left‐skewed distribution with residuals normally distributed.
Broad‐sense heritability estimates (H2) for each trait evaluated across two seasons and two locations varied from 0.47 to 0.85, with a mean of 0.63 (Table1).
On average, the selected secondary traits GL, GW, GLWR, WBRK, AC, and GT had an averageH2of 0.7 with a range of 0.53–0.85.
The primary traits for cooking quality, including BDv, FV, SBv, PkT, and PsT, along with milling quality traits such as OHRR and DHRR, had an averageH2of 0.57, ranging from 0.46 to 0.7 (Table1).
Phenotypic correlations and their significance among grain quality traits.
Phenotypic distributions (diagonal), correlations and significance (p‐value < 0.05, upper diagonal), and scatter plots between (bottom diagonal) for amylose content (AC), gelatinization temperature (GT), breakdown viscosity (BDv), final viscosity (FV), setback viscosity (SBv), peak time viscosity (PkT), pasting temperature (PsT), grain length (GL), grain width (GW), grain length to width ratio (GLWR), white belly rice kernel (WBRK), optimal head rice recovery (OHRR), and delay head rice recovery (DHRR).
The phenotypic and genetic correlations between grain quality traits were summarized in TableS1and Figure1.
The observed genetic correlations between the 13 grain quality traits ranged from −0.79 to 0.82 (TableS1), while the phenotypic correlation ranged from −0.77 to 0.83 (TableS1; Figure1).
Significant (p‐value < 0.05) positive and negative correlations were observed between AC and the primary traits: BDv (−0.64), FV (−0.46), SBv (0.75), PkT (0.3), and DHRR (−0.22).
For GT, significant correlations were found with BDv (−0.38), SBv (0.22), PkT (0.36), PsT (0.53), and OHRR (0.19).
The morphometric trait GL showed negative correlations with OHRR (−0.32) and DHRR (−0.15), while GW was positively correlated with FV (0.13), PkT (0.17), and OHRR (0.35) and negatively correlated with PsT (−0.19).
WBRK was significantly correlated with FV (0.17), PsT (−0.47), and DHRR (−0.28) (Figure1).
A neighbor‐joining tree, estimated using the genetic correlation matrix, identified three trait clusters based on their similarities.
The first group included AC, GT, FV, PkT, PsT, and SBv; the second comprised GL and GLWR; and the third contained GW, WBRK, BDv, OHRR, and DHRR (FigureS1).
Cross‐validation analysis for ST, ST including trait MC, MT, and MT including trait marker covariates (MC‐MT) was summarized in Figure2and Table2.
Cross‐validation analysis of grain quality genomic selection (GS).
Boxplots summarizing the fivefold cross‐validation analysis, replicated five independent times, for the following traits: grain length (GL), grain width (GW), grain length‐to‐width ratio (GLWR), white belly rice kernel (WBRK), amylose content (AC), gelatinization temperature (GT), breakdown viscosity (BDv), final viscosity (FV), setback viscosity (SBv), peak time viscosity (PkT), pasting temperature (PsT), optimal head rice recovery (OHRR), and delayed head rice recovery (DHRR).
The analysis includes four different genomic selection models: single‐trait (ST), single trait with trait marker covariates (MC), multi‐trait (MT), and multi‐trait with trait marker covariates (MC‐MT).
Grain quality genomic selection (GS) cross‐validation analysis.
Note: Boxplots summarizing the results of fivefold cross‐validation, replicated five times independently, for 13 grain quality traits: GL (grain length), GW (grain width), GLWR (grain length to width ratio), WBRK (white belly rice kernel), AC (amylose content), GT (gelatinization temperature), BDv (breakdown viscosity), FV (final viscosity), SBv (setback viscosity), PkT (peak time viscosity), PsT (pasting temperature), OHRR (optimal head rice recovery), and DHRR (delay head rice recovery).
The analysis was conducted using four distinct genomic selection models: Single‐trait (ST), single‐trait with trait marker covariates (MC), multi‐trait (MT), and multi‐trait with trait marker covariates (MC‐MT).
Predictive abilities for the ST models ranged from 0.39 to 0.68, with an average of 0.52.
For AC and GT, we observed predictive abilities of 0.53 and 0.57, respectively.
Among the primary cooking quality traits BDv, FV, SBv, PkT, and PsT, we observed predictive abilities of 0.46, 0.65, 0.59, 0.43, and 0.46, respectively.
For the primary milling quality traits, OHRR had a predictive ability of 0.39, while DHRR had a predictive ability 0.52 (Table2; Figure2).
For AC, three functional markers, WX‐INT, WX‐A‐GROUP, and WX‐A‐RC222, that targetWxgene in chromosome 6 were collectively referred to as the WX set and included as covariates in an ST genomic selection model (AC‐MC).
The mean predictive ability for AC‐MC was 0.77 (Table2; Figure2), representing a 48% improvement over the ST model (AC‐ST) (Table3).
For GT, we incorporated a functional trait marker known as SSIIa‐3B that targets the geneSSIIain chromosome 6, into an ST genomic selection model (GT‐MC), yielding a mean predictive ability of 0.88 (Table2; Figure2).
This is a 60% increase compared to the ST‐model (GT‐ST) (Table3).
Percentage differences in genomic predictive abilities between single‐trait (ST), marker covariates (MC), multi‐trait (MT), and MC‐MT for grain quality traits.
Note: The percentage increase in predictive ability for models incorporating marker covariates (MC), multi‐trait (MT), and multi‐trait with marker covariates (MC‐MT) relative to the single‐trait (ST) models for AC (amylose content), GT (gelatinization temperature), BDv (breakdown viscosity), FV (final viscosity), SBv (setback viscosity), PkT (peak time viscosity), PsT (pasting temperature), OHRR (optimal head rice recovery), and DHRR (delay head rice recovery).
For the cooking quality traits, BDv, FV, SBv, and PkT, three markers from the WX set were incorporated as covariates in the ST genomic selection models BDv‐MC, FV‐MC, SBv‐MC, and PkT‐MC (Table2; Figure2).
The inclusion of markers resulted in improved predictive abilities across all models.
For BDv‐MC, we observed a mean predictive ability of 0.65 (Table2; Figure2), reflecting a 41% increase compared to the reference ST model (BDv‐ST) (Table3).
For FV‐MC, the predictive ability was 0.79 (Figure2; Table2), which is a 21.5% improvement over the ST model (FV‐ST) (Table3).
For SBv‐MC, the predictive ability was 0.77 (Figure2; Table2), an increase of 30.5% compared to the ST model (SBv‐ST) (Table3).
For PkT‐MC, the predictive ability was 0.62 (Figure2; Table2), representing a 44.1% increase over the ST model (PkT‐ST) (Table3).
Finally, for PsT, we included the functional trait marker SSIIa‐3B in the ST genomic selection model (PsT‐MC), resulting in a mean predictive ability of 0.62 (Table2; Figure2), a 34.7% improvement compared to the reference ST model (Table3).
For each primary cooking and milling quality trait, we incorporated a combination of secondary traits, AC, GT, GL, GW, GLWR, and WBRK, into the MT‐GS based on their significant correlations with the primary traits observed in Figure1.
Including secondary traits consistently improved GS predictive abilities by 4.6%–50% compared to the ST models.
For BDv, when we included AC and GT (BDv‐MT), we observed a predictive ability of 0.69 (Figure2; Table2), representing a 50% increase compared to the ST model (Table3).
For FV, with the inclusion of AC, GW, and WBRK (FV‐MT), the predictive ability was 0.68 (Figure2; Table2), a 4.6% improvement over the ST model (Table3).
For SBv, when we included AC, GT, and WBRK (SBv‐MT), the predictive ability increased to 0.77 (Figure2; Table2), reflecting a 30.5% increase compared to the ST model (Table3).
For PkT, when we included AC, GT, and GW (PkT‐MT), the predictive ability was 0.52 (Figure2; Table2), an improvement of 21% over the ST model (Table3).
For PsT, with the inclusion of GT, GW, and WBRK (PsT‐MT), the predictive ability was 0.65 (Figure2; Table2), a 41.3% increase compared to the ST model (Table3).
For the milling quality OHRR, including GT, GL, and GW (OHRR‐MT) resulted in a predictive ability of 0.46 (Figure2; Table2), an 18% increase over the ST model (Table3).
Finally, for DHRR, when we included AC, GL, WBRK, and OHRR (DHRR‐MT), we observed a predictive ability of 0.59 (Figure2; Table2), a 13.46% improvement compared to the ST model (Table3).
For the cooking quality traits, BDv, FV, SBv, PkT, and PsT, we incorporated two secondary traits (AC, GT, GL, GW, GLWR, and WBRK), selected based on their higher observed correlation with each primary trait, along with the functional markers WX or SSIIa‐3B identified in previous GWAS analysis (Cruz et al.,2021, FigureS2), into an MT‐GS model with trait markers as covariates (MC‐MT) (Figure1; Table2).
Including secondary traits and trait markers in genomic selection models for cooking quality resulted in improvements in predictive abilities ranging from 6.15% to 55.81% compared to the ST models.
Notably, for PkT, the inclusion of trait markers as covariates enhanced its predictive ability beyond that observed in the MT model.
For the other traits, predictive abilities were either slightly reduced or comparable to the MT model.
For BDv, the MC‐MT model achieved a predictive ability of 0.64 (BDv‐MC‐MT) (Figure2; Table2), an increase of 39.13% compared to the ST model (Table3).
For FV, the MC‐MT model showed a predictive ability of 0.69 (FV‐MC‐MT) (Figure2; Table2), an increase of 6.15% compared to ST (Table3).
For SBv, the MC‐MT model achieved a predictive ability of 0.76 (SBv‐MC‐MT) (Figure2; Table2), reflecting a 28.3% increase compared to ST (Table3).
For PkT, the MC‐MT model yielded a predictive ability of 0.67 (PkT‐MC‐MT) (Figure2; Table2), an improvement of 55.81% compared to ST, and 28% compared to MT (Table3).
Finally, for PsT, the MC‐MT model had a predictive ability of 0.63 (PsT‐MC‐MT) (Figure2; Table2), showing a 37% increase compared to the ST model (Table3).
Grain appearance, milling, cooking, and eating quality are key breeding objectives for rice breeding programs.
At FLAR, grain quality profiles generated with traits such as AC, GT, BDv, FV, SBv, peak time viscosity (PkT), PsT, GL, GW, GLWR, WBRK, OHRR, and DHRR are utilized by scientists to develop cultivars tailored for diverse markets across Latin America and the Caribbean.
For instance, in the tropical region, FLAR aims to develop new varieties with AC ≥ 26.5%, GT ≥ 5, BDv ≤ 800 mPa/s, SBv ≥ 1600 mPa/s, GLWR ≥ 3.2, WBRK ≤ 7.08%, and OHRR ≥ 60%.
Genetically, the architectures of these grain quality traits range from simple (such as AC, GT, GL, and GW) to highly complex (such as OHRR and DHRR) (Zhao et al.,2022; H. Zhou et al.,2020).
As we showed in Figure1, these traits also exhibit varying degrees of genetic relationships, spanning from strong negative (AC and BDv; and WBRK and DHRR) to strong positive correlations (GT and PsT; and AC and SBv) (Al‐Daej,2022; Cruz et al.,2021; Pokhrel et al.,2020).
Several of these traits, including OHRR, DHRR, BDv, and SBv, are labor‐intensive, destructive, and require large sample sizes and specialized equipment.
As a result, primary milling and cooking traits are typically evaluated only in the later stages of the breeding pipeline (Aoun et al.,2022).
Frequently, advanced breeding lines with excellent agronomic characteristics do not meet milling and quality standards, preventing them from being released as varieties (Battenfield et al.,2016).
Therefore, it is crucial to assess and select breeding lines earlier in the breeding process to avoid such setbacks.
Molecular‐based selection methods, such as MAS or GS, offer a valuable solution by enabling earlier advancement and parental selection, thereby significantly improving breeding efficiency.
In this study, we test how incorporating MC and easy‐to‐phenotype secondary traits in different GS models could improve predictive accuracies for primary grain milling and cooking quality traits.
Incorporating molecular markers tagging major genes or QTLs as fixed effects in GS models can improve predictive ability in wheat stem rust (Rutkoski et al.,2014),capsaicinoidcontent in Capsicum (Kim et al.,2022), and rice plant height and flowering time (Spindel et al.,2016).
Bernardo (2014) proposed that if the QTL explains >10% of the genetic variation, it could be incorporated into GS models and potentially increase the predictive ability.
When we included WX or SSIIa‐3B markers as fixed effects (MC models), we observed a substantial increase in predictive ability for our secondary cooking traits, AC and GT, ranging from 48% to 60% (Figure2; Table3), and our primary cooking traits, BDv, FV, SBv, PkT, and PsT, ranging from 21.5% to 44% (Figure2; Table3).
Previous results showed that WX and SSIIa‐3B explained 60% and 75% of the phenotypic variability for AC (Cruz et al.,2021; Dobo et al.,2010; Teng et al.,2017) and GT (Cruz et al.,2021; Umemoto & Aoki,2005; Umemoto et al.,2004).
These same markers were also significant in our GWAS results for BDv, FV, SBv, PkT, and PsT (FigureS2) for AC and GT.
Although our GWAS identified additional SNPs asscociated with our primary and secondary traits, we selected the functional trait markers as covariates because the additional peaks were located within the same linkage blocks as the functional SNPs.
Our results strongly suggest that FLAR will significantly benefit by incorporating WX and SSIIa‐3B markers as covariates in the GS approach to improve rice cooking quality.
In this study, we observed strong and significant phenotypic and genotypic correlations between secondary grain quality traits, AC, GT, GL, GW, GLWR, and WBRK, with primary milling, OHRR and DHRR, as well as primary cooking traits, BDv, FV, SBv, PkT, and PsT, quality traits (Figure1).
These correlations offer a valuable opportunity to enhance rice milling and cooking quality through an MT‐GS approach (Jia & Jannink,2012).
When compared to ST GS models, MT‐GS has demonstrated improvements in predictive abilities across various crops, including resistance toFusariumin wheat (Gaire et al.,2022), malting quality in barley (Bhatta et al.,2020), baking quality in wheat (Gill et al.,2023), milling quality in oats (Dhakal et al.,2024), and trace elements in rice (Muvunyi et al.,2022).
MT‐GS is particularly effective when secondary traits are highly heritable, cost‐effective, and easy to phenotype on a large scale compared to primary traits (Okeke et al.,2017; Schulthess et al.,2016).
Our secondary traits exhibited relatively high broad‐sense heritability's (Table1) and were assessed using grain imaging (GL, GW, GLWR, and WBRK), near‐infrared spectroscopy (AC), and the standard alkali spread digestion test (GT).
These methods require only small grain samples (no >6 g) and can be evaluated at any stage of FLAR's breeding program, making them ideal for integrating into MT‐GS to improve the predictive abilities for primary milling and cooking quality traits.
Compared to ST models, the inclusion of secondary traits in MT‐GS models led to an increase in predictive abilities for milling quality traits, with improvements of 13.5% for OHRR and 18% for DHHR, relative to their ST counterparts (Figure2; Table3).
For primary cooking traits, BDv, FV, SBv, PkT, and PsT, MT‐GS models resulted in predictive ability increases of 50%, 4.6%, 30.5%, 21%, and 41.3%, respectively (Figure2; Table3).
The smaller increase observed for FV can be attributed to the already high predictive ability in its ST model.
To further assess the impact of trait MC, we tested whether adding WX or SSIIa‐3B MC, in addition to secondary traits, could improve the predictive ability of primary cooking trait MT‐GS models (MC‐MT).
Our results showed that the predictive abilities of the MC‐MT models were similar to those of the corresponding MT models, except for PkT, where MC‐MT showed a greater improvement (Figure2; Table3).
For all primary cooking traits, AC, GT, or both were the traits most highly correlated with the primary traits.
The similarities between the MT and MC‐MT models suggest that AC and GT phenotypes provided similar predictive information as their respective trait markers, WX and SSIIa‐3B.
The improvement in prediction accuracy for PkT may be due to the addition of a covariate into the MT‐GS model when secondary traits exhibited moderate correlations (0.30 and 0.34) with the primary trait.
Overall, our study demonstrates the feasibility of incorporating whole‐genome markers, trait markers, and secondary trait information to enhance the predictive ability of GS for grain milling, cooking, and eating qualities in rice.
For milling quality, we suggest using MT models, while for cooking quality, either MC or MT models should be considered.
These insights can help guide rice breeding programs in developing new strategies to rapidly meet global quality demands.