Cochlear outer hair cells (OHCs) are electromotile and implicated in amplification of responses to sound that enhance sound sensitivity and frequency tuning.
They send afferent information through glutamatergic synapses onto type II spiral ganglion neurons (SGNs).
These synapses are weaker than those from cochlear inner hair cells onto type I SGN, suggesting that type II SGNs respond only to intense sound levels.
OHCs also receive efferent innervation from medial olivocochlear (MOC) neurons.
MOC neurons are cholinergic yet inhibit OHCs due to the functional coupling of alpha9/alpha10 nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) to calcium-activated SK potassium channels.
The resulting hyperpolarization reduces OHC activity-evoked electromotility and is implicated in cochlear gain control, protection against acoustic trauma, and attention.
MOC neurons also label for markers of GABA and GABA synthesis.
GABABautoreceptor (GABABR) activation on MOC terminals has been demonstrated to reduce ACh release, confirming important negative feedback roles.
However, the full complement of GABAergic activity in the cochlea is not currently understood, including mechanisms of GABA release from MOC axons, whether GABA diffuses from MOC axons to other postsynaptic cells, and the location and function of GABAAreceptors (GABAARs).
We used optical neurotransmitter detection, immunohistochemistry, and patch-clamp electrophysiology to demonstrate that in addition to presynaptic GABABautoreceptor activation, MOC efferent terminals release GABA onto type II SGN afferent dendrites with postsynaptic activity mediated by GABAARs.
This synapse may have roles including developmental regulation of cochlear innervation, fine-tuning of OHC activity, or providing feedback to the brain about MOC and OHC activity.
Precise encoding of sound is mediated by powerful ribbon synapses between cochlear inner hair cells (IHCs) and type I spiral ganglion neuron (SGN) afferents.
Contributions of cochlear outer hair cells (OHCs) are thought to occur via amplification of basilar membrane responses to frequency-specific sounds via prestin-mediated electromotility (1–4).
OHCs also send information to the cochlear nucleus (CN) via glutamatergic synapses onto type II SGNs (5–11).
Synapses between OHCs and type II SGNs that have been measured in young animals are relatively weak compared to those between IHCs and type I SGNs (12,13).
These synaptic differences are thought to underly the higher sound thresholds and likely poor frequency tuning in type II SGN responses compared to type I SGN responses.
Type II SGNs are also implicated in responses to cochlear damage (14–16).
The IHC and OHC regions also receive efferent innervation from the superior olivary complex (SOC) in the ventral brainstem.
Within the SOC, lateral olivocochlear (LOC) neurons innervate peripheral processes of type I SGNs, while medial olivocochlear (MOC) neurons first form a transient developmental synapse onto IHCs (17–20), then form large cholinergic synapses onto OHCs [Warr and Guinan (21), reviewed in Guinan (22)].
The OHC response to acetylcholine (ACh) release from MOC neurons is mediated by alpha9/alpha10 nicotinic ACh receptors (nAChRs) that have a high calcium permeability.
Calcium influx gates SK or BK potassium channels resulting in a larger, longer-lasting efflux of potassium [reviewed in Fuchs and Lauer (23)].
Therefore, the net effect of MOC activity on OHCs is hyperpolarization, which reduces OHC electromotility and thus reduces OHC-mediated contributions to the “cochlear amplifier” (24–29).
MOC inhibition of OHC activity is implicated in cochlear gain control, shifting the operating point of the cochlea between louder and softer sounds to allow cochlear responses to salient sounds, protection of the cochlea against noise-evoked trauma, and auditory attention (30–39).
In addition to the canonical cochlear circuitry described above including between MOC efferent neurons and OHCs and between OHCs and type II SGNs in the outer spiral bundle (OSB), additional synaptic connections have been described in histological and ultrastructural studies.
These putative synapses include dendro-dendritic synapses between type II SGN dendrites, reciprocal synapses between OHCs and type II dendrites, synapses from the type II SGNs onto Hensen’s supporting cells, synaptic contacts between Deiters’ cells and afferent or efferent neurons, and direct synapses between MOC efferent neurons and type II SGN afferent neurons in the OSB (40–47).
More recent work also detected MOC efferent neuron synapses onto type I SGNs in the inner spiral bundle (ISB) (46). Despite supporting anatomical evidence, the developmental innervation patterns, neurotransmitter-mediated signaling, and ultimate function of these unique synaptic contacts have not been well characterized.
In addition to ultrastructural analyses, histological studies in multiple species suggest that the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is synthesized in olivocochlear efferents.
In particular, MOC efferent terminals have been shown to stain for the GABA synthetic enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD), and for GABA itself [reviewed in Kitcher et al. (48)].
Metabotropic GABABreceptors (GABABRs) have been localized to MOC axon terminals as well as type I and II SGN somata and peripheral terminals (49,50).
Several subunits of ionotropic GABAAreceptors (GABAARs) have also been localized to OHCs (51,52) and type I and II SGNs (52). At the single-cell level, GABABR function has been demonstrated at MOC axon terminals, where GABA release activates presynaptic autoreceptors to decrease ACh release onto OHCs and developing IHCs (49). While there are reports that GABA affects OHC electromotility, others suggest no direct action of GABA on OHCs (reviewed in Kitcher et al. (48)].
At the organismal level, GABAAR knockout mice exhibit hearing deficits and aberrant neuronal innervation (52). However, the localization of GABAARs on MOC somata in the brainstem confounds interpretation of these studies as systemic gene knockouts likely also impact central MOC function (53). Thus, the role of GABA in the cochlea is incompletely understood.
The present study seeks to understand aspects of GABA signaling in the cochlea that remain unclear including whether GABA diffuses from efferent terminals in response to neuronal activity, and whether GABAARs function at synapses between MOC neurons and other cells.
To establish GABA diffusion from MOC terminals to postsynaptic GABAARs in the cochlea, we combined patch-clamp electrophysiology with immunolabeling and optical detection of GABA.
Using these methods, we were able to localize both the site of GABA release in the OSB to MOC axon terminals and the site of action of GABAARs to type II SGNs, which is consistent with previous ultrastructural studies detailing a synaptic contact between MOC efferent and type II SGN afferent neurons (42). We observe activity-driven release of GABA from MOC efferent axon terminals and confirm that the mechanism of GABABautoreceptor suppression of subsequent MOC neurotransmitter release is similar to that at the MOC-IHC synapse.
Further, we demonstrate activity-dependent release of GABA from MOC axon terminals onto type II SGN afferent neurons that is established prior to hearing onset and persists in the adult cochlea in mice.
While the function of this GABAergic MOC-type II SGN synapse is yet to be determined, interplay between presynaptic and postsynaptic effects of GABA signaling could have important roles in development of cochlear innervation, providing feedback to the brain about efferent activity, or fine-tuning of OHC activity.
Animal procedures followed NIH guidelines, as approved by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke/National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders Animal Care and Use Committee.
Male and female mice were used in experiments.
Mice were anesthetized by carbon dioxide inhalation at a rate of 20% of anesthesia chamber volume per minute and then killed by decapitation.
For immunohistochemistry experiments in mice aged postnatal day (P)5-20, antibody-labeled cochlear whole mounts were imaged on a Nikon A1R inverted microscope with 40X or 60X objectives, using Nikon Elements software v5.30.
For patch-clamp recordings from OHCs or type II SGN afferent dendrites, the cochleae of P11-13 (OHC) and P3-10 (type II SGN) mice were dissected and placed under an insect pin affixed to a round glass coverslip, then viewed with a 60X water immersion lens and DIC optics.
For OHC recordings, evoked inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs) were obtained from the first row of OHCs in the whole-cell voltage-clamp recording configuration in response to extracellular electrical stimulation of the MOC fibers (54,55).
For type II SGN dendrite recordings, fibers under OHCs were exposed by removal of 4 to 6 OHCs using a glass pipette with a 10 to 15 µm diameter tip.
Drug application was performed using either a large bore gravity-fed glass pipette positioned close to the cochlear tissue (GABA or ACh application) or via addition to the recirculating bath solution.
OHCs were held at −40 mV for recordings of MOC to OHC synaptic activity.
Type II SGN dendrites were held at −80 mV for most recordings unless stated otherwise.
Endogenous neurotransmitter release from MOC axons was evoked using electrical axon stimulation via ~10 to 20 µm diameter-glass micropipettes placed ~20 to 30 µm modiolar to the ISB.
The quantal content of transmitter release (m) upon electrical stimulation of the MOC fibers was estimated by the “method of failures”:m = ln(N/N0) (56), whereNis the total number of stimuli andN0the number of failures.
Protocols of 100 stimuli at a frequency of 1 Hz were used to estimatem.
At this stimulation frequency, neither the kinetics nor the amplitudes of the evoked responses changed throughout the protocol.
To test the effect of drugs or toxins on the quantal content of evoked ACh release from the MOC synaptic terminals,mwas first assessed 2 to 3 times in order to establish a mean control value (mc) before incubating the tissue with the drug or toxin to evaluate changes in neurotransmitter release.
The tissue was then incubated for the time necessary to reach a plateau in the compound’s effect (ranging from 5 to 15 min, depending on the compound), after which the stimulation protocol was repeated (2 to 3 times).
Posterior semicircular canal (PSC) injections to introduce adeno-associated virus (AAV) particles containing gene sequences encoding optical GABA indicator (iGABASnFR) variants into the cochlea were performed as described in ref.57.
iGABASnFR imaging experiments were carried out using non-Cre-dependent virus (iGABASnFR.F102G) injected into C57BL/6 J mice (P14-15) or Cre-dependent (FLEX.iGABASnFR2.0) virus injected into Ngn1-CreERT2; tdTomato or Bhlhb5-Cre; tdTomato mice (P8-11), which result in iGABASnFR expression specifically in neurons.
The iGABASnFR or tdTomato fluorescence was localized to cells with the clear morphology of type II SGN dendrites.
iGABASnFR imaging was performed on a Nikon A1R upright confocal microscope using resonant scanning in both red (568 nm, for tdTomato imaging in cochlear neurons from transgenic mice) and green (488 nm, for iGABASnFR variants) channels.
Fluorescence intensity changes were measured in iGABASnFR-transduced neurons from a maximum intensity projection of the green (iGABASnFR) image stack, which was automatically thresholded in ImageJ and analyzed using the “analyze particles” function to automatically draw ROIs around the iGABASnFR-expressing type II SGN dendrites.
ROIs likely contain multiple neuronal segments.
The fluorescence baseline was measured for 1 s prior to stimulus onset (electrical MOC axon stimulation) or 10 s prior to drug application (exogenous GABA or ACh application).
The iGABASnFR responses were determined for the 30 s of exogenous ACh or GABA application compared to the 10 s prior to drug application.
For experiments utilizing electrical stimulation of neurotransmitter release from MOC axons, we made a binary determination of whether each ROI had a positive “response” to the axon stimulation.
Then, to determine the magnitude of the response to MOC axon stimulation, we calculated the ΔF/F of the fluorescence.
Previous work has shown immunolabeling for the GABA synthetic-enzyme GAD in cochlear structures with the typical morphology of LOC and MOC efferent neurons (58,59).
We first confirmed GAD immunolabeling in olivocochlear terminals of cochlear preparations from ChAT-IRES-Cre; tdTomato (tdT) mice, which have been previously characterized for genetic identification of MOC neurons (53,60).
GAD-immuno-positive structures were clearly visible by postnatal day 7 (P7,Fig. 1A–E) and attained the typical pattern of olivocochlear innervation of the OSB immediately prior to the onset of hearing, between P9 (Fig. 1F–J) and P11 (Fig. 1K–O).
No apparent change in labeling was observed immediately after hearing onset from P13 (Fig. 1P–T) through at least P20 (Fig. 1U–X).
GAD-positive MOC axon terminals from ChAT-IRES-Cre; tdT mice also colocalized with the presynaptic marker Synapsin, suggesting activity-dependent neurotransmitter release (Fig. 1U–X).
Taken together, early labeling of efferent terminals with GAD indicates that MOC neurons synthesize GABA during postnatal cochlear development, while labeling at later ages suggests GABAergic signaling is a stable feature of the hearing animal.
To confirm GABA release from MOC axons in the OSB and explore the underlying mechanism, we conducted whole-cell patch-clamp recordings from OHCs in excised apical cochlear turns of the organ of Corti from P11-13 mice.
During these recordings, we electrically stimulated MOC axons to evoke neurotransmitter release at a frequency of 1 Hz (Fig. 2A).
Consistent with previous results in mouse OHCs from cochlear apical turns, at a membrane holding potential (Vhold) of –40 mV, stimulation of the MOC fibers evoked mixed nAChR and SK potassium postsynaptic currents (PSC).
However, at this recording potential, the mixed sodium and calcium inward current through the α9α10 receptor is too small to be detected, therefore only the outward SK2 potassium current can be observed in the recordings shown (49,54,55,61) (Fig. 2B).
Previous work at this synapse showed that GABA negatively modulates the amount of transmitter released from MOC neurons by activating presynaptic GABABRs (49). Therefore, we first evaluated the effect of the GABABR antagonist CGP 36216 (100 µM) (Fig. 2B).
The efficacy of transmitter release was evaluated as the mean number of synaptic vesicles released per action potential triggered by electrical stimulation of the MOC axons (quantal content of transmitter release, see methods for explanation and quantification of this parameter).
Our results are consistent with those reported by Wedemeyer et al. (49), and clearly show that there is an increase in the efficacy of transmitter release in the presence of this antagonist (control: 0.15 ± 0.03, CGP: 0.41 ± 0.08 Wilcoxon rank sum test,P= 0.0313, n = 6 cells).
At P11-13, transmitter release at the MOC-OHC synapse is supported by Ca2+entry through P/Q- and R-type voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs) (55). We therefore evaluated whether the activation of GABABRs was interfering with Ca2+entry through either or both channels.
As illustrated inFig.
2C, when blocking P/Q-type VGCCs with ω-agatoxin IVA (200 nM), there was a significant reduction in the quantal content of transmitter release.
Under this condition, application of the GABABR antagonist CGP caused no additional effect on neurotransmitter release [control: 0.20 ± 0.04, ω-agatoxin: 0.06 ± 0.02; ω-agatoxin + CGP: 0.05 ± 0.01.
Friedman test (with post hoc Dunn’s test), control vs. ω-agatoxin,P= 0.0177, control vs. ω-agatoxin + CGP,P= 0.0177, ω-agatoxin vs. ω-agatoxin + CGP,P= 0.92 (NS); n = 5 cells].
However, when blocking R-type VGCCs with Ni2+(100 µM), a strong blocker of this type of VGCC (55,62), further application of CGP 36216 still caused a significant increase in the quantal content of release, indicating that the effects of GABABRs are not mediated by inhibition of R-type VGCC (control: 0.22 ± 0.03, Ni2+: 0.10 ± 0.0, Ni2++CGP: 0.24 ± 0.03.
Friedman test (with post hoc Dunn’s test), control vs. Ni2+P= 0.0269, control vs. Ni2++ CGPP= 0.75 (NS), Ni2+vs. Ni2++ CGPP= 0.0114, n = 5) (Fig. 2D).
These results are consistent with those shown at the transient MOC-IHC synapse from P9-11 mice (49). In conclusion, the present results suggest that GABA released by MOC OSB axons is regulating both ACh and potentially its own release by acting on presynaptic GABABRs that in turn reduce the amount of Ca2+flowing through P/Q-type VGCCs.
Regulation of GABA release from MOC axons in the OSB by GABABRs.
(A) Schematic of the cochlear preparation and the position of the recording and stimulating electrodes.
(B)Leftpanels: Representative recordings of synaptic responses in P11-13 OHCs, voltage-clamped at −40 mV (Vhold), in response to electrical stimulation (1 Hz) of MOC axons in control conditions and in the presence of the GABABR blocker CGP 36216 (100 µM).Rightpanel: Quantification of quantal content in both conditions (control: 0.15 ± 0.03, CGP: 0.41 ± 0.08 Wilcoxon rank sum test,P= 0.0313, n = 6 cells).
(C)Leftpanels: Representative recordings of synaptic responses in control conditions and in the presence of the P/Q-type VGCC blocker ω-agatoxin IVA (200 nM) and in the presence of ω-agatoxin IVA (200 nM) plus CGP 36216 (100 µM).Rightpanel: Quantification of quantal content in the three conditions [control: 0.20 ± 0.04, ω-agatoxin: 0.06 ± 0.02; ω-agatoxin + CGP: 0.05 ± 0.01.
Friedman test (with post hoc Dunn’s test), control vs. ω-agatoxin,P= 0.0177, control vs. ω-agatoxin + CGP,P= 0.0177, ω-agatoxin vs. ω-agatoxin + CGP,P= 0.92 (NS); n = 5 cells].
(D)Leftpanels: Representative recordings of synaptic responses in control conditions, in the presence of the R-type VGCC blocker, Ni2+(100 µM), and in the presence of Ni2+(100 µM) plus CGP 36216 (100 µM).Rightpanel: Quantification of quantal content in the three conditions [control: 0.22 ± 0.03, Ni2+: 0.10 ± 0.0, Ni2++CGP,; 0.24 ± 0.03.
Friedman test (with post hoc Dunn’s test), control vs. Ni2+P= 0.0269, control vs. Ni2++ CGP;P= 0.75 (NS), Ni2+vs. Ni2++ CGPP= 0.0114, n = 5].
Stimulation artifacts were removed for clarity in all traces (arrows).
The above work indicates that GABA is synthesized in MOC axon terminals and demonstrates that released GABA acts presynaptically through activation of GABABRs.
However, it has not yet been shown that GABA released from MOC axon terminals diffuses to a postsynaptic site.
To explore this, we combined electrical stimulation of neurotransmitter release from MOC axons with optical detection of the site of extracellular GABA transients in the OSB.
To detect GABA, the GABA-sensing fluorescent reporter iGABASnFR (63) was expressed in SGNs.
To drive iGABASnFR expression in the SGN, an AAV with the PHP.eB serotype that has enhanced transduction with nervous system tropism, paired with a neuron-specific human synapsin (hSyn) promotor, was injected into the PSC of P1-2 mice.
Type II SGN dendrites were then imaged using confocal microscopy to detect an increase in iGABASnFR fluorescence that indicates binding of GABA.
While the imaged fluorescent structures had clear morphological patterns of type II SGN dendrites, it was not possible to differentiate between individual dendrites in imaging experiments; ROIs were selected that likely encompassed multiple fibers.
To verify that iGABASnFR does not respond to ACh, which is the primary neurotransmitter of the MOC efferent system, and confirm the specificity of iGABASnFR for detecting GABA, we measured changes in iGABASnFR fluorescence in response to exogenously applied neurotransmitters in P12-15 mouse lower apical turns (approximately 8 to 10 kHz cochlear region).
Following baseline imaging of type II SGNs (20 to 30 s), we applied either ACh or GABA (1 mM, 20 to 30 s) using a large-bore gravity-fed pipette.
ACh did not evoke an increase in iGABASnFR fluorescence (ACh application compared to 10 s prior: ΔF/F = −0.049, n = 39 ROIs across six cochlear preparations, negative value due to steady fluorescence bleaching during the experiment).
By contrast, application of GABA evoked a significant increase in iGABASnFR fluorescence (ΔF/F = 0.037, n = 44 ROIs across six cochlear preparations, one-way ANOVA, GABA vs. AChP= 0.0013;Fig. 3A–C).
These experiments confirm that iGABASnFR responds specifically to GABA, but not to ACh.
Endogenous release of GABA from MOC axons in the OSB.
(A) Fluorescence responses from three ROIs from an example representative experiment with iGABASnFR expressed in type II SGNs, which do not change in response to application of exogenous ACh (1 mM).
(B) Fluorescence responses from three ROIs from an example representative experiment with iGABASnFR expressed in type II SGNs, which show an increase in fluorescence in response to application of exogenous GABA (1 mM).
(C) Quantification of iGABASnFR response to exogenously applied ACh and GABA; each dot represents mean ΔF/F of all ROIs from a single experiment, and the box indicates mean and SD of population data.
(D) Example images from a type II SGN transduced with iGABASnFR2.0 from a P8 mouse.
The transmitted detector image shows the location of imaging near the base of OHCs.
The tdTomato image from a Bhlhb5-Cre; tdT animal shows the location of the type II SGN.
The iGABASnFR imaging is visible in baseline (green) images, and then using a heatmap to show fluorescence levels in baseline conditions (“baseline”) and after electrical stimulation of MOC axon terminals (“response to MOC axon stimulation”).
(E) Thresholded image from the maximum intensity projection of the type II SGN shown inD.
(F) ROIs used for iGABASnFR analysis.
Color coding relates to ROI #’s in (G), white ROIs indicate regions that did not respond to electrical stimulation of MOC axons with a fluorescence increase.
(G) ΔF/F plots showing the time-course of iGABASnFR fluorescence before, during, and after electrical stimulation of presynaptic MOC axons (50 Hz, 1 s), at ROIs indicated by colors in (F).
Gray traces indicate fluorescent response for ROIs that did not have a positive response to MOC axon stimulation.
(H) Summary data for iGABASnFR fluorescence responses in type II SGNs at two postnatal age groups.
Dark gray bars indicate mean ± SD of the ΔF/F for ROIs with a positive Response to MOC axon stimulation at the ages indicated.
Light gray bars indicate mean ± SD of the ΔF/F for ROIs that did not respond to MOC axon stimulation (Non-Response ROI’) at the ages indicated.
Points to the right of each bar indicate the mean ΔF/F for Response (black) or Non-Response (gray) ROIs from a single experiment.
Lines connect the data from a single experiment.
Next, the activity-dependent release of endogenous GABA from MOC axons in the OSB was tested by stimulating neurotransmitter release from MOC axon terminals while imaging iGABASnFR fluorescence.
Wild-type (WT) C57Bl/6J mice were used along with Bhlhb5 Cre; tdT and NgnCreERT2; tdT mice that expressed the red fluorescent protein tdTomato in cochlear neurons to allow colocalization of the iGABASnFR with SGNs.
The cochlear apical turn from AAV-iGABASnFR-injected mice was dissected at P8-11 (before hearing onset, iGABASnFR2.0 FLEX, Bhlhb5 Cre; tdT or NgnCreERT2; tdT mice, 6 to 9 d after injection) or P14-15 (after hearing onset, WT mice with iGABASnFR.F102G, 12 to 13 d after injection).
The type II SGNs were localized under confocal microscopy using either iGABASnFR basal fluorescence or tdTomato fluorescence.
Control images were collected for ~3 s, followed by electrical stimulation of MOC axons (50 Hz, 1 s) while imaging continued for an additional ~6 s (Fig. 3D–F).
We first determined whether individual ROIs had a positive response to the MOC axon stimulation by determining whether the maximum fluorescence following MOC axon stimulation was more than two SD above the mean of the baseline fluorescence.
We then determined the magnitude of the response by calculating the ΔF/F values for ROIs with a positive response (Methods Summary).
There was a significant increase in iGABASnFR fluorescence in type II SGNs in response to electrical stimulation of MOC axons from both prehearing (P8-11, exampleFig.
3G) and posthearing onset mice (P14-15).
Although the change in fluorescence between the two age groups is not directly comparable due to differences in the iGABASnFR variants used and time course of expression, there was no detected difference in the mean amplitude of responses between the two groups: (P8-11 (iGABASnFR.2 FLEX): mean ΔF/F 0.208 ± 0.109, 1 to 8 positive ROIs per experiment, 9 of 17 experiments had at least one ROI with a positive response; P14-15 (iGABASnFR1.0): mean ΔF/F 0.197 ± 0.080, 1 to 4 ROIs per experiment, 5 of 6 experiments had positive responses, one-way ANOVA comparing age groups,P= 0.85;Fig. 3H).
Given our conservative threshold for a positive response due to the relative noise in the fluorescence signal, the number of ROIs with a positive response could be an underestimate; indeed, in some experiments, an ROI was not categorized as having a response yet still exhibited a large maximum ΔF/F.
For both age groups, however, the ROIs categorized as a positive response to MOC axon stimulation had a significantly larger mean ΔF/F compared to ROIs categorized as not having a response (P8-11: mean response ΔF/F 0.208 ± 0.109, n = 9; mean nonresponse 0.108 ± 0.054, n = 18,ttestP= 0.0039; P14-15: mean response ΔF/F 0.197 ± 0.080, mean nonresponse ΔF/F 0.058 ± 0.051, n = 6,ttestP= 0.0067).
The variability in the number of ROIs with positive iGABASnFR fluorescent responses to MOC axon stimulation could be due to differential localization of the stimulation pipette relative to the particular MOC axons that projected into the imaging field of view, variations in stimulation pipette localization and depth relative to MOC axons, or variability in the concentration of GABA released from different MOC axon terminals.
Overall, these results support an activity-dependent release of GABA from MOC axon terminals both before and after the onset of hearing.
This is consistent with GABA released from MOC axon terminals that acts at presynaptic GABABR autoreceptors, as shown in both previously published work (49), and the results above.
Notably, the iGABASnFR imaging data shown here demonstrate that GABA also diffuses from MOC terminals to other locations in the OSB, supporting a broader potential role.
To further probe whether GABA diffusion from presynaptic MOC axon terminals would act at a postsynaptic cell in the OSB, cochleae were immunolabeled with antibodies against the GABAAR β3 subunit.
Previous reports indicated GABAAR β3 subunit expression in the cochlea, with knockouts causing auditory dysfunction and innervation deficits (52). Here, the GABAAR β3 localized at punctate structures in the cochlea, specifically in the OSB (Fig. 4A).
GABAAR β3 immunoreactivity did not colocalize with GAD-immuno-positive, genetically labeled MOC terminals in ChAT-IRES-Cre; tdT mice, suggesting that MOC terminals do not have this GABAAR subunit.
Taking advantage of sparse afferent labeling that occurs in Ngn1CreERT2; tdT mice without tamoxifen treatment (64), immunolabeling for GABAAR β3 subunits clearly localized to genetically labeled, (tdT-positive) type II SGN terminals as well as the presumptive type II SGN terminals that lacked Ngn1CreERT2 (tdT-negative) (Fig. 4B).
The GABAAR β3 antibody-positive dendritic bouton structures were directly opposed to GAD-immuno-positive MOC terminals.
This labeling suggests the potential for fast, ionotropic GABAergic responses in type II SGNs.
Immunolabeling experiments above indicate that type II SGNs have GABAARs near GAD-positive MOC axon terminals, while the above patch-clamp and iGABASnFR experiments demonstrate activity-dependent release of GABA from MOC axon terminals that diffuses to type II SGNs.
To further investigate whether type II SGNs directly respond to GABA, whole-cell patch-clamp recordings (11–13) were made from the dendrites of type II SGNs from the apical turns (approx 8 to 10 kHz cochlear location) of P3-10 WT C57BL/6 J mice.
AlexaFluor 488 hydrazide was included in the pipette solution for post hoc identification based on characteristic type II SGN morphology (11,12,14,65) (Fig. 5AandB).
The type II SGN dendrite was held at a membrane voltage of −80 mV to accentuate chloride-mediated currents (ECl = −25 mV).
GABA (1 mM) was applied (duration 10 to 20 s) via a gravity fed, large-bore application pipette.
GABA application evoked currents of −26.8 ± 18.0 pA (n = 31 neurons from 31 mice, age range P3-10, mean postnatal age 7.0 ± 2.1 d), which returned to baseline after GABA application ceased (Fig. 5C).
To test for activation of GABAARs, we blocked GABA-evoked responses with the GABAAR blocker gabazine (SR 95531).
First, GABA was applied in control extracellular solution, as above, for a duration of 10 s. Gabazine (30 µM) was then added to the bath solution for a period of 10 to 30 min, at the end of which GABA was reapplied to the preparation for 10 s. Gabazine was then washed off of the preparation for 5 to 10 min, and a final 10 s application of GABA was used to test for return of GABA-evoked currents.
Gabazine application significantly reduced GABA-evoked currents (control mean: −35.8 ± 16.4 pA, gabazine: −14.4 ± 12.0 pA, wash: −21.3 ± 13.2 pA, Repeated Measures ANOVAP= 0.00229, n = 7 neurons, with post hoc Scheffe tests for pair-wise comparisons, mean age P6.3 ± 2.4, range P3-10,Fig. 5CandD), suggesting that GABA-evoked currents are mediated at least in part by GABAAR in the type II SGN.
Finally, to confirm that GABA-evoked currents in type II SGN are mediated by chloride conductances through ionotropic receptors, as would be expected for GABAAR-mediated currents, the membrane potential was stepped from −80 to +40 mV, in 20 mV increments, followed by GABA application (1 mM, 10 to 20 s).
GABA-evoked currents reversed polarity at ~−12 mV (~−21 mV after Liquid Junction Potential correction), corresponding to the calculated reversal potential of chloride for the experimental solutions used, supporting neurotransmission through ionotropic GABAARs (Fig. 5E).
GABAAR-mediated responses in type II SGNs.
(A) DIC image of acutely dissected cochlear apical turn during patch-clamp recording from a type II SGN dendrite.
(Scale bar, 250 µm.)
(B) A single type II SGN dendrite immediately following whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings, filled with AlexaFluor 488 hydrazide via the patch pipette.
(Scale bar, 100 µm.)
(C) Voltage-clamp recordings from a type II SGN (Vhold= −80 mV) during 10 s focal application of 1 mM GABA in control conditions (Top), with 30 µM gabazine in the bath solution (Middle), and after wash of gabazine (Bottom).
(D) Summary data showing the magnitude of currents evoked by 1 mM GABA application in control, gabazine, and wash conditions.
Bars indicate mean, error bars indicate SD.
Dots to the right of each bar indicate the amplitude of GABA-evoked responses from individual type II SGN dendrites.
(E) Current–voltage relation of 1 mM GABA responses from type II SGN at different holding potentials between −80 mV and +20 mV in 20 mV increments, with linear fit.
Our combined results demonstrate immunolocalization of GABAergic components (GAD and GABAAR β3) in genetically identified MOC axons and type II SGN dendrites that are suggestive of a functional synapse.
We confirmed that activity-dependent GABA release reduces further activity at presynaptic MOC axon terminals by autoreceptor GABABR-mediated inhibition of P/Q type VGCC, adjusting the strength of the efferent synapse.
Further, evoked release of GABA from MOC axon terminals also diffuses to postsynaptic sites at the type II SGN.
Finally, we recorded GABAAR-mediated responses in type II SGNs.
Together, these results indicate complex roles of GABA in the OSB that include both control of MOC efferent synaptic strength and a GABAergic synapse between MOC efferent neurons and type II SGN afferents (Fig. 6).
Schematic of neurotransmitter signaling between OHC, type II SGN afferent neurons, and MOC efferent neurons.
ACh (red squares) and GABA (blue circles) are released from MOC axons.
ACh acts at α9/α10nAChR on OHCs.
Calcium influx through the nAChR activates SK2 potassium channels to hyperpolarize OHCs.
Glutamate (green triangles) released from OHCs activates GluA2R on type II SGN dendrites.
GABA released from MOC axon terminals acts at presynaptic GABABR autoreceptors on the MOC axon terminals to decrease calcium influx through P/Q type VGCC.
This then reduces neurotransmitter release from the MOC terminals, disinhibiting OHCs and possibly type II SGNs.
GABA also diffuses from MOC terminals to act at GABAARs on type II SGN dendrites, although the effect on the type II SGN dendrite will depend on the chloride concentration gradient between the type II SGN dendrites and the extracellular space, as suggested by the double-headed arrow indicating that the direction of Cl-flow through the GABAAR is unknown.
Schematic by Alan Hoofring, NIH Medical Arts Branch.
The mammalian cochlea uses fast, high-fidelity synapses and 1:1 innervation between IHCs, the primary auditory sensory receptors, and type I SGN afferents to respond to sound stimuli with temporal precision and accurate frequency encoding.
The more numerous, electromotile OHCs are also critical for normal hearing due to their cochlear amplifier functionality that lowers the threshold for sound detection and improves frequency tuning of the cochlea.
The MOC efferent system inhibits OHC activity, thus decreasing the OHC-mediated enhancement of basilar membrane vibrations.
This MOC activity is implicated in reduced responses to sustained background noises that enable detection of salient sounds, protection of the cochlea against acoustic overstimulation, and auditory attention [reviewed in Fuchs and Lauer (23)].
Although the functions of the MOC and OHC systems are well documented, the roles of other cell types and potential circuits in this region remain elusive.
For example, OHC afferent innervation via the small population of type II SGN afferents has been clearly demonstrated, but the role of this system in hearing is yet unclear.
It has been hypothesized to respond to loud sounds including those loud enough to cause tissue damage, potentially functioning as auditory nociceptors (reviewed in Fuchs and Glowatzki (66)].
In addition to the canonical MOC-OHC and OHC-type II SGN circuitry in the OSB, ultrastructural studies suggest numerous additional synaptic contacts among OHCs, MOC efferents, type II SGN afferents, and supporting cells (40–47).
Whether these putative synapses are active in hearing, as well as which neurotransmitters are involved, has not yet been determined.
As a first step to understanding how intricate circuits between the efferent and afferent cochlear neurons connecting to OHCs contribute to OSB function, and thus, to hearing, we used patch-clamp electrophysiology recordings, immunolabeling, and optical neurotransmitter detection to demonstrate activity at one of these putative synapses, between MOC efferent and type II SGN afferent neurons in the OSB, that we propose is GABAergic.
The potential role of a GABAergic MOC efferent to type II SGN afferent synapse could include both central and peripheral mechanisms.
Regarding central signaling with the brainstem that ultimately influences MOC efferent function, OHC-type II SGN signaling to the cochlear nucleus granule cell domains has been demonstrated in response to loud, but nondamaging, broadband sound indicating the type II SGN pathway is likely active during normal hearing conditions (5). MOC neurons also send axon branches to these granule cell domains (67,68), suggesting multiple sites of interaction between MOC efferent and type II SGN afferent systems that may report MOC activity back to the brain for fine-tuning of efferent activity.
Because MOC inhibition of OHC function has critical roles in adjusting basilar membrane vibration magnitude and precision, any change to MOC efferent activity that in turn adjusts OHC function will have a major impact on hearing sensitivity and frequency tuning both in quiet and in noisy environments.
While the contributions of a GABAergic MOC-type II SGN synapse to central signaling are yet to be determined, these synapses exemplify another direct interaction between afferent and efferent cochlear neurons, suggesting that the MOC system may undergo dynamic regulation via circuits that influence their activity in the brainstem.
A GABAergic MOC efferent to type II SGN afferent synapse may also influence perception of sound by affecting afferent signaling to the brainstem via the type II SGN pathway.
Given the robust hyperpolarizing response of OHCs to MOC-mediated cholinergic transmission, however, it is perplexing why MOC neurons would then provide additional direct GABAergic inhibition of the type II SGN afferents.
This is unexpected for a signaling pathway (the OHC to type II SGN pathway) that is relatively weak.
However, given recent evidence that type II SGN signal to the cochlear nucleus during nondamaging levels of sound (5), they may be active during normal hearing conditions.
GABAergic inhibition could reduce afferent type II SGN activity in response to glutamate release from OHCs via direct hyperpolarization to reduce the likelihood of action potentials in type II SGN, or via electrical shunting to sharpen the timing of activity of type II SGN afferent neurons.
However, to date, nothing is known about the precision of sound-evoked action potentials in type II SGN under normal hearing conditions.
Type II SGN have also been hypothesized to respond to loud sound exposure that may cause cochlear damage or be perceived as painful.
MOC inhibition could reduce activity in these potentially nociceptive auditory pathways, protecting against hypersensitivity.
It would then follow that any deficits in MOC efferent activity may allow maladaptive increases in type II SGN activity at loud sound levels.
It is also possible that the MOC-type II SGN synapses have a role in peripheral cochlear function, independent of signaling to the brain.
We do not yet know whether activation of GABAARs on type II SGN under physiological conditions is indeed inhibitory, due to the possibility of a relatively depolarized Cl-reversal potential that is common in the developing nervous system and may persist in dendritic or axonal processes of mature neurons (69–74).
Immunohistochemistry studies shown here with genetically labeled efferents demonstrate the GABAergic nature of MOC terminals prior to hearing onset, before MOC terminals have achieved their mature innervation patterns and when neurons are more likely to have a depolarizing chloride reversal potential.
Due to limitations in cochlear dendritic recording techniques, patch-clamp recordings of GABAAR-mediated activity in type II SGNs were primarily performed prior to P11 and included an artificial chloride concentration; the actual concentration has not been determined.
Thus, GABAergic signaling may be excitatory in developing cochlear neurons to support roles such as synapse formation, including formation of the glutamatergic synapses that serve as the primary driver of communication between the cochlea and the brain, while the polarity of GABAergic responses in mature SGNs is at this time unknown.
Regardless, the aforementioned recording experiments indicate that type II SGNs do respond to GABA prior to hearing onset, while results from iGABASnFR imaging of activity-dependent GABA release and immuno-labeling of GABAergic structures suggest that GABAergic MOC to type II SGN signaling also occurs in the hearing cochlea.
GABA could therefore have distinct roles in development of excitatory cochlear circuits and in regulation of OHC and efferent function in the hearing cochlea.
The pre- and postsynaptic functions of GABA in the OSB contribute additional complexity.
GABA acts as a negative regulator of MOC axon terminal function, reducing ACh release by acting at presynaptic GABABR.
Here, we show that this activity occurs via the same mechanism as at MOC-IHC synapses, by GABABR-mediated decreases in presynaptic P/Q VGCC activity.
While direct inhibition of OHCs by ACh released from MOC axons likely reduces OHC-based glutamatergic drive of type II SGNs (net decrease of type II SGN activity), the negative feedback of GABA on MOC fibers would reduce ACh release, thus disinhibiting OHC-based activation of type II SGNs (net increase of type II SGN activity).
It must be borne in mind, however, that we do not yet know whether GABA and ACh are coreleased by the same MOC fibers and whether the MOC synaptic terminals reaching type II SGNs are the same and/or have the same complement of presynaptic proteins involved in release and activity dependence as those contacting the OHCs.
Further adding to this complexity, evidence suggests that presynaptic GABABR expression is likely down-regulated at MOC-OHC synapses following hearing onset because it is no longer observed in the adult (50) while in postsynaptic type II SGN dendrites, both GABAAR [present work; (52)] and GABABR expression (50) is thought to be maintained in the adult.
The functional interplay of pre- vs. postsynaptic and receptor subtype-specific GABA signaling over the course of development in both potentially decreasing and/or increasing type II SGN activity indicates that additional study into the particular patterns and conditions of GABA transmission is necessary.
In summary, our results indicate that MOC efferent neurons release GABA onto type II SGN afferent dendrites, highly suggestive of a functional synapse that operates via postsynaptic GABAAR.
While the role of this putative MOC-type II SGN synapse is unclear, this is a confirmation that one of the abundant complex circuits in the OSB previously identified by electron microscopy is likely functional.
We hypothesize that GABAergic signaling from MOC efferent neurons is present at the earliest stages of MOC innervation of the OSB to guide establishment of cochlear circuits and to regulate MOC efferent onto OHC activity, and then assumes additional roles in the hearing cochlea to dynamically fine-tune OHC and efferent activity, with potential impact on the information sent to the brain via type II SGN afferents.
These speculative roles of the MOC efferent to type II SGN afferent synapse await further study of the role of type II SGN in hearing, and an understanding of how activation of the type II SGN pathway is itself perceived by the brain in both the normal and damaged cochlea.
In addition, the present results indicate that function of the OSB, which is critical for fine-tuning cochlear activity and gain control, is likely more complex than previously demonstrated with multiple levels of interaction with the brain.
Thanks go to the GENIE Project Team at Janelia Research Campus, HHMI, for developing the iGABASnFR 1 and 2 variants and for providing iGABASnFR2 plasmids.
The synapse schematic is credited to Alan Hoofring, NIH Medical Arts Branch.
This research was in part supported by the Intramural Research Program of the NIH, NIDCD, Z01 DC000091 (C.J.C.W.
), and in part supported by Agencia Nacional de Promoción Científica y Técnica Argentina (PICT 2018-02531 C.W.
and PICT 2018-01189 E.K.
J.L.B., S.R.K., L.G.V., E.K., C.W., and C.J.C.W.
designed research; J.L.B., S.R.K., L.G.V., H.J.B., M.G.C., I.H.R., and C.J.C.W.
performed research; J.L.B., L.G.V., C.W., and C.J.C.W.
analyzed data; and J.L.B., S.R.K., E.K., C.W., and C.J.C.W.
wrote the paper.