Research has begun to focus on positive adjustment to, and aspects of, living with chronic pain, which aligns with a positive psychology approach.
This systematic review aimed to synthesize available qualitative data to understand the characteristics and approaches that enable people to thrive whilst living with chronic pain.
Five electronic databases (MEDLINE, PsycINFO, CINAHL Plus, Scopus and ProQuest) were searched from their inception until January 2024 using a combination of terms for ‘chronic pain’, ‘thriving’ and ‘qualitative methods’.
Inclusion criteria stipulated qualitative data pertaining to facilitators, barriers and inequalities in experiences of thriving in adults living with chronic pain (without a clear underlying cause).
The methodological quality of studies was assessed using the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme Tool.
Data were analysed using thematic synthesis, with GRADE‐CERQual used to determine confidence in the evidence.
In total, 4162 studies were screened; 17 were included in the qualitative synthesis.
Thematic synthesis yielded four overarching themes: (i) attitudes towards pain and its impact on life; (ii) behavioural strategies and openness to trying new things; (iii) perceiving love, support and connection with others; and (iv) ascribing meaning to life alongside pain.
GRADE‐CERQual indicated moderate confidence in findings.
Findings align with Seligman's five pillars of well‐being (PERMA) model and indicate clinical implications for supporting patients to thrive alongside pain.
Chronic pain is defined by the International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) for the International Classification of Diseases (ICD‐11) as any persistent bodily pain that has been present for 3 months or longer (International Association for the Study of Pain,2020).
Chronic pain is highly prevalent across the world, with data from 2016 suggesting that it is one of the leading causes of disease and disability globally (Vos et al.,2017).
In the United Kingdom (UK), between one third to one half of the population is affected by chronic pain, with 12% of the population of England identifying chronic pain as high‐impact and disruptive to daily activities (Fayaz et al.,2016).
The prevalence of chronic primary pain (i.e., pain that is not better accounted for by another diagnosis such as cancer) is estimated to be 1%–6% in England (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence [NICE],2021a).
A deficit paradigm—that is, an approach that focuses on problems or negative outcomes—has predominated in the field of chronic pain research.
Chronic pain has been associated with a range of negative outcomes including anxiety (Asmundson & Katz,2009; Lerman et al.,2015), depression (Angst et al.,2020; Fishbain et al.,1997), sleep disturbances (Sun et al.,2021), decline in cognitive processes (Rouch et al.,2021), impairment of sexual function (Flegge et al.,2023), poorer quality of life (Hadi et al.,2019), pain‐related disability (Meulders,2019) and increased suicide risk and suicidality (Petrosky et al.,2018; Tang & Crane,2006).
In addition, several meta‐analyses have examined psychological factors associated with, or predictive of, difficulty managing chronic pain (Georgopoulos et al.,2019; Martinez‐Calderon et al.,2019,2020; Rogers & Farris,2022; Zale et al.,2013).
Findings indicated that higher pain hypersensitivity is predictive of reported pain‐related disability and negative affect (Georgopoulos et al.,2019), with the risk of onset and persistence of pain increased by psychological distress (i.e., depression and anxiety) and fear (Martinez‐Calderon et al.,2020).
Whilst NICE (2021b) recommend cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) as a non‐pharmacological approach to help people manage distress associated with/in the context of chronic pain, this approach is rooted in this deficit paradigm, with a focus on identifying and modifying cognitive and behavioural factors contributing to the development and maintenance of a presenting difficulty (Dobson & Dozois,2021; Nezu et al.,2004).
However, the efficacy of CBT for alleviating distress in chronic pain is low to moderate (de Williams et al.,2020).
Incorporation of positive psychology approaches (in combination with current dominant deficit approaches such as CBT) has the potential to extend clinicians' capacity to provide support (Johnson & Wood,2017; Wood & Tarrier,2010) and help individuals live well with chronic pain.
Whilst comparatively less research has focused on positive adjustment to, and outcomes within chronic pain, this area is beginning to receive more attention.
A recent meta‐analysis found that higher levels of positive affect are associated with decreased pain severity in individuals living with chronic primary pain (a small but significant effect size; Ong et al.,2020).
A further review exploring psychological factors associated with the risk of onset and persistence of musculoskeletal pain found‘protective’or‘positive’associations that reduced these risks, such as self‐efficacy beliefs and positive beliefs regarding recovery (Martinez‐Calderon et al.,2020).
Exploring positive adjustment to living with chronic pain aligns well with a positive psychology approach (Seligman,1992).
Pathology‐led psychology has been argued to neglect viewing humans as proactive and self‐determined beings; a positive psychology approach instead focuses on recognizing personal strengths, connecting with others and developing gratitude and awareness despite difficulties (Seligman & Csikszentmihalyi,2000).
Whilst the term‘positive psychology’serves as an umbrella term that encompasses several key concepts (Schrank et al.,2014), Seligman (1992) identified five pillars of well‐being integral to a positive psychology approach, which he organized into the mnemonic ‘PERMA’: positive emotion, engagement (i.e., in activities that pull on personal strengths); relationships (i.e., positive, respectful and understanding relationships); meaning (i.e., identifying positive meaning in everyday life); and accomplishment (i.e., achievements, big or small, that help us feel progress; Seligman,2011).
A positive psychology approach focuses on these five elements, drawing on personal strengths and resources in the prevention and/or treatment of difficulties, such as living with chronic pain, to help individuals, families and communities to‘thrive’despite difficulties (Park et al.,2016).
To design effective and acceptable interventions rooted in a positive psychology paradigm, it is important to identify and understand what helps or supports individuals to thrive.
In positive psychology, thriving is seen as a therapeutic outcome, closely linked to the concept of ‘flourishing’.
In this review, we consider thriving as maintaining positive well‐being in the context of the difficulties posed by living with chronic pain—where pain is the primary concern.
In capturing living well in the context of adversity, thriving also overlaps with concepts such as resilience, benefit‐finding and post‐traumatic growth.
To conceptualize the links between the described concepts, Figure1groups the personal characteristics and approaches that the literature suggests support thriving and flourishing as a therapeutic outcome.
Resilience, post‐traumatic growth and benefit‐finding are considered here in relation to chronic pain as the challenge or adverse or traumatic event, and include both cognitive processes, such as reframing, and behavioural shifts that lead to growth.
Thriving and flourishing are therapeutic outcomes in the PERMA model, indicating subjective well‐being and are not necessarily tied to having experienced adversity (Brown et al.,2017), though we here conceptualize them as reflecting positive adjustment to, and living well with, chronic pain.
Thriving and flourishing encompass growth processes and are conceptually linked to benefit‐finding, post‐traumatic growth and resilience, for example through improving functioning; flourishing is more commonly relating to psychosocial well‐being whilst thriving encompasses both psychosocial and physical states (Brown et al.,2017).
Thus, we adopt the term ‘thriving’ throughout the review to represent these interlinked—though not identical—concepts and to allow us to capture primary literature on factors enabling positive adjustment to living with chronic pain.
Conceptual map of positive adjustment to chronic pain, drawing on definitions of flourishing (VanderWeele et al.,2019), thriving (Brown et al.,2017) benefit‐finding (Cassidy et al.,2014; Helgeson et al.,2006), post‐traumatic growth (Tedeschi et al.,2018) and resilience (Seligman,1992).
No hierarchy between concepts is intended.
Created inhttps://BioRender.com/dsr824w.
Quantitative studies indicate that people living with chronic pain can and do thrive (e.g., Parsons et al.,2022; Sirois & Hirsch,2013) and that thriving is linked to more positive pain‐related outcomes (e.g., intensity and disability; Kinderdietz,2012; Palit et al.,2020), reduced distress (Currier et al.,2009; Min et al.,2014; Sirois & Hirsch,2013), greater positive affect (Kinderdietz,2012) and enhanced well‐being (e.g., greater appreciation for life and better relationships; Abraído‐Lanza et al.,1998; Dirik & Karanci,2008; Purc‐Stephenson,2014).
Moreover, some quantitative research has examined how ‘resilient’ individuals living with chronic pain differ from those deemed by the researchers to be ‘non‐resilient’ in their coping style, pain attitudes and beliefs, and positive and negative social responses to pain (Karoly & Ruehlman,2006).
Qualitative research provides rich, detailed descriptions of complex phenomena, considering factors such as personal meaning and social context.
For example, in relation to chronic pain, Lennox Thompson et al. (2020) found that thriving involves resolving a disruption to one's self‐coherence by making sense of pain, deciding to see oneself as a person, not a patient and engaging with life flexibly.
Richardson et al. (2014) similarly identified flexibility, understanding of pain, and motivation to keep going as key factors shaping resilience whilst living with chronic pain.
Understanding people's lived experience is key to designing and implementing effective and acceptable interventions, and qualitative insights into what helps people to thrive whilst living with chronic pain can give a rich starting point for therapeutic intervention.
However, qualitative evidence on thriving in chronic pain has not yet been systematically synthesized.
Using our conceptualization of thriving and including associated concepts (see Figure1), we thus aimed to conduct a broad and inclusive qualitative evidence synthesis to explore which personal characteristics and approaches enable people to thrive whilst living with chronic pain.
The conduct and reporting of the review are in accordance with Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses (PRISMA) guidance.
The review protocol can be accessed via PROSPERO database (CRD42024501605) where it was registered prior to completing any searches.
Following initial scoping searches, four electronic databases (MEDLINE, PsycINFO, CINAHL Plus and Scopus) were searched for relevant literature from their inception until January 2024.
To ensure a comprehensive search of grey literature, ProQuest was also searched for theses/dissertations from inception to January 2024.
Hand searching was also conducted via Google Scholar and examination of the reference lists of included studies and relevant systematic reviews.
Search syntax was finalized in PsycINFO (Table1) and adapted for each electronic database.
All identified citations were exported to EndNote X9 (2018); following removal of duplicates, titles and abstracts of the remaining studies were imported to Rayyan (an online review software platform; Ouzzani et al.,2016) and screened against the eligibility criteria.
Studies that did not meet these criteria were excluded.
The full text of potentially relevant papers was then screened to determine eligibility.
Screening was completed independently by the primary researcher (HW) and a second reviewer (KS), who screened approximately 37% of titles/abstracts and titles and 20% of full‐text papers.
Disagreements were discussed until consensus was reached, with the wider team consulted if required.
Studies were included if they were empirical, peer‐reviewed research or grey literature, were written in English and reported qualitative data in adult (aged 18+ years) participants.
As our focus was on pain as the overarching difficulty, we included only studies focusing on people living with chronic primary pain or arthritic pain.
Chronic primary pain describes pain lasting longer than 3 months with no clear underlying secondary cause (e.g., health conditions such as cancer).
Examples include fibromyalgia, complex regional pain syndrome, chronic migraine, irritable bowel syndrome and chronic low back pain (Nicholas et al.,2019).
We included arthritic pain because it may persist after inflammation is controlled, indicating pain mechanisms are driven by changes in the central nervous system leading to neuroplastic changes (Bushnell et al.,2013) and central sensitization (Woolf,2011), similar to chronic primary pain.
Other secondary causes were excluded, as we reasoned that thriving might look different when living with a life‐limiting condition such as cancer.
Lastly, studies were included only if they made specific reference to facilitators, barriers and inequalities in thriving in chronic pain.
Studies were excluded if they reported: (i) quantitative data only; (ii) mixed‐methods data from which qualitative data could not be extracted; (iii) data from adults living with chronic pain that could not be separated from adults with broader health conditions, or those with secondary chronic pain; (iv) general experiences of individuals living with chronic pain rather than in regard to thriving; (v) data from participants under the age of 18, and/or individuals without chronic pain diagnoses; and/or (vi) were not accessible or written in English.
Included papers were assessed independently by two reviewers (HW and KS) for risk of bias using the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP,2018) checklist for qualitative studies.
Disagreement was resolved through consensus or consultation with the wider research team (MGC, CK, KH).
This tool asks reviewers to select either a response of ‘Yes’, ‘No’ or ‘Can't Tell’ to 10 questions exploring the validity of results, appropriateness, scientific rigour and usefulness of the studies.
In line with the Centre for Reviews and Dissemination [CRD] (2009), studies were not excluded where risk of bias was indicated; however, risk of bias was considered when interpreting results.
The identified reviewers were not blinded to the authors, institutions, or journals of included studies.
The primary researcher (HW) developed a data extraction form informed by guidance from Noyes et al. (2020) and the principles of thematic synthesis (Thomas & Harden,2008).
Participant and study characteristics, analysis type, themes, quotations and authors' interpretations were extracted by HW and cross‐checked by an independent reviewer (KS).
The following data were extracted: author, discipline of the author, year of publication, type of research (grey literature/peer reviewed), study design and aims, demographic characteristics of participants (age, gender, ethnicity, pain type, duration of chronic pain), qualitative analysis method/approach, main findings, themes, quotations and interpretations of results.
Data were synthesized using thematic synthesis (Thomas & Harden,2008).
This was conducted by the primary researcher (HW) and reviewed by the wider research team.
During the first stage, data familiarization, the primary researcher familiarized themselves with individual studies and the extracted data from each study; these were referred to throughout the synthesis, whilst also capturing the context of the study in which the data were generated.
Considering the wider context of studies helped to reduce the risk of placing preconceived ideas on expected findings (Thomas & Harden,2008).
The studies were then imported to NVivo, whereby the primary researcher (HW) coded data line‐by‐line to identify patterns.
Codes were generated that explained large parts/patterns of the data, following which they were reviewed, considering meaning and contextual factors across the different studies and aiming towards the generation of ‘data‐driven’ descriptive themes (Thomas & Harden,2008).
For the final stage of synthesis, ‘going beyond’ the aggregated findings from the primary studies (Thomas & Harden,2008), the primary researcher inductively developed analytical themes.
The synthesis process and final themes were reviewed by the wider research team and refined accordingly.
Throughout the process of refining the analysis, the lead researcher regularly circled back to the original studies to ensure themes were grounded in the context of each study.
Finally, to explore coherence and to assess how much confidence to place in the qualitative synthesis, the GRADE‐CERQual approach (Lewin et al.,2018) was used.
This approach is designed to improve the quality and trustworthiness of qualitative research findings by systematically evaluating confidence in them.
Each finding was assessed using the stipulated four criteria (i.e., methodological limitations, coherence, adequacy and relevance) to determine the strength of the qualitative evidence.
Narrative summaries of each theme and a thematic diagram highlighting key codes are presented in the Results section to provide transparency of the synthesis completed.
A sample of original quotations from studies for each of the themes are interwoven within the results to demonstrate participants' voices and transparency of data.
GRADE‐CERQual findings are presented for each theme.
Figure2shows the flow of studies through the review.
In total, 9872 studies were identified through database searching, resulting in 4162 unique citations to be screened.
The full text of 187 were subsequently screened, resulting in the inclusion of 17 studies.
PRISMA diagram illustrating the screening process.
Table2shows the characteristics of the included studies.
All were published between 1999 and 2023 and conducted in the Unites States of America (n =8), United Kingdom (n =3), Australia (n =2), India (n =1), Sweden (n =2) and New Zealand (n =1).
Study designs included mixed methods (n= 2), sequential mixed methods (n= 1), longitudinal mixed methods (n= 1), autoethnographic (n= 1), grounded theory (n= 2), qualitative (n= 8) and longitudinal qualitative (n= 2).
Qualitative data were gathered through methods including semi‐structured interviews and in‐depth interviews.
Data were analysed using a variety of methods/approaches, including thematic analysis, narrative analysis, interpretive phenomenological analysis (IPA), grounded theory, Qualitative Analysis Guide of Leuven (QUALOG), heuristic inquiry, insider research and autoethnography.
Abbreviations: IPA, interpretative phenomenological analysis; NR, not reported; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; T1, timepoint 1; T2, timepoint 2.
The total number of participants ranged from 1 to 136, with most identifying as female.
Ages ranged from 20 to 90 years old, as presented in Table2.
Only five studies reported ethnicity data, of which 84.91% of the participant were White.
Approximately 60.44% of the sample lived with Rheumatoid Arthritis, with approximately 10% experiencing osteoarthritis/chronic joint pain and 5% experiencing chronic pain.
The average duration of chronic pain ranged from 6 months to 55 years (average = 12.91 years, standard deviation [SD] = 6.34 years).
The results of the risk of bias assessment are depicted in Table3.
Overall, results indicated that studies presented with some risk of bias, with few studies meeting all the criteria as stipulated in the tool (CASP,2018).
All studies used appropriate qualitative methodology and all except Loffer (1999) clearly outlined their aims.
The criteria for the appropriateness of recruitment strategy, data being collected in a way to address the research question, and having a clear statement of findings was met by all studies except Richards (2023).
Across the studies, limitations included insufficient documentation on the relationship between researcher and participants.
Specifically, four studies neglected to critically reflect and examine the authors' roles, and the potential bias introduced by this aspect, or did so insufficiently (Bergsten et al.,2011; Chavare & Natu,2020; Richards,2023; Sheedy et al.,2017).
Four studies did not sufficiently justify their choice of method (Chavare & Natu,2020; Richards,2023; Rolbiecki et al.,2017; Swift et al.,2002).
Richards (2023) only met two out of the nine criteria.
This was due to this study employing autoethnographic methodology (i.e., reflecting on the author's personal experiences).
Four of the studies were not peer‐reviewed (Hernandez,2022; Loffer,1999; Saul,2015; Taylor,2021), but despite this, performed relatively well on the CASP assessment.
Loffer (1999) did not report whether ethical issues had been considered, if data were scientifically rigorous, and did not report the aims of the study.
Four overarching themes were identified, as shown in Figure3, which were each deemed to be important in helping an individual to thrive with chronic pain: (i) attitudes towards pain and its impact on life; (ii) behavioural strategies and openness to trying new things; (iii) perceiving love, support and connection with others; and (iv) ascribing meaning to life alongside pain.
The GRADE‐CERQual results (see Table4) indicated moderate confidence that all findings are a reasonable representation of what the review set out to explore (i.e., thriving in individuals living with chronic pain).
Visual summary of the findings.
Notes under each theme indicate the PERMA pillars with which each theme best aligns.
The attitudes held by individuals towards their pain appeared to be an important factor in determining whether or not they thrived.
Factors that helped an individual to thrive included having a positive outlook and perspective on living with pain, drawing on personal resources, not ‘giving up’ when faced with pain and accepting pain as present in their lives, as shown in Figure3.
By contrast, factors that appeared to hinder thriving included an unwillingness to accept a life with pain, denial of the existence of pain and experiencing psychological or emotional pain (i.e., anxiety and/or depression).
I think the denial would slip in more often when I had periods of time when I felt better: when I could leap out of bed and just go and go and go and not feel physically exhausted by it.
Until the next time when, of course, I would have a flare, and then it was, Uh, oh, it's back.
This quote indicates that participants are seeking not just physical support for their pain, but care that helps them to understand what is happening in their mind as well as their body, with this in turn helping individuals to live well.
Due to RA [Rheumatoid Arthritis], sometimes joints pain like anything.
But at that time, it is like if I have decided to work then I have to do it.
It is fine for me even though I get pain next day.
Shutting off from trying new activities or approaches, or lacking motivation to engage in potentially helpful approaches, appeared to hinder thriving.
For instance, a participant from Taylor (2021) reported that they were unable to engage with recommended pain management activities due to anxiety: “She has recommended that I do yoga, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, and other things, but I stay at home because of my anxiety…” (Taylor,2021).
Some people reported difficulty in putting recommendations from professionals into place without the right support.
Participants also felt caught between wishing to do valued activities and experiencing pain interference; for example, one participant in Sheedy et al. (2017) reported: “It's not being able to … do the physical things the way that you have done them in the past, you try to do something, and you just get stopped by a wall of pain.
So you don't do it, and then you don't do it again.” (Sheedy et al.,2017).
They shared how they could get stuck in a cycle whereby disengaging from an activity made it more difficult to get back to doing that activity again.
They reported being stopped by a “wall of pain”, which was a barrier to living well.
Perceiving practical and emotional support from others, as well as feeling a sense of connection to others going through similar difficulties, aided individuals to thrive when living with chronic pain.
This took several forms, including positive patient–professional relationships, spiritual connection, positive support from friends and family and connection with others in the community also experiencing difficulties, as presented in Figure3.
By contrast, the remaining studies found that, despite patient–professional relationships being important in helping individuals thrive when living with pain, positive experiences were not ubiquitous.
For example, one participant in Hernandez (2022) discussed changing doctors to see a professional who took a more holistic approach: “I think is a good thing to experiment if you have the right support, I see a holistic doctor here as well and he's really good.” (Hernandez,2022).
In contrast, the invisibility of chronic pain hindered participants from thriving.
Difficulties of living with a chronic illness that is not visible to others led to participants feeling dismissed, overlooked and not believed.
Participants discussed how these experiences came from interactions with professionals and non‐professionals and left them feeling unable to rely or lean on others for support.
For example, one participant in Hernandez (2022) stated: “A lot of times people are like, you're not really in pain.
Like, you don't look like you're in pain.” (Hernandez,2022) and in Sheedy et al. (2017), a participant reflected that, “it's an invisible illness, and there's that constant feeling that … people don't think your pain is genuine, or they think it's all in your head.” (Sheedy et al.,2017).
Participants also discussed how not feeling believed about their pain can feel as though they are medication‐seeking, leading them to feel dismissed by health care professionals; for example: “Being treated as a pill seeker or something along those lines and just being told to go to physical therapy and, you know, almost being treated as them not being believed.” (Hernandez,2022).
The final theme relates to the meaning that participants attribute to life alongside chronic pain.
By taking ownership of living with chronic pain and seeing the humorous side of life, appreciating life and living it to the fullest, participants were able to thrive with chronic pain.
Specifically, they discussed taking responsibility for their health and putting more effort into improving this to help them live well.
For example, a participant in Loffer (1999) shared: “When I started all this I didn't think, Well, I'm taking control of my health and my spirituality and all of that.
But that's what it comes down to ‐taking care of yourself actually in every way—physically, mentally, emotionally, and spiritually.” (Loffer,1999).
I think [rheumatoid arthritis] made me realize I am not invincible—throughout my earlier years I enjoyed very good health, and I took it for granted.
Now look at life as a gift and try not to take all the things around me for granted.
I just would love to be able to go hiking again and do the things I used to do—go camping, go hiking, go sailing.
And I can't do that yet.
I'm trying to do some walking now, but even that is an effort.
And I'd like to feel healthy so that I could go out and date again and find somebody.
Right now I feel like how could I burden anybody with this until I feel like I have a better handle on the pain.
I'm still in a fair amount of pain.
Maybe some wonderful person would come along where it wouldn't matter.
But right now I feel like how could I bring that on to somebody else to worry about and care for me.
But I can't dwell on that because it's not there.
I really think you have a finite amount of energy and you've got to think where you want to spend it: where it's going to be the most productive or helpful.
This review addressed the question, “What characteristics and approaches enable people to thrive when living with chronic pain?”.
Psychological understanding of the factors implicated in the experience of chronic pain has traditionally been grounded in a deficit paradigm.
Most of the existent literature has focused on exploring factors associated with, or predictive of, difficulties managing chronic pain.
Research exploring positive aspects of living with chronic pain for adults is emerging but qualitative findings have not yet been synthesized.
Therefore, this systematic review aimed to explore adults' experiences of thriving whilst living with chronic pain not experienced as a direct result of illnesses such as cancer.
Qualitative data from 17 studies were synthesized, resulting in four themes: (i) attitudes towards pain and its impact on life; (ii) behavioural strategies and openness to trying new things; (iii) perceiving love, support and connection with others; and (iv) ascribing meaning to life alongside pain.
All four themes described important characteristics and approaches that helped individuals to thrive with chronic pain.
Theme 1 (attitudes) aligns with previous quantitative literature that demonstrates that individuals who are considered resilient to the impact of chronic pain have more positive pain attitudes and beliefs regarding their pain than those who are considered less resilient (Karoly & Ruehlman,2006).
‘Resilient’ individuals were also proposed to have more positive coping styles, which fits with theme 2 (behavioural strategies); developing and being open to implementing strategies and techniques to self‐manage pain.
This fits with the findings of a meta‐synthesis which highlighted that enablers to pain self‐management include feeling empowered to put self‐management strategies into practice (Devan et al.,2018).
Theme 3 (connection) demonstrates how social connection with others can help individuals to thrive when living with chronic pain.
Building meaningful social connections creates feelings of safeness, which in turn can facilitate exploration and resource seeking (Gilbert,2024).
Positive social experiences, including social support, also have pain‐attenuating effects (Che et al.,2018) and can aid in pain self‐management (Devan et al.,2018).
Theme 4 (meaning) fits with previous quantitative literature that found that post‐traumatic growth in adults with arthritis is associated with greater appreciation of life and the ability to draw on and recognize personal strengths (Abraído‐Lanza et al.,1998; Dirik & Karanci,2008; Purc‐Stephenson,2014).
Seligman's PERMA model (i.e., positive emotion, engagement, relationships, meaning and accomplishments pillars; Seligman,2011) posits that thriving results from the intersection between all five pillars, thus highlighting therapeutic trajectories that could enhance thriving and flourishing whilst living with pain.
Results of the current review align well with this model, as displayed in Figure3.
Theme 1 (attitudes) appears to map onto all pillars, with attitudes impacting emotion, engagement, meaning, relationships and accomplishments, and ultimately the ability to thrive.
The positive emotion pillar is congruent with themes 3 (connection) and 4 (meaning), despite pain being defined as an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience.
Engagement especially links with theme 2 (behavioural strategies); that is, being open to trying new approaches and having a commitment to putting actions in place when living with chronic pain.
Relationships fit with theme 3 (connection), whilst the pillar of meaning links to both themes 1 (attitudes) and 4 (meaning).
Finally, accomplishments map onto several themes (attitudes, behavioural strategies, connection) which highlights the importance of engaging in valued activities, connecting with others and holding positive attitudes towards pain.
Findings from this review thus indicate that people living with chronic pain can have characteristics or develop personal approaches that facilitate thriving.
For those who require therapeutic input to move towards thriving, the PERMA (Seligman,2011) model of well‐being can be usefully extended to a chronic pain population as a therapeutic intervention to help individuals live well with pain.
In particular, findings align with the core tenets of acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT; Hayes et al.,1999), which encourages the development of psychological flexibility (i.e., an individual's ability to manage, engage with, accept and adapt to difficult situations; Burton & Bonanno,2016) and awareness and acceptance of difficulties to move forward towards a valued life.
Whilst ACT is recommended in NICE (2021b) guidelines as a treatment for anxiety and depression (i.e., distress) experienced by individuals with chronic pain, the findings of the current review indicate that this approach may also be helpful in supporting individuals living with chronic pain to thrive.
A recent review (McCracken,2024) highlights that the evidence for psychological flexibility and ACT in chronic pain is large and consistently supportive.
Comparatively less research has focused on the relationship between psychological flexibility and flourishing, but initial findings suggest that psychological flexibility may provide a theoretical explanation of flourishing (or not) in the presence of chronic pain (Trompetter et al.,2019).
Indeed, positive psychology interventions already draw on the PERMA model and the effectiveness of such interventions in reducing distress within chronic pain samples are well‐documented.
For example, a six‐week positive psychology intervention consisting of specific exercises including Three Good Things (i.e., writing down three things that went well and reflecting on these daily; Seligman et al.,2005; Seligman et al.,2006), savouring (Bryant,2003), self‐compassion‐focused exercises (Neff,2009; Smeets et al.,2014) and best possible self‐imagery (i.e., imagining a life considering what it would look like if it were the best possible future to be; Meevissen et al.,2011; Peters et al.,2010) was found to reduce levels of catastrophizing (i.e., viewing a situation as worse than it is), depressed mood and anxiety in chronic primary pain patients (Flink et al.,2015).
Positive psychology interventions have also been found to improve well‐being (Müller et al.,2016), with a randomized controlled trial in a chronic pain sample finding that a positive psychology intervention led to a significant increase in happiness (Peters et al.,2017).
Moreover, recently published systematic reviews reported that positive psychology interventions can improve mental health in chronic pain patients (Blasco‐Belled et al.,2025; Braunwalder et al.,2022).
Decreased anxiety (moderate and significant effect) and depression (small but non‐significant effect), and increased subjective well‐being (moderate and significant effect) were reported for the chronic pain sample (Blasco‐Belled et al.,2025).
This is the first qualitative evidence synthesis exploring the experiences of adults living with chronic pain to understand characteristics and approaches that help or hinder them to thrive.
A key strength of this review is that it supports the movement within psychological research from a deficit paradigm to a focus on positive psychology, which has a direct impact on evidence‐based practice.
Guidance for the conduct and reporting of systematic reviews was followed to ensure the rigour and reproducibility of this work (CRD,2009; PRISMA; Page et al.,2021).
Inclusion of grey literature aimed to address publication bias common to systematic reviews (Cherry et al.,2023), and GRADE‐CERQual was used to determine the level of confidence that can be placed in the findings.
GRADE‐CERQual results indicated moderate confidence in the findings, with key methodological weaknesses identified (i.e., studies insufficiently reporting the authors' role in the study).
Whilst the risk of bias has been discussed transparently when interpreting the results, we are aware of the potential for bias within this review (e.g., not all studies were dual‐screened for inclusion; Barnett‐Page & Thomas,2009).
The findings of this review predominantly rely on the experiences of White participants living in Global North countries (as defined in Khan et al.,2022), which is reflective of the evidence synthesized and possibly the methodological decision to only include English‐language papers.
Despite not specifying peer review or study location as an eligibility criterion to maximize inclusion of relevant literature, only one study was conducted in the Global South; further research in Global South countries is therefore needed to determine the applicability of these findings.
Studies commonly under‐reported pain characteristics, which may limit the transferability of the findings.
Furthermore, studies reflect the perspectives of a wide range of individuals living with chronic pain (i.e., those newly diagnosed to those living with pain for upwards of 50 years).
Heterogeneity in pain‐related experiences may thus have influenced the conclusions that can be drawn from this review or its transferability.
Whilst the data did not indicate that the time elapsed since diagnosis was linked to thriving, the processes involved in thriving can still take time to establish.
As we did not specify duration of time living with chronic pain as an eligibility criterion, we therefore could not draw conclusions regarding the temporal development of thriving (i.e., how long it may take), or when the onset may be (i.e., individuals can live with chronic pain many years before receiving a diagnosis).
This warrants further exploration.
Furthermore, the review synthesized only the experiences of individuals living with chronic primary pain or arthritic pain, and thus, its generalizability to the experiences of individuals with secondary chronic pain requires further investigation.
For example, for individuals living with chronic pain as a result of cancer, different attitudes (theme 1) regarding pain may be evident as the pain they experience is linked to a potentially life‐limiting condition.
In addition, individuals living with chronic cancer pain may have different views on coping strategies depending on stage of cancer, which could in turn impact management of chronic pain beyond their control.
Similarly, we did not include terms of psychological flexibility within our search.
Future research may usefully explore psychological flexibility as a cognitive mechanism or process by which individuals flourish in the context of chronic pain.
Finally, whilst the thematic synthesis method proposed by Thomas and Harden (2008) is a well‐used and comprehensive method of integrating qualitative research findings, there are risks of oversimplification of data (Barnett‐Page & Thomas,2009) and interpretive power (Thomas & Harden,2008) that should be acknowledged when interpreting findings.
For example, we were only able to synthesize direct quotations presented within the included studies; access to the raw data of the included studies may have yielded different insights and resulted in alternative themes being identified and presented.
The present findings may guide health care professionals to improve how they support individuals living with chronic pain by embedding positive psychology approaches into their usual practice (see e.g., Janevic et al.,2022; Georgiadis & Johnson,2023).
In addition to problem‐focused discussion, that is, a deficit paradigm, we recommend that healthcare professionals and multidisciplinary teams (MDTs) may wish to emphasize how patients can draw on personal strengths to live well with pain.
This may also shape conversations between professionals within MDTs by shifting attention away from problem‐based thinking that may not lead to therapeutic benefit (cf.
Schofield,2018).
Application of the PERMA model within psychological therapy and pain management programmes (PMP) that aim to increase coping, adjustment and living well with chronic pain could further enable individuals to thrive.
Whilst more research is needed to understand how PMPs currently incorporate positive psychology principles, enquiring about positive emotion, engagement, relationships, meaning and accomplishments during assessment may shape formulations and help the psychologist and client to identify areas to target to help them to thrive.
Third‐wave approaches such as ACT (already a recommended intervention for emotional distress experienced by individuals with chronic pain; NICE,2021b), may be particularly useful in supporting this patient group to live well.
It may also be beneficial to draw upon relational and systemic therapies (i.e., interventions understanding the systems in which individuals are based, how these interact and wider contextual factors such as social economic status, and access to healthcare that may influence pain and well‐being) when exploring the pillar of relationships, or to consider compassion (i.e., interventions focusing on empathy, kindness and warmth towards self, others and from others) in shaping outlook on life.
This review identified four themes of importance in helping an individual to thrive with chronic pain: (i) attitudes towards pain and its impact on life; (ii) behavioural strategies and openness to trying new things; (iii) perceiving love, support and connection with others; and (iv) ascribing meaning to life alongside pain.
These themes broadly fit with Seligman's (2011) PERMA model of thriving, supporting the utility of the model in understanding thriving in individuals living with chronic pain.
A focus on acceptance and positive psychology interventions/approaches may promote thriving in adults living with chronic pain.
For example, endorsing the shift away from a problem‐based narrative within MDTs and between patients and professionals can help empower individuals living with chronic pain to explore some of the positive factors and appreciation of life, identify personal values and embark on a journey focused on their goals to thrive.
As a Clinical Psychologist, my interest in this study stemmed from professional work experience alongside a personal curiosity about the universality of chronic pain, including the emotional pain that comes alongside it.
I have been interested in chronic pain for a number of years and wished to pursue the passion to improve the evidence base in this field.
I acknowledge that for a six‐month period whilst completing this systematic review, I was working in a Facial Pain NHS Service.
Whilst working within this service, my clinical practice was aligned to a process‐based therapy approach and integrated both cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT).
I acknowledge that these experiences and the knowledge I gained may have influenced my interpretation of results.
However, throughout the research process, I have remained aware of potential biases, including my inclination towards CBT and ACT, as well as the terminology utilized.
In addition, to make a conscious effort to help reduce biases within this research, I engaged in conversations with colleagues with different theoretical perspectives and made my own reflections throughout.