To explore the co‐prescribing of analgesic and/or adjuvant medications among residents of Australian and Finnish residential care homes.

Secondary cross‐sectional analyses of prescribing data from residents of 12 Australian residential care homes in 2019 and 53 Finnish nursing homes and assisted living facilities in 2017–2018. Demographic characteristics and medication data were extracted from medical records and medication administration charts. Co‐prescribing was defined as more than one analgesic (acetaminophen, non‐steroidal anti‐inflammatory drugs and opioids) and/or adjuvant (gabapentinoids, tricyclic antidepressants and duloxetine) medication prescribed for regular administration.

Overall, 550 Australian residents (89 [IQR 84–92] years; 73% females) and 2423 Finnish residents (84 [IQR 65–103] years; 74% females) were included. Of 416 Australian residents prescribed any regular analgesic or adjuvant, 181 (44%) were prescribed two or more, including 66 (16%) who were prescribed three or more. Of 1406 Finnish residents prescribed any regular analgesic or adjuvant, 469 (33%) were prescribed two or more, including 87 (6%) who were prescribed three or more. Acetaminophen was co‐prescribed to more than 75% of Australian and 43% of Finnish residents prescribed other analgesics or adjuvants. Of 61 Australian residents and 186 Finnish residents prescribed gabapentinoids, 38 (62%) and 86 (46%) were co‐prescribed opioids. Opioids were co‐prescribed to 59%–83% of Australian and 25%–46% of Finnish residents prescribed adjuvants.

Analgesic and adjuvant co‐prescribing was more prevalent for Australian than Finnish residents, which was largely driven by acetaminophen co‐prescribing to more than three quarters of analgesic or adjuvant users in Australia. Central nervous system‐active polypharmacy arising from high rates of adjuvant and opioid co‐prescribing warrants further attention.

The findings highlight the continued need for an increased awareness of analgesic and adjuvant co‐prescribing, particularly regarding central nervous system‐active polypharmacy. Policies should continue to focus on implementing regular analgesic stewardship interventions, including medication reviews, to ensure safe and effective medication use for older adults living in residental care homes.

Analgesic and adjuvant medications are an important component of overall pain management strategies, yet little is known about co‐prescribing patterns in residential care homes. As a result, research into the safety and efficacy of multimodal analgesia in residential care homes has been identified as a priority.9,10,11Cross‐national comparisons of medication use are important to explore medication prescribing patterns and identify potential medication‐related issues.12Comparing analgesic use in Australian and Finnish residential care homes is worthwhile because both countries have ageing populations and similar models of health‐care provision to residents.13,14Additionally, residents from both countries experience high rates of frailty, multimorbidity and polypharmacy, which brings challenges ensuring the safe and effective use of medications.15,16The objective of this study was to explore the co‐prescribing of analgesic and/or adjuvant medications among residents of Australian and Finnish residential care homes.

We conducted secondary cross‐sectional analyses of medication prescribing data for residents from 12 residential care homes in South Australia in 2019 and 53 nursing homes or assisted living facilities in Helsinki in 2017–2018.

For the Australian sample, data were collected between March and October 2019 using a combination of resident medical records and observations, physical assessments and questionnaires administered by study nurses or site registered nurses. Researchers extracted medication data from medication charts. A full audit of each medication entry was completed. For the Finnish sample, data were collected by trained study nurses between 2017 and 2018 using resident medical records.

Demographic characteristics (age, sex) were obtained from resident medical records. For the Australian sample, observed pain was assessed using the Pain Assessment in Advanced Dementia (PAINAD) scale.22Possible scores ranged from 0 to 10 and scores were classified into no (0) or mild/moderate (1–6) pain, as no residents were observed to be in severe pain (7–10). The study registered nurse observed each resident at rest for 5 min before applying the scale. The registered nurse was required to have known the respective resident for at least 2 weeks before conducting assessments. For the Finnish sample, self‐reported pain was assessed using the Health‐Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) 15D ‘discomfort and pain’ item.23This item included symptoms of pain, ache, nausea and itching.

Traditional analgesics and adjuvant medications were defined by consensus discussion with the investigator team (FileS1). Medications were categorised using the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) Classification System codes recommended by the WHO.24Traditional analgesics included acetaminophen (i.e. paracetamol, ATC code: N02BE01), NSAIDs (M01A), non‐opioid plus opioid combinations (N02AJ) and opioids (N02A, including codeine preparations [R05DA04]). Adjuvant medications included gabapentinoids (N02BF), TCAs (N06AA) and selective serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors [SNRIs] (duloxetine [N06AX21]). Medications prescribed for regular use were considered. This study did not address as‐needed (i.e. pro re nata, PRN) medications or self‐administration of any non‐prescription medications that were not recorded on the resident's medication chart.

Standardised data collection tables were developed and pilot tested with the investigator team (FileS2). Analyses were conducted independently by investigators in their respective countries using these tables to avoid sharing of resident‐level data. Descriptive statistics were used to summarise demographic and clinical characteristics of residents. Aggregate medication data from both countries were compared and graphical representations were computed using Microsoft Excel version 365. Australian data were analysed using SAS, version 9.4 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC). Finnish data were analysed using Stata statistical software, version 16 (StataCorp, USA).

The Australian study was approved by the University of Adelaide Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC‐2018‐247) and was registered with the Monash University Human Research Ethics Committee (23620). The Finnish study was approved by ethics committee of Helsinki University Hospital (HUS/2042/2016).

A total of 2973 residents were included (n= 550 from Australia andn= 2423 from Finland [n= 750 nursing home residents andn= 1673 assisted living facility residents], Table1). Australian and Finnish residents were comparable in age (median 89 [IQR 84–92] vs. median 84 [IQR 65–103]) and sex (females: 403 (73%) vs. 1791 (74%), Table2). In total, 80 (15%) Australian residents were observed to be in any ‘mild/moderate pain’ using PAINAD. In total, 1677 (69%) Finnish residents self‐reported any ‘discomfort and pain’ and 431 (18%) self‐reported marked, severe or unbearable ‘discomfort and pain’ using 15D.

Includesn= 750 nursing home residents andn= 1673 assisted living facility residents.

Abbreviations: HRQoL, Health‐Related Quality of Life; IQR, interquartile range; PAINAD, Pain in Advanced Dementia.

Self‐reported pain prevalence available for 2406 residents.

The prescribing of regular acetaminophen (380 (69%) vs. 1070 (44%)) and regular opioids (165 (30%) vs. 609 (25%)) was higher in the Australian sample than the Finnish sample. In both Australian and Finnish samples, the prescribing of regular NSAIDs was low (8 (2%) vs. 14 (1%)). The prescribing of regular gabapentinoids (61 (11%) vs. 186 (8%)) and regular TCAs (34 (6%) vs. 12 (1%)) was higher in the Australian sample than the Finnish sample. Duloxetine was prescribed to 12 (2%) Australian and 95 (4%) Finnish residents. The prescribing of analgesic and adjuvant medications was higher in Finnish nursing homes compared to Finnish assisted living facilities (acetaminophen 388 (53%) vs. 672 (40%), NSAIDs 6 (1%) vs. 8 (1%), opioids 233 (31%) vs. 117 (23%), gabapentinoids 69 (9%) vs. 117 (7%) and TCAs 5 (1%) vs. 7 (0%)), with the exception of duloxetine (29 (4%) vs. 66 (4%)).

Of 416 Australian residents prescribed any regular analgesic or adjuvant medication, 181 (44%) were prescribed two or more, including 66 (16%) residents who were prescribed three or more (Table3). Of 1406 Finnish residents prescribed any regular analgesic or adjuvant medication, 469 (33%) were prescribed two or more, including 87 (6%) residents who were prescribed three or more (Table3). Figure1outlines the patterns of analgesic and adjuvant medication co‐prescribing in Australian and Finnish samples.

Number of Australian and Finnish residents prescribed one or more regular analgesic and/or adjuvant medications.

Co‐prescribing of regular analgesic and adjuvant medications in Australian and Finnish residents.

Residents in the Australian sample had a higher prevalence of co‐prescribing across all analgesic and adjuvant medication combinations, with the exception of NSAIDs and opioids: of eight Australian and 14 Finnish residents prescribed NSAIDs, 3 (38%) vs. 7 (50%) were co‐prescribed opioids. Acetaminophen was the most frequently co‐prescribed medication in both samples, yet higher in the Australian sample (75%–90%) compared to the Finnish sample (43%–56%). Of 61 Australian residents and 186 Finnish residents prescribed gabapentinoids, 38 (62%) vs. 86 (46%) were co‐prescribed opioids. Conversely, of 165 Australian and 609 Finnish residents prescribed opioids, 38 (23%) vs. 86 (14%) were co‐prescribed gabapentinoids. Of residents prescribed adjuvant medications, 59%–83% of Australian and 25%–46% of Finnish residents were co‐prescribed opioids.

This was the first study to explicitly explore analgesic and adjuvant medication co‐prescribing among residents of Australian and Finnish residential care homes. While the general patterns of co‐prescribing were similar in Australian and Finnish residents, co‐prescribing of three or more regular analgesic and/or adjuvant medications was 2.5‐times more prevalent in Australian residents. The higher prevalence of co‐prescribing in Australian residents was largely driven by a high level of acetaminophen co‐prescribing. Further investigation into central nervous system (CNS)‐active polypharmacy is needed in both countries, arising from high rates of opioid co‐prescribing with adjuvant medications.

Our study identified that approximately half (44%) of Australian and one‐third (33%) of Finnish residents were co‐prescribed more than one analgesic and/or adjuvant medication. There was a notable 2.5‐fold higher prevalence of prescribing of three or more analgesic and/or adjuvant medications in Australian residents. Given that Australian and Finnish residents have similar clinical and demographic characteristics, this difference in co‐prescribing was unlikely to fully reflect or explain the apparent differences in pain prevalence.1,2,3,4,15,16The higher rates of co‐prescribing may be partly explained by Australian initiatives to minimise un‐ or under‐managed pain in residential care homes as a possible cause of behavioural symptoms.25,26In the literature, an increase in the use of analgesic medications has been identified as one of the top five factors contributing to the increasing polypharmacy in Australian residential care homes.27Previous research has suggested that analgesic decision‐making varies between countries and cultures.28This highlights the importance of further cross‐national exchanges of knowledge, practice and perspectives between countries with ageing populations, particularly towards analgesic decision‐making. These cross‐national comparative studies are essential for the development of targeted interventions aimed at improving the safe and effective use of these medications in residential care homes.

Acetaminophen was the most frequently co‐prescribed medication, with three‐quarters of Australian residents and over one‐third of Finnish residents prescribed NSAIDs, opioids, gabapentinoids, TCAs or duloxetine, co‐prescribed acetaminophen. Acetaminophen is considered the first‐line analgesic for mild‐to‐moderate pain in older adults and may potentiate the effects of opioids, minimising the need for higher doses of opioids and adjuvant medications, hence reducing ADEs.6,29We were not able to investigate whether acetaminophen was co‐prescribed to minimise opioid doses (i.e. opioid sparing) in this study, and further research is needed to explore this practice. Our findings suggest that Australian clinicians continued regular acetaminophen when acetaminophen alone was not achieving the required level of analgesia. The efficacy of acetaminophen in the context of chronic non‐cancer pain in older adults has recently been scrutinised.29TheBritish Journal of Pain(2022), European Society for Clinical and Economic Aspects of Osteoporosis (ESCEO, 2019), National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE, 2021) and the Australian National Prescribing Service (NPS, 2022) have highlighted the limited evidence of acetaminophen efficacy for chronic pain and potential ADEs with long‐term use, particularly when co‐prescribed with NSAIDs.30,31,32,33Favourably, the co‐prescribing of acetaminophen with NSAIDs was close to zero per cent across all residents in our study. Further understanding of the long‐term safety and efficacy of acetaminophen within older adults' analgesic regimens is needed.

Approximately three in five Australian residents and two in five Finnish residents prescribed gabapentinoids were co‐prescribed opioids. The prevalence of gabapentinoid prescribing in residential care homes has reportedly increased in Finland (1% in 2003 to 9% in 2017), Ontario (2% in 2010 to 12% in 2019) and Norway (1% in 2000 to 4% in 2011).18,34,35Specifically, the prevalence of co‐prescribed gabapentinoids with opioids in the United States was 48% higher in 2018 than in 2011.36The rising use of gabapentinoids among older adults, alone and in combination with opioids, has sparked safety concerns due to increased risks of CNS‐active polypharmacy, which is associated with heightened likelihood of sedation, cognitive impairment, falls and other serious adverse drug events.37This concern was reflected in the American Geriatrics Society (AGS) Beers Criteria (2019, updated in 2023), which strongly recommends against the co‐prescribing of opioids and gabapentinoids in older adults.38A recent Australian study reported gabapentinoid dispensing was associated with a higher risk of hip fractures, especially in frail individuals, which persisted after considering concomitant use of other CNS medications.39Our study highlights the importance of comprehensive, holistic interventions that consider a resident's entire medication regimen, including combinations that increase susceptibility of analgesic‐related ADEs, such as the co‐prescribing of CNS‐active medications with opioids.

Over 59% of Australian residents who used adjuvant medications were co‐prescribed opioids, compared to 25% of Finnish residents. Adjuvant medications are recommended for alleviating certain types of neuropathic pain, yet frequently prescribed for non‐neuropathic pain.40Though adjuvant medications provide a potentially safer alternative to opioids for pain management in the perioperative setting, the safety of adjuvants for chronic pain in older adults is not well established.41,42Nevertheless, our study identified that opioid and adjuvant medication co‐prescribing was common in Australian and Finnish residential care homes. The value of system‐level monitoring and analgesic stewardship interventions in residential care homes has been gaining international recognition in recent years.43,44Analgesic indicators have been identified as a possible mechanism for residential care homes to monitor safe and effective analgesic use, ensure effective pain management and reduce analgesic‐related harm.45,46An indicator of residents prescribed opioids with other CNS‐active medications has been proposed to identify residents who may benefit from multidisciplinary medication reviews and introduction of non‐pharmacological approaches.45,47Advances in electronic medication management systems represent a unique opportunity to efficiently implement indicators and reform analgesic optimisation in residential care homes.

The lower utilisation of adjuvant medications in Finland, including a 12‐fold lower prevalence of TCAs, may be partly explained by Finnish‐specific guidelines recommending avoidance of TCAs in older adults due to their anticholinergic effects.48Variations in adjuvant medication prevalence may partly reflect differences in cultural attitudes or clinical guidelines for managing non‐pain conditions, such as depression, rather than pain management practices between the two countries.28The Meds75+ database (the national Finnish criteria used to support clinical decision‐making regarding drug treatment for people greater than 75 years of age) lists TCAs as a medication to avoid in older adults due to significant ADEs (category D) and gabapentinoids and duloxetine as more suitable alternatives (category C).49This may explain the preference towards duloxetine in the Finnish sample.

Australian and Finnish residents included in this study were comparable in terms of age and sex. Pain assessment measurements between the two samples were not directly comparable, as the prevalence and intensity of pain varies according to the pain assessment method used (i.e. observational or self‐report measures).50Future comparative studies may explore analgesic and adjuvant prescribing practices based on pain control, using the same proxy measure for self‐reported and observed pain prevalence. The 15D ‘discomfort and pain’ item used to report pain in the Finnish sample includes symptoms of pain, ache, nausea and itching, which may have overestimated actual pain prevalence.

The Finnish sample excluded residents with moderate‐to‐severe dementia, whereas the Australian sample excluded residents considered to be at the end of life (<3 months to live) and those not able to complete baseline assessments, which may partly explain differences in prescribing. A 2015 systematic review with meta‐analyses reported that residents living with dementia or cognitive impairment had a significantly lower prevalence of analgesic use compared to residents without cognitive impairment (odds ratio [OR] .6, 95% confidence interval [CI] .4–.8).50However, previous research with the same aged care provider in Australia reported similar analgesic prevalence in residents with and without dementia (79% vs. 73.4%,p= .20).4Further research exploring analgesic and adjuvant co‐prescribing patterns based on cognitive impairment is required.

Data were derived from South Australia and Helsinki and therefore, the results may not be generalisable to overall prescribing patterns in each country. Differences in the number of residents included in the Australian (n= 550) and Finnish (n= 2423) samples should be considered when interpreting the results. This study involved secondary analysis of data. There was limited scope to explore differences in non‐pharmacological approaches, topical NSAIDs, prescribed doses of medications or indications. This is important because adjuvant medications may be used for non‐pain indications (e.g. depression). For these reasons, it was not possible to comment on the clinical appropriateness of medication regimens for pain. However, pharmacological interactions between analgesic and adjuvant medications remain an important consideration regardless of the prescribing indication.

Analgesic and adjuvant co‐prescribing was more prevalent for Australian than Finnish residents, particularly co‐prescribing of three or more analgesic and/or adjuvant medications. This was largely driven by acetaminophen co‐prescribing to more than three‐quarters of analgesic or adjuvant users in Australia. CNS‐active polypharmacy arising from high rates of opioid and adjuvant co‐prescribing warrants further attention in both countries. Cross‐national research and targeted analgesic stewardship interventions are needed to ensure the safe and effective co‐prescribing of analgesic and adjuvant medications in residential care homes.

The Frailty in Residential Sector over Time (FIRST) Study and ADJ were funded through project funding to RV from the Healthy Aging Research Consortium funded by the South Australian Department for Innovation and Skills, Hospital Research Foundation and Resthaven Inc. LAD and SJL were supported by postgraduate research scholarships funded by Monash University. SJL, RV, and JSB were supported by the NHMRC Centre of Research Excellence in Frailty and Healthy Ageing. SJL was supported by the Australian Government Research Training Program Scholarship. AJC is supported by an NHMRC Emerging Leadership 1 grant (APP2009633).

The authors would like to acknowledge Terry Short for supporting the FIRST study coordination and contributing to the study design, as well as Hilary Ashby who supported the FIRST study coordination. They would also like to thank their study nurses Jean Zhang, Victoria Foy and Kim Testi who conducted the data collection and collected informed consent. The authors would like to acknowledge Tina Cooper and Leonie Robson for contributing to the FIRST study design, and thank Tina Cooper and Merridy Baylis for reviewing this manuscript. Open access publishing facilitated by Monash University, as part of the Wiley ‐ Monash University agreement via the Council of Australian University Librarians.

Amanda J. Cross and J. Simon Bell are last joint co‐authors.