Pregnancy involves rapid physical and physiological changes that may affect feelings towards the bodily experience. This experience, including body dissatisfaction and interoceptive sensibility, is linked to antenatal attachment and maternal mental health. However, the long‐term relationships between pregnant bodily experiences and postnatal outcomes remain unknown. This study aimed to explore the complex relationships between the perinatal bodily experience and postnatal variables.

Longitudinal observational study using online surveys at three time points.

Longitudinal data were collected at three time points, during pregnancy (N= 253), and 3 (N= 137) and 6 (N= 107) months postpartum. Pregnancy‐validated measures assessed body dissatisfaction and interoception, alongside measures of postnatal bonding, maternal anxiety and depression, breastfeeding behaviours, and infant birth weight and development. A partial correlation graphical lasso network analysis was used to explore the relationships between the bodily experience and these postnatal variables.

Antenatal bodily experiences linked to postnatal anxiety, body dissatisfaction and interoceptive trust, with poorer postnatal experiences going on to correlate with higher anxiety, depression and breastfeeding rates at 3 months. Antenatal body weight dissatisfaction was linked to increased breastfeeding and depression, less trust in bodily signals and a lower quality mother‐infant bond at 6 months postpartum.

The findings underscore the importance of pregnant bodily experiences for maternal postnatal health and mother‐infant bonding, helping to identify mothers at risk of poorer postnatal outcomes.

Pregnancy is often a time of joy and anticipation for many women, as it marks the beginning of the journey into motherhood with a new child. There are multiple bodily changes that occur during pregnancy, including the appearance of a bump, enlarged breasts and increased hair growth, emphasising just how physical the experience of pregnancy is. These changes influence both the interoceptive body, which reflects internal bodily sensations such as the heartbeat or breathing, and the exteroceptive body, which relates to external bodily perceptions such as appearance. Together, these bodily changes can affect the way women feel about their bodies and their bodily experience.

One aspect of the bodily experience is body dissatisfaction, which involves negative thoughts and feelings about body appearance (Grogan,2021). This can have profound impacts on mental health and well‐being, including anxiety (Lin & Kulik,2002), depression (Scheffers et al.,2019) and disordered eating (Thompson & Stice,2001). Previous work reveals a variation in responses to the physical changes that occur. For example, while pregnancy can temporarily liberate women from conforming to societal beauty standards (Crossland et al.,2023; Davies & Wardle,1994), feelings of body dissatisfaction can persist or develop due to changes such as weight gain that conflict with societal ideals of the female appearance (Hodgkinson et al.,2014). Additionally, for many, there is still pressure to look a certain way (Crossland et al.,2023; Kirk & Preston,2019).

Alongside feelings about the external body, internal factors are also part of the bodily experience. Interoception is defined as the awareness of, or attention paid to, internal signals such as thirst, pain, and heart rate (Craig,2002). During pregnancy, interoceptive signals often increase in order to sustain the fetus (Butte & King,2005; Lee & Zaffke,1999). There is emphasis placed on recognising fetal movements in order to assess the baby's growth and well‐being (Frøen et al.,2008), and so it is understandable that women focus more on their internal body during this time. Additionally, trust in bodily signals and the body's ability to support fetal development is linked to more positive pregnancy and birth experiences (Crossland et al.,2022), which can have a direct impact on how women feel about their bodies (Crossland et al.,2022; Munns & Preston,2024).

The importance of how women feel about the pregnant bodily experience and its impact on their well‐being has been examined, suggesting that both interoception and exteroception play a key role in antenatal maternal mental health (Noda et al.,2022; Sansone, Stapleton, & Patching,2024; Sansone, Stapleton, Patching, & Lawrence,2024; Singh Solorzano et al.,2022) and antenatal attachment (Kirk & Preston,2019; Sansone, Stapleton, & Patching,2024; Sansone, Stapleton, Patching, & Lawrence,2024). The significance of both these aspects has been underscored by a recent network analysis, which identified that less trust in internal bodily signals during pregnancy, alongside feelings of body dissatisfaction, was associated with poorer maternal mental health and antenatal attachment (Munns & Preston,2024).

Network analysis provides a comprehensive view of the interconnections between different psychological variables, enabling research into complex concepts (Borsboom et al.,2021) and identifying the most influential variables within the network as potential targets for interventions (Yuqing et al.,2020). Unlike traditional methods, network analysis looks at how multiple variables are connected and influence each other. In this approach, the connections between variables are shown as edges, which represent the strength and direction (positive or negative) of their relationships. This is different from social network analysis, which looks at whether two people or entities are connected, often without specifying the nature of the connection. Through this method, Munns and Preston (2024) identified interoceptive body trust and body weight dissatisfaction to be central to antenatal outcomes. These relationships may develop through unrealistic expectations to maintain a slim figure during pregnancy (Huang et al.,2021) and the mother's need to assess the baby's movements and address their needs (Heidrich & Cranley,1989; Stafford et al.,2024).

Despite bodily experiences during pregnancy being implicated in antenatal attachment and well‐being, the associations between pregnant bodily experiences and downstream postnatal factors are yet to be fully understood. Understanding factors contributing to postnatal well‐being is critical, given the high prevalence of anxiety (13–40%) and depression (13–19%) in postnatal populations (Field,2018; O'Hara & McCabe,2013) and the impact this has on postnatal bonding (Dubber et al.,2015). Both postnatal mental health and bonding have wide reaching influences, being implicated in parenting behaviours (Mascheroni & Ionio,2019; Seymour et al.,2015), breastfeeding (Coo et al.,2020; Roth et al.,2021) and infant development (Hamdan & Tamim,2012; Mascheroni & Ionio,2019; O'Hara & McCabe,2013). A recent study has demonstrated associations between higher levels of pregnant body dissatisfaction and poorer postnatal mental health and bonding outcomes (Munns, Crossland, et al.,2024; Munns, Spark, et al.,2024). However, this research used cross‐sectional data, gathered postnatally using a retrospective measure of body dissatisfaction and did not consider the full bodily experience, including interoception. Therefore, there is a need for longitudinal research considering multiple potential variables, which enable a more robust assessment of body experience over the course of pregnancy and postpartum.

Considering the established relationship between body dissatisfaction and postnatal bonding, it is understandable that breastfeeding is also intimately connected to the bodily experience. Breastfeeding can strengthen the mother‐infant bond (Linde et al.,2020; Roth et al.,2021) and its association with the bodily experience. There are common concerns around how breastfeeding can significantly change or damage breasts (Brown et al.,2015), with women who are more dissatisfied with their bodies being less likely to breastfeed (Brown et al.,2015). Additionally, women who have greater trust in their bodies capabilities are more likely to have positive breastfeeding experiences (Flacking et al.,2021). Further research into breastfeeding within the context of the bodily experience and postnatal well‐being would allow for a deeper understanding of how these factors interact, potentially leading to improved support and interventions for mothers.

This current study will examine the relationship between pregnant bodily experiences and postnatal mother and infant well‐being. Addressing gaps in previous work, this research uses a longitudinal approach and a large sample of pregnant women to examine the pregnant bodily experience in relation to measures of maternal anxiety and depression, bonding, breastfeeding, and infant birthweight and development at 3 and 6 months postpartum. An exploratory network analysis will be used to identify the interconnectivity between the bodily experience and postnatal variables, due to this methods potential to elucidate complex interrelationships between psychological variables (Hevey,2018). Here, two networks are presented, with the 3‐month data including all variables gathered. The 6‐month data takes a hypothesis‐driven approach given the anticipated smaller sample size due to high attrition rates reported in perinatal longitudinal studies (Brown et al.,2015), and thus includes only key variables of interest identified through previous literature. Overall, this research aims to expand upon our understanding surrounding the role of pregnant bodily experiences.

Participants were invited to take part through advertisements online (via social media and parenting websites), and posters at local nurseries, health centres, and antenatal groups. Ethical approval was provided by the University of York Departmental Ethnics Committee (ref:122) and all participants provided informed consent before completing the online surveys, anonymously, at each timepoint.

Postnatal data was gathered at two time points (3 and 6 months postpartum), with the bodily experience during pregnancy being captured at an antenatal time point (Munns & Preston,2024). In total, 147 women completed the 3‐month follow‐up, and 117 women completed the 6‐month follow‐up. Individuals under 18 and those who self‐disclosed a clinical diagnosis of depression or anorexia were screened for and excluded from the experiment. Participants with incomplete data (no responses to any outcome measures, 6 monthn= 3), duplicate responses (3 monthn= 4, 6 monthn= 3) and those whose unique participant code could not be matched across time points (3 monthn= 6, 6 monthn= 4) were excluded. This left 137 participants and 107 participants at 3 and 6 months respectively. See Table1for participant demographics at each time point and Section A: AppendixS1for participant attrition characteristics.

Note:aN= 137,bN= 107,cN= 89,dN= 131,eN= 101,fN= 131,gN= 102,hN= 124,iN= 95,jN= 115.

Surveys were created and distributed using Qualtrics (Qualtrics,2020). Participants were invited to complete an online survey via a Qualtrics link. They were then presented with the relevant information sheet and consent form prior to completing the survey, followed by a debrief form. Self‐reported questionnaires were used to measure body dissatisfaction, interoceptive sensibility, anxiety, depression and postnatal bonding. See Table2for further details.

The MAIA‐Preg was adapted from the Multi‐dimensional Assessment of Interoceptive Awareness scale (Mehling et al.,2012). Questions that were not pertinent to pregnant women were removed, and the subscales underwent refinement through a factor analysis. Consequently, the MAIA subscales of ‘not worrying’, ‘body listening’ and ‘noticing’ were eliminated from the scale.

Participants were asked whether they were breastfeeding. Those who did not select breastfeeding were coded as 0, and those who did were coded as 1. Women who were currently breastfeeding, or had previously breastfeed and since stopped, were asked how positive/negative they had found their breastfeeding experience (on a 5‐point Likert scale ranging from 1 – ‘extremely positive’ to 5 – ‘extremely negative’).

Two partial correlation network analyses investigated the relationships between bodily experience measures gathered during pregnancy and postnatal variables at 3 and 6 months. The 3‐month network included variables measuring the bodily experience, anxiety, depression, bonding, breastfeeding rate and experience, and infant birth weight and development. Subscales of all variables were included, where available, rather than global scores to provide a more in‐depth analysis capturing any nuanced relationships. Age (Tiggemann & McCourt,2013), BMI (Quittkat et al.,2019) and gestation (Mokhtar Abdelsalam,2017) were integrated as nodes within the 3‐month network due to their established relationships with bodily and antenatal experiences.

In order to maintain network stability with an expected smaller sample size, the 6‐month network focused on a priori nodes of interest. These nodes consisted of antenatal trusting and dissatisfaction with body weight, which have previously been found to be central to the antenatal bodily experience (Munns & Preston,2024). Given the importance of body trust and body dissatisfaction in antenatal outcomes, postnatal body trust and body dissatisfaction were included. Finally, due to their associations with the bodily experience at both antenatal and postnatal timepoints, breastfeeding rate (Brown et al.,2015), anxiety and depression (Noda et al.,2022; Singh Solorzano et al.,2022) and attachment quality (Munns & Preston,2024; Stafford et al.,2024) were also included.

For both networks, five network properties were explored: edge weights, degree centrality, strength centrality, betweenness centrality and clustering. Edge weights are the partial correlation coefficients between nodes whilst controlling for all other nodes in the network after the application of the regularisation parameter. Only edge weights that survive the regularisation procedure are shown in the network, and for these edge weights, basic Pearson's correlation coefficients are presented. Degree centrality is defined as how well connected one node is to other nodes, while strength centrality is the degree to which a node is explained by the rest of the network as it corresponds to the sum of all edges associated with a node. Betweenness centrality reflects the frequency in which a node appears on the shortest paths connecting other nodes within the network. A node with high betweenness centrality serves as a critical ‘bridge’ or intermediary, facilitating connections and the flow across the network. Finally, clustering coefficients show the extent to which the neighbours of a specific node are connected to each other. Nodes that exhibit the highest clustering coefficients are characterised by dense connections surrounding them and may offer a less vital role within the network, as due to their interconnected neighbouring nodes, they can be perceived as providing less unique and nuanced information (Costantini & Perugini,2014).

Mixed graphical models were constructed using the graphical lasso (glasso) package (Version 1.11; Friedman et al.,2022), alongside the qgraph package (Version 1.9.8; Epskamp et al.,2012) in R (Version 4.2.3; RStudio Team,2020). The glasso method applies statistical regularisation, which is particularly beneficial in dealing with dense networks to help identify nuanced relationships. The regularisation process used the Least Absolute Shrinkage and Selection Operator (LASSO) algorithm (Friedman et al.,2008), adopting the extended Bayesian Information Criterion (eBIC; Schwarz,1978) for criterion selection, effectively controlling overfitting and contributing to the accuracy of the model. We set the gamma value that controls the eBIC at .25. To assess the network's stability and robustness, the networks underwent 1000 bootstrap iterations to compute confidence intervals for each partial correlation. Additionally, case‐dropping bootstrapping was used by removing cases and re‐analysing the relationships in the network. Both of these techniques were applied using the bootnet package (Version 1.6; Epskamp et al.,2018) in R.

T‐tests (for continuous data) and McNeamar's test (for paired binary data) aimed to identify differences between two time points (3 and 6 months postpartum). ANOVAs examined differences between three time points (antenatally, and 3 and 6 months postpartum). If assumptions of normality or homogeneity of variance were violated according to Shapiro–Wilk and Levene's tests, non‐parametric tests were employed (Wilcoxon test and Friedman's test). Bonferroni correction was applied to all post‐hoc tests in this study to adjust for multiple comparisons. We defined the ‘group’ for correction as the set of tests within each specific independent analysis, focusing on related hypotheses to ensure the correction was meaningful and relevant. The variables with the three highest strength and betweenness centrality coefficients in the networks were selected for analysis, as these measures reflect the intensity and strategic position of connections between nodes.

Descriptive statistics and sample sizes for all variables can be found in Section B: AppendixS1. The network in Figure1examines the relationships between the bodily experience during pregnancy (body dissatisfaction and interoception) and multiple postnatal variables. The network is comprised of 22 nodes and 37 edge weights (edges), the latter of which reflect the partial correlations between nodes. Network sparsity, a measure of edge density calculated as the ratio between the number of possible and actual edges, was low (.156) suggesting a relatively sparse network. According to stability indices derived from bootstrapping analyses, the network was reasonably stable (Section C: AppendixS1). To achieve a correlation coefficient of ≥.7 in at least 95% of the sample in the 3‐month network, 28.5% of cases could be dropped without significantly impacting edge weights or edge strength.

A partial correlation network analysis to show the relationships between body dissatisfaction and interoception during pregnancy and mother‐infant variables at 3 months postpartum. Nodes represent variables, and edges represent the strength of the connections between nodes. Blue edges represent positive relationships and red edges represent negative relationships. BF, breastfeeding rate; BF Exp, breastfeeding experience; Weight, antenatal body dissatisfaction with weight.

The network portrays a collection of edge weights between antenatal and postnatal bodily experience. Antenatal dissatisfaction with body weight and appearance were negatively associated with postnatal body trust suggesting dissatisfaction with the body during pregnancy links with body trust postpartum. Antenatal body trusting was positively associated with postnatal body trusting, connecting levels of body of trust across the perinatal period. Similarly, higher antenatal body weight dissatisfaction and physical abilities was associated with heightened postnatal body dissatisfaction.

High levels of postnatal body dissatisfaction were associated with multiple variables of interest, including increased breastfeeding rate, more positive breastfeeding experiences, and higher levels of anxiety and depression. Further links were found between breastfeeding experiences and infant birth weight, suggesting that those with smaller infants had more negative breastfeeding experiences. Birth weight was also understandably linked to gestation period.

Alongside postnatal body dissatisfaction, reduced levels of postnatal body trusting were associated with increased anxiety and depression at 3 months. High depression and anxiety scores were associated with a reduction in bond quality, which then went on to associate with child development, suggesting a link between stronger bond quality and more developmental milestones reached at 3 months old. See Section C: AppendixS1for all edge weights and basic Pearson's correlation coefficients.

Across all measures of centrality, postnatal body dissatisfaction was consistently identified as the most central node. Furthermore, the nodes with the highest degree centrality were postnatal body dissatisfaction (nine connections), postnatal body trust (seven connections) and postnatal anxiety (six connections). This was followed by depression, antenatal body weight dissatisfaction and bonding quality, all with five connections. The nodes with the highest strength centrality were postnatal body dissatisfaction (.96), antenatal body weight dissatisfaction (.76) and postnatal depression (.74). Similarly, for betweenness centrality, postnatal body dissatisfaction had the highest coefficient (156), followed by postnatal depression (80), and postnatal bonding quality (73). See Figure2and Section D: AppendixS1for all centrality coefficients.

Centrality plot showing the centrality coefficients for each node within the 3‐month network. BF, breastfeeding; BMI, body mass index; PBD, postnatal body dissatisfaction.

Breastfeeding rate, absence of bond hostility, interoceptive attention regulation, and antenatal body dissatisfaction with physical ability had the highest clustering coefficient (1). See Section D: AppendixS1for all clustering coefficients.

The 6‐month network in Figure3included 20 edges and 8 nodes (antenatal body dissatisfaction with weight, postnatal body dissatisfaction, antenatal and postnatal interoceptive trust, bonding quality, breastfeeding rate, anxiety, and depression). The sparsity of .714 suggests a relatively dense network. Bootstrapping analyses found the network to be reasonably stable according to stability indices (see Section C: AppendixS1). It was found that to achieve a correlation coefficient of ≥.7 in at least 95% of the sample in the 6‐month network, 28% of cases could be dropped without significantly impacting edge weights or edge strength.

A partial correlation network analysis to show the relationships between body dissatisfaction and interoception during pregnancy and mother‐infant variables at 6 months postpartum. Nodes represent variables, and edges represent the strength of the connections between nodes. Blue edges represent positive relationships and red edges represent negative relationships. BF, breastfeeding rate; Weight, antenatal body dissatisfaction with weight.

Overall, the 6‐month network shows that the bodily experience is associated with breastfeeding rate, anxiety, depression, and attachment quality. Higher levels of dissatisfaction with body weight during pregnancy were associated with lower levels of trust in the body antenatally and postnatally, higher levels of depression, and a lower quality bond between mother and baby. High levels of antenatal body trusting were linked to higher levels of trust postnatally, a stronger bond quality between mother and infant, and a higher level of body dissatisfaction postnatally.

High levels of postnatal body dissatisfaction were counterintuitively associated with lower anxiety, higher antenatal and postnatal body trusting, and an increased breastfeeding rate. High levels of postnatal body trust were correlated with lower levels of bond quality, reduced anxiety and depression, and reduced breastfeeding rates. Among the variables of interest, breastfeeding was linked to a stronger bond quality, higher levels of anxiety and lower levels of depression, with higher anxiety scores being linked to higher depression scores. See Section C: AppendixS1for all edge weights and basic Pearson's correlation coefficients.

The node with the most connections was postnatal body trusting with seven connections, followed by breastfeeding rate, antenatal body weight dissatisfaction and anxiety, all with five connections. Depression had the highest strength centrality (1.08), followed by postnatal body trust (.97) and antenatal body trust (.92). Depression had the highest betweenness centrality (5), followed by breastfeeding rate (4) and postnatal body trust (3). See Figure4and Section D: AppendixS1for all centrality coefficients.

Centrality plot showing the centrality coefficients for each node within the 6‐month network. BF, breastfeeding rate; PBD, postnatal body dissatisfaction.

Postnatal body dissatisfaction had the highest clustering coefficient (.83), followed by anxiety, depression, and antenatal dissatisfaction with weight, all with a clustering coefficient of .7. See Section D: AppendixS1for all clustering coefficients.

Post‐hoc tests were conducted to identify any significant differences in variables over time, which could indicate a change. The top three variables with the highest strength and betweenness centrality in the networks were chosen. Within the 3‐month network, these variables were postnatal body dissatisfaction, antenatal body weight dissatisfaction, depression, and postnatal bonding quality. Within the 6‐month network, these variables were postnatal and antenatal body trust, depression, and breastfeeding rate. Body weight dissatisfaction was only measured at one time point and was therefore left out of these analyses, thus leaving postnatal body dissatisfaction, breastfeeding rate, depression, bond quality, and body trust.

Assumption testing showed that not all variables were normally distributed, therefore non‐parametric tests were employed in place oft‐tests and ANOVAs. Wilcoxon and McNeamar's tests show no significant difference in postnatal body dissatisfaction (V = 1824.5,p= .990, Bonferroni correctedp= 1), bond quality (V = 1115.0,p= .263, Bonferroni correctedp= .790) or breastfeeding rate, McNeamar'sχ2(1) = .5,p= .824, Bonferroni correctedp= 1, between 3 and 6 months postpartum. Friedman's tests show no significant differences in interoceptive body trust, Friedman'sχ2(2) = 1.29,p= .524, Bonferroni correctedp= 1 or depression, Friedman'sχ2(2) = 2.68,p= .262, Bonferroni correctedp= 1 between antenatal, 3‐month and 6‐month time points. Allpvalues were Bonferroni corrected. Parametric tests (T‐tests and ANOVAs) were also conducted as robustness checks, and no results changed when using these methods. The results of the parametric analyses can be found in the Section E: AppendixS1.

Network analysis, a relatively novel approach in psychological research, has allowed the exploration of the antenatal bodily experiences and postnatal maternal well‐being and bonding. These findings highlight a significant link between women's perceptions of their internal and external bodies during pregnancy and their postnatal experiences. The 3‐month network allowed for a more holistic approach, from which we can better understand what facets of the bodily experience during pregnancy are involved with postnatal variables, and through which pathways. At 3 months, both antenatal body dissatisfaction and interoception were directly associated with postnatal bodily experiences and maternal mental health, whilst being indirectly associated with bonding, breastfeeding, and infant outcomes. The 6‐month network gives us a smaller, hypothesis‐led analysis and identified direct connections between the antenatal bodily experience and maternal mental health, mother‐infant bonding and the postnatal bodily experience. Postnatal body dissatisfaction appears more central to the network at 3 months, becoming less significant by 6 months. Conversely, antenatal and postnatal body trust consistently maintain centrality throughout both networks. Overall, both networks show the interconnectedness between antenatal bodily experiences and postnatal health and well‐being.

Antenatal body weight was consistently influential across both networks, having high strength centrality at 3 months and high degree centrality at 6 months. This extends previous literature that identified body weight dissatisfaction to be a central construct within the context of antenatal mother and infant well‐being (Munns & Preston,2024), emphasising its lasting influence across pregnancy and early motherhood. During pregnancy, body weight dissatisfaction may increase due to societal pressures and expectations around what a woman's body should look like, leading women to strive towards a desirable pregnant body shape (Hodgkinson et al.,2014). However, this is in competition with sensations such as an increase in appetite (Butte & King,2005) and a reduction in physical activity, often due to fatigue (Chien & Ko,2004) and pain (Vermani et al.,2010), which can lead to an increase in weight. The results from the networks suggest dissatisfaction with weight during pregnancy is highly influential early in the postnatal period but becomes more widely connected and less impactful over time. This may suggest that dissatisfaction with body weight negatively affects a mother's confidence immediately after childbirth, but as mothers adapt to their postnatal bodies and routines, other factors start to play a more significant role in their well‐being.

Network indices at 3 months highlight the particular significance of postnatal body dissatisfaction, which has the highest degree, strength and betweenness centrality. This suggests that how satisfied women feel about their postpartum bodies is widely influential across multiple outcomes, highlighting the potential for postnatal body dissatisfaction to be a ‘bridge’, impacting the relationship between antenatal bodily experiences and postnatal variables. This advocates for greater consideration of body dissatisfaction across the whole perinatal period, especially considering that previous literature has found antenatal body dissatisfaction predicts postnatal body dissatisfaction (Roomruangwong et al.,2017). At 6 months, internal rather than external bodily experiences seem more central, with postnatal body trusting emerging as the most connected node in the network, and both postnatal and antenatal body trusting exhibiting high strength centrality. Antenatal body trusting has been previously associated with more positive birthing experiences (Flores,2018), lower body dissatisfaction (Munns & Preston,2024), and higher levels of antenatal attachment (Stafford et al.,2024). The current findings suggest that benefits continue postpartum, with postnatal body trust being linked to lower levels of anxiety and depression, with this factor acting as a bridge between antenatal bodily experiences and postpartum outcomes. Similar to postnatal body dissatisfaction, postnatal trust could influence the relationship between antenatal bodily experiences and postnatal well‐being, supporting previous research within pregnant populations (Munns & Preston,2024).

Considering the transition in influence from postnatal body dissatisfaction at 3 months to interoceptive body trust at 6 months, different bodily experiences could be pivotal at different time points. Body dissatisfaction may be more influential at 3 months postpartum, as women are adjusting to the physical changes from pregnancy and childbirth. Pressures to return to a pre‐pregnancy state may be heightened during this period, combined with the unrealistic expectations women often hold about the postpartum body (Hodgkinson et al.,2014), which may enhance feelings of body dissatisfaction. Consistent with the current results, previous work has identified the detrimental impact that postnatal body dissatisfaction has on maternal mental health (Chan et al.,2020) and breastfeeding outcomes (Brown et al.,2015). By 6 months, when physical recovery is generally more advanced, mothers may be more focused on the functionality of their bodies in caring for their infants. This is particularly salient as the baby grows, when more demands are placed on the mother's physical abilities for breastfeeding, sleep regulation and physical activity. Enhanced trust in bodily signals may encourage mother's to more confidently and effectively respond to their baby's needs, benefiting bonding (Crossland et al.,2022; Stafford et al.,2024). This varied influence between dissatisfaction and trust emphasises their dynamic and transient influences and suggests that targeted, time‐dependent interventions may be most effective and could have downstream effects.

The change in prominence between body dissatisfaction and body trusting interoception over time fits with the competition of cues hypothesis (Pennebaker & Lightner,1980). This hypothesis suggests that there is competition between internal cues (e.g., interoception) and external cues (e.g., body dissatisfaction), and conflict can lead to a distorted perception of our bodily states and body image. This hypothesis has been previously implicated in the pregnant bodily experience (Munns & Preston,2024; Stafford et al.,2024), suggesting that a balance between external and internal experiences is optimal. Given the current network results, we can build on this theory by suggesting that this balance is disrupted postpartum, with external cues being more influential in the months following birth, and internal cues being more central at later postpartum stages. The transition from pregnancy to postpartum may initially render internal signals less reliable due to physiological changes, leading to their downregulation. By contrast, the physical changes in appearance, often perceived negatively, become more salient. While post‐hoc tests on the current dataset show no significant differences in body dissatisfaction and trust over time, this is consistent with work that suggests that body dissatisfaction is a relatively stable construct from mid‐adolescence onwards (Quittkat et al.,2019; Wang et al.,2019). Therefore, it seems that the perceived importance of these bodily experiences may be what is most influential at 3 and 6 months postpartum, and understanding the shift in influence from different aspects of the bodily experience could raise awareness and encourage tailored support for women. This is particularly important given that a lack of support for women is a recurring theme across postpartum research (Brown et al.,2015; Hodgkinson et al.,2014).

The emphasis on body trust as time progresses could have wider implications for infant feeding, with higher levels of body trust at 6 months associated with lower rates of breastfeeding. Postpartum, difficulties with breastfeeding are well known (Brown et al.,2015) and may explain the lack of trust associated with higher breastfeeding rates. Similarly, the relationship between higher breastfeeding rates and higher body dissatisfaction could be explained due to potential restrictions on diet and exercise from engaging in breastfeeding practices (the more time spent breastfeeding the less time available for their own physical recovery). This is likely to be particularly pivotal for women who feel like their body failed them during pregnancy (e.g., birth complications, unmet expectations). Societal expectations often portray breastfeeding as a natural and effortless process; however, when reality falls short of these ideals, it can lead to feelings of inadequacy or failure (Brown et al.,2015), further reducing body trust. However, this association potentially suggests the importance of infant feeding in the regaining of trust in the body. Given the strong associations between breastfeeding and stronger bonding postpartum in the current network and previous literature (Ondrušová,2023), these explanations may provide some clarity on the negative relationship between body trusting and the mother‐infant bond.

Although bonding was associated with both the antenatal and postnatal bodily experience, no associations were found between bonding and maternal mental health at 6 months. Despite previous links between maternal mental health and the mother‐infant bond (Borji et al.,2018), this network highlights the potential for the bodily experience to influence this relationship. This is particularly important given the rates of postnatal mental health difficulties and the implication of interoception and body dissatisfaction in maternal depression and anxiety (Munns & Preston,2024; Singh Solorzano et al.,2022; Singh Solorzano & Grano,2023).

While the study provides a comprehensive and novel view of the pregnant and postnatal bodily experience, there are several challenges. Due to a relatively small sample size for the 6‐month network analysis, direct comparisons between the networks could not be conducted; therefore, no firm conclusions can be drawn around how these interconnected relationships change over time. Post‐hoc analysis enabled temporal comparisons of specific variables but did not account for interrelationships, and a number of unexpected results were found. For example, the lack of difference in breastfeeding rates between 3 and 6 months postpartum. While this stability is unexpected, the results may be partly explained by participant attrition, as those who discontinued the study may have also stopped breastfeeding. Additionally, external factors such as returning to work, lack of time, or other life pressures may have influenced breastfeeding continuation and study participation. While visual observations can highlight areas of interest, larger samples are needed for statistical network comparisons. Additionally, although network analysis is suitable for exploratory research, it indicates associations between nodes rather than causality.

Another key limitation is the lack of diversity within the sample, which is predominantly White and well‐educated, despite active efforts to recruit more broadly. This is pertinent given the differences in the perinatal experience among women of different ethnicities (Henderson et al.,2013) and socio‐economic backgrounds (Nicholls‐Dempsey et al.,2023). Underrepresentation of diverse backgrounds within healthcare research is a significant concern (Redwood & Gill,2013) and impacts the potential to improve health outcomes for these populations.

The current results highlight the importance of both pregnancy and postnatal bodily experiences within the context of maternal and infant well‐being. Considering this, the current findings highlight the need to consider the bodily experience within perinatal healthcare settings and research. Within the network analyses, the bodily experience has been identified as complex and multifaceted. Acknowledging the differential influence on outcomes from both internal and external signals suggests that the bodily experience should not be reduced to simplistic or one‐dimensional assessments. The centrality of these experiences emphasises their contribution to maternal mental health, mother–infant bonding and breastfeeding outcomes. The benefit of examining the bodily experience longitudinally has allowed the identification of positive antenatal bodily experiences as a potential preventative measure for negative postnatal experiences. Further implications come from highlighting the potential of postnatal bodily experiences to bridge relationships between the antenatal body and postnatal variables. Given the role of interoception in moderating the relationship between antenatal body dissatisfaction and attachment (Stafford et al.,2024), further research is needed to identify whether this carries over to postnatal experiences. These networks emphasise the evolving importance of bodily experiences over time, with body dissatisfaction being more significant than trust at 3 months and the reverse occurring at 6 months. This dynamic and transient postnatal period means interventions can be applied in a temporally sensitive way to maximise the impact on postnatal outcomes. More accurate expectations of the postpartum body achieved through psychoeducation may negate body dissatisfaction in the early months. Interventions such as yoga and mindfulness, which have shown promising benefits for maternal postnatal well‐being (Munns, Spark, et al.,2024; Sansone, Stapleton, & Patching,2024), can encourage focus on internal sensations and body trust later on in the postpartum period. For example, Sansone, Stapleton, and Patching (2024) conducted a qualitative analysis that found mindfulness‐based interventions during pregnancy can enhance maternal body awareness and emotional well‐being, supporting body trust in the postpartum period. Beyond being able to identify which factors are most integral in the bodily experience, this temporal aspect is something that few other studies can offer, and enables the opportunity for future research to investigate causality between interventions and downstream impacts.

Overall, our results have important implications for healthcare professionals and interventions aimed at supporting pregnant individuals. Promoting body satisfaction and interoceptive body trusting during pregnancy and postpartum could contribute to stronger maternal–infant relationships, reduce the risk of depression and anxiety, and improve breastfeeding outcomes postnatally.