Chronic itch, or pruritus, is a common discomfort of the skin. Chronic itch has been described as a symptom of small fiber neuropathy (SFN), a disorder affecting the small myelinated Aδ‐ and unmyelinated C‐fibers. While prior studies report itch rates in SFN ranging from 63%–68%, a distinct pattern has not been identified.

This study aimed to describe the clinical characteristics of itch in a large cohort of SFN patients.

Between May 2016 and August 2022, 1415 patients filled out an exploratory questionnaire about characteristics of their itch symptoms. 83% were diagnosed with SFN based on the Besta criteria.

Itch was reported in 66% of SFN patients, mainly experienced as tickling, prickling, and tingling sensations. Itch was most common in the evening, with 98% reporting continuous or episodic symptoms during this time. The itch was predominantly localized to the distal extremities, especially the lower legs and feet (over 50% of patients), with additional reports on the back (25%) and face (27%). Unlike the typical stocking‐glove distribution seen with neuropathic pain, itch showed a slightly more proximal locus. SFN patients were more likely to report itching in the hands and feet than non‐SFN patients.

This study reveals that itch in SFN is a frequent, heterogeneous symptom that may differ from neuropathic pain in its distribution. Itch, particularly in the hands and feet, may provide diagnostic guidance and suggest SFN as a potential diagnosis. This finding warrants further research on itch mechanisms and its diagnostic value in SFN.

Itch, or pruritus, is a common unpleasant sensation of the skin that often leads to an urge to scratch to relieve this discomfort. It is more prevalent in women than in men, and the incidence tends to increase with age [1,2]. Itch can arise from various conditions, which can be broadly classified into dermatological, systemic, psychogenic, or neurological origins. Notably, approximately 8% of all itch cases are due to a neurological condition [3,4]. Neuropathic itch can arise from either altered neurochemical activity or direct nerve damage [5].

Small fiber neuropathy (SFN) is a disorder characterized by damage to the small, myelinated Aδ‐and unmyelinated C‐fibers. This condition typically presents with neuropathic pain, frequently in a length‐dependent pattern, alongside autonomic disturbances such as dry eyes and mouth, urinary or bowel dysfunction, palpitations, or orthostatic hypotension [6,7]. Diagnosing SFN requires a thorough workup, including nerve conduction studies (NCS), skin biopsy to quantify the intraepidermal nerve fiber density (IENFD) and quantitative sensory testing (QST) to determine temperature thresholds. Additionally, extensive blood work, including DNA analysis, is needed to determine an underlying cause of SFN, as SFN is associated with various potentially treatable conditions [8]. Despite thorough investigation, no underlying condition can be identified in about 50% of cases [9]. With a minimum prevalence of 52.95 cases per 100.000 inhabitants, SFN is not a rare disorder [10]. The exact clinical presentation of SFN is heterogeneous and not yet fully understood, although knowledge of the condition is steadily improving.

One of the lesser‐known symptoms of SFN is itch [5]. Few studies have aimed to clarify the characteristics of itch in small fiber neuropathies [11,12]. These reported itch in 63%–68% of SFN patients, suggesting that itch is a common symptom of SFN. However, no distinct clinical pattern could be identified in SFN patients, leaving its characteristics unclear. The relatively small cohorts of SFN patients may have hindered the identification of a distinct pattern of itch in SFN. The present study aims to describe itch characteristics in SFN within a larger cohort and possibly identify distinctive features of itch that may be indicative of SFN.

All patients referred to the SFN expertise center at the Maastricht University Medical Center+ (Maastricht UMC+) from May 2016 to August 2022 were eligible for this study. The Maastricht UMC+ serves as the only tertiary referral center for patients with suspected SFN in the Netherlands. Upon referral, patients undergo a standardized diagnostic evaluation during a one‐day admission to confirm an SFN diagnosis. This workup includes NCS, QST and a skin biopsy to determine the IENFD. Additionally, extensive blood and DNA analyses, along with a chest X‐ray, are done to identify a possible underlying condition associated with SFN. SFN diagnosis is established according to the Besta criteria, which are defined as a combination of at least two abnormal findings among the following: (i) clinical signs of small fiber impairment (pinprick and thermal sensory loss, and/or allodynia, and/or hyperalgesia); (ii) abnormal warm and/or cold thresholds at the foot, as assessed by QST; and (iii) reduced intraepidermal nerve fiber density (IENFD) at the distal leg [13]. Importantly, the presence of clinical signs (criterion i) was required in all cases, as this has been shown to improve diagnostic accuracy [13]. Patients with abnormal NCS suggestive of large fiber involvement or patients who did not complete the itch questionnaire were excluded from this study.

During the visit, the following data were collected for all referred patients: sex, age at visit, age at onset of SFN related symptoms, medical history, IENFD, QST, NCS, and blood test results. Using a standardized approach, we analyzed peripheral blood cell counts, liver function, glucose, creatinine, creatine kinase, angiotensin converting enzyme, thyroid stimulating hormone, vitamins (B1, B6, B12 and folic acid), anti‐nuclear antibodies, anti‐neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, myeloma protein, soluble IL‐2 receptor, serologic testing for Borrelia, hepatitis B, and HIV, and genetic testing for voltage‐gated sodium channel‐, TTR‐, and GLA‐genes. After diagnosis, patients were divided into a SFN and non‐SFN group. Based on the medical history and diagnostic findings, the SFN patients were categorized as having idiopathic SFN if no underlying condition was identified. Prior to or shortly after their visit, all patients fulfilled a standardized set of questionnaires about their pain, SFN‐related symptoms, mental health, and quality of life. During the study period, patients filled in a questionnaire specifically addressing their itch complaints, as detailed below. All data was collected after admission and anonymized. Patients were informed about the data collection before admission and had the possibility to oppose the use of their personal and medical data for research, in accordance with the Code of Conduct for the Use of Data in Health Research.

To gain a deeper understanding of the itch symptoms, an exploratory Dutch‐language questionnaire was created for this study based on the Itch Severity Scale, originally validated for dermatological diseases [14]. Given that the questionnaire should focus on neuropathic itch, specific items from the validated Eppendorf Itch Questionnaire [15] were included in the questionnaire. These items were chosen based on their relevance to SFN and refined through expert consensus and clinical experience with SFN. Although not independently validated, the questionnaire was designed to capture key descriptive features of itch in this population. In the questionnaire, patients were first asked if they experienced itch. If they did, they answered additional questions about the characteristics of their itch. Patients indicated the location of their itch symptoms on a human figure. The indicated locations were categorized into 33 distinct body parts based on side (left or right) and region (front or back) (e.g., Face, Chest, Back, left palm, right back of hand, etc.). They then described their itch symptoms using predefined attributes, namely painful, prickling, tingling, stabbing, tickling, cold, warm, hot, or burning sensations. These attributes were rated on a 3‐point Likert scale (not, mild, or strong). All other questions were answered on a 4‐point Likert scale ranging from “never” to “always” and addressed itch severity (current, best state and worst state), timing (morning, afternoon, evening and night), seasonal variation (winter, spring, summer or autumn), sleep disturbance (difficulty falling asleep, sleeping through, use of sleep aids) and exacerbating or alleviating factors (warmth/cold, clothing, exercise/rest, stress, sunlight, scratching, applying cream, or distractions).

The demographic and clinical data of the total population were summarized using mean, SD, and range for continuous variables. Categorical variables were analyzed by calculating frequencies and percentages. Differences in distributions within the SFN with itch group were analyzed using Friedman's test (F) with post hoc Wilcoxon signed rank tests (W) and post hocpvalues were corrected using the Bonferroni method. Correlations were determined using Phi or Spearman's coefficients, with coefficients interpreted as follows: < 0.3 as a weak, 0.3–0.5 as moderate, and > 0.5 as strong. Differences between groups were analyzed usingt‐tests (T) for continuous variables, Mann–Whitney U (M) for ordinal variables, or chi‐squared tests (χ2) for binary variables. Comparisons were made between patients with and without abnormal skin biopsy results to examine whether structural small fiber damage is associated with specific itch characteristics, as previous research suggests that reduced IENFD may be associated with some distinct itch features [11]. Additionally, comparisons were made between all etiological subgroups, including idiopathic SFN and those with variants in the voltage‐gated sodium channel genes, to investigate potential etiological influences on itch characteristics, as previous literature reported associations with itch [11,16,17]. Apvalue of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software (Version 28.0, SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).

A total of 1415 patients, referred for SFN analysis between May 2016 and August 2022, completed the itch questionnaire. Among these, an SFN diagnosis was established in 1179 patients (83%). The SFN group was further divided into those with itch (774 patients) and without itch (405 patients).

Demographic and clinical characteristics of all included patients and the subgroups are summarized in Table1. The cohort was predominantly female (72%) and the average age across all patients was 51.77 ± 12.99 years, with a mean duration of symptoms of 6.84 ± 8.17 years. SFN diagnosis was made based on the clinical signs and symptoms in combination with abnormal IENFD only (n= 153), with abnormal QST only (n= 463), or with both abnormal QST and IENFD (n= 556). 88% (1036/1179) of SFN patients reported pain in a symmetrical length‐dependent pattern. Compared to the non‐SFN group, SFN patients were significantly older (T;p= 0.012), experienced more severe pain (T;p= 0.001) and had a later symptom onset (T;p= 0.012). Among SFN patients with itch, pain was more severe than in those without itch (T;p< 0.001) and these patients were younger with earlier symptom onset (T;p= 0.001 andp= < 0.001, respectively). After extensive testing, 61% of SFN patients had no identifiable underlying condition. The proportion of patients with and without itch did not differ significantly in this regard (χ2;p= 0.602). The underlying associated conditions with SFN are detailed in TableS1.

Abbreviations: IENFD: intraepidermal nerve fiber density;p:pvalue; QST: quantitative sensory testing; SD: standard deviation; SFN: small fiber neuropathy.

Of the SFN patients, 66% reported itch symptoms (Table1). The reported features of itch were diverse, with most patients reporting a combination of different features. The most frequently reported features (combined mild or strong reported attributes) were ticklish (87%; 674/774), prickling (81%; 628/774) and tingling (78%; 602/774). The least common feature was a cold itch (31%; 243/774). Itch intensity varied greatly. When the overall well‐being of patients was at its worst, itch was reported as severe by 49% (383/774) of patients, while only 15 of 774 patients reported severe itch when their overall well‐being was at its best (Figure1). Additionally, itch occurred in attacks in 42% of patients (323/774).

Distribution of Itch severity during moments when overall well‐being was at best (left) and worst (right) among all 774 small fiber neuropathy patients.

Throughout the day, the frequency of itch symptoms differed significantly (F;p< 0.001). Itch was more often experienced in the evening and the least frequently experienced in the morning (W;p< 0.001 for all). Only 16 patients reported never experiencing itch in the evening, while 87% (670/774) patients indicated that they could experience itch in any part of the day.

Regarding seasonal variation, itch can be experienced year‐round in 92% of patients (714/774). The itch was more common in winter compared to spring and autumn and more frequent in summer than spring (W;p< 0.001 for all).

Itch‐related sleep disturbances were reported by 75% of patients. Specifically, 17% (124/774) reported trouble falling asleep, 6% (47/774) had trouble sleeping through the night, and 52% (405/774) reported both problems due to itch. Nevertheless, 25% of patients (195/774) reported no sleep disturbances related to itch.

Patients identified several factors that exacerbated or alleviated itch (Table2). Warm temperatures were the most reported exacerbating factor, with only 19.5% (150/774) reporting no aggravation of itch under these conditions. Conversely, cold temperatures or cold showers were the least frequently reported exacerbating factors, with 41.3% and 65.1% of patients, respectively, never experiencing worsening of itch.

For alleviating symptoms, scratching was the most effective, with only 26.2% (202/770) never experiencing relief from it. Distractions were also effective, with only 31.3% (241/770) of patients reporting no effect.

The distribution of the most reported body parts experiencing itch symptoms is depicted in Figure2. The distribution showed no differences between left and right. Itch symptoms were most frequently reported in the distal extremities. The shins were the most frequently reported (57% of patients) and more than the back of the feet (50.1%). The calves and soles of the feet were reported by 43% and 47% of patients respectively. Lower arms were reported more often than the hands, both on the front (43% and 37%) and the back (36% and 34%). The back and face were also common sites, reported by 39% and 42% of patients, respectively. The least reported sites were the neck (15%), buttocks (16%) and groin (18%). The correlation between the reported locations of itch and reported locations of pain was generally low, with phi coefficients ranging from 0.10 to 0.30.

The distribution of itch in percentage reported by all 774 small fiber neuropathy patients with itch. Colors indicate the percentage of patients reporting itch at different body locations, according to the scale on the right. Front and back views are shown separately.

Few differences in itch characteristics were found between SFN patients with or without abnormal skin biopsies, underlying conditions, or SCN gene variants. No significant differences were found in severity, frequency, timing, factors, or location between the groups, except for a stabbing feature of itch, which was more common in skin biopsy‐proven SFN than those with a normal skin biopsy (M;p= 0.030).

Between referred patients who were diagnosed with SFN and those where SFN was not established, itch was more frequently described as tingling in the SFN group (M;p= 0.003). Additionally, current itch and itch severity in the best state were reported to be more severe in the SFN group (M;p= 0.043 andp= 0.036 respectively) and itch was more often present in the morning and night in SFN (M;p= 0.031 andp= 0.041 respectively). Comparing the location of itch, the hands and feet were more commonly affected in the SFN group (χ2;p< 0.004).

This study analyzed a large cohort of patients aiming to describe the clinical characteristics of itch in SFN. In this study, 66% of SFN patients reported itch, commonly described as ticklish, prickling, or tingling. Itch was predominantly continuous, with only 42% of patients experiencing it in attacks. Symptoms were more severe in the evening and night, and there were seasonal peaks in summer and winter. Itch was most common in the distal extremities, particularly the shins. Between subgroups, stabbing itch was more common in skin‐biopsy proven SFN compared to other SFN patients, and SFN patients reported itch more commonly in the hands and feet than non‐SFN patients.

Previously, other research groups examined the prevalence of itch in SFN, with reported rates ranging from 61% to 68% [11,12]. In this study, the rate of itch aligns with previous reports and indicate that itch is a common symptom of SFN. However, unlike these earlier studies, itch in this study was more commonly experienced continuous rather than episodic.

Itch was experienced most frequently during the evening and night. A previous study also found more frequent symptoms during the evening [12]. The increased evening prevalence of itch may be attributed to patients being usually more often at rest in the evening and having fewer distractions compared to the daytime. This is in line with the observation that patients reported distractions as a common alleviating factor, and rest was also a common exacerbating factor. Additionally, in neuropathic pain, there seems to be a circadian rhythm to the intensity of pain, peaking in the late evening and early night hours [18]. This circadian rhythm could also influence itch symptoms. Nevertheless, in small fiber neuropathy, the difference in pain intensity between night and day seems minimal, and this may also apply to itch [19].

The presence of more intense itch in the night also influences sleep as 75% of patients in this study reported sleep disturbances due to itch symptoms. This finding underscores the significant impact of itch on sleep quality. In other conditions with itch as a main symptom, such as chronic dermatoses, itch is a major contributor to sleep disturbances [20].

Itch is commonly experienced throughout the year, but seasonal variation was also notable with higher itch frequency during winter and summer. This could be due to the more extreme temperatures in these seasons as both warm and cold environmental temperatures were identified as exacerbating factors. In addition to temperature, other seasonal factors, such as humidity, may contribute to itch aggravation. During winter, indoor humidity levels are relatively lower due to constant heating leading to dry skin, and it is well established that dry skin aggravates itch [21,22]. The direct application of cold is commonly associated with neuropathic itch to alleviate the sensation [23]. In this study, cold application, either through cooling or cold showers, was reported as an alleviating factor. The fact that cold environmental temperatures exacerbated itch, while direct cold application often relieved it, suggests these forms may have opposing effects. Still, a similar proportion of participants also reported that applying cold through cold showers worsened their symptoms, indicating individual variability in cold sensitivity.

In this study, itch symptoms, like neuropathic pain in SFN, were more common in the distal extremities. This was expected, as neuropathic itch classically favors localized distribution based on the underlying cause of the itch (e.g., arms in brachioradial pruritus, the back in notalgia paresthetica, or areas previously affected by zoster in postherpetic neuralgia) [24]. However, unlike the typical stocking‐glove distribution seen with pain in SFN, itch distribution appeared slightly more proximal, with the lower arms and legs more commonly involved than the hands and feet.

A possible explanation for this more proximal itch distribution might be that pain stimuli in the hands and feet inhibit itch the most, as these areas experience the most severe pain in SFN [6,7]. In the healthy somatosensory system, pain typically inhibits itch stimuli [25]. However, under pathological conditions, itch stimuli have been found to exacerbate pain and both sensations may coexist in the same locations [26,27]. Interestingly, in this study, there was only a weak correlation between pain and itch locations, suggesting that the distribution of itch is indeed different from pain in SFN. This might suggest a differing pathophysiological mechanism of these symptoms or might be explained by partially distinct C‐fiber populations for pain and itch with different topographical densities [28].

A similar mismatch was reported by another study that analyzed pruritus and pain in different peripheral neuropathies [29]. They speculated that itch neurons in hairy skin might be more affected by neuropathy than those in glabrous skin. These neurons are different as MrgprA3+ and MrgprD+ neurons mainly mediate itch in hairy skin, while MrgprC11+ neurons mediate itch in glabrous skin [30]. A predisposition of neuropathy targeting the MrgprA3+ and MrgprD+ neurons could potentially explain the slightly more proximal distribution of itch symptoms in this study. However, according to this theory, it would be expected that the hairy skin on the back of the hands and feet would be more commonly affected than the palms and soles, yet this was not observed.

Among patients with biopsy‐proven SFN, stabbing‐like itch was more frequently reported, consistent with previous findings associating reduced intraepidermal nerve fiber density with sharper sensory symptoms [11]. Other itch characteristics did not differ between subgroups of SFN. This aligns with another study, where no differences in itch frequency were found between patients with and without sodium channel variants [31]. Comparing patients with and without SFN, itch characteristics were significantly more reported as tingling in the SFN group, but the absolute frequencies were quite close. Since almost all itch characteristics were reported with similar frequencies overall, describing itch characteristics might be challenging and perhaps not as clinically useful.

In contrast, between SFN and non‐SFN patients, itch distribution did show differences. Although itch in SFN tends to follow a more proximal distribution to pain, SFN patients did report itching in the hands and feet more frequently than non‐SFN patients. Interestingly, the most reported site in SFN patients, the shins, did not differ significantly between the two groups. Nevertheless, itch localized to the hands or feet may serve as a distinguishing feature in SFN diagnosis. However, there may be selection bias due to referral patterns, and the non‐SFN group continued to experience itch symptoms likely due to other unexplained causes, which complicates the comparison. Nevertheless, this comparison is relevant as it reflects the referred population we normally assess. Future studies comparing itch characteristics and distribution between SFN and other populations are needed to explore this further.

This study benefits from a large sample size and standardized analysis of all patients but also has limitations. The study was conducted within a single center, which may limit the generalizability of the findings, especially across diverse ethnic or healthcare settings. Nevertheless, the study likely reflects the Dutch population, as Maastricht UMC+ serves as the only national referral center for SFN. Additionally, the itch questionnaire was exploratory and has not been independently validated yet, which could potentially influence the reliability and reproducibility of the findings.

This study provides a comprehensive analysis of itch characteristics in a large cohort of SFN patients. Itch is a prevalent symptom in SFN affecting two‐thirds of patients and often intensifies in the evening and night. Itch in SFN follows a tendency toward a stocking‐glove distribution, though with a slightly more proximal focus compared to the typical pain distribution. Itch in hands and feet could potentially be a diagnostic clue in the diagnosis of SFN. However, future research should aim to validate this finding in more generalized SFN populations and broaden the understanding of the mechanisms underlying itch.