Eumycetoma is a neglected tropical disease which can be caused by 69 different fungal species. In 2024, eumycetoma was listed as a high priority fungal infection on the fungal priority list of the World Health Organization. Eumycetoma is characterized by chronic subcutaneous swelling, the formation of grains, and progressive tissue destruction. If left untreated, it can lead to severe complications such as bone destruction and permanent disability. Current antifungal treatments, such as itraconazole and terbinafine, are lengthy and often ineffective without surgical intervention. The search for novel treatments is challenging due to limited interest and return of investment. Drug repurposing has emerged as a promising strategy for discovering new effective therapies against eumycetoma. Additionally, the MycetOS initiative focuses on developing novel antifungal compounds that are tested in vitro and in vivo.

Mycetoma is a neglected tropical disease (NTD), recognized in 2016 by the World Health Organization (WHO) (WHO2016). The disease manifests as subcutaneous tumor-like swellings. In these swellings sinuses can be formed which discharge fungal granules called grains (Fig.1A) (Zijlstra et al.2016). Lesions differ significantly in size, ranging from small nodes less than 5 cm to a large tumor-like growth > 10 cm (Siddig et al.2023).

Mycetoma is classified into two groups based on the causative agent: actinomycetoma, caused by filamentous, aerobic bacteria, and eumycetoma, caused by filamentous fungi. Together, there are over 80 microorganisms known to cause mycetoma, 69 of these are fungi (van de Sande et al.2018; van de Sande and Fahal2024). In this review we will focus only on eumycetoma. We will specifically focus on pathogenesis, treatment and the ongoing efforts to improve the treatment of eumycetoma.

While the exact origin of the disease is not fully known, the current hypothesis is that the pathogen enters the body through wounds or abrasions in the skin (van de Sande et al.2014). Farmers and other agricultural laborers are most affected due to direct contact with contaminated soil, thorns, or animal dung (Fahal and Bakhiet2023). Once inside the body, the causative agents form grains which are often 1–2 mm in diameter to enhance their own survival within the host (Fig.1B) (van de Sande2021). Within these grains, the fungal hyphae are found. Depending on the species, these grains can be embedded in a protective cement-like matrix (Fig.1C).

Eumycetoma has been identified in 102 countries, but the prevalence of reported cases varies significantly across regions. Eumycetoma is endemic to countries with a (sub)tropical climate, primarily within the mycetoma belt, located between 15°S and 30°N latitude. The highest incidence of cases is reported in Sudan, Senegal and India (Emery and Denning2020). The strongest predictors of mycetoma occurrence are aridity, proximity to water, low soil calcium and sodium concentrations, and the distribution of various thorny plants (Hassan et al.2021). The most common causative agents of eumycetoma areMadurella mycetomatis(n = 10,556 reported eumycetoma cases),Falciformispora senegalensis(n = 435),Trematosphaeria grisea(n = 173), Scedosporium boydii(n = 120) andMedicopsis romeroi(n = 78) (van de Sande and Fahal2024).M. mycetomatiswas reported world-wide, whileF. senegalensisis primarily found in West-Africa (Siddig et al.2023). In North America,Scedosporiumspp. are the most common causative agents of eumycetoma, while in Latin America, the Caribbean, and South America,Nigrograna mackinnoniiis the most prevalent (Ahmed et al.2018).

The time required to form a lesion varies, depending on the causative agent and patient, ranging from a few weeks to several years (Nenoff et al.2015). The most common site of lesions is in the foot (76%) and, less frequently, in the hand (8%) (Fahal et al.2015). In the initial stages of eumycetoma, the lesions remain small (< 5 cm) and are often painless (El-Amin et al.2024). In the later stages of disease progression (> 10 cm), where the lesion has formed sinuses and bone destruction is present, patients are more likely to experience pain (El-Amin et al.2024). In other cases where the patient obtains a secondary bacterial infection, pain is reported in 18–20% of patients (Fahal et al.2018). The swelling is usually firm, round and mobile, but there have been cases where it is soft and lobulated (Fahal et al.2018). Over time, the swelling increases and stretches the skin (van de Sande and Fahal2024). Pus and grains are discharged through the sinus tracts. These sinuses may close after discharge, while new ones can form (Fahal et al.2018). The disease spreads further through the bloodstream and the lymphatic system (Zijlstra et al.2016). As the infection progresses, the fungus penetrates the periosteum and cortex of the bone, creating small cavities (Abd El Bagi2003). If left untreated, the fungus can spread deeper into the bone or towards other bones (Abd El Bagi2003). This could lead to severe disfiguration, disability and amputation, and could cause economic and medical burdens to the community (Ahmed et al.2004; Singh et al.2020).

One of the most characteristic features of mycetoma is the formation of grains by the causative agent. Most fungi produce black grains, however, there have been instances where white, yellow and green grains have been found after fungal infection (van de Sande and Fahal2024). The black color is caused by melanin, which is synthesized through the 1,8-Dihydroxynaphthalene- (DHN), 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine- (DOPA), and pyomelanin pathways and is attached to extracellular proteins (Lim et al.2022a; van de Sande et al.2007). Inside the grain, the hyphae of the fungus are embedded into a cement material. The proteins and DNA present in the cement material originate mainly from the host (99.3%). Only a small fraction (0.069%) is originating from the pathogen (Sheehan et al.2020; van de Sande and Fahal2024). In humans, it was found that zinc, copper and calcium levels were significantly higher in tissues infected withM. mycetomatis(Ibrahim et al.2013).

The process of grain formation has been studied in the larvae of the greater wax mothGalleria mellonella.In this invertebrate, grains are formed which are similar to those observed in human patients and mycetoma infected mouse models (Kloezen et al.2015). Additionally,G. mellonellalarvae possess an innate immune system that shares similarities with the human innate immune system (Browne et al.2013). So far, invertebrate models have only been developed forM. mycetomatisandF. senegalensis(Kloezen et al.2015; Ma et al.2023). InG. mellonella, M. mycetomatisgrain formation can be divided into four developmental stages over 7 days (Kloezen et al.2015). Already at 4 h post-infection, the early signs of grain formation are present. In this stadium hyphae are clustered and cement material begins to form. By 24 h post infection, the cement material is fully formed, with only a few host cells present within the grains. After 72 h, no host cells are present within the cement material anymore, and in the final stage, immune cells surround the grain (Kloezen et al.2015). Grain formation seems to be slower inF. senegalensisinfectedG. mellonellalarvae. At 4 h post-infection, only loose hyphae are observed. By 24 h, early signs of grain formation are seen, but without cement material or melanization. At 72 h, cement material is formed, along with capsule formation and by day 7, the grain is fully mature (Ma et al.2023).

Based on the transcriptomic and proteomic analyses performed on different time points duringM. mycetomatisgrain formation inG. mellonella,a model for grain development was formed (Abugessaisa et al.2022; Sheehan et al.2020).In this model grain formation was divided into 4 stages. In the first stage, the pathogen enters the body and will be recognized by the host via pattern recognition receptors (Fig.2A). The fungus responds by increasing vesicles transport and producing materials to generate an extracellular matrix through the cell wall. The fungus uses adhesion proteins to attach itself to the host cells (Fig.2B). Hemocytes will cluster around the fungus and cross-link to each other. The fungus secretes zincophores and siderophores to retrieve zinc and iron for survival. At this point, degranulation of the hemocytes happens, which causes high reactive oxygen species production and discharge of antimicrobial peptides (Fig.2C). As a protective mechanism, the fungus produces melanin, which forms a capsule around the grain (Fig.2C). It was seen in theG. mellonellamodel that no hemocytes were found inside the grain anymore, proposing that the fungus has killed the hemocytes (Fig.2D).

Currently, diagnosis relies on clinical presentation and identification of the causative agent. Imaging techniques such as X-rays, ultrasound, magnetic resonance and computer tomography are used to assess the extent of the lesions and aid in the clinical management. To identify the causative agent, tissue samples containing the grains are collected via surgical biopsy or fine needle aspiration. Culturing the grains is the gold standard to identify the causative agent. However, this method is time-consuming, and its accuracy is limited, as identification relies on colony morphology (Siddig et al.2023). Histopathology, alone has a specificity of 42.8% compared to molecular identification (Siddig et al.2023). This is due to the black grains being misclassified asM. mycetomatis.Molecular identification with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is the most specific method to determine the causative agent, but due to high cost and lack of standardized techniques it is not used in the endemic areas (Siddig et al.2023). However, an effort is made to implement PCRs in endemic areas by several groups.

Actinomycetoma can often be successfully treated with a combination of antibiotics, such as sulfonamides, amoxicillin and tetracyclines, without the need for surgery (Welsh et al.2013). Although cure rates for actinomycetoma can be as high as 90%, treatment remains challenging due to the prolonged duration of therapy, the emergence of antibiotic resistance, and the high cost of newer drugs, which limits accessibility for many patients (Cárdenas-de la Garza et al.2020).

In contrast, the treatment of eumycetoma is even more challenging, often requiring long-term antifungal therapy combined with surgery (Fig.3). Treatment outcomes are often less than ideal, with low cure rates, a high chance of recurrence, and, in severe cases, the possibility of amputation (38.5%) (Clark et al.2024). These challenges are mainly due to limited available resources of affected populations. Treatment success also depends on factors such as the causative agent, disease stage, and the extent of the lesions. While early-stage nodules can often be treated effectively without surgery, advanced stages are significantly more difficult to treat (Elkheir et al.2020).

Currently, itraconazole is the first-line antifungal treatment in endemic regions (Fig.3). The standard regimen consists of 400 mg of itraconazole daily for 6 months, followed by surgical intervention to remove the lesion. This pre-surgery treatment is to facilitate lesion encapsulation and localization, thereby reducing the extent of surgical intervention and minimizing the risk of recurrence(Fahal et al.2011). After surgery, the patient continues itraconazole therapy for at least an additional 6 months. Itraconazole inhibits the cytochrome P450-dependent enzyme lanosterol 14-alpha-demethylase (CYP51A), preventing the synthesis of ergosterol, a crucial component of the fungal cellular membrane (Zhang et al.2019; Zonios and Bennett2008). The lack of ergosterol increases membrane permeability, ultimately leading to cell lysis (Herrick et al.2025).

Itraconazole was the comparator drug in the first ever clinical trial for eumycetoma and using the standard regimen depicted in Fig.3. After 12 months of treatment an 80% cure-rate was obtained in the 30 patients in the modified intention-to-treat group (Fahal et al.2024). However, when looking at the treatment response before surgery, no significant differences in the clinical appearance of the lesion between the start of itraconazole treatment and 6 months into therapy were noted (Fahal et al.2024). Symptoms such as swelling, sinus formation, discharge, and pain did not decrease significantly after 6 months of treatment (Fahal et al.2024). Furthermore, (1–3)-β-D-glucan serum levels did not decrease during the first 6 months of therapy, but decreased after surgery (Nyuykonge et al.2023,2024; Tissot et al.2013). In clinical practice, the high cure rates reported in the clinical trial are not found. In a case series in which 377 eumycetoma patients infected withM. mycetomatiswere followed, a corrected cure rate of only 67.6% was noted (van de Sande and Fahal2024). Furthermore, 23 (6.1%) of patients had to undergo amputation (van de Sande and Fahal2024; Wadal et al.2016). Moreover, itraconazole treatment is limited by poor availability in endemic regions. In developing countries, treatment response rates are low due to several factors, including drug resistance, high costs, limited drug access, and toxic side effects (Elkheir et al.2020; Kyriakidis et al.2017; Zein et al.2012). These challenges often lead to patient non-compliance, increasing the risk of disease recurrence and, in severe cases, amputation (Zein et al.2012).

When azoles are not available, terbinafine is often used as an alternative treatment for mycetoma, again in combination with surgery. Terbinafine inhibits squalene epoxidase in fungi, resulting in sterol deficiency and the toxic intracellular accumulation of squalene (Ryder1992). It is effective againstM. mycetomatis,with a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) between 1—> 16 µg/mL in vitro (van Belkum et al.2011). InM. mycetomatis-infected larvae, terbinafine was able to prolong survival compared to itraconazole and no treatment. In a small open-labeled study, 20 patients with eumycetoma caused byM. mycetomatis, F. senegalensis,and two unidentified fungal species were treated with 500 mg terbinafine twice per day for 24–48 weeks. Of these, 16 patients (80%) were either cured or showed clinical improvement without the need for surgery (N'Diaye et al.2006). In a retrospective study, terbinafine in combination with surgery has a cure rate of 55.6% (Sow et al.2020). Terbinafine is well tolerated, with no reports of severe adverse effects (N'Diaye et al.2006).

Despite the availability of treatments such as itraconazole and terbinafine, they need to be combined with surgery to achieve effective results. Small lesions (< 5 cm) are removed by a wide surgical excision and closed using primary skin closure (Gismalla et al.2024). Removal of big lesions (> 10 cm) is generally followed by reconstructive surgery, involving a skin graft or flap (Gismalla et al.2024). When eumycetoma has reached the bone, major surgery or reconstruction is usually ineffective due to the high likelihood of recurrence (Zein et al.2012). As a result, amputation is often performed (Gismalla et al.2024).

Since the current treatment options are lengthy, include both antifungal therapy and surgery, and often have a poor clinical outcome in daily practice there is an urgent need for a new and effective treatment for eumycetoma—one that is affordable and eliminates the need for surgery. However, neglected diseases like eumycetoma often receive limited prioritization and support in the search for new treatments. In the recent years there have been a few efforts to find a new drug for mycetoma. Figure4provides an overview of the modes of action of current and novel antifungal treatments for eumycetoma.

Posaconazole (FDA approved in 2006), has demonstrated potent inhibitory activity againstM. mycetomatiswith an IC50 < 0.098 µM (Lim et al.2018). In vivo,posaconazole significantly increased survival inM. mycetomatis-infectedG. mellonellalarvae by more than 20% (Lim et al.2018)(Fig.5). The efficacy and safety of posaconazole has been investigated in patients with eumycetoma. In one study, six patients (3 withT. grisea,2 withM. mycetomatis,1 withS. boydii)received 200–800 mg/day for up to 34 months (Negroni et al.2005). Five out of the six patients were successfully healed from eumycetoma without surgical intervention, and no long-term effects were reported. Another study using posaconazole 400 mg twice daily reported a higher rate of complete healing. However, both studies had small sample sizes, limiting the strength of their conclusions (Crabol et al.2014). A major drawback of posaconazole is its high cost, making it largely inaccessible in low resources areas, where eumycetoma is most prevalent.

Ravuconazole exhibited strong efficacy againstM. mycetomatiswith < 0.098 µM (Nakano et al.2019) InG. mellonella,ravuconazole also prolonged larval survival (Lim et al.2022b) (Fig.5). Fosravuconazole, the prodrug of ravuconazole was originally developed for the treatment of onychomycosis, a fungal infection of the nails. Due to its potent in vitro and in vivo activity againstM. mycetomatis,it was selected for the first clinial trial in mycetoma patients. In this clinical trial, patients received either 200 mg/week or 300 mg/week fosravuconazole for 6 months, followed by surgical lesion removal, and 6 additional months of post-treatment with fosravuconazole (Fahal et al.2024). This regimen was compared to the standard itraconazole treatment of 400 mg/week combined with surgery. The results showed that weekly doses of 200 or 300 mg had a cure rate of 85% or 65%, respectively and were not significantly more effective than itraconazole (Fahal et al.2024). Since fosravuconazole requires only weekly dosing and itraconazole must be taken daily, further investigation into this treatment is worth exploring.

Olorofim, a compound from the orotomides class, targets dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH), disrupting pyrimidine synthesis, DNA/RNA formation, protein synthesis and cell cycle regulation (Feuss et al.2024). Olorofim demonstrated an IC50 of < 0.098 µM againstM. mycetomatisand significantly prolonged the survival of infected larvae (Lim et al.2022b) (Fig.5). While olorofim shows promise for the treatment ofM. mycetomatiscaused eumycetoma, it has been less effective against other causative agents of eumycetoma, such asF. senegalensisandM. romeroi,likely due to differences in DHODH sequences among these species (Lim et al.2022b). Several clinical trials have been conducted to assess olorofim’s toxicity and efficacy against fungal infections, but no mycetoma patients were included. From the randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase 1 clinical trial registered on 20 May 2015 and which investigated the tolerability of olorofim in 40 healthy male volunteers, it was shown that with olorofim only minor adverse events were noted such as headaches, eczema, or epistaxis (NCT02142153) (ClinicalTrials.gov2015). No severe adverse effects were experienced. A follow-up clinical trial will commence in the near future to investigate the effect of olorofim against invasive aspergillosis (NCT05101187) (ClinicalTrials.gov2024). While the promising results from early trials suggest potential for olorofim, further in vivo studies are warranted before advancing to human trials for the treatment of eumycetoma.

Manogepix inhibits GWT1, an enzyme in the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchor biosynthesis pathway, resulting in the disruption of mannoproteins formation, which are critical for the fungal cell wall (Watanabe et al.2012). For eumycetoma causative agents, manogepix had an IC50 of 4 mg/L and reduced the hyphal and biofilm formation (Konings et al.2023). Synergy was observed between manogepix and itraconazole in vitro. However, no prolonged survival was observed whenM. mycetaomtisinfectedG. mellonellalarvae were treated with either manogepix alone or a combination of manogepix and itraconazole (Konings et al.2023) (Fig.5).

Ibrexafungerp (FDA approved in 2021) is a novel triterpenoid antifungal that targets β-(1,3)-D-glucan synthase, thereby inhibiting the synthesis of β-(1,3)-D-glucan. It has been demonstrated to inhibitM. mycetomatiswith an IC50 of 16 mg/L.Ibrexafungerp also prolonged larval survival at day 10 and decreased grain size in infected larvae (Ma2025). It is currently approved for the treatment of vaginal infections and its strong in vitro and in vivo activity suggests potential for repurposing in the treatment of eumycetoma.

Medicines for Malaria Venture (MMV) has established Open Access compound libraries aimed at repurposing drugs for neglected tropical diseases (NTDs). These include the Pathogen Box, Stasis Box, Pandemic Box, COVID Box, and Global Health Priority Box. A total of 1,600 compounds from these MMV Open Access boxes were tested for their efficacy againstM. mycetomatisin vitro (Lim et al.2018,2022b; Ma et al.2024). Among them, 29 compounds demonstrated an IC50 below 10 µM, including 15 from the pandemic box, 10 from the pathogen box, three from the global health priority box and one from the stasis box. Of these 29 compounds, 10 significantly increased survival inM. mycetomatis-infectedG. mellonellalarvae. Among the most promising compounds identified were azole antifungals, including posaconazole, bitertanol, and ravuconazole. All of which exhibited an IC50 < 10 µM againstM. mycetomatis.

Another class of potential compounds identified from the MMV boxes, were the benzimidazoles (Lim et al.2022b). Benzimidazole fenbendazole and MMV1782387, were identified as potent inhibitors ofM. mycetomatis.Fenbendazole, commonly used as an anthelmintic in veterinary medicine, demonstrated an IC50 of 3 µM and significantly prolonged the survival of infected larvae (Lim et al.2022b).Benzimidazoles bind to β-tubulin, destabilizing microtubule formation, which impairs cell division and motility (Dogra et al.2018). MMV1782387 exhibited an IC50 of 3 µM and significantly improved larvae survival (Lim et al.2022b).

MMV006357, a 2-aminothiazole derivative, has an IC50 of 0.4 µM (Lim et al.2018). Abafungin, another 2-aminothiazole derivative, is known to inhibit sterol C-24 methyltransferase, resulting in ergosterol impairment of the fungal cell membrane (Borelli et al.2008).

Other compounds that were potent in vitro and in vivo coming from MMV boxes were MMV22478, MMV675968 and MMV1804559 (IC50 = 2.95 µM, 2.3 µM and 6.95 µM, respectively). MMV022478 and MMV1804559, both pyrazolopyrimidines, showed prolonged survival in infected larvae early in infection (Ma et al.2024). MMV1804599 also resulted in fewer and smaller grains in vivo. When combined with itraconazole, MMV1804599 enhanced therapeutic efficacy in infected larvae (Ma et al.2024). And lastly, MMV675968, a quinazoline, inhibits dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), which is crucial for DNA and RNA repair, replication and methylation, as well as cell proliferation and cell growth (Lim et al.2018,2022c).

The Mycetoma Open Source (MycetOS) is an innovative open science initiative dedicated to developing and testing new compounds in vitro and in vivo.Research data is openly shared on Github in real time. What sets MycetOS apart is its inclusivity, engaging scientists at all levels, from professors to high school students, who help synthesize the compounds.

A key series of compounds tested are fenarimols, which are known to inhibit the ergosterol biosynthesis pathway. Initially, MMV689244, a compound from the Pathogen Box, was identified as a hit with an in vitro IC50 of 1.35 µM againstM. mycetomatis(Lim et al.2018). Following this, 35 fenarimols analogs were tested in vitro againstM. mycetomatis.Five fenarimol analogs demonstrated significant inhibitory activity againstM. mycetomatis,and three analogs prolonged the survival of infected larvae (Lim et al.2018). These findings correlate with the compounds’ lipophilicity (logD), revealing that compounds with a logD below 2.5 at pH 7.4 were more likely to effectively penetrate the grain, a critical factor for therapeutic efficacy (Lim et al.2018). Since then, a total of 194 fenarimol analogs have been synthesized and tested within the MycetOS project. Of these, 30 compounds displayed inhibitory activity againstM. mycetomatisin vitro,and six of them significantly prolonged larval survival. However, it is important to note that fenarimols have thus far shown potent activity exclusively againstM. mycetomatis,with no efficacy against other causative agents of eumycetoma.

Another promising class of compounds under investigation in MycetOS is benzimidazoles carbanates. This series was started based on two hits earlier discussed, fenbendazole and MMV1782387 (Lim et al.2022b). To date, 83 benzimidazole analogs have been synthesized, with 22 exhibiting inhibitory activity againstM. mycetomatisin vitro.Two of these compounds have also shown the ability to prolong larval survival, not yet published (Todd2025).

Additionally, ongoing work in MycetOS includes the exploration of other compound classes, such as aminothiazoles, phenothiazines, and ketoximines. The progress of these series and detailed data on their in vitro and in vivo activities can be found in the MycetOS repository on GitHub.

Eumycetoma remains a significant public health challenge in endemic regions, demanding more accessible diagnostic and therapeutic strategies. Despite advances in understanding its pathogenesis and immune response, the disease remains difficult to treat. While many of the novel antifungals mentioned here show promise for treating eumycetoma, the search for more potent compounds continues. The MycetOS initiative is dedicated to developing and testing new compounds in vitro and in vivo to identify potential hits. These novel agents aim to improve safety profiles, reduce drug interactions, enhance potency, and ensure accessibility in the endemic regions.