Environmental cues provide critical sensory information for the survival of animals. Understanding how distinct sensory cues elicit or modulate certain behaviour thus provides insights into the adaptations to rapid and continuous changes in the surrounding world. Intertidal ecosystems are particularly exposed to environmental fluctuations. Due to changing exposure to seawater, animals are subjected to continuous fluctuations of temperature or salinity during the course of day-night and tidal cycles. Animals in intertidal environments show physiological and behavioural adaptations to these changes. Acoel worms constitute an important component of intertidal ecosystems.Symsagittifera roscoffensis, a well-studied species inhabiting the Atlantic coastline, has been extensively described in terms of its anatomy and development, yet its physiological responses remain poorly understood. When the acoelS. roscoffensisare exposed to daylight during the tidal cycle, these animals are found at the surface of sandy beaches, which enhance the exposure of their photosynthetic algal symbionts to light. Moreover,S. roscoffensisshows a strong positive phototaxis as well as both positive and negative geotaxis, both being evolved behavioural adaptations to enhance light exposure for its photosymbiont. Currently little is known about other sensory systems and their functions in this, or any other acoel worm.In this study, we probe sensory capabilities ofS. roscoffensisfocusing on chemical and temperature cues. Using two-choice and barrier assays, our findings support thatS. roscoffensisshows avoidance behaviours to increased temperature and salinity, preferring cooler environments with lower salinity. We demonstrate that early branching bilaterians possess the sensory capacity to identify specific chemical and environmental stimuli, adding to the knowledge that may prove useful in understanding marine ecosystems in a period of global climate change that greatly affects aquatic environments.

While many animals utilise external sensory organs to determine the nature of their surroundings, the compositional, morphological and anatomical organization of sensory organs varies greatly in different animal clades, including different, often unrelated genes being responsible for the same functions, indicating convergent evolution [1]. Sensory systems evolved to transduce signals of their surroundings into neuronally encoded information, which are subsequently integrated and processed in the central nervous system to ultimately elicit or modulate the response of an animal.

In many animals, chemosensation is mediated by specialised external organs such as insect antennae, vertebrate olfactory epithelia, the antennules and aesthetascs of crustaceans, or the amphid sensilla of nematodes [1]. These organs bear high densities of receptor neurons exposed to the medium and thus are considered “canonical” chemosensory structures. By contrast, no such obvious external chemosensory organs have been described inS. roscoffensis,except a some suggested through ultrastructure analysis, as well as some putative receptor genes [16–18].

Like other acoels, theS. roscoffensispossesses paired rhabdomeric eyes: cup‑shaped invaginations lined with microvillar photoreceptors that detect light direction and intensity; and a statocyst, an internal, fluid‑filled vesicle containing a statolith whose deflection under gravity provides theS.roscoffensiswith information on body orientation [19–22].

While the strong phototactic behaviour as well as geotaxis ofS. roscoffensishas been well investigated [21,23], comparatively little is known about other sensory capacities. Bridging this gap in knowledge may uncover how non-visual sensory modalities govern howS. roscoffensislocates and retains its algal symbiont and selects microhabitats in a highly variable intertidal environment. Establishing these capacities also provides comparative data for the early evolution of multimodal sensory integration in bilaterians.

Here, we try to remedy this lack of information by investigating the chemosensory and thermosensory sensitivities ofS. roscoffensisby examining a variety of chemical and environmental modalities to determine the functional significance of identified sensory sensilla [16,24].

Given that this worm lives in an aquatic, intertidal, environment, where changes of physical parameters or chemical composition are most probable (e.g., light intensity, UV radiation, temperature, oxygen, and salinity [25]), we hypothesised thatS. roscoffensisshould be capable of sensing not only environmental stimuli such as temperature, and salinity, but are also able to respond to chemical cues, including potentially those emitted by their internal symbionts (and their free-living relatives) or other species occupying their same ecological niche.

The chemosensory behaviours inS. roscoffensisremains currently understudied. In order to gain insights into the chemosensory capacity ofS. roscoffensiswe first performed two-choice assays to assess navigational responses when exposed to putatively relevant chemical cues. As first set of experiments we investigated the chemosensory behavioural response to a set of AA known to be used as neurotransmitter-precursors or neurotransmitters in both invertebrates and vertebrates [26]. While the dependence ofS. roscoffensison its symbiont to provide essential neurotransmitters remains unknown, it has been previously shown that glutamate and aspartate, two AAs that may act as neurotransmitters [27], were only detected inS. roscoffensiswith symbionts, while it was absent in juvenile worms that did not yet harbour its 1 algae [28]. Other AAs that act as neurotransmitters such as glycine, or neurotransmitter precursor AAs such as tyrosine (dopamine and noradrenaline precursors), tryptophan (serotonin precursor), were not tested in regard to navigational response in previous studies. Given the conserved nature of these neurotransmitter systems in metazoans [26], it can be presumed that they are also present in Acoels. Hereby, we tested whetherS. roscoffensisis able to detect and respond to the presence of these AAs (glutamate, aspartate, tryptophan, tyrosine and glycine) in the environment (water column), as there is no evidence that tryptophan, tyrosine, and glycine are provided by the symbiont, using a two-choice navigation assay, measuring preference indices at 2-, 5-, and 10-minute timepoints. We placedS.roscoffensison dishes containing agarose (control), or dishes containing half agarose and half agarose supplemented with the given AA (Fig 1B). During 10-minute trials, we observed that the preference indices at the 10-minute timepoint for glutamine (Mean PI = −0.001, SEM = 0.103, Brown-Forsythe ANOVA: 4.909df1, df2 = 4, p = 0.9996) and tyrosine (Mean PI = −0.1, Brown-Forsythe ANOVA: 4.909df1, df2 = 4 p = 0.74) largely match those of the plain agarose control, suggestingS. roscoffensisdid not prefer either side (PI = 0.03). For the AA aspartate, we observed a mild preference, albeit not showing statistically significant differences from the control (Mean PI = 0.2, SEM = 0.0895, Brown-Forsythe ANOVA: 4.909df1, df2 = 4 p = 0.36,Fig 1B,1C). For glycine, we observed that there was a moderate preference across longer timepoints (PI = 0.15, SEM = 0.126, Brown-Forsythe ANOVA: 4.909df1, df2 = 4 p = 0.86,Fig 1C). Tryptophan, however, evoked the strongest response, with significance being reached above the 5-minute timepoint (PI = 0.46, SEM = 0.0417, Brown-Forsythe ANOVA: 4.909df1, df2 = 4, p < 0.0001Fig 1B,1C).

A: Overview ofSymsagittifera roscoffensisoutlining the symbiont algae (Alg), brain (Br), eye spots (Ey), the gravisensory statocyst (St) and the putatively chemosensory frontal organ (FO). B: left: diagram of the behaviour arena indicating a two-choice set-up with one half containing plain agarose, and the other half containing agarose with dissolved test substance, in this case the indicated AA. Right: preference indices for indicated test AAs compared with the “nutrient plain” agarose control (purple) at the 5-minute timepoint, all trials displayed with min-max bars. C: Summary of the PIs shown as time-series across tested AAs, mean with SEM. N = 10 for all tests. **** - p < 0.0001, ns where not shown, Brown-Forsythe and Welch ANOVA test with Dunnet’s T3 multiple comparisons test against the control group.

Considering the dynamic nature with varying salinity in intertidal waters due to evaporation and temperature changes during low tides, it has been shown that during low tides the salinity of sea water can change by up to 300% [29]. Since this is directly related to the environment of the acoel, we hypothesised that they may seek specific salinity levels, suggesting an ability to sense this modality. Therefore, we asked whether changes in salinity of the substrate would result in a preference phenotype.

Here,S. roscoffensiswere given a choice between a plain agarose/dH2O substrate and agarose with dissolved artificial sea water (ASW) adjusted to 34 ppm salinity using a refractometer, to reflect the salinity of the ambient sea water measured outside the Roscoff marine station (Fig 2A). We observed one-fold ASW (34 ppm) showed a mildly positive, albeit insignificant, preference index at the 10-minute timepoint (Mean PI = −0.22, SEM = 0.092, Brown-Forsythe ANOVA: 7.268df1, df2 = 2, p = 0.09) compared with the environmental sea water control, and across all time points (Fig 2B). However, we observed that the PI for two-fold ASW concentration (68 ppm) was significantly negative across the time series, reaching significance after the 5-minute timepoint (Mean PI = −0.45, SEM = 0.0387, Brown-Forsythe ANOVA: 7.268df1, df2 = 2, p < 0.0001) (Fig 2B). The concentration-dependent responses to variations in salinity thus allow us to assume a sensory ability to perceive high salt concentrations. This potentially reflects an ability to adapt to the dynamic variations in the intertidal environments whereS. roscoffensisis found.

A: overview of experimental conditions showing pooledS. roscoffensisbeing placed on the behaviour arena comprised of plain agarose on one half, and agarose with added salt content on the other half. B: Time-series diagrams showing preference indices over time, with twofold ASW concentration showing significance beyond the 5-minute timepoint; N = 10 for all trials, mean and SEM shown. C: salinity barrier assay diagram indicating the considered “attempt” and “cross” determinants; C’: – quantification of successful crosses across the high-salinity barrier compared with a plain agarose barrier; N = 10 trials, all points and min-max bars are shown. **** - p < 0.0001, ns where not shown, Brown-Forsythe and Welch ANOVA test with Dunnet’s T3 multiple comparisons tested against the control group.

The finding thatS. roscoffensisappears to prefer lower salt concentrations suggests that this condition is preferential for the acoel. However, we wanted to evaluate whetherS. roscoffensisdecided to avoid higher salt concentrations, or whether another physiological effect, such as reduced mobility, was at play. To test this, we developed a barrier-assay, in which we took advantage of the known strong positive phototaxis behaviour ofS. roscoffensis.In short, we removed a 1 cm agarose strip in the middle of the plain agarose plate and replaced it with agarose containing twofold ASW. Subsequently a group ofS. roscoffensiswas placed on one side of the strip while a LED lamp was placed, laterally, at the opposing side with the aim of inducing the acoels to cross the midline attracted by the light. We recorded their movement across the high-salinity barrier during phototaxis. Here, we observed that when presented with a plain (agarose in dH2O) barrier, 73% (403/553) ofS. roscoffensisattempted (evaluated by counting the encounter ofS. roscoffensiswith the barrier) to cross the barrier towards the light source, and 100% (403/403) of the attempts were successful, evaluated by the complete crossing of the barrier towards the light source. Meanwhile, when presented with a two-fold ASW barrier, 52% (184/352) ofS. roscoffensisattempted to cross the barrier, with only 19.6% (36/184) of attempts resulting in a cross (Fig 2C), and significantly higher compared with the agarose barrier (N = 10. Agarose mean = 100 SEM = 0, 2xASW mean = 18.33 SEM = 4.417, Welch’s t test t = 18.49, df = 8, p < 0.0001). Therefore, we show that despite the presence of a highly attractive light stimulus,S. roscoffensisavoid the approach it if they encounter high salinity, suggesting a hierarchical aversion-attraction perception and decision making.

Next, since it has been shown that juvenileS. roscoffensisare attracted by the symbiont and its supernatant [14,30], we asked if adultS. roscoffensisare similarly responsive to chemical cues emitted by symbiotic and non-symbiotic algae (which also live in their surrounding waters). Thus, to probe whether the presence or absence of the symbiontT. convolutaeor other, closely related algal species (C. concordia, T. chuii, andT. striata) may be used as a sensory cue, we performed similar two-choice assays, providingS. roscoffensisa choice between plain agarose and either a fresh algal culture F/2 medium, or a supernatant of an extract of algal cultures, over 10-minute trials with preference indices being measured at the 2-, 5-, and 10-minute timepoints. We observed that while there is a strong preference for pure F/2 medium, matureS. roscoffensisstrongly avoid the supernatants from cultures ofT. convolutae, C. concordia, T. chuii. However, they show a slight but statistically insignificant negative PI toT. striataextracts (Fig 3A). Furthermore, we utilised the same barrier decision-making assay to determine whether the presence of theT. convolutaesupernatant displays similar aversive properties as compared to excessive salinity. Here, we found that only 37% (252/687) ofS. roscoffensisattempted to cross the barrier, with a total success rate of 19.4% (49/252) (Fig 3B,3D) which is significantly lower than the agarose control (N = 10. Agarose mean = 100 SEM = 0,T. convolutaemean = 15.95 SEM = 5.810, Welch’s t test t = 14.47, df = 8, p < 0.0001).

A: diagram showing the process of extraction of algal culture. Approximately 20 ml of algal culture was Dounce homogenised, then spun down and supernatant was used to prepare the choice assay, with half of the plate containing plain agarose, and the other half containing agarose dissolved in extracted supernatant. B: summary of behaviour phenotypes at the 10-minute timepoint, with F/2 medium by itself showing a strong attractive index, while supernatant extracted from algal cultures shows strong aversive indices; N = 10 for all trials, all points and min-max bars shown. C: time-series diagrams showing preference indices over time. F/2 medium preference is positive beyond the 5-minute timepoint, while supernatant fromT. convoliutae, T. chuii,andC. concordiacauses immediate strong aversion. While supernatant fromT. striataalso shows a mild aversion, it is not statistically significantly different from the plain control. N = 10 for all trials, mean with SEM shown. D:T. convolutaeculture supernatant barrier cross assay performed similarly to the salinity barrier assay. D’:S. roscoffensiswas less likely to cross the barrier towards the light when compared with a plain agarose barrier.

Apart from chemical environmental cues, temperature may act as a key determinant for an animal to navigate towards favourable conditions. Therefore, we chose to characterise whetherS. roscoffensisdisplays also preference for specific temperature conditions. Here, we placed groups ofS. roscoffensison plates with different temperature gradients: a) high (30oC) to low (5oC), b) high to ambient (18oC), c) low to ambient, or d) ambient to ambient ranges (Fig 4A). We observed that there is, as expected, no difference in the side preference index between ambient-to-ambient areas at 10 minutes (PI = −0.01), and, similarly, no significant preference index between the low to ambient conditions compared to the ambient/ambient control at 10 minutes (Mean PI = −0.05, SEM = 0.08, Brown-Forsythe ANOVA: 5.592df1, df2 = 2, p = 0.9366). On the other hand, when presented with a choice between a high and low temperature,S. roscoffensistend to show a positive PI to the low temperature side after 10 minutes compared with the ambient/ambient control (PI = −0.37, SEM = 0.074, Brown-Forsythe ANOVA: 5.592df1, df2 = 2, p = 0.0028). Moreover,S. roscoffensispreferred the side with ambient temperature in comparison to the side with higher temperature at the 10-minute timepoint compared with the ambient/ambient control (MeanPI = −0.30, SEM = 0.092, Brown-Forsythe ANOVA: 5.592df1, df2 = 2, p = 0.0398), suggesting an avoidance behaviour towards higher temperatures (Fig 4B,4C). These experiments support the notion thatS. roscoffensisdo prefer lower temperatures over ambient or high temperatures. This in turn suggests that while low temperatures are neither attractive nor aversive, high temperature is decidedly an aversive cue, since animals show no preference between ambient and low temperatures, and only negative preference to high temperature.

A: diagram showing the experimental setup, with a plate being in contact with ice on one side, and a heated Peltier plate on the other. B: summary of behavioural phenotypes at the 10-minute timepoint, showing a general preference towards lower temperatures. C: individual test time-series for each condition, showing a trend for increased preference for cooler temperatures over time. N = 10 for all tests. Brown-Forsythe and Welch ANOVA test with Dunnet’s T3 multiple comparisons test against the ambient control group.

AdultS. roscoffensiswas collected on 01.09.2023 from wild colonies from the sands in the vicinity of Roscoff (48°43’38.6“N 3°59’16.5”W) and Carantec (48°40’14.4”N 3°54’40.3”W) (Brittany, France). The collected sand was then placed in deep trays andS. roscoffensiswas collected with Pasteur pipettes during low tides whenS. roscoffensisdisplay negative geotaxis. CollectedS. roscoffensiswere transferred into plastic containers (approximately 1000–5000 animals per container) with filtered natural sea water, continuously flowing to ensure consistent oxygenation, at constant water temperature (14 ± 1°C) and constant air temperature (18°C)at Station Biologique de Roscoff (Roscoff, Brittany, France). All experiments were performed during similar tidal and circadian conditions, between 09:00 and 15:00. All experiments were performed using animals with visible symbiont presence. Animals were not discriminated by sex. Experiments were performed between 03.09.2023 and 08.03.2023. Animals were not provided supplementary food outside of what may have been present in the surrounding water and sand.

Amino Acid assays: L-Glutamine (Sigma-Aldrich, 56-85-9), L-Aspartic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, 56-84-8), L-Tyrosine (Sigma-Aldrich, 60-17-4), L-Tryptophan (Sigma-Aldrich, 73-22-3), L-Glycine (Roth, 3187.3). All tests were performed at 20mM concentration.

Artificial sea water (Aquarium Sytems, Instant Ocean) diluted in distilled water to a concentration of 34 ppm (onefold) or 68 ppm (twofold).

Choice assays with culture supernatant from the classical and facultative symbiont:Tetraselmis convolutae(the classical symbiotic algae ofS. roscoffensis), andTetraselmis striata,Tetraselmis chuiiandChlamydomonas concordia, (three facultative symbionts ofS. roscoffensis) were cultured in flasks containing of sea water and F/2 feeding medium (UTEX culture collection of algae) for a period of 15 days. Before collecting the supernatant, the algae were examined at the microscope to exclude any abnormalities or increased cell death. The content of the flasks was collected by means of a Douce tissue grinder following 20 passes of the pestle, before centrifuging the slurry. 87 mm petri dishes were prepared with one half containing 2% agarose in distilled water and the other half containing 2% agarose in a 25 ml mix composed of 12 ml distilled water and 13 ml supernatant solution of one of each four algae species, respectively.

87mm dishes were prepared with 2% agarose in distilled water on both sides, with a 10 mm strip cut out from the middle, and subsequently filled with agarose containing twofold ASW orT. convolutaesupernatant. An LED lamp (OSRAM LED, 80012 White) was placed at a 45° angle, 9 cm above the table at a distance such that the lamp-oriented side of the dish was illuminated at 1100 lux, the middle of the plate 840 lux and the side opposite of the lamp with 400 lux.S. roscoffensiswere placed on the side of the barrier further from the light, and subsequently observed over the course of 10 minutes, with the attempts and successful crosses counted. 10 minutes were given for each trial in order to negate any effects of reduced mobility, which was not noticed by the experimenter.

87mm petri dishes were coated with 2% agarose before being placed in a Styrofoam box for thermal insulation. One half of the petri dish was in contact either with ice water (reaching a temperature of 5oC), RT (18-21oC) or with a Peltier plate running at 24W, reaching a temperature of 30oC. The temperatures were selected to ensure sufficient difference between conditions under practical limitations. were pooled and placed in the middle of the petri dish in a similar fashion to the choice assays described above. The number ofS. roscoffensiswas then recorded on each side, and a preference index was calculated.

All statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 10. For each trial of each experiment, a fresh set of acoels was used, thus no worms were subjected to multiple stimulation experiments. For time trials, each time point was treated independently. Welch’s test was used to determine unequal variance within the individual experiments, and, combined with a relatively low sample size (n = 10), Dunnet’s T3 multiple comparison test was chosen. Individual statistical results are presented in the relevant results sections and figure legends.

No permits were required for this work on invertebrate model animals. Site access to the Roscoff Marine Biology Station was provided and supervised by Xavier Bailly (xavier.bailly@sb-roscoff.fr).

All behaviour data are available on Zenodo:https://zenodo.org/records/15470219?token=eyJhbGciOiJIUzUxMiJ9.eyJpZCI6ImRiYTc3OTM0LWNkMDItNDVkMC04NzY4LWE0N2FiNDQ0NjNhOSIsImRhdGEiOnt9LCJyYW5kb20iOiJiYWQ5ZmU2NGI3ODdhMzM5YzhhY2I1ODUzODE1YmFhZSJ9.KJhEgc7RN0yJZeKa9npMKW3wBQx8lxdL_XoUNSqaPo8gY6xI2Djula4wxGVZrwfyDPuLm9oTamO9RGZXOahk4w.

To isolate responses exclusively to the stimuli of interest, our experimental conditions therefore differ from the natural environment in whichS. roscoffensisis typically found. For instance, the substrate used in our experiment was agarose, as opposed to the natural substrate of sand, which may contain a large variety of chemical and biological contaminants that could, in turn, affect the behaviour ofS. roscoffensis. However, for the purposes of this study, we aimed to observe any response specifically to a narrow range of individual, ecologically relevant stimuli, rather than observingS. roscoffensis’ behaviour in the natural environment. Furthermore, we maintained a constant ambient temperature, which may not be the case in nature due to factors such as winds, waves, or clouds. Further studies may be performed to understand the impact of these factors on the responses ofS. roscoffensisto varied stimuli. For example, future work could use sand as a substrate, perform chemosensory experiments under varying temperature and light conditions, or test at different points of the tidal cycle.

The aversion to increased salinity may also relate to the naturally varying changes in the habitat of the worms. During low tide, as water evaporates from the surface of the sand, salinity will increase, thus causing a changing environment forS. roscoffensis. Thus, it may be presumed thatS. roscoffensiswould prefer a specific level of salinity to remain in an isotonic environment and avoid a hypotonic one. However, it is known thatS. roscoffensisemerges to the surface during low tide conditions, thus contraindicating an aversion to increasing salinity levels. One explanation for this may be that the strong negative geotaxis, but not positive phototaxis responses, overpower the natural aversion to increased salt levels, and the worms instead fine-tune their positioning within different levels of salinity on the surface.

The results for the responses to the symbiont supernatant also provide a surprising new perspective on the interactions between these host (worm) and the algae. While it is known that juvenileS. roscoffensisincorporate algae into their bodies, suggesting a level of attraction to any chemical cues that the algae may emit, adults show the opposite response. Firstly, we controlled for whether it is the medium of the algal culture that causes a behavioural phenotype, and, indeed, we found that it is an appetitive stimulus. However, despite this, the presence of any algal emissions, and not the algae themselves, causes a strongly aversive response. It is possible to speculate that onceS. roscoffensisreach a state of maturity, including incorporating enough algae within them (with a narrow stoichiometry), a physiological switch occurs which causes them to avoid the free-living alga in their immediate environment. Perhaps, this may be in order to avoid overcrowding and allow new or growing juveniles more access to the algae, thus ensuring that the population is maintained, and self-competition is avoided. On the other hand, considering that in these experiments algal extract was used, the aversive behaviour may be due toS. roscoffensisavoiding broken (thus dead) algae, perhaps being expelled by deadS. roscoffensis. The presence of certain chemicals may thus indicate that the locality is under stress, as indicated by the liberated chemicals and metabolites from broken algae, indicating thatS. roscoffensisneed to hide or migrate to safer places (e.g., DMSP, dimethylsulfoniopropionate (an organosulfur compound) [34]). Further studies on adult and juvenileS. roscoffensismay provide the answers to these questions. For example, the concentration present in our tests may have been too high, resulting in the aversive response we observe, thus performing a concentration dilution series, using additional or distantly related algae, or controlling for algal cell number may prove as an interesting study in the future.

Like the responses of the salinity assays, the phenotype of high-temperature avoidance may also play a role in the navigation ofS. roscoffensison the surface during low tide. Since increasing temperature causes increased evaporation of the water, this may be an interlinked response with the avoidance of high salinity. Furthermore, higher temperatures may result in increased metabolism within the algae, or the worms themselves. Increased metabolism may result in increased stress, for example from excess oxygen production resulting in elevated oxidative stress. Thus, avoiding increased temperatures may be a physiological response to avoid excess or premature death. Contrarily, lower temperatures may instead result in a neutral preference index due to either a lack of ability to detect such temperatures, or the fact that the temperature of the water fluctuates between an average low of 9oC to an average high of 17oC across the year. Thus, the “low temperature” condition in our assay may not be sufficiently lower than the temperature experienced byS. roscoffensisin the natural environment. While in [23]an increased stress in both very low (0° C) and very high temperatures (30° C) compared to the normal condition was shown, the worms were still able to survive. It is therefore reasonable to postulate that the worms tend to seek an environment within the optimal temperature range of their physiology. In this context, it is important to point out that our work represents a good complement to the one published by Thomas and collaborators [23], where they test the response ofS. roscoffensisto several physical and chemical cues. Though they use the same species, their stimuli are different than those studied by us (in their set up: light, vibration, sea water or frozen worms), bringing the study of behaviour in acoels under a more secure footing. In all, we show that early-branching bilaterians display sensory responses to a variety of stimuli, and further studies can be performed to understand how the natural environment can affect the sensory responses ofS. roscoffensis.