Species of the Apiaceae family produce furanocoumarins—photosensitizing substances widely used in pharmacology. Among them, certain species of the genusHeracleum, commonly known as “giant hogweeds”, are particularly renowned for their photosensitizing properties. While the metabolic composition of these plants has been studied extensively, their genomics remains largely unexplored, as does the biosynthesis of furanocoumarins within the genus. The reasons behind the increased photosensitivity of giant hogweeds compared to otherHeracleumspecies remain unclear.

A comparison of the genomic features and furanocoumarin content of the aboveground organs in twoHeracleumspecies was carried out:H. sosnowskyi, a giant hogweed with strong photosensitizing activity, andH. sibiricum,a non-invasive and “harmless” species. Both species produce all known angular and linear compounds of the furanocoumarin synthesis pathway (from umbelliferone to isopimpinellin). The genomes of both species possess homologues of genes involved in the biosynthesis of both angular and linear furanocoumarins. However, the two species differ significantly in the quantity of those compounds.H. sibiricumsynthesizes angular furanocoumarins in a much lower level, probably due to lack of the gene for umbelliferon-8-dimetylallyl transferase enzyme.H. sosnowskyiaccumulates significantly higher level of xanthotoxin. Interpopulation differences were observed in both the compound content and the expression level of biosynthetic genes.

This study represents the first comparative analysis of genomic and metabolic data for closely relatedHeracleumspecies in relation to furanocoumarin biosynthesis.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12870-025-07042-3.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12870-025-07042-3.

The species of Apiaceae have long been in the focus of phytochemistry due to the fact that many of their secondary metabolites are prospective pharmaceutical agents and have the potential to be used in chemosystematics [1].

GenusHeracleumL. is one of the largest genera in the family Apiaceae; it contains 88-120 species by different estimates [2,3]. Species of the genus are widespread in temperate, polar, and tropical regions of Europe, Asia, Africa and North America [4]. Some species are cultivated as ornamental plants, others as forage crops, and some are considered invasive due to their uncontrolled spread [4,5]. Certain species of the genusHeracleum, commonly known as “giant hogweeds”, are particularly renowned for their photosensitizing properties [4,6,7]. In this study, we focus on two ofHeracleumspecies, which are the most widely represented in the European flora. The first one is the invasive speciesHeracleum sosnowskyiManden.

According to Mandenova's taxonomy [8],H. sosnowskyibelongs to the section Pubescentia, which includes a number of other large hogweeds, including a very close relative,H. mantegazzianumSommier & Levier. The latest data on its genetic diversity indicate on the close relationship and possible sameness of those two species [9,10].H. sosnowskyiis a giant herbaceous biennial plant two or more metres tall with large white inflorescences. The native area of this species includes the Caucasus region [11], while its introduced area extends across Russia, Eastern and Northern Europe [12]. In the habitat of the secondary area, it grows as a monodominant species in abandoned agricultural fields, along roadsides, on the edges of forests. The important characteristic of bothH. sosnowskyiandH. mantegazzianumis their ability to cause photosensibilization (an increased sensitivity of the skin to sunlight, causing a reaction like a burn). This ability is explained by the presence of linear furanocoumarins, in particular, psoralen, and 5- and 8-metoxypsoralen [13].

The second species,Heracleum sibiricumL., is a much smaller herbaceous plant with yellow inflorescences. It is predominantly found in Europe, but also in Siberia (extending to the Altai region). It is considered a non-invasive and harmless species that can be used as an edible plant. Notably, in many Eastern European languages, the vernacular name of the whole genusHeracleumis derived from “borscht” – a special kind of traditional vegetable soup. Both species contain furanocoumarins (see, e.g. [14,15]) including photosensitizing ones. Furanocoumarins have been found in a wide range of plant species of the families Apiaceae, Rutaceae, Moraceae, Fabaceae, Asteraceae; in the genusHeracleumfuranocoumarins have been found in more than 100 species.

The content of furanocoumarins inHeracleum, in particular inH. sosnowskyiplants, was widely studied in the twentieth century using thin-layer chromatography (TLC) methods [16]. Those studies revealed that several compounds were found in all species, while other substances were found in only a few numbers of species. The presence of such compounds in various organs was confirmed later by LC–MS methods [14,17–20]. They also have been identified in the closely relatedH. mantegazzianum[21–29]. In the last thirty years, due to their highly invasive nature, both giant hogweeds have been intensively studied [30–38].

Furanocoumarins ofH. sibiricumfirst attracted the attention of Svendsen’s group [39], and were later examined in a comparative study of phototoxicity of Scandinavian hogweeds [40]. After the 1980 s,H. sibiricumbecame a focus of attention of Polish researchers, who analysed it using LC–MS methods [15,41–49].

The core biosynthetic pathway of furanocoumarins is well understood (see, e.g., [50]) and it consists of several enzymatic steps most of which are catalysed by cytochromes P450 (Fig.1). However, these different steps of furanocoumarin biosynthesis were studied in different plant families (Moraceae and Rutaceae), while many details are highly taxon-specific. Little is known about the biosynthesis of furanocoumarins inHeracleumspecies as no research has focused on the precursors of furanocoumarin structures (umbelliferone, marmesin and columbianetin). Furthermore, there is no available data on the presence of intermediate coumarins demethylsuberosin and osthenol forH. sosnowskyi, H. mantegazzianumandH. sibiricum.

Aside from early chemosystematic studies using TLC [16,51,52],H. sosnowskyiandH. sibiricumhave not been directly compared. To date, no whole genome or transcriptome analysis has been conducted forHeracleumwith exception of our study ofH. sosnowskyigenome [53] that reported some preliminary data on this subject.

The aim of this study was to determine the factors contributing to the increased photosensibilization ofH. sosnowskyiin comparison toH. sibiricumusing transcriptomic and metabolomic data. In order to provide quantitative estimates for the content of noxious compounds psoralen, xanthotoxin, bergapten and angelicin in different above-ground organs ofH. sosnowskyiandH. sibiricum, we performed HPLC and mass spectrometry analysis. Additionally, to compare the biosynthetic pathways for the synthesis of furanocoumarins in theseHeracleumspecies, we intended to identify compounds known to function as intermediates in linear and angular furanocoumarin biosynthesis and candidate genes that can be responsible for these biosynthesis steps.

Samples ofH. sosnowskyiandH. sibiricumwere collected from two populations of each species (Karelia, Russia and Moscow Region, Russia) in July 2021; the coordinates of the collection sites are given in Additional Table S1. The samples were identified by Dr. Maria Logacheva (Lomonosov Moscow State University), one of the co-authors of this work. Samples were collected in solid carbon dioxide; after transportation they were stored at –80 °C. Voucher specimens are deposited in Herbarium of the Lomonosov Moscow State University (MW), deposition numbers MW1053906, MW1053907, MW1053910, MW1053908 (details provided in Additional Table S1). Each final sample represented a pool containing material from 5 plants.

All LC–MS/MS analyses were performed using the equipment of “Human Proteome” Core Facilities of the Institute of Biomedical Chemistry (Russian Federation). The plants were chopped with a scalpel, 0.5 g samples were transferred to 5 ml test tubes. Plant samples were extracted with 4 ml of methanol for 30 min under sonication with subsequent centrifugation at 10,000 g for 5 min. The procedure was repeated 3 times with the same sample; the methanol extracts were then combined and evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator (Vacuum concentrator plus, Eppendorf, Germany) at 45 °C. The residues were redissolved in 1 ml of methanol, centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000 g. 10 µl of the obtained extracts and 90 µl of methanol were added to vials for HPLC–MS l and subjected to analysis. An Agilent 1290 Infinity LC system was used in connection with an Agilent 6495 Triple Quad mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, USA) with an electrospray ionization source.

Mobile phases consisted of: water purified with a Milli-Q Integral 3 system (Millipore, France), formic acid (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA), acetonitrile (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). The composition of the mobile phases was: mobile phase A – MilliQ water with 0.1% formic acid, mobile phase B – acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. An injection volume of 1 µl was used in all cases.

Chromatography was performed using Waters Acquity UPLC BEH C8, 1.7 µm, 2.1 × 100 mm column with a Waters Acquity UPLC BEH C8 1.7 µm 2.1 × 12.5 guard column (Waters Corporation, USA) at the flow rate of 0.25 ml/min, and column temperature of 40 °C. Gradient elution conditions were as follows: isocratic elution at 5% of mobile phase B and 95% of mobile phase A until the 3-min mark, followed by linear gradient to 30% of mobile phase B at 18 min, then another linear gradient to 100% of mobile phase B at 19 min with isocratic wash until the 22 min mark. Then within a minute the solvent composition was switched back to 5% of B followed by a column equilibration step until the 50-min mark. MS detection parameters were as follows: positive ionization mode, source temperature 300 °C, carrier gas pressure 4.8 bar, drying gas flow rate 12 l/min, capillary voltage 4 kV. The samples were analysed using the MRM mode. Collision energy was 20 eV for all compounds.

The amount of 100 mg plant sample was extracted with 1 ml of methanol in 2 ml sample tubes for 30 min under sonication with subsequent centrifugation at 10,000 g for 5 min. The procedure was repeated 3 times with the same sample; the methanol extracts were then combined and evaporated to dryness. The residue was redissolved in 1 ml of methanol and centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000 g. For analysis, the final extract was diluted 10 to 100 times with 5% acetonitrile in MilliQ water with 0.1% formic acid. An Agilent 1290 Infinity LC system was used in connection with an Agilent 6550 Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, USA) with an electrospray ionization source.

Mobile phases were prepared with the following materials: water purified with a Milli-Q Integral 3 system (Millipore, France), formic acid (Acros Organics, Germany), acetonitrile (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). The compositions of the mobile phases were: mobile phase A – MilliQ water with 0.1% formic acid, mobile phase B – acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. An injection volume of 1 µl was used in all cases.

Chromatography was performed using Poroshell 120 SB-C18 2.7 µm, 2.1 × 100 mm column with a Zorbax SB-C8 5 µm 2.1 × 12.5 guard column (Waters Corporation, USA) at the flow rate of 0.3 ml/min, and column temperature of 40 °C. Gradient elution conditions were as follows: isocratic elution at 5% of mobile phase B and 95% of mobile phase A until the 3-min mark, followed by linear gradient to 40% of mobile phase B at 35 min, then another linear gradient to 100% of mobile phase B at 40 min with isocratic wash until the 45-min mark. Then within a minute the solvent composition was switched back to 5% of B followed by a column equilibration step until the 50-min mark. MS detection parameters: positive ionization mode, source temperature 290 °C, carrier gas pressure 4.8 bar, drying gas flow rate 12 l/min, capillary voltage 4 kV.

The samples were analysed using the TIC mode in 100–1000m/zrange with collision energy of 20 eV and AutoMSMS scanning of the fragment ions at 100–1000m/zrange.

The data about manufacturers, country of origin, lot/batch numbers, purity of used reagents is given in Additional Table S2, part II. Standards of psoralen, angelicin, xanthotoxin and bergapten were used to prepare methanol solutions with 0.01–5 μg/ml concentrations of the analytes. Those solutions were subjected to the same untargeted LC–MS/MS procedure. We used the peak areas from the extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) of the respective masses to form a linear calibration curve. Analyte concentrations in the samples were determined by comparing the respective peak areas from the XICs to the calibration data. The obtained concentrations were transformed to the quantities in the solid sample assuming complete extraction of the analytes. Peak abundance analysis was performed using Agilent Mass Hunter Workstation Softwear (Version B.07.00 Service Pack 1). Resulting peak abundances were exported to the tabular data file and used for subsequent qualitative analysis, PCA analysis and abundance plots.

The data about manufacturers, country of origin, lot/batch numbers, purity of used reagents is given in Additional Table S2, part II. Commercially available standards of marmesin, columbianetin, demethylsuberosin, osthenol, xantotoxol, bergaptol were used. Umbelliferone, oxypeucedanin hydrate, isopimpinellin, pimpinellin, heraclenin, isooxyimperatorin, imperatorin, isoimperatorin, phellopterin were kindly gifted by prof. A.L. Shavarda from Komarov Botanical Institute of the Russian Academy of Science (Russia). The standards were used to prepare 1 mg/ml methanol solutions. The solutions were then mixed and diluted to yield MIX1 (10 μg/ml of umbelliferone, isoimperatorin, oxypeucedanin hydrate, isopimpinellin, phellopterin, isooxyimperatorin, psoralen, marmesin, bergapten) and MIX2 (10 ug/ml of imperatorin, pimpinellin, heraclenin, angelicin, columbianetin, xanthotoxin), which were subjected to the same untargeted LC–MS/MS procedure. Compound peaks were identified by comparing retention times and fragmentation patterns.

Two-component PCA analysis was performed using previously obtained peak intensities for the identified compounds. The analysis was performed using sklearn Python module. The code for the analysis is available upon request.

Four above-ground structures ofH. sosnowskyiandH. sibiricumwere collected: leaves, flowers, inflorescence rays, and immature fruit. RNA extraction, library preparation and sequencing was performed as described in our earlier study [53].

To assess the patterns and levels of gene expression ofH. sibiricum, we assembled the transcriptome de novo by using the Trans2express [54] protocol, combining short and long-read RNA sequencing data from fruit, leaves, flowers, and inflorescence rays. The assembly was checked with BUSCO [55].

To identify candidate genes involved in furanocoumarin biosynthesis in bothH. sibiricumandH. sosnowskyi, we combined homologous search and expression analysis. As the first step, we used blastn [56] with previously known enzyme proteins from other species (please see the list of blasted enzymes in Additional TableS3) against CDS from theH. sibiricumtranscriptome andH. sosnowskyigenome [53]. We used a thresholde-value of 10–100and a score of 200.

We performed gene expression analysis ofH. sibiricumandH. sosnowskyifruit, leaves, flowers, and inflorescence rays. The expression levels were estimated by RSEM [57]: RSEM-bowtie was used forH. sibiricumwith the transcriptome assembly as the reference, and RSEM-star forH. sosnowskyiwith the complete genome as the reference, and then normalized to zFPKM [58].

We applied regression analysis to assess the association between two numeric variables, concentrations (for bergapten, xanthotoxin, psoralen and angelicin) or intensities of certain furanocoumarin structures and candidate genes expression (FPKM). Software “linregress” from Python “scipy.stats” package was used. The parameters for the pairs"substrate/gene","product/gene"were considered. In order to estimate the possible cross-action of enzymes in the angular/linear biosynthetic pathway, the substrates and products of the corresponding step in the"parallel"pathway were also included in the calculation. The results are given in Additional Table S4, including Pearson correlation coefficients and thep-values adjusted for multiple testing. The table only includes data for pair withp-values < 0.1.

Analysis of information about presence of furanocoumarins structures known to date is carried out with Sci-Finder (https://scifinder-n.cas.org/). Articles were searched by queries “H. sosnowskyi”,”H. mantegazzianum” and “H. sibiricum”.Only publications that described the fact of isolation of furanocoumarin substances from the plant were considered.

We conducted a preliminary study related to the effect of climatic factors on the presence of certain furanocoumarins in giant hogweed. Using the Sci-Finder publication database (https://scifinder-n.cas.org/), we selected all publications for the queries “Heracleum sosnowskyi” and “Heracleum mantegazzianum”. From the resulting list we selected the publications (Additional Table S5, sheet “Samples”) containing information about the geographical location, the period of sample collection and the furanocoumarins isolated from plants. The presence/absence of furanocoumarins was scored on a three-point scale: 2– furanocoumarin detected in significant quantities, 1– furanocoumarin detected in trace amounts, 0– no furanocoumarin detected when searching (Additional Table S5, sheet “Compounds”). The final analysis (after excluding substances with insufficient data) included only furanocoumarins with two grades of substance content (0 and 2).

Then, using the CEDA climate database (https://data.ceda.ac.uk/badc/cru/data/cru_ts/cru_ts_4.08/data) we collected climate data for the respective geographic locations (Additional Table S5, sheet “Climate”). There were 10 climate parameters including temperature, cloudiness, humidity and others (the full list of climate parameters considered and their units of measurement are given in the Additional Table S5, sheet “Legend”). Next, their average values for May–September and June–September of the sample collection year (vegetation period) were calculated. In addition, based on three of the initial climate parameters, 19 bioclimatic parameters (BIO1,…, BIO19) were calculated for each point (for year period).

Then we used step-by-step building of binomial generalized linear models using the forward regression method, along with the assessment of Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and variance inflation factors (VIF). At each step the model was chosen using the following criteria: a) with AIC (lower than the AIC of null model, b) with the lowest AIC, c) with the absence of collinearity, assessed by calculating the variance inflation factor, d) with significant predictorp-values. The selected models were also evaluated by calculating the coefficient of determination.

All calculations were performed in the R 4.0.0 environment using ‘dismo’ [59], ‘car’ [60], ‘MASS’ [61], and ‘MuMIn’ [62] packages.

Furanocoumarin content exhibited differences between species though inter-population and inter-organ variations within a single species were also observed (Table1).

The highest concentration of psoralen was found in flowers ofH. sosnowskyifrom the population of the Moscow Region (in Köppen classification characterized by a continental fully humid climate with warm summer).

In contrast,H. sibiricumsamples from the same region contained only trace amounts of psoralen. Samples ofH. sibiricumfrom another location also had lower psoralen level thanH. sosnowskyi, though the compound was still detectable. Overall,H. sibiricumcontained significantly less psoralen, with only traces detected in the organs of the Moscow Region population. Among all furanocoumarins studied, angelicin showed the most pronounced interspecific difference: only trace amounts were detected in all organs ofH. sibiricumin both populations. The highest concentration of xanthotoxin was found in inflorescences ofH. sosnowskyifrom the Moscow Region population, while in some organs ofH. sibiricumof the same population its level dropped to trace amounts. At the same time,H. sibiricumfrom Karelia (continental fully humid climate with cold summer in Köppen classification, softened by the influence of the White and Barents Seas) exhibited relatively high xanthotoxin levels. Bergapten was more uniformly distributed, with organ-specific differences sometimes exceeding interspecific variation. The highest bergapten concentration was detected in fruits ofH. sibiricumfrom the population of the Moscow Region, while it was completely absent in inflorescences of the same population. Overall, furanocoumarin content varied not only between populations but also across different plant parts. Reproductive organs (flowers and fruit) generally contained a higher amount of all furanocoumarins (except for leaves ofH. sosnowskyifrom Karelia).

We have detected the presence of 13 compounds. Compound structures were identified by comparing their retention factor (Rf) and mass-spectrometric data with those of the respective standards.

Both species contained all the compounds included in the furanocoumarins biosynthesic pathway, from the two-ring to the three-ring structure: precursor coumarins umbelliferone, demethylsuberosin, osthenol, precursor dihydrofuranocoumarins marmesin, and columbianetin, and the core furanocoumarin structures psoralen and angelicin. Notably, the presence of precursor coumarins demethylsuberosin and osthenol was demonstrated in the first time for these species. Intensity plots for the identified compounds are shown in Fig.2.

We also identified 8-derivatives with an isoprenoid side chain, imperatorin and oxyimperatorin (heraclenin), in both species. However, 5-derivatives with an isoprenoid side chain, oxypeucedanin, oxypeucedanin hydrate, isooxypeucedanin, were entirely absent both inH. sosnowskyiand inH. sibiricum. Similarly, hydroxy-derivatives xanthotoxol and bergaptol were not detected at all, at least in their free state.

Based on metabolomic data, we performed a principal component analysis (PCA). PCA plots illustrating differences between species based on type, organ and population are presented in Fig.3A-C. Loadings to these scatterplots are shown on Fig.3D-E. Principal component 2 (PC2) effectively differentiates the species, with the most pronounced distinction observed between the fruit of the respective species. Negative PC2 weight values correspond to the compounds found in higher concentrations inH. sosnowskyi, whereas positive values indicate compounds more abundant inH. sibiricum.It should be noted, however, that this analysis does not fully account for the differences between the samples when saturation limit is achieved (e.g., for xanthotoxin and bergapten).

Principal component 1, on the other hand, does not seem to carry any identifiable meaning with its narrow weight distribution for the peak intensities. The value of that component generally follows the trend of increasing of furanocoumarin concentration across most of the identified compounds, progressing from leaves to umbel rays, flower and fruit.

In order to characterize the genes involved in furanocoumarin biosynthesis we sequenced and assembled the transcriptome ofH. sibiricum. The assembly contained 37,223 contigs, with N50 = 2190, and covered 83.8% of odb-10 BUSCO genes, with 81.1% of single-copies and 2.7% duplicates. We used all 55 known homologues of furanocoumarin biosynthesis genes (Additional Table S3, sheet “Proteins for BLAST”) from Apiaceae species (Peucedanum praeruptorum,Ammi majus,Pastinaca sativa,Apium graveolens,Glehnia littoralis,Petroselinum crispum), including enzymes of steps for umbelliferone synthesis (the latter are not shown in Table2). After discarding genes with coverage by nanopore reads less than 30 or with expression level zFPKM lower than–3, we identified candidate genes for furanocoumarin biosynthesis (Table2). Best results for reciprocal BLAST betweenH. sosnowskyiandH. sibiricumcandidates are shown in Additional Table S3, sheet “Sosn_vs_sib”.

Expression levels of the candidate genes are shown in Fig.2(see also Additional Table S3, sheets “Cand_sosn” and “Cand_sib”). As reported above,H. sosnowskyidata demonstrated higher content of furanocoumarins, especially photosensibilizating structures psoralen and bergapten. Congruent with this, we found in this species higher copy number of most furanocoumarin biosynthesis candidate genes and their expression levels in higher than inH. sibiricum.H. sibiricumis characterized by lower intensity of angular furanocoumarin metabolism: small and trace amounts of angular substances, one gene of columbianetin synthesis with low expression, absence of expressed U8DT-homologoues. It is also interesting to note a higher amount of demethylsuberosin and marmesin inH. sibiricumcompared toH. sosnowskyi, while the content of psoralen is lower. This is congruent with the expression pattern–H. sibiricumtranscriptome contains two highly-expressed candidate homologues of marmesin synthase and one of psoralen synthase, whileH. sosnowskyicontains one for MS and two for PS. Levels of expression of furanocoumarin synthesis genes is higher in reproductive organs (flower and fruit) for both species that is also congruent with the amounts of furanocoumarin substances.

Regression analysis showed different relationships between the level of gene expression and the content of furanocoumarins for each species. ForH. sosnowskyi, we have found a dependence withp< 0.05 between the content of bergapten and the expression levels of candidate genes for bergapten synthesis (XS, 5-OH-XS, BMT), see Additional Table S4. In the case ofH. sibiricum, a statistically significant correlation has been shown for a larger number of genes. Thus, candidate copies of U6DT, MS and AS demonstrated positive correlations between gene expression and amounts of both substrates and products of predicted reactions. At the same time, the expression levels of MS, PS and AS showed correlations not only with the compound content of the predicted step, but also with the compound content of the corresponding step of the"parallel"furanocoumarin synthesis pathway. No significant correlations were found between gene expression levels and psoralen and xanthotoxin content for either species.

The structures of furanocoumarin compounds found in theseHeracleumspecies are listed in Additional Table S2. There are linear and angular forms, 5- and 8-derivatives, monoderivatives with methyl radicals (bergapten, xanthotoxin, isobergapten, sphondin, isopimpinellin, pimpinellin) and prenyl radicals (imperatorin, heraclenin and heraclenol), as well as di-derivatives with the same radicals (byacangelicin, byacangelicol, phellopterin). Hydroxyl derivatives (bergaptol, xanthotoxol etc.) have almost never been registered.

We estimated the effect of climatic factors on the presence of specific furanocoumarins inHeracleumspecies based on a literature data analysis (including the data obtained in this study). We analysed all the available information that allowed us to establish relationships between the geographical locations of collection sites, the climatic conditions in which the plants grew and the compounds detected. In addition toH. sosnowskyidata, we included data onH. mantegazzianum; this species is very closely related toH. sosnowskyi, has the same primary area and invasive habit. Many other physiological, morphological and ecological traits are identical inH. mantegazzianumandH. sosnowskyi, making them “twin species”. Genetic data indicate that they may even represent the same species [9,10]. Congruently, there are low differences in their furanocoumarin content (Additional Table S6). We excluded data with unclear geographical coordinates. From the remaining dataset, we further excluded compounds that a) were only reported as absent or identified in only one study (oxypeucedanin hydrate, isooxyimperatorin), b) were found only in articles excluded from consideration (pabulenol), and c) were found in significant amounts in all studies where they were searched for (umbelliferone, marmesin, bergapten, heraclenin, isopimpinellin, byakangelicin, heraclesol, apterin). From the remaining set of compounds (columbianetin, psoralen, isoimperatorin, xanthotoxin, imperatorin, phellopterin, angelicin, isobergapten, sphondin, pimpinellin), we selected those measured on a scale of at least three points in at least 15 studies. Therefore, the final analysis included only two compounds—xanthotoxin and imperatorin (25 and 19 articles respectively).

Stepwise selection of generalized linear models and along with the assessment of Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) and variance inflation factors (VIF) enabled us to conclude that the variation in xanthotoxin content is best explained by a combination of two predictors, BIO19 (precipitation of coldest quarter of year) and the average total evapotranspiration for June–September at 90% significance level (p-values 0.095 and 0.083, total AIC 17.283 vs AIC for null model 20.35, VIF 1.535, theoretical coefficient of determination 0.767). The variation in imperatorin content is best explained by the combination of predictors BIO7 (annual temperature range) and BIO13 (precipitation of the wettest month) at 85% significance level (p-values 0.076 and 0.126, total AIC 16.221 vs AIC for null model 18.574, VIF 2.136, theoretical coefficient of determination 0.604). The results are presented in Additional Table S5, sheets “Xanthotoxin models” and “Imperatorin models”.

In this study, we used mass spectrometry analysis in order to provide quantitative estimates for the content of main hogweed furanocoumarins in different above-ground organs ofH. sosnowskyiand its congenerH. sibiricum. Coupled with the mining of published data this allowed us to reconstruct an integrated picture of furanocoumarin content in various organs of those species (see Fig.4).

According to both published data and our results,H. sosnowskyiandH. sibiricumdo not differ in their theoretical ability to synthesize linear furanocoumarins. Both species contain all known intermediate compounds, both linear and angular, within the furanocoumarin biosynthetic pathway, from umbelliferone to psoralen and angelicin. The genomes of both species encode enzymes capable of synthesizing both types of structures. However, we observed interspecific, interorgan and interpopulation differences in the quantity of most compounds.

The content of secondary metabolites in plants is influenced by various environmental factors including temperature, soil composition, humidity, and other abiotic and biotic conditions. In order to account for that, we analysed samples from two populations growing at a distance of ~ 1000 km. The results show that both species contain psoralen and metoxypsoralens, though their content greatly differs between populations and organs. Most samples are rich in xanthotoxin (8-MOP). InH. sosnowskyiit is especially abundant in flowers in both populations, while inH. sibiricumthe content of all four compounds drastically differed. Psoralen and bergapten (5-MOP) show more uniform pattern across organs in both populations ofH. sosnowskyiand in one population ofH. sibiricum. Genome and transcriptome ofH. sosnowskyicontains more homologues of genes for metoxy-derivative structures synthesis (bergapten and xanthotoxin) and they have higher expression in every organ, thanH. sibiricum(Fig.2). Since the amount of bergapten was lower than the amount of xanthotoxin in both species we can assume that candidate homologues of BMT exhibit a substrate specificity to xanthotoxol. The exact substrate specificity of the enzymes requires further investigations.

The most striking interspecific difference betweenH. sosnowskyiandH. sibiricumis the presence of angular furanocoumarin structures. Osthenol, columbianetin, and angelicin are more characteristic forH. sosnowskyi. The high content of angelicin in different populations ofH. sosnowskyiwas also highlighted in earlier studies [14]. At the same time, angelicin is almost absent inH. sibiricum. Surprisingly, given the complete absence of angular precursors, no interspecific difference was recorded in the occurrence of the 5,6-angular methoxy derivative, pimpinellin. We found that a homologue of umbelliferone-8-dimethylallyl transferase gene is present in the transcriptome ofH. sibiricum(NODE_72116), but with an almost zero level of expression. The expression levels of other homologues of angular furanocoumarin biosynthesis genes were lower than the expression levels of those for linear furanocoumarins (Fig.2). These data indicate the plant's hypothetical ability to synthesize angular furanocoumarins. The presence of angular structures in roots ofH. sibiricumis showed by Ušjak et al. and Ozek et al. [45,46]. We can hypothesize that angular furanocoumarin biosynthesis is activated in certain environmental conditions or in underground organs that were not examined in this study. U6DT enzyme may have secondary specificity for the synthesis of U8-derivatives.

The amount of xanthotoxin inH. sibiricumcan also drop to zero but xanthotoxin can be synthesized, although in smaller quantities than inH. sosnowskyi. The amount of psoralen inH. sibiricumis also lower, although the species is definitely capable of synthesizing it.

Moreover, the content of the precursors of the linear furanocoumarins demethylsuberosin and marmesin is quite high inH. sibiricum. One can assume that umbelliferone inH. sibiricumis mostly converted in precursors of linear furanocoumarins which accumulated due to the low activity of psoralen synthase, while inH. sosnowskyiprecursors of linear furanocoumarins are converted to psoralen under the activity of two copies high-expressed psoralen synthases.

ForH. sibiricum, many more significant correlations between gene expression levels and compounds content were found than forH. sosnowskyi. In addition, no significant correlations were found between the expression level of any gene and the content of psoralen and xanthotoxin. We assumed that considering the fact thatH. sosnowskyi's genome have several copies of many genes and the high metabolic activity, relations between gene expression and compounds content do not follow simple linear patterns. Psoralen is an intersection point of some furanocoumarin synthetic pathways, xanthotoxin may be a storage form. Compound content changes can occur due to additional metabolic transformations, catabolism, transport, excretion, and storage processes.

According to a previous study [35], furanocoumarins are distributed unevenly in the tissues and organs of various species of the genusHeracleum. In particular, inH. sosnowskyi, furanocoumarin crystals were found on the surface of trichomes and other epidermal cells, as well as in parenchyma cells. InH. sibiricum, angular derivatives accumulate in roots [45,46] while their content is very small in the aboveground organs. In line with these findings, we found the differences in furanocoumarin content between organs in both species, with the tendency of higher accumulation in the reproductive organs. Even angular furanocoumarins, which have very low content in leaves, inflorescence rays and flowers (close to undetectable level) inH. sibiricum, are clearly detected in fruits.

Population differences were found to be particularly pronounced inH. sibiricum. Notably, in the Moscow Region population ofH. sibiricum,furanocoumarin concentrations in all organs were at trace level, except for the fruit, which accumulated linear furocoumarins at the levels comparable to those inH. sosnowskyi.

Population level variation in furanocoumarin content has been previously reported [51]. Certain compounds are consistently found across all populations regardless of the geographical location (mainly methoxylated derivatives: bergapten, pimpinellin, isobergapten, sphondin, pimpinellin). However, different hogweed populations differed in the presence and concentrations of xanthotoxin, psoralen, imperatorin, phellopterin, isobergapten in fruit, as well as in the presence of the angular furanocoumarin angelicin [51]. Variability in furanocoumarin content between populations may be influenced by multiple factors, including plant age, collection time, and environmental conditions [63,64]. The furanocoumarin biosynthetic pathway can apparently be activated in response to external factors, such as exposure to ultraviolet radiation [65], high temperature [31], and herbivore insect attacks [66]. These findings suggest that while the risk of photosensitization is typically associated with invasive “giant” hogweeds (H. sosnowskyiandH. mantegazzianum), certain populations of native species, such asH. sibiricum, may also pose a potential hazard.

By analyzing literature data on the presence of various compounds inH. sosnowskyiandH. mantegazzianumacross different climatic conditions, we aimed to identify correlations between furanocoumarin accumulation and environmental factors during the growing season (primary parameters—CRU TS climate data variables such as cld and dtr) and during the total year (secondary parameters—bioclimatic variables BIO1-19). Our preliminary findings suggest that xanthotoxin and imperatorin content are correlated with precipitation levels and temperature fluctuations. However, those observations are tentative, and further research– including a broader geographical sampling and quantitative furanocoumarins measurements, daily weather conditions,– is necessary to confirm these trends.

In addition to quantitative estimates for angelicin, psoralen and the metoxypsoralens bergapten (5-MOP) and xanthotoxin (8-MOP), we identified other furanocoumarins and their precursor compounds based on retention times and MS/MS fragmentation patterns in comparison to relative standards. Combined with previously published data, this allowed to get a comprehensive picture of furanocoumarin diversity inH. sosnowskyi/H. mantegazzianumandH. sibiricum(Fig.4, Additional Table S6). The furanocoumarin content in fruit ofH. sosnowskyihas been investigated in the studies of Satsyperova and Komissarenko [16,52,67,68]. Our findings support their conclusions regarding the presence of both linear (bergapten, xanthotoxin, psoralen, isopimpinellin, phellopterin) and angular furanocoumarins (isobergapten, sphondin, pimpinellin) in both species.

We detected the precursors of both linear and angular furanocoumarins (umbelliferone, demethylsuberosin, osthenol, marmesin, columbianetin) in at least one population. To date, columbianetin and osthenol have not been reported in eitherH. sosnowskyiorH. sibiricum. According to the current paradigm of the furanocoumarin biosynthesis pathway, these two compounds serve as precursors of angular structures [69]. Columbianetin has been identified in only fewHeracleumspecies (H. brunonis,H. candicans,H. ceylanicum,H. grandiflorum,H. sprengelianum,H. wallichii) and osthenol was found only inH. candicans. However, these species were found to be distant from typicalHeracleumand are reclassified into other genera (TetrataeniumandSemenovia) [70,71].

The absence of columbianetin and osthenol in mostHeracleumspecies that contain angular furanocoumarins led to a suggestion that their biosynthesis pathway is different from the canonical one (such pathways are described in the study of Brown and Steck [72]). We found both columbianetin and osthenol (using standards of the respective compounds) inH. sosnowskyi, thus supporting the idea that the absence of those compounds in earlier studies is rather a consequence of method limitation than the evidence of differences in angular furanocoumarin biosynthesis pathway. We found neither of those two compounds in detectable amounts inH. sibiricum; this is congruent with very low amount of angelicin in both populations of this species. Our work is the first to demonstrate the presence of columbianetin and osthenol inH. sosnowskyi.

Although the hydroxyderivatives xanthotoxol and bergaptol are known to be precursors in xanthotoxin and bergapten biosynthesis, respectively [73], we were not able to detect them in free state by using the respective standards. Osthenol, a coumarin with a hydroxyl group, is relatively rare, but its methoxy derivative osthol has been identified in manyHeracleumspecies [74]. It is possible that methoxy derivatives (and also bi-methoxy derivatives) are the most physiologically stable forms of those compounds, allowing them to accumulate, whereas the highly reactive hydroxy-precursors do not accumulate and are rapidly converted into more stable methoxy-, isoprenoxy- and glycosylated forms. This suggest that osthol may function as a storage form of osthenol.

We did not detect any 5-isoprene derivatives (oxypeucedanin, isooxypeucedanin, isoimperatorin) in any of the two species, while 8-isoprene derivatives were found in both species. This is the first report on differential distribution of 5- and 8-isoprenoxy derivatives inHeracleum. The observed differences may be genetically determined.Heracleumspecies may possess genes encoding enzymes that catalyze isoprenylation of furanocoumarin nucleus at the 8-position, and at the same time lack genes for enzymes that catalyzed isoprenylation at the 5-position. Alternatively, a single enzyme may catalyze isoprenylation at both positions, with species-specific differences in substrate specificity. Another possibility is that genes encoding both types of enzymes are present but differentially expressed. However, the known Apiaceae enzyme bergaptol-5–8-O-prenyltransferase ofAngelica keiskeiAkPt1 [75] does not have any highly expressed homologs in either species. This question remains an area of further investigation.

We found the presence of all furanocoumarin precursors in twoHeracleumspecies,H. sosnowskyiandH. sibiricum.H. sosnowskyicontains more angular furanocoumarin forms thatH. sibiricum. We found homologues of all the furanocoumarins biosynthetic pathway genes inHeracleumtranscriptomes. Both species are capable of biosynthesizing angular and linear furanocoumarins.H. sosnowskyiexpressed more genes (and at higher level) related to synthesis of photosensitizing methoxy-derivatives of psoralen, bergapten and xanthotoxin, thanH. sibiricum. Differences in the expression level of genes of biosynthetic enzymes and presence of furanocoumarin structures are observed on both organ and population levels, which implies that the synthesis of certain structures can depend on environmental, epigenomic and physiological factors.

Supplementary Material 1. Table S1.Heracleumsample sources.

Supplementary Material 2. Table S2. List of chemical compounds mentioned in the article. Part I. Chemical identifers. Part II. Used standards.

Supplementary Material 3. Table S3. Expression, coverage and homology data for candidate genes.

Supplementary Material 4. Table S4. Results of regression analysis.

We are very grateful to Dr. M.V. Malakhov (Pirogov Russian National Research Medical University, Russian Federation) and Dr. A.L. Shavarda (Komarov Botanical Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences) for their gift of furanocoumarin standards, Dr. N.V. Petrova (Komarov Botanical Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences) for the phytochemical description of hogweeds, Dr. T.G. Elumeeva (Faculty of Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State University) for the consultation on climate-related statistical analysis, Dr. S.S. Nasaev for the figures containing structural formulae, and staff of Genomics Core Facility (Skoltech, Russian Federation) for producing sequencing data.

During the preparation of this work the author(s) used ChatGPT v.4 in order to improve the readability and language of the manuscript. After using this tool/service, the author(s) reviewed and edited the content as needed and take(s) full responsibility for the content of the published article.

ML, VS– Conceptualization, Methodology, Supervision, Investigation, ML, VS, VB, MK, EP– Writing– original draft, AP– Methodology, Resources, Funding Acquisition, VB, MS, MK, AK– Software, Data curation, Formal analysis, AP– Methodology, Resources, Funding Acquisition, EP, ME, EO– Investigation, VS– Visualization.

The study was conducted under the state assignment of Lomonosov Moscow State University (supporting MK, ML), state assignment of Lomonosov Moscow State University, research topic “The Study of Intra- and Intercellular Interactions by Molecular, Cell Biology, Physiology, and Mathematicals methods and Bioinformatics,”no. AAAAA19–119121690043–3 (supporting VS), state assignment of Vavilov Institute of general genetics FFRW-2024–0003 (supporting AP, MS, AK, ME, EP).