The claustro-insular region is an evolutionarily conserved and extensively interconnected brain area, critical for functions such as attention, cognitive flexibility, interoception, and affective processing. Despite its importance, its cellular composition and organization remain poorly characterized, hindering a comprehensive understanding of the mechanisms underlying its diverse functions. By combining single-cell RNA sequencing and spatial transcriptomics, we create a high-resolution atlas of this region in mice, uncovering distinct neuronal subtypes and unexpected complexity. Leveraging this atlas, we investigate the role of NR4A2, a neuropsychiatric risk factor expressed in several claustro-insular neuronal subtypes. In anNr4a2haploinsufficiency model, we find that only claustrum neurons exhibited shifts in molecular identity. This identity shift, which involves the activation of a transcription factor cascade, is associated with alterations in neuronal firing activity. Our findings provide new insights into the cellular architecture of the claustro-insular region and highlightsNr4a2as a key regulator of its component’s identities.

Here the authors present a high-resolution atlas of the mouse claustro-insular region and reveal unexpected neuronal diversity.Nr4a2haploinsufficiency alters claustrum neuron identity and activity, implicating it as a key regulator in this brain area’s organization.

The claustro-insular region of the mammalian brain is an evolutionarily conserved bilateral complex composed of multiple structures. The insula, located laterally, is a neocortical area involved in diverse functions, including interoception, salience detection, pain processing, and regulation of affective states1–3. The claustrum (CLA), situated medially adjacent to the external capsule, is an intricate subcortical nucleus characterized by dense, reciprocal connections with nearly all cortical areas4–6. This extensive connectivity suggests that the CLA plays a role in modulating cortical activity and may also contribute directly to specific cognitive functions. Consistent with this, a growing body of research has implicated the CLA in attention modulation, cognitive flexibility, sleep regulation, and working memory, among other processes7–11. Despite increasing interest, progress in understanding the CLA has been hindered by anatomical challenges, particularly in rodent species, where the CLA boundaries with the adjacent insula remain poorly outlined.

Visual examination of spatial gene expression patterns in the mouse claustro-insular area reveals an unusually complex landscape of cellular composition and organization12. Several studies have, sometimes indirectly, profiled the gene expression of CLA projection neurons at single-cell resolution13–24. Most identified a single transcriptomically defined population; however, in rare instances, two distinct populations were reported19,24, which were suggested to correspond to a proposed subdivision of the CLA into a core and a shell19. The observation of a relatively homogenous CLA cell population at the transcriptomic level is counterintuitive, especially considering that numerous CLA subpopulations have been defined based on their electrophysiological properties25–28or on their projection targets in the brain6,19,29–32, and that CLA neurons have been shown to have both inhibitory and excitatory effects in the cortex17,33. The discrepancy between transcriptomic homogeneity and functional diversity underscores the need for deeper investigation into the cellular architecture of the CLA. A thorough characterization and spatial mapping of claustro-insular cell types are thus essential for further elucidating the complex roles of this brain region.

Although anatomically separated, the CLA and the dorsal endopiriform nucleus (EP) have been suggested to be part of the same complex based on ontogenic and gene expression data34,35. Excitatory neurons in this claustrum/dorsal endopiriform complex (CLA/EP) are characterized by their expression of a set of canonical marker genes, including early and sustained transcription ofNr4a2(also calledNurr1), which codes for the NR4A2 transcription factor36–41. In the dopaminergic system, NR4A2 is critical for determining neuronal identity42–45and has been linked to various neurodevelopmental diseases46–53. The role played byNr4a2in the development and function of the CLA/EP is still being explored36,37,39,40,54,55.

To address gaps in our understanding of the identity and organization of cells in the claustro-insular region, we generated a high-resolution map of its cell types by combining single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) with spatial transcriptomics. Furthermore, given the early and persistent expression ofNr4a2in the CLA and surrounding cells, and its critical and established role in defining and maintaining cellular phenotypes in other brain regions, we investigated its function in determining the cellular identities of claustro-insular neurons.

To characterize the cellular composition and organization of the claustro-insular region, we performed a dual analysis combining scRNAseq and multiplexed error-robust fluorescence in situ hybridization (MERFISH) spatial transcriptomics (Fig.1a, Supplementary Fig.1a). First, we performed scRNAseq on isolated cells from claustro-insular microdissections, covering a substantial portion of the CLA/EP along the anteroposterior axis (bregma +1.545 to −1.355). We recovered a total of 67,226 cells, encompassing various neuronal and non-neuronal cell types (Supplementary Fig.1b–d). To uncover the neuronal cell types populating the claustro-insular region, we filtered for high-quality neurons, clustered them, and identified their marker genes. This analysis revealed the presence of CLA projection neurons and known adjacent cortical and subcortical cell types, including deep-layer L5b, L6a and L6b cortical neurons, upper-layer L2/3 cortical neurons, piriform cortex neurons (pir), a heterogeneous group of interneurons (IN), and multiple subtypes of medium spiny neurons (MSN) of the striatum (Fig.1b, Supplementary Fig.1e–g).

aSchematic of the experimental design for high-resolution characterization of the claustro-insular region.bVisualization of neuronal cell types from the scRNAseq dataset on a Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) plot. CLA claustrum projection neuron, dMSN striatal direct pathway medium spiny neuron, iMSN striatal indirect pathway medium spiny neuron, IN interneuron, L2/3 layer 2/3 glutamatergic neuron, L5b layer 5b glutamatergic neuron, L6a layer 6a glutamatergic neuron, L6b layer 6b glutamatergic neuron, mMSN mixed striatal medium spiny neuron, pir piriform glutamatergic neuron, shell shell projection neuron, sMSN striosome medium spiny neuron. n = 13 mice. Exact sample details are provided in the “Methods” section and in Supplementary Fig.1a.cVisualization of expression of cell type-specific marker genes on a representative coronal section of a mouse brain after MERFISH labeling and imaging.dVisualization of neuronal cell types from the MERFISH dataset on a UMAP plot. Cell type attributes of cells were obtained after mapping the MERFISH data onto the scRNAseq dataset. n = 7 mice. Exact sample details are provided in the “Methods” section and in Supplementary Fig.1a.eViolin plots showing the distribution of expression of cell type-specific marker genes in the scRNAseq dataset (normalized data are shown on a log10scale).fVisualization of the expression of cell type-specific marker genes on a representative coronal section of the claustro-insular region from the MERFISH dataset. Cells expressing at least 5 mRNA molecules of the corresponding gene are plotted. Colors indicate the cell type to which the genes are specific. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.

Within the excitatory neuron population, we identified two subpopulations characterized by a canonical CLA transcriptional profile. These subtypes, named CLA 1 and CLA 2, express high levels ofNr4a2, Gnb4,Oprk1,Lxn,Slc17a6, andSmim32(a recently identified marker of the CLA)56, among other known CLA marker genes (Fig.1e). The CLA 2 subtype is further distinguished by the expression of immediate early genes such asFosl2andEgr2. Additionally, we identified four subtypes of L6a neurons, all characterized by high expression levels ofNfib,Sdk2, andRprm, with variable expression levels ofNnatandCrym, which distinguish the subtypes (Fig.1b, e).

Beyond these neuronal types, we identified a large cluster of cells with a unique transcriptomic identity, intermediate between a CLA-like and a cortical identity. We refer to these as shell projection neurons (or “shell” for short) (Fig.1b, e, Supplementary Fig.1g). Three subpopulations of shell neurons were identified, all characterized by low expression ofNr4a2,Gnb4, andOprk1, high expression ofNfib,Col6a1, andNnat, low but relatively specific expression ofSyt17, sparse expression ofNpsr1, and the absence of expression ofSlc17a6,Smim32, or L6a markers likeRprmandCrym(Fig.1e). Among these subpopulations, shell 1 and shell 2 are distinguished by differing levels ofNr4a2expression, with shell 2 further characterized byNpyexpression. The third subtype, shell 3, exhibits expression of immediate early genes, akin to CLA 2.

To localize the identified cell types and subtypes within the claustro-insular region, particularly to resolve the spatial distribution of CLA and shell neurons within the CLA/EP, we designed a custom panel of 300 genes enriched for markers specific to the populations described above and performed MERFISH spatial transcriptomics (Fig.1a, c, Supplementary Data2). Multiple coronal sections at bregma +1.045, as well as two more posterior sections (bregma +0.145 and −1.355) were imaged, revealing robust and specific expression of these cell type markers (Fig.1c). To assign cell types in the MERFISH dataset, we performed a reference-based mapping of the data onto the scRNAseq dataset57. This strategy enabled the detection of most previously identified cell types and subtypes (Fig.1d). Many populations exhibited high prediction and mapping scores, indicating strong confidence in cell type assignments and good concordance between the MERFISH and scRNAseq datasets (Supplementary Fig.2). Visualization of cell type marker gene expression confirmed their spatial specificity across the claustro-insular region and underscored the complex organization and intermingling of diverse cell types within this brain region (Fig.1f).

The complexity of gene expression patterns observed in MERFISH sections indicates that drawing discrete, non-overlapping anatomical boundaries is not an optimal way to represent the organization of the claustro-insular region. Instead, our goal was to create a map that captures this complexity while still providing insight into the relative localization of its components. To this end, we adopted a data-driven strategy by labeling tissue sections for gene expression, identifying cell types based on their gene expression profiles, and delineating contours that represent the 2-dimensional density distributions of these cell types across the sections. We used single-molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization (smFISH) to label multiple coronal sections spanning four anteroposterior levels of the CLA/EP, targeting five key marker genes. These markers enabled us to distinguish four major components of the claustro-insular region:Nr4a2for CLA, shell, and L6b neurons;Slc17a6for CLA neurons;Ccn2for L6b neurons;Rprmfor L6a neurons; andSyt17for shell neurons (Fig.2a–c).

aSchematic of the data processing approach.bRepresentative image of a coronal section (bregma +1.045) of the claustro-insular region labeled by smFISH with probes forNr4a2(purple),Ccn2(cyan), andRprm(blue). The white square highlights the region magnified in the inset. The dotted line highlights the border of the external capsule. Scale bar: 200 μm. The same labeling was done on a total of n = 15 sections.cViolin plots showing the distribution of expression of marker genes across identified cell types in the smFISH data (raw data are shown on a linear scale). Probe set A: n = 2 mice, 15 sections, 91,634 clustered cells; Probe set B: n = 2 mice, 15 sections, 80,627 clustered cells.dSpatial organization of neuronal cell populations identified in the smFISH dataset. Multiple images are aligned, and cells are projected on the same framework. Scale bar: 500 μm. n = 2 mice, 8 sections.eProportional visualization of the claustro-insular region, binned into 20 μm bins. Bin colors are weighted by the relative proportion of neuronal cell types within that bin. n = 2 mice, 8 sections.f2D density maps showing the spatial distribution of neuronal cell populations within the claustro-insular region. The total area comprises 90% of the 2D kernel density estimation of the distribution of all cells within the respective population. n = 2 mice, 8 sections.g–jMaps of the claustro-insular region at four different anteroposterior levels. Colored areas represent the highest density region of cell types at a 50% probability level of the two-dimensional kernel density estimate. The inset shows the representation of the CLA and endopiriform nucleus (EP) in the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas (mouse.brain-map.org), at the corresponding anteroposterior position. Red squares highlight the region imaged after smFISH labeling for map generation. Scale bar: 500 μm. n = 2 mice, 6–8 sections/bregma level. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.

We chose smFISH for its high quantitative resolution, which enabled us to capture the substantial variability in expression levels of marker genes (Supplementary Fig.3and Supplementary Fig.4). After staining, we clustered the cells, identified cell types, aligned images from sections at the same anteroposterior level, and projected the cells’ coordinates onto a reference image to construct 2D maps of cell type localization for each brain level (Fig.2d, Supplementary Fig.5a). To illustrate the diversity of cell types in the claustro-insular region, we generated proportional visualizations of these maps (Fig.2eand Supplementary Fig.5b). We binned the 2D spatial maps into 20 μm bins, and the proportion of each cell type in each bin was used to assign a color weighted by these proportions. To characterize the spatial distribution of individual cell types within the claustro-insular region, we generated 2D density maps for CLA neurons, shell neurons,Ccn2+ neurons (labeling mainly L6b), andRprm+ neurons (labeling mainly L6a, L5b, and pir) at each brain level (Fig.2f, Supplementary Fig.5c). The final maps represent the highest density regions of CLA, shell,Ccn2+, andRprm+ neurons at the 50% probability level of their respective 2D kernel density estimates (Fig.2g–j). These data-driven maps proved more flexible than conventional brain atlases, reducing discrepancies in boundary annotations and accommodating overlapping borders between structures (Supplementary Fig.6), and accurately reflecting the high complexity of the claustro-insular region, where distinct cell types are closely juxtaposed and interspersed. Notably, neurons expressing canonical CLA markers were distributed throughout the entire CLA/EP, as well as in L6a in more caudal sections. Moreover, the high-density regions for CLA and shell neurons showed substantial spatial overlap with each other and with cortical L6a and L6b neurons (Fig.2g–jand Supplementary Fig.6).

We leveraged our spatial map to localize each cell type and subtype identified by scRNAseq within the brain. As expected, well-defined cell types from the MERFISH dataset, located within or near the claustro-insular region boundaries, were reliably mapped (Supplementary Fig.7). We then focused on characterizing the spatial localization of CLA, shell, and L6a subtypes (Fig.3a).

aUMAP plot highlighting the cell types or subtypes whose localization was determined by smFISH and MERFISH spatial transcriptomics.b–iSpatial organization of different neuronal types and subtypes projected on the map of the claustro-insular region at bregma +1.045.Left: cells from the MERFISH dataset. Prediction scores highlight the confidence of cell type attribution in the MERFISH data after reference-based mapping onto the scRNAseq dataset. Dotted lines highlight the border of the ROI used for cell selection. Cells from one representative section are shown for each cell type and subtype.Right: cells from smFISH datasets. Violin plots below the maps show the distribution of expression of marker genes used for cell type and subtype identification in the smFISH data (raw data are shown on a linear scale). Plus and minus signs indicate whether the gene is considered a marker of the given cell population or not, respectively; max count corresponds to the maximum gene expression levels in all cells analyzed in the respective experiments. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.

Shell subtypes were consistently identified across animals and exhibited highly stereotyped spatial localizations (Fig.3d–fand Supplementary Fig.8), suggesting that they are not merely a heterogeneous group of cells adjacent to the CLA, but rather represent distinct and spatially organized neuronal subpopulations. Contrary to the shell and L6a subpopulations, CLA 1 and CLA 2 subtypes were spatially intermingled (Fig.3b, c). Consistent with the patterns observed in Fig.2, neurons exhibiting a CLA transcriptomic identity (i.e., CLA 1 and CLA 2) were distributed throughout the entire CLA/EP.

Nonetheless, subtle differences in the expression levels of select genes may distinguish neuronal populations between the CLA and EP, even if these differences are not necessarily captured by clustering alone. To identify region-specific genes, we performed a joint analysis of the scRNAseq and MERFISH datasets, investigating how their transcriptionally defined nearest neighbors were distributed across subregions of the CLA/EP complex (Supplementary Fig.9). We were able to assign a regional identity to ~10% of CLA 1 and CLA 2 neurons in the scRNAseq dataset and identified a handful of differentially expressed genes between the CLA and EP, includingCdh8, a gene known for its CLA specificity58,59(Supplementary Fig.9b). Furthermore, the MERFISH data revealed regional differences in cell type composition, with the EP containing a slightly higher proportion of CLA 2 neurons compared to the CLA (Supplementary Fig.9c).

To evaluate whether cell type composition varies along the anteroposterior axis, we compared sections from three different anteroposterior levels (Supplementary Fig.10). While CLA and shell subtypes were uniformly distributed (even in more posterior sections where these populations are more dispersed within layer 6), L6a subtypes displayed notable regional variation. Specifically, L6a 3 neurons were detected exclusively in more posterior sections, where they showed partial overlap with L6a 2 neurons. In contrast, only a small number of L6a 4 neurons were identified in the MERFISH dataset (Supplementary Figs.7g, hand10), which may reflect sampling differences between the scRNAseq and MERFISH experiments (this subtype may be predominantly located in more anterior cortical regions not included in the MERFISH dataset).

Since MERFISH may not be accessible to all researchers, we compared our results with a simplified strategy using smFISH, which relies on combinations of only 2–3 marker genes to distinguish cell subpopulations (Fig.3b–i, Supplementary Fig.8and Supplementary Fig.11). By assessing the presence or absence of select marker genes, we were able to match subpopulations from the smFISH data to those identified in the scRNAseq dataset. We observed strong correspondence between the spatial localization of cell types and subtypes identified by smFISH and those detected by MERFISH, particularly for cell populations with high prediction scores in the MERFISH dataset (Fig.3b–i, Supplementary Fig.8). Together, these results highlight the robustness of our claustro-insular maps and underscore the value of integrating spatial transcriptomics with scRNAseq for the high-resolution characterization of complex brain regions.

We next aimed to investigate how the transcriptomic identity of CLA neurons is established. Noting the variable levels ofNr4a2expression across different subpopulations of the claustro-insular region, particularly in CLA and shell subtypes (Fig.1e), and given the early developmental onset ofNr4a2expression in CLA neurons36,37, we hypothesized that this transcription factor may regulate gene expression within these subpopulations. To test this, we usedNr4a2heterozygous mice (Nr4a2del/wt) carrying one non-functionalNr4a2allele, and compared them to wild-type littermates (Nr4a2wt/wt). smFISH quantification ofNr4a2mRNA in the claustro-insular region showed a 2.6-fold reduction ofNr4a2expression in heterozygous mice (Fig.4a–c). To assess the impact ofNr4a2heterozygosity on gene expression in the claustro-insular region, we compared the scRNAseq-derived transcriptomes of various cell types and subtypes betweenNr4a2wt/wtandNr4a2del/wtmice. CLA projection neurons, particularly the CLA 1 subtype, exhibited a substantial number of differentially expressed genes, while other cell types appeared relatively unaffected (Fig.4d, Supplementary Fig.12, Supplementary Data5–20). The CLA 2 subtype had fewer cells represented in the dataset, likely contributing to the low number of significantly modulated genes. Among the differentially expressed genes, we identified key marker genes (e.g.,Cdh13,Rxfp1,Nr2f2,Syt17, andNtm) as well as genes coding for ion channels that could influence neuronal function (e.g.,Scn1bandRyr2) (Fig.4e, f, Supplementary Fig.13, Supplementary Data5–20). This strong modulation of gene expression inNr4a2-expressing cells was further confirmed by smFISH quantification of selected up- and downregulated genes inNr4a2heterozygous mice (Fig.4g, h, Supplementary Fig.14a–h).

Images of the CLA in coronal sections fromNr4a2wt/wt(a) andNr4a2del/wt(b) mice, withNr4a2mRNA transcripts labeled by smFISH (white). Insets show magnified regions (white squares). Nuclei are stained with DAPI (blue). Scale bar: 200 μm.cMean number ofNr4a2mRNA puncta per cell in the claustro-insular area. Each dot represents one section of anNr4a2del/wtmouse relative to the mean of all sections ofNr4a2wt/wtcontrol mice processed in the same batch. Data are mean ± SD. n = 4 mice per genotype; ***p < 0.001; χ2-based LRT applied to a negative binomial GLMM with quadratic parametrization.dTotal number of significantly modulated genes inNr4a2del/wtmice in each cell type from the scRNAseq dataset (n = 5Nr4a2wt/wtand 8Nr4a2del/wtmice). Two-sided Wilcoxon rank sum test;p-values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Bonferroni method. Violin plots illustrating the distribution of expression for downregulated (e) and upregulated (f) genes across claustro-insular neuronal populations fromNr4a2wt/wtandNr4a2del/wtmice in the scRNAseq dataset (normalized data are shown on a log10scale). Mean number of mRNA puncta per cell of downregulated (g) and upregulated (h) genes inNr4a2+ and/orOprk1+ cells from the claustro-insular region. Each dot represents one section of anNr4a2del/wtmouse relative to the mean of all sections ofNr4a2wt/wtcontrol mice processed in the same batch. Data are mean ± SD. n = 2-3 mice per genotype. *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001; χ2-based LRT applied to a negative binomial GLMM with quadratic parametrization;p-values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Holm method. Cell type-specific modulation ofNtm(i) andRyr2(j) expression.Top:Violin plots show the distribution of expression of marker genes used for cell type identification in the smFISH data (raw data are shown on a linear scale).Bottom:Box plots show the meanNtmandRyr2expression levels within specific cell populations fromNr4a2wt/wtandNr4a2del/wtmice (n = 2 mice per genotype, 6–8 sections). Each dot represents one section. Box limits: Q1–Q3; line: median; whiskers: ±1.5*IQR. *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001; χ2-based LRT applied to a negative binomial GLMM;p-values adjusted using the Holm method. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. Exact sample details are provided in Supplementary Data1.

The scRNAseq analyses also suggested differential sensitivity of CLA and shell neurons to a reduction inNr4a2mRNA levels (Fig.4e, f). To explore this further, we clustered cells from the smFISH experiments to differentiate CLA from shell neurons based on the expression patterns ofNr4a2andSyt17, and evaluated the expression of two genes that showed strong upregulation inNr4a2del/wtmice (Fig.4i, j).NtmandRyr2were either not or only slightly modulated in cells lacking CLA identity, indicating thatNr4a2heterozygosity primarily affects transcription in CLA neurons, with no or minimal effects on neighboring shell and other cell populations.

Since multiple genes encoding ion channels, neurotransmitter receptors, and related signaling proteins were dysregulated in CLA projection neurons ofNr4a2haploinsufficient mice (Fig.5aand Supplementary Fig.15a), we investigated whether the transcriptomic changes led to alterations in spiking behavior. Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings of mPFC-projectingSlc17a6+CLA neurons (Fig.5b) revealed reduced firing frequency inNr4a2del/wtcells (Fig.5c–e), with no change in resting membrane potential (Fig.5f). This hypoexcitability persisted even in the presence of blockers for fast GABAergic and glutamatergic synaptic transmission (Fig.5d, e), suggesting intrinsic alterations in cellular properties. Action potential (AP) analysis showed that while rise time and amplitude were unaffected, decay time and half-width were shorter inNr4a2del/wtneurons (Fig.5g, h), a feature typically indicative of higher excitability. Several genes encoding different types of sodium and potassium channels were dysregulated inNr4a2heterozygous mice (Fig.5a). Notably, the Nav1.6 α subunit (encoded byScn8a) was upregulated, while the auxiliary β1 subunit of voltage-gated sodium channels (encoded byScn1b;VGSCs) was downregulated (Fig.5aand Supplementary Fig.15a). β subunits are known to influence VGSCs’ trafficking and modulate their biophysical properties, such as the resurgent sodium current. ReducedScn1bexpression has been associated with reduced resurgent current and decreased firing rates60,61. However, neither AP depolarization kinetics (Fig.5h) nor the pharmacological modulation of resurgent sodium current differed between genotypes (Supplementary Fig.15b), suggesting that changes in VGSC function are unlikely to underlie the observed excitability deficits.

aSignificantly modulated genes encoding channels, neurotransmitter receptors, and related signaling proteins in CLA cells ofNr4a2del/wtmice when compared to wild-type littermates.bRetrogradely labeled CLA neurons projecting to the mPFC were recorded.Bottom: example of a patched cell filled with biocytin. The same procedure was performed on n = 585 CLA neurons.cExample of the spiking activity evoked by a 1s 250 pA depolarizing step.dInput/Output functions of CLA neurons recorded in artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) or in blockers of the fast glutamatergic (NBQX and APV) and GABAergic (Gabazine) synaptic transmission (* indicates significant using Fisher’s LSD test corrected with a 5% FDR Benjamini–Hochberg).eArea under the curve (AUC) of the input/output function for eachNr4a2wt/wtandNr4a2del/wtcell in ACSF and synaptic blockers.fResting membrane potential is recorded at the opening of cells.gExamples of recorded action potentials (AP), (bottom traces: truncated AP). HW half-width, RT rise time, DT decay time, AHP afterhyperpolarization potential.hQuantifications of the different AP parameters (each circle represents the mean parameter value computed on all spikes of all steps for a given cell).iExample of the firing frequency evoked by a 250 pA current step under various pharmacological conditions.jInput/Output functions of CLA neurons recorded in the presence of VGCC blockers (10 µM nifedipine, 100 nM ω-agatoxin IVA, 3 µM ω-conotoxin GVIA, 400 nM SNX-482, 2 µM ML218), BK channels blocker (100 nM iberiotoxin), and RyR2 channel blocker (10–20 µM ryanodine).kComparison of the firing functions betweenNr4a2wt/wtandNr4a2del/wtcells, expressed as a percentage of the mean wild-type AUC calculated for each pharmacological condition (see “Methods” section). Cav2&3: ω-Agatoxin IVA, ω-Conotoxin GVIA, SNX-482, and ML218. Cav2.1&2.2: ω-Agatoxin IVA and ω-Conotoxin GVIA. Cav2.3: SNX-482. Cav3: ML218. *p < 0.05, ***p < 0.001; Mann–Whitney U test.lComparison of the relative AHP amplitude betweenNr4a2wt/wtandNr4a2del/wtcells under each pharmacological condition. **p < 0.01; Mann–Whitney test.mSummary diagram of the mechanism controlling changes in firing frequency through the activation of BK channels. Data are shown as mean ± SEM. Ine,f,h,k, andl, each circle represents one recorded neuron. Source data are provided as a Source Data file. See Supplementary Data1for more details.

We next investigated whether altered expression of voltage-gated potassium channel (VGPC, Kv) genes could account for the firing phenotype. Notably,Kcnc1(which encodes Kv3.1), which supports fast spiking by promoting AP repolarization, was downregulated inNr4a2del/wtneurons. Although reducedKcnc1expression would be expected to prolong AP repolarization, we observed the opposite effect (Fig.5h). Additional dysregulation ofKcnv1(Kv8.1) andKcnf1(Kv5.1), modulators of Kv2 channel biophysics62, may alter Kv channel function and sensitivity to antagonists like 4-aminopyridine63,64. SCN1B can also form complexes with various VGPCs, including Kv1, Kv4.2, and Kv765,66. Application of 4-aminopyridine, an antagonist of Kv1-4 channels, strongly affected firing in wild-type cells but had no effect inNr4a2del/wtneurons (Supplementary Fig.15c, d), while a Kv7 antagonist altered input/output curve shape but preserved the difference between genotypes (Supplementary Fig.15e). These results indicate that VGPC dysfunction alone cannot explain the altered excitability. GIRK1 and GIRK3 channels (encoded byKcnj3andKcnj4, respectively), which were upregulated inNr4a2del/wtneurons, are G-protein-activated inward rectifier potassium channels that reduce excitability67. However, blocking inward rectifier channels with barium altered the input/output curve shape but maintained the genotype difference (Supplementary Fig.15f).

In contrast, we observed a 25% increase in afterhyperpolarization potential (AHP) amplitude inNr4a2del/wtneurons, a key determinant of firing frequency (Fig.5g, h). During APs, activation of voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs) leads to calcium influx, which in turn activates calcium-gated potassium channels, including BK and SK subtypes, to regulate different phases of AHP68–70. WhileKcnma1(BK channel), which mediates the fast AHP, was highly transcribed in CLA neurons, its expression was unchanged across genotypes (Supplementary Fig.15). Similarly,Kcnn1, 2, and 3(encoding SK channels) were expressed at low levels in both groups (Supplementary Fig.15a). Strikingly, pharmacological blockade of VGCCs normalized both AHP amplitude and firing frequency (Fig.5i–l). Cav2.3 and Cav3 channels contributed to this rescue effect, despite their transcript levels remaining unchanged (Fig.5k, land Supplementary Fig.15g–k). Furthermore, blocking BK channels with iberiotoxin fully restored excitability inNr4a2del/wtneurons (Fig.5j–l).

How can we link transcriptional dysregulation to BK channel-mediated hypoexcitability? We next investigated the potential role of altered calcium handling in the process.Ryr2, which encodes a ryanodine receptor central to calcium-induced calcium release (CICR) (Fig.5m), was overexpressed inNr4a2del/wtneurons (Fig.4and Fig.5a). Pharmacological blockade of ryanodine receptors significantly improved excitability and reduced AHP amplitude inNr4a2del/wtneurons (Fig.5l), supporting a role for enhanced CICR in mediatingNr4a2-dependent hypoexcitability. However, this might reflect only one component of a broader, more complex regulatory network. It also remains possible thatRyr2dysfunction arises not solely from transcriptional changes, but from interactions with other dysregulated signaling pathways or post-translational mechanisms. We thus examined the potential contribution of disrupted G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) signaling. We did not attempt direct activation of specific GPCR pathways, as the potential effects on non-CLA projection neurons would have complicated the interpretation of pharmacological manipulations. Instead, we focused on downstream components of GPCR signaling to assess whether altered cAMP/PKA signaling, potentially resulting from downregulation ofGnao1/Gnb4/Gnal, could affect RyR2 function71(Supplementary Fig.16). SinceGnao1encodes Gαo, an inhibitor of adenylate cyclase (AC), its downregulation could hypothetically lead to increased cAMP levels and PKA activation, which is known to modulate RyR2 activity. However, inhibition of AC (SQ22536) did not rescue the reduced firing frequency observed inNr4a2del/wtneurons (Supplementary Fig.16a, d, g, j, k). Interestingly, PKA inhibition selectively altered the input/output function kinetics in wild-type neurons, producing a block at high current injections, possibly reflecting altered voltage-gated sodium channel inactivation dynamics (Supplementary Fig.16b, e). Despite these genotype-dependent effects on intracellular signaling, PKA inhibition did not restore normal excitability inNr4a2del/wtneurons within the depolarization range that excludes the block (Supplementary Fig.16h, j, k). Nonetheless, other GPCR pathways, such as Gαq-mediated IP3signaling or pathways converging on other calcium stores, may still contribute to the phenotype. Like the effects of PKA inhibition, blocking IP3 receptors (2-APB) primarily altered the input/output function kinetics in wild-type neurons, leading to a depolarization block at higher current injections (Supplementary Fig.16c, f). However, 2-APB treatment did not restore the firing frequency inNr4a2del/wtneurons within the depolarization range that excluded depolarization block (Supplementary Fig.16i, j). Collectively, these findings suggest that while the AC–cAMP–PKA pathway and IP3 receptor signaling modulate neuronal excitability, they are unlikely to represent the primary mechanisms underlying the hypoexcitability observed inNr4a2del/wtneurons. Instead, we propose that upregulation ofRyr2plays a central role by enhancing CICR, which in turn increases activation of BK channels (Fig.5m). This leads to an elevated AHP amplitude, thereby reducing firing frequency.

Given the alterations observed in other brain systems42–45and the substantial transcriptomic changes in CLA identity genes inNr4a2del/wtmice (Supplementary Fig.13), we investigated whether these modifications could affect the cellular composition of the claustro-insular area. Our smFISH analyses showed that while the overall number of cells in the claustro-insular region remained unchanged (Fig.6a), there was a 2.3-fold reduction in the number of cells exhibiting robustNr4a2expression (defined as a minimum of 20 mRNA puncta/cell) (Fig.6b). The scRNAseq dataset revealed a strong decrease in the proportion of cells classified as CLA 1 and CLA 2, with no significant differences noted in other cell types and subtypes between genotypes (Fig.6c). This reduction was also evident in the MERFISH dataset (Fig.6d, e). To further characterize the changes in cellular composition, we performed a similar analysis on smFISH data, confirming cell type-specific alterations (Fig.6f). We aligned multiple images, overlaid cell identities onto a reference section, and generated a contrast map to highlight the relative proportions of CLA and shell cells within 20 µm bins (Fig.6g). The resulting map revealed a notable reduction in CLA cell density, particularly in the core of the CLA and in the EP.

aQuantification of the total number of cells present in the ROI around the CLA inNr4a2wt/wtandNr4a2del/wtmice. Each dot represents the mean of one section. Data are mean ± SD. n = 4Nr4a2wt/wtmice, 26 sections, 55,697 cells; n = 4Nr4a2del/wtmice, 34 sections, 71,389 cells.bTotal number ofNr4a2+cells ( ≥ 20 mRNA puncta/cell) within the ROI. Each dot represents one section of anNr4a2del/wtmouse relative to the mean of all sections ofNr4a2wt/wtcontrol mice processed in the same batch. Data are mean ± SD. n = 4Nr4a2wt/wtmice, 26 sections, 55,697 cells; n = 4Nr4a2del/wtmice, 34 sections, 71,389 cells. ***p < 0.001; χ2-based LRT applied to a negative binomial GLMM with quadratic parametrization.cRatio of cell type proportions from the scRNAseq dataset. Each dot represents oneNr4a2del/wtmouse relative to the mean of allNr4a2wt/wtcontrol mice. Data are mean ± SD. n = 5Nr4a2wt/wtmice, 6851 cells; n = 8Nr4a2del/wtmice, 8001 cells. *p < 0.05; moderatedt-test with robust empirical Bayes variance shrinkage;p-values adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) method. Spatial organization of cell types and subtypes on a representative coronal section of the claustro-insular region of anNr4a2wt/wt(d) and anNr4a2del/wt(e) mouse from the MERFISH dataset.Left:all cell types and subtypes.Right:CLA 1 and CLA 2 cells.fRatio of cell type proportions from the smFISH dataset. Each dot represents one section of anNr4a2del/wtmouse relative to the mean of all sections ofNr4a2wt/wtcontrol mice. Data are mean ± SD. n = 2Nr4a2wt/wtmice, 14 sections, 17,737 cells; n = 2Nr4a2del/wtmice, 15 sections, 16,174 cells. ***p < 0.001; moderatedt-test with empirical Bayes variance shrinkage;p-values adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR method.gLeft: Spatial organization of neuronal populations identified in the smFISH dataset, with aligned images fromNr4a2wt/wtandNr4a2del/wtmice projected on the same framework.Right: CLA/shell contrast maps of the claustro-insular region, binned into 20 μm bins. Bin colors correspond to the relative proportion of CLA or shell neurons within each bin. n = 2Nr4a2wt/wtmice, 14 sections; n = 2Nr4a2del/wtmice, 15 sections. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.

Nr4a2haploinsufficient CLA projection neurons exhibited downregulation of CLA identity genes, includingCdh13,Rxfp1, andNr2f2, alongside upregulation of shell identity genes, such asSyt17andNtm(Fig.4e–j, Supplementary Fig.13and Supplementary Fig.14). To further explore the role ofNr4a2in establishing CLA projection neuron identity, we trained linear classifiers (Fig.7a, b, Supplementary Fig.17). First, we trained a classifier to distinguishNr4a2wt/wtCLA, shell and L6a neurons using the whole transcriptome and found that modulated genes had significantly higher weights than unmodulated genes, indicating that these genes are important to discriminate the three cell types (Fig.7a). Modulated genes were also significantly enriched among high-weighted genes from the classifier compared to their representation in the transcriptome (Supplementary Data1). When inspecting the expression of modulated genes inNr4a2del/wtCLA neurons across CLA, shell and L6a neuron subtypes, it became apparent that among these modulated genes (1) downregulated genes typically were CLA-specific markers, (2) upregulated genes typically were expressed by both shell and L6a subtypes, and (3)Nr4a2del/wtCLA neurons often exhibited expression of these genes at the same level as L6a neurons (Fig.4e–fand Supplementary Fig.13). We therefore sought to explore whether these modulated genes indicate a shift towards a shell-like or L6a-like identity. To identify the cell type toward which the identity ofNr4a2del/wtCLA projection neurons shifts, we trained another linear classifier using only modulated genes (Fig.7b). The expression pattern of these genes in wild-type cells allowed for accurate classification of CLA, shell, and L6a neurons. Similarly, shell and L6a neurons fromNr4a2del/wtmice were classified with accuracy scores comparable to that ofNr4a2wt/wtcells. However, CLA neurons fromNr4a2haploinsufficient mice showed a significant decrease in classification accuracy, with nearly 18% of the cells being misclassified as shell projection neurons. These results suggest that CLA and shell neurons are transcriptomically related and thatNr4a2influences their transcriptional programs based on its expression levels.

aBox plots showing the distribution of gene weights for modulated and unmodulated genes from a linear classifier trained on the whole transcriptome. Each dot represents one gene. n = 324 modulated genes; n = 17,707 unmodulated genes. Box limits: Q1–Q3; line: median; whiskers: ±1.5*IQR. ***p < 0.001; Two-sided Wilcoxon rank sum test with continuity correction.bCell type classification performance of CLA, shell, and L6a neurons ofNr4a2wt/wtandNr4a2del/wtmice from the scRNAseq dataset using a linear support vector classification algorithm trained on modulated genes. Violin plots show the distribution of classification outcomes across 1000 iterations. n = 5Nr4a2wt/wtmice, 4363 cells; n = 8Nr4a2del/wtmice, 4537 cells. ***p < 0.001; χ2-based LRT applied to a logistic regression model;p-values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Holm method.cDot plot showing the contrast in regulon specificity scores betweenNr4a2wt/wtandNr4a2del/wtmice for CLA, shell, and L6a cell types from the scRNAseq dataset.dViolin plots showing the distribution of downregulated and upregulated transcription factors expression across claustro-insular neuronal populations fromNr4a2wt/wtandNr4a2del/wtmice in the scRNAseq dataset (normalized data are shown on a log10scale).eRaster plot showing transcription factors from enriched regulons and their target-modulated genes inNr4a2del/wtCLA neurons. Source data are provided as a Source Data file.

Several transcription factors were modulated as a result ofNr4a2haploinsufficiency. To assess whether the shift in CLA identity was directly mediated byNr4a2, that is, whether modulated genes are direct targets ofNr4a2or whether other transcription factors play an intermediary role, we inferred gene regulatory networks (i.e., regulons) from the list of expressed genes. We identified 28 regulons involving 16 transcription factors (Fig.7c), characterized cell type and genotype-specific regulons by computing regulon specificity scores72, and calculated contrasts in these scores between genotypes. While the Nr4a2 regulon showed differential enrichment in CLA neurons betweenNr4a2wt/wtandNr4a2del/wtmice, three other regulons, involvingNr2f2,Cux1, andNfib, displayed higher enrichment scores inNr4a2wt/wtCLA projection neurons (Fig.7c). Among these,Nr2f2andCux1were downregulated due toNr4a2haploinsufficiency, whileNfibwas upregulated (Fig.7d). Matching the downstream targets of these transcription factors with the list of modulated genes revealed thatNr2f2andCux1play critical roles in activating many downregulated genes and repressing several upregulated genes (Fig.7e). These transcription factors are direct targets ofNr4a2, which promotes their transcription (Fig.7e). Together, these results indicate thatNr4a2exerts a dose-dependent regulation over CLA and shell identities by modulating the expression ofNr2f2andCux1.

In this study, we first characterized the transcriptomic identity and spatial organization of cell types and subtypes in the mouse claustro-insular region at high-resolution, then created a versatile map of this region using cell type-specific marker genes, and ultimately demonstrated thatNr4a2, a gene encoding a nuclear transcription factor, plays a crucial role in the development of this brain area.

By combining single-cell RNA sequencing with MERFISH spatial transcriptomics, we molecularly distinguished and spatially localized several cortical and subcortical neuronal cell types in the mouse claustro-insular region, including L2/3, L5b, L6b, and several L6a and striatal populations. Our analysis revealed two subtypes of CLA projection neurons, CLA 1 and CLA 2, both defined by their expression of canonical CLA marker genes such asNr4a2,Gnb4,Smim32, andSlc17a6. While the CLA 2 population can be distinguished by the expression of immediate early genes, both CLA subtypes are genetically extremely close and spatially indistinguishable, supporting previous findings of a single transcriptomically defined CLA population13–18,20–23. Notably, the CLA 2 subtype may represent recently activated CLA 1 neurons whose transcriptomic profile is partially and transiently modulated — a sparse population missed in previous studies.

Using MERFISH and smFISH, we explored whether the CLA 1 and CLA 2 subtypes corresponded exclusively to neurons located within the CLA. We found that neurons with a CLA transcriptional identity were not restricted to the CLA, but were also located in the EP and in L6a of some cortical areas, often neighboring the CLA. Previous transcriptomic studies primarily focused on CLA neurons, often overlooking EP neurons and the less characterized dorsal and caudal CLA-like neurons located within L6a (e.g., bregma −1.355)13–24. Our results suggest that these neurons represent the same cell type but are differentiated by their localization, by the expression of a select number of genes, and likely by their projection targets and functions within the brain.

In addition to CLA neurons, we identified a second neuronal population with a transcriptomic identity that lies intermediate between claustral and cortical neurons. We named these neurons “shell projection neurons”, as they likely correspond to the “claustrum shell” neurons described by Erwin et al.19. However, their transcriptomic profiles and spatial organization significantly differ from those of CLA neurons, leading us to classify them as a separate population. This population is subdivided into three subtypes, each characterized by specific expression levels ofSyt17and low levels ofNr4a2, and exhibiting distinct and stereotypical spatial organizations within the mouse brain. Notably, all shell neurons expressGnb4(as do some L6b and L5b neurons), although at lower levels than CLA neurons. This indicates thatGnb4is not a unique marker of one population in the claustro-insular area, and caution should be exercised when using theGnb4-Cre line for targeting. Finally, like the CLA 2 subtype, the shell 3 cluster is characterized by strong expression of immediate early genes and may represent recently activated neurons from other shell subpopulations.

Several anatomical definitions of the CLA boundaries have been proposed over the years32,34,35,73–77, including a subdivision of the CLA into a core and a shell19,29. Our findings demonstrate that CLA, shell, and cortical neurons exhibit a significant overlap in their spatial localizations, indicating that sharp delineations around claustro-insular structures are inadequate. Additionally, studies by other groups using retrograde tracing have shown a partial overlap in the projection sites of CLA and shell neurons, complicating the distinction between these populations based solely on their projection targets19,29. Given the complexity of this brain region, we propose a new map for the claustro-insular area, grounded in its cell types. Using a data-driven approach, involving smFISH labeling of coronal sections, we have constructed a versatile map that accounts for this overlap. Whether or not shell neurons are considered part of the CLA/EP complex, in this map, these cells are appropriately annotated. We demonstrate the utility of this map by projecting cells from the MERFISH dataset onto it. Moreover, this map can also be overlaid over any labeled coronal section of the mouse claustro-insular region, using landmarks such as the tip of the piriform cortex and the lining of the external capsule.

The potentially shared developmental origin of CLA and shell neurons is supported by their common expression ofNr4a2, although at different levels. Given the early and sustained expression of this transcription factor in developing CLA neurons37,39, we aimed to investigateNr4a2’srole in the establishment of neuronal populations within the claustro-insular region. Using aNr4a2haploinsufficiency model, we unexpectedly found that only neurons with highNr4a2expression (i.e., CLA neurons) exhibited transcriptomic alterations and reduced abundance when lacking oneNr4a2allele, whereas shell neurons, characterized by lowerNr4a2expression levels, were minimally affected, if at all. In CLA neurons, many of the dysregulated genes were associated with cell type identity, including the downregulation of numerous canonical CLA markers. Another research group, whose data was published while preparing this manuscript, also demonstrated a downregulation of CLA identity genes (though at the population level) inNr4a2-deficientmice55. Our results expand on these observations at the single-cell level. Building on our high-resolution atlas, we also show that upregulated genes inNr4a2del/wtCLA neurons were indicative of shell marker genes. These findings, along with predictions of a linear classifier, suggest that both shell and CLA neuronal populations are developmentally related, withNr4a2transcription levels influencing, if not determining, their cell type identity in a dose-dependent manner. Unexpectedly, our results also indicate that NR4A2 does not directly modulate the expression of these identity genes, but instead orchestrates a cascade of other transcription factors that influence a broad array of target genes. Future studies should investigate whether CLA and shell neurons arise from a common pool of precursor cells and explore the roles of NR2F2 and CUX1 in defining their identities.

Among genes modulated inNr4a2haploinsufficient mice, we identified those coding for channels or channel subunits, such asScn1bandRyr2.Scn1bshowed higher transcript levels in wild-type CLA neurons, whereasRyr2was more prevalent in shell neurons, suggesting differing firing properties between these neurons. Several studies have reported the existence of distinct groups of CLA neurons characterized by varied electrophysiological profiles25–28. Moreover, the projection sites and functional effects of CLA neurons in the cortex remain controversial, with studies reporting disynaptic inhibition of deep-layer cortical neurons and others excitation of upper-layer neurons17,33. Whether these functional subtypes of neurons correspond to CLA and shell neurons remains to be determined, but these results constitute an important first step in that direction.

We observed thatNr4a2haploinsufficiency alters the spiking behavior of CLA neurons, identified both genetically (Slc17a6+) and by their projections to the mPFC. Specifically,Nr4a2del/wtCLA neurons exhibited reduced firing frequency. To understand the molecular basis of this hypoexcitability, we examined the link between this phenotype and the transcriptomic dysregulation of genes encoding ion channels, neurotransmitter receptors, and signaling proteins, including G-protein subunits such as Gnb4, a proposed CLA marker. Our electrophysiological and pharmacological analyses suggest that changes in VGSCs, VGPCs, or downstream components of GPCR signaling—such as GIRK channels, the AC–cAMP–PKA cascade, or IP3 receptor signaling—are unlikely to be the primary drivers of the observed excitability deficits. Instead, our data point to upregulation ofRyr2as a key factor: enhanced CICR via RyR2 appears to increase activation of BK channels, leading to a larger afterhyperpolarization (AHP) and reduced firing frequency. Importantly, we acknowledge that the dysregulation of additional genes encoding voltage-gated ion channels, receptors, and associated signaling molecules could exert cumulative or context-dependent effects on excitability. While our ex vivo slice recordings isolate intrinsic properties, further alterations may manifest in vivo under conditions of network activity, neuromodulation, or behavioral engagement. These indirect or state-dependent mechanisms may further shape CLA neuron function and merit investigation in future studies.

What are the behavioral implications ofNr4a2haploinsufficiency-mediated alterations in the claustro-insular region? Several studies have reported that alterations in the excitation of CLA projection neurons lead to behavioral deficits in mice, particularly affecting higher-order cognitive functions17,78–82. We demonstrate that the overexpression ofRyr2inNr4a2heterozygous mice is responsible for the hypoexcitability of CLA projection neurons. Given thatNr4a2coding variants are associated with neurodevelopmental disorders47–52, including schizophrenia46,53, and considering the electrophysiological alterations we observed, we hypothesize that these functional impairments may contribute to specific cognitive deficits, rather than broad or nonspecific impairments arising from dysfunction in upstream or downstream brain regions connected to the CLA.

In summary, we developed a high-resolution map of the claustro-insular region, providing a nuanced understanding of the CLA, shell, and cortical populations. This work lays the foundation for future studies aimed at exploring the developmental origins of CLA and shell neurons and their roles in higher-order cognitive functions, particularly in the context of neurodevelopmental disorders.

All experiments followed veterinary guidelines and regulations of the University and the state of Geneva (Direction de l’expérimentation animale de l’UNIGE). Male C57BL/6 J mice (5–7 weeks old) were purchased from Charles River Laboratories. Nr4a2-SA-IRES-Dre mice (Nr4a2tm1(dreo)Hze, MGI: MGI: 6790280)83were generated by replacing the completeNr4a2coding sequence with a splice acceptor–ires-Dre sequence. HeterozygousNr4a2mice (Nr4a2del/wt) were bred by crossing heterozygous and wild-type parents of the same genetic background. Wild-type littermates were designatedNr4a2wt/wt. For electrophysiological recordings of genetically identified CLA neurons,Slc17a6tm2(cre)Lowl/J mice (Vglut2-IRES-Cre; Jackson laboratory, strain #016963)84were crossed toNr4a2tm1(dreo)Hzemice. In Vglut2-IRES-Cre mice, the Cre coding sequence, placed after the stop codon, does not disrupt theSlc17a6gene. Upon arrival, mice were group-housed in standard type II cages with ad libitum food and water, maintained on a 12/12 h dark/light cycle, at 21–22 °C and 45–55% humidity.

Nr4a2wt/wtandNr4a2del/wtmale (n = 4, 8–9 weeks and 3, 15 weeks old) and female (n = 3, 8–9 weeks and 3, 15 weeks old) littermate mice were used for scRNAseq experiments. For each age/gender combination, one or twoNr4a2wt/wtmice were used for twoNr4a2del/wtmice. Tissue collection and dissociation were performed following the methods described by Fodoulian et al.17. Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and sacrificed by decapitation. Brains were immediately extracted and placed in ice-cold oxygenated artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) containing (in mM): 124 NaCl, 3 KCl, 2 CaCl2, 1.3 MgSO4, 26 NaHCO3, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 10 D-glucose with an osmolarity of 300 mOsm and pH at 7.4 when oxygenated with 95% O2, 5% CO2. Coronal sections of the brain spanning the anteroposterior localization of the CLA were cut at a thickness of 300 μm using a vibrating-blade microtome (Leica VT1000S; Leica Biosystems). Immediately after sectioning, the CLA and adjacent brain regions were microdissected under a stereomicroscope. Tissue dissociations were performed using the Papain Dissociation System (ref.LK003150; Worthington® Biochemical Corporation) according to the manufacturer’s protocol with slight modifications, using EBSS and medium with serum solutions adapted from Saxena et al.85. After microdissection, extracted tissues were kept in ice-cold oxygenated EBBS#185. Tissues from each mouse were processed individually, with no pooling across different animals. Papain and DNase I vials provided with the kit were reconstituted using the oxygenated EBSS#1 solution. Tissues from each mouse were transferred to a 50 ml Falcon tube containing 5 ml of the papain/DNase I mix, and were incubated at 37 °C for 20 min in a rotating laboratory oven (ProBlotTMHybridization Oven; Labnet International) at a speed of 8–10 rpm. Tissues were then gently triturated using a P1000 pipette and left to settle for 1 min. Cell suspensions were then passed through a 70 μm nylon cell strainer (ref. 352350, Falcon) to remove undigested tissue fragments, transferred to 15 ml Falcon tubes, and centrifuged (Centrifuge 5430R; Eppendorf) at 300 ×gfor 5 min. Supernatants were discarded, and cell pellets were resuspended with 3 ml of EBSS#285to stop digestion. In order to remove myelin debris, two discontinuous density gradients were produced by carefully adding the 3 ml of cell suspension on top of 5 ml of an ovomucoid-albumin protease inhibitor solution reconstituted following the manufacturer’s instructions. Tubes were centrifuged at 70 g for 6 min at room temperature, the supernatants discarded, and the cell pellets resuspended in 1 ml medium solution with serum. Cell suspensions were then passed through another 70 μm nylon cell strainer.

To ensure the exclusive isolation of live nucleated cells, cell suspensions were incubated with 2 μg/ml of Hoechst 33342 (a UV fluorescent adenine-thymine binding dye; ref. H1399, Life TechnologiesTM) at 37 °C for 15 min. In order to exclude dead cells, 1 μM of DRAQ7TM(a far-red fluorescent DNA intercalating dye; ref. DR71000, BioStatus) was added to the cell suspensions before FACS sorting. Hoechst+/DRAQ7-cells were then sorted in an empty Eppendorf tube according to their forward scatter (FSC) and side scatter (SSC) properties using a Beckman Coulter MoFlo Astrios cell sorter with a 100 μm nozzle at a pressure of 25 psi. Doublets were excluded after gating on FSC-A/FSC-H, followed by SSC-H/SSC-W. Between 11,000 and 25,000 Hoechst+/DRAQ7-cells were collected from each sample.

Single-cell capture, reverse transcription, cDNA amplification, and library preparation were performed using the 10x Genomics Chromium Controller instrument and the Single Cell 3′ v3.1 reagent kit with dual indexes, following the manufacturer’s protocol (CG000315Rev B User Guide). Cells were loaded on the 10x Genomics Chromium Controller instrument at a concentration of 400 cells/μl, and the targeted cell recovery was adjusted for each sample based on the number of sorted cells. Eleven rounds of PCR amplification were conducted after reverse transcription, and 13–14 rounds during library preparation. After the first round of PCR, cDNA quality and quantity were assessed using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer with the Agilent Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity DNA Assay Kit (ref. 5067-4626; Agilent Technologies). After library preparation, cDNA library molarity and quality were assessed using the Qubit 4.0 with the Qubit™ 1× dsDNA HS Assay Kit (ref.Q33231; Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the TapeStation with the Agilent D1000 ScreenTape (ref. 5067-5582; Agilent Technologies). Libraries from mice of the same age were then pooled and each loaded at 2 nM on 4 lanes for clustering on a paired-end Illumina Flow Cell using the HiSeq 4000 PE Cluster Kit (ref. PE-410-1001; Illumina) and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq 4000 sequencer using the HiSeq 4000 SBS Kit (ref. FC-410-1001; Illumina) chemistry. Read 1 consisted of 28 bases, while read 2 was either 90 or 100 bases. An average of 5171 cells were sequenced with 42,199 mean reads, 1125 median genes, and 1999 median UMI counts per cell.

Demultiplexing of Illumina indices was performed on the raw Illumina data using bcl2fastq2 Conversion Software version 2.20.0 (Illumina), which generated a pair of fastq files per sample (i.e., reads 1 and 2).

Digital gene expression matrices (i.e., matrices with genes in rows, cells in columns, and gene counts as matrix entries) were generated using Cell Ranger version 6.0.086. Fastq files were mapped to theMus musculusgenome primary assembly reference 38 (GRCm38) using STAR87, implemented in Cell Ranger. A modified version of Ensembl release 102 of theMus musculusGTF annotation was used, with theGm45623annotation replaced by a custom annotation forSmim32, as described in Tuberosa et al.56. Mapping, UMI counting, and barcode filtering were performed using the count function of Cell Ranger. The expected number of recovered cells (--expect-cells argument) was customized for each sample and set to the targeted cell recovery of the sample.

scRNAseq data analyses were performed using R version 4.3.188. The filtered feature-barcode matrices from the Cell Ranger output served as the initial files for downstream analyses. Three rounds of clustering (following the steps detailed below) were applied to the data. The datasets at each round will be named “all cells” (Supplementary Fig.1a), “neurons unfiltered” (Supplementary Fig.1d), and “neurons filtered” (Fig.1b) in the rest of the “Methods” section. Cells were iteratively filtered to retain high-quality cells. After the initial clustering step of the “all cells” dataset, only neuronal clusters were retained for further analysis. These cells (forming the “neurons unfiltered” dataset) were re-clustered to remove clusters formed by low-quality cells or doublets that could not be detected in the full dataset. A final filtering step was applied to the cells, following the criteria detailed by Fodoulian et al.17. Briefly, we removed all cells (1) that were characterized by fewer than 1000 expressed genes, (2) for which mitochondrial counts exceeded 10% of their total counts, as high mitochondrial counts indicate suffering or dead cells, (3) for which the total number of detected genes, total number of UMIs, and percentage of mitochondrial counts were three median absolute deviations away from the median after log10transformation, and (4) that showed unusually high or low numbers of genes given their total number of UMIs, after log10transformation, by fitting a loess curve (loessfunction of the stats R package, with span = 0.5 and degree = 2), where the number of genes was taken as the response variable and the number of UMIs as the predictor. Cells for which the model residual was not within three median absolute deviations of the median were filtered out. The final number of cells in each dataset was 67,226 for “all cells”, 18,386 for “neurons unfiltered”, and 14,852 for “neurons filtered”. After cell filtering, we also selected genes expressed in at least three cells separately in each sample, with a minimum expression threshold of 1 UMI count. This filtering resulted in a total of 27,453 genes for “all cells”, 24,549 for “neurons unfiltered”, and 23,916 for “neurons filtered”.

In order to identify distinct cellular populations, we selected genes for downstream analyses based on their mean expression and dropout-rate relationship using the M3Drop R package version 3.10.689. We fitted a depth-adjusted negative binomial (DANB) model on the raw counts of each sample using theNBumiFitModelfunction of M3Drop. This model accounts for differences in sequencing depth and UMI tagging efficiency between cells. Genes with significantly higher dropout rates than expected by the model were selected for dimensionality reduction and clustering using theNBumiFeatureSelectionCombinedDropfunction of M3Drop (p-value < 0.05), adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate method90. This selection corresponded to a total of 3860 high dropout genes for “all cells”, 2316 for “neurons unfiltered”, and 1780 for “neurons filtered”.

To account for technical variability (i.e., tissue dissociation effects and sequencing depth differences between cells) in downstream analyses, a variance stabilizing transformation was applied to the raw counts of each sample using theSCTransformfunction of the Seurat R package version 5.1.091–93. This function implements thevstfunction of the sctransform R package (version 0.4.1 was used)91–93. All cells and genes were used for initial negative binomial regression parameter estimation, with the method set toglmGamPoi_offset(implemented using the glmGamPoi R package version 1.12.2)93,94. The Pearson residuals from the second regularized negative binomial model were computed for all genes and clipped to a range of [−n/30,n/30]. To correct for confounding variables, a final linear model was fitted to the Pearson residuals to regress out the number of UMIs per gene and the percentage of mitochondrial counts for each cell, and the residuals from this model (i.e., corrected Pearson residuals) were centered at the mean. Corrected counts and their log1p transformation were also computed. The process described here was applied either separately to each sample, with the resulting data used for dimensional reduction, clustering, or differential expression analysis - this latter after re-correcting UMI counts using the minimum of the median UMIs across samples via thePrepSCTFindMarkersfunction of Seurat - or applied to all cells together for the analysis of cell type identity shifts, gene regulatory network inference, and reference-based mapping on the “neurons filtered” dataset.

For gene expression plotting, raw gene expression values were normalized by the total number of counts per cell and scaled to 104(i.e., corresponding to norm. UMI) using theNormalizeDatafunction of Seurat. Plotted gene expression values are actual normalized values, but the scales are in log10after adding a pseudocount of 1.

Prior to cell clustering, principal component analysis (PCA) was performed on the corrected Pearson residuals of the high dropout genes (see “Selection of high dropout genes” section)using the irlba R package version 2.3.5.195, implemented in theRunPCAfunction of Seurat. Only the first 100 PCs were computed. The elbow in the decrease of the explained standard deviation of the successive PCs was detected using theKneeLocatorfunction of the kneed Python package version 0.8.596with the following parameters: S = 1, curve = “convex”, direction = “decreasing”. The location of the elbow was then used as a threshold to retain the top relevant PCs for downstream processing of the datasets. This resulted in retaining 19 PCs for “all cells”, 20 for “neurons unfiltered”, and 19 for “neurons filtered” (explaining 82%, 78%, and 77% of the variance calculated with the top 100 PCs, respectively). These PC embeddings were subsequently used for dataset integration through theRunHarmonyfunction of the harmony R package version 1.2.097. The ridge regression penalty was automatically estimated (with lambda = NULL), the maximum number of Harmony rounds was set to 50, the maximum number of clustering rounds at each Harmony round was set to 200, and the convergence tolerance values for clustering and Harmony rounds were set to 1e-5. Harmony-corrected cell embeddings were then used for clustering and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP)98,99dimensional reduction. To construct a shared nearest-neighbor (SNN) graph, 15 approximate nearest neighbors were identified for each cell using the RcppAnnoy R package version 0.0.22, implemented in theFindNeighborsfunction of Seurat. A forest of 50 trees was built for the nearest-neighbor search, using the Euclidean distance metric. The ranked nearest neighbors were then used to construct the SNN graph, and a Jaccard index cutoff of 1/15 was applied to prune weak connections from the graph. Cells were clustered using the leidenalg Python package version 0.10.2100, implemented in theFindClustersfunction of Seurat. The RBConfigurationVertexPartition singleton partition type was used, implementing Reichardt and Bornholdt’s Potts model with a null configuration101,102. The Leiden algorithm was run until no improvement in iteration was found (with n.iter = −1L). If singleton clusters were found, these were grouped into the same cluster. Clustering resolution selection varied by dataset. For the “all cells” and “neurons unfiltered” datasets, clustering resolution parameters ranged from 0 to 1 in increments of 0.1, and the lowest resolution that allowed segregation of large “noise” clusters was selected. For the “neurons filtered” dataset, the variation of information (VI)103between successive resolutions (ranging from 0 to 1.5 in increments of 0.1) was computed and normalized by the absolute difference in the number of clusters, and the resolution with the highest normalized VI was chosen. VI was computed using thecomparefunction of the igraph R package version 2.0.3. These steps resulted in clustering resolutions of 0.3 for “all cells”, 0.2 for “neurons unfiltered”, and 1.2 for “neurons filtered”. UMAP dimensional reduction was computed using the uwot R package version 0.1.16, implemented in theRunUMAPfunction of Seurat. Since 15 nearest neighbors were identified for each cell for SNN graph construction, 15 neighboring points were used during the local approximation of the manifold structure, and the cosine metric was used to measure distances. Note that UMAP was solely used to visualize the cluster assignment of cells on a 2-dimensional plot.

To identify cell type and subtype marker genes, or genes modulated due toNr4a2haploinsufficiency, a two-sided Wilcoxon rank sum test was performed on the corrected, log1p-transformed counts, implemented in theFindMarkersfunction of Seurat. When identifying cell type marker genes, differential expression analysis was computed between each cell type and all other cell types combined. For cell subtype marker genes, pairwise comparisons between related cell types were conducted. To identify modulated genes, comparisons within cell types or subtypes were performed, comparingNr4a2wt/wtcells toNr4a2del/wtcells. Genes expressed in at least 10% of the cells in either group, with a log fold-change of 0.25 and an adjustedp-value < 0.05 using the Bonferroni method, were considered significant. To test for robustness in the obtained results, a leave-one-out approach was implemented, where a given sample was removed from the dataset prior to differential expression analysis. To assess false-positive results, cell type, subtype, or genotype labels were permuted before conducting the differential expression analysis (n = 1000 permutations).

To study shifts in cell type identities due toNr4a2haploinsufficiency, classification and prediction of cell type identities based on the corrected Pearson residuals of modulated genes were performed using theLinearSVCfunction of the scikit-learn Python package version 1.3.2104,105. Only CLA, shell, and L6a neurons from the “neurons filtered” dataset were used in this analysis. Linear classifier parameters were optimized withNr4a2wt/wtcells using cross-validated grid search via theGridSearchCVfunction of scikit-learn. The optimized parameters were “C” for regularization strength, “penalty” for the norm type, and “dual” for the optimization problem formulation. This search was conducted over 10-fold cross-validation iterations, and the performance of the cross-validated model was evaluated by computing the balanced accuracy, resulting in the following optimized values: C = 9e-04, penalty = “l2”, and dual = “auto”. The tolerance value for the stopping criteria was set to 1e-5, and the maximum number of iterations was set to 50,000. Linear classifier models were trained with the optimized parameters described above using 80% of theNr4a2wt/wtcells, and cell type labels were predicted for the remaining 20% ofNr4a2wt/wtcells and allNr4a2del/wtcells. To obtain a balanced partition of the data prior to model training, thepartitionfunction of the groupdata2 R package version 2.0.3 was used. Cell type classification performance was tested over 1000 iterations. Significant differences between the genotypes in the percentage of classified cells across iterations for each actual-predicted cell type label pair were assessed using a generalized linear model (GLM)106–108with a binomial distribution. Models were fitted via the glmmTMB R package version 1.1.9109–111, using Template Model Builder (TMB). No random effect term was specified. Likelihood ratio tests (LRT) with χ2-basedp-values were then computed by comparing the resulting models with null models where the fixed effects term (i.e., genotype) was dropped, using thedrop1function of the stats R package112. To correct for multiple comparisons,p-values were adjusted using the Holm method113. To test for false negative results, permutation of cell identities was performed prior to model training, and accuracy differences between genotypes were compared to the observed results.

To assess whether modulated genes are important for the discrimination of CLA, shell, and L6a neurons, a linear classifier was trained onNr4a2wt/wtcells using genes expressed in at least 3 cells. Linear classifier parameters were set to the values described above. Since the multiclass linear classifier is implemented following a one-vs-the-rest scheme, gene weights were computed as the sum of the absolute weights across all one-vs-the-rest classifiers. The difference in gene weights between modulated genes and all other genes was tested using a two-sided Wilcoxon rank sum test with continuity correction. Genes whose weights were at least three median absolute deviations away from the median of all gene weights were considered as high-weighted genes. A two-sided one-sample proportions test with continuity correction was then used to test whether modulated genes were enriched among high-weighted genes compared to their representation in the transcriptome.

To investigate alterations in transcription factor activity due toNr4a2haploinsufficiency, gene regulatory network inference was conducted on the corrected, log1p-transformed counts of genes expressed in at least 3 cells using the pySCENIC Python package version 0.12.1114,115. Only CLA, shell, and L6a neurons from the “neurons filtered” dataset were used in this analysis. Motif2TF annotations and cisTarget databases generated with the 2022 SCENIC+116motif collection were utilized (mm10 annotation files). The list of transcription factors was filtered to include only those modulated inNr4a2del/wtmice. Genes lacking ranking values in the “genes versus motifs” ranking files were also excluded from the analysis. Gene regulatory networks (i.e., transcription factor-target gene co-expression modules) were inferred from the expression of genes using the GRNBoost2 algorithm117via thegrnboost2function of the arboreto Python package version 0.1.6114, with an early stop window length set to 100. Regulons (i.e., gene targets of a given transcription factor) were then derived from the co-expression modules using themodules_from_adjacenciesfunction of pySCENIC, with the following criteria: gene targets with importance values above the 90th and 95th percentiles were retained; the top 25 and 50 targets of each transcription factor were retained; and the targets for which the transcription factor is within its top 5, 10, and 50 regulators were retained. Activating and repressing regulons were inferred using a Pearson correlation coefficient threshold of 0.03, calculated using all cells. Only regulons containing at least 20 target genes were kept for further analysis. Regulons were pruned, and target genes with a cis-regulatory footprint for the corresponding transcription factor were retained using the “genes versus motifs” ranking files via theprune2dffunction of pySCENIC. Recovery curves were created using the top-800 ranked target genes of each transcription factor, and the area under the curve was calculated using 2.5% of the ranked genome. Regulons with a normalized enrichment score above 2.1 were retained, and regulon enrichment scores were calculated for each cell using theaucellfunction of pySCENIC. To identify regulons enriched in eitherNr4a2wt/wtorNr4a2del/wtcells, regulon-specific scores (RSS)72were calculated for each cell type and genotype using theregulon_specificity_scoresfunction of pySCENIC, and the contrast in these scores was computed between genotypes.

Differences between genotypes in cell type proportions were tested using thepropellerfunction of the speckle Bioconductor package118version 1.0.0. This package implements functions from the limma Bioconductor package (version 3.56.2 was used)119. The mouse from which each cell was derived served as a biological replicate. A linear model was fitted to the logit-transformed proportions, and a robust empirical Bayes shrinkage120of the variances was applied. Since there are two genotypes, at-test was used to calculatep-values, which were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate method90.

For the MERFISH121gene panel, marker genes that effectively segregate neuronal cell populations in the mouse claustro-insular region were selected. Criteria included: (1) markers of major claustro-insular cell types, (2) differentially expressed genes segregating related cell types, (3) previously described claustro-insular markers, and (4) variable genes in the scRNAseq data. Generic markers such asSlc17a7, Slc32a1, Pvalb, Sst, Vip, andGfapwere also added. A list of 500 genes was submitted to the Vizgen portal; genes with insufficient target regions or exceeding abundance thresholds were excluded to prevent optical crowding. A final panel of 300 genes was used.

Mice (~12 weeks old; n = 2 C57BL6 male, n = 3Nr4a2wt/wtmales, and n = 3Nr4a2del/wtmales) were anesthetized with 4% isoflurane (AttaneTM, Piramal Healthcare) and euthanized by cervical dislocation. Brains were removed, embedded in OCT (ref. KMA-0100-00A, CellPath Ltd), frozen in an isopentane and liquid nitrogen bath, and stored at −80 °C until sectioning.

Brains were sectioned on a Leica CM3050 cryostat (chamber: −21 °C, sample: −16 °C). Brains were placed in the cryostat for at least 30 min before starting sectioning. The OCT block was trimmed until reaching the beginning of the claustro-insular region. After alignment using the Allen Mouse Brain Atlas, 10 μm sections (approx. bregma +1.045, +0.145, and −1.355) were mounted onto MERSCOPE slides (ref. PN 20400001, Vizgen), air-dried in the cryostat for 10–15 min. RNA quality was checked using additional sections, stored in 350 μl RLT Plus lysis buffer (ref. 74034, Qiagen) at 4 °C until analysis.

RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Plus Micro Kit (Qiagen) per protocol, eluted with 14 μl RNAse-free water, and analyzed on the 2100 Bioanalyzer (RNA Nano Chips, ref. 5067-1511, Agilent). All samples showed RIN = 10 and DV200 = 98–100%, confirming RNA integrity.

Slides were fixed in 4% PFA in 1× PBS for 15 min at room temperature, washed in 1× PBS, covered in 70% EtOH, sealed in parafilm, and stored at 4 °C (maximum 6 weeks). For hybridization, Vizgen protocols were followed. Verification was done on adjacent sections using the Sample Verification Kit (ref. 10400008, Vizgen). The hybridization procedure was the same for verification and experimental samples. Slides were washed and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C in Formamide Wash Buffer (ref. 20300002, Vizgen) in an incubator. Verification Gene Probes or the custom gene panel mix (50 μl) were applied to sections, covered with parafilm, and incubated at 37 °C for 18–24 h. Sections were incubated twice in Formamide Wash Buffer for 30 min at 47 °C. Slides were washed with Sample Prep Wash Buffer for 2 min. A Gel Coverslip (ref. 20400003, Vizgen) was coated with 100 μl of Gel Slick Solution. Wash buffer was removed from the sample, which was then covered with a thin layer of Gel Embedding Solution (ref. 20300004, Vizgen) containing 10% ammonium persulfate solution and N,N,N′,N′-tetramethylethylenediamine. The Gel Coverslip was placed on top of the sample, which was incubated at room temperature for approximately 90 min, until the gel was solidified. For tissue clearing, after removing the Gel Coverslip, slides were incubated in 5 ml warmed Clearing Solution (ref. 20300003, Vizgen) with Proteinase K (ref. P8107S, NEB) for 24 h at 37 °C.

Sections were washed twice for 5 min in Sample Prep Wash Buffer and incubated for 15 min on a rocker with either 3 ml of Verification Staining Reagent (ref. 20300014, Vizgen, for verification samples) or 3 ml of DAPI and PolyT Staining Reagent (ref. 20300021, Vizgen, for experimental samples). Sections were washed with 5 ml of Formamide Wash Buffer for 10 min and then placed in Sample Prep Wash Buffer. For verification samples, slides were placed in the MERSCOPE Flow Chamber and Imaging Buffer (ref. 20300016, Vizgen), with Verification Imaging Buffer Activator (ref. 20300015, Vizgen) was injected into the chamber, which was inserted into the MERSCOPE instrument (ref. 10000001, Vizgen) and imaged according to the manufacturer’s protocol. For imaging of samples labeled with the 300-gene panel, the MERSCOPE Imaging Cartridge (ref. 20300018, Vizgen) was prepared by injecting 250 μl of Imaging Buffer activator (ref. 20300022, Vizgen) mixed with 100 μl of RNase inhibitor (ref. M0314L, NEB) into the cartridge. Next, 15 ml of mineral oil (ref. M5904-500ML, Sigma) was pipetted on top of the Imaging Activation Mix. The cartridge was inserted into the MERSCOPE instruments, and the fluidics system was primed according to instructions. The sample was placed in the Flow Chamber, inserted into the MERSCOPE instrument, and connected to the fluidics system. After acquiring a low-resolution image of DAPI labeling, the region of interest was drawn, and imaging was initiated. Sections were imaged with a 60× lens and 7 planes on the z-axis.

Raw images of entire coronal sections were automatically processed by the MERSCOPE Instrument software, generating cell-by-gene and cell-metadata output matrices for each sample. Regions of interest, including cortical deep layers, endopiriform nucleus, piriform cortex, and striatum, were selected around the claustro-insular regions of each section for downstream analyses using R version 4.3.1. Three brain hemisections of wild-type mice were removed from the analysis because one detached from the slide during the imaging procedure (bregma +1.045), and two were out of focus (bregma +0.145 and −1.355). The number of expressed genes and mRNA molecules was computed for each cell. Cells with a volume of 500–3500 µm3(inclusive) and containing at least 10 but no more than 3000 mRNA molecules were retained for further analysis. To filter out non-neuronal cells, clustering was performed on the cells following the same pipeline used for scRNAseq data analysis, with the following differences: (1) high dropout genes were not computed, (2) Pearson residuals were clipped to a range of [−10, 10] and the effect of cell size on the number of mRNA molecules was corrected by regressing out cell volume, (3) PCA was performed on the corrected Pearson residuals of all 300 genes, (4) 21 PCs were used for dataset integration, and (5) a clustering resolution of 0.1 was used for cluster identification. Clusters corresponding to non-neuronal cells, typically not expressingSlc17a7andSlc32a1, were removed from downstream analysis. No genes were filtered for downstream analysis.

To identify cell types in the MERFISH dataset, a reference-based mapping approach was employed, where cell types were predicted using the scRNAseq dataset as a reference. To build this reference, supervised PCA (SPCA)122was performed on the corrected Pearson residuals of the MERFISH panel genes expressed in the “neurons filtered” dataset (296 genes were used) using theRunSPCAfunction of Seurat. The linear matrix factorization during SPCA calculation was supervised using the SNN graph from the “neurons filtered” dataset. Only the first 100 SPCs were computed, and the top relevant SPCs were selected using theKneeLocatorfunction of kneed (see “scRNAseq data analysis” and “Dimensionality reduction, dataset integration, and unsupervised graph-based clustering” sections). An Azimuth reference was created using the variance-stabilized data, the top SPCs, and the UMAP model from the “neurons filtered” dataset via theAzimuthReferencefunction of the Azimuth R package version 0.5.057. The cell type and subtype identities of cells were used for prediction in the MERFISH dataset. Prior to dataset projection, a variance stabilizing transformation was applied to the raw counts of all filtered MERFISH cells using theSCTransformfunction of Seurat92,93, as described in the “Data normalization and confounder regression” section, with the following differences: Pearson residuals were clipped to a range of [−10, 10], and the effect of cell size on the number of mRNA molecules was corrected by regressing out cell volume. This variance-stabilized data was then projected onto the scRNAseq reference dataset, and cell type and subtype label prediction was performed via theRunAzimuthfunction of Azimuth.

For visualizing the 2D brain maps of predicted cell types and subtypes, the rotation angle for each section was visually estimated, and the rotated coordinates were computed using a rotation matrix.

To characterize differences between CLA projection neurons located in the CLA, EP, or L6, a joint analysis of the scRNAseq and MERFISH datasets was performed. First, a region identity (namely, CLA, EP, or CLA-like L6) was attributed to CLA cells from the MERFISH dataset with a minimum prediction score of 0.7, based on their anatomical localization. The CLA-like L6 region was assigned to dorsally located CLA neurons from the bregma −1.355 hemisection, differentiating them from more ventrally located CLA and EP cells, which in this section could not be easily segregated. Differences between CLA and EP in cell type proportions were tested using thepropellerfunction of speckle, as described in the “Claustro-insular cellular composition analysis” section, with the following difference: the region of interest from which each cell was derived served as a biological replicate, and a non-robust empirical Bayes shrinkage of the variances was applied.

To identify differentially expressed genes between neurons from these regions, the MERFISH dataset could not be used because: (1) it contains expression values for only 300 genes, and (2) some genes exhibit spurious expression with this technique (mainly due to probe design). Instead, the scRNAseq dataset was used, as it includes expression measurements for thousands of genes per cell. Because scRNAseq lacks spatial information, the initial localization—representing the likely region of origin—of CLA cells in this dataset was inferred by examining how their nearest neighbors from the MERFISH dataset were distributed across subregions of the CLA/EP complex. The list of nearest neighbors from the reference-based mapping step—where 20 nearest neighbors from the scRNAseq dataset were identified for each cell in the MERFISH dataset—was used for this analysis. A one-sample proportions test with continuity correction was then applied for each CLA cell from the scRNAseq dataset. Cells displaying inequalities in their proportion distribution of nearest neighbors between subregions of the CLA/EP complex, compared to expected proportions calculated from the MERFISH dataset, were assigned a region identity. To increase the statistical power of this analysis, MERFISH samples from bothNr4a2wt/wtandNr4a2del/wtwere used. From the 1192Nr4a2wt/wtCLA cells in the scRNAseq dataset, 31 were predicted to have originated from the CLA, 67 from the EP, and 2 caudally from the L6. Due to their low number, these latter were excluded from further analysis. Differentially expressed genes between CLA projection neurons with a predicted CLA or EP region attribute were finally computed using theFindMarkersfunction of Seurat, as described in the “Differential expression analysis” section.

Mice (details in Supplementary Data3) were anesthetized with isoflurane and euthanized by cervical dislocation. Brains were removed, embedded in OCT, frozen in an isopentane/liquid nitrogen bath, and stored at −80 °C until sectioning. Coronal sections (10 μm) were cut on a cryostat microtome, mounted on Superfrost™ Plus slides (ref. J1800AMNZ, Erpredia), dried for 1–2 h at −20 °C, and stored at −80 °C. Sections were labeled using the RNAscope™ Multiplex Fluorescent V2 Assay (ref. 323136, Advanced Cell Diagnostics) following the manufacturer’s guidelines for fresh-frozen tissues. Before hybridization, sections were post-fixed in 10% formalin (15 min, 4 °C), dehydrated, treated with hydrogen peroxide (10 min, room temperature), and incubated with Protease IV (15 min, room temperature). Sections were hybridized with sets of 2–3 probes (see Supplementary Data3) for 2 h at 40 °C in a humidified chamber. Signals were developed using TSA Vivid Fluorophores 520 (1:750, ref. 323271), 570 (1:1000–1500, ref. 323272), and 650 (1:1500–2000, ref. 323273), diluted in TSA buffer. Sections were counterstained with DAPI and mounted with ProLongTMGold antifade (ref.P36935, InvitrogenTM). Imaging was performed with a Nikon Ti/CSU-W1 Spinning Disc Confocal microscope (405, 488, 561, 640 nm lasers, 60 × 1.49 NA objective). Image tiles of the claustro-insular region were acquired in 6 z-planes, and merging and orthogonal projections were applied using the SlideBook software (Intelligent Imaging Innovations).

To characterizeNr2f2expression in the claustro-insular region, we performed dual RNAscope/immunofluorescence labeling to visualize bothNr2f2mRNA and NR2F2 protein. The procedure followed the manufacturer’s protocol for dual ISH-IHC assays (Advanced Cell Diagnostics). Briefly, after labeling sections forNr4a2andNr2f2mRNA using the RNAscope Multiplex Fluorescent V2 Assay, sections were incubated with a primary antibody against NR2F2 (1:250, ref. ab211775, Abcam), followed by an HRP-conjugated secondary antibody (1:500, ref. W4011, Promega). Signal was then developed using TSA Vivid Fluorophore 650 (1:750, ref. 323273).

Images were analyzed using QuPath version 0.4.3. Cells were selected by drawing a region of interest (ROI) (see Supplementary Data3for details). Cell segmentation based on DAPI staining was performed using theCell detectionfunction. The cell expansion parameter was adjusted depending on the analysis: for co-expression analyses (Figs.2and3), a 2 μm expansion was used to minimize false-positive co-expression by restricting the analysis to areas close to the nucleus. For the quantification of the expression of individual genes (Figs.4and6), a 4 μm expansion was applied to maximize transcript detection. In the particular case ofNr2f2, we observed widespread nuclear localization of transcripts across most cells in the cortex and striatum (as also seen in the Allen Brain Atlas ISH dataset; mouse.brain-map.org, experiment 308055507), except inNr4a2+ CLA/EP neurons, where nuclear and cytoplasmicNr2f2transcripts were observed (Supplementary Fig.14i–o). This reflects the CLA/EP-specific expression pattern of NR2F2 observed by IHC77. Therefore, only cytoplasmicNr2f2puncta were quantified, as these likely represent the translated mRNA pool specific to CLA/EP cells. Next, puncta corresponding to individual mRNA molecules were automatically detected and quantified using theSubcellular detectionfunction. For each fluorophore, a detection threshold was set, and all puncta above this threshold were counted. When multiple puncta were clustered together, an estimation of the number of individual puncta within the cluster was performed automatically by theSubcellular detectionfunction. The same parameters were applied to all images from the same experiment. When referring to one section, this corresponds to an image of one claustro-insular region.

A custom R script was used for the analysis of RNAscope data on R version 4.3.1. Cells not expressing any of the three genes tested were removed. Two transformation steps were applied to the count data: (1) to account for outlier cells, the number of puncta per cell was log-transformed, (2) to eliminate gene-specific biases in the clustering of cells, gene-wise standardization of the data was applied by scaling and centering the numbers of puncta of a given gene across cells, using thescalefunction of the base R package. Euclidean distances were then computed between each pair of cells using thedistfunction of the stats R package. The data was finally clustered using Ward’s minimum variance agglomeration method implemented in thehclustfunction of the fastcluster R package version 1.2.6 (with method = “ward.D2”)123–125. This package provides a fast implementation of hierarchical agglomerative clustering. The resulting hierarchical clustering tree was iteratively cut into 2–12 groups using thecutreefunction of the stats R package. The optimal number of groups was determined through visual inspection of gene expression across groups (typically using violin plots126) and was guided by the scRNAseq data (details in Supplementary Data4). Clustering was performed separately for each probe set. The number of mice, images, and cells varied for each experiment and are provided in Supplementary Data3. When the experiment included mice with different genotypes, the data was jointly clustered, and no correction for the genotype effect was performed. When the probe set was designed to identify cell subtypes, a second round of clustering was necessary. This involved identifying the group (or groups) containing the desired cells (identified based on their gene expression profiles), and a second round of clustering only on these cells was applied following the steps described above. Right (medial-lateral) and left (lateral-medial) claustro-insular images were used in all experiments and were clustered together per probe set. However, these images did not always respectively correspond to sections from the right and left sides of the brain.

Claustro-insular maps (Fig.2, Fig.6, Supplementary Fig.5) were created using multiple images. For each anteroposterior level, a representative reference image was selected, and all other images from the same position were registered to it. The left images were horizontally flipped to align all images to the right side. A reference point located between the CLA and dorsal EP near the external capsule was used for image centering, along with two landmark points for landmark-based image rotation. The relative rotation angle of each image with the reference image was computed through slope-based angle calculation. Finally, 2D coordinate rotation using a rotation matrix was applied. No scaling of images was performed.

2D coordinates of analyzed cells were used to generate a map of major claustro-insular cell types. As the claustrum extends over several millimeters along the anteroposterior axis of the brain, four representative coronal sections (bregma +1.42, +1.045, +0.145, and −1.355) were chosen. Probe sets A and B (see Supplementary Data3) were clustered separately (“Cluster identification” section) and projected onto the same map via rigid image registration (“Rigid image registration” section). The number of mice, images, and cells analyzed is described in Supplementary Data3. Reference images for each anteroposterior level corresponded to probe set A images, with landmark points differing by brain level: dorsal and ventral EP tips for bregma +1.42 to +0.145 and dorsal and ventral tips of the claustrum-like L6a region for bregma −1.355. Two bregma −1.355 images that were used for clustering were excluded during map generation due to distortions (one was anterior to the other images, and one was oblique). The cluster characterized by high expression levels ofNr4a2but no expression ofSlc17a6from probe set B was also excluded from the map: since both CLA and L6b neurons exhibit high expression levels ofNr4a2and as this probe set did not include a probe forCcn2(also known asCtgf), a marker gene for L6b neurons, this cluster constituted a mixed set of neuronal populations that distorted the final map. However, CLA projection neurons expressingNr4a2andSlc17a6were identified using probe set B.

To highlight the diversity of cell types constituting the mouse claustro-insular region, proportional visualizations of the maps (Fig.2e, Supplementary Fig.4b) were created by binning the 2D spatial maps into 20 μm bins, calculating cluster proportions per bin, and assigning weighted colors to each bin. To visualize the density distribution of CLA, shell,Ccn2+, andRprm+cells at each brain level (Fig.2f–jand Supplementary Fig.5c), two-dimensional kernel density estimations were computed using thekde2dfunction of the MASS R package version 7.3.60.0.188, implemented in thestat_density_2d_filledfunction of the ggplot2 R package version 3.5.0. Density estimates were scaled to a maximum of 1 with contour breaks ranging from 0.1 to 1 in increments of 0.1. The number of grid points in the dorso-ventral and medio-lateral directions was set to 100, and bandwidths were estimated using the normal reference distribution via thebandwidth.nrdfunction of the MASS package. The maps were finally generated by plotting the highest density region of CLA, shell,Ccn2+, andRprm+cells at a 50% probability level of the two-dimensional kernel density estimate using thestat_hdrfunction of the ggdensity R package version 1.0.0. All the maps were scaled to the same coordinate space.

where N is the number of cells from the corresponding cluster.

All statistical analyses of RNAscope data were performed using R. Differences between genotypes in the total number of cells (Fig.6a), number ofNr4a2+cells (Fig.6b), number ofNr4a2puncta (Fig.4c), and the expression levels of modulated genes (Fig.4g–j) were tested using generalized linear mixed models (GLMM) with negative binomial distributions, quadratic parameterization127, and a log link function (with family = nbinom2(link = “log”)). Models were fitted via the glmmTMB109–111R package version 1.1.9, using Template Model Builder (TMB). Probe sets and/or images were included as random effects depending on the test, as detailed in Supplementary Data1. Likelihood ratio tests (LRT) with χ2-basedp-values were then computed by comparing the resulting models with null models where the fixed effects term (i.e., genotype) was dropped, using thedrop1R function112. When testing for differences in the expression levels of modulated genes between genotypes,p-values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Holm method113. Differences between genotypes in cell type proportions were tested using thepropellerfunction of speckle, as described in the “Claustro-insular cellular composition analysis” section, with the following difference: the image from which each cell was derived served as a biological replicate.

Slice recordings were conducted on 16–23-week-old Vglut2-IRES-Cre;Nr4a2wt/wtand Vglut2-IRES-Cre;Nr4a2del/wtmice, infected with retrogradely transported adeno-associated viral particles AAV(rg)-hSyn-DIO-EGFP (Addgene #50457) in the mPFC 3–4 weeks prior. In brief, mice were anesthetized with isoflurane (3–5% induction, 1–2% maintenance), and the skin over the skull was removed under local anesthesia using carbostesin (AstraZeneca). Animals were head-fixed in a stereotaxic apparatus (Stoelting) using ear bars and a nose clamp, with their eyes protected by artificial tears. Body temperature was maintained at ~37 °C via a heating pad (FHC). Bilateral craniotomies above the mPFC were performed using an air-pressurized drill. A glass pipette filled with AAV solution was inserted one hemisphere at a time at the following coordinates relative to bregma: AP: 1.7 mm, ML: ±0.3 mm, and DV: ‒1.5 mm from the surface of the brain. A volume of 200 nl was injected per site. After the procedure, mice were allowed to recover for 3–4 weeks. For slice recordings, animals were anesthetized with isoflurane, and the brain was quickly extracted. 300-μm-thick coronal slices were cut using a vibratome (Leica VT 928 S1000, Germany). Slices were transferred to continuously oxygenated artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF) at 37 °C for 60 min, then maintained at room temperature for the remainder of the experiment. The ACSF contained (in mM): 124 NaCl, 3 KCl, 2 CaCl2, 1.3 MgSO4, 26 NaHCO3, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 10 D-glucose, with an osmolarity of 300 mOsm and a pH of 7.4 when bubbled with 95% O2−5% CO2. Slices were transferred to the recording chamber and perfused with oxygenated ACSF. All recordings were performed at ~37 °C (using a recording chamber and temperature controller from Luigs & Neumann, Germany). Claustral neurons projecting to the mPFC and expressing the viral construct were identified using a 473 nm LED (Thorlabs, Germany). Neurons were visualized using an IR-DIC microscope (Olympus BX51, Germany), and whole-cell recordings of identified neurons were performed using borosilicate glass pipettes with a resistance of 4–7 MΩ, filled with an intracellular solution containing (in mM): 120 K-gluconate, 10 KCl, 10 HEPES, 4 ATP, 0.3 GTP, 10 phosphocreatine, 1 EGTA, and 0.4% biocytin. The solution had a pH of 7.2–7.3 and an osmolarity of 280–290 mOsm. The signal was amplified using Multiclamp 700B amplifiers (Molecular Devices, USA) with a sampling rate of 50 kHz, high-pass filtered at 4 kHz, and digitized using the PulseQ electrophysiology package running on Igor Pro (Wavemetrics, USA). Neurons were recorded either in ACSF or in ACSF supplemented with various pharmacological agents. Fast GABAergic and glutamatergic transmission was blocked using SR 95531 hydrobromide (GBZ, 10 μM; Tocris), NBQX-disodium salts (10 μM; Tocris), and DL-AP5 (100 μM; Tocris). ATX-II (10 nM, Alomone Labs) is an enhancer of the resurgent current of voltage-gated sodium channels. Kv1-4 Channels were blocked with 4-aminopyridine (1 mM, Tocris), Kv7 channels with XE991 dihydrochloride (20 µM, Alomone Labs), and IRK channels with barium chloride (1 mM, Sigma-Aldrich). Adenylate cyclase was blocked with SQ22536 (100 µM, Tocris), PKA blocked with H89 (10 µM, Tocris), and IP3receptors blocked with 2-APB (100 µM, Tocris). Finally, the mechanism underlying calcium-induced calcium release modulation of BK channels was dissected using the following pharmacological channel blockers: Cav1: Nifedipine (10 μM), Cav2.1: ω-Agatoxin IVA (100 nM, Alomone Labs), Cav2.2: ω-Conotoxin GVIA (3 μM, Alomone Labs), Cav2.3: SNX-482 (400 nM, Alomone Labs), Cav3: ML218 (2 μM, Alomone Labs), BKCa channels: Iberiotoxin (100 nM, Alomone Labs), RyR2: Ryanodine (10–20 μM, Alomone Labs).

To analyze patch-clamp data, waveforms acquired in IgorPro6 were converted to MATLAB files. Action potential (AP) peaks were detected with MATLAB’s built-in ‘findpeaks’ function. To identify AP onsets, we computed the rolling average and rolling standard deviation over a window of 30 time points. An onset was defined when the absolute difference between the membrane potential and the rolling average exceeded four times the rolling standard deviation, and the potential was above the rolling average. The half-width was measured at half the AP’s amplitude. Offsets were identified after the peak as the point closest to the onset potential. Rise time was calculated from onset to peak, decay time from peak to offset, and the afterhyperpolarization potential (AHP) was measured from the offset to the lowest potential following the offset.

The area under the curve (AUC) for each cell was calculated as the total surface area under the input/output function curve, using GraphPad Prism 8. To better compare the change in firing frequency between genotypes under different pharmacological conditions, the AUC and AHP amplitude were normalized to the wild-type values. For each pharmacological condition, we calculated the difference between a cell AUC and the meanNr4a2wt/wtAUC, then divided this difference by the mean AUC of the controlNr4a2wt/wtcells for that condition (data presented as a percentage change). For each pharmacological condition, AHP amplitude was normalized by dividing each cell's AHP amplitude by the meanNr4a2wt/wtAHP amplitude for that condition. Statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 8. For input/output functions, statistical differences were assessed with a two-way ANOVA test. Single comparisons were analyzed using Fisher’s LSD test, andp-values were corrected for multiple comparisons with a 5% false discovery rate (Benjamini–Hochberg method). Group differences betweenNr4a2wt/wtandNr4a2del/wtfor AP properties were determined with a two-way ANOVA followed by a Fisher’s LSD test, andp-values were adjusted for multiple comparisons using the two-stage linear step-up procedure of Benjamini, Krieger, and Yekutieli. Finally, changes in AUC and normalized AHP amplitude were assessed using a Mann–Whitney test. All statistical details can be found in Supplementary Data1.

No statistical method was used to predetermine sample size; sample sizes were based on established protocols and aligned with veterinary and ethical guidelines. For scRNAseq, MERFISH, and RNAscope smFISH experiments, the high resolution and cell numbers per sample provided strong statistical power despite small animal numbers. For scRNAseq, 13 mice spanning age, sex, and genotype combinations yielded 14,852 quality-filtered neurons. For spatial transcriptomics, n = 2–3 animals per condition were used, with n = 1 for certain localization-only experiments. Patch-clamp sample sizes were based on prior literature and ensured genotype balance. No data were excluded from scRNAseq analyses; limited exclusions were made in MERFISH and smFISH due to technical issues (e.g., tissue damage, imaging artifacts), and patch-clamp recordings were excluded based on predefined quality criteria. Experiments were reproducible across independent biological replicates, with consistent findings across platforms and batches. Randomization was not necessary, as there was no treatment allocation and the only grouping variable was genotype. The investigators were blinded to genotype during patch-clamp recordings, but not during other experiments, where group allocation was not applicable and analyses were automated.

Further information on research design is available in theNature Portfolio Reporting Summarylinked to this article.

We thank all members of I.R and A.C laboratories for helpful discussions, Francisco Resende for expert mouse care, Loris Mannino and Leonardo Marconi for technical assistance, Dr. Jose Manuel Nunes for statistical advice, the Photonic Bioimaging Center of the University of Geneva for assistance with imaging, the NeuroNA Human Cellular Neuroscience Platform of Campus Biotech Geneva for assistance with MERFISH spatial transcriptomics, the Flow Cytometry core facility and the iGE3 Genomics Platform at the Faculty of Medicine of the University of Geneva for expert technical assistance for the scRNAseq experiment. We warmly thank Dr. Hongkui Zeng (the Allen Institute) for generously providing theNr4a2tm1(dreo)Hzemice. This research was supported by the University of Geneva and the European Research Council (contract ERC-SyG-856439-CLAUSTROFUNCT to A.C. and I.R.), the Swiss National Science Foundation (grant 501100001711-215572 and 501100001711-219531 to A.C. and I.R., respectively), the Fondation Privée des HUG (grant RC03-11 to A.C. and I.R.), and the Novartis Foundation for Medical Research (A.C. and I.R.).