Triggered by advances in atomic-layer exfoliation and
growth techniques,
along with the identification of a wide range of extraordinary physical
properties in self-standing films consisting of one or a few atomic
layers, two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene, transition
metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), and other van der Waals (vdW) crystals
now constitute a broad research field expanding in multiple directions
through the combination of layer stacking and twisting, nanofabrication,
surface-science methods, and integration into nanostructured environments.
Photonics encompasses a multidisciplinary subset of those directions,
where 2D materials contribute remarkable nonlinearities, long-lived
and ultraconfined polaritons, strong excitons, topological and chiral
effects, susceptibility to external stimuli, accessibility, robustness,
and a completely new range of photonic materials based on layer stacking,
gating, and the formation of moiré patterns. These properties
are being leveraged to develop applications in electro-optical modulation,
light emission and detection, imaging and metasurfaces, integrated
optics, sensing, and quantum physics across a broad spectral range
extending from the far-infrared to the ultraviolet, as well as enabling
hybridization with spin and momentum textures of electronic band structures
and magnetic degrees of freedom. The rapid expansion of photonics
with 2D materials as a dynamic research arena is yielding breakthroughs,
which this Roadmap summarizes while identifying challenges and opportunities
for future goals and how to meet them through a wide collection of
topical sections prepared by leading practitioners.

Intense research on two-dimensional
(2D) materials was sparked
in 2004 by the isolation of single-layer graphene and the discovery
of its unique photonic properties. This
breakthrough introduced the technique of exfoliation, which was quickly
applied to other materials composed of atomic layers held together
by relatively weak van der Waals (vdW) forces. By stacking these layers
together, heterostructures were created, and the introduction of a relative twist angle between the layers
produced moiré patterns, further expanding the range of properties
of 2D materials. These techniques, along
with the broad variety of exfoliable materials, form the backbone
of the rapidly growing field of 2D materials. Because of the exceptional
optical properties of these materials, photonics occupies a prominent
position within this field, where they have generated high expectations
for the discovery of new phenomena and the development of groundbreaking
applications.

Strong Optical Confinement. The in-plane
wavelength of polaritonic modes is much smaller than that of light,,enabling small, laterally structured 2D materials to be optically
resonant.

Broad Spectral Range. 2D polaritons,
and material excitations in general, span a wide range of frequencies,
extending from the terahertz (THz) domain to the visible and ultraviolet (UV),
and acquiring the form of plasmons (e.g., in graphene and thin metals), phonons
(e.g., in ionic crystals,such as hexagonal boron
nitride (hBN) and MoO3), and excitons (e.g., in transition
metal dichalcogenides (TMDs)).

Long Lifetime. Graphene
plasmons and
phonon polaritons in the mid-infrared (mid-IR) exhibit quality factors
(lifetime multiplied by frequency) of several hundred, while TMD excitons in the visible range can have line widths
of microelectronvolts.

Strong Field Enhancement. When polaritons
are excited by external illumination, their associated electric field
can be enhanced by several orders of magnitude relative to the incident
light.

High Susceptibility to External Perturbations. Thermal heating,,mechanical stretching, magnetic fields, and interactions with additional neighboring materials can also induce substantial, unity-order changes
in the linear and nonlinear optical responses of 2D materials.

Large Nonlinear Response. 2D materials
exhibit remarkable intrinsic nonlinear responses, with graphene and TMDs featuring
nonlinear susceptibilities that rival those of the best available
nonlinear materials.

Chameleonic properties and uses of 2D materials.
Driven by their
exceptional properties and unique physical behavior (top), 2D materials
are unlocking disruptive applications in photonics (bottom), as discussed
in this Roadmap.

We adopt a broad interpretation of the termpolaritons, referring to excitations in the material that
involve induced charges
interacting with light. Depending on the nature of the charges, we
consider various types of excitations, such as plasmons, phonons,
or excitons, that hybridize with light to produce plasmon, phonon,
or exciton polaritons. Polaritons permeate the optical properties
of 2D materials, with key features outlined above, which are being
leveraged for applications in electro-optical modulation, light emission
and detection, imaging and metasurfaces, integrated optics, sensing,
and quantum physics across a broad spectral range extending from the
far IR to the UV. Additionally, they enable hybridization with spin
and momentum textures of electronic band structures.

Noteworthy
properties of 2D materials include easy spatial access
and precise placement. Moreover, their strong in-plane atomic binding
makes them both robust and well-suited for nanofabrication. The atomic structures of 2D materials are well-defined,
as are the structures of certain atomic defects, which can be leveraged
to create quantum optical emitters. Moreover,
the electronic band structures of these materials can be both passively and actively modified,
providing a powerful interplay between photonics, electronics, and
magnetism. The ultrafast dynamics that arises from these interactions
configures a rich and fertile research playground.

It should
be noted that 2D materials possess quantum properties
that are absent in their bulk counterparts. Many of them are not merely
thinned-down versions of common three-dimensional (3D) compounds but
are electronically richer and different. In this regard, photonics
is only beginning to harness the full potential of the rich electronic
physics inherent in 2D materials.

Fundamentals of 2D Polaritons. We present
an overview of 2D polaritons (Section), their generation, detection, and strong coupling
in hyperbolic materials (Section), plasmonics in twisted 2D materials (Section), nonlocal effects in these
excitations (Section), and the understanding of the optical responses of 2D materials
in terms of a Maxwell Hamiltonian (Section).

Characterization
Techniques. Nanoscopy
through near-field optical probes (Section) is a driving force in this field, while
tip-enhanced nanoscopies (Section) and free-electron spectromicroscopy (Section) are also powerful sources
of unique insights.

Excitons
and 2D Semiconductors. 2D
exciton polaritons are discussed inSection, tunable excitons and trions are analyzed
inSection, their
optical emission properties are covered inSection, and the engineered confinement of these
excitations is presented inSection.

Nonlinear and
Ultrafast Optical Phenomena. Ultrafast dynamics in 2D materials
present unique characteristics
that lead to extraordinary nonlinear optical properties. These areas
are discussed with emphasis on ultrafast dynamics in 2D semiconductors
(Section), quantum-coherent
coupling (Section), nonlinear photonics (Section), nonlinear generation of entangled light (Section), nonlinear polaritonics
(Section), nonlinear
valleytronics (Section), and nonlinear magneto-optics (Section).

Chirality, Singularities, Geometric Phases,
and Moiré Systems.This category includes discussions
on quantum geometric photonics (Section), optical wave singularities (Section), topological
polaritonics (Section), chirality in moiré systems (Section), and light control in twisted (Section) and anisotropic
(Section) 2D systems.

Metasurfaces and Emerging Materials.Metasurfaces are a natural application
of 2D materials, here discussed in connection with their coupling
to photonic structures (Section) and a new class of active structures (Section). We also present analyses
of several classes of emerging materials: the so-called transdimensional
materials (Section), 2D inorganic compounds known as MXenes (Section), microscopic insights into photoelectronic
responses exemplified by black phosphorus (Section), and plasmons in few-atomic-layer metal
films for optical-field confinement and modulation (Section).

Applications: Integrated Photonics.This emerging
technology can benefit from the participation of 2D
materials, as discussed inSection. In particular, 2D materials can serve as interconnects
(Section) and exhibit
unique electro-optical capabilities (Section).

Applications: Light Emission and Detection.Light emission
from 2D materials is discussed for single-photon
generation (Section), tunneling devices (Section), and far-infrared sources (Section), whereas light detection is analyzed in
the UV (Section) and the infrared (IR) (Section) spectral ranges.

Applications: Disruptive Directions.Potential applications
in quantum information processing are discussed
inSection, and
2D magnetic photonics is the subject ofSection.

A concludingSectionfurther discusses future trends in the field. This
wide selection
of topics aims to provide an overview of the current state of the
art and emerging opportunities to guide research in nanophotonics
with 2D materials. However, the list is not exhaustive, as this is
a rapidly evolving field in which new directions and developments
are constantly emerging.

This block describes
the fundamentals of polaritons in 2D materials,
which are understood here in a broad sense of material excitation
modes that hybridize with light. This definition is in the spirit
of Hopfield’s pioneering work, although the photonic component of 2D polaritons decreases with
increasing in-plane wave vector, moving away from the light cone.
In this sense, 2D polaritons permeate many other aspects of nanophotonics
with 2D materials.

2.1. Local Description of 2D Polaritons. Polaritons
are self-sustained charge oscillations mediated by electromagnetic
interactions in different materials. While
nonlocality plays a substantial role in 2D plasmons when their wavelength
is comparable to the Fermi wavelength (e.g., in extrinsically decorated or laterally patterned graphene, down to the molecular level), the optical response of atomically thin 2D materials can be generally
described through frequency-dependent surface conductivities σ­(ω),
ignoring nonlocal and out-of-plane polarization effects. In these materials, polaritons emerge under
the condition Im­{σ­(ω)} > 0 as optical surface modes
of
p (TM) polarization, revealed through the poles of the corresponding
Fresnel reflection coefficient outside the light cone and characterized by the dispersion relationk∥=iωϵ̅/2πσ(ω), wherek∥is the in-plane wave vector andϵ̅the
average environment permittivity ­(Figurea). This description, derived
in the electrostatic limit (c→ ∞),
remains valid for material films with small thicknessdcompared to the in-plane polariton wavelength λpolariton= 2π/Re­{k∥}. Because the
light wave vector vanishes in the electrostatic limit, the out-of-plane
wave vectork⊥must satisfyk⊥+k∥= 0 (i.e.,k⊥= ±ik∥), therefore confining
the mode to a region of vertical extension (1/2π)­λpolariton(Figurea) around the material (for 1/edecay of
the field intensity). This result is universal and applies regardless
of material composition and environmental permittivities.

Overview of 2D polaritons. (a) Universal scaling of the out-of-plane
confinement length (1/2π)­λpolaritonin the
local electrostatic limit for polaritons in planar films of small
thicknessdcompared with their wavelength λpolariton, sandwiched by media of arbitrary permittivities
ϵ1and ϵ2. (b) General parametrization
of the frequency-dependent surface conductivity σ­(ω) in
terms of a Drude weightωD, an intrinsic resonance frequencyωg, and a phenomenological lifetime τ.
The polariton-to-photon wavelength ratio, expressed in terms of the
fine-structure constant α ≈ 1/137 and the average environmental
permittivityϵ̅= (ϵ1+ ϵ2)/2, is much smaller than 1 for actual material
parameters. (c) Range of optical parameters in common types of 2D
polaritonic materials. We haveωg= 0 for plasmons, whileωDscales like the product of the Fermi
velocityvFand the Fermi
wave vectorkFin conducting
materials. For phonons/excitons,ωDis expressed as a fractionfph/fexofωg.
(d) Experimental techniques available to synthesize 2D polaritonic
materials based on geometry/composition and the application of external
actions such as doping, electromagnetic fields, or heating. (e,f)
Selection of challenges and opportunities associated with 2D polaritonics,
as discussed in more detail in the main text.

A
Lorentzian fit to the surface conductivity (Figureb) provides a generic way of describing 2D
polaritons and, when plugged into the dispersion relation above, leads
to the conclusion that the polariton wavelength is much smaller than
the photon wavelength at the same frequency (Figureb), thus justifying the assumption of the
electrostatic limit. The conductivity incorporates a Drude weightωD, an intrinsic resonanceωgfor phonons and excitons,
and a phenomenological lifetime τ, whose values depend on the
type of polariton and material, as indicated inFigurec. From a photonics viewpoint, the nature
of the induced charge associated with polaritons (delocalized electrons
in plasmons, atomic vibrations in phonons, bound electron−hole
pairs in excitons) is fully encapsulated in these parameters. This
approach can be equally applied to in-plane anisotropic materials, where σ­(ω) becomes a 2 × 2
tensor.

The polariton frequencies in laterally patterned structures
satisfy
the expression ω =iσ(ω)/ηϵ̅D, whereDis a characteristic distance of the structure (e.g., a
ribbon width or a disk diameter), whereas η is an electrostatic
eigenvalue that depends on 2D morphology but not on size and composition
(e.g., η ≈ −0.073 for the fundamental dipole of
a circular disk or η ≈ −0.069 for the transverse
dipole of a ribbon, see ref ).

When stacking 2D layers forming a heterostructure
of small total
thickness compared with the polariton wavelength, the mode dispersion
is also given by the expressions above using a single conductivity
that captures all layers. In particular, heterostructures made of
vdW materials undergo a minor overlap of their electronic wave functions,
and consequently, the conductivities of the individual layersσj(ω) remain nearly
unperturbed from their pristine values, so we can write the conductivity
of the heterostructure simply as a sum over layers σ­(ω)
= ∑jσj(ω). This zero-thickness approximation
(ZTA) works extremely well to explain the dispersion of hybrid modes
involving different types of polaritons (e.g., hBN phonons and graphene
plasmons). However, it should be noted
that the ZTA fails to describe moiré structures with substantial
electronic hybridization (seeSectionsand ) and it becomes inaccurate
when the film thickness is no longer small compared with the polariton
wavelength (e.g., in thicker hyperbolic materials,Sections, , and ).

This panorama experienced a radical change two decades ago
with the isolation of single-layer graphene via mechanical exfoliation. Currently, exfoliation and stacking are widely adopted as powerful nanofabrication
techniques on par with lithography, generating an impressive number
of unprecedented 2D material structures based on vdW single- or few-atomic
layers. This approach does not require UHV and benefits from vdW attraction
between layers that push polluting molecules to the edges of the exfoliated
islands, thus automatically cleaning the interstitial region between
the layers. Combined with self-assembly
and nanopatterning, these methods configure a comprehensive suite
of tools to fabricate previously inaccessible 2D materials of varied
geometry and composition (Figured).

The small thickness of 2D materials makes
them extremely sensitive
to external actions, such as chemical and electrical doping. In particular,
long-lived graphene plasmons can be switched on/off and strongly modulated
by gating the material, decorating it
with donor molecules, or exposing it
to magnetic fields. Likewise, electrical
gating or heating can modulate the exciton line shapes of TMDs beyond
their pristine line widths. Mechanical
stretching and heating (e.g., via optical pumping, seeSection) also affect the polariton characteristics
dramatically. These properties of 2D materials provide great flexibility
for engineering structures with designated polaritonic properties
(i.e., on-demand parametersωD,ωg, and
τ for σ­(ω), seeFigureb).

2.3. Challenges and Opportunities.Figuree summarizes several appealing
opportunities associated with 2D polaritonics. Besides the structural
robustness inherited from the use of vdW layers and the flexibility
in polaritonic design, 2D polaritons cover spectral ranges extending
from the mid-IR (e.g., hBN phonons and graphene plasmons) to the visible
(e.g., TMD excitons and noble metal plasmons), they feature long lifetimes
(e.g., vdW material phonons, graphene plasmons, and TMD excitons),
they display deep-subwavelength confinement (Figureb), and they are susceptible to external
stimuli (Figured).

Photon-Free Integrated Polaritonics (PFIP). Electrical generation and detection of polaritons are on the agenda
to produce optical sensing and signal processing devices with small
footprints and no external light sources or detectors needed. Given
the fact that 2D polaritons are strongly confined and well described
in the electrostatic limit, photons are only involved in a perturbative
manner in this approach. The generation and detection of polaritons
with spectral sensitivity define an appealing challenge in PFIP.

Polaritonic Sensing. As
a byproduct
of PFIP, polaritonic sensing could rely on the electrical emission
and detection of polaritons to reveal the presence of analytes dispersed
on a 2D material region on which they propagate. The dream of all-electronic
polaritonic sensing is still on the agenda of nanophotonics with 2D
materials.

Polaritonic Laser. Long-lived polaritons
and the strong Purcell factors observed near polariton-supporting
2D materials constitute a good basis for materializing a nanoscale
polaritonic laser analogous to the spaser. A bottleneck in this research frontier is the design of quantum
emitters that can undergo population inversion in the mid-IR spectral
range where phonon polaritons and graphene plasmons emerge.

Nonlinear Nanophotonics. The relatively
large nonlinear response of 2D materials and the strong confinement
of 2D polaritons provide an excellent platform for realizing all-optical
devices, as discussed inSections, , and .

Single-Photon Emitters. Quantum light
generation from localized sources is emerging as a solid research
direction (seeSection). The production of identical photons and polaritons remains
a challenge that would enable the realization of quantum interference
within integrated nanoscale environments (i.e., a nanoscale version
of plasmonic Hong−Ou−Mandel interference).

Integrated
Quantum Optics/Sensing.
The realization of quantum-optics devices in an integrated solid-state
platform also remains a challenge that
demands the development and controlled placement of quantum emitters
enhanced by the extraordinarily large Purcell factors associated with
ultraconfined 2D polaritons.

Small-Footprint Photodetectors. Several
designs have been proposed for IR photodetection using 2D materials
and featuring relatively small footprints, particularly in the mid-IR (seeSectionsand ). Further
developments in this area could explore atomic-scale structures in
combination with optical funnels.

These items define an exciting research agenda with
high potential
for technological impact, stimulating the exploration of intriguing
material properties and the discovery of novel phenomena associated
with the two-dimensionality of these systems (seeSectionsand ).

3.1. Introduction.Hyperbolic materials are a special
class of anisotropic media characterized by a dielectric permittivity
tensor that has both positive and negative principal components within
the same frequency range. Their discovery and exploration have been
a significant breakthrough in nanophotonics for their ability to host
hyperbolic polaritons, deep subwavelength electromagnetic waves with
asymptotically large wave vectors, and exhibiting directional dependence.
These features of hyperbolic polaritons can be readily visualized
by comparing the isofrequency surfaces of an isotropic dielectric
with those calculated for a hyperbolic material.Figurea shows the spherical isofrequency
surface of an isotropic material, indicating that light can propagate
with a finite wavelength in all directions. In contrast, as shown
inFigureb, the isofrequency
surface of a hyperbolic material takes on a more complex, open shape,
allowing light to propagate with asymptotically small wavelengths
in ways that would not be possible in conventional materials.

Illustration of isofrequency contours and the hyperbolic
on-chip
nanophotonic platform. (a) Isofrequency surface of a dielectric isotropic
medium. (b) Isofrequency surface of a Type I hyperbolic material that
is characterized byϵxx=ϵyy>
0 andϵz< 0.
Notably, for any pair of coordinates (kx,ky),
it is always possible to find a point on the normal surface. (c) On-chip
nanophotonic-platform generation: A high-bias current is driven through
a graphene channel encapsulated with hBN, producing hyperbolic phonon
polaritons (HPhPs) through electroluminescence. The schematic represents
the cross section of a configuration in which HPhPs bypass the source
contact and propagate for further processing. (d) On-chip nanophotonic-platform
manipulation: A tunable polaritonic or topological crystal for molecule
detection. The schematic illustrates the cross section of an hBN/graphene/hBN
polaritonic lattice (hyperlattice) in which the polaritonic density
of states can be electrically tuned by adjusting the gate voltage.
This concept could enable molecular selectivity based on their interaction
with the crystal lattice. (e) On-chip nanophotonic-platform detection:
A graphene-based photothermoelectric detector. The schematic illustrates
the processed HPhPs incoming from one side of the device being absorbed
at the graphene PN junction defined by a split-gate structure. This
absorption generates a photothermoelectric response, converting the
polaritonic signal into an electrical output.

Pivotal to this field are 2D polar dielectric materials, which are
ideal for studying hyperbolic phenomena because of their layered crystalline
structure and natural anisotropy. The layered crystalline structure,
characterized by strong in-plane covalent bonds and weaker interlayer
vdW forces, causes the material’s optical phonons to have different
energies in different directions, resulting in an anisotropy of the
permittivity tensor. When a polar hyperbolic material is thinned into
slabs, the propagation of light is guided, and the propagating modes
are referred to as hyperbolic phonon polaritons (HPhPs). This behavior
has catalyzed research into vdW materials, particularly thin flakes
of hBN and α-phase molybdenum trioxide
(α-MoO3), which stand
out as the leading choice for advancing hyperbolic nanophotonics.

Earlier studies have demonstrated the potential of controlling
the hyperbolic phonon polariton wavelength with atomic layer precision,
as well as the possibility of designing a large variety of heterostructures
where variations in thickness, composition, stacking order, and twist
angle can drastically alter the properties of the polaritons. For
instance, control of the hyperbolic phonon polariton’s group
velocity and wavelength can be obtained when the hyperbolic material
is placed in contact with any kind of substrate. This proximity effect becomes even more pronounced in heterostructures
composed of various hyperbolic materials, leading to remarkable optical
phenomena such as polaritonic canalization, isofrequency surface topological transitions, and negative reflection. Furthermore,
active control of HPhPs has been demonstrated by coupling hyperbolic
media with active materials such as graphene, enabling electric tunability of the hyperbolic plasmon phonon polariton
wavelength.

3.2. Hyperbolic Nanophotonics.Recent research on
photonic crystals,,cavities,−and other optical
components created through the direct
patterning of hyperbolic materials has expanded beyond translationally
invariant systems. Structuring hyperbolic media into customized photonic
devices provides a direct method for obtaining specific optical properties.
For instance, engineering photonic bandgaps and resonances allows
for precise spectral filtering and facilitates strong coupling in
light−matter interactions.

The drawback of this approach
is the extreme sensitivity of hyperbolic phonon polaritons to imperfections,
which, due to the limitations of current fabrication technologies,
constrains the quality of nanophotonic devices. For this reason, further
advancements have been made using an alternative and more effective
approach to spatially modulating HPhPs properties, which involves
patterning the substrate beneath or above the hyperbolic material
rather than the material itself. In recent years, a substantial number
of studies have explored indirectly patterned devices to investigate
the reflection and refraction properties of both active and passive−nanoscaled lenses and interfaces.
Tunable plasmonic lattices have been developed that can be seamlessly coupled to hBN HPhPs, effectively
creating tunable hyperbolic photonic crystals. Significant progress
has also been made with gold-based indirectly patterned lattices and nanoresonators, with which, owing to the use of focused-ion-beam lithography, record-breaking
quality factors have been achieved while maintaining tight volume
confinement. Moreover, on the same platform, topologically nontrivial
one-dimensional (1D) HPhPs lattices have been demonstrated, marking the first realization of a topological
nanophotonic system in hyperbolic media. The latter finding suggests
a potential extension of these concepts to 2D systems, enabling the
exploration of photonic Chern insulators and photonic valley Hall
systems. This would allow guided modes to propagate in topologically
protected edge states, thereby extending the robustness against disorder.
These advances could enable the development of miniaturized photonic
isolators, diodes, and logic circuits and may lead to entirely new
concepts for communication systems, optical transistors, and optical
information processing.

3.3.1. Active Hyperbolic Devices for Detection and Emission. By leveraging the unique capabilities of hyperbolic vdW heterostructures,
we can now envision an active platform where hyperbolic phonon polaritons
are electronically generated, actively or passively manipulated, and
detected. As illustrated inFigure, this concept integrates the three key elements of
generation, manipulation, and detection.

Inspired by the work
of Guo et al., which demonstrated that
HPhPs can be electrically generated by driving a high-bias current
through a simple hBN-encapsulated graphene channel (Figurec), this platform could move
beyond outcoupling polaritons to the far field. Instead, the generated
HPhPs can be guided from the emission site to a manipulation area
using directly patterned hBN waveguides, photonic crystal waveguides,
or even topologically protected channels. In the manipulation stage,
HPhPs could interact with other polaritons via nanoscale interferometers,
while being focused and redirected using nanophotonic lenses and interfaces
or filtered through photonic crystals. These elements, whether passive
or active, could also enable applications, such as molecular sensing
and strong light−matter interactions, exploiting the strong
electromagnetic field of polaritons (seeFigured). Finally, at the detection stage, as shown
inFiguree, HPhPs
can be converted into electronic signals through the photothermoelectric
effect, enabling the retrieval of the
processed information. This seamless integration of generation, manipulation,
and detection could offer a pathway to functional nanophotonic circuits
for a variety of advanced optical and sensing applications, eliminating
the need for external sources or signal detection units and enabling
full on-chip integration.

3.3.2. Strong Coupling with Hyperbolic Polaritons in Nanophotonics. Another promising feature of ultrastrong optical field compression
is the strong enhancement of light−matter interactions, leading
to strong-to-ultrastrong coupling and extreme Purcell factors. Moreover, it has been shown that strongly confined
polaritons carry extreme field gradients with wavelengths that reach
spatial variations in the electronic wave functions. This leads to
novel phenomena that break the limits of the dipole approximation,or even fundamental topological invariances.

These enhanced coupled systems exhibit single molecule
detection,,improved photovoltaic response, and extreme phenomena in the strong and ultrastrong coupling regimes. Examples include the modification of the quantum
Hall effect in split ring resonators coupled to a 2D electron gas and the macroscopic modification of ferromagnetism
in YBCO nanoparticles coupled to a plasmonic substrate. The strong-coupling regime has also been realized
by using hyperbolic polaritons coupled to vibrational modes of molecular
layers, demonstrating that even the bare
presence of the unpatterned hyperbolic material could achieve the
few molecules strong coupling. Hyperbolic
phonon polaritons have also demonstrated strong coupling with magnetic
excitation in graphene, where magneto-excitons
were tuned to be resonant with the polaritons, causing the opening
of a gap in the dispersion. This experiment revealed contributions
to the dispersion arising from Landau transitions that are forbidden
by dipole selection rules, showing that the high momentum carried
by hyperbolic polaritons led to the breakdown of the dipole approximation.

Theoretical studies of such systems have demonstrated that subwavelength polaritons require a multimodal
nonlocal treatment of the Hamiltonian to explain the behavior of the
coupled system, revealing unprecedented regimes of superstrong coupling,
where each magneto-exciton is strongly coupled to many hyperbolic
modes. These studies pave the way for describing many-body systems
coupled to confined hyperbolic polaritons, where strongly correlated
electron−photon physics emerges due to intense and rapidly
varying electromagnetic fields interacting with wave functions that
exhibit comparable spatial gradients. This coupling can lead to macroscopic
changes in the electron liquid, such as Fermi velocity renormalization, or induce exotic states like cavity-mediated
fractional magnetic phases and cavity-induced
superconductivity through modified electron−electron interactions.

Plasmonics
is a branch of optoelectronics that revolves around
the excitation and manipulation of collective modes, known asplasmons, which arise from the interaction between electromagnetic
fields and free electrons, typically at metallic or conductive interfaces.
At the beginning of the 21st century, plasmons were seriously considered
as potential candidates for revolutionizing technology, promising
a new generation of superfast computer chips and ultrasensitive molecular
detectors.

But what is a plasmon?
At a fundamental level, a plasmon is a pole
of the density−density response function χG,G′(q,ω), which is a causal (i.e., retarded) linear response function.
Such a singularity, physically denoting a self-sustained oscillation
of the electron density, emerges for certain values of the momentum
ℏqand energyℏωtransfer. The position of the pole in theqand ω
plane,ℏωp(q), is called the plasmon dispersion. In a crystal,
the density−density response function also depends on two reciprocal
lattice vectors,GandG′. This matrix form in reciprocal lattice
space is crucial to capture crystalline local field effects (LFEs).

In general, the causal density−density response function
can be written in terms of a more fundamental building block, which
is dubbed theproper density−density
response function. The name stems from the fact that this
daunting object is the sum of all the proper Feynman diagrams, from zero order up toarbitraryorder in the strength of the electron−electron (e−e) interaction. Finding a reasonably good
approximation that describes the poles of χG,G′(q,ω) is therefore extremely challenging.
Almost 99% of papers in the literature focus on a specific limit,
the so-calledlocal limit, in which one setsG=G′=0(thereby
ignoring LFEs) and takes the long-wavelengthq→
0 limit. In this limit, the plasmon dispersion can be found analytically
within the Random Phase Approximation (RPA), which turns out to be totally equivalent to a standard approach
followed by the community of plasmonic scientists. In this plasmonic
approach, one combines Maxwell equations with a constitutive equation
that links the current to the electric field through the aid of the
local (frequency-dependent) conductivity σ­(ω). In crystals,
one needs to consider the classical intraband Drude contribution to
σ­(ω) as well as the quantum-mechanical interband contribution.
Plasmons obtained in this local limit are therefore completely described
by σ­(ω) (seeSection). One finds that, in the long-wavelength limit,ωp(q) tends
to the well-known plasma frequency in 3D electron systems while it
behaves asq=|q|in 2D electron systems. While these results remain foundational to plasmonics,
modern experimental techniques such as scattering-type scanning near-field
optical microscopy (s-SNOM) have made
it possible to explore regimes whereq/kFis on the order of unity, withkFbeing the Fermi wavenumber of the electron system. The reach
of this deeply nonlocal regime calls for theoretical approaches that
greatly transcend the RPA/local approximation, which is valid only
forq/kF≪ 1.
s-SNOM, indeed, enables the coupling of far-field light with short-wavelength
collective modes through a nanometric metallized tip. The fast development
of this great experimental investigation tool was facilitated by the
advent of atomically thin 2D materials.

In recent years, in
fact, 2D materials, particularly graphene, have emerged as promising platforms for plasmonic
applications due to their unique electronic and optical properties.
Graphene, a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb lattice,
exhibits exceptional electrical conductivity, tunable carrier density,
and strong light−matter interactions. Unlike traditional plasmonic
materials such as metals, graphene supports long-lived and highly
confined plasmons that can be tuned via electrostatic gating or optical
pumping. Beyond graphene, other 2D materials,
such as TMDs, have also been extensively studied. Their unique semiconducting
and excitonic properties make them key materials for the development
of innovative electronic and optoelectronic devices.

Research
on graphene and related 2D crystals has been, and continues
to be, a prominent area of study in condensed matter physics and materials
science. Shortly after the isolation of 2D materials in monolayer
form, it was realized that their 2D nature enables them to be reassembled
into custom heterostructures, known as vdW heterostructures, with
precisely tailored layer sequences. This
new fabrication technique has unveiled virtually limitless possibilities
for engineering novel layered materials by stacking 2D materials such
as graphene, TMDs, and many others.

A particularly exciting
development is the advent oftwisted2D materials,
where two or more layers are stacked with a slight
rotational misalignment. These structures exhibit highly tunable electronic
and optical properties due to the moiré superlattice stemming
from the relative twist between monolayers. Remarkably, twisted bilayers have demonstrated to be excellent platforms
to explore a plethora of exotic phenomena. In twisted bilayer graphene
(TBG) superconductivity. correlated insulating
states, strange metal behavior, and topological phases have been observed at a specific twist angle referred to as themagic angle. In this regime,
electronic bands near the charge neutrality point become extremely
flat, enhancing electronic correlations. Similar studies in twisted
bilayer semiconductors, like TMDs, have been equally successful. These systems host moiré excitonic bands,
unconventional superconductivity (e.g., in twisted bilayer WSe2) and fractional Chern insulating
states (e.g., in twisted bilayer MoTe2).

These breakthrough discoveries in the context of
electronic properties
are expected to have a counterpart in the realm of plasmonics. Plasmons,
being highly sensitive to the band structure of their host 2D materials,
are powerful tools for investigating electronic properties, even within
the local approximation. Beyond the local approximation and at low
densities, however, plasmons are extremely sensitive to profound many-body
effects. A simple yet illustrative example is given by systems with
Rashba spin−orbit coupling (SOC) where Galilean invariance
is broken. In this case, plasmons calculated beyond the RPA are a
sensitive tool for measuring effects ofe−einteractions on the carriers’ effective mass and
SOC strength.

Looking ahead, the
exciting landscape of exotic phases in twisted
2D materials highlights the need for new experimental techniques and
more reliable, deeply nonlocal theories of collective excitations.

4.1. Current State of the Art.The plasmonic properties
of 2D electron systems have been studied since the 1980s. These are
known to exhibit a center-of-mass (COM) plasmon, which, in the local
limit, disperses asq. In twisted 2D materials, the
moiré superlattice significantly alters the plasmonic spectrum
with respect to that of a simple, single-band 2D electron system,
endowing plasmons with exotic properties such low losses, chirality,
and topology.

The moiré superlattice reshapes the plasmonic
bands even at the single-particle level. This transformation introduces a series of higher-energy, quasi-flatinterbandplasmons accompanying the standard COM plasmon.
These modes were first theoretically predicted in TBG and subsequently detected experimentally. In twisted 2D materials tuned to the magic angle, also
the highly dispersive COM plasmon morphs into a dispersionless, undamped
mode. This phenomenon, originally predicted in TBG, has also been discovered in other twisted systems such
as twisted MoS2and twisted double bilayer graphene.

An intriguing feature of twisted bilayers
is the fact that they
also harboracousticplasmons, absent in their monolayer
counterparts. Sharp collective modes
with an acoustic dispersion arise in multilayer structures, with their
dispersion providing insights on the interlayer coupling strength
and posing severe bounds on the underlying many-body theory. The electromagnetic
field associated with acoustic plasmons is highly confined within
the layered structure, offering potential applications in strong and
ultrastrong light−matter interactions.

Additionally, the structural chirality of twisted
2D materials
further enriches their plasmonic behavior. The chiral nature of the
underlying atomically thin crystals imparts
a longitudinal magnetic moment to the COM plasmon, endowing it with
a unique chiral character. These chiral
plasmon modes not only propagate with inherent chiral content but
also enhance the chirality of the near field, as demonstrated in TBG.
Also, the chiral nature of twisted 2D materials offers exciting opportunities
for developing novel photonic devices, as these materials could pave
the way for the fabrication of chiral sensors.

Lastly, it is worth recalling that in the realm of
plasmonics also
the concepts of Berry phase and Berry curvature have played an important
role. These intrinsic features underlie a variety of phenomena, including
electric polarization, anomalous Hall effects, and quantum Hall states.
For plasmons, a new class of modes, driven by the interplay between
Berry curvature ande−einteractions,
has been predicted in 2D metallic systems. These chiral plasmonic
modes exhibit nonreciprocal energy dispersions at zero magnetic field
and offer advanced tools for diagnosing topological band structures.

4.2. Challenges and Future Goals.The field of twisted
2D materials has grown rapidly in recent years, presenting new challenges
to the scientific community and leaving many open questions.

Although not directly related to photonics, one of the most compelling
challenges is the microscopic explanation of unconventional superconductivity
in twisted 2D materials. Despite numerous theoretical proposals, the
nature of the superconducting phase in these systems remains elusive.
A related but distinct challenge involves understanding the ground
state of broken-symmetry phases in twisted 2D materials, which emerge
from stronge−einteractions
in the flat-band regime. Addressing
these issues will require the development of novel probing techniques
and theoretical approaches.

Furthermore, the nontrivial topology
in momentum and real space
in twisted 2D materials, particularly quantum geometry, represents
a rapidly expanding area of research. While the study of how quantum
geometric properties influence macroscopic observables and quantum
phases is still in its early stages, advancing our understanding of
topology and its effects on collective phenomena remains a major goal
for the future.

Looking ahead, a thorough investigation of collective
modes in
correlated phases of mattersuch as unconventional superconductors,
correlated insulators, strange metal phases, and topological phasesis
expected to shed light on these fascinating phenomena. Twisted 2D
materials have proven to be an ideal platform for such exploration,
offering a versatile nanoscale laboratory where these phases can coexist.Figuresummarizes the list
of future challenges alongside their corresponding most promising
twisted 2D materials, where we anticipate the most favorable outcomes
in plasmonics.

Manifesto of plasmonics in twisted 2D
materials. We list future
challenges and potential outcomes of plasmonics applied to twisted
2D materials.

4.3. Suggested Directions to Meet Goals.The ability
to engineer plasmonic resonances in twisted systems opens new opportunities
for manipulating light−matter interactions and exploring exotic
quantum phenomena. Theoretical and experimental studies on the plasmonic
properties and, more broadly, the collective modes of twisted 2D materials
and their correlated phases are highly relevant for both fundamental
and applied research, advancing our understanding of exotic quantum
phases in these materials.

Experimental efforts are needed to
investigate highly nonlocal excitations. To achieve this, the implementation
of new exotic photonic couplers will be essential. For instance, advancements
in tip engineering for s-SNOM devices are expected to play a crucial
role. Innovative tip designs with specific symmetries could be vital
for detecting chiral plasmonic modes and launching multipolar excitations.
The latter are particularly important for detecting exotic magnetoroton
excitations (akin to gravitons), which lack an electrical dipole moment.

From a theoretical perspective, studying
the effects of nonlocality
on the optical properties of these systems could provide valuable
insights into many-body interactions and
topological phenomena. For example,
analyzing the fully nonlocal density−density response function
of a crystal, including crystalline LFEs, has proven useful in identifying
correlated phases in twisted TMDs through their plasmonic spectra. Furthermore, plasmons and other collective
modes, such as magnetorotons, can deepen our understanding of exotic
topological phases like fractional Chern insulators, which have been
recently observed in twisted MoTe2. While the exact ground state of these phases remains uncertain,
their stabilization appears to be linked to real-space orbital Skyrme
textures arising from the moiré superlattice in twisted TMDs. Notably, plasmons in twisted MoTe2have been proposed as proxies for the real-space topology induced
by these Skyrme textures.

Although
these findings are promising, the presence of flat bands
and stronge−einteractions
characteristic of these systems necessitates nonperturbative approaches
for studying their collective modes. A comprehensive description of
these modes, including nonlocal effects, will likely require a combination
of advanced analytical many-body techniques and numerical methods
(such as exact diagonalization and quantum Monte Carlo).

The
study of plasmons in twisted 2D materials bridges fundamental
physics and applied sciences, offering insights into quantum phenomena
and opportunities for technological innovation. By addressing current
challenges and exploring these suggested directions, we may be able
to unlock the full potential of these materials, paving the way for
breakthroughs in quantum materials science.

The authors thank
D. Basov, P. Jarillo-Herrero, F. Koppens, and
I. Torre for many useful discussions.

5.1. Current State of the Art.The interaction between
electromagnetic radiation and charged particles is a central and recurring
problem in condensed-matter physics and nanophotonics. Notably, this
interaction can be significantly enhanced by exploiting polaritons,
formed through the hybridization of photons with collective oscillations
of polarization charges in materials (e.g., plasmons, optical phonons, excitons). Polaritons enable the
confinement of electromagnetic fields below the diffraction limit,
leading to enhanced light−matter interactions. Over the past few decades, this property has
been exploited for various purposes, including the realization of
subwavelength nanophotonic circuitry and the control of emitter dynamics.
More recently, the advent of 2D materialssuch as graphene,
hBN, and TMDsand related vdW heterostructures,(vdWH) has significantly expanded the range of possibilities for
polariton-empowered phenomena. This expansion has been primarily driven
by the strong light−matter interactions enabled by polaritons
in atomically thin materials, which
span the electromagnetic spectrum from the THz to the UV range. While polaritons in 2D materials have been
studied in settings similar to those previously explored with conventional
3D materialsoften demonstrating superior performancethe
strong light−matter interactions promoted by 2D materials offer
new opportunities for probing the complex, multifaceted nanoscale
response of material nanostructures in unprecedented ways (Figurea). This enticing
potential is the focus of this section.

Harnessing ultraconfined
graphene plasmons to probe collective
excitations and strongly correlated phenomena in condensed-matter
systems. (a) Schematic of a 2D material (here represented by graphene)
in the vicinity of a probing material, separated by a thin insulating
slab. The field provided by the 2D polaritons can couple to quasiparticles
in the nearby medium, thereby probing the response and collective
excitations of the material. (b) Illustration of the out-of-plane
component of the electric field associated with acoustic graphene
plasmons (AGPs) in a graphene−dielectric−metal (GDM)
configuration. (c) Collective modes, emerging as features in Imrp, of a 2DSC−G−2DSC heterostructure.
The 2D superconductor (2DSC) is FeSe, with a superconducting gap of
23 meV at zero temperature and supporting a Bardasis−Schrieffer
mode at 18.2 meV. See ref  for details. (d) Dispersion relation of AGPs in a GDM configuration.
The metallic quantum surface response (encoded through the Feibelmand⊥-parameter; see inset) leads to sizable
spectral shifts, underscoring the potential of AGPs to infer quantum
nonlocal effects in nanoplasmonics. Adapted with permission from ref  (Copyright 2021 Springer
Nature). (e) Dispersion relation exhibiting the hybridization between
graphene plasmons and the magnon mode of monolayer CrI3in a heterostructure composed of three single layers: graphene−hBN−CrI3. Adapted with permission from ref  (Copyright 2023 American Chemical Society).

5.1.1. Quantum Nonlocal Effects in Graphene.Over
the past decade, plasmons in graphene-based platforms have attracted
significant interest due to the remarkable properties of graphene
plasmons (GPs), including strong field confinement, relatively low
losses (especially when encapsulated in hBN),,and
electrical tunability.,Among the various configurations
where GPs have been exploited, the realization of plasmons in graphene−dielectric−metal
(GDM) heterostructures (Figureb), where screening from the nearby metal reshapes the GPs
dispersion, endowing these plasmons with extremely large wave vectors
at small graphene−metal separations,,−has revealed a new paradigm in graphene plasmonics. Such plasmons
are dubbed acoustic graphene plasmons (AGPs), due to their nearly
linear dispersion relation, and are capable of achieving in-plane
wave vectorsqapproaching the Fermi wave vectorkF, while the plasmon group velocity is slowed
down toward the Fermi velocity. This has dramatic consequences, enabling
AGPs to effectively probe both the frequency and momentum dependence
(i.e., nonlocality) of graphene’s conductivity. Using a scattering-type
scanning near-field optical microscope (s-SNOM), Lundeberg et al. have experimentally mapped the nonlocal optical
conductivity of graphene through measurements of the AGPs’
dispersion in GDM structures, revealing nonlocal and many-body effects
beyond the random-phase approximation, including Fermi-velocity renormalization
and compressibility corrections due to electron−electron interactions.

5.1.2. Probing Collective Modes in Superconductors.Beyond plasmon polaritons, the interaction between electromagnetic
radiation and (quasi)­particles in strongly correlated matter gives
rise to a wide range of collective phenomena, including collective excitations in superconductors,−and in magnetic systems.−Such excitations often correspond to otherwise dark modes, meaning
they do not typically couple to far-field electromagnetic radiation.
In this context too, the highly confined graphene plasmons excited
in a nearby graphene sheet play a crucial role in probing these collective
modes. Additionally, the optical response of a superconductor is inherently
nonlocal due to the finite size of the
Cooper pairs. Superconductors support a plethora of collective modes, ranging from collective excitations of the
order parameter amplitude (phase)i.e., the Higgs (Nambu−Goldstone)
modeto the Bardasis−Schrieffer mode, arising from fluctuations
of the subdominant order parameter in an s-wave superconductor. Taking
the Higgs mode as a concrete example, within linear-response theory,
its coupling to electromagnetic radiation vanishes in the local limit
(q→ 0), as it is proportional to the magnitude
of the in-plane wave vector. For this reason, the Higgs amplitude
mode has primarily been studied using intense THz fields in the nonlinear
regime.,However, it has been theoretically proposed
that the large wave vectors associated with screened plasmons in a
graphene−dielectric−superconductor configuration enable
their coupling to the Higgs mode, and
that such an interaction can be detected using standard near-field
optical microscopy techniques (e.g., s-SNOM).

The coupling is
enhanced for 2D superconductors (2DSCs), in the sense that it leads
to larger Rabi-like mode splittings. Furthermore, combining graphene
with 2DSCs allows for a variety of configurations, involving one or
more graphene and 2DSC layers separated by thin insulating materials.
These more complex structures can further enhance the coupling between
graphene plasmons and collective modes in 2DSCs.Figurec shows the imaginary part
of the p-polarized reflection coefficient for a graphene sheet sandwiched
between two 2DSCs (FeSe, with a superconducting gap of 2Δ =
26 meV), calculated atℏω≃ 18
meV (approximately the energy of the Bardasis−Schrieffer mode).
The figure shows three peaks: the first two correspond to one of the
two branches of the Cooper-pair plasmon and to the graphene plasmon,
respectively, while the third peak at large wave vectors (q≈ 100 μm−1) is due to the
2DSCs’ Bardasis−Schrieffer mode.

5.1.3. Interrogating the Quantum Surface Response of Metals. Nonlocal effects in conventional plasmonics are inherently difficult
to probe because the Fermi wave vector of 3D metals is typically much
larger than the one of surface plasmons. With this backdrop, ultraconfined
graphene plasmons, and AGPs in particular, constitute a viable route
to circumvent this obstacle, due to the large wave vectors attained
by AGPs in GDM stacks.,,,Figured illustrates this point, where the quantum
surface response of a nearby metalencoded by the Feibelmand⊥-parameter,,characterizing the centroid of the induced densitycan be
inferred from the its influence on the dispersion relation of AGPs. Strikingly, the characteristic electronic length
scale, on the order of Å, can be clearly discerned through substantial
spectral shifts. For a given wave vector,
Red⊥> 0 (Red⊥< 0) leads to a redshift (blueshift) of the
AGP frequency, while the Imd⊥contributes
to increased losses originating from surface-assisted excitation of
electron−hole pairs in the metal. Incidentally, while the Feibelmand⊥-parameter at optical and near-IR wavelengths
can be probed using metal-based plasmonics (i.e., ω ≲ ωp), AGPs enable the characterization
of the low-frequency, static (ω → 0) metallic quantum
response,d⊥(ω ≃
0). Such knowledge holds significance for incorporating quantum corrections
to the classical electrostatic image theory of particle−surface
interaction as well as to the vdW interaction affecting atoms or molecules near metal surfaces.

5.1.4. Probing Magnetism in Condensed-Matter Systems.An intriguing approach for exciting magnons in magnetic systems
involves their coupling with plasmons (Figuree). A magnon represents the quantum of collective
spin excitation in magnets, which, in classical terms, can be visualized
as spins precessing around their equilibrium direction at a characteristic
frequency, ωmagnon. This coupling mechanism offers
a powerful platform for investigating and manipulating magneto−optical
interactions at the nanoscale, opening up exciting opportunities for
fundamental research. While much of
the progress in this area has been achieved within the framework of
linear optics, recent advances in nonlinear optical phenomena present
a promising new direction for exploration. These developments have
catalyzed the emergence of novel fields such as nonlinear magnonics,
which hold significant potential for transformative applications.

5.1.5. Other Possibilities.The possibilities
outlined in Sections 5.1.1−5.1.4 represent just the tip of
the iceberg, with numerous additional possibilities to probe collective
excitations in matter using different types of 2D polaritons, supported
by the rapidly expanding library of atomically thin materials. Furthermore,
the recent discovery of novel physical phenomena in twisted graphene
bilayers and twisted metasurfaces has fuelled new prospects for light−matter
interactions. These include, for instance, the realization of topological
states, photonic flat bands, and transitions between localized and
delocalized states of light.

5.2. Challenges, Future Goals, and Suggested Directions to
Meet These Goals. While some of the opportunities and theoretical
proposals discussed above require advancements on the experimental
front, others are well within reach using current state-of-the-art
techniques. For instance, guided by the theoretical framework introduced
in ref , the metallic
quantum surface response can be characterized using the same s-SNOM
approach employed in previous nanoimaging studies of GDM structures.,Similarly, collective modes in superconductors could be detected
by measuring their hybridization with acoustic-like graphene plasmons,
for example, through cryogenic SNOM,,(especially when incorporating high-Tcsuperconductors, where the higher critical temperature
reduces cooling requirements). On the theoretical front, advancements
are needed to establish a general and practical framework that accounts
for both nonlocal and nonlinear effects in the electrodynamics of
superconductors.

Another exciting prospect involves exploiting
polaritons in vdW heterostructures that combine graphene with superconducting
magic-angle twisted bilayer grapheneor other moiré
materialsto map the system’s optoelectronic response.
Such studies could provide valuable insights into the physics underlying
the exotic phenomena observed in moiré materials.

Recent advancements in 2D magnetic materials,
characterized by
strong magnetic anisotropy energy (the presence of an easy axis) and
significant spin−orbit coupling, have opened new avenues for
studying magnon−plasmon interactions. These materials exhibit
gapped magnon spectra, which align well with the energy and momentum
scales of graphene plasmons, making them ideal for probing such interactions.
Additionally, many 2D magnetic materials possess hexagonal real-space
lattices with two atoms per unit cell, a symmetry that gives rise
to two magnonic bands, including one at higher frequencies that features
a distinctive gap at the Dirac point. The magnonic gap in these systems
has the potential to host chiral topological magnetic modes, which are particularly intriguing due to their
ability to support robust, dissipation-resistant edge states. Since
these modes emerge at the edge of the Brillouin zone, they are not
susceptible to probing by graphene plasmons. However, we can consider
a scenario where two twisted 2D magnetic layers are present. In this
case, the twist-induced superlattice structure leads to a significantly
reduced Brillouin zone compared to that of a single layer. As a result, the chiral modes could be probed
using the large wave vectors associated with graphene plasmon modes,
opening up new avenues for studying topological excitations in 2D
magnetic materials. Manipulating the twist-angle is also a viable
route to altermagnetism, a new form
of collinear magnetic order where the atomic spins adopt a Néel
arrangement (like in an antiferromagnet), thus having zero total magnetization,
but whose electronic bands are spin polarized (like in a ferromagnet)
over sizable portions of the Brillouin zone. Using the standard Holstein−Primakoff
transformation, the mathematical description of twisted magnetic bilayers
follows a similar approach to that of their Fermionic counterparts,
such as graphene layers. Therefore, it is plausible to describe twisted
magnetic bilayers as tight-binding magnons, along with the corresponding
spin order in each layer.

Graphene plasmons have a magnetic
field that lies parallel to the
plane of the material. As a result, this field is perpendicular to
the magnetic moments of materials with perpendicular magnetization,
such as CrI3, Fe3GeTe2, and other
vdW magnets, enabling the excitation of spin waves. In this context,
polaritons form through Zeeman coupling of the magnetic moment to
the magnetic field of the graphene plasmons. Another mechanism for
plasmon−magnon-polariton formation involves the coupling of
the electric field of 2D plasmons to the lattice degrees of freedom
of the magnetic material. In this scenario, there is an indirect coupling
where the magnon hopping is modulated by the electric field, since
the former depends on the relative distance between atoms. This unexplored
possibility could pave the way for the study of electromagnons in
hybrid graphene−2D-magnetic systems.

6.1. Introduction. Nanophotonicsthe study
of light−matter interaction at length scales smaller than the
wavelength of radiationhas widespread applications ranging
from plasmonic waveguiding and topological
photonic crystals to superlensing. Nanophotonic structures are artificial materials
made up of two or more dielectric constituents. The wave dynamics
governing these structures can be effectively described by the classical
Maxwell equations in continuous media. In contrast, it has been a
long-standing problem for more than 40 years to understand the dynamics
of optical waves within a crystalline material at the lattice level. For the past century, manifestations of the
Schrödinger, Dirac, and Frohlich Hamiltonians have pushed the
frontier in the discovery of numerous electronic and phononic phases
of 2D materials. It is pertinent to ask what role crystal symmetries
play in light−matter interactions and whether a description
shift emerges at the subnanometer regime in crystalline materials.
To address this, we have introduced a Maxwell-Hamiltonian theory of
matter combined with a quantum theory of deep microscopic optical
polarization.

The concept of the Maxwell Hamiltonian was first
introduced by Michael Berry to explain the origin of geometric phases
in helical optical fibers. We note that
the Maxwell-Hamiltonian formulation in free space has also been considered
in the past to comprehend the connection between photons and massless
Fermions in the Dirac equation. However, only recently has the Maxwell
Hamiltonian attracted renewed attention in condensed matter to predict
deep microscopic electrodynamic phases of matter.,The Maxwell-Hamiltonian framework satisfies U(1) gauge symmetry
and SO(3) spin symmetry, hence presenting a unique approach for treating
the interaction of materials and electromagnetic fields.

Two-dimensional
materials have traditionally served as the primary
platform to investigate new topological phases of matter. Even at
its inception, the topological phase was first proposed by Haldane on a graphene monolayer with time-reversal
breaking via next-nearest neighbor hopping. This is an example of
a Chern phaseC∈Zand a nontrivial Thouless−Kohmoto−Nightingale−den
Nijs (TKNN) invariant. The Kane−Mele model, which is based on spin−orbit coupling in graphene,
demonstrates a quantum spin Hall phaseν∈Z2, without breaking time-reversal symmetry.
Both the quantum hall conductivityσxy=Ce2/hand spin hall conductivityσxy=νe/2π are manifested
from the 2D Dirac Hamiltonian and are electrostatic observables at
zero frequency ω = 0 and zero momentumq= 0. Since
electromagnetic fluctuations in matter span over all frequencies ω
≠ 0 and momentaq≠ 0, one must look beyond
these paradigms to characterize the topological photonic phases of
2D materials. In this regard, the Maxwell-Hamiltonian framework provides
a foundation for the discovery of the topological electromagnetic
phases in 2D materials, laying the groundwork for a novel optical
classification of condensed matter (Figure).

Topological phases in 2D materials. (a) A Chern insulator
is related
to charge transport and generates a voltageVHacross the sample. (b) A quantum spin Hall
insulator is connected to spin transport, which results in a currentIsacross the sample. Both Chern
and quantum spin Hall insulators are manifestations of the 2D Dirac
Hamiltonian. (c) In contrast, in certain 2D materials, an effective
photon mass term can enter the Maxwell Hamiltonian arising from viscous
hydrodynamic light−matter interactions. This leads to an optical
topological number:N-invariant which captures the
winding number of the microscopic optical response tensor. Adapted
with permission from ref  (CC BY 4.0. International license).

The photon spin-1 operators satisfy
the angular momentum algebra [Si,Sj] =iϵijkSk. We observe that, analogous to the
Dirac Hamiltonian for spin-1/2 quasiparticles, the Maxwell Hamiltonian
depends on the spin-1 behavior of photons. However, unlike the Dirac
Hamiltonian, the time reversal operatorTin the Maxwell-Hamiltonian formalism satisfies
the relationT2=+I3, reflecting the bosonic nature of photons.

6.2.1. Effective Photon Mass in 2D Gyrotropic Materials. In 2D gyrotropic materials,T-symmetry is broken, and one can show that the effective photon massmeff≠ 0 is finite. In this sense, the gyrotropy can also be thought
of as a high-frequency equivalence of the DC Hall coefficient. By
solving the continuum Maxwell Hamiltonian for a 2D interface between
positive and negative gyrotropic layers, it has been shown that the
system can host unique unidirectional Maxwellian spin waves. These
waves are photonic analogs of Jackiw−Rebbi waves (electron waves at the interface between a
positive and negative mass), as described by Dirac−Hamiltonian
solutions. These Maxwellian spin waves are fundamentally different
from surface plasmon polaritons or magnetic edge plasmons, which are
present at the interface of a medium with opposite signs for the dielectric
constant.

whereχGG′(q,ω) is the deep microscopic
optical response tensor, which includes permittivity, permeability,
and magneto-electric coupling. The tensorχGG′(q,ω)
is invariant under spatial and temporal crystal symmetry operations.
Combiningeqsand , we observe that the Maxwell-Hamiltonian equation
of matter belongs to the class of generalized nonlinear eigenproblems.
SinceχGG′(q,ω) plays the role of the Green function of
the optical polarization density, it naturally possesses a topological
invariant that is conserved under continuous deformations, which we
define as the opticalN-invariant.

6.2.3. OpticalN-Invariant of 2D Viscous
Hall Fluid. The opticalN-invariant is obtained
by computing the winding number of the microscopic optical response
tensor and is distinct from topological invariants known from electronic
band theory. We have recently shown that this topological quantum
number is captured by the spatiotemporal dispersion of optical constants,
which has been defined as the deep microscopic optical band structure
of a material.,We emphasize that the opticalN-invariant introduces a completely new classification of
2D materials based on the topological electromagnetic phase of matter.

The first candidates for this new class
of topological phase (N≠ 0) have been identified
as hydrodynamic electron fluids in strongly correlated 2D materials
such as graphene. The fundamental physical
mechanism responsible for this topological electromagnetic classification
is the Hall viscosityηH, which adds a nonlocal component to the Hall conductivity. In the bulk magnetoplasmons of graphene, the
opticalN-invariant encodes the vorticity of spin-1
Néel-type skyrmions, which are
different from skyrmions in plasmonic lattices or photonic crystals.
This enables the measurement of the opticalN-invariant
experimentally using magnetic field repulsion resembling the Meissner
effect. Further, the opticalN-phase exhibits gapless
unidirectional edge plasmons that are immune to backscattering, which
can be used to develop an ultrasubwavelength broadband topological
hydrodynamic circulator. A topological circulator based on opticalN-plasmons can function as an essential component for information
routing and interfacing quantum-classical computing systems.

6.2.4. Deep Microscopic Electrodynamic Dispersion of Materials. Within the framework of the Hamiltonian band theory of solids,
extensive research has been undertaken on obtaining the dispersion
for various electronic, phononic, and magnonic excitations in 2D and
bulk materials. However, only artificial materials such as photonic
crystals and metamaterials have been used to analyze the photonic
dispersion and the corresponding field confinement. The Maxwell-Hamiltonian
formalism combined with the quantum theory of optical polarization
provides a pathway to obtain the deep microscopic electrodynamic dispersion
of natural materials interacting with the photon field. It has recently
been shown that this formalism predicts the existence of anomalous
Maxwellian waves confined with subnanometer effective wavelengths
even in well-studied materials like bulk silicon. These waves occur in the spectral region where propagating
waves are conventionally forbidden in the macroscopic electromagnetic
framework. These findings demonstrate that natural media can support
a variety of yet-to-be-discovered electromagnetic phases beyond the
nanoscale limit.

6.3. Challenges, Future Goals, and Suggested Directions to
Meet These Goals. The findings presented here highlight the
significance of photonic phases of matter as well as the need for
the development of first-principles-based computational techniques
to reveal novel effects associated with the Maxwell Hamiltonian.

One of the primary challenges in the experimental discovery of these
phenomena is the development of appropriate probes for detecting the
Maxwellian waves hidden within a crystal lattice. Traditional pump−probe
spectroscopy, DC transport measurements, and ellipsometry measurements
yield the optical conductivity at the far-field limit (q →
0), which significantly limits the spatial resolution required to
separate the optical response at the lattice level. The constant development
of new near-field tools for light−matter interaction establishes
an exciting frontier for investigating the optical response in the
extreme momentum regime. We anticipate that THz scanning near-field
optical microscopy, microwave impedance
microscopy, and momentum-resolved electron
energy-loss spectroscopy are best suited
to probe these phenomena. These techniques allow one to overcome the
Abbe limit and achieve subwavelength real-space resolution.

Further, the newly discovered class of emergent 2D moiré
materials are particularly well-suited
to host deep microscopic Maxwellian waves. The large effective lattice
constant (amoiré∼ 10 nm)
of moiré materials is a distinguishing feature that sets them
apart from conventional 2D materials (a< 1 nm).
Hence, one can anticipate significant spatial variation of microscopic
fields even within a unit cell of moiré materials. When compared
to typical bulk metallic structures, moiré materials can offer
stronger photon confinements due to their strong electron correlations
and lower dimensions. The discovery of Maxwellian phases in 2D moiré
materials further ensures the pathway for designing high-performance
devices with spatial dimensions 3 orders of magnitude smaller than
the current limits.

In conclusion, the Maxwell-Hamiltonian framework
integrates the
fields of 2D materials and photonics to span a novel area of research
in materials science.

The experimental characterization
of the optical properties of
2D materials is central to unlocking their potential in photonics.
Near-field scanning optical microscopy has played an important role
in the study of 2D polaritons, while scanning tunneling microscopy
and electron-beam-based spectroscopies offer insights with unparalleled
atomic precision. The following three sections examine the use of
these techniques to investigate 2D materials.

“Seeing is knowing”: this
maxim coined by Plato in
theTheaetetusdoes apply to the outsized impact
that imaging methods are playing in contemporary science and engineering.
There is plenty to see in 2D materials, especially if one applies
modern scanning probe methods capable of resolving in real space the
structure and attributes over a broad range of length scales spanning
from atomic arrangements/reconstructions to mesoscale properties of
integrated devices. Since the advent of atomic force and scanning
tunneling microscopes (AFM and STM), dozens of imaging modalities
have been implemented based on these two foundational platforms (Figure). A major advance
attained in the last two decades is in the implementation of deeply
subdiffraction nano-optical imaging empowered by the coupling of lasers
to the AFM (or STM) scanning platforms. Scanning probe images provide
powerful visualization of structural, compositional, electronic, optical
and magnetic properties information in a form of 2D maps produced
by a specific contrast mechanism. Spatial patterns uncovered in images
often decode the underlying physics and functions (vide infra). Because each scanning probe modality carries its ownmessageabout the complex materials under investigation, it is instructive
to acquire collocated maps with multiple imaging modalities applied
to the same spatial region. This task of multimessenger nanoimaging guided the development of instrumentation and
analysis tools carried out in research groups of the coauthors of
this Roadmap and many other groups around the globe.

Multimessenger scanning probe nanoimaging is
based on AFM and STM
platforms. Top panel: Schematic representation of scanning probe imaging
modalities commonly applied to the exploration of 2D materials and
their heterostructures. Bottom panel: Examples of images of different
classes of 2D materials reported by coauthors. From left to right:
(A) MFM imaging of atomically layered magnetism in semiconducting
CrSBr; (B) Nanophotocurrent in minimally
twisted graphene; (C) Nano-THz response
of few layer WTe2microcrystals; (D and E) Co-located nano-IR and STM studies of nonlocal relaxation
dynamics in twisted trilayer graphene moiré superlattices; (F) Nano-PL image of a strained nanobubbles
in a WSe2monolayer on Au substrate; (G) Nano-Raman image of WS2monolayer bubbles
on a Au substrate; (H) Nano-SHG characterization
of layer stacking in WSe2. Panels A-H are reproduced with permission from (A) ref ; (B) ref ; (C) ref ; (D,E) ref ; (F) ref ; (G) ref ; (H) ref  (Copyright 2022 Wiley;
2021, 2021, 2022, 2020 Springer Nature; 2021 American Chemical Society;
2022 Wiley; respectively).

7.1. Current State of the Art.Figuredisplays a diorama of AFM-based scanning
probe methods, including a variety of nano-optical tools. A notable
achievement of nano-IR imaging is the visualization of propagating
plasmon polaritons, initially on the surface of the prototypical 2D
material graphene, accomplished using scattering-type scanning near
field optical microscopes (s-SNOM) operating with IR lasers.,Polaritons are quantum mechanical superpositions of photon states
with elementary excitations in solids. 2D materials host many forms
of polaritons produced by hybridizations of electronic, lattice, spin,
and excitonic processes with photons of a matching frequency. Nano-IR imaging experiments with traveling
plasmon polaritons,paved the way for the systematic
exploration of numerous other types of polaritons hosted by 2D materials,
including phonon polaritons and exciton
polaritons.,Polaritonic imaging enables
an entirely novel approach toward optical studies of the physical
phenomena in materials. Traditional far-field optical methods are
focused oncolorsand derive insights from the analysis
of spectra of emitted, absorbed, reflected, and transmitted radiation.
Polaritonic imaging infers physics insights from the examination of
shapes and line forms produced by these light−matter standing
waves and their rich interference patterns.

7.1.1. On Spatial Resolution. The spatial resolution
of nanoimaging methods is commonly governed by the radius of the apex
of the scanning probe tips reaching single-digit nanometers in many
AFM applications. Nano-optical experiments typically require metal
coatings on the tips to enhance near-field interaction, and these
duller tips yield a spatial resolution of a few tens of nanometers.
Likewise, magnetic force microscopy (MFM) requires ferromagnetic metal
coatings that also limit the spatial resolution down to ∼10−50
nm; the spatial resolution of MFM is also reduced by the intricacies
of the contrast mechanism governed by long-range magnetic forces.
Nano-optical and MFM signals can be acquired with the same tip, enabling
several concomitant imaging modalities: topography, multicolor optical
scattering amplitude, and magnetic susceptibility. In this fashion, multimessenger nanoimaging allows one
to uncover correlations between structural, electronic, and magnetic
properties. Nanoterahertz (nano-THz) or nanophotoluminescence experiments also require specialized tips.
Counterintuitively, nano-optical experiments can visualize features
and textures that are much smaller than the tip diameter. For example,
polaritonic standing waves display contrast due to reflections and
interference prompted by atomically narrow domain walls in bilayer
and multilayer twisted 2D materials, even in maps recorded with metalized
tips of ∼10 nm diameter. Advances
in hardware and signal processing now allow one to visualize a few
nanometer features in twisted 2D bilayers hosting reconstructed moiré
patterns using very long-wavelength microwave range imaging.

7.1.2. On Moiré Reconstructions. Moiré
superlattices in twisted 2D materials can serve as a unique control
knob of this class of materials, enabling the control of electronic,
excitonic, magnetic, and superconducting properties. These moiré
heterostructures have emerged as capable quantum simulators of condensed
matter physics. Direct visualization
of physical processes in moiré superlattices is imperative
to understand and fully realize the opportunities offered by the twist
angle control. Specifically, STM data uncovered distinct electronic
properties associated with multiple possible atomic arrangements of
the two layers in moiré superlattices. Furthermore, information on energy landscapes in bilayer
and multilayer vdW materials can be extracted directly from the analysis
of the shapes of the reconstructed pattern via the tool ofmoiré metrology. Nano-IR
imaging was utilized to explore the electrodynamics of flat bands
in twisted graphene near the so-called magic angle, a regime known
for hosting superconductivity. Apart
from superconductivity, ferroelectricity is yet another notable emergent
state in moiré superlattices of 2D materials. A combination
of piezo-force, Kelvin force and nano-optical imaging offered a detailed
characterization of ferroelectricity emerging at the interface of
twisted 2D materials.−Finally, moiré superlattices in the
magnetic 2D material CrI3exhibit intricate textures comprised
of ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic domains, which can be visualized
by single-spin quantum magnetometry also known as NV-center imaging.

7.1.3. Nano-Optical Imaging of Semiconducting 2D Materials. The exploration of semiconducting 2D materials has benefited from
the advances of the nanoimaging versions of light emission experiments
including nanophotoluminescence (nano-PL), nanoelectro-luminescence (nano-EL), and nanosecond-harmonic generation (nano-SHG).,These methods have already attained sensitivity to emission characteristics
down to single monolayer and even single defect levels. The STM platform is likewise well suited to collect
both PL and EL spectra and images.

7.1.4. In Operando Nanoimaging and Nano-Spectroscopy. One appeal of multimessenger imaging based on AFM/STM platforms
is that these methods empowerin operandoexperiments,
particularly in the regime where the properties of 2D materials are
controlled by external stimuli such as electric fields,,magnetic fields, chemical dopants, photoexcitation,,strain, or
high-density electrical currents.,Furthermore,
nanophotocurrent imaging stands out
for its ability to directly visualize current pathways, which can
offer insights into the physics of flat bands and topology in 2D material
structures.

7.1.5. On Spatiotemporal Imaging. Nano-optical
imaging experiments carried out with femtosecond lasers provide insight
into the spatiotemporal evolution of the properties of 2D materials.
Notably, these experiments can be carried out under both equilibrium
and nonequilibrium conditions. The latter are performed in a pump−probe
mode. Here, a pump laser photoexcites the studied 2D material over
a large area of a diffraction-limited spot. The probe signal is collected
locally from the area underneath the tip of a nanoprobe apparatus.
By adjusting the time delay between the pump and probe pulses, one
gains access to the evolution of the system response pixel by pixel. One novelty of nanopump−probe experiments
is that it is feasible to visualize propagating plasmonic or polaritonic
waves in the nonequilibrium regime when the electronic system of a
studied material is agitated by the pump pulse.,,This latter capability enabled
imaging of the plasmonic response in regimes of high carrier densities
of hot electrons created by photoexcitation.,The equilibrium version of spatiotemporal experiments stems from
the ability to track polaritonic motion not only in space but also
in time.,Polaritonic worldlines that are directly
observable in space−time metrology experiments facilitated
the exploration of electronic interactions in graphene over a broad
range of gate voltages, from nearly charge neutral state to highly
conducting regimes. The current record
in spatiotemporal imaging, picometer length scales and femtosecond
time scales, has been achieved at THz frequencies by capitalizing
on atomic nonlinearities of mesoscopic near fields.

7.1.6. Electronic and Photonic Phenomena at Interfaces
of 2D Materials. Multimessenger nanoimaging is a unique resource
for visualizations of the emerging properties at interfaces. For example,
2D layers with distinct work functions reveal prominent charge transfer
leading to the formation of conducting interfaces. The effect is purely
nonvolatile: no applied voltage is required to promote highly conducting
metallic interfaces. The emerging metallicity of charge transfer interfaces
was quantified through a combination of nano-IR and STM imaging. The charge transfer forms atomically abrupt
boundaries that are required, for example, for the implementation
of nanophotonic versions of whispering gallery resonators. Additionally, interfaces of hyperbolic 2D materials
display nonintuitive optical phenomena including negative reflection and negative refraction,,which have been visualized by tracking polaritonic motion across
interfaces.

7.1.7. Probing Topology in Electronic and Photonic Phenomena. 2D materials display a rich variety of effects rooted in topology.
These effects can be classified into two broad categories: electronic/magnetic
and photonic. Both categories of the topological effects can be readily
visualized by multimessenger methods. A hallmark of topological phenomena
is the emergence of edge states at the boundary between regions with
distinct topological invariants. A recent tour-deforce experiment
carried out with microwave nanoimaging has visualized topological
edge states in a fractional Chern insulator twisted MoTe2. Earlier nano-IR experiments with
polaritonic nanostructures have identified a protocol for the extraction
of topological charges from nanoimaging data and confirmed fractional
topological charges for phonon polariton vortices in hexagonal boron
nitride initiated with circularly polarized light.

7.2. Challenges and Future Goals. Over the last two
decades, versions of multimessenger nanoimaging combining nano-optical
modalities with other scanning probe tools advanced from sparse demonstrations
to an indispensable research tool in many laboratories around the
globe. Notably, nano-optical instruments now equip many IR/optical
beamlines at synchrotron facilities, offering broad access to users
requiring multimessenger nanoimaging data for their research. The
library of nanoimaging modalities continues to expand. We anticipate
that expansion of nano-optics in a spatially resolved version of 2D
spectroscopy, platforms combining advanced
multidimensional far-field and near-field imaging, and experiments
operating with entangled photons are on the horizon. At the moment,
not all available modalities have been implemented under the conditions
required for the exploration of condensed matter physics: cryogenic
operation and high magnetic fields. Nanoemission experiments remain
particularly sparse despite a broad scope of opportunities offered
by emission experiments across the electromagnetic spectrum, especially
in far-IR and THz ranges. STM electroluminescence
experiments offer good opportunities in this regard since they naturally
confine the excitation to the atomic scale. Electron tunneling also offers the possibility to directly measure
electronic structure changes induced by strong light−matter
interactions and the possibility of observing the electronic component
of polaritonic waves in the future.

Data science methods are
poised to provide monumental advantages for the analysis of multimessenger
imaging data. The discussion in the previous paragraph shows that
multimessenger data sets are fundamentally multidimensional in nature.
Manual processing can only uncover some of the most generic trends.
So far, the use of data science in multimessenger imaging remained
rather limited despite remarkable successes of artificial intelligence
(AI) approaches in other areas of research. Apart from the analysis,
data science methods offer advantages for accelerated measurements,and data acquisition that are yet to be fully exploited in multimessenger
imaging.

“Not seeing is not knowing” posited Plato.
Multimessenger
imaging will continue to deliver new knowledge by allowing practitioners
in this bourgeoning field to see the previously unseen and uncover
the previously unknown.

8.1. State of the Art. Recent advancements in the
field of tip-enhanced nanoscopies have opened new avenues for studying
light−matter interactions and manipulating quasiparticles down
to the atomic scale. These techniques typically involve positioning
a sharp metallic tip at nanometer-scale distances from the surface
of the material under investigation, while illuminating it with highly
focused light. This configuration creates a nanocavity that can significantly
enhance and localize electromagnetic fields to volumes well below
the diffraction limit. It also facilitates the exchange of photons
between the near- and far-field, allowing for the coupling of external
light sources to the nanocavity or guiding light generated beneath
the tip to optical detectors.

Depending on the specific systems
and processes being examined, a variety of excitation light sources
can be used, spanning from THz to UV wavelengths (1 meV−10
eV). Many of these techniques employ conventional methodologies for
photonic absorption, emission, and scattering, with some of the most
common being scattering-type scanning near-field optical microscopy
(s-SNOM), tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS), and tip-enhanced
photoluminescence (TEPL). The incorporation of a conducting tip further
expands the methodological toolkit, enabling techniques that rely
on electronic excitation or detection. For instance, tunneling electrons
induced by static or pulsed bias voltages can generate localized electroluminescence,
as seen in scanning tunneling microscope-induced luminescence (STML)
and incident photons can generate photocurrent that is collected by
the tip, enabling near-field photocurrent nanoscopy. Additionally,
forces induced by photoexcitation can be measured in IR atomic force
microscopy (IR-AFM). The family of tip-enhanced nanoscopies, and the
main physical magnitudes and, through them, quasiparticles that can
be probed, are schematically summarized inFigure.

Schematic illustration of tip-enhanced
nanoscopies applied to the
study of photonics in 2D materials. The tip−sample nanocavity
can confine electromagnetic fields and couple near- to far-field photons,
and vice versa, enabling local probing of optical and electronic excitations
with atomic-scale spatial resolution. This can be done by using photons
or tunneling electrons for excitation and detection. The intrinsic
surface sensitivity and subnanometer spatial resolution of tip-enhanced
techniques make them especially suited for studying and controlling
light−matter interaction phenomena in 2D systems. The spatial
resolution is particularly useful for the study of systems exhibiting
nanometer-scale lateral modulations or inhomogeneities such as moiré
superlattices, nanostructures, lateral heterostructures, or defects.
The application of external stimuli such as strain, electrical gating,
and magnetic fields can be incorporated for the manipulation of the
local properties and correlating it with mesoscopic propertiesvia in operandostudies. Incorporating fast detection or
pump−probe schemes adds time resolution to study quasiparticle
dynamics with the same spatial resolution. All these elements converge
in a toolbox of techniques that enable deterministic characterization
and manipulation of photonic phenomena at the ultimate spatiotemporal
limits of picometers and attoseconds.

In a broad, nonsystematic categorization,
these techniques can
be grouped by the energy range of the excitations involved. This leads
to two main families: one suited for studying excitations from a few
meV to approximately 100 meV, while the other is more appropriate
for examining excitations in the range of eV.

Low-energy excitations
include quasiparticles such as phonons,
polarons, phonon polaritons, or plasmon polaritons in some 2D materials
such as graphene. They can be probed by techniques that use radiation
in the same energy scale (THz to IR), as in s-SNOM, its nano-Fourier
transform IR spectroscopy (nano-FTIR) variant or IR-AFM/STM. s-SNOM
has been extensively applied in the study of 2D materials. Gate-tunable
surface-plasmon polaritons (SPPs) have been mapped with resolutions
of a few nanometers on graphene devices and hyperbolic SPPs on engineered hBN metasurfaces. Spectral information can be acquired using
the nano-FTIR variant for hyperspectral imaging, as shown for phonon
polaritons in photonic hBN crystals. Since
the first real space visualization of the moiré superlattice
acting as a photonic crystal for graphene SPPs in 2018, this technique and its variants have been pivotal
in the field of twist-optics. Remarkable demonstrations are the detection
of local enhancement of the photothermoelectric effect at stacking
domain walls, or the 1D channeling of
highly localized photons assisted by their strong coupling to phonons
in MoO3bilayers.

Inelastic
scattering of high-energy visible radiation can also
provide insights into low-energy modes, as exemplified by Raman spectroscopy.
While this technique is predominantly used to study phonons, it can
also address other low-energy excitations, such as optical polarons
and magnons. In its tip-enhanced mode, TERS has been employed to spatially
resolve phenomena like the localization of strain solitons at stacking
domain boundaries in graphene bilayers. However, most TERS studies involving 2D materials have been conducted
in conjunction with TEPL, obtaining correlated information on vibrational
and optoelectronic properties. This combined approach allows us to
gain insights into phenomena such as doping and strain or interlayer interactions from the optical response of TMD.

Higher-energy excitations,
such as excitons, can be effectively
probed using TEPL and STML, utilizing visible excitation and detection.
TEPL represents the tip-enhanced variant of conventional photoluminescence,
while STML employs highly localized tunneling currents to induce electroluminescence.
The spatial resolution of these techniques is essential for investigating
light emission from heterostructure interfaces, superlattices, or
single emitters of nanoscopic dimensions. An illustrative example
is the TEPL study of exciton diffusion across MoSe2/WSe2lateral junctions, where the observed unidirectional flow
mimics thermal Kapitza resistance. Another
important application is the ability to discriminate between intrinsic
exciton emission of pristine materials and that generated by defects
or impurities, which requires spatial resolution well below the diffraction
limit. Measurements conducted under ambient conditions have achieved
resolutions of 10 nm, sufficient to resolve defects such as bubbles
and wrinkles. However, detecting emission
from single atomic vacancies and impurities requires advancing optical
nanoscopies to ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) and cryogenic temperatures.
These controlled conditions, along with the development of picocavities
that terminate in single-atom protrusions, have enabled the characterization
of photonic phenomena at the atomic scale using STML, TEPL, and TERS. While many of these advanced approaches have
been applied to single molecules, only a few exemplary experiments
investigating 2D materials with atomic resolution exist. These include
atomic-scale variations in luminescence from a MoS2/few-layer
graphene heterostructure, emission from
single vacancies in WS2, and
valley excitons in WSe2.

A significant advantage of optical excitation over electronic excitation
is the ability to access ultrafast phenomena. The use of radio frequency
electric pulses limits time resolution to the nanoseconds in time-resolved
(TR)-STML. In contrast, the bottleneck
for TR-TEPL is on the detector side. The integration of fast single-photon
avalanche diodes (SPADs) in the experiments, combined with deconvolution
methods, has achieved a resolution of 5 ps. TR-STML and TR-TEPL also differ substantially in the primary type
of driving mechanism, and consequently in the subsequent cascade of
events and temporal scales that could be explored in a system. While
TR-STML is based on charge carrier injection and inherently involves
the intervals between the individual electron transfers, TR-TEPL can
excite states without electron exchange and probe the exciton lifetimes
directly. In the field of TERS, although time-resolved measurements
have not been demonstrated yet, static TERS data have already been
obtained with 500 fs pulsed lasers. In
parallel, THz-STM has evolved, bringing picometer-femtosecond spatiotemporal
resolution into the research areas of ultrafast photoexcitation and radiative decay phenomena. This method relies on inducing transient electron
tunnelling using subcycle THz pulses. It can also be expanded to mid-IR
wavelengths that provide higher time resolution, as evidenced by measurements
of subpicosecond dynamics in MoTe2related to photocarrier-induced
band renormalization. Finally, a variant
of this subcycle technique that uses two-pulse mixing has achieved
subfemtosecond resolution and has enabled the imaging of quantum electronic
coherence in molecular orbitals.

In addition to studying transients, special types of time correlated
single photon counting can be conducted to analyze the statistics
of a photon source, such as the Hanbury Brown and Twiss interferometry.
By measuring and binning the time delays between many two-photon emission
events, the second-order correlation function can be evaluated to
determine the type of emitterwhether it is a single-, two-photon
or a stochastic source depending on the observation of photon bunching
or antibunching. The technique can be
further extended to study the temporal order of different photon emissions
in a quantum emitter with various charge and excitation states and
to extract the transition rates involved in its many-body dynamics. The state-of-the-art time resolution in these
experiments is constrained by the jitter time of the SPAD detectors,
typically achieving resolutions of only a few tens of picoseconds.

Despite proof-of-principle demonstrations of subpicosecond electron
dynamics in materials like MoTe2and the excitonic insulator candidate Ta2NiSe5, time-resolved nanoscopies have yet
to be systematically applied to study dynamics in 2D materials.

8.2. Challenges and Future Goals. One of the primary
ongoing efforts is focused on studying light−matter interactions
in atomically engineered materials at the ultimate spatiotemporal
limits of picometers and attoseconds. Concurrently experiments are
advancing in laboratories worldwide to characterize emission statistics,
directionality, coherence, chirality, and the integration of these
characteristics into spintronic and electronic devices. However, numerous
challenges accompany these ambitious goals. In the following, we will
address both the overarching challenges of tip-enhanced nanoscopies
and the specific technical and fundamental issues related to characterizing
photonic phenomena in 2D materials.

A primary objective is to
expand the pool of quasiparticles that can be probed within the near-field
of a nanocavity. Beyond plasmons, excitons, polarons, and phonons,
other quasiparticlessuch as magnons, Cooper pairs, spinons,
skyrmions, and solitonsmay also be manipulated using optomechanical
or optoelectronic methods involving sharp probes and electromagnetic
fields. Controlling the transduction between light and other state
variables at the nanometer scale could open new avenues for innovative
multivariable quantum technologies. Developing local nanocavity techniques
for addressing new quasiparticles optically would enable studies in
their genuine nanoscale environments and at their characteristic scales.

Quasiparticles such as the excitons, which are routinely studied
by a range of tip-enhanced techniques, can reveal new phenomena when
harnessed in engineered 2D superstructures. Imprinting metagate electrostatic
potentials to manipulate the energy, lifetime, and localization of
excitons can lead to excitonic superlattices that exhibit exotic many-body
phenomena. Metagates can be achieved, for instance, by twisting layers,
by directly nanostructuring the 2D layer, or by interfacing with nanostructures.
A recent study utilized local photocurrent detected by STM to map
in-plane charge transfer excitons arranged by the moiré potential
landscape in twisted WS2. Similar investigations could be performed at 1 nm-scale superlattices
by using bottom-up nanostructures as atomically precise metagates.
At this scale comparable to the characteristic size of excitons in
2D semiconductors, strong interexciton interactions are anticipated.
Additionally, the rather unexplored charge transfer excitons in lateral
heterostructuresthe 1D analogues of interlayer excitonscould
be studied by taking advantage of the lateral resolution capabilities
of the tip-enhanced nanoscopies.

Chirality effects can be investigated
using circularly polarized
light, as recently shown in the probing of valley excitons in a decoupled
WSe2monolayer by STML. Similar
studies could be extended to TEPL and TERS to shed light on the origins
of gyrotropic electronic order or on
chiral-selective magnon-phonon coupling. These approaches would allow for the correlation of polarized emission
with simultaneous maps of electronic and spin density of states, achievable
through STM.

Furthermore, the numerous degrees of freedom offered
by scanning
probe methodologies will enable the control of exotic optoelectronic
phenomena through local and external stimuli. Recent advancements
have demonstrated the gating of emission from single quantum emitters
via current injection; similar atomic-scale
switching can be achieved using local tip-induced electric or magnetic
fields. The generation of single photons on demand and the emission
of heralded entangled photons of various wavelengths is now at hand,
along with superradiant sources that exceed the quantum efficiencies
of their individual constituents. These
can be engineered by using the atomically precise, deterministic capability
of STM to manipulate matter.

The broad range of the electromagnetic
spectrum offers a wealth
of physical processes that can be characterized and potentially controlled.
In the coming years, we envision extending TERS and TEPL to the NIR
and UV regimes, a yet unexplored territory in most tip-enhanced setups.
This extension will facilitate the study of 2D materials with narrow
bandgaps, such as black phosphorus, PdSe2, and PtSe2, to explore their applications in telecommunications and
theragnostics, as well as enabling investigations of UV photochemistry
at the nanoscale. Additionally, it will allow for resonant TERS and
TEPL studies across a broad range of wavelengths.

Accessing
the near-field induced fast excitonic decays, electronic
transients, or photoexcitation dynamics requires achieving time resolution
in the subpicosecond regime. Although significant advancements have
been made in time-resolved nanoscopic methodologies, their application
to the study of ultrafast dynamics in 2D materials is still in its
infancy. The same holds true for time correlation studies of quantum
emitters, such as point defects in 2D materials. In this case, expanding
the studies to include multiphoton events and their correlations will
provide valuable insights into the nature of the emitters, energy
transfer between color centers, and cascade emission phenomena.

8.3. Suggested Directions to Meet These Goals. In
this section, we will outline our perspective on potential directions
to address some of the key challenges discussed above. These suggestions
will encompass both materials and device fabrication, as well as anticipated
advancements in the techniques themselves.

Fundamental studies
of the coupling between photons and other quasiparticles will greatly
benefit from correlative measurements. Although scanning probe microscopies
can provide simultaneous electron, force, and optical spectroscopy,
complementary information is often necessary. Correlative studies
using techniques such as angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy
(ARPES), X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), and its magnetic circular
dichroism (XMCD) variant can yield a comprehensive, atomistic picture
of the system under investigation. Achieving this requires the development
of strategies for the colocalization of micrometer scale regions and
the transfer of samples between different instruments under UHV conditions.
In this regard, initiatives aimed at creating multitechnique platforms
for correlative characterization, such as the InCAEM facility at ALBA,
are beginning to emerge.

The application
of subnanometer optical nanoscopies in 2D materials
is often limited by sample quality. Atomic scale investigations of
surfaces always require stringent conditions in terms of sample preparation
and measuring conditions, typically involving UHV and cryogenic temperatures,
and in most cases the use of STM as local probe. The need of conductive
samples for this technique clashes with the need of decoupled systems
to prevent the quenching of radiative processes and preserve their
intrinsic properties, thus adding further challenges to sample preparation.
While vdW epitaxy on inert, low-conductivity substrates such as graphene
on SiC allows forin situgrowth and characterization
of monolayers in UHV for some 2D materials, more versatile approaches for twisted layers and heterostructures,
as well as the implementation of gate and source/drain electrodes,
primarily rely on top-down approaches transferring flakes onto insulating
layers. In thick insulating buffers, as the ones needed for gating,
metallic electrodes need to be contacted to the 2D material to facilitate
electronic transport. The main challenges for conducting atomic scale
nanoscopy in these systems include the stringent cleanliness requirements
that far exceed those for macroscopic measurements, the precise positioning
of the tip on the flake with micrometer accuracy, and the fabrication
of efficient tunneling electron paths. Cleanliness can be enhanced
by developing glovebox and UHV sample transfer protocols. For accurate
and reproducible navigation, high magnification capabilities provided
by the embedded lens systems of optical nanoscopes can be utilized,
along with strategic sample marking. Appropriate metallic contacts
can be achieved using patterned multilayer graphene. Several research
groups are beginning to overcome these barriers,,,and we anticipate that their
pioneering results will inspire the community.

Engineering nano-
and picocavities is a challenging endeavor that
has proven essential for advancing our fundamental understanding of
quantum states confined in nanocavities. Plasmonic nano- and pico-cavities
formed at the STM junction offer a controlled and versatile platform
for this purpose, thanks to their intrinsic atomic-scale precision
in tip positioning and tip apex geometry. Pioneering studies have
achieved several significant milestones, including the realization
of directional emission through atomic-scale cavity engineering, the control of plasmonic modes by shaping Fabry−Pérot
resonators at the tip, and the quantification
of coupling strength and Purcell factors derived from localized Fano
resonances. Additionally, the contributions
of near-field effects and tunneling
current on exciton lifetimes can also
be simultaneously assessed. Tip engineering can also be used as a
strategy to eliminate far-field contributions, for instance by employing
nanowire waveguides attached to the tip that allow for the separation
of excitation and detection positions. The near-field enhancement can alternatively be tailored, by modulating
the amplitude and phase of incoming photons. Progress in the design and fabrication of tailored SPM-based plasmonic
cavities will open avenues for manipulating light at subwavelength
scales. With tip reproducibility being a challenge even for commercial
tips, developing protocol standards will
be crucial for advancing in this direction.

The extension of
TERS and TEPL to the NIR and UV regimes also represents
a challenge from the tip engineering side. The necessity for plasmonic
tips that operate in the UV and deep-UV ranges requires the exploration
of materials beyond the commonly used Au and Ag. Mg, Al, Ga, or Rh
offers large field-enhancement factors and localized surface plasmon
resonances in the UV regime. Notably, Rh stands out for its combination
of a high field-enhancement factor and a low oxidation rate, and tips
fabricated from this material have already been successfully developed.

In terms of time resolution, reaching
picosecond resolution is
already at hand through several methods. While these techniques can
select specific electronic excitations and investigate their relaxation
dynamics, they provide limited spectroscopic information. Incorporating
picosecond-gated spectroscopy would enhance ultrafast techniques by
adding the ability to reveal sequenced, correlated phenomena, such
as energy transfer in coupled chromophores and color centers, or cascade
emission at atomic resolution. This could be realized by implementing
streak camera detectors. Furthermore, advancing beyond second-order
correlation in photon statistics would yield valuable insights into
multiphoton quantum states characterized by superposition, entanglement,
or nonclassical correlations. This could be accomplished by measuring
the photon-number distribution using a true photon-number-resolving
detector, such as a streak camera, or through manifold coincidence
counting, in the spirit of the Hanbury Brown and Twiss experiment.

In conclusion, the integration of tip-enhanced nanoscopies into
the field of photonics for 2D materials has already proven crucial
for addressing significant challenges, yet it remains in its infancy,
with highly promising prospects ahead. Key milestones, such as the
exploration of new photon-quasiparticle interactions, operando studies
of vdW optoelectronic devices, or the implementation of picometer-attosecond
resolution techniques, are anticipated in the coming years. The application
of these techniquesparticularly in moiré superlattices,
single-atom emitters, lateral heterostructures, and other vdW engineered
materialswill provide the atomistic insights necessary for
an in-depth understanding of the interactions of light and quasiparticles
in these complex energy landscapes.

9.1. Introduction. Electron microscopy has become
an indispensable tool for investigating the properties of 2D materials
at the atomic scale. The structure, morphology, chemistry, vibrational
response, and optics of these materials have been extensively studied
down to the atomic level using electron microscopy (EM) and spectroscopy.
Since the initial production of 2D materials, EM contributed to different
aspects of their understanding. Imaging and diffraction can map deformation
in 2D monolayers; electron energy-loss
spectroscopy (EELS) (Figurec) and energy-dispersive X-ray
(EDS) spectroscopy allow for the chemical
identification of individual atoms in 2D layers. Vibrational EELS
can map the vibrational response of a single Si atom on a graphene
monolayer. EELS and cathodoluminescence
(CL) have been shown to measure spectra similar to those of optical
absorption and photoluminescence in hBN-encapsulated WS2,(Figureb). The objective of this section is not to be an extensive
review of electron microscopy and spectroscopy for 2D materials, but
to give a perspective of which technical developments could help solve
standing questions for these materials.

Chemistry,
electronic structure, and optics of 2D materials with
fast electron spectroscopies. (a-b) Electron-microscopy images and
model for nitrogen atoms in graphene in different atomic configurations.
(c) Electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) core-loss spectra and
simulation for the nitrogen K edge of atoms in the graphitic and pyridinic
configurations. (d) WS2trion (X−) cathodoluminescence
(CL) intensity map. High-intensity spots are numbered and marked by
dashed circles to be compared with (e). (e) Spectral profile along
the arrow in (d), showing how the trion-to-neutral exciton CL emission
evolves on the local maxima. Panels (a-c) are adapted with permission
from ref  (Copyright
2018 American Association for the Advancement of Science); Panels
(d-e) are adapted with permission from ref  (Copyright 2020 American Association for the
Advancement of Science).

Advanced imaging techniques such as
ptycography, coupled with structural and imaging simulation, might
be a way to measure the interlayer spacing in 2D material heterobilayers
and more complex vdW heterostructures, including when moiré
patterns are formed. This approach could help determine how interlayer
spacing affects the electronic band structure. In this respect, ptychography
has already been used to measure the interlayer distance in bi- and
trilayer graphene.

A standing
problem in 2D materials is the identification of atomic
structures that can operate as single-photon emitters (SPEs). Specifically,
in TMDs, SPEs are linked to the presence of defects and strain, which
funnel excitons toward the defects, leading to localized photon emission.

Coupling EM with other methods, such
as photoluminescence, can
be quite fruitful. Furthermore, the improvement of detectors and microscopes
to optimize 4D-STEM and ptychography has significantly increased spatial
resolution and data throughput, opening new avenues for correlative
microscopy.

9.3. Nano-Optics. CL and EELS have been extensively
used to study the optical properties of materials at the nanoscale,
including 2D materials.,,These techniques probe excitonic transitions in TMD monolayers.
Probing these transitions with EELS at nanometer spatial resolution
only became possible with the development of modern electron monochromators,
which allow for spectral resolution in the 5−30 meV range. For CL, the spatial resolution is limited by
the diffusion and drift of excitations, while for EELS, it is limited
by the delocalization of inelastic scattering. Both types of spectroscopies
have been used to study excitonic transitions in 2D materials, revealing
nanoscale phenomena. For example, the modification of the charged-to-neutral
exciton emission intensity down to tens of nanometers has been reported
in hBN-encapsulated WS2. A SPE in hBN at 4.1 eV was detected
using a Hanbury Brown and Twiss interferometer coupled to a CL system. The spatial modulation of MoS2neutral
excitons due to the moiré structure formed in a MoS2/WSe2bilayer was probed by EELS.

Finally, these spectroscopies can be implemented
with temporal resolution, especially CL (time-resolved CL, TR-CL).
This allows for the detection of decay traces from the emitter in
2D materials with subnanosecond temporal resolution.

The spectroscopic signatures in EELS and CL, such
as changes in
plasmon energy or phonon population, can be used to measure the temperature
of materials at high spatial resolution. This capability has also been applied to 2D materials. Recently, a synchronized laser injection-EELS
experiment with an electron event-based detector has demonstrated
the possibility of measuring the spectroscopic signature of thin materials,
including 2D layers, as a function of temperature with nanosecond
and nanometer resolutions.

These
experiments are mostly well-established (except for the time-resolved
ones) in the EM community and currently present in many laboratories
and universities around the world. A promising next step is to perform
these experiments under different stimuli: electrical biasing, controlled
magnetic field, variable temperature, and laser irradiation, among
others. Specifically, for 2D materials,in situelectron
spectroscopies might be extremely valuable, as they would allow for
experimental approaches similar to those used in more standard optical
ones. For example, doping and internal electric field control using
electrostatic potentials in a variable temperature setup are a way
to identify neutral and charged excitonic states.

9.4. New Electron Spectroscopies. New electron microscopy
and spectroscopy techniques are in constant development, aiming to
expand the range of measurable physical quantities and enable new
types of experiments that reveal deeper insights into materials. Here,
we shall describe three recent ones that might have a strong impact
in the study of 2D materials. First, electron−photon (EELS-CL)
coincidence experiments have recently been revisited, based on new
event-based electron detectors (Timepix3).,The resulting technique is a nanometric analog of photoluminescence
excitation (PLE) spectroscopy. It allows one to measure the relative
quantum efficiency of light-emitting materials in a large spectral
range (the same available for EELS). This technique, tentatively called
CL excitation spectroscopy (CLE), can identify the excitation pathways
that lead to light emission following an electron inelastic scattering
event. It can also measure temporal decay profiles of the emitter
similarly to TR-CL. For 2D materials, it might be the best way to
understand the detailed mechanisms of how CL is generated, specifically
in vdW heterostructures with TMDs. Notably, it might be a way to pinpoint
why energy shifts have been reported between PL and CL of the same
devices.

Another electron spectroscopy
method that has been developed over the last 20 years is photon-induced
near-field electron microscopy (PINEM). This technique involves coupling
a laser field to a fast electron mediated by the near field of a nanostructure. With PINEM, the structural dynamics of thin
materials can be followed down to the picosecond temporal scale. Also, electron-photon coupling with chirped
optical pulses mediated by a thin MoS2film has been reported.

Related to PINEM is another spectroscopic
method called electron
energy-gain spectroscopy (EEGS). EEGS
can achieve spectral resolutions much better than the energy line
width of the electron beam, limited only by the laser line width used.
For 2D materials, an evident application of EEGS is the measurement
of absorption line widths in materials such as TMD monolayers. These
materials have intrinsic line widths much smaller than those currently
achievable in EELS measurements (above 2.5 meV in the best cases,
and typically 5 meV in state-of-the-art microscopes).

Finally,
a recently theoretically proposed improvement of EELS
will allow the measurement of signatures with degrees of freedom analogous
to light polarization: phase-shaped EELS (PEELS). In this method, an electron beam with a specific phase
distribution is scattered by a material. A measurement of the scattered
beam under certain conditions allows for the identification and distinction
of modes that would usually be missed in standard EELS. Modes beyond the dipolar approximation, inaccessible
to optical experiments, can also be detected. Applications for TMD materials are evident, where polarization
degrees of freedom play a key role in spin-valley states. PEELS could
therefore provide unique insights into the nanoscale optical and electronic
properties of these materials.

9.5. Conclusions. The perspectives for electron spectroscopies
to study 2D materials are very promising, especially given the improved
spectral resolution approaching those achievable in optical experiments.
Moreover, some key recent advances might be very beneficial for experiments
with 2D materials. These include improved vacuum quality in the sample
chamber, reaching a truly clean 10−10Torr range,
and hBN encapsulation. New scanning methods and detection approaches
to minimize the required dose will help reduce electron-beam-related
sample damage.−Finally, greater automation and standardization of microscopes and
related equipment (sample holders, apertures,in situcapabilities) are needed. This is crucial for reproducibility, increased
throughput of data acquisition, and easier design and development
of new experiments. Ultimately, such advancements could democratize
these powerful experimental methods, making them accessible to the
entire scientific community, beyond a small group of specialists.

Excitons in transition
metal dichalcogenides have emerged as a
source of new physics with promising prospects for practical photonic
applications because of their appealing properties, such as spatial
accessibility, relatively strong coupling to light, and potential
for active control. The following sections explore different aspects
of excitons in 2D semiconductors and highlight interesting opportunities.

10.1.1. Introduction. Nearly 70 years after the
hybrid light−matter quasiparticles called exciton-polaritons
(EPs) were postulated, and decades into their research in 3D semiconductors
and quantum-well cavities, strong exciton−photon coupling was
demonstrated in a monolayer 2D semiconductor. Since then, research on strong light−matter coupling
in 2D materials has been thriving. The
large exciton oscillator strength in these materials eases formerly
more stringent requirements for high cavity quality factors while
binding energies reaching hundreds of millielectronvolts ensure that
excitons remain stable excitations at elevated temperatures. With
2D materials, strong light−matter coupling has become a staple
of solid-state optics now routinely achieved at room temperature.
Initial experiments with planar microcavity structures were soon followed
by demonstrations of strong coupling using external mirror cavities and cavities made of plasmonic or dielectric
lattice structures.−Optical excitations occasionally referred to as self-hybridized
EPs, which are formed by excitons strongly
coupling to the photons confined inside bare bulk crystals, were also
observed.Figureshows a schematic illustration of the different material types,
resonator structures, and intriguing phenomena that have been observed
in the context of EPs in 2D materials.

Study of
strong exciton−photon coupling in 2D vdW crystals
combines different classes of materials with optical resonators to
investigate intriguing phenomena related to optics and photonics.

10.1.2. Materials. A common experimental approach
to obtain strong light−matter interaction is to incorporate
a monolayer semiconductor from the family of TMDs into an optical
cavity. Such monolayers are typically encapsulated between hBN to
avoid detrimental effects produced by the substrate. Besides the advantage
of realizing Rabi splitting energies of several tens of millielectronvolts,
these materials host exciton complexes such as trions, with reasonable
binding energy and oscillator strength, which can also be coupled
to cavity photons. In the limit of high
doping, the trion state transitions to the Fermi polaron picture where novel effects have been predicted.

More recently, EP studies employ twisted
hetero- or homobilayers of TMD layers to modulate the potential landscape
into a superlattice that can induce collective excitonic behavior.
When coupled to a cavity, the resulting moiré EPs combine the
large oscillator strength of the direct excitons in TMDs with a strong
nonlinearity resulting from the quantum dot nature of each moiré
cell. Such a system circumvents the
trade-off between exciton binding energy and exciton nonlinearity,
thereby providing a pathway to strongly nonlinear and robust polaritons.
Additionally, pristine bilayer TMDs are of high interest for polaritonics.
MoTe2bilayers feature a direct bandgap with high-oscillator-strength
excitons in the near IR, and interlayer
excitons with a permanent dipole moment emerge in bilayer MoS2,,facilitating dipolar interactions,
which can enhance the polariton nonlinearity.

A relatively new direction for EP research is currently
emerging
from the discovery of excitons in vdW materials with highly correlated
degrees of freedom. An archetypal platform for polariton physics from
this class of materials is the antiferromagnetic correlated insulator
NiPS3. Its excitons enabled
the first experimental demonstration of strong exciton−photon
coupling in a magnetic vdW material. The study found that many properties of EPs are intimately linked
to magnetic order. Prominent magneto-optic effects also characterize
the layered magnetic semiconductor CrSBr, a material recently attracting considerable attention. Its excitons
couple directly to magnetic order, while
supporting self-hybridized polaritons and pronounced interactions with magnons. Besides magnetic materials, ferroelectric vdW crystals, such as
SnSe, further enrich the palette of exciton polaritons in ferroic
materials, with few-layer TMD crystals
of rhombohedral stacking remaining a promising candidate to functionalize
EPs with ferroelectric properties. Lastly,
the recent emergence of large-bandgap monolayer topological insulators
with strongly pronounced exciton resonances, such as Bismuthene, could
compose an interesting platform to explore the physics of quantum
spin Hall polaritons.

10.1.3. Phenomena. As light−matter hybrids,
EPs obtain properties from both excitons and photons. This is why,
from a photonics perspective, they often exhibit exceptionally large
nonlinearities which are primarily inherited from the excitons’
exchange coupling and a nonlinear saturation of the oscillator strength.
Such properties are highly sought after in the quest for reaching
the important quantum blockade regime. Polaritons offer pronounced nonlinearity from the excitonic component
and long coherence from the photonic component. Efforts to enhance
nonlinearity for reaching the blockade regime in the weak pump limit
have included the use of Rydberg states of excitons, moiré
EPs, trion polaritons and dipolar EPs.,,,Nonlinearities also
play a key role in the context of polariton Bose−Einstein condensation,
an important platform for reservoir computing and potentially low-threshold
lasing. Polariton condensation and the
emergence of coherence was recently reported in TMD based EPs.−From their excitonic component, EPs also adopt symmetries of the
underlying crystal lattice. Their emission in TMD monolayers, for
instance, shows intriguing polarization properties that reflect the
locking of exciton spin and valley degrees of freedom. As a direct consequence, the emergent valley-momentum
coupling in optical cavities has the effect that photons with different
helicity propagate in opposite directions. In addition, it was recently demonstrated that the transport of
EPs in TMDs can be further manipulated via the topological order of
the optical cavity structure. Owing
to the large binding energy of excitons in TMDs, they also host excitonic
complexes, including trions and Fermi polarons in the limit of small
and large doping, respectively. Polariton states realized using these
charged excitonic systems are especially interesting from the standpoint
of nonlinear interaction owing to Coulomb interaction.

Interesting EP properties also result
from the magneto-optic effects of 2D magnetic materials. By inducing
linear or circular dichroism, magnetic order can impart optical polarization
selection rules onto EPs. Magnetic order can also be a powerful control
knob to alter the electronic band structure. In CrSBr, the changes
in the electronic structure that occur when the magnetic layer configuration
is forced from an antiparallel into a parallel configuration can shift
excitonic resonances by tens of millielectronvolts, inducing considerable magnetochromism. When CrSBr excitons
are strongly coupled with cavity modes exhibiting a different polarization
dichroism, the resulting polariton modes have polarization properties
that are distinct from that of either the exciton or the photon but
are controllable via both and in turn by a magnetic field.

10.2.1. Crystal Size. Exciton polaritons in 2D
materials could bring many benefits to optics applications. Technologically,
however, these benefits are currently still outweighed by the limited
size and homogeneity of exfoliated 2D crystals, which typically do
not exceed a few tens of micrometers. For most photonic devices, this
size needs to reach millimeter and centimeter scales. Continuing efforts
directed at achieving wafer-scale growth and passivation of TMD monolayers,
as well as metal tape-assisted exfoliation and passivation techniques, already report significant progress. Thus,
while the primary challenge toward technological applications with
EPs in 2D materials remains to increase lateral crystal sizes, recent
advances are promising.

10.2.2. Nonlinearity. A major goal for strong
light−matter coupling with 2D materials is realizing polariton
blockade, potentially enabling single photon nonlinearity and switching.
Although large nonlinear responses have been observed in TMD based
EPs, the nonlinear interaction strengths measured are well within
the classical limit. Currently, approaches to enhance this further
via cavity engineering, reducing excitonic line widths or field effects
are being pursued.

10.2.3. Coupled Degrees of Freedom. The primary
challenge with EPs in correlated materials is to obtain a better understanding
of the microscopic interactions involved in the coupling of excitons,
photons, phonons, and magnons. Of particular interest are polariton
Bose−Einstein condensates in antiferromagnetic crystals, since
magnons in these materials often exhibit very high frequencies. These
condensates could be interesting for (quantum) transduction. Interactions
between magnons with ∼THz frequency and exciton-polariton condensates
might be utilized to modulate the condensate’s coherent emission
on ultrafast time scales. Despite much smaller magnon frequencies,
the antiferromagnetic semiconductor CrSBr is a highly promising candidate
to demonstrate this effect. In addition, ferroelectric materials could
provide new degrees of electrical control over polariton laser emission.

10.2.4. Coupling Electron and Photon Transport. Transports of photons and charges are usually two independent processes
studied in different types of experiments. EPs induced by trion/Fermi
polaron resonances may however provide a means of efficiently connecting
them. Similar phenomena are expected for EPs and phonon-polaritons, in either a thermal or condensed state, where
coupling with photons generally helps overcome local disorders for
both ballistic and coherent transport, with the perspective to reach
a polariton-mediated regime of superconductivity.

10.3. Suggested Directions to Meet These Goals. Utilizing
strong light−matter interactions in 2D materials offers compelling
advantages over conventional optics in many regards. Realizing their
potential is directly linked to achieving a consistent fabrication
of high-quality 2D materials with technologically meaningful lateral
extensions. A promising path toward this goal may lie with recent
efforts in printing 2D materials.

A direction for fundamental research is to continue exploring new
materials with excitonic resonances suitable for achieving strong
light−matter coupling. Especially tapping into the vast pot
of materials with strongly correlated degrees of freedom should provide
insight into interactions between different quasiparticle excitations
and new functionalities for optics. Of interest in this regard are
optically anisotropic materials, and multiferroics promising a large
degree of control over optical properties by external voltages and
magnetic fields. Ongoing efforts in increasing nonlinearities could
also benefit substantially from exploring new materials and quasiparticle
interactions. From the cavity engineering point of view, a promising
direction currently pursued is using chiral cavities for breaking
symmetries and allowing new functionalities of optical devices.

11.1. Current State of the Art. Mono- and few-layer
structures of semiconducting TMDs host strongly bound excitons with
binding energies of several hundred meV. These binding energies are much larger than those of their bulk
counterparts due to quantum confinement and reduced dielectric screening
leading to strong electron−hole Coulomb attraction. In the
presence of free charge carriers the neutral excitons may capture
a free electron or hole and form charged excitons called trions (seeFigurea).,An alternative description increasingly used at higher doping densities
is that of the Fermi polaron corresponding to the exciton being dressed
by the excitations of the Fermi sea.,Typical binding
energies of the extra charge carrier to the exciton in monolayer TMDs
are a few tens of meV, making them observable even at room temperature
for sufficiently high doping. Experimentally, excitons, trions, and
Fermi polarons can be probed by optical absorption and emission-type
measurements as well as a variety of nonlinear and time-resolved techniques. Theoretical calculations of excitons can be
based onab initiomany-body methods like GW and
Bethe-Salpeter equation (BSE), analytical
effective Hamiltonian approaches, or
employing the Bloch equations methods. Altogether, the stability of the excitonic complexes combined with
design flexibility of TMD structures and their tunability renders
them excellent platforms for exploration and manipulation of fundamental
exciton physics as well as for optoelectronic and excitonic devices
operating up to room temperature.

Tunable properties of
excitons and trions. (a) Exciton wave function
of excitons (right top) and trions (left bottom) in monolayer MoS2. The hole is fixed in the center, and the (averaged) electron
distribution is shown in a top view. Adapted with permission from
ref  (Copyright
2017 Springer Nature). (b) Exciton energies with respect to an applied
vertical electric field in a bilayer MoS2. While intralayer
states are almost constant in energy, states with strong interlayer
contributions show an X-like shape. The colored data areab
initioresults overlaying experimental reflectance measurements.
Adapted with permission from ref  (Copyright 2021 Springer Nature). (c) Representative
relaxation channels and momentum dependent excitations in TMDs. While
transitions between valence and conduction bands at K have a momentum
close to Γ, momentum-indirect transitions involving phonons
(arrows) are also possible with a pronounced temperature dependence.
Adapted with permission from ref  (Copyright 2017 American Physical Society).
(d) Strain dependent photoluminescence of WSe2monolayer
featuring bright (X0, X) and dark (D1, D2) excitons. Adapted
with permission from ref  (Copyright 2022 Springer Nature). (e) Magnetic tuning of
the ground and excited states in monolayer WS2. Adapted with permission from ref  (Copyright 2019 Springer
Nature). (f) Tuning of interlayer excitons in a MoSe2/WSe2heterobilayer with electric field. (g) Corresponding injection of free charges demonstratingp- andn-type interlayer trions. Panels
(f,g) are adapted with permission from ref  (Copyright 2019 American Association for the
Advancement of Science).

Historically, the interest
in excitons in TMD materials was motivated by the demonstration of
bright, luminescent excitons in monolayer MoS2in 2010.,Theoretical and experimental studies of the exciton properties quickly
followed (see Wang et al. for an overview),
demonstrating both large binding energies and deviations from the
hydrogen-like excited states series in contrast to more traditional
quantum well systems. The non-hydrogenic exciton series originates
from the nonlocal nature of the dielectric function of a 2D material.,In most experimental setups the TMD structures are either placed
on insulating substrates or encapsulated in other 2D materials (typically
hBN). The chemically inert nature of the TMDs limits the formation
of chemical bonds with the surrounding materials. However, the long-range
Coulomb interaction inside the TMD can be significantly affected by
the dielectric environment, which in turn can renormalize the electronic
bandgap and exciton binding energies. In fact, by varying the dielectric constant of the substrate, it
is possible to tune not only the size of the exciton binding energy but also the qualitative form of the exciton
series.

The lowest bright excitons
in TMDs consist of transitions close
to the degenerate K and K′ points of the hexagonal Brillouin
zone. Due to the spin−orbit coupling, degenerate excitons at
K and K′ have different total angular momenta. As a result,
the inequivalent K and K′ valleys can be selectively excited
using circularly polarized lightan effect that motivated propositions
for valleytronic applications using valley index as a carrier of quantum
information. The bright excitons have
vanishing angular momentum (l= 0), finite g-factors
and diamagnetic shifts increasing with the principal quantum number
of excited states. This leads to a fan-like splitting in a magnetic
field; seeFiguree. Of particular importance, especially
for W-based TMD monolayers, are spin- and momentum-dark states involving
K/K′ transitions or those to the Γ or Q­(Λ) points
that can be lower in energy compared to bright ones (seeFigured). The ordering
and precise splitting of the dark and bright excitons is determined
by a competition of exchange interaction and spin−orbit coupling.,These excitons can be probed by light via phonon-assisted processes
and play an important role for exciton dynamics (see alsoFigurec). In close analogy
to bright excitons the dark states can also bind additional charges
and form trion states. Moreover, both the energies and the nature
of the excitonic wave functions can be strongly affected by externally
tunable strain potentials, opening up interesting opportunities for
basic science and applications; seeFigured.

If
different layers are stacked, the excitons are no longer confined
to the same layer and interlayer excitons may form. A general TMD
heterostructure thus typically hosts both intra- and interlayer states.
The latter are challenging to probe in reflection or transmission
because of the small spatial overlap of the electron and hole, albeit
possible in selected cases.,When intralayer and
interlayer excitons are close in energy, they may even hybridize to
form a mixed interlayer exciton with both intra- and interlayer character
(Figureb and f).
Such states combine a significant oscillator strength with an out-of-plane
dipole moment, allowing them to be tuned by a vertical electric field.,In analogy to the intralayer excitons, negative or positive interlayer
trions may form, depending on the doping level.,Moreover, in structures containing more than two layers, dipolar
interlayer excitons may couple and form quadrupolar excitons in symmetric
trilayers. In general, in-plane lattice
mismatch and finite rotation angles will lead to moiré or atomically
reconstructed structures upon stacking of TMDs, depending on the particular
combinations including trion complexes. In this case, the effects discussed above remain
largely valid yet, crucially, are also subject to the spatial modulation
with a substantial impact of their band structure including predictions
of topological edge states. Particularly
interesting are the practical consequence of the external screening
mentioned above. This allows the use of the excitons as dielectric
sensor for a rich variety ofelectronicmany-particle
correlations including Wigner crystals, Mott insulating, or even superconducting
states, among many others.

11.2.1. Complex Structures. These include vertical
stacks with two or more lattice mismatched or rotationally misaligned
layers such as moiré or reconstructed superlattices. A material-realistic
representation of such structures often requires simulation cells
with several thousand atoms, which is challenging even with standard
density functional theory (DFT). Moreover, a quantitatively accurate
description of band structures and excitons requires beyond-DFT methods
that are currently only feasible for systems with less than 100 atoms.
Similar challenges face the description of crystal defects (which
can couple to and/or trap excitons) and local strain fields (e.g.,
due to interactions with substrates). One solution to these challenges
may be constituted by emerging machine learning interatomic potentials.
However, the potentials are currently limited to the prediction of
total energies and structures. The prediction of electronic band energies
using machine learning seems significantly more difficult and currently
does not represent a viable solution.

11.2.2. High-Density Regime. Most theory and calculations
of excitons in TMDs assume a comparatively low density of excitons
or trions. However, many phenomena of interest, such as exciton condensation,
superfluidity, and Mott transition, occur in the high-density regime
where exciton−exciton interactions become of crucial importance
or the excitons even dissociate into dense correlated carrier gases/liquids.
A similarly interesting and unexplored area is that of high doping,
where the high density of free carriers may lead to the formation
of more complex charged quasiparticles beyond the three-particle trions.

11.2.3. Exciton Dynamics. The important role of
dynamics is so far mainly investigated based on parameter-based models.
Further progress ofab initioapproaches in this
direction would be highly desirable. This would require the inclusion
of electron−phonon coupling alongside electron−hole
interactions in combination with real time propagation within the
framework of either time-dependent DFT or many-body Green-function
theory (the Kadanoff−Baym equations). Especially in combination
with the previous discussion of defects, a simplified model may remain
required to achieve a better understanding and comparison with experiments,
for example, on transport-related quantities.

11.2.4. Time-Resolved Imaging on Nanometer Scale. There are already a number of state-of-the art approaches featuring
atomic-scale spatial resolution and femtosecond dynamics successfully
applied also to TMDs. It would be highly desirable, however, to combine
them with time-resolved imaging capabilities to directly monitor the
evolution of the excitonic wave functions in real space under a variety
of external conditions. The capability to optically track the excitonic
response on extremely short time-scales could then be exploited to
understand structurally complex scenarios including edge states at
in-plane interfaces, interplay of localization and delocalization
in superlattice potentials, and, possibly, excitonic quantum transport
phenomena. Experimentally this would require independent, simultaneous
tracking of the optical response from different sample positions with
high spatial and temporal resolution. Recent demonstrations of excitons
in photoemission could motivate using focused electron beams both
as a pump and probe, potentially combining them with tip-enhanced
microscopy and similar methods. While technologically demanding, this
could open up exciting opportunities to combine high level many-body
theory with closely matching experimental observables.

11.2.5. Dynamics of Electronic Correlations from Excitonic
Sensors. The direct consequence of using excitons as optically
accessible detectors for electronic correlations would be the extension
of this concept to the time domain. A wide range of interesting scenarios
would then become possible, including formation, relaxation, and decay
of stable and metastable correlated states using pump−probe-based
and similar techniques. The excitons themselves could be briefly promoted
to states more or less sensitive to specific correlations, including
dressing them with free charge carriers or promoting them to highly
excited states. This could potentially enable time-dependent sensitivity
also to the out-of-plane direction due to the transiently modified
long-range interaction from different excited states. Independently
controlling the exciton and free carrier densities in the exciton
sensing layers would further allow for precise tuning to experimentally
desired conditions.

11.2.6. Control of Neutral and Charge Excitons with Low-Energy
Photons. This concept goes back to studies of excitonic quasiparticles
using low-frequency microwave and THz radiation. In TMDs this process can be very
efficient and fast and should thus allow
for transient modification of the exciton composition, their charged
state, or possibly even spin-, valley- or intra-/interlayer configurations.
This could also be exploited for controlling a variety of excitonic
complexes or even higher-particle states including electronic correlations
probed by the excitons. There are clear experimental challenges considering
sample size and geometry as well as the properties of the THz or microwave
radiation that can be more difficult to adjust for the atomically
thin samples in contrast to the visible spectral range. In addition,
the by now routinely used methods of tip-enhanced THz and NIR microscopy
would be ideal for implementing similar schemes of transient excitonic
control.

Altogether, considering an ever-increasing material
base of low-dimensional platforms and their combinations in hybrid
heterostructures, these are only a few among many exciting directions
for research. Advances are to be expected in both theory and experiment
with the common goal of better understanding the properties of Coulomb-bound
states in nanostructured matter. In that respect, TMD-based structures
are likely to remain on par with other types of optical materials,
such as conventional semiconductor quantum wells, nanoplatelets, and
nanotubes, or even outperform these types as a platform for advancing
our understanding of excitonic quasiparticles as a platform for exploring
fundamental physics of excitonic quasiparticles.

12.1.1. Introduction. Controlling material properties
at the atomic scale is a long-sought goal in materials science and
holds profound implications for science and technology. In a visionary
1959 talk, Richard Feynman famously asked, “What would the
properties of materials be if we could really arrange the atoms the
way we want them?” With the rise of atomically thin 2D materials
hosting quantum phenomena, we are closer than ever to realizing this
dream. For example, bound electron−hole pairs (i.e., excitons),
which dominate the optical properties of these materials, can be manipulated
by many-body effects arising from the dynamic interplay of charge,
spin, and moiré superlattice structures. Despite recent advances,
achieving complete atomic-level control remains a significant challenge.
In this section, we review recent advances that enable the tuning
of excitonic quasiparticles at the atomic scale in 2D semiconducting
chalcogenides through doping, alloying, and intercalation of vdW crystals
(Figurea). We correlate
these fundamental approaches with advances in characterization methods
and resulting applications (Figure). Finally, we summarize the remaining challenges for
this field and propose a forward-looking roadmap aimed at realizing
the full potential of 2D semiconducting chalcogenides for photonic
applications.

Overview of growth, characterization, and applications
in doping,
alloying, and intercalation of 2D vdW materials. (a) Schematic of
structural changes in vdW materials and heterostructures for doping,
alloying, and intercalation. (b.1) The current status of growth efforts
includes doped and alloyed high-quality wafer-scale 2D materials by
bottom-up approaches such as chemical vapor deposition. However, producing
wafer-scale 2D materials with minimal defects and achieving controlled
dopant density and alloy stoichiometry with minimal strain is still
a challenge. Adapted from ref (Copyright
2021 Springer Nature). (b.2) The remaining challenges include low-temperature
growth, reversible doping strategies, and precise postgrowth patterning
that are critical for applications relying on heterojunctions and
BEOL processing. Adapted from ref (Copyright
2016 Springer Nature). (c.1) The current status of characterization
methods for quasiparticles is exemplified by STEM (left) and far-field
optical spectroscopy techniques (right) that reveal dopant and defect
distributions, chemical composition, and excitonic properties in 2D
materials. Left and right schematics are adapted from ref  (Copyright 2020 American
Chemical Society) and ref  (Copyright 2024 Wiley), respectively. (c.2) A key challenge
in characterizing intercalated, doped, and alloyed samples is achieving
the spatial resolution necessary to probe both the atomically resolved
crystal structure and the dynamics of excitons at the Bohr radius
length scale (1−2 nm) at low temperatures. (d.1) An example
of a current application enabled by solution-processed 2D materials
is electroluminescence from megasonicated MoS2inks that
retain monolayer direct bandgap character in percolating films. Adapted
from ref  (Copyright
2023 American Chemical Society). (d.2) Challenges for photonic applications
include the ordering of dopants, substitutional species, and intercalated
molecules. The specific example depicted here is ordered intercalated
chiral molecules in MoS2that have the potential to realize
macroscopic chiral optical response. Adapted from ref  (Copyright 2022 Springer
Nature). (e) Schematic illustrating opportunities for integratingin situhigh-resolution imaging and spectroscopy techniques
for real-time monitoring of crystallinity, defect states, and electronic
structures during growth, which can accelerate the realization of
patterned doped regions without disturbing the underlying material
lattice. The incorporation of advanced artificial intelligence and
machine learning approaches with large-scale data sets will accelerate
data analysis, while an integrated feedback mechanism will further
refine the understanding of the physical mechanisms influencing device
performance.

12.1.4. Applications. The potential applications
enabled by intercalation, doping, and alloying fall into two broad
categories: (i) High-performance photonic technologies such as photodetectors;
(ii) Emergence of new phenomena including bandgap engineering, monolayer behavior in bulk, superconductivity, quantum
phase transitions, chemochromism in
intercalated 2D compounds, and novel
spin structures in vdW magnets. In the
case of alloying, the bandgap can be tuned to vary the spectral responses
of light-emitting diodes, photodetectors, and single photon sources. Substitutional doping facilitates the realization
of lateral and vertical p−n heterojunctions that show gate
tunability of photonic responses. Through
electric-field doping, sub-bandgap trap states in 2D TMDs can be filled,
which has resulted in near unity gain in photoluminescence albeit
at low fluence. Overall, 2D photodetectors
have shown high internal photoconversion gain (>105)
in
the visible range, but they are more competitive in the mid-IR where
options for bulk semiconductors are limited.

12.2.1. Synthesis. Challenges in achieving controlled
modification of 2D materials by doping, alloying, and intercalation
share characteristics with the general challenges for bottom-up and
top-down approaches. For example, desired properties from doping compete
with unintentional effects from contamination and disorder in 2D materials,
so doping-induced tuning of photonic devices assumes the availability
of relatively defect-free intrinsic 2D materials. In this regard, five main challenges can be delineated:
(i) Production of wafer-scale intrinsic 2D materials with minimum
defects; (ii) Controlled dopant density and alloy stoichiometry with
minimum strain; (iii) Postgrowth patterning of doped and alloyed regions
for on-demand production of heterojunctions with ohmic electrical
contacts; (iv) Reversible doping strategies such as healing of dopant-induced
defect states; (v) Low-temperature growth and transfer strategies
for back-end-of-line (BEOL) processing.,Spatial control of dopant distributions during CVD growth presents
additional challenges and opportunities. For example, dopants such
as Cr and Fe can be confined to specific regions of hexagonal 2D sheets
given the high affinity of chalcogen zigzag edges to create metal
vacancies that can be filled with dopants. For reversible doping, approaches are needed to eliminate synthetic
defects after growth. The two main challenges
for intercalation are (1) avoiding spurious electrochemical reactions
with the host crystal and (2) controlling the density and spatial
distribution of the intercalant. For completeness, it should be noted
that chemical functionalization of the basal plane can also tune electronic
properties for photonic applications, as has been described in detail
elsewhere.

Future opportunities
include: (i) Templated growth to achieve highly crystalline, rotationally
commensurate materials using epitaxy or remote epitaxy approaches;
(ii) Growth of Janus crystals for tunable photonic properties; (iii)
Direct growth of vdW and moiré heterostructures from different
2D materials. The opportunities in top-down
approaches include: (i) Morphotaxial conversion synthesis that can
produce 2D counterparts of materials that do not exist as vdW crystals; (ii) Tunable magnetic properties in doped 2D
materials such as vanadium-doped WSe2. Postgrowth processing with proton and ion irradiation in
controlled plasma environments can further tailor the spatial distribution
of doped regions, preferably in a manner that minimizes perturbation
of the underlying crystalline lattice.

12.2.2. Characterization. Although tip-based nanoscopy
methods (such as those mentioned above) are increasingly used to characterize
excitons and related quasiparticles, it has been challenging to achieve
the spatial resolution needed to probe exciton emission at the length
scale of the Bohr radius (1−2 nm). Moreover, most TEPL studies
are confined to ambient conditions, whereas a low-temperature setup
could reveal intrinsic excitonic properties with enhanced PL intensity
without homogeneous broadening, thereby quantifying the effect of
dopants on excitonic structures and recombination processes. By combining
cryogenic s-SNOM with TEPL, for example, demodulation can be achieved
for the tip-scattered PL signal at high harmonics. Recent efforts
have also correlated electronic structure from low-temperature atomically
resolved scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) with tip-induced excitons
and their luminescence spectra, mapping structure−property
relationships at nanometer-scale spatial resolution (<5 nm). Coupling ultrafast laser excitation within
nanoscopy methods will further quantify competing recombination pathways
involving excitons, dopants, defects, and vdW heterojunctions (Figurec.2). In particular,
recent advances hold promise for atomic-scale near-field spectroscopy
and imaging, such as optical tunneling emission microscopy and X-ray-excited resonance tunneling, which
measure the local density of states.

In situhigh-resolution optical and structural
diagnostic techniques are needed for real-time monitoring of crystallinity,
defect states, and electronic structures during growth in order to
provide insights into defect formation and photochemical pathways
that can be tailored for controlled doping and alloying (Figuree). For example,in situcharacterization of TMDs can capture critical kinetic
information often missed in postgrowth interrogation, offering insights
into the intermediate complex formation, grain boundary stitching,
defect dynamics, phase transitions, and chemical reactions. These
insights will help address key challenges in understanding how growth
conditions affect material structure, enabling precise control over
properties. Correlated measurements using high-resolution spatial,
spectral, and temporally resolved spectroscopy and microscopy in a
multimodal setup under ultrahigh vacuum and cryogenic temperatures
will facilitate a comprehensive analysis of optical and optoelectronic
properties, which will facilitate optimization for photonic applications.
Finally, integrating advanced machine learning methodologies with
large-scale data sets can enable the extraction of nuanced insights
into excitonic dynamics, the acceleration of data analysis, and a
deeper understanding of the physical mechanisms governing complex
systems. Including device performance metrics in machine learning
analyses would further refine our understanding of multifaceted excitonic
phenomena that play performance-limiting roles in photonic devices
(Figuree).

12.2.3. Applications. Current challenges in realizing
viable 2D photonic technologies include: (i) Minimizing disorder in
wafer-scale, monolayer films; (ii) Controlled doping and alloying;
(iii) Effective passivation and contact engineering. For example,
the electrochemical intercalation of individual micron-sized black
phosphorus flakes has shown monolayer behavior, but this scheme needs
to be generalized to other wafer-scale crystals such as TMDs. As an example of molecular-level control, left-handed
or right-handed intercalants (such asR-α-methylbenzylamine)
have shown strong chirality-induced spin selection effects in 2D crystals
such as TaS2and TiS2(Figured.2). Further
progress in this direction that achieves long-range lattice order
in interacted species would be of particular interest for tailoring
the optospintronic properties of magnetic vdW semiconductors. In additive manufacturing approaches, printed
2D films require a high fraction of monolayers in inks and efficient
charge transport in percolating films. Solution-based densification of monolayers into bulk crystals has
been demonstrated, but these strategies are not likely to preserve
monolayer behavior without spacer layers provided by covalently tethered
molecular adlayers. While electrostatic
doping in all-2D stacks using micron-sized graphene, hexagonal boron
nitride, and TMC flakes has been shown to minimize disorder for high-quality
2D photonic devices (Figureb.1), the challenge is to generalize these approaches to wafer-level
photonic applications.,Finally, postgrowth
substitutional doping, contact engineering, encapsulation, and BEOL
integration with readout integrated circuits are of high interest
for photonic applications, but these methodologies need to be achieved
without introducing additional disorder.

Doping and alloying
impact several photonic applications, including single-photon sources,
IR photodetectors, electro-optical switches relying on strong nonlinear
optical processes, and light-emitting devices (Figuree).,All of these technologies
will benefit from resolving the materials science challenges mentioned
above. For example, a recently demonstrated megasonication approach
enhanced the monolayer fraction in solution-processed MoS2inks in a manner that preserves monolayer character in restacked
MoS2flakes, ultimately leading to electroluminescence
from bulk films (Figured.2). Monolayer behavior in
intercalated crystals is also promising for quantum emitters where
localized strain can funnel excitons to increase quantum yield. Effective
passivation strategies are also essential for emerging 2D magnetic
semiconductors that couple excitonic quasiparticles with spin states. Combining two different doping strategies could
yield further control over photonic properties, such as intercalating
alloyed TMDs to achieve a greater bandgap tunability. Likewise, combining
electric field effects in ambipolar TMDs and heterojunctions between
doped monolayers (e.g., Nb-doped p-type MoS2and Redoped
n-type MoS2) can independently induce electrostatic control
and electrical emission of quasiparticles such as trions, biexcitons,
and dark indirect excitons.

13.1. Introduction. Excitonsbound electron−hole
pairsdominate the optical response of 2D TMD semiconductors.
The reduced Coulomb screening in these materials, together with the
high quality of state-of-the-art encapsulated monolayer samples, results
in robust excitonic states with binding energies on the order ofEB∼ 0.5 eV. The states
exhibit large oscillator strength and nearly radiatively limited line
width at low temperatures.,These features have
established 2D TMDs as a promising light−matter interface for
photonics applications. However, weak
interactions between tightly bound 2D excitons have so far limited
their relevance for quantum nonlinear devices. Largely motivated by
the possibility of realizing exciton-based quantum photonic devices,
several recent works have focused on confining the center-of-mass
motion of these bosonic quasiparticles as a pathway to increase their
nonlinear response. In this context, the 2D materials toolbox offers
a wide variety of possible approaches, including patterning of the
semiconductor or surrounding dielectric,,formation of moiré superlattice potentials, strain-engineering,,and electrostatic
engineering,−among other schemes.

In the context
of precisely engineering the confinement of an exciton, a key recent
development is the possibility of tuning the confinement length by
lithographic patterning and the use of applied strain and electrostatic
fields. These degrees of freedom allow one to reach an optimal confinement
scale that exhibits large optical nonlinearity, while simultaneously
maintaining sizable oscillator strength.

In this section, we
will focus on two approachesstrain
engineering and electrostatic engineeringwhich constitute
two scalable platforms for the control of multiple nonlinear excitonic
sites, a key ingredient of future quantum photonics applications.

13.2.1. State of the Art. Strong confinement of
excitons associated with localized tensile strain was initially shown
to produce quantum emitters (QEs) in tungsten-based TMD monolayers.,This was achieved by deposition of the monolayer on a substrate
that had been patterned with pillar arrays (Figurea,b). The pillars induce a strain field
in the monolayer and localize the QEs with a spatial precision of
∼100 nm. The deposition was often accompanied by the formation
of wrinkles in the monolayer, which may result in variation in the
strain profile. This issue has been addressed by decoupling the straining
process from the initial monolayer deposition in two subsequent studies.,In both works, localized strain was created by the monolayer conforming
to a depression, rather than a protrusion, in the substrate. In one
approach, nanoindentation on polymeric substrates was explored, and thermal molding was used in the other. Complementing strain confinement, additional
control over the defect density by electron-beam irradiation was utilized
in another recent investigation, in which
encapsulation of the monolayer in thin dielectric layers improved
the spectral quality of the QEs. Further integration also enabled
electrically driven QEs.

Strain and
electrostatic engineering for monolayer exciton confinement.
(a,b) The principle of strain-induced quantum confinement (a) and
representative site-controlled quantum emitters (b). Reproduced with
permission from ref  (Copyright 2017 Springer Nature). (c,d) Structures for 0D electrostatic
quantum confinement of intralayer excitons with position and energy
tunability. Reproduced with permission from ref  (Copyright 2024 The American
Association for the Advancement of Science). (e) Some future possibilities
for scaled-up arrays of controlled QEs, interfacing with photonic
integrated circuits, and new interfaces with 2D material platforms.
Adapted with permission from ref (Copyright
2021 American Chemical Society).

While
WSe2and WS2have been the materials of choice
in most of the studies of strain-induced QEs, the origin of their
(quantum) emission has been a source of discussion. Naïvely,
the emission could come from bright excitons that are tightly localized
in the localized strain field. Subsequent theoretical analysis, however, attributed the origin to dark excitons
that are brightened due to strain-induced mixing with in-gap defect
states. Two experimental signatures were considered in the analysis:
the spectral gap (>40 meV) between the QEs and 2D bright excitons,
and the (dis-)­agreement of the excitong-factor between
the QEs and the 2D (bright) dark excitons. With this understanding,
in a subsequent work the strain and the defect density were controlled
independently in the fabrication process, and it was found that neither factor alone was able to produce QEs.
More recently, in one investigation where WSe2monolayers
are incorporated into nanomechanical devices,in situstrain tuning allowed the hybridization
between dark and localized excitons to be observed directly. Also,
correlated photoluminescence imaging and atomic-force microscopy have
found smooth strain variation around the QEs, which is considered
insufficient to confine bright excitons sufficiently tightly to enable
quantum emission. The picture of strain-induced
mixing between dark and localized excitons is thus supported by growing
experimental evidence.

This challenge calls for
new directions in the research of 2D confined excitons and QEs. One
such direction is to start with monolayers with bright (spin-allowed)
exciton ground states, thereby eliminating the defect band as a requirement
to brighten the dark excitons of WSe2. Progress toward
this direction has been made using monolayer MoSe2, where the spin-allowed nature of the QEs was
supported by the measured excitong-factor and the
lack of a discernible zero-field splitting. The authors also showed
an improved method for developing localized emitters that appeared
to reduce the QE spectral inhomogeneity down to a few meV from a few
tens of meV in other works. Another material that also features bright
excitons is MoTe2. The MoTe2QEs exhibited characteristics of spin-allowed transitions
like those of the MoSe2QEs, but with emission in the telecom
wavelength range that is desirable for long-distance quantum communication.
Additionally, multilayer GaSe can be tuned toward a direct gap with
applied strain. The strain-induced GaSe
QEs show distinct emission lines without the lower-energy defect-related
bands that accompany WSe2QEs, but further spectroscopic
investigations are needed to determine unambiguously the nature of
the relevant optical transition of the QEs.

Another promising
direction is to combine strain with layer stacking
to induce QEs in heterobilayers (HBLs) that host interlayer excitons.
Interlayer excitons possess static dipole moments, and energy shifts
under an electric field could be used to compensate for spectral variation
up to tens of meV. This tunability would, however, typically come
at the price of a reduced radiative rate of interlayer excitons. This
approach does not presume the elimination of defects, as the HBLs
that are reported to show localized interlayer excitons also include
the WSe2layers. We also
note that the cause of the localization in this report is not attributed
to moiré confinement. Epitaxial HBLs from nearly lattice-matched
materials can thus be used to avoid the complexity of moiré
structures. A work in this direction has already shown strain-induced
interlayer QEs in MoS2/WSe2HBLs, although Stark tuning was not explicitly demonstrated
because of the lack of electrical contacts.

With the engineerability
of monolayers, progress has been made
in achieving strain confinement, vdW heterostructures, and coupling
to photonic structures. We expect further improvement and integration
of these capabilities to enable a scalable source of indistinguishable
single photons for quantum photonics applications.

13.3.1. State of the Art. Electrostatic confinement
of excitons is a promising direction for scalable nonlinearities because
of the possibility afforded forin situenergy tuning
and lithographic patterning. Electrostatic confinement may be achieved
in several ways, depending on the nature of the excitonic state involved
and the electric-field distributions considered. Early experiments
on III−V materials already reported the electrostatic control
of out-of-plane dipolar excitons by applying spatially varying vertical
electric fields. In this configuration, the position-dependent Stark
shift creates a potential energy landscape for out-of-plane dipolar
excitons that can be used to control their center-of-mass motion.
Similar results have been obtained in 2D materials, in particular
using stacks with type II band alignment where the hole sits in one
layer and the electron sits in the other layer. Such heterostructures generally also exhibit moiré
superlattice potentials, which can further confine excitons or interfere
with their electrostatic control. Another consideration related to
confinement strategies based on interlayer excitons is their aforementioned
low radiative rate.

Recently,
electrostatic quantum confinement of neutral intralayer
excitons in monolayer TMDs has been achieved using the second-order
Stark effect in gate-defined lateral p−i−n junctions. In this technique, the steeply varying in-plane
electric field present in the depletion region polarizes and traps
excitons, resulting in a 1D confinement potential that follows the
natural edges of the gate. Repulsive charge−exciton interactions
in the doped regions (repulsive polaron formation) can further confine
the neutral excitons to the region of charge neutrality. Building
on this approach, researchers have demonstrated quantum confinement
of excitons in a variety of geometries, including quantum dots,,quantum rings, and arrays, by lithographic
structuring of gate electrodes (Figurec). A salient feature of this approach is
its scalability, as the quantum dot positions are lithographically
defined, and the energy of individual trapping sites of a lattice
can simultaneously be tuned by independent gate electrodes. Simultaneous
resonant tuning of three independent quantum dots in the same device
has been achieved, demonstrating a route
toward large arrays of degenerate solid-state quantum devices (Figured). The energy
tuning range of the trapped excitons, limited by their field ionization,
reaches 10 meV in state-of-the-art devices at cryogenic temperatures.
The 0D nature of such emitters has been demonstrated through the on−off
blinking behavior of emission, typical of 0D quantum emitters. Finally, electrical control of valley hybridization
of the localized exciton states has been reported. For applications, however, the samples must be optimized
to suppress blinking and spectral jumps of the 0D exciton resonance,
and photon correlation measurements are needed to confirm their QE
nature.

13.3.2. Challenges, Future Goals, and Suggested Directions
to Meet Goals. These advances in electrostatic trapping of
excitons pave the way for several new research directions and applications.
We identify three main themes (Figuree) that will benefit from the techniques
introduced above for electrostatic, as well as for strain confinement.

Integration in photonic structures:
A central challenge in the field of 2D materials photonics is the
realization of highly nonlinear optical media, in which photons coherently
propagate while undergoing strong exciton-mediated nonlinearities.
A key advantage of 2D materials for realizing this polaritonic platform
is their suitability for integration with photonic elements, such
as optical cavities, photonic crystals, and waveguides. In particular,
interfacing confined excitons with a specifically engineered photonic
mode would have implications for the long quest for scalable single
photon sources.

Large-scale
control and quantum optical
metasurfaces: Another important goal is the upscaling of existing
platforms to realize very large arrays of controllable quantum confined
excitons. Electrically trapped intralayer excitons in TMDs hold promise
thanks to their controllability with CMOS-compatible voltages and
their sizable optical cross section. With advances in 2D materials
growth, monolayers with larger area and high quality are expected
to become available. This will open the possibility of integrating
these heterostructures in wafer-scale CMOS architectures, enabling
a massive scale-up of the demonstrated devices. The large-scale control
over quantum confined exciton states offers a new avenue to the design
of metasurfaces operating in the quantum nonlinear regime. The ability
to control electronic fluctuations in the local environment of trapped
excitons, the demonstration of QE statistics, and the management of
crosstalk in large-scale devices constitute near-term challenges for
this approach.

Interfacing
with the 2D materials
ecosystem: A unique feature of 2D materials is that they cover the
whole range of electronic, optical, and magnetic properties. This
brings up exciting opportunities for electrical confinement of excitons
in other vdW systems, such as layer-hybridized excitons in bilayer
semiconductors, moiré superlattices, electronic quantum-dots
in bilayer graphene, ferromagnetic semiconductors (e.g., CrSBr), and
many other possibilities. For instance, gate-control of the charge
density in CrSBr could be used to realize
electrically trapped excitons with energies sensitively depending
on the interlayer spin alignment. The confined state energy could
thus be controlled with small external magnetic fields, providing
a new tuning knob for quantum photonics applications. Another exciting
direction is the interaction of gate-defined excitonic QDs with their
electronic counterparts in bilayer graphene. This may lead to the
creation of a spin-photon interface hosted entirely in vdW materials.

The design and control of large-scale nonlinear photonic
devices operating in the quantum regime is a tantalizing frontier
of 2D semiconductor optics. While new approaches hold promise for
the scalable assembly of quantum nonlinear building blocks, material
constraints have so far limited the progress toward that goal. Achieving
high-quality, large-area encapsulated devices with homogeneous excitonic
response over millimeter scales is key for getting such devices out
of the research laboratories. Once such materials become available,
interfacing with CMOS technologies, as well as with existing integrated
photonics platforms, should enable significant breakthroughs.

Nonlinear
nanophotonics faces the challenge of the inherently weak
anharmonic response in many materials. However, certain 2D materials
rank among the most nonlinear known, unveiling rich phenomena, particularly
through their interplay with magnetic responses and electronic structures.
These and other exciting aspects are explored in this block.

Two-dimensional TMDs have been at the forefront
of research on
condensed matter physics due to their unique optoelectronic properties
enabled by strong light−matter interaction. Quantum confinement
and reduced Coulomb screening make TMDs an ideal playground to study
excitons and their many-body complexes (i.e., trions, biexcitons,
and other multiparticle states) and to investigate their tunability
with external parameters like electric/magnetic fields and the lattice
strain. Moreover, the possibility to optically address and manipulate
the spin/valley degree of freedom further increased interest in these
materials.

Since the advent of
2D materials, out-of-equilibrium spectroscopies
have been extensively used to study the mechanisms of formation, relaxation,
and recombination of excitons occurring on different time scales,
ranging from tens of femtoseconds to nanoseconds. Exciton line-shape
analysis performed at different delay times has shown that the transient
optical response as measured by pump−probe optical spectroscopy
is the result of the interplay between dynamical screening of Coulomb
interaction (i.e., renormalization of the quasiparticle bandgap and
the binding energy of the exciton), broadening of the exciton peak
due to excitation-induced dephasing, and reduction of its absorption
due to the phase-space filling effect. In the time domain, the transient optical signal decays over multiple
time scales as a consequence of radiative and nonradiative relaxation
processes, scattering with defects, and energy equilibration to the
lattice.

A fundamental step forward
in the research on 2D materials was
the realization of vdW heterostructures made by vertically stacking
two or more 2D monolayers without any constraints due to the lattice
mismatch. Here, the twist angle acts
as an external parameter to tune the optical properties and the exciton
landscape. Early optical pump−probe experiments performed on
heterostructures with type II band alignment focused on the study
of ultrafast electron or hole transfer dynamics occurring between
the K/K’ valleys, which are weakly hybridized due to their
in-plane orbital character. These interlayer
scattering processes are extremely fast (i.e., tens to hundreds of
femtoseconds) and show a weak dependence
on the interlayer twist angle because they are mediated by intermediate
scattering through layer-hybridized valleys. Charge separation suppresses
the intervalley electron−hole exchange interaction, which is
the main cause of fast valley depolarization in TMDs, leading to the
formation of spin-polarized holes characterized by valley polarization
close to unity and spin/valley lifetime on the order of microseconds. The strong Coulomb interaction binds electrons
and holes located in opposite layers of the heterostructure (seeFigurea), giving rise
to interlayer excitons (ILXs) characterized by lower emission energies
than those of their intralayer counterparts and reduced oscillator
strength as a result of the small overlap between the electron and
hole wave functions. Optical pump−probe and time-resolved photoluminescence
spectroscopy measurements have shown that ILXs have an extremely long
lifetime (exceeding by several orders of magnitude the lifetime of
intralayer excitons) and enhanced valley polarization retention. The
ILX formation process has also been also investigated by different
nonequilibrium spectroscopy techniques. Broadband transient absorption spectroscopy measurements performed
on MoSe2/WSe2heterostructures have reported
picosecond formation dynamics of the optically bright ILXs at the
K valleys (i.e., a time scale much slower than the build-up time of
intralayer excitons). Theoretical calculations have shown that (i)
the delayed formation is the result of a phonon-assisted interlayer
exciton cascade process of hot ILX populations down to the ground
state (seeFigureb) and (ii) the dynamics of optically bright excitons are strongly
affected by optically dark momentum-indirect excitons.

Ultrafast optical processes in vdW heterostructures. (a) Sketch
of a TMD heterostructure illustrating intralayer, interlayer, and
hybrid excitons, along with the simplified representation of the heterostructure
band structure with the different band alignments hosting different
excitonic species. Hybrid exciton results from resonant interlayer
electron tunneling. Adapted with permission from ref  (Copyright 2021, American
Chemical Society). (b) Graphical representation of the interlayer-exciton
(ILX) formation process in a MoSe2/WSe2heterostructure
upon resonant photoexcitation of the bright exciton in MoSe2. Hole transfer results in the formation of a hot ILX population
with finite momentum Q. Hot ILXs quickly relax to the optically bright
ILX ground state by exchanging energy and momentum with phonons. Adapted
from ref  (Creative
Commons CC BY). (c) Sketch of the single-particle valleys of MoS2/WSe2heterostructures at some high-symmetry points
(i.e., K and Σ). After resonant photoexcitation of the intralayer
exciton in MoS2, an ILX at the K valleys forms via intermediate
phonon-mediated scattering with hybrid exciton (hΣ). Adapted
with permission from ref  (Copyright 2023 IOP Publishing). (d) Exciton diffusion
in TMD heterostructures with and without moiré superlattice
(left and center panels). θ is the twist angle between the two
monolayers. The moiré potential (sketched in the right panel)
tends to localize ILXs and to hinder their diffusion.

Time- and angle-resolved photoemission
spectroscopy (tr-ARPES)
techniques have noticeably expanded the research on excitons in TMDs
because of their unique ability to combine energy and momentum resolution,
also in the time domain, enabling direct tracking of the band structure
evolution following photoexcitation. A clear photoemission signature
of photoexcited momentum-direct excitons (at the K valleys) has been
predicted by theory and reported experimentally. The excitonic signature,
located at a lower energy with respect to the single particle band
and shifted by an amount equal to the exciton binding energy, has
a peculiar energy−momentum dispersion, which is inherited from
the valence band. The capability of accessing the exciton dispersion
has enabled the retrieval of the excitonic wave function in real space,
allowing estimation of its spatial extent. Another advantage of tr-ARPES is the possibility to directly address
the formation dynamics of momentum-forbidden dark exciton states (i.e.,
excitons characterized by finite crystal momentum with an electron
and a hole residing on different valleys in the conduction and valence
bands) which cannot be detected with all-optical spectroscopy techniques.

Time-resolved momentum microscopy, a
variant of tr-ARPES, has also
been applied to track intra- and interlayer exciton dynamics in TMD
heterostructures. In particular, in
the MoS2/WSe2heterostructure, interlayer coupling
results in the hybridization of the Σ valley conduction bands
of both WSe2and MoS2layers. A direct consequence
of the layer hybridization is the formation of the so-called momentum-indirect
hybrid excitons (i.e., Coulomb bound electron−hole pairs where
the hole resides at the K valley of the WSe2layer and
the electron at the Σ valley is shared between the two layers).
Upon photoexcitation of the intralayer bright exciton of MoS2, hybrid excitons form almost instantaneously by phonon scattering
and mediate the formation of momentum-direct ILXs at the K point on
a slower time scale (seeFigurec).

The ability to control
the orientation between the layers of the
heterostructure with increasing precision has led to the systematic
study of exciton emission and absorption as a function of the twist
angle. The periodic alignment of the atomic registry in the twisted
layers of the heterostructure results in an overarching periodic pattern
(i.e., the moiré pattern) which modulates the electronic band
structure of the heterostructure. The spatial periodicity depends
on the relative orientation and the lattice mismatch between the layers.
The periodic potential induced by the moiré pattern spatially
confines ILXs and gives rise to a series of sharp excitonic resonances
(called moiré excitons), spaced in energy and characterized
by alternating spin/valley selection rules.

During the last years several experimental studies have tried
to
capture the effect of the twist angle and the moiré potential
on the recombination dynamics of the excitons. Unlike the charge transfer
and exciton formation process, the radiative recombination time of
ILXs can drastically change in response to small variations of the
twist angle. Two mechanisms are responsible
for this effect: (i) the growing momentum mismatch between the conduction/valence
band states at K which are involved in the formation of the ILXs,
and (ii) the localization effect of excitons in the moiré potential.
An experimental signature of moiré potential affecting the
spatiotemporal diffusion of ILX is reported in refs  and  (seeFigured).

14.1. Challenges, Future Goals, and Suggested Directions.Despite the efforts made in recent years to understand, characterize,
and control the dynamics of excitons in TMD heterostructures, much
still needs to be done to clarify certain aspects and answer new questions.
Here we present possible future directions in this research field
and novel experimental techniques that can help in this quest.

14.1.1. Effect of Moiré Potential on Exciton Dynamics. The measurements of exciton dynamics in TMD heterostructures as
a function of the twist angle, mentioned earlier, have been performed
when little was known about the nature of moiré excitons. Only
recently several studies have shed more light on the nature of these
excitons, clarifying how the transition from localized to nonlocalized
states can drastically alter their absorption and emission spectra.
This was made possible by successfully imaging the moiré periodic
domains via electron microscope techniques and by correlating them
to the optical response of the excitons. Recent studies have also shown that rigid lattice moiré pattern
models cannot be applied for small twist angles, and atomic reconstruction
must be considered. Calculations have
shown that the rearrangement of the atoms results in the appearance
of multiple flat bands which affect the excitonic spectrum.

In light of these new results, novel
time-resolved optical spectroscopy experiments will be extremely useful
to understand how the dynamics of exciton formation and thermalization
change when they are spatially confined within the moiré potential
or when they are in a delocalized regime. Since spatial localization
of excitons is supposed to enhance their mutual interaction, optical
pump−probe experiments as a function of the incident fluence
will enable quantification of the role of the Auger-type exciton−exciton
annihilation process and understanding of how this process depends
on the confinement. Another dynamical aspect of moiré excitons
that deserves to be considered is the origin of their spatiotemporal
diffusion, which might not be fully compatible with a simple model
of exciton hopping between moiré sites. Systematic studies
of the role of phonon-mediated, exciton−exciton scattering
processes in the diffusion dynamics are needed. The depth of the moiré
potential and the degree of exciton localization within the potential
are other parameters that might affect the diffusion dynamics. Shallow-trapped
excitons are expected to diffuse more freely on the crystal than deep-trapped
excitons. Experimental verifications of this prediction are still
missing.

14.1.2. Ultrafast Dynamics of Correlated Electronic States
in Moiré Superlattices. One of the big revolutions
brought by the advent of moiré materials is the appearance
of strongly correlated states of electrons in the periodic potential
created by the moiré superlattice. When the Coulomb repulsion
energyUof charge carriers is much larger than the
kinetic energy termWrelated to the tunneling between
the potential pockets, the system can be described by the Fermi-Hubbard
model. This model predicts Mott insulating phases and high-temperature
superconductivity. Strongly correlated
insulating states have been observed in different TMD moiré
systems whenU > W, such as graphene-gated heterobilayers
of WSe2/WS2, MoSe2/WS2and MoTe2/WSe2, as well as twisted homobilayers
of WSe2and MoSe2. In such systems, the signatures of the electronic Mott insulating
phase can be optically probed by monitoring the exciton photoluminescence
or reflectance spectrum, changing the doping level around integer
filling factors of the moiré lattice sites.

Although
this new research field is sparking tremendous interest in the scientific
community, to date only a handful of studies have aimed at understanding
and optically manipulating the ultrafast dynamics of strongly correlated
states in moiré materials, with several fundamental questions
still remaining open. Very recently, temperature-dependent pump−probe
optical experiments on a gated WSe2/WS2heterostructure
revealed the prominent role of electron−phonon coupling in
the collapse of the Mott insulating phase, occurring within a few
picoseconds, previously mainly attributed to electron−electron
interactions. These findings also suggest the presence of a polaron
lattice in the TMD moiré system. However, the processes behind the recovery of the Mott insulating
state after photoexcitation remain still unclear. Because of the possibility
to tune the intercell tunnelling term by the twist angle and the average
filling factor of holes and electrons in the moiré cell by
the electrostatic gating, moiré TMD heterostructures are an
ideal and a novel framework for studying the out-of-equilibrium physics
of different correlated states by transient optical spectroscopy techniques.
We expect several studies in the future on this topic.

14.1.3. Advances in Ultrafast Spectroscopy Techniques. Optical pump−probe spectroscopy is a mature technique that
has been extensively used to unveil the exciton dynamics in TMD heterostructures.
An extension of this technique which employs two phase-locked femtosecond
excitation pulses is 2D electronic spectroscopy (2DES). Although less
frequently used, this technique has the advantage to disentangle homogeneous
and inhomogeneous excitonic line widths and to combine high temporal
and spectral resolution, allowing retrieval of important dynamical
properties like exciton and spin-valley coherence time, exciton many-body
effects and coherent coupling between excitons. The possibility to extend 2DES, improving the spatial resolution
to the diffraction limit (in a collinear geometry), will provide the
opportunity to study interlayer coherent carrier and energy transfer
and the coherent coupling involving intralayer, interlayer and hybridized
excitons in aligned and twisted TMD heterostructures.

In close
connection with 2DES experiments, multiple pump−probe optical
techniques based on the use of delay-controlled phase-locked few-cycle
excitation pulses can allow the manipulation of the valley polarization
on a time scale shorter than the exciton dephasing time, opening the
way to valleytronics in the petahertz regime, as recently proposed
in ref . In this
context, subcycle switching of the valley polarization has been recently
achieved by photoexcitation with strong THz pulses, paving the way
to light-wave valleytronics in TMDs.

As mentioned before, tr-ARPES has been used to further extend
the
out-of-equilibrium excitonic landscape to finite-momentum (i.e., optically
dark) excitons. We envisage that further developments of this technique
will add novel insights and bring a deeper understanding of the exciton
physics in TMD heterostructures. By improving the spatial resolution
(i.e., <1 μm) and the energy resolution (i.e., <20 meV),
energy and momentum space studies of exciton dynamics in higher quality
TMD heterostructures with moiré superlattice effects will become
feasible. High energy resolution combined with 100 fs temporal resolution
will also allow one to detect the dynamics of many-particles excitonic
states with momentum resolution and to resolve the spin−orbit
energy splitting of the conduction band states at the K valleys: this
will enable unambiguous disentanglement of spin-flip and spin preserving
intervalley scattering processes.

Finally, it is worth noting
that all the pump−probe spectroscopy
measurements discussed so far are performed in the far-field regime,
where the limited spatial resolution prevents singling out the response
of an individual moiré cell. In this context, the field of
ultrafast spectroscopy has recently witnessed disruptive developments
entering the near-field regime and combining atomic spatial resolution
and subpicosecond temporal resolution. Such recently developed near-field
techniques, including ultrafast scanning tunneling spectroscopy, are
extremely promising and could open novel pathways to explore the moiré
physics in TMD heterostructures and to image the dynamics of localized
moiré excitons in real space.

15.1. Current State of the Art. Transition metal dichalcogenide
monolayers present a fascinating nanoscale laboratory for probing
coherent couplings and many-body interactions (MBI). Already their
linear optical properties are governed by strong Coulomb correlations,
forming excitons with binding energies of up to several hundred meV,
stable even at room temperature.,Their unusual
band structure and broken inversion symmetry couple spin and valley
degrees of freedom. This makes the optical absorption spectra of different
valleys sensitive to the circular polarization of the incident light,
opening up the field of valleytronics. Weak dielectric screening enhances
the formation of charged quasiparticles with properties that can be
controlled by chemical doping and/or electrostatic gating. This weak
screening also makes excitons in TMD monolayers particularly sensitive
to strain-induced variations in the potential landscape, resulting
in exciton localization and the creation of single photon sources with direct applications in quantum communication,
metrology, and computing.

Coherent couplings and MBI govern
not only the linear but also the nonlinear optical properties of TMDs.
Their optical nonlinearities largely arise from MBIs such as excitation-induced
dephasing (EID) and resonance energy shifts (EIS). For sufficiently low temperatures, biexcitons and charged
exciton complexes appear as new resonances in the nonlinear spectra.
Importantly, coherent couplings among quasiparticles can manifest
as distinct dynamic oscillations in time-resolved nonlinear experiments.
These rich inherent physical phenomena are largely affected by the
stacking of multiple TMD layers and by introducing external degrees
of freedom. Of particular relevance are couplings to plasmonic nano-
or dielectric microcavities, resulting, for example, in polariton
lasing or polariton condensation at room temperature. Moreover, TMD
bilayers have recently emerged as a tunable moiré system for
studying and designing correlated electron physics. In such bilayers,
the moiré potential leads to the formation of triangular electron
or hole spin−lattices exhibiting correlated magnetic phases
that can be controlled via an external magnetic field.

An important
experimental tool to unravel coherent couplings and
MBI in TMD-based monolayers and heterostructures is ultrafast multidimensional
coherent spectroscopy, specifically 2D electronic spectroscopy (2DES).,In its simplest implementation, 2DES is a powerful extension of
pump−probe spectroscopy that replaces the impulsive excitation
of the system under investigation by an excitation with a phase-locked
pair of two ultrashort pulses. As in multidimensional nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy, 2DES results in energy−energy maps
(Figurea) that
correlate the excitation and detection as a function of the waiting
timeTbetween the second pump and the time-delayed
probe pulse. To generate these maps, differential absorption or reflection
spectra are measured as a function of the time delay τ, the
coherence time between the two pump pulses. Fourier transform of this
set of spectra along τ provides the excitation axis of the 2DES
map. Here, two distinct excitation scenarios should be distinguished.
If the first pump and the probe pulse interact nonlinearly with the
same resonance in the system, this gives rise to a diagonal peak in
the map. If, in contrast, the first pump and probe interact with different
resonances in a nonlinear system, this creates a cross peak, provided
that the two resonances are interacting. A variation of the waiting
time provides access to the quantum dynamics. Again, two different
scenarios appear. If both pump pulses interact with the same resonance,
the waiting time evolution of the diagonal and cross peaks probes
incoherent population relaxation and energy transfer dynamics. If,
however, the two pulses interact with different resonances, this gives
rise to a coherent quantum beat that oscillates at their difference
frequency during the dephasing time of the induced coherence. The
induced coherent oscillations of cross and diagonal peaks are distinct
signatures of coherent couplings in the investigated quantum system.

Ultrafast
2D electronic spectroscopy of 2D materials. The sample
is resonantly excited with a phase-locked pulse pair with delay τ.
A probe pulse at waiting timeTinduces a nonlinear
polarization in the material. (a) Coherent couplings induce temporally
oscillating diagonal and cross peaks in the 2DES map. (b) Valley-selective
2DES of A and B excitons using circularly polarized light pulses.
(c) Intrinsic many-body interactions result in a rich variety of quasiparticles
and dominate their optical properties. Such interactions can be tuned
by moiré potentials. (d) New quantum states are created by
hybridization with fields in external microcavities and plasmonic
nanoresonators.

The first 2DES of TMD monolayers has
been reported by Moody et
al. in 2015. The work makes use of the
ability of 2DES to separate homogeneous and inhomogeneous broadening,
revealing narrow homogeneous exciton line widths in WSe2. This line width is shown to be highly sensitive to EID induced
by exciton−exciton interactions. This central role of MBI for
the optical nonlinearities of TMDs has been further confirmed by semiconductor
Bloch equation simulations and recent
pump−probe experiments. Zero
quantum 2DES with circularly polarized pulses has directly measured
the valley coherence of excitons in WSe2, persisting for
∼100 fs. Coherent couplings between
excitons and trions in monolayer MoSe2have directly been
identified by resolving coherent oscillations of 2DES cross peaks
for waiting times of up to 150 fs. The
intrinsic trion coherence time and trion valley coherence have also
been explored in MoSe2.

Broadband 2DES with pulses
covering simultaneously A and B exciton
resonances, combined with valley-selective excitation, have demonstrated
strong intravalley exchange interaction and coherent mixing between
A and B excitons as a consequence of strong spin−orbit couplings
in MoS2, confirmed by first-principles calculations of
the Bethe−Salpeter equation. A
similar experimental approach using helicity-resolved excitation has
revealed cross peak formation due to a Coulomb-induced, Dexter-like,
intervalley coupling. Very recently,
such cross peaks have also been resolved in 2DES studies of WS2, where A and B excitons are detuned by almost 400 meV. Here, coherent intervalley couplings give rise
to pronounced 11.5 fs oscillations in pump−probe, persisting
for 100 fs at room temperature. Semiconductor Bloch equation simulations
confirm these direct signatures of coherent intervalley couplings.

The first 2DES studies of TMD bilayers have resolved ultrafast
sub-100 fs electron and hole transfer processes in large area MoS2/WS2heterostructures. Pioneering 2DES imaging experiments with subμm resolution
on MoS2/WSe2heterostructures have shown thatdespite
noticeable local straininterlayer couplings and exciton lifetimes
are mostly robust across the sample.

Helicity-resolved double quantum 2DES has allowed for directly
observing biexcitons in monolayer WS2by spectrally separating
them from the correlated unbound two-exciton state. A biexciton binding energy of 26 meV has been deduced.
In electrostatically doped MoS2monolayers, both attractive
and repulsive Fermi polarons, excitons that are coherently dressed
by the surrounding Fermi sea of unbound electrons and/or holes, and
their cross peaks have been observed. The dependence of the polaron energy, oscillator strength and line
width on the Fermi energy of the surrounding electrons has been compared
to polaron theory.

Two-dimensional fluorescence-detected microspectroscopy
has allowed
investigation of exciton−phonon coupling in single-layer MoSe2. From a coherent oscillation of the 2DES amplitude with a
period of ∼2 ps a Huang−Rhys factor of ∼1, larger
than in most other inorganic semiconductor nanostructures, has been
deduced. In a first 2DES study of a
microcavity with an embedded WSe2vdW heterostructure at
room temperature, multiple polariton branches have been observed. These arise from exciton-photon-phonon hybridization
in the cavity, consistent with the results of a vibronic polariton
Hamiltonian model.

15.2. Challenges and Future Goals. This short summary
of the state-of-the-art highlights the enormous potential of 2DES
for uncovering coherent couplings and MBI in TMDs. Such experiments
provide a unique tool for probing the time evolution of the density
matrix in complex quantum materials, even in the presence of fast
decoherence processes in the 100 fs range. This requires broadband
and highly sensitive 2DES setups, providing sufficient time resolution.
Currently, suitable 2DES systems exist in a handful of laboratories
worldwide and, so far, have mainly been applied to studies of TMD
monolayers. Extensions of such experiments to (twisted) bilayers,
gated and doped samples, and polaritonic systems are just emerging
and form important future goals. In particular, 2DES studies of strong
coupling phenomena and coherent spin dynamics in magnetic heterostructures
hold promise for significant new insight.

Ideally, such experiments
should probe quantum dynamics across all relevant regions of the TMD
band structure. This presents a substantial experimental challenge,
as it requires not only valley-selective (Figureb) but also fully momentum-resolved studies
of charge carrier dynamics with a time resolution much below the decoherence
time. Since the optical and electronic properties of existing TMD
samples are substantially affected by local strain variations and
defects, it will be crucial to add high spatial resolution to ultrafast
2DES. This will be instrumental for isolating the dynamics of localized
quantum emitters and therefore provide valuable insight into the electronic
and optical properties of single and entangled photon sources based
on TMDs.

The emergence of moiré physics and twistronics
(Figurec) highlights
the
need for optical studies with a resolution beyond the superlattice
period. With these systems emerging as novel simulators of Hubbard
physics, coherent studies of the spin dynamics may offer qualitatively
new insight into the underlying coherent couplings. High spatial resolution
experiments of quantum dynamics of polaritonic systems are another
key future goal for exploring and exploiting the strong coupling between
TMDs and external resonator modes (Figured). Such studies may shed light on nonequilibrium
dynamics relevant for polariton condensation and lasing.

Plasmonic
nanoresonators hold great promise due to the possibility
of creating spatially highly localized electromagnetic fields with
high local field enhancement. Their strong coupling to TMDs will therefore
create spatially strongly inhomogeneous polariton systems enabling
real-space quantum transport of optical excitations which is still
largely unexplored so far. Importantly, in addition to exploiting
vacuum field fluctuations of such resonators to create new quasiparticles,
also strong external optical fields, spanning from the THz to the
visible and UV range, offer new possibilities for transiently altering
the electronic structure of TMD materials. This could facilitate inducing
and controlling new types of light-driven quantum dynamics.

15.3. Suggested Directions to Meet These Goals. To
reach the goals outlined above, it will be crucial to further advance
2DES beyond the state-of-the-art. Further improvements in spectral
bandwidth are important to cover a broader range of elementary excitations.
The recent discovery of UV interlayer excitons, for example, calls
for 2DES experiments covering the full visible range and extending into the UV range. Current 2DES experiments
have resolved coherent coupling with energies of up to ∼ 400
meV, corresponding to oscillation periods in the 10 fs range, which
represents the upper limit of what can be reached in current 2DES
setups. Improved time resolution will be essential to achieve broader
spectral coverage. Combinations of supercontinuum white light generation
with light field synthesis and/or pulse
shaping have the potential for designing pulses with durations of
<3 fs. Yet such pulses have not been applied in 2DES experiments
so far.

Not only the recording but also the interpretation of experimental
2DES data needs further development. This includes, for example, the
use of rapidly developing artificial intelligence methods for spectral
analysis as well as of automated schemes to compare experiments and
simulations based on model Hamiltonians. We emphasize that high-quality
2DES measurements provide an important benchmark for theoretical descriptions
of nonequilibrium quantum dynamics in TMDs, using, for example, semiconductor
Bloch equation calculations. Improving the merger between theory and
experiment will therefore be crucial for future advancements. This
is especially true for the development ofab initiodescriptions which still are in a very early stage.

So far, all the discussed experiments
have used all-optical 2DES
detection schemes. Time- and angle-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy
has provided crucial insight into momentum-resolved incoherent exciton
dynamics and interlayer exciton formation. Integrating such momentum-resolved photoelectron
detection schemes with ultrafast 2DES may give intriguing new insight
into the coherent quantum dynamics in TMDs and their heterostructures.
Equally promising are combinations of 2DES with high-resolution microscopy
techniques. This includes both further improvements of far-field 2DES
microscopy and, in particular, also
the development of entirely new detection schemes providing nanometer-scale
spatial resolution and few femtosecond temporal resolution. A promising
step in this direction is the coherent 2D optical nanoscopy technique
reported in ref . More generally, combining 2DES with action-based detection schemes,
such as, for example, photocurrent or photoelectron emission microscopy,
or with the all-optical readout of the optical field emitted from
the junction of a scanning probe tip, may bring 2DES microscopy of
TMD materials to the nanometer scale. These advancements will enable
deeper and more detailed exploration of spatiotemporal light-driven
quantum transport in 2D materials and heterostructures.

16.1. Introduction. Two-dimensional materials with
third-order and higher-order optical nonlinearities, complementing
the capabilities of second-order nonlinear effects, represent a promising
frontier in optical science. Despite their atomic-scale thickness,
these materialssuch as graphene, TMDs, black phosphorus (BP),
and their heterostructures−exhibit remarkable nonlinear
optical susceptibilities. Fully harnessing these advanced nonlinearities
holds the potential to drive revolutionary advances in next-generation
photonic devices, enabling applications across light emission, all-optical
modulation, frequency conversion, sensing, computation, and quantum
technologies.

16.2. Current State of the Art. Unlike second-harmonic
generation, which typically requires noncentrosymmetric structures,
third- and high-odd-order nonlinear susceptibilities (i.e., χ(3), χ(5), ..., χ(2n+1)) of materials do not necessitate symmetry breaking, making
them broadly applicable for 2D material-based photonic applications.
For example, the real part of χ(3)supports several
coherent optical nonlinear frequency generation processes such as
third-harmonic generation (THG) and four-wave mixing (FWM). In contrast,
the imaginary part of χ(3)is associated with nonlinear
absorption processes arising from light−matter interactions,
such as two-photon absorption and saturable absorption. Indeed, recent
advancements in various high-order nonlinear optics processes with
2D materials have highlighted their unique properties, including significant
high-order susceptibilities, ultrafast response time, and large tunability.

16.2.1. Third-Harmonic Generation. THG, primarily
governed by the real part of χ(3), is among the most
extensively studied third-order nonlinear processes and has proven
to be a versatile, effective, and nondestructive method for characterizing
2D materials. It enables direct measurement of the nonlinear susceptibilities
of these materials, providing an approach to discover and evaluate
novel materials with high nonlinear efficiency. Moreover, the sensitivity
of the χ(3)tensor to both internal factors (e.g.,
defects, doping, band structures, excited states) and external conditions
(such as substrates, strain, and electric or magnetic fields) enhances
the ability of THG to investigate the fine structures and phase transitions
of 2D materials, and opens new avenues
for efficient frequency generation.

16.2.2. Four-Wave Mixing. FWM is a process of
third-order nonlinear generation in which photons of two or three
different energies are combined to produce one or two new photons.
This process has diverse applications in areas such as wavelength
conversion, THz generation, optical signal amplification, and imaging.
Research on FWM in 2D materials began with graphene and gained momentum as these materials were integrated
with various photonic structures, including microring resonators, optical fibers, waveguides, and others. These integrations
have unlocked significant potential in 2D materials for supercontinuum
generation and frequency comb applications.

16.2.3. Two-Photon Absorption (TPA). Governed
by the imaginary part of χ(3), TPA in 2D materials
has emerged as a pivotal phenomenon in the study of their nonlinear
response. Taking monolayer MoS2as an example, TPA is observed
to be up to 103times stronger than in bulk materials,
which is attributed to the strong nonlinearity under reduced dimensionality. Just like MoS2and other TMDs, the
strong optical responses and tunable bandgaps make TPA in 2D materials
tailorable for applications in imaging systems, ultrafast spectroscopy, and photonic detection applications.

16.2.4. Saturable Absorption (SA). SA in 2D materials
is typically explained by Pauli blocking. This phenomenon has been
observed across a variety of 2D materials, from graphene to various
TMDs, BP, and their heterostructures. Consequently, an increasing
number of 2D material-based saturable absorbers have been developed
for mode-locked or Q-switched lasers covering the visible to mid-IR
ranges, as well as in all-optical modulators.

16.2.5. High-Harmonic Generation (HHG). Higher-order
nonlinear processes, such as HHG, have been less explored due to limitations
in pump energy and wavelength range for excitation pulses. However,
HHG plays a crucial role in generating deep UV wavelengths and attosecond
pulses. Graphene has demonstrated remarkable HHG efficiency, which
is attributed to its ultrafast carried relaxation time, which aligns
with the THz wave periods used as excitation pulses. HHG effects up
to the 16th order have also been observed in monolayer TMDs and various
members of the 2D materials family.−The strong many-body
interactions and unique electronic properties of 2D materials position
them as promising candidates for HHG applications, prompting ongoing
research into their potential for higher-order nonlinearities.

16.3.1. Theoretical Challenges. One of the primary
challenges in nonlinear optics with 2D materials is the limited understanding
of their nonlinear optical properties. Accurately modeling nonlinear
interactions in 2D materials is complex, and hence, high-order nonlinearity
theories become increasingly complex. In addition, traditional nonlinear
optical theories often rely on bulk material assumptions that do not
readily apply to atomically thin layers. In 2D materials, quantum-confinement,
surface, edge, and doping effects become significantly more pronounced,
altering their optical behaviors in a non-negligible fashion. Additionally,
the presence of many-body interactions and strong excitonic effects
introduces further complexities that require advanced computational
approaches beyond conventional mean-field theories. These theoretical
limitations hinder the predictive modeling of nonlinear responses,
complicating efforts to optimize 2D materials and their versatile,
artificially stacked heterostructures for targeted applications. Overcoming
these obstacles will require the development of novel theoretical
frameworks and computational methods that accurately account for the
unique quantum and multibody interactions in 2D systems, ultimately
enabling the design of high-performance, application-specific nonlinear
optical devices.

16.3.2. Designing 2D Materials with Higher Nonlinearity. Various computational methods, such as density functional theory
and the Bethe−Salpeter equation, have been extensively employed
to guide the prediction of band structures and nonlinear optical coefficients
in artificially designed 2D materials, incorporating many-body effects.
The progress of machine learning and artificial intelligence (AI)
technology makes it even more productive to identify or predict potential
candidates of nonlinear 2D materials with the large databases developed
so far. Further, advanced experimental approaches, such as atomic
engineering to create Janus structures, ion intercalation, and heterostructure
design, offer promising routes to develop hybrid materials with high
nonlinear efficiency that do not exist in nature. With ongoing experimental
measurements, we can anticipate that more 2D materials will be discovered
for their high nonlinear optical properties, which will then be integrated
with a theoretical framework to deepen our understanding of these
materials. As illustrated inFigure, the short-term goal is to uncover previously unknown
trends that can help predict the nonlinear properties of 2D materials,
facilitating the discovery of high-performance materials. Ultimately,
we aim to artificially create new nanomaterials for nonlinear devices
that demonstrate superior performance.

Representative path
toward next-generation photonics based on high-order
nonlinearities in 2D layered materials (2DLMs). Stacking engineering,
χ(n)engineering, field enhancement, and hybrid integration
methods can be used for the overall enhancement of the nonlinear conversion
efficiency of 2D materials. With new emergent 2D materials exhibiting
better nonlinear performance, disruptive advances and revolutionary
findings can be foreseen in integrated photonics, attosecond and strong-field
physics, petahertz electronics, and ultrafast lasers.

16.3.3. Light−Matter Interaction Enhancement. A practical challenge in nonlinear 2D photonics arises from the
atomic thickness of 2D materials, which as extensively addressed in
previous literature, limits their associated light−matter interaction.
With interaction lengths typically around or even less than several
nanometers, the resulting nonlinear signal output is constrained despite
the high nonlinear susceptibility per unit volume that 2D materials
possess. Additionally, the nature of nonlinear processes leads to
weaker intensity for higher-order nonlinear signals, compounded by
the overall low output. This makes it difficult to implement 2D materials
in real photonic circuits that require multidevice communication or
cascade structures. One of the key objectives in decades of research
on nonlinear 2D photonics is to enhance the nonlinear optical conversion
efficiency of 2D materials (e.g., stacking engineering, χ(n)engineering, field enhancement,Figure).

One strategy to enhance light−matter
interactions leverages the sensitivity of 2D materials to lattice
and electronic structures, enabling the engineering of their nonlinear
properties through mechanical, electrical, or optical methods, for
example, strain engineering, carrier injection, heterostructure construction (such as 2D-2D, 2D-1D, or
2D-0D moiré superlattices,
 with interlayer twisting angles), and optical techniques like laser writing.
It can be foreseen that novel strategies in material, chemical, mechanical,
thermal, or other levels will be developed in the future. Another
effective approach to increasing light−matter interactions
in 2D material photonic devices is through field-intensity enhancement
techniques like plasmonic resonances and resonant-microcavity embedding. Integration with new emerging photonic structuressuch
as photonic crystals, metasurfaces, and bound states in the continuum
(BIC)will also contribute to this objective and create new
paradigms for photonic applications. Finally, increasing the light−matter interaction length is
the most well-studied and practical approach. Two directions can be
followed: (i) In thex−yin-plane
direction, integrating 2D materials with optical fibers, waveguides,
photonic crystals, and microring resonators can be highly beneficial.,Mass-production methods, such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD),
can further enhance the scale of these hybrid 2D material photonic
structures, leading to improved nonlinear conversion efficiency. (ii)
In thezout-of-plane direction, using artificial
stacking methods or optimizing stacking phases during growth, it is
possible to create thicker 2D material crystals with a thickness of
hundreds of nanometers or micrometers, high nonlinear efficiency,
and novel phase matching conditions. This trend toward thicker 2D materials is expected to play a significant
role in developing efficient photonic devices.

16.3.4. Integration Challenges. Integration of
2D materials with various photonic devices offers a dual benefit:
this integration not only enhances light−matter interactions,
as previously discussed, but also maximizes the practical utility
of 2D materials in advanced photonic applications. The mature approach
of transferring mechanically exfoliated 2D material flakes to photonic
structures such as optical waveguides, microfibers, and ring-resonators
yields successful enhancement of nonlinear performance of 2D materials
but is still limited to micrometer-scaled devices. Using CVD-grown
2D materials instead of exfoliation can lead to a significant increase
in the device scale accompanied by stronger nonlinear output. Pioneering
demonstrations have been made in graphene or TMD-grown photonic crystal
fibers, but the precise control of the 2D materials quality, such
as uniformity, orientation, and defect density, remains a challenge
for future research (e.g., hybrid integration inFigure). Designing 2D material-compatible
novel photonic structures, like BICs, will also benefit 2D photonics
integration. Nevertheless, the integration of 2D materials into photonic
circuits can enable novel devices for signal amplification and lasing,
contributing to the miniaturization and enhancement of existing technologies.
The tunable nature of 2D materials also allows for adaptive optical
components, which can dynamically adjust their properties in response
to external stimuli, paving the way for smart photonic systems. We
believe that improvements in fabrication and integration techniques
of 2D materials will continuously broaden their application in photonics
and optoelectronics, paving the way for innovations in computing,
signal processing, and quantum information science.

16.3.5. Application Perspectives. Due to their
exceptional high-order nonlinearity, tunable electronic structures,
and high damage thresholds, 2D materials are transforming certain
applications in photonic devices. For example, 2D materials with outstanding
saturable absorption like graphene, TMDs, and BP can serve as mode-lockers
in ultrafast lasers. Looking forward, 2D materials and their engineered
heterostructures open exciting possibilities for developing compact,
tunable, and highly efficient ultrafast laser systems across a broad
spectral range, making them invaluable for emerging technologies in
quantum communications, light detection and ranging (LiDAR), and ultrafast
spectroscopy.

Up until now, attosecond pulses have primarily
been generated through HHG processes. Recently, the detection of HHG
in atomically thin 2D materials highlights the potential to explore
strong-field and attosecond phenomena in lower-dimensional materials.
Moreover, recent findings indicate that strong-field-driven phenomena
in nanoscale structures often have subcycle durations, offering insights
into collective electron dynamics and enabling the generation of optical-field-driven
currents on an attosecond time scale. Currents induced in graphene
by few-cycle optical pulses can be precisely controlled on the attosecond
scale, suggesting that field-driven
processes, including HHG in graphene and other 2D materials, hold
promise for a variety of novel attosecond-science applications, such
as subcycle photoemission, attosecond metrology, and attosecond control
of electronic processes.

Efficient HHG and ultrafast dynamics
of 2D materials also make
them an ideal platform for new emerging petahertz electronics because
of the efficient responses to petahertz-frequency electric fields
(1 petahertz = 1015Hz). This ability makes such materials
particularly promising for faster electronics beyond the current THz
range. Materials like graphene, with its zero-bandgap and linear dispersion,
are particularly attractive because they can exhibit broadband, high-speed
responses across the visible and near-IR spectral ranges, enhancing
their utility in petahertz electronics.

Besides the applications mentioned above, we anticipate that
high-order
nonlinearities of 2D materials will also play significant roles in
the fields of biosensing, all-optical computing, white light emission,
quantum photonics, and numerous interdisciplinary fields, pushing
the frontier of 2D photonics forward and beyond.

17.1. Current State of the Art. Recent work has revealed
the exceptional potential of vdW crystals and device architectures
for achieving simple, scalable, and tunable entangled photon-pair
production−a direction in the field that is both attractive and challenging. Efforts to date have focused on the generation
of photon pairs and squeezed states via spontaneous parametric down-conversion
(SPDC), a nonlinear process that depends on the second-order nonlinear
optical susceptibility χ(2)of the material. χ(2)can be intrinsically large in vdW systems, and beyond broken
inversion symmetry, it is increasingly linked to a nontrivial electronic
structure characterized by a large quantum metric.,Driven by these sizable nonlinearities, with χ(2)reaching values ∼10−1,000-fold larger than those in
crystals utilized for current state-of-the-art devices, the field
of nonlinear optics with layered materials has experienced rapid growth.
Innovative vdW-based nanostructures can serve as key components in
the miniaturization paradigm of quantum light sources, promising previously
unattainable functionalities while offering direct, on-chip integration
for applications in quantum information, computing, cryptography,
spectroscopy, and sensing, all exploiting the use of entangled photons.

Notably, nonlinear optical processes in atomically thin vdW materials
can be achieved over ultrabroad operational bandwidths, with phase-matching-free
χ(2)processes such as second-harmonic generation
(SHG), optical parametric oscillation (OPO), and amplification (OPA)
being demonstrated at the ultimate monolayer (1L) limit.,Within the context of quantum- and nanophotonic applications, monolayers
are appealing thanks to their straightforward on-chip integrability,
easy realization of multifunctionality from vdW interfaces, direct
bandgaps allowing large transmittance at IR communication wavelengths,
and much-reduced screening of the Coulomb potential. The latter is
responsible for the large oscillator strength from tightly bound excitons,
strong many-body interactions and quantum phase transitions, and the
ability to modulate many of their properties even at ultrafast time
scales.

While featuring a large
χ(2)(a thickness-independent
material property), monolayers typically suffer from limited nonlinear
frequency-conversion and entangled-light-generation efficiencies owing
to the surface-like nonlinear interaction. Intense research has been
dedicated to enhancing these efficiencies by integrating vdW crystals
into photonic structures such as waveguides, resonators, microcavities,
fibers, and metasurfaces,,−as well as by exploiting layered crystal symmetries like the 3R
(rhombohedral) crystal polytype that remain noncentrosymmetric even
in the bulk.,For the latter, vdW crystals
that are tens to hundreds of nm thick combine substantial optical
path lengths with large χ(2)to provide the high
efficiencies required by real applications.

Within the vdW materials
family, ferroelectric layered compounds
such as niobium oxide dihalides NbOX2(X = Cl, Br, and
I) have emerged as appealing nonlinear crystals thanks to their anisotropy
and large χ(2)(≈200 pm/V). NbOI2and NbOCl2can undergo a reversible
ferroelectric-to-paraelectric phase transition and a ferroelectric-to-antiferroelectric
phase transition, respectively, potentially rendering external electric
fields an effective tuning knob for nonlinear optical device applications. These crystals have recently enabled the generation
of entangled photon pairs at λ = 800 nm from sub-μm-thick
flakes via SPDC. Evidence of pair generation
was provided by measurements of the second-order correlation function
g(2)(τ) and the pump power-dependent coincidence
rate. The coincidence rate shows a quadratic dependence on crystal
thickness, demonstrating that phase matching constraints do not play
any role in the thickness range explored by these researchers, lying
within the material coherence length. Very recently, SPDC has been observed in thin 3R-stacked TMD flakes,
with researchers demonstrating broadband generation of maximally polarization-entangled
Bell states with fidelity as high as 96% at telecom wavelengths.

For all these known materials, further
improvements in efficiency
necessitate the use of even thicker crystals, where phase matching
requirements come into play. In nonlinear optics, the key phase matching
parameter is the coherence length, lc, defined as the path
length over which the fundamental and converted frequency waves become
completely out-of-phase due to material dispersion. In 3R-MoS2, lchas now been experimentally measured to be ≈500 nm at communication-band-relevant
wavelengths (for light normally incident to the layered plane). Knowledge
of lchas now enabled the demonstration of so-called periodically
poled (PP) TMD stacks, where 3R-TMD slabs of thickness lcare vertically stacked, alternating the orientation between each
constituent slab by 180 deg (Figurea), achieving the quasi-phase-matching condition. Photon-pair
generation has now been observed in PP 3R-MoS2crystals,
demonstrating an increase in the SPDC brightness by ∼20×
compared to a single crystal slab with thickness equal to lc.

Nanoscale platforms for efficient SPDC generation. (a) Periodically
poled vdW materials. (b) vdW waveguide. (c) vdW metasurface.

The successful demonstration
of high-efficiency SPDC over microscopic
thicknesses in PP 3R-TMDs is now motivating further research on quasi-phase-matched
vdW structures and devices for entangled photon generation, as well
as other novel strategies that may enable tunable, dynamic nonlinear
quantum light generation with higher efficiencies and smaller footprints.

17.2. Challenges, Future Goals, and Suggested Directions
to Meet These Goals. Layered 2D compounds and their heterostructures
promise to heavily impact the integration of nonlinear optical functionalities
with nanoscale photonic devices. A notable advantage of vdW materials
is their potential ease of integration, as their direct transfer and
stacking onto structured substrates are compatible with existing photonic
chip fabrication processes. Still, an
open challenge remains the development of strategies for optimizing
the coupling between vdW structures and universal photonics platforms.,To date, researchers have successfully integrated 2D materials with
photonic crystals, optical fibers, and optical waveguides, increasing
the effective interaction length through cavity mode coupling and
evanescent field coupling, respectively.−However, more efficient light coupling with the nonlinear material
will require sophisticated designs, due in part to the large refractive
index mismatch that exists between promising nonlinear vdW materials
and silicon oxide/nitride optical elements on chip. The large refractive
indexes are beneficial in terms of enhancing
light confinement within the material but also demand precision optical
elements for optimizing in- and out-coupling.

A promising approach for both optimizing conversion
efficiency and streamlining device design is fabricating photonics
elements directly from vdW crystals themselves.,,,Efficient frequency doubling within microscopic 3R-TMD waveguides
(Figureb) has now
been demonstrated,,and thus a near-future goal
is the realization of ultracompact SPDC sources utilizing optimized
vdW waveguide geometries. In such structures, a key challenge is attaining
phase matching, for example, by birefringence or by designing the
waveguide geometric dispersion. To this end, recent work has shown
that birefringent phase matching can be achieved for SH generation
in 3R-MoS2waveguides, combining large χ(2)and optical interaction lengths to reach up to few-percent conversion
efficiencies. This strategy should
be generalizable to SPDC and other vdW crystals, since it exploits
the natural anisotropy between their in- and out-of-plane optical
susceptibilities. Quantifying the out-of-plane dielectric functions
and χ(2)components of promising 2D materials is
therefore critical. Measuring these fundamental material tensors will
require advanced characterization methods such as high-resolution
ellipsometry and scanning near-field microscopies capable of probing
the nanostructured photonic elements.

The use of vdW metasurfaces, illustrated inFigurec, and similar resonating
structures promises
to bypass phase-matching constraints altogether by further reducing
the layer thickness required for achieving efficient entangled-photon
generation. Metasurfaces are an excellent platform for boosting the
efficiencies of processes such as SHG and SPDC within thin (subwavelength)
films while simultaneously controlling
the polarization state of the interacting fields, as they can be engineered
to support optical modes that simultaneously enhance fields at both
fundamental (ω0) and final frequencies (e.g., ω0/2 for SPDC and 2ω0for SHG). A common approach
to implement this paradigm consists of transferring atomically thin
layers (down to 1L) onto existing metasurfaces comprised of other
materials. However, as noted above, it may be even more desirable
to fabricate MSs and resonators directly from vdW crystals. The newly
available noncentrosymmetric vdW crystals are appealing for these
purposes, thanks to their nonzero bulk nonlinear responses. Moreover,
3R-MoS2and other TMDs are excellent materials for realizing
metasurfaces due to their high refractive indexes in the visible and communication wavelength regimes (∼≥4)
that reduce design constraints. To date, enhanced nonlinear signals
have been experimentally demonstrated in WS2metasurfaces and MoS2nanodisks. More generally, the trade-off between mode quality factor
and operational bandwidth is an important, application-dependent consideration.
Current efforts are investigating strategies for tuning these parameters
by tailoring geometrical asymmetries that induce modes with controllable
quality factors such as quasi-bound states in the continuum.

Looking further ahead, more complex photonic structures can be
envisioned. Such future nanostructured devices, including multilayered
media, nanocavities, nonlinear antenna arrays, and metasurfaces, will
be able to further manipulate the phase matching requirements that
fundamentally affect SPDC. In this context, the mixing of forward
and backward photons in such innovative nanostructures is expected
to yield qualitatively new quantum phenomena. The adoption of metasurfaces
for orbital angular momentum (OAM) manipulation promises SPDC of spatially structured photons, yielding
prospects for a new generation of quantum computation schemes based
on qudits (quantum states in a d-dimensional Hilbert space). Combining
SPDC with nanosystems and metasurfaces encompassing spin-to-OAM conversion
will enable the generation of hyperentangled photon pairs involving
richer quantum correlations. Engineered nonlocalities in metasurfaces
hold the promise of realizing structuring of the nonlinear states
without sacrificing strong spatial correlations stemming from the
underlying lattice resonances, leading
to more sophisticated control over the nonlinearly generated waves. Hyperentanglement (i.e., entanglement in multiple
degrees of freedom in a quantum system) is promising for a range of
potentially groundbreaking applications in quantum information, enhancing
the capabilities of quantum computers and quantum networks.

Importantly, 2D materials also offer
inherent programmability and
tunability, which is expected to yield unprecedented control and manipulation
of quantum radiation states in future architectures. Material properties can be tuned, for example, by applying
stimuli such as light, mechanical strain, electric and magnetic fields,
or local changes to the dielectric environment. The polarizations of the fully entangled states generated
in 3R TMDs by SPDC are completely tunable, with constant efficiency,
by simply changing the polarization of the incident fundamental beam. In addition, the interlayer twist angle degree
of freedom offers a compelling control knob to tune and optimize crystal
symmetries, optical nonlinearities and phase matching in vdW homo-
and heterostructures.,By precisely controlling twist
and assembly of vdW interfaces, new microscopic 3D nonlinear crystals
with unique nonlinear susceptibilities and polarization selectivity
will be realized.

18.1. Introduction. Nonlinear optics facilitates diverse
light-based technological applications while opening new areas of
fundamental research (e.g., in attosecond science, high-harmonic-generation
(HHG) spectroscopy, spatiotemporal pulse shaping, mode-locked fiber
lasers, parametric oscillators, and the generation of nonclassical
photon states). In nanophotonics, the enhancement of nonlinear optical
phenomena is generally pursued by boosting the local optical field
strength, increasing the light−matter
interaction time, and engineering the
intrinsic nonlinear optical response of materials. The former two
strategies can be effectively utilized by polaritonsquasiparticles
formed by the hybridization of light with collective polarization-carrying
excitations in matteracting as nanoscale optical resonators
that concentrate electromagnetic energy on subwavelength scales. Enhancement of the intrinsic nonlinearity may
involve patterning and heterostructuring nanomaterials to modify their
optoelectronic properties (e.g., through quantum confinement) or applying
external stimuli that actively tune the optical response.

These
approaches to expanding nonlinear nanophotonics can be uniquely addressed
using 2D materials. In the 2D (atomically thin) limit, polaritons
push near-field confinement to extreme levels (seeSection),
enhancing the nonlinear field produced in their host media. In addition,
the comparatively small number of charge carriers in 2D materials
makes their response highly susceptible to sizable modulations driven
by mild stimuli (e.g., charge-carrier doping, applied static fields,
or temperature variations by optical pumping or Joule heating), opening
exciting possibilities for active and ultrafast tuning that cannot
be accessed in bulk materials. Furthermore, the electronic structures
of 2D materials, which govern their polaritonic and nonlinear optical
properties, can be more easily customized than those of their bulk
counterparts, for example, by patterning or stacking.

18.2. Current State of the Art. We discuss paradigmatic
examples of recent investigations on polariton-driven nonlinear light−matter
interactions, initially focusing on graphene plasmonics and broadening
into 2D polaritonics.

18.2.1. Nonlinear Graphene Plasmonics. The emergence
of highly doped graphene as a platform for strongly confined and actively
tunable plasmons (e.g., through electrostatic doping), combined with
the large intrinsic nonlinear optical response originating from its
Dirac electronic dispersion,,motivates intensive
research efforts in nonlinear graphene plasmonics to capitalize on
these synergistic effects (Figurea). Numerous theoretical studies have predicted relatively
strong optical nonlinearities associated with propagating plasmons
in extended graphene and localized plasmons
in graphene nanostructures. On the experimental
side, far-field measurements of graphene nanoribbons have revealed
that localized THz plasmons enhance coherent four-wave mixing, while difference-frequency generation has been
exploited for all-optical excitation of graphene-plasmon polaritons
in extended samples. Aside from theinstantaneousplasmon-driven nonlinear optical response
associated with coherent processes (e.g., harmonic generation and
wave mixing), the transient electronic heating in graphene by optical
pumping constitutes a strong source of incoherent (delayed) nonlinearity that is also boosted by plasmon resonances (Figureb). In this regard, the inherently low electronic
heat capacity of graphene enables rich and sizable electron temperature
dynamics down to subpicosecond time scales, enhancing the natural
nonlinear optical properties of the carbon monolayer and opening possibilities
for the spatiotemporal modulation of its optical response (Figurec). Acting as artificial
doping in graphene, electron temperature can tune and either enhance
or suppress graphene plasmon resonances in an ultrafast manner using
intense femtosecond laser pulses. While
such transient plasmonic states have been experimentally observed, their potential for nonlinear optics has yet
to be fully realized.

Nonlinear
polaritonics in 2D materials. (a) Intense high-harmonic
generation from graphene nanostructures (upper part) is predicted
to arise from the combination of plasmonic field enhancement and anharmonic
electron motion associated with the conical band structure of graphene
(lower-left part), with the latter attribute leading to an intrinsically
nonlinear optical response that contrasts the harmonic response exhibited
by a parabolic electron dispersion (lower-right part). Adapted with
permission from refs  and  (Copyright
2014 and 2017 Springer Nature). (b,c) The large transient photothermal
response of graphene and ultrathin metals can be harnessed to trigger
incoherent nonlinear light−matter interactions that enable
the creation of transient optical responses (b) and optical switching
at the single- or few-photon level (c). Adapted with permission from
refs  (Copyright
2020 Springer Nature) and  (Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). (d,e) In crystalline
ultrathin metal films (d), anharmonicity can be engineered by vertical
quantum confinement to enhance the nonlinear response of plasmon polaritons
(e). Adapted with permission from ref  (Copyright 2021 de Gruyter). (f) The nonlinear
response of phonon polaritons in hBN originates from the anharmonicity
of the potential landscape under atomic displacements (upper part),
which can produce nonperturbative effects (lower left) and enables
electrical modulation of the phonon frequency through wave mixing
with a static field in the V/nm range (lower right). Adapted with
permission from ref  (Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society).

18.2.2. Nonlinear Polaritonics. Beyond graphene,
other 2D materials hold significant promise for applications in nonlinear
optics. Hexagonal boron nitride naturally supports highly confined
phonon polaritons exhibiting long lifetimes and low propagation losses,
which make them ideal for enhancing nonlinear interactions at mid-IR
frequencies, as explored in first-principles theory and experiments. The polaritonic
response in hBN can be tuned across the mid-IR spectrum (e.g., passively
by patterning or varying the thickness, and actively through temperature
or exposure to DC electric fields), enabling explorations of nonlinear
optical effects over a broad spectral range where many other materials
exhibit a weak nonlinear optical response.

Transition metal
dichalcogenides, such as MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2, are semiconductors that, in their monolayer
form, display large excitonic binding energies due to reduced dielectric
screening in the 2D limit, leading to robust exciton polaritons capable
of significantly enhancing nonlinear optical processes. Unlike many
materials in which polaritons require low temperatures to be stable,
exciton polaritons in TMDs are observable at room temperature, making them practical for real-world nonlinear
optical devices. In contrast to graphene or thin metallic films, these
materials are noncentrosymmetric in monolayer form and can therefore
naturally support strong even-ordered nonlinear processes. Second-order coherent nonlinear optical effects
in monolayer TMDs, encompassing second-harmonic generation as well
as parametric down-conversion, amplification, and oscillation, present
opportunities to generate and manipulate quantum photon states at
the nanoscale.

18.2.3. Nonlinear Nanophotonics in Low-Dimensional Crystals. Recent explorations of nonlinear plasmonic phenomena in ultrathin
crystalline noble metal films show that these materials constitute
a paradigmatic example of nonlinear 2D polaritonics. Approaching the
2D limit in ultrathin noble metal films, the plasmonic field enhancement resulting from reduced screening
and anharmonic electron motion produced by vertical quantum confinement
simultaneously increases as the film thickness decreases (seeFigured,e). These complementary
behaviors were hypothesized to boost plasmon-driven optical nonlinearity
in ultrathin crystalline noble metal films, a prediction that is consistent with recent experimental measurements
of second-harmonic generation. Incidentally,
the intense ultrafast laser pulses typically used to measure coherent
optical nonlinearities can also excite hot electrons that rapidly
thermalize to an equilibrium distribution with an elevated electronic
temperature, effectively modulating the optical response during a
transient period as heat energy is transferred to the lattice. Compared
to bulk systems, this photothermal nonlinearity is considerably enhanced
in ultrathin metal films with inherently small surface-to-volume ratios
and fewer charge carriers per surface area.

18.3. Challenges and Future Goals. Strategies to leverage
2D polaritons for nonlinear optics are discussed in terms of coherent
and incoherent nonlinear optical processes.

18.3.1. Coherent Polariton-Driven Nonlinear Optical Phenomena. Despite the large body of theoretical research in nonlinear graphene
plasmonics, there are relatively fewer experimental demonstrations
of proposed phenomena. Measurements of large coherent plasmon-driven
nonlinear optical effects (e.g., harmonic generation) could be pursued
in doped graphene nanoribbons, offering
a simplified geometry that supports electrically tunable and polarization-dependent
localized plasmon resonances that can in- and out-couple to free-space
illumination. Beyond patterning, leveraging hybrid structures that
combine graphene with other photonic materials could enable enhancements
in nonlinear responses.

As a complementary direction, many of
the concepts developed in nonlinear graphene plasmonics can be extended
to polaritons in other emerging 2D materials, which offer unique advantages
and appealing properties. For instance, phonons in hBN sustain high-quality
resonances that are predicted to drive efficient harmonic generation
and optical bistability. Exciton polaritons
in TMDs are also long-lived and offer additional valley-dependent
degrees of freedom, although they feature
low group velocities that render them inadequate to propagate encoded
signals. The strong second-order nonlinear response of TMDs is particularly
promising for the manipulation of quantum radiation states. Indeed,
thanks to the surface-like nonlinear interaction, the phase-matching
condition is bypassed, so that photon state generation and manipulation
is expected to yield qualitatively new quantum phenomena. The integration
of TMDs with conventional plasmonic elements can also boost the overall
nonlinear optical response of the hybrid system while enabling subwavelength
control over the generated near fields.

Polaritons in 2D materials are also envisioned to overcome
the
long-standing challenge of triggering nonlinear optical phenomena
at the single-photon level. In this context, theory proposals based
on the optical Kerr effect have been put forward to achieve unity-order
interactions among propagating graphene plasmon polaritons, but unfortunately they rely on extreme nanopatterning
and large quality factors that could be difficult to achieve in practical
experiments with current fabrication methods.

18.3.2. Photothermal Nonlinearities and Incoherent Phenomena. The large photothermal response of graphene presents both challenges
and opportunities in the context of nonlinear optics. Intense ultrashort
optical pulses are routinely employed in nonlinear optics, which result
in sizable electron heating. This is detrimental to coherent plasmon-driven
nonlinear effects, but it plays a central role in driving thermally
mediated, incoherent phenomena. Graphene thermoplasmons, which are
sustained by temperature-induced carrier dynamics, provide an appealing
platform for exploring such effects, enabling optical switching and
modulation based on thermal engineering (seeFigureb).

18.4. Suggested Directions for Nonlinear 2D Polaritonics.While plasmon resonances in graphene are typically limited to THz
or IR frequencies, they can be boosted to the near-IR or visible domains
by extreme doping or nanostructuring. The latter approach holds intriguing
possibilities to harness quantum finite size effects in the nonlinear
plasmonic response of structures with lateral sizes below the Fermi
wavelength (∼10 nm for typical doping levels). For instance, the large photothermal response
of relatively few electrons in small graphene nanoislands is predicted
to enable unity-order modulations in plasmon resonances triggered
by single-photon absorption (seeFigurec), while
narrow graphene nanoribbons could be optically pumped to support near-IR
thermoplasmons that can drive a coherent nonlinear plasmonic response.

In phonon polaritonics, the vibrational
origin of the nonlinear optical response allows for larger applied
light intensities without boosting optical losses associated with
electronic degrees of freedom. Additionally, introducing strong in-plane
DC fields can actively modify the nonlinear response, further enhancing
the control over the system. Indeed, as shown inFiguref, by introducing in-plane
DC fields through, for example, lateral gating, significant shifts
are predicted to occur in the frequency of phonon polaritons in monolayer
hBN, exceeding the spectral widths of the modes.

The design of atomically thin heterostructures comprised
of materials
with complementary optoelectronic properties can open new paths to
enhance nonlinear light−matter interactions at the nanoscale.
Polaritons in 2D materials interfacing with noble metal films can
hybridize with their mirror images to form so-called image polaritons, reaching extreme light-focusing regimes for
nonlinear optics. This concept has been demonstrated for graphene−dielectric−metal
heterostructures and should similarly
produce large polariton-driven optical nonlinearity in other 2D systems.
In a related approach, the strong coupling of excitons in TMDs with
optical cavity modes can be leveraged for nonlinear light−matter
interactions such as saturable and multiphoton absorption.,Turning to the intrinsic nonlinear optical response of 2D materials,
moiré electronic-structure engineering offers an appealing
route to tailor anharmonic electron motion, with polaritons supported by twisted 2D materials or nearby metal−dielectric
interfaces enhancing nonlinear light−matter interactions.

In quantum nonlinear optics, recent theory proposals to generate
entangled photon pairs directly in the guided modes of optical waveguides
show promise for emerging quantum photonic technologies. These strategies can be mapped directly to
waveguided 2D polaritons in nanophotonic architectures (e.g., the
optical generation of plasmon-polariton pairs in graphene nanoribbons
via spontaneous parametric down-conversion). In an alternative scheme, free electrons that impinge normally
to a 2D waveguide can excite guided polaritons that are entangled
in energy and momentum, and heralded by measuring the energy loss
of undeflected electrons.

19.1. Current State of the Art. Monolayer TMDs are
direct-gap semiconductors with energetically degenerate minima (maxima)
of the conduction (valence) band at the ±K points of the Brillouin
zone (i.e., the ±K valleys). The combination of broken space-inversion
symmetry (SIS)E↑(+K) ≠E↑(−K) and preserved time-reversal symmetry (TRS)E↑(+K) =E↓(−K) imposes that electrons
residing in opposite valleys have opposite spins, leading to the so-called
spin-valley locking. The deterministic
control of the valley information naturally leads to the field of
valleytronics, which has a dual scientific and technological relevance.
From one viewpoint, the valley-contrasting Berry curvature and Berry
phase make TMDs the ideal platform to study fundamental processes
unexplored in standard bulk semiconductors, such as the valley Hall
effect and the valley-exclusive Bloch−Siegert
shift. From another viewpoint, valleys
in TMDs represent a unique platform for information technology, with
the possibility to write and read the spin-valley information with
all-optical methods, potentially increasing the operation speed by
orders of magnitude compared to standard electronic devices.

All-optical valleytronic operations are ultimately defined by the
selection rules of light−valley interactions, which in TMDs lead to the coupling of circularly polarized
light of opposite helicity to the opposite valleys. This can be used,
for instance, to generate a valley imbalance either by a real excited
state population with linear (seeFigurea) and two-photon
absorption, or by a valley selective
bandgap modulation with the coherent optical Stark and/or Bloch−Siegert
shifts (seeFigureb). For a real excited state population,
the readout of the valley information can be achieved either by helicity-resolved
photoluminescence (PL, seeFigurec) or by optical Kerr rotation measurements (seeFigured). Note that optical
Kerr rotation is able to probe both an imbalance in real carriers
residing in the valleys and a coherent
bandgap modulation. Recently, new methods
based on nonlinear optics have emerged as an alternative and powerful
approach to measure the valley degree of freedom in TMDs.

Schematic
of all-optical valleytronic operations and time-reversal
symmetry (TRS) modulation/detection. A valley imbalance can be generated
by resonant one-photon absorption of circularly polarized light (a)
or the coherent valley-selective optical Stark effect (b). The valley
imbalance is typically measured via helicity-resolved PL (c) or ultrafast
resonant Kerr rotation (both linear and nonlinear) (d). Future valleytronic
devices could use local field enhancement via metallic tips (e) and
potentially probe broken TRS even in centrosymmetric crystals by nonlinear
third-harmonic Kerr rotation.

The measurement of a rotation angle
in the emitted second-harmonic (SH) polarization upon creation of
a valley imbalance.−Here, the valley imbalance can be generated by real excited states
carriers, off-resonant coherent bandgap
modulation, or external magnetic fields. This method is equivalent to the nonlinear
Kerr rotation, which has been used in the past to probe bulk magnetic
materials.

The detection of a deviation in the
ratio of the SH intensity for circularly versus linearly polarized
excitation. This approach builds on
the following observation: ±K resonant second-harmonic generation
(SHG) in TMDs is dictated by the C3hwave vector group
of the ±K valleys, rather than the D3hwave vector
group of the Γ point. The generation of a valley imbalance can
then be traced back to a specific modulation of the different elements
of the C3hsecond-order nonlinear susceptibility tensor.

Another interesting aspect of nonlinear valleytronics
is that,
in TMD monolayers, a valley imbalance breaks TRS. Thus, nonlinear
optics can serve as the ultimate tool to probe changes in symmetries
(both SIS and TRS) in a crystal and, consequently, the field of nonlinear
valleytronics can be further generalized to the field of all-optical
detection of broken TRS. The most significant limitation of SHG as
a universal probe of broken TRS is undoubtedly its limited applicability
since strong SH within the electric-dipole approximation is only possible
in crystals with broken SIS. While electric-quadrupole SH, which is
possible in any material, can be employed to probe TRS breaking, this approach is experimentally challenging.
The electric-quadrupole SH is orders of magnitude weaker than the
electric-dipole SH; it requires an oblique angle of incidence, and
a larger amount of polarization scans for multiple angles of incidence.

Finally, the development of these ultrafast
methods to probe broken
TRS also calls for new and alternative all-optical methods to break
TRS. To date, the most common methods have been the valley-Zeeman
splittingviathe application of strong external
magnetic fields and the introduction
of a carrier imbalance between the ±K valleys by circular/elliptical
one-photon absorption. To reach the
boundaries in terms of operation speed, all-optical valleytronics
can now rely on two additional approaches for ultrafast bandgap engineering:
(1) asymmetric bandgap opening by the valley-selective optical Stark
effect and Bloch−Siegert shifts,and (2) application
of a trefoil topological field, tailored to the crystal symmetry.

19.2. Challenges and Future Goals. Looking ahead,
we identify five main challenges for the field of nonlinear valleytronics
and all-optical probing of broken TRS, which we further divide into
fundamental and technological challenges.

19.2.1. Fundamental Challenges.I. The most fundamental and important challenge for this field is
arguably the necessity to find a universal, ultrafast, and noninvasive
probe of broken TRS. Here, withuniversalwe refer
to a method that can be applied to any crystal, regardless of SIS.
As discussed, electric-dipole SH applies only to a limited set of
materials (those with broken SIS), while electric-quadrupole SH is
experimentally challenging. The goal is to find a simple rule within
the realm of nonlinear optics that allows researchers to unambiguously
tell if a system displays broken TRS, analogous to SHG as the universal
probe of broken SIS.

19.2.2. Fundamental Challenges.II. In addition to experimental endeavors, further
development of the underlying theories is required to understand and
guide experiments. The field of topology, which is fundamentally linked
to symmetry, is the primary focus in this regard. The inseparable
interplay of topology and TRS was demonstrated in condensed matter
physics, for example, in the light-induced anomalous Hall effect in
graphene (seeFiguref), and has also been extended to other
areas such as photonics. For this reason,
future methods for the all-optical probe of broken TRS should develop
alongside new theories that allow explanation of experimental findings
on the basis of topological quantities, such as Berry curvature, Berry
phase, and the Chern number.

19.2.3. Technological Challenges.III. The first technological challenge for valleytronic devices is miniaturization.
While 2D materials already represent the ultimate limit of device
thickness, the minimum possible lateral dimensions are yet unknown.
We identify two factors that can have a major impact on the lateral
dimension: (1) for all-optical operations, the lateral size of a device
is limited by the spot-size of the driving/reading light pulse; (2)
the valleys as an electronic property of 2D materials are derived
from the ansatz of periodic Bloch-states. When shrinking the lateral
size of a device, this might turn out to be increasingly inaccurate.

19.2.4. Fundamental Challenges.IV. The shortest switching time possible to achieve with all-optical
valleytronics is ultimately given by the optical cycle. In turn, ultrashort
pulses have an ultrabroadband spectral coverage, dictated by the Fourier
theorem. This limits the applicability of nonlinear valleytronics,
which is in large part predicated on ±K resonant excitation/detection.,Therefore, ultrashort pulses might not be able to adequately address
the desired states due to their broad energy spectrum.

19.2.5. Fundamental Challenges.V. Being
in an early stage, nonlinear valleytronics requires a precise
calibration of the ultrafast methods employed for TRS breaking, namely
the amplitude of the optical Stark and Bloch−Siegert shifts,
and the resulting asymmetric bandgap opening, the effective bandgap
change upon application of a topological field, and the impact of
the aforementioned processes on the different elements of the nonlinear
susceptibility tensor.

19.3. Directions to Meet These Goals. Building on
the challenges and future goals mentioned above, we envision new methods
and theoretical approaches for the future of nonlinear valleytronics.

From our point of view, the most promising candidate as a universal
probe of broken TRS is third-harmonic generation (THG), in particular
third-harmonic (TH) Kerr rotation (seeFiguref). THG combines universality (i.e., applicability
to any material regardless of SIS) with a simple experimental realization,
especially in comparison to the electric-quadrupole SH. To date, TH
Kerr rotation has been applied to measure magnetic phases in EuO, and we believe it is now the time to fully
unlock the potential of this technique by applying it to layered materials
and related heterostructures.

For the challenges associated
with the lateral size of devices,
we foresee solutions based on local field tip-enhancement (seeFiguree), similar to
what has been done, for example, in Raman or PL, combined with nanofabrication and patterning down to a
few nanometers.

Topology has been identified in linear Hall
currents via the Chern
number, and even- and odd-order nonlinear
responses via the Berry phase and Berry curvature, respectively. However, the current model connecting NLO
with topology does not include excitonic effects. Furthermore, the
topological nature of NLO remains yet to be explored experimentally.
We believe that a combined effort is crucial for advancing the field.
From our point of view, a unification of the Chern number with the
conservation of angular momentum of crystals and light appears promising.

20.1. Current State of the Art. The discovery of 2D
magnetic materials such as CrI3and Cr2Ge2Te6has greatly benefited from linear magneto-optical
effects including Kerr rotation and reflective magneto-circular dichroism
(RMCD).,These linear magneto-optical effects are
sensitive to nonzero total magnetization of the materials and, thus,
effective in detecting ferromagnetic states or materials. In contrast,
the nonlinear magneto-optical effects such as magnetic second-harmonic
generation (SHG) are sensitive to the breaking of spatial inversion
symmetry in spin−lattices under study.,This spatial inversion symmetry breaking often occurs in antiferromagnetic
materials or at the surface of ferromagnetic materials.

Indeed,
the very first observation of magnetic SHG was done on a Fe(110) surface
under ultrahigh vacuum conditions by Reif et al. in 1991. Consistent with the theoretical prediction
by Pan et al. in 1989, the intensity
of observed SHG changed with the reversal of the magnetization. Later,
magnetic SHG was detected in the antiferromagnetic bulk crystal Cr2O3by Fiebig et al. in 1994. Since then, magnetic SHG has become a powerful tool to
study multiferroic orders in functional oxide materials. However, the second-order nonlinear optical
susceptibility arising from magnetic orders in these bulk materials
is typically weak, in comparison to that contributed by the crystallographic
structures with broken spatial inversion symmetry. Surprisingly, it
was found that the layered antiferromagnetic states in bilayer CrI3yield giant magnetic SHG, with
nonlinear susceptibility approximately 3 orders of magnitude larger
than that of Cr2O3, and even 10 orders of magnitude
larger than that at the Fe(110) surface. This discovery was soon followed
by the observation of significant magnetic SHG signals in other 2D
antiferromagnetic materials, including MnPS3, MnPSe3, and CrSBr.

Similar to conventional
SHG from crystallographic structures, magnetic
SHG is also subject to the symmetry constraints, and the corresponding
response is described by the second-order nonlinear optical susceptibilitiesχ(2)(Figure). If the long-range magnetic order breaks
the spatial inversion symmetry,χ(2)becomes nonzero under the electric-dipole approximation.
Note that this SHG comes from the symmetry breaking of spin-polarized
electronic structures, and thus it is electric dipole allowed and
differs from the magnetic dipole contribution. The specific form ofχ(2)is determined by the symmetry
of magnetic orders and has been systematically tabulated according
to the magnetic point groups. Because
the magnetic orders can reverse their direction under time-reversal
operation, the tensor elements inχ(2)are often time-noninvariant and referred to as c-type,
in contrast to the conventional i-type time-invariantχ(2)that arises from crystallographic structures.

Symmetry-sensitive nonlinear optics as a powerful
tool for probing
2D magnets under external stimuli. PM and AFM represent paramagnetic
and antiferromagnetic, respectively.Tcdenotes the Néel temperature of the magnetic phase transition.
The symbolsiandtindicate spatial inversion and time reversal operations,
respectively.

Taking bilayer CrI3as an example, the layered antiferromagnetic
structures in its ground state break the spatial inversion symmetry,
although the crystallographic structure is centrosymmetric. The correspondingχ(2)is a third-rank tensor as an odd function
of its Néel vectorL, meaning
that the sign of tensor elements inχ(2)changes with the direction ofL. If the magnetization of bilayer CrI3is forced
to align in the same direction by an external magnetic field, the
magnetic symmetry becomes centrosymmetric, and the time-noninvariant
c-typeχ(2)vanishes. Similarly,
when the sample temperature is increased above the Néel temperatureTc, the c-typeχ(2)also vanishes due to the disappearance of long-range
magnetic order. These symmetry-governed phenomena were exactly observed
in the nonlinear magneto-optical measurements.

Because of the
resonant optical excitation and enhanced light−matter
interaction in atomically thin 2D materials, the magnetic SHG in bilayer
CrI3turns out to be strong, comparable to those time-invariant
i-type SHGs observed in noncentrosymmetric crystals such as MoS2,and GaSe. By conducting the polarization-resolved SHG measurements,
the anisotropic patterns dictated byχ(2)provide an experimental means to determine the magnetic
symmetry. The beauty of this SHG technique is that the revealed symmetry
would be independent of the excitation wavelength used in the experiments,
although the SHG intensity and pattern may change. Since the magnetic
structure in bilayer CrI3is registered with the crystal
lattice as in many magnetic materials, the measurement of magnetic
symmetry can also reflect the crystallographic symmetry. In bilayer
CrI3, the structure and symmetry are highly sensitive to
the stacking order at the vdW interface. Magnetic SHG has thus helped
to unveil the mysterious stacking structure and elucidate the interfacial
magnetic coupling.

As Louis Néel famously remarked, antiferromagnetic
materials
are extremely interesting. Unfortunately, few experimental techniques
are available for probing 2D antiferromagnets. Because of the atomically
thin thickness, neutron scattering becomes impractical despite its
powerfulness for studying rich magnetic structures in bulk crystals.
Meanwhile, linear magneto-optical tools and some emerging novel scanning
probes such as SQUID and NV-center magnetometry mostly work for ferromagnetic materials but
are ineffective for antiferromagnetic systems with zero total magnetization.
In this context, magnetic SHG can nicely fit in the niche, particularly
for its noninvasive optical microscopic capability with spatial resolution
down to the diffraction limit (roughly 1 μm).

Very recently,
we developed a phase-resolved SHG microscopy that
is compatible with cryogenic and high vacuum conditions. By applying this technique to layered antiferromagnet
CrSBr few layers, we were able to resolve the magnetic polymorphs,
which have the same magnetization but different magnetic structures. Because these magnetic polymorphs are counterparts
by spatial inversion or time reversal operations, their correspondingχ(2)from magnetic structures
exhibit a sign change that can be measured by phase-sensitive SHG
as a π phase shift. Furthermore, an interesting magnetic layer-sharing
effect between the laterally interconnected bilayer and tetralayer
was observed, manifesting the strong lateral exchange interaction
within a ferromagnetic intralayer. With the extreme sensitivity of
magnetic SHG to antiferromagnetism, more intriguing magnetic properties
and effects are thus being observed in 2D antiferromagnets, which
hopefully could lead to some functional spintronic or opto-spintronic
devices.

20.2. Problems and Challenges. The study of nonlinear
optics in solid materials often starts with the known crystal structures
and symmetries, as exemplified in textbooks. Based on the symmetry
analysis, one can deduce the corresponding nonlinear optical susceptibilities
and predict the expected responses and phenomena. However, in many
practical scenarios, prior knowledge of structure and symmetry is
absent, posing significant challenges for analysis. With the addition
of nonlinear magneto-optical effects in magnetic materials, thereverseanalysis is even more challenging and involves multiple
possibilities to include or exclude. A notable example is the case
of polar magnets, whose crystallographic structures are noncentrosymmetric.,Even in the ferromagnetic states, the magnetic symmetry is no longer
centrosymmetric, leading to contributions to the SHG from both the
crystal and magnetic structures. The coherent superposition of both
contributions complicates the experimental observations. Additionally,
surface and interface effects are also worth mentioning, as they intrinsically
break the spatial inversion symmetry and may contribute to the SHG
signal. Sometimes, higher-order contributions
such as the electric quadrupolar term are also appreciable.

Moreover, 2D materials are more susceptible
to external controls such as carrier doping, electric field, magnetic
field, tensile strain and hydrostatic pressure. Therefore, these tuning
knobs provide a unique means to decipher the origin of the nonlinear
optical response and develop advanced nonlinear photonic devices.
For nonlinear magneto-optical effects, the most relevant control is
the external magnetic field. Yet under the external magnetic field,
the Faraday rotation through optical components such as the microscope
objective is appreciable, which can reach as high as 6°/T·cm
at a wavelength of 400 nm for fused silica. Therefore, special care must be taken during nonlinear optical measurements
under a magnetic field, particularly in the linear polarization basis.
Furthermore, current SHG measurements under a magnetic field are limited
to normal incidence due to the constraints by bore size of the superconducting
magnet. This restriction means that only 8 out of the 27 elements
in the third-rank nonlinear tensor can be effectively obtained. Thus,
there is a pressing need to develop advanced nonlinear optical microscopy
withz-polarization capabilities that can operate
at low temperature and magnetic fields.

20.3. Future Directions and Goals. Moving forward,
nonlinear optical studies of 2D magnetic materials offer substantial
research opportunities and potential applications. While current studies
mainly focus on the characterization of static magnetic structure,
exploring ultrafast spin dynamics through nonlinear optical pump−probe
techniques offers a key direction. For example, pump−probe
SHG is expected to provide exceptional sensitivity in 2D antiferromagnetism
with atomic thickness, making it ideal for investigating phenomena
such as magnon dynamics and related quasiparticle interactions.

In addition, the development of nonreciprocal nonlinear magneto-optical
devices based on 2D magnets offers exciting possibilities. These devices
can be fabricated by stacking different vdW materials through dry
transfer methods, enabling the construction of integrated 2D opto-spintronic
circuits. The tuning of magnetism will not be limited to magnetic
fields but can also be achieved through various means such as charge
doping, electric field, optical field, and external strain. The modulation
of nonlinear magneto-optical responses lays the foundation for coherent
multiphoton applications such as quantum computing, neural networks,
and artificial intelligence.

Chiral responses, phase singularities, and geometric
phases are
being extensively studied in photonics, and 2D materials provide a
particularly rich platform in this area. In addition, the ability
to synthesize artificial structures composed of twisted atomic layers
has emerged as a powerful source of novel physical phenomena. These
topics are discussed in the following sections.

21.1. Introduction. Unlike conventional optoelectronics
that are dominated by free-particle-like dynamics and scattering,
a new range of optoelectronic responses are emerging that directly
rely on the winding of the Bloch wave functions in quantum materialstermed
quantum geometry. Such quantum geometric optoelectronic responses
have recently been explored in 2D materials. For instance, valley
circular dichroism and a light-induced Hall effect can be controlled
by the Bloch band Berry curvature; nonreciprocal
propagation of collective modes (such as plasmons) can be controlled
by the quantum metric dipole.

Recent attention, however, has focused on bulk quantum geometric
photocurrents induced even in the absence of a p−n junction.
In these, photocurrents flow in a direction determined by a material’s
intrinsically broken centrosymmetry. Unlike built-in fields that control
the conventional photovoltaic effect, or temperature gradients and
the Seebeck coefficient for the photothermoelectric effect, bulk photocurrents
are now understood to strongly depend on the intrinsic properties
of Bloch wave functions (seeFigure). For instance,
when electrons are photoexcited in noncentrosymmetric materials, light-induced
coherences during the interband transition from a valence-to-conduction
band change a material’s electric polarization. Such a continuous
rate of change of electric polarization produces a shift photocurrent.
Shift photocurrents have been related to a range of quantum geometric
properties, including a Pacharatnam−Berry phase and a Hermitian connection, and contribute to a bulk photocurrent response for linearly
polarized irradiation in nonmagnetic materials. Similarly, under circularly
polarized irradiation, bulk photocurrents can be induced that depend
on an interband Berry curvature termed injection photocurrents.

Bulk quantum geometric photocurrents. (a,b)
Injection (a) and shift
photocurrents (b) arise from the change in electron group velocity
(vcandvvin the
conduction and valence bands) and real space displacement (RcandRvin conduction and valence
bands) when electrons are photoexcited from valence to conduction
bands in noncentrosymmetric materials. (c−e) In the presence
of a Fermi surface, a variety of other mechanisms become activated
including (c) an intrinsic Fermi surface effect (arising from virtual
interband processes), (d) a Berry curvature dipole (inset; asymmetric
distribution of Berry curvature across a Fermi surface), and (e) skew
scattering contributions (produced when the transition ratesWbetween Bloch states at momentak1,2become imbalanced). These mechanisms provide a means for achieving
a type of optoelectronics based on bulk noncentrosymmetric metals.

21.2. State of the Field. Due to the pronounced and
tunable quantum geometry in 2D materials, large bulk photovoltaic
photocurrents have recently proliferated in a diversity of 2D systems
that range from WSe2/black phosphorus heterostructures to monolayer MoS2and twisted bilayer graphene. These 2D systems have stood apart from those found in traditional
bulk photovoltaics due to the immense tunability of 2D materials:
the interface configuration and dipoles can be directly customized
by stacking, the quantum geometry and
band structure can be tuned by twist or strain, and the Fermi energy can
be tunedin situby the gate voltage.

21.2.1. Metallic Quantum Geometric Optoelectronics. Going beyond interband transitions, an emerging range of optoelectronic
processes are being explored that areintrabandin
nature. A key example are second-order nonlinearities enabled by the
Berry curvature dipole that produce
a rectified photocurrent or second-harmonic generation from the dynamics
of Bloch electrons on a metallic Fermi surface (see right panels ofFigure). These have gained
recent attention due to the pronounced Berry curvature dipole-induced
nonlinear susceptibilities found in 2D materials that are gate tunable as well as their quantum geometric
origin. The latter quantum geometric origin is particularly striking,
since in nonmagnetic materials, second-order nonlinearities cannot
arise from the simple classical group velocity dynamics of electrons
about the Fermi surface even when inversion symmetry is broken; instead,
they arise from quantum geometric corrections such as the anomalous
velocity. Second-order nonlinearities
arising from the classical group velocity of electrons typically only
arise when time-reversal symmetry is broken, for example, in magnetic
materials. Beyond the Berry curvature dipole, a growing zoo of nonlinear
intraband processes have emerged that include other intrinsic contributions
such as the Berry connection polarizability (see, for example, ref  for an experiment in the heterostructure MnBi2Te4on black phosphorus), intrinsic Fermi surface contributions, extrinsic scattering such as skew scattering
nonlinearities,(see, for example, ref  for an experiment in
graphene/hBN), and mixed extrinsic-intrinsic contributions such as
anomalous skew scattering.

While
most experimental studies in metals have focused on (near DC) low-frequency
operation, many of these intraband metallic nonlinearities persist
to higher frequencies. Taking a characteristic electron scattering
time of about a picosecond in a good metal, these nonlinearities can
persist into the THz frequency range, providing new tools formetallic optoelectronicswithout p−n junctions. As
a result, metallic optoelectronic devices operating in the THz range
have been recently proposed that include energy harvesters, as well as electro-optic modulators,−that modify absorption and reflection by
an applied in-plane current.

Electro-optic modulation is particularly
exciting, since it can
provide tools for nonreciprocal THz devices. For large enough applied
electric fields, these metallic nonlinearities have even been envisioned
to produce the preliminary conditions for THz amplification,without population inversion in a (p−n) junction-less metal.
Note that for large electric fields, high-order nonlinear electro-optic
effects can ensue; for example, beyond the linear electro-optic modulation
(i.e., Pockels effect), higher-order effects such as second-order
electro-optic modulation (e.g., nonlinear Kerr effect) can manifest. Systematically taking into account the range
of mechanisms responsible for electro-optic modulation (and, more
generally, in the use of quantum geometric nonlinearities) in realistic
materials remains an ongoing challenge in the fieldimplementing
these promises to reveal new types of electro-optic modulation. Indeed,
the metallic Fermi surface can become strongly modified in the presence
of periodic driving to produce a rich
out-of-equilibrium phenomenology that can depend on the details of
relaxation.

Beyond the charge degree of freedom, there has been
recent attention
focused on using quantum geometry to control other degrees of freedom.
In layered materials, quantum geometry can grant optical control over
the layer polarization in both chiral and achiral stacks of 2D materials;
in a similar fashion, it can enable the manipulation of magnetization
and spin.

21.3.1. Dynamical Control and Light-Induced Ferroic Phases. Light can be used to dynamically control band structures and electronic
phases. Indeed, recent experiments in ref  have demonstrated light control of a Floquet−Bloch
band structure and the anomalous Hall effect; and these have only
persisted for ultrafast time scales. Pushing these to longer time
scales remains an ongoing challenge. One emerging strategy is to exploit
the effect of optically induced polarization or magnetization that
induces feedback on the underlying band structures. For instance,
a light induced layer polarization in rhombohedral trilayer graphene
can boost the electric potential drop across the layers, transforming
screening (the reduction of applied electric fields across the layers)
into antiscreening (the amplification of applied electric fields across
the layers). Strikingly, this feedback
can even sustain dynamical symmetry broken phases such as a light-induced
ferroelectric-like state in rhombohedral trilayer graphene or a light-induced ferromagnet in disks of
grapheneboth are examples of
symmetry breaking induced by the quantum geometric dynamics of electrons.
Using such optical control to sustain broken symmetry phases as well
as a tool for optically controlling the dielectric environment of
stacked materials is a new, and as yet experimentally unrealized,
vista for future growth.

21.3.2. Interacting Quantum Geometric Photocurrents. More generally, the role of electron interactions in modifying
fundamental quantum geometric optoelectronic functionality in 2D materials
(such as photocurrent) is an ongoing intense area of research. The
pronounced quantum geometric photocurrents in twisted moiré
materials make it a particularly striking example. For instance, Hartree
corrections to the band structure of twisted bilayer graphene can
induce appreciable changes to the shift photocurrent; these corrections have been recently used to
explain unconventional filling-dependent photovoltage close to charge
neutrality in twisted bilayer graphene.

Even more signs that electron interactions may play a dominant
and essential role in the photocurrent of 2D materials are beginning
to show up in experiments in 2D materials. For example, THz photocurrent
measurements in magic angle twisted bilayer graphene heterostructures
have revealed multiple sign changes in bulk photocurrent as filling
is tuned across well-defined fractions 1/4, 1/2, and 3/4 of a moiré
unit cell. This mirrors the Dirac cascades
of magic angle TBG. These measurements simultaneously indicate that
photocurrent can be used as a probe of the interacting ground state
but also highlight the urgent need for a comprehensive understanding
of quantum geometric nonlinearities in interacting systems.

Another sign of the importance of interaction effects is the bulk
photocurrent in TMD heterostructures such as WSe2/black
phosphorus or strained MoS2monolayers where photocurrent is induced
for frequencies that corresponded to exciton peaks. Importantly, even
as excitons are charge neutral, they enable enhancement of charge
photocurrents and occur below the nominal
single-particle bandgap. Surprisingly, photocurrents in unstrained
TMD systems were found to be highly suppressed,even as symmetry allows for them to develop. In contrast, straining the TMDs dramatically activates
the photocurrent. Understanding the detailed mechanisms for this suppression
in pristine samples remains a challenge in the field.

21.4.1. Nanophotonic Quantum Geometric Optoelectronics. Harnessing quantum geometric optoelectronics has largely focused
on materials with pronounced quantum geometry whereby symmetry (e.g.,
centrosymmetry or time-reversal symmetry) is broken intrinsically
in the material. These have typically utilized electromagnetic fields
in free space where the interaction of light and matter takes on an
electric dipole character. A different strategy is emerging that involves
exploiting nanophotonic techniques where the spatial profile of electromagnetic
fields either activates or enhances quantum geometric optoelectronics.
By accessing the small wavelengths available in a proximal plasmonic
material (e.g., graphene), pronounced quantum geometric (polariton-drag)
photocurrents can be activated in a target quantum material placed
on top of the plasmonic material,even if the
target quantum material possesses high symmetry. For example, the
finite wave vector of polaritons can activate circular shift and linear
injection type photocurrents in a nonmagnetic and inversion symmetric
material. Such photocurrents track higher-order
quantum geometry (e.g., shift current dipole or even a momentum-resolved quantum geometry). Indeed, such finite-wave vector quantum geometric optoelectronics
are currently being explored even in a single contiguous stack (e.g.,
twisted spiral multilayer WS2) and represent a promising new direction for enhanced quantum geometric
nonlinearities.

21.4.2. Stack Engineered Optoelectronics. Another
emerging direction is the use of stack engineering to control optoelectronic
response. For example, by twisting adjacent layers of graphene together
to form a chiral stack, optical circular
dichroism was induced; similar dichroism can be activated even at
low frequencies arising from the quantum geometric properties (e.g.,
an in-plane magnetic moment) of a metallic Fermi surface in such a
chiral material. Similarly, bulk photocurrents can be sensitive to
AB or BA atomic stacking arrangements in gapped bilayer graphene even as the dispersion relations for AB or
BA stacked gapped bilayer graphene are the same; instead AB/BA stacking
arrangements are imprinted into the shift vectora property
of the electronic wave function. By tailoring stacks rationally engineered
in thezdirection, artificial materials with pronounced quantum geometric optoelectronic
responses can be envisioned.

22.1. State of the Field. Wave singularities, such
as vortices and field dislocations, refer to points or lines in a
wave field where intensity vanishes and the wave phase is undefined.
These singularities have been a central topic in all areas of physics
due to their universal properties across different systems. Since
the pioneering works by Berry and Nye on singularities and dislocations
in electromagnetic waves,,various types of singularities
have been demonstrated using light, such as Möbius rings, knots, skyrmions, and hopfions, with each of these holding a conserved topological charge, a quantized
property representing the underlying structure of the singularity
(Figurea,b).

Overview of optical singularities and their correlations.
(a) Different
types of optical singularities and their experimental demonstrations,
including phase singularities, polarization singularities, and more
complex types of singularities such as knots and skyrmions. (b) Many
systems show natural occurrences of multiple singularities, which
can interact and annihilate in pairs, conserving their combined topological
charge. Adapted with permission from refs  and  (Copyright 2018 American Association for the Advancement
of Science and 2016 American Physical Society). (c) Ensembles of phase
singularities emerging from the interference of random waves have
spatial correlations as theoretically predicted in ref  and experimentally demonstrated
in ref . Adapted
with permission from ref  (Copyright 2016 American Physical Society). (d) The interference
of random wave packets results in spatiotemporal dynamics of phase
singularities, characterized by the creation and annihilation of vortex
pairs. The spatiotemporal correlations of these phase singularities
remain an underexplored area, warranting further investigation.

The topological charge can imbue light with well-defined physical
traits, such as angular momentum,,as first
demonstrated in the phase of propagating optical beams, making optical singularities a versatile tool
for many applications. Such applications include control over light−matter
interactions with either bound−or free−electrons; super-resolution imaging techniques; and the encoding of classical and quantum information.

Singularities
in polariton waves, and specifically surface plasmon
polaritons, provided exceptional degrees of tunability of the singularities’
dynamics and singularity-pairs creation and annihilation events, reaching exotic regimes for light−matter
interaction. In such systems, the spin−orbit
interaction of light was shown to alter
the physical properties of singularities, leading to the creation
of unique vector singularities in the electric field,and to the time-resolved observation of the rotation of light.

Of particular interest are singularities
in polariton waves propagating
in 2D materials, such as graphene and hBN. Such materials have exceptional
tuneabilityvia biasing,or the construction
of heterostructuresfacilitating
unique optical properties, like hyperbolic dispersion, manipulation of magnetic fields, and low group velocities with long lifetime. The tunability of these properties in 2D materials
provides novel ways of controlling light−matter interactions
and altering the dynamics of optical singularities.

22.2. Challenges and Goals. One of the universal characteristics
of singularities that has proven challenging to study experimentally
is their correlations and statistical properties in random waves, which were studied theoretically at length.,The vortex patterns emerging in ensembles of singularities exhibit
spatial correlations (Figurec) that share similarities with liquid-like distributions, hinting at an underlying organizing principle
in random wave systems. While theoretical frameworks have been developed
to describe such singularity correlations, capturing their evolution and interactions remains challenging.
Experimental investigations on random waves,provided insights into spatial correlations of vortices, but no
work so far observed their dynamical correlations (Figured).

2D materials offer
a robust platform to study such collective dynamics of optical singularities,
with unique properties that support advanced light−matter interaction.
For example, the high tunability and slow group velocities enable
the study of dynamics in ensembles of singularities and the signatures
of creation-annihilation events. Leveraging
the high tunability of 2D materials could provide access to new properties
of singularity statistics, for example, their dynamics in the presence
of nonlinearity, especially by employing
advanced fabrication methods to sculpt 2D-polariton cavities. Recent advancements in ultrafast electron microscopy enable the detection of low-intensity fields, which is especially important for resolving
the singularities and their dynamics accurately because the field
near every singularity quickly drops to zero. Enhancing detection
sensitivity is especially important in creation and annihilation events,
which are hard to accurately pinpoint, and can allow observing and
analyzing otherwise inaccessible phenomena in sensitive materials
that cannot withstand strong fields.

22.3. Future Directions and Conclusions. Looking forward,
heterostructure engineering could control
material phase transitions and study how the emergence of topological
order may affect the statistics of singularities emerging by their
light−matter interaction. Controlling the dispersion of unique
structures like molybdenum trioxide may
induce topological transitions not only in the wave dispersion but
also in the behavior of vector singularities, similar to topological
phase transitions. By modulating both
in-plane and out-of-plane interactions, these heterostructures allow for tunable electronic band structures
achieving phase transitions that will change the statistics and correlations
of singularities in a controllable manner. A complementary approach
could be altering the coupling of the electric field to the magnetic
field, which will incorporate interesting statistics and correlations
among singularities.

The authors thank Qinghui Yan for fruitful
discussions.

respectively. The polarityPgives the number of rotations that the out-of-plane component of
a vector carries out when going along the radius from the center of
the defect to the boundary of the topological structure. The vorticityVgives the number of rotations that the in-plane component
of a vector carries out when going azimuthally around the defect of
the topological structure. The skyrmion number is given as the product
of polarity and vorticity,S=P·V. Skyrmions, which exhibitS= 1, have been demonstrated in a variety of different experimental
realizations, both in free space as well as in plasmonic systems. Just recently, also higher-order integer skyrmion
numbers in the form of skyrmion bags have been discovered in plasmonics. Fractional skyrmion numbers lead to so-called
merons, and different meronic structures have also been found, in
free space as well as in plasmonic systems.,Not only the electric vector field can be analyzed regarding its
structure, but also magnetization, magnetic
field components of the electromagnetic field, spin angular momentumS= Im­{ϵE* ×E+ μH* ×H}/(2ω), and, recently, also
the Poynting vector of the free-space electromagnetic field have exhibited such topological structures.

Du et al. and Zheludev et al. have pointed out that certain features in these
topological vector field structures can be much smaller than the wavelength
of the excitations, sincein contrast to variations of the
intensityspatial changes of the direction of the electromagnetic
field are not limited by diffraction. In particular, Du et al. pointed
out that spin texture features can be deeply subwavelength and reported
spin reversals on length scales as small as λ/60 = 10 nm. This
could make topological light excitations an attractive candidate for
high-resolution imaging and precision metrology.

In plasmonics,
the so-called long-range surface-plasmon polaritons
(SPPs) are a common subject of investigation. These are evanescent
surface waves at the boundaries between a thick metal and a dielectric,
for example the gold-air interface of a gold flake. However, when
going toward thin gold films, in the range of 20 nm or thinner, it
is possible to excite surface plasmon polaritons on both sides of
the thin metallic film using light impinging from above.,Hybridization between those two SPPs takes place, forming an odd
and even coupled mode. The odd mode is nonradiative and hence exhibits
a long propagation distance, typically for gold in the range of a
few hundred μm; hence it is termed long-range SPP, whereas the
even mode is radiative and hence has only a limited propagation distance
of a few μm. However, the dispersion of this long-range SPP
is very close to the light line, resulting in a SPP wavelength that
is very close to the excitation light wavelength. Yet the dispersion
of the short-range SPP is more plasmon-like, thus giving a slope that
deviates strongly from the light line (it is much flatter) and exhibits
hence a higher effective refractive index, leading to compression
of the SPP wavelength. Values as short as 176 nm have been measured
experimentally for incident light at 800 nm, yielding a compression factor of around 4.5. In graphene, the ultimate
2D material, Koppens et al. have demonstrated surface plasmon polaritons
that exhibited a compression factor of up to 150 (λSPP= 70 nm for 10.5 μm light wavelength),,,,which has
led to plasmonic skyrmions with wavelength compression factors of
up to 100.

Therefore, it is very
exciting to study other polaritonic excitations. Especially, phonon polaritons have been known
to exhibit extreme dispersion values that can give effective refractive
indices of over 100. Hallmark systems include SiC−or hBN. Here, we would like to expand
the concept of topological excitations to phonon polaritons in thin
and 2D solid-state materials, with the possibility to utilize their
strong dispersion for extreme wavelength compression and hence ultradeep
subwavelength structured light features.

Figurea depicts
the dispersion relation of surface phonon polaritons (SPhPs) in SiC
membranes. As the phonon (i.e., the
oscillatory vibration of the atoms in the solid lattice) can occur
transversely and longitudinally with respect to the phonon propagation
vector, the phonon dispersion is split into a transverse and a longitudinal
optical branch. In the forbidden zone between the transverse and the
longitudinal phonon resonances ωTO= 797 cm−1and ωTO= 973 cm−1(Reststrahlenband),
the permittivity is negative and leads to an evanescent character
of plane waves in the medium. Therefore, localized and propagating
SPhP modes can be supported analogous to SPP resonances in metals.
As visible inFigurea, the phonon polariton dispersion of the odd mode exhibits extreme
sublinear behavior for larger wavenumbers and deviates strongly from
the light line, allowing for smaller SPhP wavelengths. This effect
is even stronger for thinner polaritonic media, ideally for 2D materials.

Surface phonon polaritonic
(SPhP) skyrmions and other topological
features with varying spatial compression. (a) Theoretical SPhP dispersion
for different SiC membrane thicknesses from 10 nm to 1 μm. Displayed
are the odd and even modes, calculated using the method outlined in
ref . On the left,
the excitation wavenumber is plotted as a function of SPhP wave vector,
and on the right the excitation wavenumber is given as a function
of the normalized propagation lengthL/λSPhP. There are two even modes, one of them very close to the
light line and the other one with propagation lengthL< λSPhP. The odd mode features high propagation
lengths and strong wavelength compression. The wavelength compression
increases rapidly for thinner membranes. (b) Schematic representation
of collective atom displacements in polar dielectrics as the foundations
of even (odd) SPhP modes that are illustrated in the center (bottom)
image. (c) Exemplary implantation of a skyrmion in the SPhP electric
field. SPhPs are launched from a spiral structure with an opening
of λSPhP, which is illuminated by circularly polarized
light in the mid-IR. The SPhPs interfere in the center of the structure,
creating a skyrmion vector texture in the electric field, as depicted
in the vector plot and the 2D cut on the right. The size of the skyrmion
is determined by the SPhP wavelength and can be compressed strongly
in comparison to the excitation wavelength by using thin SiC membranes.

Figureb displays
the oscillatory behavior of the different atoms in a polar lattice
for a phonon polariton mode, yielding a dipole moment to which the
light field can couple. Furthermore, the two possible solutions of
Maxwell’s equations for SPhP propagation on the upper and lower
interface are indicated, yielding an odd and even solution. We would
like to focus here on the odd solution, as the even mode is either
very close to the light line or has a propagation length ofL/λSPhPbelow unity.

Recently, Mancini
et al. have utilized
the sublinear SPhP dispersion on a 200 nm SiC membrane to tune the
phonon polariton wavelength over an extremely wide range, ranging
from 1.5 to 10 μm for incident light wavelengths of around 11
μm. Using this extreme sublinear dispersion, they were able
to demonstrate multiplication of the orbital angular momentum of phonon
polaritons. In fact, they could achieve OAM tuning froml= 1 tol= 7 when tuning the laser merely from
880 to 924 cm−1(i.e., a relative tuning of only
5% of the wavelength). They obtained a wavelength compression factor
as large as 7.

Figurec illustrates
such a phonon polaritonic skyrmion vector field in 3D view and in
a side-cut view. Note that the length scale is determined by the SPhP
wavelength and could thus be on a deep submicrometer scale.

One possibility would be to use hBN, MoO3, or other
vdW materials which are in the few nm thickness range and would give
extreme confinement way beyond 100, leading to structured light features
in the sub-100 nm range with laser wavelengths in the mid-IR spectral
region. In h-BN, we would find isotropic 2D dispersion and hence isotropic
skyrmions, merons, and such, whereas in α-MoO3, one
could expect elliptical skyrmions, as the dispersion in the 2D plane
is anisotropic. This is very unique and can only be found in 2D materials
with strong anisotropy. An exciting
perspective is coupling of such phonon polaritonic structured light
to matter excitations (OAM light or light with nontrivial topological
vector textures to chiral material excitations, for example, in Weyl
semimetals).

As phonon polaritons
are inherently nonlinear, one could also use
this concept to try generation of nonlinear topological excitations,
for example, solitons, so that eventually skyrmion−skyrmion
interaction becomes possible and could resemble Dzyaloshinskii−Moriya
interaction (DMI) as in magnetic skyrmions.

24.1. Introduction. Properly designed metasurfaces
offer control over the amplitude, phase, and/or polarization state
of light at a certain frequency range. Including more layers, with
or without direct coupling between them, can further increase the
control and also open up more functionalities. Multilayer metaoptics
thus comprises two or more independent metasurfaces that are designed
to operate as sequential optical elements.

Usually, these metasurfaces are separated by a few wavelengths
of the incoming light and the optical elements are bulky and difficult
to couple. Moiré materials may provide a viable alternative,
as their layers are only a few Ångströms apart and display
a variety of correlated phases. This
atomistic separation leads to quantum-mechanical coupling between
the layers and may give rise to novel chiral properties that cause
intriguing optical phenomena such as circular dichroism (CD) (see
ref ). Furthermore,
the CD shows a resonance at transitions of states that are maximally
hybridized between the two layers, depending on the twist angle (seeFigurea).

Chiral response in moiré multilayers.
(a) Ellipticity or
circular dichroism spectra due to the resonant interband transition
at the M point as a function of the twist angle observed in twisted
bilayer graphene. Adapted with permission from ref  (Copyright 2016 Springer
Nature). (b) Schematic of a chiral cavity consisting of moiré
systems with an enhanced chiral near field suitable for sensing. Adapted
with permission from ref  (Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society). The electric
momentpdue to longitudinal current densities is locked
to a magnetic momentmdue to transverse current densities.
(c) The electric field associated with plasmon excitations propagating
in thexdirection together with its helicity/spin.
For ordinary plasmons, the spin points in theydirection,
whereas for chiral plasmons there is also a component in thexdirection. Adapted with permission from ref  (Copyright 2020 American
Physical Society). (d) Schematic view of supertwisted multilayers
and AFM image of a representative supertwisted WS2sample
with continuously twisting layers (scale bar 4 μm). Adapted
with permission from ref  (Copyright 2024 Springer Nature).

In this
section, we summarize the current state of the art regarding
chiral moiré systems and possible applications. We also discuss
strategies to enhanced the chiral response in moiré multilayers.
We close with future goals and experimental directions.

24.2. Current State of the Art. Polarization control
is a crucial aspect of optoelectronic devices, and twisted 2D material
stacks, including twisted bilayer graphene (TBG), offer new avenues
for tunable polarization optics. Twisted vdW materials, either using
quantum interlayer coupling,,or in-plane birefringence, can be
used to create polarization transformers, such as wave plates and
polarizers. By adjusting the twist angle and doping levels in TBG,
the eigenstates of the system’s Jones matrixwhich describes
the polarization transformations of incident lightcan be modified.
This leads to the development of tunable wave plates that can function
as elliptic or linear birefringent elements, useful for controlling
the polarization state of light. These properties highlight the potential
of TBG-based devices in polarimetry and Stokes polarimetry, where
multiple polarization states can be measured to infer unknown polarization
characteristics of light. The high degree of tunability in TBG makes
it a promising candidate for reconfigurable photonic circuits and
polarization-sensitive detectors in
advanced optical communication systems.

TBG offers the possibility
of rotating the polarization plane without breaking time-reversal
symmetry, since the two enantiomers can be distinguished by their
relative rotation between the two layersto the left or to
the right. It thus displays a circular dichroism without the presence
of a magnetic field, which becomes largest for optical frequencies
that correspond to transitions close to the van Hove singularities
(i.e., where the hybridization between the two layers is largest).
However, chiral effects are also expected in the static (intraband)
regime, and plasmons, with their confined wavelength, generally allow
for substantial enhancement in light−matter interactions.

Plasmonic excitations display chiral
effects in TBG as the electric
dipole oscillations are linked to magnetic dipole oscillations. This
coupling is either parallel (+) or antiparallel (−) as longitudinal
current densities in one sheet give rise to transverse current densities
in the other sheet; seeFigureb. Interestingly, the sign (±) depends on not
only whether the twist angle is clockwise or anticlockwise but also
whether the twist angle is less or greater than themagic
angleat which flat bands emerge. Nevertheless, the dispersion of bulk plasmonic modes is only slightly
changed from the usual square-root behavior, as for chiral effects,
retardation needs to be included. These
effects lead to a spin component of the confined plasmonic near field
that also points in the propagation direction (seeFigurec). We finally note that the
energy of the plasmonic edge modes in TBG depends on chirality even
in the nonretarded regime.

TBG’s
chiral sensing capabilities provide an attractive
platform for biosensing and enantioselective photochemistry (seeFigureb).,−Especially, the interaction between plasmons and electromagnetic
waves in TBG can be harnessed to detect small changes in the optical
properties of surrounding materials, making it a powerful tool as
a label-free biosensor. The ability to enhance chiral interactions
through external tuning mechanisms, such as electrostatic doping or
changing the twist angle, makes TBG an ideal platform for testing
these ideas.

where the electric and magnetic momentspandmare usually directly related to the electric
and magnetic fieldsEandBvia the electric
polarizability α and magnetic susceptibility χ. In chiral
systems, though, also the electromagnetic responseGenters.

The chiral response is linear with the interlayer
separation (G∼d⊥) and, thus, small due to the atomistic spacing (d⊥≈ 3.4 Å). Systems with (substantially)
larger interlayer separation can principally be ruled out since the
chiral effects require a quantum mechanical coupling between the layers
which is exponentially reduced for larger distances. However, we may
explore several stacks of the same interlayer separation and look
for enhanced chirality in moiré multilayers.

where σn,mdenote 2 × 2-matrices for the layer-resolved
conductivity tensors. Ineq, we have generalized the response function toNlayers withn,m= 1
...Nand the conductivity tensors are further related
to each other through the electronic structure and geometry of the
system. Note that, in this framework, chirality is described by the
nonlocal response with respect to the layers (i.e., it is encoded
in the nondiagonal matrix elements of σn,mwithn≠m). A detailed analysis of this equation should be able
to guide experimentalists to exploit chiral responses in moiré
multilayers.

Apart from this theoretical
challenge, an experimental challenge
is to contact the layers separately which seems feasible if the twisted
graphene sheets have different dimensions. This would open up the
possibility to observe the layer-contrasted Hall effect and a chiral
supercurrent in twisted bilayer, and
we expect more complex response patterns for three, four, or even
more layers especially when normal modes close to resonances are excited.

24.4. Future Goals. The circular dichroism in moiré
multilayers scales with the number of layers. However, mechanical
stacking of these moiré multilayers to a thickness comparable
to the optical wavelength is not feasible experimentally. Recently,
it was demonstrated that continuously twisted chiral TMD superstructures
can be grown experimentally (seeFigured).,This breakthrough
suggests a potential pathway for producing moiré multilayers
with thickness approaching the light or plasmon wavelengths.

Also, recent interest in emerging optical responses arising from
the quantum geometry of Bloch electrons in moiré multilayers
warrants further examination. Magnetoelectric responses can further
arise from the Berry curvature dipole, the magnetic moment texture
of Bloch electrons, or the concomitant presence of these two. Optoelectronic responses that probe the Berry
curvatures and their dipoles in moiré graphene bilayers have
been studied experimentally.,Their emerging magnetoelectric
responses present a compelling avenue for further experimental investigation.

Finally, chiral molecules are widespread, constituting a significant
fraction of pharmaceuticals, flavorants, and biological building blocks.
Using light−matter interactions to drive chiral-specific chemistry
is appealing for potentially enhanced selectivity and tunability.
Chiral graphene platforms can selectively activate bonds in only one
enantiomer of a racemic mixture. Achieving enantioselectivity in molecular
excitation is challenging because the asymmetry in light absorption
between chiral pairs is minimal. However, chiral plasmons in twisted
bilayers generate near-field electromagnetic waves with significantly
larger asymmetry. These chiral polaritonic platforms would also allow
for precise tuning of plasmonic resonances through electrostatic doping
and twist-angle control, enabling alignment with the vibrational modes
of the target chiral molecules.

25.1. Introduction and State of the Art. One of the
most attractive features of vdW crystals is their straightforward
mechanical exfoliation into extremely thin layers, potentially down
to atomic-scale thicknesses. Mechanical exfoliation enables the production
of nanoscale materials with minimal defects, without the need for
conventional nanofabrication techniques like lithography or milling,
which always introduce optical losses to some extent. Moreover, vdW
layers can be stacked, regardless of their lattice parameters, to
form homo- or heterostructures with unique properties, allowing even
layers with significantly different lattice constants to be easily
overlaid. This feature not only adds versatility and precise control
over the resulting structure but also enables stacking at arbitrary
twist angles. This unique twisting-and-stacking technique was crucial
for the discovery of unconventional superconductivity and correlated insulating states in twisted bilayer graphene, a landmark in condensed matter physics
research in the past decade that initiated the field oftwistronics.

In 2020, an analogous breakthrough in nanophotonics occurred
when four independent research groups experimentally demonstrated
that the propagation of polaritons could be significantly altered
by stacking flakes of in-plane hyperbolic materials,,,at different
twist angles. The studies showed that, when two such flakes are stacked
with their optical axes not aligned, hyperbolic phonon polaritons
(HPhPs) in the top flake may propagate along in-plane directions that
are different from those in the bottom flake. Since the electromagnetic
field of the modes in both layers partially overlaps, they can hybridize,
with the strength of the coupling depending on the relative orientation
of the polaritonic propagation directions, which are related to the
opening angle of each layer’s hyperbolic isofrequency curve
(IFC, a cross section of the polariton dispersion at a fixed frequency).
This coupling results in hybridized HPhPs with intriguing physical
properties: the propagation of PhPs in the bilayer can change dramatically
based on the twist angle. Specifically, as the twist angle increases,
the IFC of the coupled system undergoes a transition from a hyperbolic
shape to an elliptical one. This marks a topological transition from
an open to a closed curve, which can happen as a function of both
the twist angle and the frequency. At
the specific twist angle for which this transition occurs (referred
to asphotonic magic anglein analogy to its electronic
counterpart in twistronics), the IFC is bound to exhibit a flat band,
resulting in highly collimated propagation at a single, well-defined
propagation direction. Such a flat IFC is associated with thecanalizationregime, meaning that the wave can propagate
without geometrical decay; that is, the propagation is diffraction-less.
While topological transition and canalization of polaritons can be
observed in hyperbolic metasurfaces at a specific frequency around
the metasurface resonance, the twisted geometry offers the opportunity
to tune these effects across a broad range of frequencies, simply
by twisting. Such a broadband canalization phenomenon was directly
observed via nano-IR imaging of PhPs in twisted α-MoO3slabs, initiating the field oftwistoptics(Figure). In contrast
to twistronics, the slabs in twistoptics are typically tens to hundreds
of nanometers thick.

Roadmap for twistoptics. Current and potential
functionalities
in twistoptics (gate-tunable polariton canalization, moiré physics, twisted
polaritonic crystals, topological transitions) that could trigger a wide array of applications
in nanophotonics (sensing, information technologies, radiative heat
transfer, optoelectronics). The “Chirality” sketch is
reprinted with permission from ref  (Copyright 2020 American Physical Society);
the “Gate-tunable canalization” panel is adapted with
permission from ref  (Copyright 2023 American Chemical Society).

Nevertheless, twisted bilayers support
a single predetermined magic
angle at a given frequency; that is, the propagation direction of
canalized polaritons cannot be controlled in the same device without
changing the twist angle. Another work in 2023 demonstrated that,
by adding a third layer, the resulting device can support multiple
photonic magic angles at a given frequency, enabling in-plane, all-angle
polariton canalization. Moreover, magic
angles in twisted α-MoO3trilayers can be made robust
to frequency variations, a phenomenon known asbroadband canalizationof polaritons.

Apart from polariton canalization effects,
it is also possible
to realize platforms and devices where the polaritonic properties
become dependent on the twist angle. For example, placing an α-MoO3slab on an array of sufficiently separated metallic ribbons
allows Fabry−Pérot nanoresonators to be uniquely tuned
by simply rotating the host crystal. The principles of twistoptics can also be extended to polaritonic
crystals:−rotating an α-MoO3layer on a periodic hole array
fabricated in a metallic layer enables the selective excitation of
Bloch modes, an effect that can also be achieved by patterning the
hole array directly onto the α-MoO3flakes.

Beyond directing the flow of energy in the near-field, twisted
stacks of anisotropic vdW materials are also promising for manipulating
optical properties in the far-field. For instance, electrostatically
doped twisted stacks can control the light polarization state, since they can function as birefringent waveplates
or polarizers with tunable degrees of non-normality. This, in turn,
gives access to a plethora of polarization transformers, which are
important in applications in information processing, telecommunications,
and spectroscopy.

However, twisting 2D materials supporting
HPhPs for light control
in the near field and the far field is not the only approach to twistoptics.
Alternatively, moiré photonics leverages periodic stacking
misalignments in twisted vdW layers to create moiré patterns,
offering a novel platform for engineering optical responses and exploring
salient optical phenomena (seeSection). For instance,
second-harmonic generation can be modulated by a factor of 50 by changing
the alignment of two hBN layers. This
was shown byin operandoAFM rotation of the top
hBN layer. Moreover, intriguing optical effects have also been observed
in moiré patterns of twisted bilayer graphene, including interband
plasmons driven by transitions within the moiré superlattice as well as hyperbolic enhancements of photocurrent
patterns.,Furthermore, moiré patterns
can also create confined conducting channels that can enable aquantumpolaritonic crystal for graphene plasmon polaritons, a novel approach to manipulate and route the
flow of energy at the nanoscale.

Additionally, due to the quantum
coupling between twisted atomic
layers, light−matter interactions in these structures are inherently
chiral, offering a promising platform for chiral polaritons at the
nanoscale. Chiral plasmons have been demonstrated to possess longitudinal
spin in addition to the conventional transverse spin of plasmons, opening up avenues for novel spin−orbit
light−matter interactions. With the extensive range of atomically
thin materials available, twisted vdW heterostructures can also serve
as fundamental building blocks for advancing chiral plasmonics research,
such as chiral sensing of molecular enantiomers. Since different enantiomers can have drastically different
effects (for instance, one enantiomer of a drug may be therapeutic,
while the other could be inactive or harmful), their accurate detection
is essential for drug development, food safety, and environmental
monitoring.

25.2. Challenges and Opportunities and Suggested Directions
to Meet These Goals. Many current challenges and opportunities
in twistoptics revolve around the development of more mechanisms to
actively tune its features through external stimuli (seeSection). Major advancements
could be triggered by the ability to dynamically control canalized
polaritons through external stimuli. This is essential not only for
implementing twistoptics in nano-optical technologies but also for
exploring fundamental phenomena. A promising approach was theoretically
predicted and experimentally demonstrated: an electrical tuning mechanism in twisted bilayer
α-MoO3through hybridization with gated-graphene
plasmon polaritons. By adjusting the doping level of the graphene
layer, polariton canalization can be tuned on demand, enabling dynamic
control over topology, propagation, and confinement. Also, as many
of the materials of interest, such as α-MoO3, are
semiconductors, carrier injection via photoexcitation and gating could
also be employed. This is key for the implementation of polariton
canalization in optoelectronic devices, allowing for reconfigurable,
high-speed, and energy-efficient photonic circuits, sensors, and modulators.
Moreover, mechanical tuning constitutes an interesting alternative
to electrical control mechanisms: by using an AFM tip to push the
vdW layers, the alignment between themand consequently the
optical response of the whole systemcould be dynamically modified,
as demonstrated in twistronics studies on twisted bilayer graphene. This approach would be particularly interesting
when using s-SNOM tips, as they would allow for anin operandotunable response. In contrast to twisted bilayer graphene, the large
adhesion forces among the α-MoO3layers, as well
as between the α-MoO3and traditional substrates
in nanophotonics, such as SiO2, make it challenging to
perform this operation in a reproducible and controllable way. A complementary
alternative bridging electrical and mechanical control mechanisms
to actively tune the twist angle involves using piezoelectric and
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), which allow precise control
over the twist angle and vertical separation between multiple twisted
layers, as well as other parameters like lateral translation, stretching,
tilting, and shearing. This flexibility
opens up a wide range of photonic applications. Phase-change materials
also present an encouraging platform for dynamic control in twistoptics,
whether through temperature-dependent metal-to-insulator transitions
or by creating rewritable nanostructures.

Additionally, several
challenges in twistoptics are similar to those encountered in the
PhP field, where twistoptics has been most extensively explored. One
of the challenges is to extend the polariton frequency ranges. Namely,
while twistoptics has already been extended to the THz regime, further extension and tunability could be achieved
by intercalating atoms of different materials, thereby passively modifying
the underlying collective excitations. Notably, the discovery of hyperbolic
plasmon polaritons in the visible spectrum opens the door to advance
twistoptics also into the visible range. In addition, leveraging twistoptics
in materials with even greater optical anisotropy constitutes a growing
interest in nanophotonics. In this regard, materials with a monoclinic
crystal structure, like β-Ga2O3and CdWO4, which host hyperbolic shear polaritons, could unlock new
extraordinary optical features. In fact, recent research has also
shown that by placing a thin α-MoO3layer on a monoclinic
β-Ga2O3substrate, it is possible to engineer
an IFC that is approximately linear along the asymptotes of the hyperbolic
dispersion while suppressing half of the IFC, leading tounidirectional
ray propagation. This effect
can also be achieved by combining two α-MoO3layers
with significantly different thicknesses. The potential can be even
greater in lower-symmetry triclinic systems, such as ReS2, where real-space imaging of polaritons has remained elusive so
far. The search for low-symmetry crystals has become a central pursuit
in nano-optics, as demonstrated by the intense study of strongly anisotropic
PhPs in vdW slabs, heterostructures, and bulk crystals in recent years
(seeSection).

Like any other 2D-material-related field, twistoptics also faces
challenges associated with the fabrication of high-quality 2D layers.
Currently, the best quality flakes are produced through mechanical
exfoliation, which yields small flakes with limited reproducibilityposing
a hurdle for twistoptics to reach industry requirements. Advances
in growth processes, such as CVD and other techniques, could help
standardize the fabrication of twisted samples. Another challenge
lies in the creation of efficient polariton antennas and emitters
within the samples, as well as nanoscale detectors and absorbers,
crucial for integration into on-chip devices, and which are largely
missing as well. While gold antennas and the s-SNOM tip have been
used as launchers, both present disadvantages: the former lack broadband
capabilities, and the latter cannot be integrated into future devices.

As the number of parameters in twisted stacks increases, designing
precise propagation for specific outcomes in nanophotonics is becoming
more challenging. Although analytical methods and approximations are
available, inverse design is emerging as a powerful alternative to
traditional intuition-based approaches. This shift has led to recent
efforts in applying machine learning and advanced data processing
to nanophotonics. Inverse design has already proven successful in
tasks such as beam steering in twisted layers and designing other nanophotonic, plasmonic, and metamaterial
structures.

Many of the applications employing polaritons―such
as polaritonic
chemistry, which involves coupling to molecular vibrations and could
lead to advances in sensing and catalysis―stand to gain from
the development of twistoptics, for instance by the capability of
guiding heat with canalized polaritons and without the need for patterned
structures. In fact, the diffractionless
nature of canalized polaritons makes them particularly promising for
achieving extremely directional thermal emission exceeding classical
blackbody radiation limits. This could unlock precise control over
heat flow, which would be useful in thermal imaging and targeted cooling
applications, such as efficient cooling solutions in nanoscale devices.
Additionally, phonon polaritons offer an ideal platform for strong
coupling with molecules. Investigating vibrational strong coupling
in the canalized regime could lead to advancements in sensing and
security. Similarly, because polariton canalization enables the collimation
of the many different wave vectors characteristic of hyperbolic materials
into a single direction, resulting in a very high density of states
along it, applications such as enhancing the coupling between quantum
emitters and facilitating long-range dipole−dipole interactions
could as well be boosted by the advancement of twistoptics. This has
significant implications for fields such as quantum information processing
through coupling to quantum emitters, with potential impacts on entanglement
and information technologies. Advances in polariton canalization could
also trigger the development of super- and hyper-lenses that benefit
from the extremely collimated behavior to achieve unprecedented resolution,
driving advances in nanoimaging. On a more fundamental level, exploring
deeply subwavelength, topologically protected polaritons in twisted
crystals could provide new insights, as could the design of extremely
small nanocavities based on the noncollinearity of the wave vector
and the group velocity for the largest part of the momenta distribution
of canalized polaritons.

Anisotropy
of materials is at the heart of many optical phenomena.,,−It leads to birefringence and hyperbolicity, which are key effects
that enable light manipulation and nanophotonic applications. Two-dimensional
vdW materials intrinsically possess anisotropic crystal structures,
owing to their strong in-plane covalent bonds and weak out-of-plane
vdW interaction. This gives rise to unique anisotropic optical properties
that make them promising building blocks for flat optical components
and nanoscale waveguides.,,−Many functionalities arise from polaritons,
which are formed through the strong coupling between electromagnetic
(EM) fields and dipolar excitations such as phonons, plasmons, or
excitons.,,−The primary motivation for studying polaritons
resides in their ability to enhance light−matter interactions
at the nanoscale, particularly when these interactions are not only
anisotropic, but they are so anisotropic that the real parts of different
permittivity tensor components have opposite signsthe hallmark
of hyperbolicity.,,−This gives rise to hyperbolic polaritons
that are associated with open, hyperbolic isofrequency contours in
momentum space, enabling large electromagnetic energy confinement
within narrow, directional channels with a large photonic density
of states. Hyperbolic wave propagation was initially introduced in
the context of artificial materials. In many 2D vdW materials, these
hyperbolic modes instead arise naturally due to their strong anisotropy,
without the need for artificial structuring. This makes them highly
attractive for nanophotonic on-chip components, such as flat lenses,
resonators, or waveguides. The vast range of vdW materials, of which
only a few have been explored so far optically, opens thus a large
tool-box to exploit extreme anisotropy for optoelectronic applications.

Role of crystalline anisotropy on polaritonic
response and function.
(a) Role of structural anisotropy in the optical properties of 2D
vdW materials, including, from top to bottom, different crystal classes,
optical axes leading to birefringence, hyperbolic isofrequency contours,
and polariton propagation launched by a point dipole. (b,c) Challenges
and future directions.

26.1.1. Hexagonal. Graphene, hBN, and TMDs are
hexagonal vdW materials (Figurea, first column). This high symmetry leads to a uniaxial
optical response that is isotropic in-plane but can be largely anisotropic
out-of-plane. One consequence is a giant optical birefringence, which
can reach Δn∼ 3 for TMDs in the visible
(VIS), and Δn∼ 1.6 and ∼0.8
for hBN in the IR and THz spectral range, enabling extreme forms of
light manipulation.,The large index contrast is
associated with highly directional material resonances driven by phonons,
excitons or plasmons. The resonances are often so pronounced that
the associated permittivity component becomes negative, giving rise
to hyperbolic polaritons.,,A prime example is hyperbolic phonon polaritons in hBN at IR wavelengths,
which propagate as rays in the material bulk. The ray direction is perpendicular to the asymptotes of the hyperbolic
isofrequency contour, which gives access to very large wave vectors
associated with highly confined fields and extreme light−​matter
interactions. This has been exploited for hyperlensing, ultraslow
light propagation and extreme compression of the polaritonic wavelength.,,,In general, a finite thickness of vdW materials is required to exploit
the out-of-plane uniaxial anisotropy. Therefore, further symmetry
reductions are required to achieve in-plane, 2D anisotropic responses.

26.1.2. Orthorhombic. Significant advances toward
2D optical anisotropy have been made in the past few years with materials
with orthorhombic crystal symmetry, such as α-MoO3, WTe2and CrSBr (Figurea, second column).,,,These materials have
a biaxial response leading to in-plane birefringence, linear dichroism
and hyperbolicity. Particularly noteworthy has been the discovery
and control of in-plane hyperbolic phonon polaritons in α-MoO3and α-V2O5.,Using near-field microscopy, researchers have visualized concave
wave-fronts for these polaritons, occurring along specific in-plane
directions. These enable flat optical lenses, diffraction-free propagation
across interfaces and peculiar effects such as negative reflection
and refraction. The isofrequency contours of these modes undergo topological
transitions between elliptical (closed) and hyperbolic (open) shapes,
enabling exotic phenomena like canalization. Furthermore, hyperbolic
plasmon polaritons in WTe2show intriguing tunability. Here, the combination of intraband (free carrier)
and interband (valence-conduction) transitions produces an inductive
and capacitive response in orthogonal directions, leading to an in-plane
hyperbolic dispersion. Recently, in-plane
anisotropic exciton polaritons were discovered in CrSBr in the near-IR
range at low temperatures (Section). The material is particularly
interesting because of its antiferromagnetic response that opens a
route to tune polaritons with magnetic fields (Section).

26.2.1. Materials Search. Given the vast range
of vdW materials that have been exfoliated from their known bulk crystal
forms, but have not been characterized optically, we expect a surge
of research in polariton phenomena.,,,,Many of these materials belong to orthorhombic, monoclinic or triclinic
crystal classes, which underlines the importance of understanding
their optical anisotropy in order to utilize them in photonic applications.
It is currently challenging for ellipsometry to extract the full frequency-dependent
components of the permittivity tensor, in particular for the out-of-plane
response. Thus, further developments for full nano-optical characterization
are needed. Furthermore, predictiveab initiomodeling
of the optical properties, including material losses, would benefit
materials searches. A material database that reports crystal structures
along with the frequency-dependent permittivity tensors would be highly
desirable. Furthermore, expanding the range of vdW materials supporting
hyperbolic polaritons in the mid-IR molecular fingerprinting region,
beyond hBN, would be desirable for sensing applications.

26.2.2. Characterization. The prime tool for characterizing
polariton propagation and nano-optical phenomena is scattering-type,
scanning near-field optical microscopy (s-SNOM), which has been mostly
used in conjunction with tunable continuous-wave lasers to access
frequency-dependent properties (Section).,,This works well in the mid- and near-IR spectral ranges but is technically
challenging at VIS frequencies for stability reasons and in the far-IR
and THz ranges because of the lack of narrowband lasers. The latter
long-wavelength spectral ranges are currently only accessible with
advanced light sources, such as free-electron lasers or synchrotron
sources. Recent developments in narrowband difference-frequency generation
down to ω ≈ 500 cm−1promise to widen
the range of materials accessible with table-top lasers, but there
is still a need for narrowband light sources to bridge the THz gap.
A notable emerging capability is time-resolved nanoscopy with ultrafast
laser systems, opening a route toward spatiotemporal characterization
and temporal photonic control.,Several experiments
have achieved all-optical activation of polaritonic states by exploiting
transiently excited carriers, which enabled, for example, transient
hyperbolicity in WSe2. Another
notable recent development is cryo-SNOM, which is crucial for the
characterization of functional materials with phase transitions and
enables characterization with greatly reduced material losses.

26.2.3. Fabrication and Scalability. For scalability
and device integration it is crucial to fabricate large-area highly
crystalline vdW materials of defined thickness. The currently most
popular approach of exfoliation is nondeterministic and not scalable,
although recent advances with metal-assisted exfoliation offer a route
to large-area mono- and few-layers. A
promising approach to large areas and scalability is chemical vapor
deposition (CVD), but recent experiments showed that maintaining high-quality
polariton propagation is challenging. An unexplored opportunity for CVD is to employ isotopically pure
precursors, which have greatly improved phonon polariton properties
in exfoliated crystals. Another device
challenge is to pattern vdW materials with lithography or focused
ion beam milling without damaging their crystal structure. Recent
approaches of engineering polaritons through a patterned substrate
instead of structuring the material itself are promising. Ultimately it would be desirable to grow vdW
materials on a nanostructured template directly.

26.2.4. Tunability. A major challenge for polaritons
at large is that many interesting optical phenomena, such as hyperbolicity,
only occur within narrow spectral ranges that are set by material
resonances. A wide range of approaches has been explored to achieve
tunability.,−For plasmon polaritons, the plasma frequency is shifted through
charge carrier doping and gating; an approach that also carries over
to other material excitations when hybridized with plasmons, as demonstrated
for hBN/graphene and MoO3/graphene heterostructures. For exciton polaritons, a key advantage, but
also a challenge, is their dependence on excitation density and temperature,
offering tunability of frequency and oscillator strength, and even
condensation and lasing when tailoring their dispersion (Section). Active tuning
of phonon polaritons is much more difficult, as their spectral range
is set by the vibrational frequencies of the lattice. Isotopic substitution,
intercalation and heterostructures of different materials and isotopes
have been demonstrated as concepts to design and shift phonon resonances.
A particularly promising approach to actively induce and tune anisotropy
and hyperbolicity is strain, which is so far largely unexplored experimentally. Other emergent fields are twist optics and
polaritonic metasurfaces, which are discussed in dedicatedSectionsand .

26.2.5. Flat and On-Chip Photonic Devices. Optical
anisotropy and hyperbolicity in vdW materials provide unique tools
to realize flat optical devices and on-chip photonic components.,The giant birefringence and linear dichroism of biaxial vdW materials
are ideally suited to realize ultraflat polarization optics and light
manipulators.,These flat optical components
can be stacked to combine different functionalities in compact and
miniaturized devices. In addition, hyperbolic polaritons pave the
way for on-chip light processing through their unique propagation
and confinement. Several key concepts and components have been realized
recently, including flat lenses, bend-free refraction, and directional
propagation, that occur on deep subwavelength scales. Transformation optics and inverse design are
powerful approaches to expand the search for new designs. The strong
and tunable confinement of polaritons also offers a route to frequency
multiplexing and conversion in nanoscale waveguides, bridging functionalities
of different spectral ranges. Importantly, the implementation of on-chip
devices relies on interfaces between electronic and optical components
(Section).

26.2.6. Sensing. Sensing applications can benefit
from the extreme field confinement of hyperbolic polaritons, particularly
in the mid- and far-IR molecular fingerprinting regions. This enhances sensitivity to environmental
changes, making hyperbolic media ideal for chemical detection and
biosensing. The enhancement of molecular fingerprint spectra mainly
occurs through the hybridization and strong coupling of IR vibrations
with phonon polaritons.,Recent experiments,
demonstrating deeply subwavelength confinement down to 10−7/λ03mode volumes, give hope that the
sensitivity can be pushed to the single-molecule level.

26.2.7. Thermal Applications. Another promising
and emerging field is to exploit material anisotropy and polaritons
in the IR for thermal emission and transport. Coherent and directional thermal light sources have been
realized based on hyperbolic metasurfaces and phonon polaritons in
structured 3D polar crystals.,It will be interesting
to realize similar concepts through the natural optical anisotropy
of vdW crystals. Hyperbolic phonon polaritons
are expected to enable super-Planckian thermal emission, surpassing
the blackbody limit, which could lead to innovations in thermophotovoltaics,
radiative cooling, and nanoelectronics heat management. Beyond thermal emission, also thermal transport
can be significantly modified with phonon polaritons,but has yet to be fully explored for anisotropic 2D materials, opening
a new route to steer thermal dissipation and to build on-chip thermal
diodes.

In conclusion, optical anisotropy and hyperbolic polaritons
in 2D vdW materials represent a booming research area with significant
technological implications. Ongoing progress in material synthesis,
polariton engineering and device integration is expected to drive
important advances in light manipulation, nanophotonics, quantum technologies,
sensing and thermal management.

Two-dimensional
materials serve as natural building blocks for
metasurfaces and metamaterials, an area of intense research further
stimulated by the emergence of new families of 2D materials with diverse
optical properties. This block discusses selected developments and
emerging opportunities in this dynamic field.

27.1. Current State of the Art. As discussed in other
sections of this Roadmap, polaritons are quasiparticles that emerge
from the strong coupling between light and material excitations. The
ultrathin nature of 2D materials, combined with their strong material
resonances, offers a plethora of opportunities in the context of polaritonic
phenomena, stemming from excitons, phonons, magnons, plasmons and
electronic transitions. While a wide
range of novel photonic phenomena have been explored in this context,
broadly covered by the other sections of this Roadmap, recently it
has also been realized that photonic engineering of polaritonic materials
through nanostructuring offers a new playground for fundamental phenomena
and applications. In addition, photonic engineering allows tailoring
local density of states, field enhancement, quality factor, and modal
engineering of the near-field light profiles that engage local material
resonances, resulting in tailored polaritonic responses that are not
accessible in the unstructured materials. In turn, polaritonic phenomena
offer new opportunities to enhance the growing field of metasurfacesultrathin
devices that exploit nanoscale engineered structures to tailor and
control the optical wavefront in all its degrees of freedom. While
conventional photonic metasurfaces are fundamentally limited in the
way they interact with light due to the limited extent of light−matter
interactions at the nanoscale in conventional materials, polaritonics
offers a platform to overcome these limitations and realize metasurface
responses that go beyond the conventional limits, in terms of field
enhancement, nonlinearity, bandwidth, and other constraints dictated
by passivity, linearity, and time invariance. Indeed, polaritonic
metasurfaces have become in the past decade a blossoming field of
research, offering opportunities for exciting interdisciplinary research
and for technological breakthroughs.

For instance, polaritonic
metasurfaces based on quantum engineered materials that support tailored
electronic transitions have been shown to sustain giant optical nonlinearities, orders of magnitude larger than those observed
in natural crystals at the same frequencies, and free from phase matching
constraints due to their inherently low profile. These have been used
over the years to demonstrate efficient wave mixing and harmonic generation,
as well as power limiting, emerging from ultrathin structures that
leverage the optimized synergy between photonic engineering and tailored
polaritonic responses. Similar approaches have been applied to a wide
range of 2D materials, from boron nitride and other phononic materials,
to transition metals and excitonic systems.,,−In all these and many other demonstrations, enhanced polaritonic
phenomena as well as enhanced metasurface functionalities have emerged
by the optimal combination of material responses and photonic engineering
at the nanoscale through nanostructuring.

Beyond numerical optimization
of the metasurface geometries, the
rational design of polaritonic metasurfaces through tailored broken
symmetries has emerged as a powerful tool, leveraging both localized
resonances with tailored broken symmetries,and delocalized nonlocal responses. Particularly intriguing in this context is the opportunity that
emerges from leveraging also the natural broken symmetry in the underlying
2D materials composing polaritonic metasurfaces, which can support highly confined directional modes. InSection, we indeed discuss
how twisting thin films of 2D materials can enable novel polaritonic
phenomena, and it is then not surprising to realize that more sophisticated
forms of photonic engineering, in the context of metasurface designs,
can further enhance this control.Figurea, for instance, showcases a wide range
of extreme polaritonic phenomena demonstrated in ultrathin planarized
settings, obtained by structuring 2D vdW material interfaces, demonstrating how the interplay of directional
material resonances, nanostructuring in space, and metamaterial concepts
can be synergistically combined to demonstrate extreme control over
nanoscale light. 2D polaritonic materials also naturally offer a very
large index of refraction, large nonlinearities and tunability, all
excellent features to augment photonic metasurfaces.

Polaritonic metasurfaces. (a) Polaritonic metasurfaces
based on
vdW interfaces to demonstrate a range of extreme polaritonic phenomena
at the nanoscale. Adapted from ref  (Copyright 2021 Springer Nature). (b) Topological
polaritonic metasurface obtained by loading a topological photonic
crystal with a thin film of boron nitride. The right panel shows the
effect of such loading: the topological edge state splits its dispersion
within the bandgap of the photonic crystal due to the coupling with
the phonon resonance of boron nitride. The topological phase is transferred
to the polaritonic response. Adapted from ref  (Adapted from ref  (Copyright 2021 American
Association for the Advancement of Science).

27.2. Challenges and Future Goals. While the field
of polaritonic metasurfaces has been blossoming in the past decadeacross
various material platforms and frequency rangesa few challenges
have been hindering its full deployment and its impact beyond basic
science explorations. First, directly structuring 2D materials may
hinder their exceptional optical properties, as a function of the
nanofabrication processes that may involve high temperatures or mechanical
challenges. As an alternative, 2D materials can be coupled to photonic
metasurfaces by simply stacking a thin film over a structured surface.
This approach preserves the pristine properties of the polaritonic
material but trades this benefit with the risk of weaker coupling
with the metasurface. As an example,Figureb shows a topological polaritonic metasurface
obtained by stacking a pristine 15 nm film of boron nitride on a topological
photonic crystal. By optimizing the
thickness of the polaritonic thin film, and tailoring the photonic
crystal to support its nontrivial bandgap around the phonon resonance
of boron nitride, it is possible to transfer the topological phase
of the edge state living at the boundary between domain walls from
light to the phonon polariton. The robustness inherited by the topological
features of this mode is now observable in the far-field, and phonon
vibrations in the thin film are guided around defects and sharp transitions
due to the strong coupling to topological light. As shown in the right
panel, the dispersion of the topological mode is strongly impacted
by the phonon resonance, and as the mode gets more confined to the
interface, for larger transverse momenta, the polaritonic nature of
the topological mode emerges.

While this example features a
phononic response clearly observable at room temperature, polaritonic
metasurfaces involving excitonic responses often require operating
at cryogenic temperatures, which enables stronger polaritonic responses.
This clearly represents a challenge, which is typically accompanied
by the fact that many 2D materials are poorly compatible with conventional
optoelectronic platforms. A related challenge emerges when the 2D
materials need to be exfoliated, which is often the case in the context
of vdW materials. This challenge impacts repeatability and limits
the available lateral extent of the polaritonic material.

The
2D nature of many polaritonic materials is an appealing feature
for many applications, enabling strong coupling, large light−matter
interactions and natural coupling with photonic structures, as inFigure, yet it can also
represent a challenge due to the underlying symmetries. A 2D thin
film naturally supports transverse electric responses, which are symmetric
in the two half spaces above and below it. This implies fundamental
limits on the efficiency of the optical response. In addition, the
underlying crystal symmetry may prevent even-order nonlinear responses
in 2D materials, which may be overcome selecting lower-symmetry crystal
lattices, as discussed in another section of this Roadmap.

Another
emerging challenge is the limited overall efficiency of
the resulting polaritonic devices. While 2D materials offer giant
refractive indexes and nonlinearity coefficients, these are typically
a byproduct of the tiny volumes involved in such planarized structures.
As a result, the overall efficiency of polaritonic metasurfaces for
linear and nonlinear phenomena tends to be limited, especially when
operating at room temperature. Efforts to enable scalability, high-quality,
and large-area fabrication are necessary to overcome this challenge.

27.3. Suggested Directions to Meet These Goals. The
most appealing aspect of polaritonic metasurfaces is their inherently
multiphysics operation, involving not only electromagnetic responses,
but also other material responses, which can serve as a reservoir
for new degrees of freedom in photonic engineering. A byproduct of
this feature is that proper optimization of polaritonic metasurfaces
inherently requires a co-optimization effort that goes beyond just
optics and photonics. A good example is the polaritonic metasurfaces
based on electronic transitions as in ref . Their optimal responses are achieved by optimizing
the underlying electronic band structure of the multiple quantum well
substrates while at the same time controlling the nanostructure design.
This feature emerges also in the design of the topological polaritonic
metasurface inFigureb, where the optimization of the boron
nitride thickness was crucial to ensure strong coupling with the photonic
mode. This co-optimization requires new computational and design tools,
which inherently span multiple disciplinesan interesting direction
for future research, involving both theoretical and numerical efforts.

In parallel, efforts to improve large-area fabrication and growth
of high-quality 2D materials will certainly enhance the performance
of polaritonic metasurfaces, which may come hand-in-hand with progress
in nanofabrication and structuring of these materials without affecting
their polaritonic responses. Explorations to improve the material
response and avoid the need for cryogenic temperatures will largely
benefit the future of this research area.

In addition, the static
nature of polaritonic metasurfaces, whose
response is engrained in their spatial structure, represents an important
challenge, which may be overcome by exploiting electric gating or
optical pumping. Explorations in this context hold the promise to
offer real-time tunability of the polaritonic metasurface responses.
In this context, another promising direction is the use of magnetic
materials, such as CrSBr, supporting polaritons. In a recent demonstration, strong coupling between light and the excitonic
response of CrSBr in optical cavities has resulted in giant tunability
of the optical response through the applied magnetic bias. A transition
from antiferromagnetic to ferromagnetic response, associated with
large tuning of the optical properties and exciton resonance, was
observed, ideally suited as a platform for magnetically tunable polaritonic
metasurfaces and for the manipulation of magnons.

Finally, efforts
to scale these devices, improve their reproducibility,
and increase the compatibility of photonic systems are certainly needed
to ensure a maximized impact of polaritonic metasurfaces for practical
technologies, spanning from thermal management to sensing, imaging,
wave mixing and more. The future of polaritonic metasurfaces is certainly
vibrant, with important roles being played by the interplay and strong
collaborative efforts among material scientists, physicists, chemists
and optical engineers.

28.1. Introduction. Metasurfaces employ resonant light
scattering in compact arrays of nanoscale structures to perform a
collective optical function. Accurate control over the local scattering
amplitude and phase enables (near-)­arbitrary wavefront shaping. While
initial metasurfaces employed plasmon resonances in metal nanoparticles,
subsequent designs quickly moved to Mie-like resonances in dielectric
and semiconductor nanostructures to mitigate the optical losses associated
with the metallic light−matter interaction. Leveraging more
advanced design concepts including propagation phase and geometric
(Pancharatnam−Berry) phase, state-of-the-art metasurfaces now
enable high-numerical aperture lensing, multicolor holography, beam
steering, and even multifunctional flat optical elements. For dielectric
metasurfaces, a high refractive index of the photonic material is
of crucial relevance, as it controls the scattering cross section
and nanoscale confinement of light. As such, titanium dioxide (TiO2, refractive indexn∼ 2.6) and silicon
(Si,n∼ 3.5) are common photonic materials
for metasurfaces.

Over the past decade, TMDs have emerged as
a new class of photonic materials for metasurfaces, for two reasons:
(i) these 2D semiconductors exhibit remarkably high refractive indices
(n> 4), which enable very strong light scattering
(Figurea); (ii)
their optical response is characterized by a very strong excitonic
resonance in the red/near-IR spectral range (Figureb). The steady-state formation and recombination
of excitons give rise to a resonant light−matter interaction
that is intrinsic to the material and, unlike plasmon and Mie resonances,
this exitonic resonance occurs independent of the (nanoscale) geometry.
In their monolayer limit, the exciton resonance energy and amplitude
have been demonstrated to be very sensitive to external stimuli. This opens new avenues for active metasurfaces
where the optical function can be tuned postfabrication using external
parameters including electric/magnetic fields, strain, or optical
pump fields.

Comparison of TMD optical
constants and schematic illustrations
of TMD-based metasurfaces. (a) Comparison of the spectrally varying
real parts of the refractive indices for the principal semiconducting
TMDs in multilayer form together with Si and GaAs.−(b) Comparison of exciton oscillator strengths versus resonance
energies of various monolayer and multilayer TMDs as measured at room
temperature.,,,,A comparison of GaAs quantum wells at a temperature of 6 K is also
provided. (c) Schematic approaches to
passive metasurfaces using bulk (multilayer) TMD active layers. Both
linear and nonlinear approaches are depicted and discussed. (d) Schematic
of approaches to active TMD-based metasurfaces through external parameters.

Here, we outline the state-of-the-art in TMD based
metasurfaces,
highlight the key challenges in their development, and discuss potential
pathways to address these challenges. Crucially, in this Roadmap we
defineTMD metasurfacesas those where the TMD functions
as theoptically active materialof the metasurface
(i.e., the principle medium for light−matter interactions and
photon-field confinement), in contrast to decorating dielectric/metallic
metasurfaces with a (monolayer) TMD.

28.2.1. High-Index Metasurfaces. The refractive
index of many TMD materials reaches values >4 in the visible and
near-IR
part of the spectrum, outperforming traditional materials like Si
and GaAs (Figurea). Moreover, due to their intrinsic
vdW nature, TMDs are inherently anisotropic, resulting in birefringence
values exceeding 1.5. These optical
properties have been experimentally measured by several methods including
normal-incidence reflectivity, near-field optical microscopy, and spectroscopic ellipsometry. Such characteristics make TMDs exceptional
candidates for passive high-index metasurfaces. Furthermore, optical
anisotropy and the flexibility of integration with diverse substrates
provide TMD metasurfaces with additional advantages over traditional
Si and GaAs counterparts. Nanostructuring these materials enables
the excitation of Mie resonances and related anapole states in TMD
nanodisks. Furthermore, several proof-of-principle
experiments, including metasurfaces, waveguides, ring resonators,
and photonic crystal defect cavities, have also been reported recently.

28.2.2. Excitonic Polaritonic Self-Hybridization. Depending on the spectral range and their overlap with excitons,
the passive photonic modes discussed in the previous section could
demonstrate polaritonic or pure photonic behavior. Because in the
former case, the polaritonic behavior is demonstrated without the
use of the external cavity, these polaritons are sometimes referred
to as self-hybridized. In this scenario, the optical modes supported
by the geometry of the material and its refractive index can strongly
couple or hybridize with material excitations (excitons, phonons)
within the very same material, leading to the emergence of new quasiparticlespolaritons
that inherit both light and matter character from their constituent
parts. Such self-hybridization has been demonstrated in TMD films
both above and below the light line, in WS2nanodisks with anapole states, in 1D grating resonators on Au, and more recently within passive WS2metasurfaces. Self-hybridization can also be observed with
waveguide modes in monolayer TMDs when layered into a multiquantum
well (MQW) or a superlattice structure.

28.2.3. Optical Nonlinearity. Due to the lack
of inversion symmetry, monolayer MoS2is known to provide
one of the highest second-order nonlinear coefficients (10−7m/V) in the near-IR part of the spectrum. At the same time, multilayer
TMDs, which typically adopt AB stacking, result in a 2H-TMD configuration,
where strong nonlinearity disappears in the bulk crystal. Recently,
a new type of AA′ stacked form of TMDs, particularly, 3R-MoS2and 3R-WS2, has started gaining popularity. These
materials combine high refractive index with substantial second-order
nonlinearity, making them potentially useful in nonlinear nanophotonics.
Specifically, giant second-harmonic generation (SHG), piezophotovoltaic and piezoelectric effects,
and spontaneous parametric down-conversion have been recently demonstrated
using 3R-TMDs. Furthermore, structuring these materials into nanodisks
enabled a combination of nanophotonic (anapole) and material (excitonic)
resonances, which led to substantial (>102) enhancement
of the SHG signal. It is also recognized
that 3R-WS2might offer an advantage over 3R-MoS2in terms of substantially smaller indirect band photoluminescence,
which often complicates down-conversion measurements.

28.2.4. Exciton Resonance Tuning. In their monolayer
limit, TMDs exhibit a direct bandgap instead of the indirect bandgap
that is associated with their bulk counterpart. Combined with reduced
dielectric screening, the quantum confinement of the exciton wave
function in the monolayer results in a few-hundred meV exciton binding
energies. This renders the exciton resonance
stable, even at room temperature. On a fundamental level, tuning of
this exciton resonance in monolayer TMDs has been explored using a
wide range of external parameters, including
Stark and Zeeman tuning of the exciton energy using external electric
and magnetic fields, respectively; Fermi-level tuning using solid-state
gating or ion-liquid gating, which enables electrical control over
the exciton decay channels, and thereby, the amplitude of the exciton
oscillator strength; strain tuning using flexible substrates or suspended
monolayers, which induces large (red-)­shifts in the exciton energy;
and temperature tuning to control the exciton−phonon scattering
rate and, thereby, the exciton line width. Of these tuning mechanisms,
electrostatic doping has proved to be the most technologically relevant
tuning mechanism because it can capitalize on the design and fabrication
schemes of established CMOS technology.

28.2.5. Active 2D Excitonic Metasurfaces. While
most studies focused on active tuning of the exciton photoluminescence,
leveraging the strong and tunable resonant light−matter interaction
offered by the steady-state excitation and recombination of excitons
for coherent wavefront control has so far remained limited to a handful
of initial demonstrations. The first works toward this end showed
electrically tunable reflection and absorption in monolayer TMDs at
cryogenic temperatures.,Since then, active
2D excitonic metasurfaces with tunable optical functions beyond simple
reflection started to develop. These include the following: (i) Exciton
resonance tuning of an atomically thin WS2lens using ion-liquid
gating, where the intensity in the focal
point can be modulated with a depth of 33%. Tuning the optical function
with temperature is studied in a follow-up work. (ii) Excitonic beam steering in continuous layer MoSe2using nanopatterned gate electrodes to locally change the
refractive index in the monolayer and induce an electrically controlled
periodic grating. (iii) Excitonic phase
modulation using a superlattice or MQW structure of TMD monolayers
that are biased through an oxide via a conducting substrate.

28.3. Major Challenges, Future Goals, and Suggested Directions
to Meet These Goals.

28.3.1. Scalability. To enable the nanophotonic
applications discussed in this section, it is essential to achieve
wafer-scale production of TMD materials. In this respect, chemical
vapor deposition (CVD) represents a promising method. However, CVD
typically yields polycrystalline films, which introduce additional
optical losses that can degrade device performance. For this reason,
high-quality, single-crystalline multilayer TMDs are required to achieve
optimal optical characteristics. These high-quality crystals are often
produced by mechanical exfoliation from bulk crystals, typically grown
through high-temperature physical processes. Recently, gold-assisted
exfoliation methods have been demonstrated to selectively exfoliate
the outer monolayer from a bulk TMD crystal. This enables exfoliation of high-quality monolayers with active
areas on the cm-scale. While this poses a tremendous opportunity for
large-area TMD metasurfaces in an academic setting, the exfoliation
technique is, however, not scalable, which limits its practical use
in an industrial setting. Therefore, the challenge of synthesizing
single-crystallinemultilayerTMDs, suitable for
nanophotonic applications, at the wafer scale remains significant.
Recent advances in interfacial epitaxy growth methods have made important steps toward addressing
this issue. These methods offer the potential for wafer-scale, high-quality
single crystals, making them highly relevant for practical high-index
TMD nanophotonics applications. Rapid and encouraging progress in
this field suggests that wafer-scale production of high-quality single-crystalline
multilayer TMDs will likely be overcome soon, paving the way for innovative
high-index nanophotonics and metasurface applications.

28.3.2. Sub-Bandgap Nanophotonics. TMDs are well-known
for their high oscillator strength excitonic effects, which have led
to numerous applications in optoelectronics and nanophotonics. However,
these excitons also contribute to considerable optical absorption
in the visible and near-IR spectrum. Beyond the bandgap, at longer
wavelengths, there exists a broad spectral region of relatively low
optical losses. This low-loss region is characterized by a high refractive
index and optical anisotropy, making multilayer TMDs promising candidates
for high-quality factor nanophotonic resonators, metasurfaces, and
low-loss waveguides. Currently, optical
loss levels in this spectral range are determined primarily through
ellipsometry and near-field measurements;,however, a more precise determination of these losses is required
for developing integrated all-TMD nanophotonic elements.

28.3.3. Selective Etching in Multilayer TMDs for Atomically
Sharp Edges. Fabrication of TMD metasurfaces is inherently
associated with several technological challenges. In particular, it
is often problematic to remove resist leftovers and avoid fabrication-induced
defects and intolerances. To mitigate these issues, several anisotropic
wet etching techniques were recently introduced. These approaches enable the transformation of rough edges
in nanostructured TMDs into self-limited atomically sharp zigzag edges,
thereby providing control over the edge states of TMD metasurfaces
and potentially reducing the scattering losses. This advancement offers
significant advantages not only for nanophotonic applications but
also for catalysis and sensing, where edge states play a critical
role in governing the underlying physics. Nevertheless, the full potential
of these ultrasharp edges for nanophotonic applications remains to
be demonstrated.

28.3.4. Efficiencies of Active 2D Metasurfaces. Despite the uniquely strong tunability of excitons in monolayer
TMDs, their applications in active metasurfaces face important challenges
that hinder widespread development in dynamic wavefront shaping. The
tunability of TMDs is most pronounced in their monolayer limit, which
results in strong challenges associated with the optical efficiencies
of 2D excitonic metasurfaces. In fact, all state-of-the-art demonstrations
described above show large relative tunability but exhibit absolute
efficiencies <1%, limited by the atomic scale optical path length.
Stronger light−matter interactions for the monolayer TMD are
crucial to address this stringent limitation. Coupling monolayer TMDs
to plasmonic or dielectric metasurfaces has been widely pursued to
study strong coupling and exciton polaritons (see alsoSectionon polaritonic metasurfaces).
Future work should focus on high-efficiency tunable metasurfaces where
the material quality and tunability of the TMD remain intact while
coupled to plasmonic or dielectric metasurfaces, for example by embedding
the monolayer in a heterostructure with hBN within the metasurface.

28.3.5. Tunability of Thicker Layers. A promising
approach to induce a multilayer-like strong optical response with
high efficiency yet maintain the direct bandgap nature and tunability
of the monolayer is to create MQWs and superlattices of 2D TMDs. This
approach was initially attempted with exfoliated monolayers to realize
quantum well-like electronic states. However, it was soon realized that light-trapping and modulation
can also be achieved in highly absorptive and high-index semiconductors
such as monolayer TMDs when placed alternatively with insulating dielectric
spacers such as hBN or other atomic-layer-deposition-grown oxides.
The large mismatch in refractive indices and extinction coefficients
of TMDs as compared to hBN or ALD insulating oxides in the visible
means one can observe near unity absorption at the exciton for just
5−7 monolayers of TMD stacked alternatively with an insulating
spacer. Given the advances in CVD-grown materials over wafer scales,
this approach was achieved over cm2scales showing not
only near-unity absorption at the WS2exciton but also
exciton-polariton coupling and dispersion at oblique incidence angles
where the incoming light gets trapped in a waveguide-like mode in
the multilayer structure which further resonantly couples with the
in-plane excitons. This MQW and superlattice
approach with WS2has also been extended to demonstrate
electrically tuned phase modulation of light in metasurfaces achieving
full 2π phase modulation of light coming in at angles of 55
degrees away from normal. While this
approach works in principle, current demonstrations are limited to
unpatterned multilayers and MQW-like structures that do not exploit
the geometric phase. Further, electrical tunability has been limited
to a bottom gate connected concurrently with all WS2monolayers
in the stack. To achieve bulk tunability individual electrical connections
must be achieved to each TMD monolayer, which is challenging from
a fabrication and scaling perspective. Alternatively, use of patterned
MQW or superlattice structures or even multilayer/bulk TMDs could
be an alternative approach for electrochemical intercalation and tuning
of their optical properties via insertion/deinsertion of alkali metal
atoms or other organic ligands (Figured). Such approaches to tuning have already
been demonstrated on an individual flake scale by several groups. However, extension of these concepts to optical
metasurfaces and demonstration of repeated electrochemical cycling
to tune the optical properties are yet to be made. In addition, it
is expected that the tunability of an electrochemistry-based process
that involves diffusion and intercalation will be inherently slow.

28.3.6. Challenges of Exciton Tuning. The excitonic
nature of the resonance carries intrinsic limitations. First, exciton
transitions are characterized by strong losses that can limit device
efficiencies. By operating the metasurface at a frequency that is
slightly detuned with respect to the exciton energy, losses can be
decreased at the price of reduced tunability. Second, the operation
wavelength is limited to the material’s exciton energy and
thus cannot be designed at arbitrary wavelengths. For applications
in telecommunications and integrated photonics, it is of particular
importance to achieve (excitonic) tunability for wavelengths around
1.5 μm. This could be potentially achieved with smaller-bandgap
TMDs such as MoTe2and ReS2though their large-area
synthesis with high optical quality is still in the early stages.
The future of excitonic metasurfaces therefore strongly relies on
explorative research in 2D material science to identify new semiconductor
2D materials.

28.4. Future Directions. While the above sections
have already suggested a few forward-looking ideas for TMD-based metasurfaces,
here we elaborate on some pressing needs and important directions
that the community could take to push the concept of TMD-based metasurfaces
into the practical domain. Primary among them is the ability to grow
high crystalline quality layers with uniform and controlled thicknesses
over wafer scales. While high-quality growth of monolayers over 8′′
wafers has been achieved, the growth of multilayers all oriented in-plane
with high-crystalline quality remains far from accomplished due to
the vdW nature of interplanar interactions which limits homogeneous
nucleation of subsequent layers after the first layer of growth. Another
major challenge regarding multilayers is the accurate measurement
of optical losses and dielectric functions below the optical band
edge (exciton resonance). This has been particularly tricky since
most samples are small flakes or ultrathin films. One approach to
address this challenge is to fabricate waveguides and ring resonator
structures from TMD flakes or thick crystals to quantify the loss
below the band edge. Recent attempts to fabricate such structures and prior measurements of the full in-plane
and out-of-plane dielectric function of MoS2have been a welcome step in this regard. Nonetheless,
the determination of in-plane and out-of-plane dielectric functions
of layered TMDs remains scarce and more efforts must be made to measure
them and post them for community validation and further use in optical
design. Similarly, efforts need to be made to measure and quantify
such optical dielectric functions at low temperatures and under varying
levels of electrostatic dopinga direction that has also been
lacking.

Finally, one area where this community could truly
lead to new innovations in metamaterials and metasurfaces is the use
of epsilon-near-zero (ENZ) points emanating from the excitons. While
these points are difficult to attain in TMDs at room temperature,
they have been observed in MoSe2at cryogenic temperatures, thus raising the prospects of ENZ metamaterials
and hyperbolic metasurfaces using excitons.

29.1. Status. Systems with strong electron−electron
correlations, where the interactions between electrons are strong
enough to dramatically influence their behavior, have long been the
focus of extensive studies across solid state physics, materials,
and quantum science due to the unique properties that they enable.
These include high-temperature superconductivity, unconventional magnetism,
and several varieties of metal−insulator−transitions
(MITs) related to remarkable physical phenomena, such as quantum-
and disorder-related Anderson electron localization, Kondo effect,
Wigner crystallization, and beyond.,,−These effects have been studied in strongly correlated materials,
including insulators and metals, for electrons as well as for excitons
and their complexes,−particularly in the low-dimensional regime in systems like semiconductor
quantum wells, graphene, and TMDs.

One of the most interesting
MIT phenomena is the electron Wigner crystal state formation that has intrigued physicists since 1934.,,−In the Wigner crystal state, an electron gas crystallizes and forms
a lattice of the electron density below some dimension-dependent critical
value. Despite a large body of research on this topic, achieving and
observing electron Wigner crystallization remains an outstanding challenge;
it requires finding high-purity, high-quality materials that can offer
a tailorable electronic response, sufficiently low electron densities,
and low disorder. Thus, far, signatures of Wigner crystals were observed
in 2D electron gases under high magnetic fields−and bilayer TMD moiré superlattices (the so-called generalized
Wigner crystals),,−and only recently, some first microscopic images to prove charge
excitations in 1D,and generalized 2D Wigner crystals
were reported.,However, most Wigner crystal
observations require lowT, strong magnetic fields,
or other external means, such as the moiré potential, making
Wigner crystals challenging to observe in conventional materials and
under reasonable operational regimes. Moreover, the generalized Wigner
crystal state in bilayer moiré superlattices has little in
common with the original Wigner’s electron crystal concept,
as thecrystallizationthere is achieved mostly due
to the trapping of electrons by periodic moiré potential wells
rather than being due to their Coulomb repulsion. To date, the genuine
electron crystallization process has been observed indirectly in monolayers and bilayers of
TMDs by monitoring exciton photoluminescence intensities, particularly,
an extra resonance peak as a function ofT(∼10
K) that could originate from the exciton Umklapp scattering by the
2D electron lattice formed below the Wigner crystal melting point.

As researchers are on the continuing lookout for new material systems
to study strongly correlated phenomena, an exciting opportunity is
offered by the so-calledtransdimensional (TD) materialsthat have originally been proposed
in the field of nanophotonics/plasmonics.−These ultrathinbetween 2D and 3Dmaterials are expected
to support strong electron−electron correlations and could
potentially enable strongly correlated quantum phenomena including
Wigner crystallization. Transdimensional plasmonic/metallic materials
have thicknesses of only a few atomic layers and were shown to enable
unprecedented tailorability of their optical response. This includes
an unusually strong dependence on structural parameters such as thickness
(number of atomic monolayers), composition (stoichiometry, doping),
strain, and surface termination compared to conventional thin films,
as well as an extreme sensitivity to external optical and electrical
stimuli. Highly tailorable, quasi-2D designer-choice TD materials
uniquely offer strong light confinement via highly localized surface
plasmon excitations and show remarkable
tunability as well as novel quantum phenomena. Recently, epitaxially
grown TD materials composed of transition metal nitrides (TMNs) such
as TiN, ZrN, and HfN have been studied extensively and showed a confinement-induced spatial nonlocal dependence
of their plasma frequency as well as other related new physical phenomena.−However, while several electron-confinement-induced photonic effects
in TD materials have been reported, until recently, TD materials have
never been explored as a possible platform to study strongly correlated
regimes (Figure). The first experimental evidence of the breakdown of plasmonic
behavior and related MIT in HfN TD thin films was reported in a recent
work. The possibility of observing the
electron confinement-induced MIT in metals is intriguing and could
provide insights into the physical phenomena associated with strongly
correlated systems in TD materials as well as new means to control
them.

Strongly correlated electrons in transdimensional
materials. (a)
Electron confinement-induced plasmonic breakdown in a transdimensional
material. We show a schematic of a plasmonic metal film sandwiched
between a substrate and a superstrate. As the film thicknessddecreases, the interaction potential among charges acquires
an in-plane character and increases drastically, leading to electron
confinement. (b) Schematic of Wigner crystallization when an interacting
electron liquid has a sufficiently low electron density minimizing
its total energy via crystallization into a quantum solid phase. (c) Platzman−Fukuyama (PF) ratio given
byeqsand  plotted as a function of the surface charge density
and film thickness with experimentally measured parameters of HfN
TD films at room temperature.

is the repulsive Keldysh−Rytova (KR)
interaction potential and ⟨Ekin⟩ is the mean electron
kinetic energy per particle. The KR potential is a sum of the zeroth-order
StruveH0and NeumannN0(sometimes denoted as Y0) special functions
and it represents the repulsive electrostatic potential interaction
energy of a pair of electrons separated by the average in-plane distanceρ̅and confined vertically in the interior of
the film of thicknessdwith the background dielectric
constant ϵfilmcore, which is sandwiched
in between a substrate and a superstrate with dielectric constants
ϵ1,ϵ2< ϵfilmcore(Figure). The KR potential energy ineqindicates that the vertical electron confinement
in optically dense ultrathin planar systems leads to an effective
dimensionality reduction from 3D to 2D and replaces thez-coordinate dependence by the film thicknessdfilm, which is now a parameter to represent the vertical size.
The mean electron kinetic energy per particle atT<TF(∼103−104K) can be obtained by integrating over
the 2D Fermi surface (the circular zone of radiuskFin the 2D reciprocal space). This givesℏ2πN2D/(2m) whereN2D=N3Ddfilm= 1/(πρ̅2) is the surface charge
density while its volume counterpart isN3D. Using the measured HfN film parameters ϵfilmcore= 5,ε1= 3 (MgO substrate)
andε2= 1 (air), fromeqsand  we obtain the PF ratio as a surface
in the (dfilm,N2D) space (Figure). It can be observed that, for the 2-nm-thick
HfN film (withN2D= 7.4 × 1013cm−2measured), a PF ratio Γ0∼ 10 can be achieved, which indicates the possibility
of electron Wigner crystallization. In accordance with this, the 2-nm-thick
film resistivity was observed to increase drastically with decreasing
temperature, in contrast to what one would expect when lowering the
temperature in conventional materials.

The observed effect could
also occur due to the electron trapping
by the random surface roughness potential of the film. However, this
scenario would not explain the drastic resistivity increase with decreasing
temperature. Clearly, more theoretical and experimental research is
required in order to separate disorder/roughness-induced effects from
the Wigner crystallization signatures.

29.2. Challenges and Future Goals. While experimental
progress in TD materials for nanophotonics has earlier been impeded
by the challenges in producing atomically thin films of noble metals,
plasmonic TMNs can easily be grown as epitaxial-quality films with
thicknesses down to 1−2 nm (5−10 atomic layers).−Recently, the optical and electronic properties of TMDs have been
studied both experimentally and theoretically; and the existing possibility
to realize strongly correlated systems in TD materials is now ready
to be explored. For example, to achieve the electron density required
for the Wigner crystallization, static tailorability can first be
used where the electron concentration is varied depending on the choice
of material stoichiometry, deposition/annealing technique, and the
film thickness. The dynamic tunability induced by electrical, optical
and electro-optical stimuli should also be studied. Another avenue
to tailor the optical properties of TD materials includes strain engineering.
Below a critical thickness, an epitaxial thin film is expected to
retain strain induced by the substrate. It has been theoretically
demonstrated that by varying the in-plane lattice parameter of an
ultrathin film, its optical response can be tuned. This can be achieved experimentally by growing strained
ultrathin films on lattice-mismatched substrates. In conjunction with
the thickness dependence of TD materials, strain engineering offers
a novel way to tailor the optical response of plasmonic materials.

Since several physical effects could play a role in MITs observed
in ultrathin plasmonic films, the experimental efforts should be closely
aligned with the theoretical considerations for the Wigner crystallization
phase diagram. This is crucial not only to guide experiments toward
the realization of the strongly correlated state but also to distinguish
between Wigner crystallization and Anderson localization due to disorder-related
formation of the random surface roughness potential. To distinguish
between the two possibilities, one might use an in-plane magnetostatic
field to reduce the number of the electron translational degrees of
freedom from two (in-plane motion) to one (translational motion along
the applied magnetic field direction), which would change drastically
the Wigner crystallization picture whereas the Anderson localization
process is not expected to change.

29.3. Suggested Directions to Meet These Goals. TD
materials offer an interesting approach to exploring strongly correlated
electronic systems. When compared to bulk metals, the screening in
TD materials is greatly reduced, thus making the interactions between
electrons dominant. Leveraging the possibility to control and tune
the thickness-dependent plasma frequency of TMDs provides aknobnot only to reduce their electron density but also
to enhance the electron repulsive potential energy. Enhancing both
factors at once could provide a viable route to achieve the Wigner
crystallization state. The availability of various TMNs (TiN, ZrN,
HfN, and others), their ability to grow as high-quality, ultrathin
epitaxial films, and the sensitivity of the electron density to the
material/structural/geometrical parameters provide a rich playground
for the realization of strongly correlated electron systems in different
regimes. The possibility of achieving Wigner crystallization in TD
plasmonic materials is of great interest for photonic applications.
When free electrons are crystallized, the thin film turns into a transparent
dielectric. When the electron Wigner crystal melts, the material restores
its metallic response. Exploring the conditions for electron Wigner
crystallization opens up an entirely new avenue for the realization
of optical modulation/switching and can be applied to develop tailorable/tunable
photonic structures.

Importantly, a theory for electron Wigner
crystallization in TD materials should be further developed based
on the previous studies of 2D electron liquids.,,Since the Wigner state is a
crystal of the repulsively interacting particles with their average
potential interaction energy exceeding the average kinetic energy,
the specific PF ratio should be mapped for various materials and various
thicknesses. The theoretical critical densities for observing the
Wigner crystal as well as its phase diagram and melting curve should
be studied for various TD materials and thickness regimes. The theory
must also provide the guidance for experimentalists to distinguish
between Wigner crystallization and Kosterlitz−Thouless transition
in ultrathin TD plasmonic systems. These
efforts would be critical in both guiding experiments and proving
the Wigner crystal formation. Equally importantly, the techniques
to provide direct microscopic evidence for Wigner crystal formation,
such as those utilizing scanning tunneling microscopy and other advanced
microscopy techniques, should be applied to characterize strongly
correlated electrons in TD materials.

29.4. Conclusion. Gaining fundamental insights into
MITs in various TD materials and exploring the feasibility of the
realization of Wigner crystal states potentially at room temperature
and with no magnetic field applied represent a new direction in the
field of strongly correlated systems. It is expected to bring critical
fundamental insights into the physics of strongly correlated regimes
and open applications that would eventually enable a new generation
of tunable, reconfigurable, and multifunctional devices for nanophotonics,
optoelectronics, and quantum technologies that are compact, are ultrathin,
and operate at low powers.

MXenes have
the chemical formula Mn+1XnTxand the flake structure
(Figure) consists
ofn+ 1 layers of early transition metal atoms (M)
with layers of carbon or nitrogen (X) sandwiched in between. The number
of layers can be in then= 1−4 range, and
Txis a surface termination group that
commonly consists of = O, -OH, or -F but can include many more elements
(Figure). Over
60 different MXenes have been synthesized to date. Some include multiple
transition metals combined to create both ordered atomic arrangements
like Mo2TiC2Txand
disordered arrangements such as high-entropy TiVNbMoC3Tx.,The unprecedented
tailorability of the MXene structure allows for the tuning of electrical
and optical properties. Generally, MXenes with fewer layersnare more likely to have insulating or semiconducting properties
due to the fewer overlapping electronic bands. Conversely, MXenes
with a highernnumber tend to have metallic behavior. Theoretical results show that MXenes could
even exhibit topological properties and
composition-controlled ferromagnetic and antiferromagnetic properties.

Pathways
for the use of MXenes in optical applications. The tunability
of MXene stoichiometry and versatile fabrication methods will allow
for the manufacture of designer optical films to enhance current applications
and pave the way for future uses. Periodic table adapted with permission
from ref  (Copyright
2022 Springer Nature). Optical application and flake structure figures
adapted from ref . Blade coating figure reprinted in part from ref  (Copyright 2024 American
Chemical Society). Spray coating and vacuum filtration figures adapted
from ref  (Copyright
2017 American Chemical Society). Dip coating image adapted with permission
from ref  (Copyright
2018 Wiley). Spin coating figure reprinted in part from ref  (Copyright 2016 Wiley).

The most studied MXene,
Ti3C2Tx, has found
many uses in optoelectronics. Its conductive
properties allow for nanometer-thick films to be used as transparent
conducting electrodes and as a charge
transfer layer for perovskite solar cells. In the visible spectrum, MXenes generally exhibit large absorption
due to interband transitions and, in combination with their metallic
properties in the IR, can be employed as broadband absorbers. Additionally, MXenes have been used for electromagnetic
interference shielding in the THz, microwave, and RF spectral regions. Most of these optical applications of MXenes,
including photothermal, optical detection, and broadband absorption,
focus on the lossy nature of the film form of MXenes.

30.2. Challenges and Goals. While losses in MXenes
play a crucial role for some devices, they inhibit other applications.
At the flake level, losses could occur from defects created in the
MXene precursor or during the MXene synthesis process. With current
technology, a solution-based process is used to synthesize MXene flakes
from MAX phases via the removal of the A element. For example, Ti3C2Txis created from
the MAX phase Ti3AlC2when the Al layer is selectively
etched with chemicals such as HF and delaminated. The result is a
solution of multilayer and single-layer MXene flakes. MXenes can be used either as single flakes,
as is done during the exploration of surface plasmon properties, or
as films, which are used for nonlinear applications.

To understand
the loss mechanisms, researchers must explore how MXene films are
made. Individual MXene flakes serve as the building blocks of optical
films. At the film level, the optical permittivity is also expected
to depend on the film morphology, surface charge, intercalants, and
the interaction between flakes. Various techniques such as spin-casting,
spray-coating, blade-coating, and dip-coating allow for deposition
on a substrate, and a free-standing film can be formed using vacuum
filtration. In the film, vdW forces
cause overlapping flakes to adhere to one another. The relationship
between the film morphology, which is different from each deposition
technique, and the optical properties should be further investigated.

30.3. Applications Abound. The solution-based film
creation process also leads to facile integration into many optical
devices. For example, MXene spray could be applied to an existing
structure to enable electromagnetic interference shielding or a curved
substrate could uniformly be coated for optical applications. Conductive
MXenes are known to have an epsilon-near-zero (ENZ) point where the
real part of the permittivity ϵ1passes through zero,
changing from a positive to negative sign. This is especially exciting for dynamic and nonlinear optics, as
ENZ-hosting materials have been shown to exhibit large nonlinearities
and novel dynamics. Solid solutions
or mixtures of multiple MXenes can be combined to tune the optical
properties and possibly enable the creation
of films with tailorable optical properties such as the ENZ point.
Further, anisotropic optical properties of MXenes have just started
to be investigated.−Mixed MXene films consisting of one highly
conductive and one lesser-conductive MXene have recently been showed
to tune the ENZ point throughout the near-IR spectrum. Further, engineered metamaterial structures
could enable tailored optical properties including hyperbolic optical
dispersion.

Additionally, because monolayer flakes have a thickness
of approximately a single nanometer, incident light sees a single-species
MXene film as an effective metamaterial composed of MXene and termination
layers. In comparison to traditional vdW materials like graphene and
TMDs, the interflake spacing for MXenes is larger due to the termination
layers. This presents an exciting possibility to incorporate intercalants
and make hybrid materials. The manufacturing process has allowed for
molecules to be incorporated into MXenes to enhance nonlinear properties. Intercalants used to improve electrode properties could also be applied to control the optical
properties for plasmonic applications.

30.4. Outlook. Since MXenes research is a developing
field, some early experimental results may need to be reinterpreted.
For example, MXene films can quickly grow oxides, which could alter
electrical and nonlinear optical properties. Additionally, TiO2oxide defects can result in photoluminescence. It was shown that a standard fabrication method
to produce Ti3C2TxMXene leads to oxygen defects at the titanium sites of the lattice. With this coming to light, it is worthwhile
to reinvestigate early optical studies. Currently, there are debates
on dominate nonlinear mechanisms which could be re-examined.

The exploration of MXenes in the field of optics and photonics has
unveiled a plethora of promising applications and unique properties.
MXenes have already demonstrated significant potential in various
domains, including optoelectronics, nonlinear optics, photothermal
devices, broadband absorbers and electromagnetic interference shielding.
The ability to tailor their structure and surface terminations offers
unparalleled flexibility in tuning their optical and electrical properties,
making them versatile materials for future technologies, including
the expanding space of wearable electronics. As research continues, the initial focus should be on understanding
the fundamental mechanisms that govern the optical properties including
losses in MXene films to expand capabilities in more traditional optical
applications like lasing and optical modulation. Therefore, exploring new synthesis techniques,to minimize defects and other potential loss sources will be a key
direction of research. Following from there, the development of hybrid
materials and engineered metamaterials could pave the way for innovative
applications in plasmonics and metamaterials, such as sensing. The journey of MXenes in optics is just beginning,
and with continued interdisciplinary collaboration, these materials
could make a significant impact on optical technologies.

31.1. Introduction. Two-dimensional materials hold
promise for advanced photonics and electronics by providing ever greater
miniaturization of electronic components and novel functionalities
based on their optical and electronic properties and their application
strategies. Black phosphorus (BP), a small bandgap semiconductor with
prominent excitonic and highly anisotropic properties, in particular, is interesting for its high
carrier mobility andcolossalUV (>3 eV) photoresponsivity, which
give it intriguing photonic and electrical properties.

The shrinking of electronic
device dimensions presents challenges
concerning the properties of electron quasiparticles in materials
with reduced dimensionality. A distinctive intrinsic property of 2D
materials that is likely to play a key role in any application is
screening of the Coulomb interaction. The reduced screening of an
electron by a free electron cloud and the strongly anisotropic dielectric
functions that can gain large densities of states by band nesting
and hyperbolic profiles can promote b-RPA interactions to compete
with the direct interband optical responses.−The carrier scattering in 2D materials can be explored through transport
properties or through their optical responses. Here, we elaborate
on the ultrafast carrier scattering in bulk BP as revealed by the
energy-dependent rise of b-RPA features in its TR-mPP spectra.

In 1900, before the advent of quantum mechanics, Paul Drude proposed
a model to explain the transport properties of electrons in metals,
attributing resistivity to scattering of electrons by the relatively
immobile ions, impurities, and defects. The concept of Drude absorption−has been extended to explain the frequency-dependent intraband optical
absorption in alkali and noble metals. Intraband absorption in metals is well documented when a photon
generates a virtual electron−hole pair with a lifetime defined
by the energy−time uncertainty of detuning from resonant interband
transitions, where the photon energy can only be absorbed by b-RPA
scattering processes to a range of real states that satisfy energy
and momentum conservation. Similarly, an electron promoted nonresonantly
from the valence band to the conduction band of a semiconductor is
in a virtual superposition state from which it must decay by scattering
processes to energy- and momentum-conserving eigenstates.

The contribution ofe−eand electron−phonon (e−ph) scattering to intraband absorption in
alkali and noble metals has
been debated from 1960 to 1990 with respect to the frequency dependence
and degree of energy exchange by virtual electron-scattering processes.−Whilee-phscattering can dominate in the low-energy
region (<1 eV), the electronic scattering involving multiplee-phpair and plasmon excitations is likely to dominate
at higher energies and appear as wings that decay from the Fermi level
to higher energies.,−This is broadly significant because hot electron distributions define
the efficiency of processes such as hot-electron-induced chemistry.
While hot electron and hole distributions are commonly assumed to
have equal excitation probabilities of states betweenEF± ℏω relative to
the Fermi levelEF, with
ℏω denoting the optical excitation energy, such distributions
are not supported by a few experimental measurements of such distributions. In fact, hot electron distributions have been
observed to rise approximately exponentially fromEF+ ℏω toEF. Such distributions have been predicted
by Hopfield for alkali metals,and have been measured
in Ag(110) by TR-mPP. If b-RPA scattering
explains hot electron distributions in metals, it is also likely to
explain hot electron distributions under ultrafast laser excitation
in BP and similar 2D materials.

31.2. Results. Having elaborated on how b-RPA electronic
scattering processes generate hot electron distributions in 3D metals,
we examine the mPP spectra of layered BP as the excitation energy
ℏω is tuned from visible to UV at ambient temperature
under ultrahigh vacuum conditions. Contrary to optical spectroscopy,
which records energy- and momentum-integrated optical transitions,
mPP (Figurea) measures
the energy- and momentum-resolved coherences and populations of transiently
excited unoccupied states aboveEFthat participate in multiphoton excitation leading to photoelectron
emission.,Figureb shows representative angle-resolved mPP
spectra of BP for selected ℏω, which are fully explained
by the known in-plane electronic bands from a DFT calculation (Figurec), and shown schematically
inFigured for
the near-normal emission component together with the possible excitation
pathways. The excitation with ℏω = 2.14 eV is dominated
by a near-resonant two-photon transition from valence band 1 (VB1)
to conduction band 4 (CB4), with the angle-resolved spectrum displaying
the negative band mass of CB4. The line profile taken at the Z point
(k||= 0 Å−1) also
shows a weak contribution from the first image potential state (IPS)
that exists at the BP/vacuum interface. The signal associated with
the near-resonant CB4 ← VB1 transition is far more intense
than the signal at the work function edge, where the contribution
from secondary processes (i.e., hot electrons) is expected to have
its maximum intensity. Moving on to ℏω = 2.58 eV excitation,
we record CB1, CB4, and IPS features that are populated by one- or
two-photon absorption and further photoemitted in overall three-photon
excitation processes. It is notable, however, that, for this excitation
energy, the work function signal has become dominant, indicating a
strong contribution from secondary processes that generate a hot electron
population in CB1. In this spectrum, all spectroscopic features of
the conduction band involve three-photon absorption, so the relative
intensities belong to the same photon order excitation. The VB1 signal,
however, is excited by a nonresonant coherent two-photon absorption,
where a fraction of the virtual intermediate state population scatters
with the electrons remaining in VB1 to generate the intermediate-state
hot electron population. Because both the populations of the virtual
state generated by promotion of VB1 electrons by one photon and the
hot electron population derived from it require one additional photon
absorption to be photoemitted, we conclude that the virtual intermediate
state scatters to form hot electrons with a high probability. A similar
overlay of inelastic hot-electron generation and coherent interband
mPP features has been observed in 2PP spectroscopy of Ag(110). Upon further increasing to ℏω
= 2.88 eV excitation, we see that the coherent two-photon signal from
VB1 is further diminished with respect to the incoherent signal associated
with scattering of the VB1 + ℏω virtual state to form
hot electrons. This shows that the b-RPA scattering increasingly dominates
for UV excitation. The direct and indirect excitation processes from
VB1 again involve one-photon absorption. The last spectrum for ℏω
= 3.44 eV shows that the hot electron distribution dominates over
the vestige of coherent two-photon absorption from VB1. We note that
IPS remains for all excitations, as it is a coherent feature of the
transient screening response of the BP/vacuum interface. The primary hot electron distribution has an
exponential energy dependence consistent with a Fermi−Dirac
distribution with an effective electron temperature that increases
with ℏω to ∼1500 K at ℏω = 3.44 eV.Figuree shows an interferometric
two-pulse correlation measurement of the 2PP signal as a function
of the intermediate state energies. While above 1.5 eV the intermediate
state electron lifetimes are nearly laser-pulse limited, below 1.5
eV one observes femtosecond time scale hot electron population decay
with lifetimes that are quantified inFiguref. The hot electron population decays with
an energy-dependent rate that can be interpreted by Fermi liquid theory.,While the hot electron distribution is weakly sample-temperature-dependent,
the energy-dependent hot electron lifetimes tell thate−escattering is its dominant excitation
process.

Distinct
first-order interband and higher-order inelastic optical
responses of BP from the visible to UV excitation regions. (a) Schematic
excitation of mPP from BP, a representative 2D material. The frequency
tunable pump pulse of ∼30 fs duration generates interband and
intraband (hot electron) excitations, and the identical delayed probe
pulse records their population decay. (b) Representative mPP energy−momentumE(k||) maps excited along the
zigzag direction of BP with photon energies ℏω = 2.14,
2.58, 2.88, and 3.44 eV, respectively. The dashed lines guide the
band dispersions. The lower panels are the corresponding line profiles
extracted atk||= 0 Å−1. The inset for ℏω = 3.44 eV expands the mPP signal
above 5.8 eV to show the remaining band features. The bottom arrows
indicate the spectral regions that are excited by 2PP-4PP processes.
(c) Calculated band structure of bulk BP with band dispersions along
the Z-S (kAC) and Z-T
(kZZ) directions. (d)
Illustrative excitation diagram respectively showing band-to-band
resonant excitation (left) and inelastic scattering of virtual states
promoted from VB1 leading to the production and detection of hot electrons
(right). (e) Interferometric two-pulse correlation measurement of
the 2PP signal as a function of the intermediate state energy probing
the BP polarization dephasing and hot electron population dynamics.
(f) Extracted lifetime, τe, of hot electrons as a
function of the intermediate state energy. At an energy higher than
1.6 eV, the measurements are limited by the time resolution of ∼35
fs at ℏω = 3.49 eV. Below 1.6 eV, the data are fit toτe∼ (E−EF)−1.76, which slightly deviates from theτe∼ (E−EF)−2behavior of a
3D Fermi liquid.

31.3. Conclusion. The immediate significance of the
reported hot electron generation in BP is that it explains itscolossalphotoresponsivity in the UV region. This was attributed by Castro Neto and co-workers
to a band nesting in the Γ-Z direction, a common feature in
multilayer 2D materials. One would expect that such band nesting results
in a high joint density of states for resonant optical transitions.,,While this is a reasonable interpretation,
our mPP spectra of BP show no evidence of interband transitions between
nested bands. Instead, we argue for an alternative mechanism that
can increase the density of states and dielectric field strengths
of 2D materials. BP, like many other anisotropic 2D materials, has
a dielectric function that is hyperbolic in different spectral regions. In a 2D material, the hyperbolicity can be
tuned by impurity or photodoping. The
ultrafast electronic excitation of BP dynamically performs such photodoping
on a few femtosecond time scale. The hyperbolic dielectric functions
introduce a large joint density of states for photon absorption and
scattering, and they can cause giant field enhancements in regions
where the real part of the dielectric functions is near zero. The hyperbolic dielectric properties are likely
to be intrinsic to all 2D materials because of their anisotropic electronic
structures giving them a metallic optical response in one direction
with respect to the crystal plane, and a semiconducting response in
an orthogonal direction. In BP, and related materials with in-plane
dielectric anisotropy, we even anticipate quasi-1D excitonic, electronic,
transport, and optic properties. These features are evident in the
electronic,,,and THz,properties of BP as hyperbolic exciton polaritons and tunable plasmons.

32.1. Introduction. Ultrathin metal structures down
to single-atom thickness constitute a powerful platform to control
light at the nanoscale. Plasmons have
been demonstrated in metallic systems with small dimensions, including
zero-dimensional crystallites, 1D atomic
metal wires (e.g., gold chains growth on the Si(557) vicinal surface), and few-atomic-layer metal films (e.g., Ag(111)
crystal layers grown on a silicon wafer,). Metal films
have a much larger density of conduction electrons than graphene and
doped 2D semiconductors, which makes them more difficult to modulate
(i.e., less susceptible to external stimuli), although some possibilities
have been formulated (see below). In exchange, they exhibit plasmons
in the near-IRa technologically appealing spectral regionand
their optical properties are more robust.

Atomically thin noble
metal nanoislands can support strong plasmon resonances in the near-IR
spectral range.Figurea shows the theory for the extinction cross section of a 20
nm nanodisk carved from a single monolayer of gold placed in vacuum, as obtained by numerically solving the Maxwell
equations with the frequency-dependent homogeneous dielectric function
for gold and a thickness of 0.236 nm,
corresponding to the separation between (111) atomic planes in the
bulk metal. The extinction spectrum displays a pronounced plasmon
resonance, yielding a peak that exceeds that of a gold nanosphere
with the same diameter. The spectral position of the plasmon resonance
and its response to near- and far-field excitation can be tuned by
adjusting the aspect ratio of the nanostructure defined as the ratio
of its diameter to thickness, as illustrated
inFigureb: for
a fixed diameter, an increase in thickness blueshifts the plasmon
resonance toward the visible range. However,
the increased number of charge carriers in thicker structures makes
them harder to tune through, for example, electrical doping.

Plasmonics in ultrathin metal films. (a) A single-atomic-layer
gold disk with (111) crystallographic orientation exhibits a sharp
plasmon red-shifted to a technologically appealing spectral region
relative to a gold nanosphere with the same diameter. Adapted with
permission from ref  (Copyright 2014 Springer Nature). (b) The plasmon energy of few-atomic-layer
gold or silver disks scales roughly ast/Dwith the disk thicknesstand diameterD. Adapted with permission from ref  (Copyright 2015 Royal
Society of Chemistry). (c,d) The plasmon band of an ultrathin silver
layer (1 nm) deposited on graphene is quenched at plasmon energies
exceeding the graphene optical gap 2EF, whereEFis the graphene Fermi energy (c). This effect can be used
to modulate the plasmons of a thin silver ribbon array, thus producing
a radical change in light reflection depending onEF(d). Adapted with permission from ref  (Copyright 2016 Springer
Nature). (e-h) Ultrathin crystalline silver ribbons can be prepared
by epitaxial growth on silicon, followed by nanolithography (e). The
resulting metal film exhibits high quality and wafer-scale crystallinity
(f), reflected in the emergence of sharp electronic quantum-well states
observed via angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (g) (i.e.,
the electron intensity as a function of parallel wave vectork∥and energy relative to the Fermi level,E−EF). The quality factor (energy-to-width ratio,ωp/γ) of the obtained ribbon plasmons
reaches ∼4 (with a measured widthℏγribbons≈ 230 meV), which is far from the large
values predicted from the bulk Drude-model damping for silver, as
measured optically (ℏγAC≈ 21 meV) or electrically (ℏγDC≈ 24.6 meV for a bulk conductivity of 6.30 ×
107S/m). This reduction in quality factor can be presumably
ascribed to the effect of imperfections introduced during passivation
of the film (with a silica coating) and nanolithography (h). Panels
(e-h) are adapted from ref  (Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). (i) Prepatterning
of silicon followed by epitaxial deposition of silver crystalline
films leads to higher quality structures with great flexibility to
pattern different morphologies, as shown in the upper sketches and
the lower secondary-electron-microscope images. The measured quality
factor of the bowties reaches ∼ 10. Adapted with permission
from ref  (Copyright
2024 Wiley).

An alternative scheme to achieve tunable plasmons and dynamical
light modulation is to exploit hybrid films consisting of an ultrathin
metal film and a graphene sheet, as shown inFigurec. In such an ultrathin graphene-metal hybrid
film, optical losses of the hybrid plasmon mode can be controlled
by tuning the doping level of graphene and moving its Fermi energyEFrelative to the neutrality
point. InFigurec, the dispersion of the hybrid mode is illustrated through the reflectance
forppolarization, plotted as a function of both
the photon energy and wave vector. We find that, when the photon energy
is larger than 2EF, there
is a substantial quenching of the hybrid mode via coupling to interband
transitions in graphene. In contrast,
for photon energies below 2EF, the plasmon dispersion remains almost intact (i.e., like
that in the film without graphene).

The synthesis of high-aspect-ratio
structures like gold flakes represents an extension of these colloidal
techniques. Gap-assisted methods, for instance, utilize a confined
growth environment created by placing two substrates in proximity. By introducing halide ions such as chloride
and bromide, vertical growth is suppressed while lateral growth is
promoted. This process yields gold flakes with lateral dimensions
up to 250 μm and thicknesses around 10 nm. Template-assisted
synthesis further refines this approach by using predefined scaffolds,
such as layered hydroxides, to guide the deposition of gold atoms.,This method, which employs methyl orange as a confining agent to
produce gold nanosheets with subnanometer thickness (as low as 0.47
nm), offers significantly less control over the lateral sizes and
morphology of the films. Techniques for thinning these high-aspect-ratio
flakes enable further advancements in precision and functionality.
Atomic-level precision etching relies on chemical agents to remove
material in a layer-by-layer fashion. This approach allows one to achieve a thickness reduction down to
single atomic layers while maintaining lateral dimensions of over
100 μm, ensuring smooth surfaces and uniformity, which are essential
for quantum-confinement applications. In addition, transfer methods,
such as graphene-inspired exfoliation, facilitate the integration
of gold flakes onto diverse substrates. In this method, gold films grown on copper are delaminated through
chemical etching of the copper layer, thus ensuring the structural
integrity of the transferred film.

A significant leap in scalability
and quality has been achieved
through ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) epitaxial growth techniques, as demonstrated
in recent plasmonic studies of few-atomic-layer crystalline silver
films,(Figuree-i) based on the silver-on-silicon platform. These studies reveal that UHV conditions enable
the growth of atomically thin, single-crystal films with smooth surfaces
and low resistivity, reaching thicknesses as low as 8 monolayers (<2
nm) for silver films grown on atomically flat Si(111) substrates and
extending across entire chips, far exceeding the lateral size limitations
of chemically synthesized flakes. Furthermore, these films are compatible
with advanced lithographic patterning techniques, including electron-beam
lithography and reactive ion etching, allowing for the fabrication
of plasmonic nanoribbon arrays with high crystalline quality.

Prepatterned substrates have emerged as
a strategy to enhance pattern
quality: by guiding the growth process,
those substrates act as templates for the epitaxial deposition of
silver, significantly minimizing damage often associated with postpatterning
processes. This approach enables the fabrication of high-quality,
atomically thin silver structures (Figurei) exhibiting larger quality factors and
superior plasmonic performance than postpatterned structures. These
films achieve both atomic-scale thickness and chip-scale lateral dimensions,
providing a robust platform for high-performance photonic and quantum
devices.

32.3. Challenges and Suggested Directions. The significantly
reduced number of charge carriers in nanostructures consisting of
an atomic layer of noble metal (compared to their 3D counterparts)
makes these systems a promising platform for achieving efficient electrical
light modulation. A practical implementation could involve a periodic
array of identical nanostructures controlled by an electrical back
gate. In this configuration, the average charge density in the layer
of nanostructures is inversely proportional to the areal filling fraction
occupied by the noble metal, as determined by capacitor theory for
a fixed distance from the gate. Similar behavior is expected in systems
comprising several atomic layers, although the degree of modulation
is then reduced because the doping charge is distributed across the
increased thickness. An alternative
approach could involve a continuous noble-metal atomic layer, which also exhibits large electrical tunability
of its propagating plasmons, and can be decorated with dielectric
structures to bridge the light-plasmon momentum mismatch.

Building
on the modulation of thin metal plasmons by varying the doping of
an adjacent graphene layer (Figurec), we can simultaneously bridge the plasmon kinematic
mismatch with the light cone (dashed line inFigurec) and realize efficient light-plasmon coupling
by patterning the graphene-metal hybrid film into a periodic array
of ribbons, as shown inFigured. When examining the reflection spectra of such an
array with undoped (EF= 0) or highly doped (EF= 1 eV) graphene, we observe a 3-fold effect of doping: (1) the
plasmon resonance peak is blue-shifted; (2) the magnitude of the resonance
peak increases; and (3) the resonance line width becomes narrower
for higher doping levels. The figure illustrates a modulation depth
≈ 36% at a photon energy ≈ 0.9 eV. The doping level
of graphene can be controlled through electrical gating at a relatively
high speed depending on the design of the electronic circuit. As an
alternative that can reach higher speeds, one could exploit ultrafast
optical pumping to effectively dope graphene,,through its large photothermal
response (seeSection).

The remaining sections
are organized into three thematic blocks
focused on applications of 2D materials. The first of these explores
integrated photonics, where 2D materials have emerged as natural and
versatile building blocks.

33.1. Introduction. Integrated photonics is reshaping
modern technology by enabling low-cost, compact, energy-efficient,
and multifunctional optical systems. To expand the potential of integrated
photonics, 2D materials have emerged as a powerful tool mainly due
to their unique optical and electronic properties. These ultrathin
materials are highly versatile, offering strong light−matter
interaction, tunable optical characteristics, and compatibility with
existing photonic integration technologies. They can function on-chip
devices like light sources, modulators, and photodetectors, making
them ideal for the next generation of integrated photonics. In addition,
2D materials cover a completed material regime across insulators like
hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), semiconductors such as molybdenum disulfide
(MoS2) to semimetal graphene, and superconductors such
as niobium diselenide (NbSe2), thus providing a broad range
of passive and active photonic and optoelectronic function possibilities.
This combination puts 2D materials at the forefront of integrated
photonics, offering exciting opportunities to advance research and
applications in areas such as optical communication and computing,
sensing and imaging, and quantum technologies.

33.2. Current State of the Art. Over the past two
decades, integrating 2D materials, primarily focusing on monolayer
and few-layer 2D materials, with waveguides for photonics has shown
two key advantages: (1) It can significantly enhance the device performance
by improving light−matter interaction along the waveguide structures
while preserving the intrinsic waveguide advantages (e.g., low transmission
loss, dispersion and broad bandwidth); (2) It can enable new functional
or multifunctional optoelectronic devices by flexibly combining different
2D materials with various waveguides. The integration of 2D materials
thus opens up exciting possibilities for integrated photonics. In
the following sections, we will concentrate on two primary types of
2D material integrated optical waveguide structures: optical fibers
and on-chip waveguides,,while the integration
of polariton-based (including plasmon, phonon, and exciton polaritons)
waveguides is addressed in separate sections of this Roadmap.

33.2.1. Two-Dimensional Material Integrated Optical Fiber
Devices. Optical fibers play a crucial role in long-distance
communication, sensing applications, and biomedical technology due
to their low attenuation, customizable optical properties, flexibility,
and well-established manufacturing processes. These make them the
current most widespread waveguide for practical applications. The
integration of 2D materials with optical fibers has mainly evolved
through three main stages: starting with the fiber facet, proceeding
to the fiber surface, and incorporating them into the interior of
the fiber (Figurea).

Two-dimensional
materials for integrated photonics. (a-c) Selected
demonstrations of 2D materials integrated optical fiber devices (a),
on-chip waveguide devices (b), and novel 2D materials-based integrated
platforms (c) over the past years. (d) Schematic illustration of future
hybrid integration, providing a vision of the combination of various
waveguide platforms, active materials, and their engineered structures,
along with multifunctional optoelectronic interconnection systems,
aimed at developing the next generation of highly integrated photonics.

33.2.1.1. Fiber Facet Integration. This approach offers a convenient
and compact platform for directly coupling light with 2D materials
or their polymer composites, typically sandwiched between two fiber
facets. By leveraging this integration method, the exceptional properties
of 2D materials and their heterostructures have been utilized to create
high-performance fiber-based photonic and optoelectronic devices,
including lasers, modulators, and photodetectors. Among these applications,
a key research focus is the integration of 2D materials between the
fiber facets in a fiber-ring cavity to exploit their ultrafast saturable
absorption capabilities for generating ultrafast optical pulses. The demonstrated performance of the ultrafast
lasers includes down to sub-100-fs pulse duration with the operation
wavelengths covering from ∼1 to 2 μm.

33.2.1.2. Fiber Surface Integration. This method involves transferring
various 2D materials onto the surface of nanofibers or side-polished
fibers, significantly enhancing light−matter interaction along
the fiber, in contrast to the fiber facet integration method. Using
this approach, numerous linear and nonlinear optical effects have
been achieved in the hybrid fibers, including anisotropic absorption,
saturable absorption, four-wave mixing, difference frequency generation,
and sum frequency generation. These
advancements open the door to a range of applications, such as polarizers
with an extinction ratio of up to 27 dB, ultrafast all-optical modulators (with a response time at ∼ps
scale), ultrasensitive gas detection
(down to subppm), high-speed logic gates,
all-fiber phase-modulators, and continuous-wave nonlinear optical
converters.

33.2.1.3. Fiber Interior Integration. This route was initially
demonstrated by filling 2D material dispersions into microstructured
fibers, and it has now been revolutionized by advancements via the
chemical vapor deposition method. This deposition technique enables
the controlled growth of 2D materials within the air-holes of fibers,
creating high-quality hybrid fibers that can extend up to tens of
centimeters. This approach allows significantly stronger light−matter
interaction compared to the surface or facet integration methods,
thanks to the enhanced length and considerate overlap between optical
modes and 2D materials. This integration also unlocks new possibilities
for photonic and optoelectronic applications, such as graphene-integrated
photonic crystal fibers for broadband (∼1150−1600 nm)
electro-optic modulators with impressive modulation depths (∼20
dB cm−1at 1550 nm), and semiconducting 2D materials in hollow-core fibers for enhanced
second- and third-harmonic generation by ∼300 times. Recent advancements also improve supercontinuum
generation efficiency, exhibiting a 70% reduction of the threshold
power for spectra with one octave spanning and distinct layer-dependent
behavior only working for 2D materials thinner than five atomic layers. These breakthroughs broaden the application
areas by meeting the demand of large-scale production, paving the
way for highly integrated all-fiber devices.

33.2.2. Two-Dimensional Material Integrated On-Chip Waveguide
Devices. In contrast to optical fibers, on-chip waveguides
offer greater compactness, making them more suitable for photonic
chips, and enhanced flexibility in structural design, enabling diverse
engineering of the optical field. Within this framework, different
2D material integration methods are also utilized for a wide range
of applications (Figureb).

33.2.2.1. Waveguide Surface Integration. This integration method,
which involves straightforwardly transferring or depositing 2D materials
onto the surfaces of various waveguides, is widely adopted. Its popularity
stems primarily from its simplicity and compatibility with complementary
metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technology. To date, a variety of
typical 2D materials have been explored, including graphene, TMDs,
black phosphorus, gallium selenide and various 2D material heterostructures,
such as moiré structures. The demonstrated waveguides include
but are not limited to channel waveguides, photonic crystals and microresonators,
which enable photonic and optoelectronic applications in both linear
and nonlinear optical regimes. In the linear optical domain, 2D materials
significantly enhance integration functions, enabling high-performance
devices such as electro-optic modulators (over 15 dB modulation depth
and 30 GHz bandwidth operating at telecommunication wavelengths), photodetectors (over 100 GHz bandwidth and
100 A W1−responsivity separately),,polarizers (∼20 dB extinction ratio), and absorbers (∼85% unpolarized absorptivity covering
almost the entire solar spectrum of 300−2500 nm with graphene
metamaterials). In the nonlinear optical
domain, 2D materials enlarge the optical responses of hybrid waveguides,
addressing the limitations of traditional bulk materials with relatively
weak intrinsic nonlinearities. For example, 2D materials introduce
second-order nonlinearities, such as second-harmonic generation and
the Pockels effect, into silicon-based materials that naturally lack
these properties due to their crystal centrosymmetry. Additionally,
they enhance third-order processes, including four-wave mixing (>9
dB conversion efficiency improvement), supercontinuum generation (>300 times enhancement of the nonlinear
coefficient), and all-optical modulation
(with switching energy and time of ∼35 fJ and 260 fs, respectively). Furthermore, the gate-tunability of 2D materials
(including graphene and TMDs) introduces an additional degree of freedom
for refractive index (including real and imaginary parts) adjustments
for novel optoelectronic applications (e.g., shifting the frequency
comb lines from ∼2.3 to 7.2 THz, and facilitating efficient
tuning respectively).,These contributions greatly
expand the functional capabilities of waveguide-based photonic systems.

33.2.2.2. Waveguide Interior Integration. Integrating 2D materials
directly within waveguides presents a promising strategy for enhancing
light−matter interactions by maximizing the overlap between
the optical modes and material. This approach shows significant potential
for applications such as polarizers, modulators, and photodetectors.
However, its adoption remains limited due to the involved fabrication
complexities, the associated device losses, and the already-achieved
relatively satisfactory light−matter interaction through the
waveguide surface integration. Currently, the waveguide interior integration
is primarily explored in theoretical studies. Nonetheless, this method merits further investigation,
especially as advancements in hybrid waveguide fabrication techniques
and evolved complex 2D material integration (e.g., hybrid 3D integration).

33.3. Challenges and Future Research Directions. Integrated
photonics with 2D materials has demonstrated great potential in many
aspects and has been extensively studied and achieved massive advancements
in the past years. However, its direct implementation as a replacement
for current commercial devices is still challenging. To fully realize
the potential of 2D materials in photonics and optoelectronics for
practical applications, several challenges and areas for improvement
must still be addressed, thereby enhancing its competitiveness in
the near future.

33.3.1. 2D Materials-Based Integrated Platforms. 2D materials can feature atomically smooth surfaces to minimize
scattering losses at interfaces, high-refractive index (for example,
MoS2∼ 4.2 at near-IR region), large transparent window (for example, hBN extending into
the deep ultraviolet region), negligible
interlayer electronic coupling, and monolayer-like excitonic behavior
in bulk form. Thus, they have recently emerged as a promising material
platform for integrated photonics (Figurec) instead of integrating with conventional
platforms (e.g., silicon). For example, given their large optical
nonlinearity, 2D material-based waveguides, in principle, can achieve
high efficiency of nonlinear optical conversion toward new functions
(e.g., rhombohedral MoS2waveguide for broadly tunable
second-harmonic generation). Further,
a versatile template-assisted method enables the efficient fabrication
of various perovskite waveguides with predefined geometries and the
observation of their edge lasing, which can also apply to many other
2D materials. Sequentially, with an
increasing number of new vdW crystals identified and invented, it
is foreseeable that these emerging materials hold the complete potential
to develop into new integrated photonic platforms.

33.3.2. New 2D Materials for Integration. In the
realm of searching for novel 2D materials for integrated photonics,
there are three potential directions. First, there is an interest
in expanding the material library by investigating and synthesizing
new 2D materials beyond the most common 2D materials. This expansion
can encompass materials like borophene, silicene, germanene, antimonene,
2D oxides, and 2D nitrides, as well as synthetic materials not found
in nature, such as Janus structural materials and heterostructures,
for integrated photonic demonstrations. Second, it is important to
explore novel 2D materials exhibiting unique physical properties,
such as superconductors for single-photon detection, highly nonlinear
materials for entangled photon pair generation, and 2D topological,
ferroelectric, and magnetic materials for integrated spintronics,
quantum devices, and other advanced integrated photonic technologies.
Finally, further exploration of new organic 2D materials that offer
tunable electronic and optical properties and can be easily integrated
with existing photonic platforms and sustainable integration systems
is also warranted for future research.

33.3.3. Novel Structural Engineering. In addition
to searching for new materials, structural engineering plays a pivotal
role in achieving high-performance integrated photonic devices. This
approach mainly encompasses two key aspects: stack engineering of
2D materials and the development of innovative waveguide structures.
Regarding the stacked 2D materials and their homostructures in the
former, the twisted bilayers or multilayers of 2D materials stacked
in two or three dimensions can not only generate novel physical phenomena,
for example, moiré patterns and superconductivity, but also
facilitate the phase manipulation of the optical field, enhancing
nonlinear optical processes such as second- and third-harmonic generation
for frequency conversion, modulation,
and signal processing. Further, the
lateral or vertical heterostructures consisting of different 2D materials
enable tailored bandgaps and electronic properties, adjustable via
twist angles, creating wavelength-specific photonic devices and integrating
quantum photonic functions (e.g., sources, memory, detectors) with
classical photonic integrated circuits. For waveguide structures,
optimized waveguide designs significantly enhance linear and nonlinear
processes. For instance, a better phase-matching design in hollow-core
fibers for hybrid MoS2integration can boost nonlinear
conversion efficiency to rival bulk crystals. Similarly, careful structure and dispersion tuning in 2D
materials integrated on-chip waveguides can improve nonlinear optical
performance, supporting further studies like high-order nonlinearities,
soliton dynamics, and frequency combs.

33.3.4. Innovative Device Function Exploration. Beyond the novel material/structural engineering considerations
outlined above, another pivotal approach that necessitates enhancement
in current demonstrations is external (thermal, acoustic, optical,
electric/magnetic, mechanical, etc.) modulation for innovation functionalities
previously unattainable with conventional materials. For instance,
temperature impacts the phonon populations in 2D materials, influencing
their interaction with electronic states and affecting light scattering
and absorption processes. Understanding and leveraging these interactions
can drive innovations in optoelectronic and photonic devices, including
new thermal management and phonon-assisted photonic devices. Additionally,
acoustic waves can introduce periodic strain fields, which can alter
the electronic bands and crystal structures, affecting optical transitions
and enabling dynamic control over light propagation, respectively.
This capability can be harnessed for dynamic modulation of optical
responses in both linear and nonlinear regimes for new devices such
as optical modulators. Furthermore, novel magnetic vdW materials have
impressive Verdet constants, rendering them highly responsive to external
magnetic fields. The application of a magnetic field can induce significant
Faraday effects, enabling the manipulation of light polarization and
offering potential applications in high-performance magneto-optic
isolators, circulators, and sensors.

33.3.5. Hybrid Integration Advantages. The termhybrid integrationbroadly encompasses the combination of
various well-established waveguide platforms, diverse active materials,
and multifunctional electro-optical systems (Figured). To date, most 2D material-integrated
photonics have been demonstrated on traditional material platforms,
such as silica fibers and silicon-based on-chip waveguides. However,
emerging material platforms and technologiessuch as silicon-core
and chalcogenide glass fibers, lithium niobate, lithium tantalate
and III−V semiconductors photonic platforms, and laser-written
waveguides in glasses, polymers, and sapphiresare gaining
interest for hybrid 2D material integration, presenting significant
opportunities to enhance performance and expand the functional scope
of photonic devices. Integrating various 2D materials with these platforms
can further enrich their wide-ranging properties and functions, and
allow for extensive hybrid integration, enabling both passive and
active photonics and optoelectronics. For example, insulators like
hBN for wideband waveguides, semiconducting 2D materials for lasers,
modulators, and detectors, ferroelectric 2D materials for modulators,
metallic 2D materials for contacts, and superconducting 2D materials
for single-photon detectors fully support highly specialized or integrated
applications. Further, graphene and semiconducting 2D materials, in
particular, exhibit outstanding electronic properties, making them
also ideal for applications such as transistors, receivers, memories,
sensors, and beyond (e.g., in-memory
optical computers). In this regard, 2D materials hold the potential
to fully realize true electro-optical hybrid integration, paving the
way for seamless on-chip convergence of communications, sensors, computers,
electronic, photonic and optoelectronic systems into a single platform
for next-generation technologies.

33.3.6. Large-Scale and High-Quality 2D Materials Fabrication. One of the most pressing challenges in the field of 2D materials
for integrated photonics is associated with their large-scale and
high-quality preparation. Currently, the existing research is predominantly
confined to lab-level studies at the micrometer scale, relying heavily
on the well-known mechanical exfoliation method and manual transfer
techniques. Therefore, scalable synthesis or integration methods,
such as chemical vapor deposition, molecular beam epitaxy, liquid-phase
exfoliation, and atomic layer deposition, hold promise to be developed
for their large-scale production with high-quality via precise control
over parameters (e.g., thickness, uniformity, crystallinity, composition,
and stacking) on wafer scales. For 2D materials integrated waveguides,
only few materials like graphene and MoS2have been realized
in waveguides on a large scale. In general, future advancements should
prioritize the production or transfer of high-quality and uniform
2D materials and the expansion of their diversity deposited throughout
the entire waveguide area. Key improvements include the fabrication
of single-crystal materials with pristine surfaces, ensuring consistent
layer thickness with minimal defects, or achieving seamless coverage
over curved and edged surfaces. Further, the development of techniques
for creating on-demand vertical and lateral heterostructures is essential
to enable new functionalities and enhance performance by leveraging
the unique properties of each layer. Additionally, the ability to
facilitate selective area and pattern growth for directly synthesizing
2D materials on a waveguide is paramount for both single hybrid integrated
waveguides and the integration of multiple 2D materials with diverse
functionalities. On 2D materials-based integrated platforms, the recent
successful implementation of both interfacial epitaxy and bevel-edge
epitaxy techniques to produce large-scale and single-crystal vdW materials
(up to 15,000 layers) provides a significant opportunity to establish
a truly integrated photonics platform.

33.3.7. Future Applications. With the advancement
of high-performance devices achieved through the diverse integration
of 2D materials with waveguides and the implementation of varied fabrication
strategies for high-quality hybrid integration, the field of integrated
photonics with 2D materials demonstrates significant potential. For
instance, the exceptionally high nonlinear responses, combined with
the distinctive peaks and scattering propertiessuch as Raman
and Brillouin effectsof 2D materials, compared to those of
conventional silicon, make it particularly advantageous for advancing
optical fiber sensing technologies. Additionally, the demonstrated
capability for high-speed data processing and communication, along
with the complete integration of devices on a single chip, is expected
to yield more compact and efficient optical interconnects within data
centers and 6G networks. And owing to their exceptional mechanical
flexibility, 2D materials can be seamlessly integrated onto nonplanar
substrates for the development of flexible and wearable integrated
photonics, as well as for the creation of lightweight, and high-performance
optical components essential for augmented/virtual reality displays
and headsets, thereby enhancing user experiences. Furthermore, given
that vdW stacked 2D materials possess exceptional features enabling
the precise manipulation and control of quantum states at the nanoscale,
they hold significant potential in the realms of quantum technologies,
encompassing communication, computing, sensing, and networking.

34.1. Current State of the Art. Electronic chips are
facing dual challenges related to computational power and energy consumption
as they approach their physical limits. To address these issues, three
technical pathways have been proposed for advancing next-generation
information technologies: More Moore, More-than-Moore, and Beyond
Moore. The essence of the Beyond Moore
approach is optoelectronic integration, which incorporates photonic
functionalities into integrated circuits. This integration harnesses
the rapid information transmission capabilities of photons while capitalizing
on the significant advantages of photonic matrix computations, greatly
enhancing chip performance. The primary research focus is on achieving
high integration of optoelectronic devices through heterogeneous integration
and advanced packaging solutions. Various schemes for optoelectronic
integration have been proposed, including silicon-based photonics
that are compatible with complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS)
processes. These schemes leverage the plasma dispersion effects of
silicon; lithium niobate photonics,
which utilizes the nonlinear electro-optic effects of lithium niobate
crystals; and wide-bandgap III−V
semiconductor materials, which harness quantum well confinement effects
and offer advantages in source devices. Additionally, there are platforms based on microsized metallic plasmonics.

34.2. Challenges and Future Goals. Despite significant
advancements in transmission speed and photonic computation, the integration
of optoelectronic devices remains limited by the optical diffraction
limit. Key photonic devices, such as modulators, typically range from
millimeter to hundred-micron scales, creating a substantial size mismatchover
3 orders of magnitudecompared to nanoscale electronic devices.
This severe disparity necessitates additional specialized interfacing
components, which act asbridgesto connect the two
domains. These components generally include modules for digital signal
processing, serial-to-parallel conversion, amplification, and driving,
and therefore, their power consumption can account for more than two-thirds
of the entire system, presenting a significant bottleneck for the
large-scale adoption of optoelectronic integration technologies.

To address these challenges, there is an urgent need to significantly
miniaturize optical devices, transitioning from microscale to nanoscale
optoelectronic integration. This advancement is essential for achieving
size and performance compatibility with integrated circuits. A critical
requirement is the development of electro-optic modulators that are
compact, highly efficient, and low in power consumption. Consequently,
the search for innovative materials that can drastically reduce the
size of electro-optic modulators while substantially improving key
performance parameters, such as modulation bandwidth, modulation speed,
half-wave voltage, and overall modulator size, has become a primary
focus for advancing next-generation optoelectronic device integration.

34.3. Suggested Directions to Meet These Goals. When
light strikes a specific material surface, photons excite charge carriers
within the material, resulting in collective oscillations. These oscillations
give rise to special electromagnetic modes known as polaritons. As
unique quasiparticles, polaritons exhibit both the wave-like characteristics
of light and the particle-like properties of matter. Depending on
the coupling between the incident light and various charge carriers
in the material, a diverse array of polaritons can be formed, including
plasmon polaritons, phonon polaritons, and exciton polaritons.

In contrast to traditional 3D materials
like gold and silver, 2D materials possess unique characteristics
stemming from their atomic-scale thickness, distinct band structures,
and vdW heterostacking. These features enable the formation of polaritons
with enhanced light field confinement, a broad bandwidth response,
long propagation distances, and the potential for electrical dynamic
control. These diverse polaritonic modes
can break the diffraction limit, compressing the wavelength of light
into the nanoscale, thus facilitating new breakthroughs in the design
of optical functionalities at the nanoscale.

Compared to electrons
and photons, polaritons offer four distinct
advantages as carriers for on-chip information processing and the
development of novel electro-optic modulators (Figure): (1) Polariton modes in 2D materials can
be more tightly localized at the material surface, even achieving
subdiffraction-limited light field confinement down to atomic scales,
which is conducive to optoelectronic integration at the nanoscale;
(2) They allow for multidimensional control over amplitude, phase,
polarization, and angular momentum, significantly enhancing bandwidth
for optoelectronic interconnection and information processing through
multidimensional multiplexing; (3) Thesemilight/semimattercharacteristics of polaritons can overcome the limitations of electrical
control typically associated with photons as bosons; (4) The hybrid
coupling and strong interactions between different types of polaritons
provide the potential for efficient signal processing and the realization
of photonic matrix computations.

Optoelectronic interconnection of polaritons
in 2D materials. (a)
Interaction between a dipole emitter and plasmons in doped homogeneous
graphene (upper panel) and near-field generated by a perpendicular
dipole positioned 10 nm from doped graphene (lower panel). Reprinted
from ref  (Copyright
2011 American Chemical Society). (b) Edge and waveguide THz surface
plasmon modes in graphene microribbons. Reprinted from ref  (Copyright 2011 American
Physical Society). (c) Gate-tunable topological polaritons in vdW
heterostructures with high spatial confinement. Reprinted with permission
from ref . (Copyright
2023 AAAS). (d) Thermoelectric detection and imaging of propagating
graphene plasmons. Continuous-wave laser light is scattered by a movable
metallized AFM tip, which excites plasmons in the hBN-graphene-hBN
heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref  (Copyright 2016-Springer
Nature). (e) Schematic illustration of the optoelectronic interconnection
of polaritons in 2D materials featuring several key components arranged
from left to right: the module for converting electrical signals into
polariton signals, the polariton waveguide for signal transmission,
the polariton signal modulation module, the polariton photonic computing
module, and the polariton detection module. Each modulator is individually
controlled by an electronic chip to encode the optical signals. Additionally,
a silicon waveguide connects the modulators to the photodetector and
can be extended and adapted for fiber optics, enabling long-distance
signal transmission.

However, current research primarily
focuses on the materials supporting
polaritons, polariton performance tuning, characterization methods,
and discrete functional polaritonic devices. There is yet to be a
consensus on establishing nanoscales for optoelectronic interconnections
driven by polaritons as a main research direction. This lack of consensus
arises from the need to overcome a series of physical, material, and
process challenges to achieve this ambitious research goal. These
challenges include addressing inherent losses in polaritonic modes;
achieving good performance in a spectral region that covers the communication
frequency bands; developing multiple essential photonic devices for
on-chip applications, particularly various electro-optic modulators,
and further advancing polaritonic devices with nonlinear modulation;
overcoming challenges in heterogeneous integration across materials
and scales; and achieving functionalities for polariton storage and
polariton matrix computation.

In this context, future research
should focus on interdisciplinary
collaboration, integrated optics, electronics, materials science,
and physics to tackle these complex foundational scientific problems.
In response to the demand for large-scale integration, high speed,
and low energy consumption in on-chip optoelectronic interconnections
and optical computing, the development of polaritonic optoelectronic
interconnection frameworks is imperative. The research goal can be
divided into four stages: principle verification, device fabrication,
architectural design, and chip computation. The first stage aims to
clarify the fundamental physics of polaritons, develop materials and
fabrication methods for polaritons, and establish characterization
methods for their optoelectronic responses, with significant progress
already achieved in this area in recent decades. The second stage
focuses on fabricating fundamental polaritonic components, such as
modulators (Mach−Zehnder (MZM), resonant ring (RRM), and in-phase
quadrature (IQM)) and switching devices (high-frequency electro-optic
switches, ultrafast optical switches, thermal-optic switches, and
optical transistors), where notable advancements have already been
made. The third stage aims to realize polaritonic photonic circuits
and optoelectronic interconnection modules, with each circuit containing
polaritonic light sources, waveguides, modulators, switches, transistors,
and detectors, ensuring efficiency in device cascading. Currently,
much of this work remains at the theoretical and simulation stages,
with few experimental results. The fourth stage seeks to achieve the
packaging of polaritonic photonic chips and the validation of optical
matrix computations. In terms of processes, the development roadmap
of electronic chip technology based on 2D materials, as exemplified
by “The Roadmap of 2D Materials and Devices Toward Chips”, can be referenced to facilitate collaboration
between academia and industry.

The unification of 2D materials,
subdiffraction-limited photonics,
and light-induced states is creating opportunities for material design.
Emerging possibilities are rooted in the exquisite properties of 2D
materials. These compounds often possess exceptionally clean interfaces
and sharp lateral boundaries, and they are amenable to experimental
control. Moreover, 2D materials can host polaritonshybrid
collective modes that possess characteristics of both light and matter.,Polaritons often display nonintuitive properties, including the
confinement of radiation to subdiffraction-limited length scales and
diffractionless propagation, that defy conventional limits of far-field
radiation. Polaritons in 2D materials have garnered attention for
their potential to produce cornerstones of photonics in next-generation
technologies including miniaturized devices, optical modulators, and
superlenses. Numerous proposals have emerged suggesting novel paradigms
to tailor the properties of quantum materials with structured radiation.
In this section, we discuss proposed prospects for polariton modes
to deliver unique properties, experimental results, and suggestions
to advance this emerging line of research. We discuss three topics
of importance for controlling quantum materials with near fields:
(1) Engineering near fields, or ‘nanolight’ (Figurea); (2) Using strong
near fields to drive quantum materials (Figureb); (3) Passively mediating quantum states
with near fields in cavities (Figurec).

Controlling
quantum materials with optical near fields. (a) Producing
structured near-field radiation can be accomplished with polaritons,
including subdiffraciton-limited superlattices of IR radiation in
moiré-patterned twisted bilayer graphene. Adapted from ref  (Copyright 2018 American
Association for the Advancement of Science). (b) A 2D material driven
by a periodic potential of plasmons with subwavelength periodicity.
Adapted from ref  (arXiv). (c) Near fields interacting with a Hall bar of GaAs. Adapted
from ref  (arXiv).

35.1. Engineering Nanolight with 2D Materials. Polaritons
are produced when dipole-active resonances, including the collective
motion of lattice vibrations, electronic charges, or spins, hybridize
with IR radiation. Extensive research
has demonstrated exceptional control over the near-field radiation
patterns produced by polaritons. In a single sheet of 2D graphene,
plasmon interference can produce polaritonic standing waves with subdiffraction-limited
confinement. Twisted bilayers can naturally form nanoscale photonic
crystal structures that derive from their moiré superlattices
(Figurea).,Polaritons can also propagate along ray-like trajectories with ultraslow
group velocity within highly anisotropic layered compounds known as
hyperbolic materials. When 2D materials
are stacked, hybrid polaritons with properties that are distinct from
the constituent layers can form in hetero- or homobicrystals.,,Hybrid polaritons often display
avoided crossings where the frequency−momentum dispersion of
the unhybridized crystals intersects and forms large strong coupling
gaps.,The directional propagation of hyperbolic
polaritons can be tuned in bicrystals by changing the relative twist
angle of the two stacked hyperbolic crystals. Polaritonic radiation
can also be focused and steered in circulating loops or spirals via
negative or all-angle refraction.,,Moreover, polariton trajectories are amenable toin situcontrol by a variety of experimental stimuli including
electrostatic gating, magnetic fields, and photoexcitation. Thus, there are
many ways to confine, steer, and structure programmable polaritons
below the diffraction limit in 2D materials.

Within the past
decade many ways and means to engineer nanolight have been established.
Yet, several opportunities remain just beyond the horizon of front-leading
experiments. For instance, the polaritons that have been visualized
to date, including plasmons, phonon polaritons, and exciton polaritons,
are all governed by the dispersion of the permittivity in the material.
Systems where the permeability governs the electrodynamics of polaritons
could lead to magnetic near fields, which
remain largely unexplored. Investigations of polaritons in superconductors,
correlated materials, and topological systems are in their infancy. These systems are candidates to host
polaritons with desirable properties for controlling quantum materials,
including longer propagation lengths and stronger modulation of nanoscale
periodic potentials created by polaritonic standing waves. Moreover,
properties could be generally useful for subwavelength optical control
including beam routing and nonlinear optics below the diffraction
limit for next-generation nanophotonics. A first goal is the development
of advanced near-field probes that can be used to study polaritons
and expand the toolset to control nanolight.

Next, we address
suggestions to characterize polaritons that could
enable novel functionalities. The THz frequency range is appropriate
to examine low-energy collective excitations in 2D materials. Terahertz dipole-active resonances, including
magnetic resonances, orbital transitions, and superconducting plasma
resonances, could produce polaritons with exceptional properties.
Yet, THz near-field spectroscopy remains challenging. Further advancements
are required to reach the highest possible spatial resolution and
perform quantitatively accurate near-field measurements across the
entire THz frequency range. Even higher spatial resolution could be
attained with electron microscopies. Emerging electron-assisted optical
methods including photon-induced near-field electron microscopy (PINEM), THz-STM, and
NOTE spectroscopies are promising. The
determination of the local optical response function at the smallest
length scales will require further developments.

35.2. Nanolight Can Be Used to Control Quantum Materials. Experimental results demonstrating that polaritons can be used
to control quantum materials are emerging. Two distinct regimes, classified
as driven and passive, can be identified. In driven systems, large
numbers of photons are used to perturb quantum materials. In passive
systems, the interactions between quantum materials and vacuum radiation
fields are considered.

35.2.1. Quantum Materials Driven by Optical Near Fields. Strong pump lasers can be used to perturb charge, spin, lattice,
and orbital degrees of freedom in quantum materials. While most experiments
have been conducted in the far-field regime, optical near fields can
also be used to control quantum materials. Enhanced electric fields
from localized plasmons were used to induce an insulator-to-metal
transition in thin films of vanadium dioxide. Propagating polaritons were used to reverse the ferroelectric
polarization of LiNbO3outside of the photoexcitation volume. These experiments suggested a highly nonlinear
process involving propagating photoexcitation, near superluminal domain
wall motion, and re-emission of perturbative radiation, all of which
could play a role in the observed dynamics.

In a 2D MoSe2monolayer, subwavelength optical lattices have been employed
to create a spatially varying Stark shift (Figureb). In plasmonic
structures engineered to exhibit hyperbolic dispersion, surface-plasmon
polaritons (SPPs) can feature diffractionless propagation, allowing for the excitation of SPP modes tightly
confined within a spatial region as small as ∼100 nm. When
these modes were optically excited, the resulting field was shown
to induce a spatially varying AC Stark shift in excitons within a MoSe2monolayer, effectively creating
a subwavelength periodic potential. Importantly, the SPP-driven AC
Stark shift is significantly more power-efficient than conventional
far-field approaches, making this method a promising platform for
exploring optically induced phenomena at subdiffraction-limited length
scales.

Inspiring atomic and molecular optics experiments have
successfully
demonstrated effects including trapping, cooling, and creation of
condensates in optical lattices. In condensed matter systems, spatially
uniform drives have been proposedand partially demonstratedto
yield phenomena including Bloch-Floquet states and nonthermal light-induced
phase transitions.,With spatially structured driving
radiation, one can conceive, for example, imprinting an optical lattice
for itinerant excitons and electrons to engineer band structures and light-induced fractional quantum Hall phases. The bandwidth of the emergent effective bands
is, however, directly related to the periodicity of the structured
radiation. Requirements for tight optical lattice periods demand the
creation of subdiffraction-limited photonic superlattices to realize
several proposed effects. Motivated by these proposals, the second
goal of investigating the properties of quantum materials that are
driven by structured radiation below the diffraction limit or polaritonic
lattices is suggested.

To meet the goal of accessing states
that are driven by structured
radiation, the optical response function of the polaritonic host materials
must be known at the relevant momenta. Thus, adequate characterization
tools must be developed and utilized to determine the properties of
materials hosting tightly confined polaritonic superlattices. Experimental
observables must also be time-resolved and local, at least within
the driving pulse and region of space where the transient potential
is uniform. Evaluating spectral features that change within the probe
pulse duration, which is common in Floquet engineering, could require
a generalized understanding of reflectivity and transmission in certain
cases.

35.2.2. Mediating Quantum States in Passive Near-Field
Cavities. The possibility of mediating quantum states of
matter with cavity modes has gained considerable attention both theoretically
and experimentally. Experiments addressing the impact of polaritons
on condensed matter systems are emerging. Changes in the metal−insulator
transition temperature of 1T-TaS2were documented within
a Fabry−Pérot cavity. Modifications
of phase transitions have been witnessed in quantum materials proximate
to plasmons, including enhancements of ferromagnetism. Pioneering experiments have recently supported
the notion that strong gradients of the electric near fields could
enhance fractional quantum Hall conductivity in bulk GaAs (Figurec).

Even in the absence of a radiation source, passive cavities
could
change the properties of quantum systems. Unambiguous observables
with explicit connections between theory and experiment are desired.
The Purcell modification of emission in the polaritonic near field
is one example, where the dynamics of optical excitations is not yet
fully understood. The collective properties of charge carriers can
also be modified by cavities. In a gaped system, the relevant coupling
strength is quantified by a strong coupling gap relative to the system’s
decay rates. The description of strong coupling in a gapless sea of
itinerant Fermions is subject to subtleties. Recent proposals have
suggested that enhancements of the effective mass, or equivalently, changes of the Fermi velocity, could reveal cavity-induced changes of Fermi
liquids. Two-dimensional materials are likely to play a central role,
as these can be placed precisely within engineered near-field environments.

We continue
with a second thematic block of applications, highlighting
the capabilities and emerging opportunities that 2D materials bring
to light emission and detection technologies.

To fully exploit the potential of SPEs in 2D materials, it
is essential to create them in a deterministic and controllable manner.
Such control allows for the tailoring of emission energy and enhances
reproducibility and stability, which is crucial for practical applications.
Moreover, achieving operational stability at ambient conditions is
a key goal, as it facilitates the integration of SPEs into quantum
photonic chips. These advancements include coupling to waveguides
and resonators and enabling coherent control of qubits for applications
in quantum communication and computation.

36.2. Current State of the Art. Techniques like strain
engineering, nanopatterning, and moiré superlattices are used
to control and enhance the emission properties of SPEs, allowing for
their on-demand creation. Mechanical strain has proven effective for
modulation of the local bandgaps and exciton confinement in 2D materials.
This approach has been successfully demonstrated in monolayer TMDs
such as WSe2, WS2, MoSe2,,and MoTe2, where improved
light−matter interactions and stabilized photon emission were
achieved. A fabrication process using strain engineering is illustrated
inFigurea, where
a PDMS-assisted transfer onto a prepatterned Si/SiO2substrate
creates localized deformations visible in the dark-field optical microscopy
image inFigureb.

Single-photon emitters in 2D materials. (a)
Schematic illustrating
strain engineering via PDMS-assisted transfer of a monolayer TMD onto
a prepatterned Si/SiO2substrate, creating localized deformations
that form quantum emitters. (b) Dark-field optical microscopy image
showing pierced and nonpierced defects in a 2D material lattice. The
image covers an area of 170 μm by 210 μm. (c) Illustration
of a monolayer WSe2integrated with a Si3N4waveguide for photon routing, featuring two output channels.
This configuration allows excitation either through the waveguide
or a standard confocal setup. (d) Cross-sectional schematic of a WSe2monolayer on a gold mirror and sapphire substrate, enhancing
photon emission. (e) Plot of PL intensity versus excitation power
for uncoupled and coupled WSe2emitters, demonstrating
enhanced emission when coupled to optical structures. (f) Simplified
energy-level diagram for the negatively charged boron vacancy in hBN,
illustrating ground, excited, and metastable states. (g) Evolution
of the ODMR signal with an external magnetic field applied parallel
to the hexagonalcaxis (B||c) of hBN. (h) AFM topography
of hBN/WSe2nanobubbles, showing height variations. (i,h)
Integrated PL intensity map of WSe2nanobubbles (i) over
the 1.5−1.6 eV energy range corresponding to localized excitons
(LX), correlated with the topography in panel (h). The scale bar indicates
500 nm length. (j) Schematic of scanning tunneling microscopy (STM)-induced
photon emission from a monolayer WS2on graphene and a
SiC substrate, where inelastic tunneling induces light emission. (k)
Spectrally integrated photon map of a sulfur vacancy in WS2, acquired with a constant current ofI= 20 nA
and a bias voltage ofV= 2.9 V. Corresponding photon
counts are displayed. Panels (a,b) are adapted from ref  (Copyright 2017 Springer
Nature); panel (c) is adapted from ref  (Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society);
panels (d,e) are adapted from ref  (Copyright 2018 Springer Nature); panels (f,g)
are adapted from ref  (Copyright 2020 Springer Nature); panels (h,i) are adapted from
ref  (Copyright
2020 Springer Nature); panels (j,k) are adapted from ref  (Copyright 2020 American
Association for the Advancement of Science).

Another approach to deterministically create point defects
involves site-selective electron or ion beam exposure of 2D materials.,−Compared to strain engineering, the resolution
of irradiation is limited by the resolution of the beam, making it well suited to structure 2D materials
at the nanometer scale. In irradiated hBN samples, additional thermal
annealing in an oxygen atmosphere is often necessary. This method
has enabled the deterministic creation of emitters with a precision
better than 50 nm and a creation yield exceeding 35%.

Stacking 2D materials with slightly mismatched
lattice constants
creates moiré superlatticesperiodic potential variations
that trap excitons, leading to enhanced single-photon emission. These
superlattices enable the realization of ordered arrays of quantum
emitters, improving both the uniformity and tunability of SPEs. For
example, spectrally tunable quantum emission from interlayer excitons
trapped in moiré superlattices has been proposed for TMD heterobilayers and realized in heterostructures such as WSe2/MoSe2.

Integrating
SPEs with photonic structures such as optical cavities
and waveguides enhances photon emission rates through the Purcell
effect. This embedding improves emission efficiency and enables effective
photon routing, which supports the development of scalable quantum
networks and precise, on-demand photon delivery. Recent advancements
in this area include WSe2SPEs coupled to high-refractive
index GaP nanoantennas demonstrating enhancement of the radiative
rates and the reduction of the nonradiative decay rates with 102−104enhancement of the PL intensity. Another example shows the coupling of SPEs
in WSe2with plasmonic cavities, resulting in a significant
increase in quantum yield from 1% to 65%, as well as a substantial
reduction in photon lifetime, with a Purcell factor of up to 551. The schematic of a representative plasmonic
Au nanocube cavity array is depicted inFigured.Figuree presents the PL intensity versus excitation power
for both uncoupled and coupled WSe2emitters, highlighting
the enhanced emission when integrated with the cavity structures.
Additionally, a photonic waveguide can simultaneously induce strain-localized
SPEs and couple them into a waveguide mode. This was demonstrated
for the WSe2monolayer, where autocorrelation measurements
were obtained from the top and through the waveguide output, schematically depicted inFigurec. Progress has also been
made in integrating hBN emitters with photonic structures. For instance,
tunable cavities on PDMS substrates have achieved a Purcell factor
of 4.07, a reduction in line width from 5.76 to 0.224 nm, and a 2-fold
improvement ing(2)(0) values. In another study a monolithic cavity with a
quality factor of 5,000 demonstrated a Purcell factor of 15, resulting
in a 10-fold increase in emission intensity and a shortened emitter
lifetime. The coupling of hBN SPEs to
waveguides has also seen notable progress. Monolithic integration
of red emitters, confirmed by finite-difference time-domain (FDTD)
simulations, has shown higher efficiency than hybrid configurations.
Experimental data has demonstrated successful coupling with an efficiency
of 0.032 and the observation of photon antibunching. Further studies have shown the coupling of red emitters
to dielectric SiN waveguides and the
top-down integration of blue emitters into photonic platforms, marking significant steps toward scalable quantum
photonic systems.

Furthermore, the spin states inherent in 2D
materials like TMDs
and hBN can be utilized for coherent control of qubits. Techniques
like optically detected magnetic resonance (ODMR) allow for the manipulation
and readout of spin states via photon emission. Hexagonal boron nitride
has emerged as a standout platform with room-temperature ODMR arising
from a magnetic dipole transition between the spin sublevels of the
ground state. The zero-field splitting
is around 3.47 GHz, which is typical for spin-1 systems related to
boron vacancy (VB−). This is demonstrated
inFiguref, and
the evolution of the ODMR spectrum with a magnetic field applied parallel
to the sample is shown inFigureg. The room-temperature spin coherence time (T2) was measured to be 18 μs in this material. In TMD monolayers, strong spin-valley coupling
arises from the lack of inversion symmetry and significant spin−orbit
interactions, leading to spin splitting in the conduction and valence
bands in the K and K′ valleys. For example, in WSe2, external magnetic fields have been employed to manipulate both
spin and valley states, enabling coherent control that can be observed
through Shubnikov−de Haas oscillations. Quantum coherence for single moiré excitons within
a twisted WSe2/MoSe2heterobilayer has revealed
additional beating patterns that visualize the presence of quantum
coupling between them. These findings
showcase the potential of valley locking and advanced quantum systems
in 2D materials, emphasizing their capacity to manipulate multiple
quantum states.

36.3. Challenges, Future Goals, and Directions to Meet Goals. Despite substantial progress in the creation of SPEs, significant
challenges still remain. A major obstacle for the implementation of
such SPE in real-life applications is achieving controlled and reproducible
emission at specific energy levels. While
strain-engineering techniques have shown promise in the deterministic
placement of emitters, scaling these methods continues to be a challenge.
Ion or electron beam irradiation offers higher precision for defect
placement across larger areas, but maintaining consistency in emitter
behavior remains an issue. Additionally, controlling the mesoscopic
environment to minimize variability between emitters is essential. Identifying and eliminating decoherence channels,
along with developing high-fidelity, scalable pumping schemessuch
as electrically driven optical emission and selective excitation methods
that allow for greater control over emission propertiesare
important for optimizing emitter performance, improving single-photon
purity, and achieving practical applications. Accurate characterization
of emitters is also vital for understanding their electronic and optical
properties. Techniques such as scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM), integrated
with optical methods, have been effectively employed to gain deeper
insights into these systems.

For example, AFM-based nanoindentation
has been applied to locally deform WSe2monolayers, creating
SPEs with a high degree of purity, evidenced by values of the second-order
correlationg(2)(0) as low as 0.02. The
combination of AFM topography and photoluminescence mapping revealed
that the SPEs were not located at the center of the nanoindents but
instead formed around the edges, indicating a complex interaction
between strain-induced potential wells and exciton localization.

Another notable example involves apertureless
scanning near-field
optical microscopy (SNOM), which has been used to resolve nanoscale
exciton localization in WSe2monolayers. This technique
revealed that localized excitons formed doughnut-shaped distributions
around nanobubble edges, with localization lengths as small as 10
nm. The AFM topography and corresponding
integrated PL intensity map of these WSe2nanobubbles are
shown inFigureh,i.

Additionally, tip-enhanced photoluminescence (TEPL) has
been proven
instrumental in achieving high-resolution optical imaging of quantum
emitters. A study utilizing adaptive TEPL achieved a 4.4 × 104-fold enhancement in photoluminescence in WSe2monolayers
through feedback-based optimization of the spatial phase mask, leading
to a spatial resolution of approximately 14 nm.

An electrically driven photon emission from defects
in monolayer
WS2, employing a plasmonic scanning tunneling tip to induce
optical transitions via sequential inelastic tunneling, was also demonstrated.
The system’s schematic is presented inFigurej. This technique allows for tuning emission
by adjusting the applied bias voltage and mapping photon emission
from individual defects as illustrated by the photon map of a sulfur
vacancy inFigurek. This method, known as STM luminescence
(STML), has been applied in studies of metallic surfaces and molecular
systems, surpassing the diffraction limit by 2 orders of magnitude.,However, the universal application of such measurements is limited
by the stability and spatial resolution, which are typically sufficient
only at cryogenic temperatures. Moreover, the requirement of conductive
substrates provides additional limitations, as hybridization effects
may arise between commonly used plasmonic noble metal substrates and
semiconducting samples modifying and quenching the intrinsic optical
emission. Epitaxial graphene grown on
SiC has been shown to be an effective substrate preserving the native
TMD band structure. Recent work demonstrated
that inserting a few-layer graphene flake between the TMD monolayer
and the metallic substrate significantly weakened interfacial coupling.
This setup successfully preserved STML signals at negative sample
voltages, enabling the observation of excitonic features from various
local structures within a MoSe2monolayer. A similar approach was employed for electrically
driven photon emission from defects in monolayer WS2, where
the samples were prepared by growing TMD islands on epitaxial graphene
on SiC using chemical vapor deposition.

36.4. Outlook and Future Directions. A key focus moving
forward will be the on-chip integration of SPEs into photonic circuits,
such as waveguides, resonators, and cavities. The Purcell effect,
which enhances photon emission rates by coupling emitters to optical
cavities, will support the integration of SPEs into scalable quantum
photonic networks. Additionally, developing electrically driven SPEs,compatible with CMOS technology is important for creating practical
quantum applications.

While many current systems rely on cryogenic
cooling to maintain quantum coherence, recent success in achieving
room-temperature operation of SPEs in materials such as hBN and TMDs
is encouraging. Future research should focus on engineering defects
that remain stable under ambient conditions, reducing the need for
complex cooling.

Addressing decoherence, which limits the performance
of quantum
systems, is also important. Increasing the coherence time of excitons
or spin states by minimizing interactions with environmental factors
is key for quantum information processing. Approaches such as stacking
2D heterostructures, applying encapsulation, and material engineering
could help to reduce decoherence channels.

Nanoscale imaging
and spectroscopy techniques, including STM, AFM,
SNOM, and TEPL, will continue to provide valuable insights into quantum
states at the atomic level. Enhancing surface qualitythrough
cleaner fabrication techniques, encapsulation, and ultrahigh vacuum
environmentscan improve the precision of optical and electrical
measurements. Integrating high-efficiency detectors, such as superconducting
nanowire single-photon detectors (SNSPDs), into STM/AFM setups will
also aid simultaneous electrical and optical measurements. These detectors,
known for their low dark count rates, high timing resolution, and
low noise, can improve photon detection from low-light emitters and
boost the signal-to-noise ratio in correlated quantum readout. This
is particularly beneficial for detecting weak photon emissions from
individual defects or quantum dots.

In addition, advances in
spin-resolved techniques, such as Electron
Spin Resonance (ESR)-STM, will help map and manipulate spin states
within quantum emitters. 2D materials are also emerging as promising
platforms for generating entangled photon pairs. The use of interlayer
excitons in heterostructures offers a promising mechanism for photon
entanglement, which is important for secure quantum cryptography and
advancing quantum networks.

37.1. Introduction. The possibility of stacking 2D
materials into heterostructures with twist-angle control provides
a unique capability for band-structure engineering. In particular,
band-structure engineering can be exploited to control electron tunneling
between individual layers and the coupling between electrons and material
excitations, such as phonons and excitons, by taking advantage of
the conservation of both energy and (in-plane) momentum.

Here,
we briefly present the progress in the understanding of tunnel junctions
made of 2D heterostructures and discuss their use in light-emitting
devices, electronic circuitry, and optical spectroscopy.

37.2. Current State of the Art. One of the first realizations
of vertical transport light-emitting diodes with 2D materials, showcasing
band-structure engineering, came in 2015 by Withers et al. In this study, a WSe2monolayer
was sandwiched between two thin hBN layers, acting as tunnel barriers,
and two outer graphene layers that acted as transparent electrodes.
Such a quantum well (QW) configuration is illustrated inFigurea. If the applied
bias potential is higher than the electronic bandgap of WSe2, electrons and holes can tunnel to the conduction and valence bands
of WSe2, respectively. The incorporation of tunnel barriers
increases the probability of the injected carriers forming excitons
that decay radiatively. This device structure achieves an external
quantum efficiency (EQE) of 1% and can be improved by multiple QWs
in series. Designing efficient on-chip optical sources requires an
in-depth understanding of electronic transitions and optical modes
in such structures.

Inelastic
electron tunneling between graphene monolayers. (a) Schematic
of an all 2D quantum-well type light-emitting device. Charge carriers
are injected in the device through the two graphene electrodes. Light
emission is facilitated by exciton generation and their subsequent
radiative decay. (b) First Brillouin zones (1BZ) of two graphene layers
overlapping with a twist angle θ. This leads to a momentum mismatch
between the two layers of ΔΚ1and
ΔΚ2for neighboring K points.
(c) A 3D expansion of a band-diagram to accommodate for both energy
and momentum conservation, representing an inelastic tunneling process
between two graphene electrodes. The three axes represent energy,
momentum, and distance along which tunneling occurs. The initial and
final states of the tunneling electron are separated by an energy
eVband momentum ΔΚ. The inelastic
tunneling process occurs by exciting modes (e.g., phonons, photons,
excitons, plasmons) that can fulfill energy and momentum conservation.
(d) Momentum-indirect excitation of excitons can lead to direct exciton
formation by phononic relaxation at the light cone.

In a follow-up study on single-QW devices, an important observation was made. Excitons
were created in the TMD with voltages lower than the electronic bandgap
with an onset voltage that matched the optical bandgap. This observation
suggested mechanisms beyond charge injection that contribute to the
creation of excitons in the monolayer TMD. Similar studies, but with
heterobilayer TMDs in place of monolayer TMDs, observed interlayer-exciton
electroluminescence.,Furthermore, in the work of
Binder et al., upconverted electroluminescence
from intralayer excitons was reported. This observation was interpreted
as Auger scattering of interlayer excitons and subsequent formation
of intralayer ones.

Subsequent studies introduced alternative
interpretations, like
resonance energy transfer.,Pommier et al., by studying STM-induced electroluminescence
from TMDs, confirmed the creation of excitons and their radiative
recombination with an onset voltage close to the optical bandgap of
the TMD, and they proposed resonance energy transfer as the mechanism
responsible for sub-bandgap electroluminescence.

Papadopoulos
et al. demonstrated
electrically excited light emission from graphene−hBN−graphene
tunnel junctions with a TMD placed outside of the tunnel barrier.
In this configuration, the TMD is not part of the electronic pathway
and is only optically coupled to the tunnel junction. By separating
the TMD with a hBN spacer of variable thickness from the tunnel junction,
one could study the emission intensity as a function of separation
and provide evidence for a Foerster-type energy transfer mechanism.
Electroluminescence in this case is a result of inelastic electron
tunneling assisted by exciton creation. In fact, the coupling to excitons
appears to be 10,000 times stronger than the coupling to photons,
making energy transfer an attractive candidate for electrical excitation
of luminescence.

Moreover, it was shown that the energy transfer
mechanism is also
responsible for electroluminescence upconversion. As reported in the
work of Shan et al. on TMD coupled tunnel
junctions, emission at the exciton energy has been observed for bias
voltages as low as half the optical bandgap, a process that involves
excitation via two electrons. Follow-up studies have provided further
evidence for upconversion via energy transfer in tunnel junctions.

The logic of the studies discussed so
far is based on energy conservation,
but the role of momentum conservation is being ignored. While in localized
tunnel junctions, such as in point contacts, momentum conservation
is largely relaxed, this is not so for 2D interfaces with monatomic
flatness. In fact, energy and in-plane momentum conservation give
rise to distinct resonances in tunnel junctions based on 2D materials
and allow for the selective coupling to photons, phonons, plasmons,
and excitons, as illustrated inFigurec.

Energy and momentum-conserving
tunneling is referred to as resonant
tunneling and is best exemplified for a pair of twisted and separated
graphene layers. Twisting gives rise to Dirac cone separation in reciprocal
space. For twist angles for which the Dirac cones overlap at the K
points, one observes a negative differential resistance peak in the
current-to-voltage curves. This peak
indicates a resonance (energy and momentum conservation) in the elastic
tunneling process. Resonant inelastic tunneling is also possible.
Photon-assisted electron tunneling becomes resonant for twist angles
near 0°, giving rise to a narrowing of the photon emission spectrum
and an increase of the external quantum efficiency (EQE).

For graphene−gold tunnel junctions
there is a momentum mismatch
of 17 nm−1between the Γ point in Au and the
K point in graphene. Early STM studies suggested that this momentum
gap is bridged through phonon-assisted tunneling processes. When the graphene−gold tunnel junction
is coupled to a TMD, as reported by Wang et al., one observes distinct conductance peaks associated with
exciton-assisted electron tunneling, meaning that the momentum gap
is bridged by coupling to indirect excitons.

The aforementioned
studies demonstrate that energy and momentum
engineering in tunnel junctions can be exploited for tuning the electrical
and optical properties of 2D tunnel junctions, and hence for optoelectronic
applications.

37.3. Future Goals, Challenges, and Suggested Directions. Tunneling between graphene electrodes has the benefit of atomically
flat interfaces (little disorder) and partial transparency (outcoupling
of optical radiation). Resonances in elastic and inelastic electron
tunneling depend not only on the graphene−graphene twist angle
but also on the structure of the tunnel barrier and the outer environment
of the tunnel junction. For light emitting tunnel junctions one aims
at maximizing the photon-assisted inelastic tunneling process.

As shown inFigureb, by introducing a twist angle between the two graphene layers we
can address interactions that involve at minimum the momenta of ΔΚ1and ΔΚ2. The bias voltage applied to the tunnel junction provides an energy
offseteVb.Figurec illustrates the
corresponding energy−momentum landscape. The two Dirac cones
are projected onto planes atz= 0 andz=d. Transitions between the two cones have to
account for the energy offseteVband the momentum difference ΔΚ.
The energy and momentum difference can be provided by excitations
(modes) such as phonon, photons, plasmons, or excitons. For example,
TMDs support several momentum-direct and indirect excitons, and by
coupling TMDs to tunnel junctions one can selectively excite these
excitons.

For light-emitting devices, one can design the tunnel
junction
so as to excite efficiently photons or direct excitons (θ =
0°, ΔΚ= 0). However, for voltages in
the range of exciton energies (>1.6 V) the background current is
rising,
thereby making the inelastic tunneling process less probable and hence
decreasing the EQE. One possibility to suppress the background current
at these energies is to use sufficiently high twist angles, such that
momentum-direct transitions are less likely. Another possibility is
to excite electron−hole pairs with finite momenta inside the
conduction and valence band at the K point (Figured) that are allowed to relax (by coupling
to phonons) to ultimately form direct excitons. Thus, the momentum
gap is bridged by low-energy momentum nonconserving interactions.

To establish momentum conservation the twist angle between graphene
electrodes has to be precisely controlled and angle disorder throughout
the heterostructure lowers the reproducibility during fabrication
and affects the quality of a device. The quantum twisting microscope
can alleviate such problems during the design stage, as demonstrated
by the Ilani group. With the addition
of optical access for allowing electroluminescence spectroscopy, the
entire angular spectrum can be addressed, thereby accelerating the
exploration process of angle-tuned light emission. We note that not
only the twist angle between graphene electrodes matters but also
the crystallographic orientation of the TMD coupled to the tunnel
junction. This is an area of ongoing exploration and it highlights
the richness of control parameters involved in the design of simple
single-QW structures (Figurea).

As pointed out above, the quantum efficiency of
a light-emitting
tunnel junction depends on the ratio of inelastic to elastic electron
tunneling. Elastic tunneling is responsible
for a background current that is not coupled to any electromagnetic
modes of the system. One way to suppress this background current is
to use electrodes with no electronic states of low energy into which
electrons can tunnel. Therefore, semiconducting materials like TMDs
can be of interest as electrical electrodes. In fact, tunnel junctions
with TMD electrodes have been shown to depend on the twist angle, which provides control through momentum engineering
as in the case of graphene electrodes. A major challenge, however,
is the efficient injection of electrons and holes into TMD electrodes,
since Schottky barriers are formed at the TMD−metal contact
regions. A possible solution is to control charge injection by gating. Gate voltages control not only charge injection
but also the Fermi level of a TMD which can strongly enhance or suppress
radiative recombination of excitons. All these parameters have to be fine-adjusted to achieve efficient
exciton emission.

In conclusion, band-structure engineering
of tunnel junctions offers
numerous possibilities for device innovation through layer combinations,
twist angles, and bandgap selection of 2D semiconductors. However,
realizing these designs requires extensive experimentation to address
feasibility and to uncover new physical phenomena within these heterostructures.

38.1. Introduction. Dynamical phenomena in 2D materials
and vdW heterostructures typically occur on a time scale of picoseconds,
which corresponds to frequencies that fall in the THz range (i.e.,
in the far-IR). Consequently, in recent years, 2D materials, and particularly
graphene, attracted wide interest as new material platforms in photonics
for engineering THz-frequency devices and integrated systems, including
photodetectors;,,,amplitude, phase, frequency, and polarization modulators;,plasmonic devices; and ultrafast lasers.,These extraordinary advances are a consequence of some key properties
of graphene: (i) The extremely high electron mobility (300,000 cm2/(V s)), which means a very efficient electrical conductivity;
this property is particularly important for applications in the THz
bandwidth, where fast response times are often required. (ii) Absorption
of electromagnetic radiation over a wide range of frequencies, including
the 1−10 THz window, which allows graphene to be used for devising
broadband sensors, modulators, and detectors for THz waves. (iii)
The optical properties of graphene can be tuned using external stimuli
such as electrical bias or chemical doping, which can be useful for
tunable THz frequency devices. Graphene also shows ultrafast electron
cooling dynamics with quasi-instantaneous (∼100 fs) carrier−carrier
thermalization and THz-rate (∼ps) cooling time scales to the
driving electric fields. The combination
of wide tunability and ultrafast dynamics allows for dynamic control
over the response to THz radiation, as well as providing graphene
with a strong, nonlinear, ultrafast, and adjustable response to THz
frequency radiation. Furthermore, due to the recent availability of
industrial production processes and the compatibility with a wide
range of substrates, if placed on a chip with flat optical circuits,
2D material nanodevices can allow maximal interaction with light,
prospecting a wealth of applications in transformational optics.

38.2. Current State of the Art. One of the most vibrant
research fields in the past decade has certainly been the one of 2D
material-based light detectors, with the quest for nanoreceivers that
are highly sensitive (i.e., have a low noise-equivalent power, NEP)
and simultaneously work at room temperature (RT), exhibit a fast photoresponse,
display a broad dynamic range (between the lowest and highest measurable
incident light power), operate over a broad range of THz frequencies,
are possibly suitable for upscaling to multipixel architectures, and
can be eventually on-chip integrated with modulators. Photothermoelectric detection at RT has been
demonstrated with high-quality hBN-encapsulated graphene field effect
transistors (GFETs),,or scalable graphene-based architectures,reaching NEP ∼ 100 pWHz−1/2and response
times of a few nanoseconds, or even with layered black phosphorus and topological insulators.

Recently, graphene has also been innovatively exploited
for photonic integration in semiconductor heterostructure lasers,
being integrated on-chip, either as a microthermometer, for monitoring
laser cooling, or as nonlinear elements
for inducing phenomena that cannot be spontaneously sustained in quantum
cascade lasers (QCLs). As an example,
the back-facet integration of graphene in the Fabry−Pérot
cavity of a QCL proved to be a key ingredient to induce intensity-dependent
losses that promoted a stable frequency-modulated comb regime. Harmonic frequency combs of predefined order
have also been demonstrated to be spontaneously generated in a QCL by locally patterning equidistant graphene
islands on the top QCL waveguides. Furthermore,
with graphene being a very efficient THz saturable absorber, it has been embedded intracavity to promote
self-starting pulse formation (4 ps long) in a THz QCL, a long-dreamed of goal since the initial demonstration
of QCLs. Finally, inserting multilayer graphene in a random THz laser,
mode-locking was realized. These achievements
provided the first convincing experimental demonstration that, even
if technologically challenging, graphene integration in well-known
solid-state platforms can lead to a concrete technological revolution
in photonics.

Graphene also exhibits a remarkably high third-order
THz susceptibility
χ(3)∼ 10−9m2/V2,,which is 7 orders of magnitude
larger than that reported in a semiconductor heterostructure laser. Such a huge χ(3)has been
exploited to demonstrate, by frequency upconversion, high-harmonic
generation (HHG), up to the seventh harmonic using moderate fields
(∼10 kV/cm) at frequencies ≤ 2.2 THz,even in grating−graphene metamaterials. Terahertz third-harmonic generation has also been reported
in topological insulators (TIs),and Dirac
semimetals,and, more recently, proved
at high THz frequencies (9.63 THz) in QCL-pumped split-ring resonator
arrays embedding single-layer graphene sheets.

38.3. Challenges and Future Goals. One of the current
challenges in THz photonics is the engineering of THz photodetectors
providing quantum-enhanced sensitivity and high saturation intensities
(mW), which are of major interest in astronomy, quantum sensing, and
quantum information. Traditional radiation detectors, such as superconducting
hot-electron bolometers (HEB), superconducting transition-edge sensors, and kinetic inductance detectors operating at cryogenic (sub-Kelvin) temperatures,
have been prevailing for decades. These technologies are now reaching
the photon noise limit required in astronomy, with a noise equivalent
power NEP ∼ 10−20W Hz−1/2. THz photon counting has also been demonstrated, albeit in a narrow
band around 1.5 THz, using quantum capacitance detectors. Despite these advances, suitable solid-state
devices for detection of squeezed THz frequency light are still missing,
due to major technological challenges.

None of the state-of-the-art
THz detectors developed so far are indeed fully adapted to quantum
technology applications. Squeezing measurements across the THz require
NEPs ∼ 0.1 pW/Hz1/2, electrical bandwidths above
tens of MHz, and large dynamic ranges. Commercial HEBs have either
a low electrical bandwidth or a modest dynamic range that limits the
usable THz power to a few μW, which, considering the required
∼ 0.1 pW/Hz1/2NEP, is not sufficient to detect
subshot noise features. Also, HEBs show extremely low saturation powers
(∼10 pW). Interestingly, 2D materials may provide a valuable
solution in this respect. In particular, photodetectors based on graphene
show linear response for the expected power levels in the mW range,,and excellent performances at room temperature (NEP ∼ 100
pW/Hz1/2, subns response time, responsivities ∼
100 V/W). Recently, photodetectors based
on single-layer graphene (SLG) and bilayer graphene (BLG) have shown
large dynamic ranges,,(up to 4 orders of magnitude) due to their high saturation currents
and efficient electron cooling dynamics (electron-optical phonon scattering
time ∼ 1 ps). Additionally,
BLG, which is a gapless semiconductor, allows bandgap opening either
through interaction with a substrate or by applying an out-of-plane electric field (Figurea) controlled by external
double gates.,Exploiting this effect, BLG
tunnel field-effect transistors (TFETs) have been demonstrated to
operate as extremely sensitive receivers (NEP ∼ 30−300
× 10−15WHz−1/2) at frequencies
of 0.1 THz in single-top-gated or top
p−n junction configurations,
hence potentially representing a fitting platform for multiphoton
quantum detectors in the THz.

Graphene-integrated
THz frequency devices (a) Schematic representation
of a bandgap opening in bilayer graphene (BLG) induced by an out-of-plane
electric field. Adapted from ref  (Copyright 2009 Springer Nature). (b) Optical
microscope image of an assembled vdW heterostructure comprising a
top-hBN flake, BLG, and a bottom hBN flake on a large-area single-layer
graphene flake. (c) Schematic of a dual back-gate (BGL, BGR) tunneling
field-effect transistor (TFET) with an on-chip planar bowtie antenna
connecting the source (S) and top-gate (TG) electrodes of the TFET.
The drain and S contacts connect the heterostructure of panel (b).
(d) Schematic of 5th- and 6th-order harmonic frequency-comb QCLs in
a wire cavity with top graphene-etched trenches acting as frequency
filters.

Novel and brilliant opportunities
can also arise from the integration
of large area, wafer-scalable 2D and vdW crystals with artificial
semiconductor heterostructures. Current advanced nanofabrication technologies,
combined with new resonator concepts, have recently facilitated the
confinement and handling of electrons and photons with an extraordinary
degree of control. As an example, microcavities, either plasmonic or high-quality-factor
optical ring resonators, able to manipulate and confine light in small
volumes and at preselected frequencies, have expanded the functionalities
of photonic devices. They have enabled a dramatic size reduction from
laboratory scale to chip-level of optical filters, modulators, frequency
converters, and frequency combs (FCs), mostly in the visible and the
near-IR spectral domains.,The THz frequency
range, despite being of utmost interest for chemical and biological
sensing, communications, and imaging, does not yet fully benefit from
integrated photonic solutions. Novel possibilities promise to open
if 2D materials are embedded in semiconductor heterostructure resonators
to engineer a fully novel generation of light sources. To provide
a few examples, graphene can be a relevant building block for devising
a miniaturized solid-state platform for the generation of nonclassical
squeezed states of THz frequency light, or for devising innovative
nonlinear electrically pumped light sources in frequency domains where
solid-state narrowband light sources do not exist.

38.4. Suggested Directions to Meet These Goals. Combining
SLG and BLG with hBN (Figureb) in a TFET architecture can promise a rectifying capability
of the junction (Figurec), orders of magnitude larger than that achieved in a standard
FET, which translates in significantly higher sensitivities. The concept
is frequency scalable (from 0.1 THz to 10 THz) across the entire sub-THz
and THz ranges. TFETs can hence offer concrete perspectives for detecting
nonclassical states of THz light that could be, for instance, generated
by miniaturized quantum sources such as THz QCL frequency combs. This
can open exciting opportunities for developing THz quantum platforms
all based on scalable solid-state devices, which can also be integrated
on-chip.

Graphene can also potentially allow one to develop
a miniaturized solid-state platform for the generation of nonclassical
squeezed states of THz frequency light. High-ordern> 5 harmonic frequency combs with quantum-correlated sideband
modes
and a custom-tailored output spectrum can be, for instance, sculptured
by embedding on-chip integrated local graphene frequency filters (Figured) that suppress
nonharmonic modes, preserving defined high-order harmonic modes.

The recent demonstration of third-harmonic frequency upconversion
in graphene at high THz frequency (9.63 THz) anticipates major advances in the field of innovative nonlinear
light sources. As an example, novel integrated solutions for light
generation in theReststrahlenband of conventional
III−V semiconductors (6−12 THz), where optical photon
absorption hinders band-structure engineering for light emission,
can be conceived. A spectrally narrowband technology to entirely access
this range does not exist. Available technologies (thermal sources
commonly adopted in Fourier-transform IR (FTIR) spectroscopy, spintronic
emitters, or time-domain spectroscopy (TDS) systems, which rely on
III−V photoconductive switches) suffer from poor performance
or are cumbersome and lack stability (as, for example, difference-frequency
generation in gas lasers (e.g., NH3)). Distributed feedback
Bragg grating cavities in double-metal QCLs are particularly suited
for graphene intracavity integration, stemming from the possibility
of lithographically engineering gratings of shape, pitches, and depth
designed from scratch and tunable on purpose. Although technologically
challenging, engineering graphene plasmons in a specific fashion in
a ribbon grating superimposed to a distributed-feedback-laser pattern
on a QCL resonator can provide the field enhancement needed for harmonic
generation (HG) and can offer a valuable solution to engineer a monolithic,
electrically pumped solid-state source in the 6.5−12.0 THz
range. The patterned ribbons can allow optimizing the nonlinearity,
since the HG efficiency depends on the carrier concentration, which
can be locally tuned, for example, by gating. Importantly, unlike
in other spectral domains, only moderate THz fields (<40 kV/cm)
are required to induce HG in graphene, comparable to those available from THz QCLs when electromagnetic
radiation is confined, for instance, via plasmonic effects. This represents
a long-dreamed of frontier in THz photonics.

Materials
for UV-C photonics. (a) Graphic of current technologies
for UV-C sensing: materials and applications. (b) A diagram of the
bulk and monolayer (1L) bandgap energies of 2D semiconductor materials
relevant for UV-C photodetection. (c) Examples of different hybrid
systems used for UV-C sensing. Images adapted with permission from
(leftmost) ref  (Copyright 2024 Wiley-VCH); (middle-left) ref  (Copyright 2024 American
Chemical Society); (middle-right) ref  (Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society);
and (rightmost) ref  (Copyright 2022 American Chemical Society).

The 21st century boom of atomically thin 2D semiconductors
(2DSEM) has led to new platforms for energy-efficient solar-blind
photodetectors (Figureb) that exploit photovoltaic,and photoconductive effects for the conversion of UV−C
light into an electrical signal. Photodetectors with enhanced responsivity
can be achieved by photogating. In these devices, a high gain in the
electrical response can be realized by charge traps, whereby one of
the photogenerated carriers is trapped, producing an additional electric
field that increases the channel conductance. Due to the large surface-to-volume
ratio and reduced screening in 2DSEM, impurities and defects can cause
a large gain and responsivity, but they tend to increase the carrier
lifetime, thus limiting the frequency bandwidth. Examples include
2D metal chalcogenides with strong absorption in the UV-C (e.g., GaS and GaSe),
all-inorganic 2D perovskites (e.g., Sr2Nb3O10), and graphene functionalized
with UV-C absorbing layers. A number
of wide-bandgap 2DSEM are currently under investigation for UV-C spectral
selectivity, such as NiPS3, GeSe2, and GaPS4,,,but they all tend to suffer from a slow response. Monolayer hBN
is also a promising candidate due to its direct bandgap (∼6
eV) and large band-edge absorption coefficient (7.5 × 105cm−1). Liu et al. reported on hBN devices
with a weak responsivityR= 0.1 mA/W at 225 nm and
slow response time (∼0.1 s). The responsivity can be increased through localized surface plasmon
resonances in Al nanoparticles on the hBN surface but remains small. Another distinct advantage of 2DSEM over traditional
materials is their compatibility with flexible substrates. Veeralingam
et al. reported a cost-effective solid-state reaction synthesis of
hBN nanosheets onto a flexible Cu(111) foil to form a metal−semiconductor
Schottky junction with high responsivityR> 5­(A/W
at 210 nm) but slow response (∼0.2 s).

One of many directions to cementing a place for 2DSEM
in modern
optoelectronics is by integration with other systems, such as Ga2O3, with an absorption cutoff in the UV−C
region. Chen et al. fabricated a graphene/Ga2O3Schottky junction on an Al/Si/Al substrate for
position-sensitive-detection in the UV-C range. A 25-nanometer-thick film of Ga2O3was grown by plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and
a graphene film was transferred on Ga2O3. This
thin junction exhibits a photovoltaic response withR= 48.5 mA/W at 250 nm and a strong 250 to 400 nm rejection ratio
ofR250/R400= 5 × 103. A fast (∼μs) response time
was also achieved, making it suitable for fast data transfer in UV-C
communications. Another advantageous property of 2D materials is the
relative ease in the formation of heterojunctions through mechanical
exfoliation and stacking, as shown by Zeng et al., who reported on
a MoTe2/Ta:β-Ga2O3p−n
junction withR= 358.9 A/W at 254 nm, ms response
time, and a rejection ratioR260/R400∼ 103. The device could operate in photovoltaic mode, although
with a lower responsivity of 9.2 mA/W. Finally, the scalable conversion
of gallium-based 2D layers (e.g., GaS and GaSe) into an oxide offers
an alternative route to the fabrication of ultrathin UV-C sensors.
Using high-quality GaSe grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), Cottam
et al. demonstrated the complete conversion of nanometer-thick layers
of GaSe into β-Ga2O3through oxidation
and crystallization atT> 600 °C. The oxidized material was employed in solar-blind
photodetectors with R = 2.1 mA/W and a response time of ∼10
ms. In summary, the recent literature demonstrates that 2D UV−C
photodetectors can be fabricated by various techniques using hybrid
heterostructures or wide-band 2DSEM but require further development
toward improved performance and scalability (Figurec).

39.2. Challenges and Future Goals. There are numerous
challenges in the development of high-performance solar-blind sensors
based on 2DSEM. Traditionally, a large proportion of devices based
on 2DSEM utilize top-down fabrication techniques, such as mechanical
exfoliation and stacking. This results in high-quality 2D materials
with an extra degree of freedom in heterostructure stacking for solar-blind
detectors. However, mechanical exfoliation of vdW bulk crystals generally
produces only small-area flakes, which is incompatible with the large-scale
deployment required for these 2D systems to reach their full potential.
Bottom-up approaches to material growth via epitaxy offer a route
to the scalable growth of 2DSEM but require highly technical and costly
equipment as well as vast expertise in the operation and optimization
of growth parameters. While wafer-scale growth of 2D materials is
a maturing field, the challenge remains in the large-scale transfer
of grown layers onto technologically relevant substrates to unlock
the versatility of this approach. Strain engineering, defect engineering,
and dopant implantation offer the opportunity to modify the optoelectronic
properties of the grown layers, but these techniques still require
considerable investigation.

Many 2D materials suffer from oxidation
and degradation under ambient conditions, which presents a significant obstacle to their deployment in relevant
applications. 2DSEM can be influenced by interactions at the material−air
boundary, most notably with O2and H2O. This
oxidation and degradation in ambient conditions can reduce the performance
of a device over time. Thus, technological improvements in surface
capping materials and processes that do not impinge on device performance
are required. However, introducing a protective, UV-C transparent
coating that does not negatively influence the properties of the underlying
2D layer (e.g., carrier concentration and mobility) brings additional
challenges.

The performance of 2D photodetectors requires the
careful characterization
of many key performance parameters, and one challenge is the inconsistency
in the reporting of such parameters within the community. Specific
detectivity is particularly useful, as it enables a comparison of
diverse device geometries. However, different interpretations of how
to calculate the noise, optical power density, and response time of
a photodetector can lead to an overestimation of the specific detectivity. Furthermore, for solar-blind 2D photodetectors,
the testing conditions are affected by the limited availability of
UV-C laser sources; in particular, the optical power, wavelength,
and sensor operating voltage vary considerably throughout the literature.
Thus, direct comparison of photodetectors that incorporate different
materials, structures, and photosensing mechanisms is challenging.

39.3. Suggested Directions to Meet These Goals. Despite
increasing work on UV photodetectors based on 2D materials, deployment for applications in the UV-C range
is still limited. Future progress and innovative solutions for UV-C
specific spectral selectivity require a shift toward novel approaches
to synthesis and advanced integration technologies. State-of-the-art
manufacturing technologies for precise engineering of 2DSEM, such
as for the wide bandgap hBN, are needed
to overcome the reliance on exfoliated layers. Advanced solution-based
exfoliation methods can offer scalability but can compromise crystal
quality; most importantly, physical properties associated with specific
compositions, crystal structures, doping, and size are difficult to
control by exfoliation. Other techniques, such as MBE, CVD, and metal−organic
CVD (MOCVD) are less common due to the high entry-level costs of the
necessary infrastructure and/or the specialized requirements for operational
expertise. The fabrication of single and arrays of photodetectors
for UV imaging also presents significant challenges. Bespoke fabrication
strategies are needed to minimize process-induced material damage
and flexibility in the integration of ultrathin and flexible single-crystalline
2D membranes on different platforms, such as with silicon-on-insulator
(SOI) waveguides for photonics and Si-CMOS-based read-out circuits. In particular, new approaches are required
to optimize light−matter interaction in the deep UV. Localized
surface plasmons can be used to enhance the photon absorbance of 2D
materials, but current approaches work mostly in the near-UV and visible
ranges. Finally, as the growth and
fabrication of 2D materials advance, new regimes of photodetection
can be expected. The reduction in thickness of 2D materials to a few
layers or the combination of 2D materials to form new 2D−2D
layer structures, such as moiré superlattices, can dramatically impact electronic properties,
leading to new forms of charge, magnetic, and superconducting order,
driven by weakly screened electron correlations. These phenomena could
enable new concepts for fast and sensitive photon sensors via the
manipulation of carrier correlations. Other device technologies are
phototransistors based on 2D ferroelectrics for self-powered applications
and polarization-sensitive detection. In summary, we can expect a myriad of further developments in this
field by advances in the science and technologies of 2D materials.

40.1.1. Physical Properties of Black Phosphorus (BP). Black phosphorus (BP) is the most stable allotrope of phosphorus,,and it has a puckered honeycomb lattice as shown inFigurea. The atomic layers bonded
by weak vdW force allow for the mechanic exfoliation down to monolayer
limit.−Black phosphorus is a promising layered material for IR sensing,
imaging and spectroscopy due to its high carrier mobility, a moderate
bandgap, and wide tunability by electric field or strain. It is a
direct bandgap semiconductor, and the bandgap varies from around 0.3
eV in the bulk (>10 nm) to 2.0 eV in a monolayer due to enhanced
quantum
confinement. Due to the crystal-symmetry
reduction arising from the puckered honeycomb lattice, BP exhibits
highly anisotropic electronic and optical properties.,,The effective mass and carrier
mobility are different along thex(armchair) andy(zigzag) directions. A
hole mobility above 1,000 cm2V−1s−1was reported in a 15-nm-thick BP film at 120 K, and a higher hole mobility above 5,000 cm2V−1s−1was observed
in few-layer BP encapsulated in hBN layers even at room temperature. This high mobility makes BP a promising material
for field-effect transistors (FETs).

BP properties and its applications in IR sensing.
(a) Schematic
of black phosphorus crystalline structure. Reproduced from ref  (Copyright 2014 IOP
Publishing). (b) Illustration of bandgap tunability by vertical external
electric field in BP thin film (∼10 nm). (c) Schematic of a
hBN encapsulated BP photodetector in dual-gate configuration. Reproduced
from ref  (Copyright
2017 Springer Nature). (d) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of
a BP flake after exposure to ambient environment for different times.
Reproduced from ref  (Copyright 2015 IOP Publishing). (e) AFM images of BP flake exposed
to air without (left) and with (right) aluminum oxide (AlOx) encapsulation. Reproduced from ref  (Copyright 2014 American
Chemical Society). (f) The schematic growth setup to achieve a low
P4pressure for BP and b-AsP synthesis. The diffusion section
is filled with silica sand. Adapted from ref  (Copyright 2023 Springer
Nature). (g) 3D schematic view of the exfoliator of Q-Press, consisting
of a sample stage, a press roller, a rewinder, and a vacuum chuck
with a heater.

The strong in-plane anisotropy due to the crystal structure of
BP induces angular dependent optical absorption and emission, which can be exploited for polarization-sensitive
photodetectors or light-emitting diodes. Photoluminescence (PL), Raman spectroscopy,
DC conductance, and Hall mobility measurements have been leveraged
to determine the lattice orientation of the BP flake. A previous study on excitons in monolayer
BP showed that a linearly polarized emission was observed regardless
of the excitation laser polarization. A light-emitting diode consisting of BP/MoS2p−n
junctions that show strongly polarized emission within the mid-IR
range has been demonstrated by Wang et al.

40.1.2. Bandgap Tunability. As discussed above,
the BP bandgap can be effectively tuned by film thicknesses to cover the spectral range from the near-IR
to mid-IR range up to ∼3.7 μm. First-principle calculations
based on density function theory (DFT) have predicted that monolayer
BP can switch from a direct bandgap semiconductor to an indirect semiconductor,
and eventually to a metal with strain applied on thex-direction. Kim et al. experimentally
confirmed the strain tunability of the BP bandgap from 0.22 to 0.53
eV. An external electric field can
also continuously modulate the bandgap of a 10-nm-thick BP film from
around 300 meV to below 50 meV, as
illustrated inFigureb. Such tuning can significantly extend the wavelength coverage of
BP based optoelectronic devices. Leveraging this dynamic tuning method,
a 5 nm BP photodetector with photoresponse up to 7.7 μm was
demonstrated. Additionally, in black
arsenic−phosphorus (b-AsP) alloys, the bandgap can be tuned
from 0.33 to 0.15 eV by varying the molecular fraction of arsenic. The tunability of the BP bandgap by different
approaches greatly extends its operational wavelength and provides
possible pathways for more advanced optoelectronic applications.

40.1.3. Black Phosphorus in Infrared Sensing and Spectroscopy. The operational wavelength range of BP photodetectors spans from
UV to mid-IR with a cutoff wavelength of ∼4 μm.,,−The high carrier mobility and fast carrier dynamics enable ultrafast and THz photodetection.
Integration of BP with silicon photonic platforms, including waveguides and photonic crystal cavities, can significantly enhance the interaction
of light and BP. Silicon-integrated avalanche BP photodetectors have
been demonstrated at wavelengths of around 1.55 μm with responsivity
up to 125 A/W. Its optical anisotropy
has also been utilized for polarization-sensitive photodetection covering
a wavelength range of 400−3750 nm with a polarization contrast of 288 at 1450 nm. Interestingly, the photothermal effect in BP has been utilized
to acquire THz images.

Beyond
imaging, the tunable properties of BP photodetectors have been utilized for spectroscopy applications.
A double-gated BP FET tunable by an electric field can function as
a spectrometer (Figurec), which is capable of measuring the mid-IR spectrum in the
range of 3.5−9.5 μm by
leveraging the regression algorithm in the interpretation of the high-dimensional
photoresponse. Moreover, BP photodetectors can also be designed to
possess characters of memristors, where the photocurrent is dependent
on the previous operational conditions. Such characteristics have
enabled the implementation of a programmable image sensor capable
of performing cognitive operations such as edge detection.

40.1.4. Research Progress on Arsenic Phosphorus. As discussed above, the relative arsenic concentration in b-AsP
can be varied to tune its bandgap. When the molecular fraction of
arsenic changes from 0 to 0.83, the bandgap of b-AsP varies from around
0.33 to 0.15 eV. Thus, b-As0.83P0.17photodetectors
can cover a wavelength range of up to 8.27 μm. The polarization-sensitive absorption characteristics
inherent to BP are preserved in b-AsP, as confirmed experimentally
across various molecular fractions. Amani et al. have demonstrated a b-AsP photodetector operational
in the mid-IR range with a detectivity up to 2.4 × 1010cm Hz−1/2W1−, which is an order of magnitude better than
commercial detectors at room temperature. A room temperature mid-IR
photodetector based on b-AsP/MoS2heterojunctions with
high detectivity (>4.9 × 109cm Hz−1/2W1−) and suppressed dark current with noise equivalent
power (NEP) below 0.24 pW Hz−1/2was also reported
in a spectral range of 3 to 5 μm.

40.2.1. Stability. One major obstacle to scaling
and commercializing BP devices is the instability of the material
under ambient environmental conditions. As a result, passivation and
encapsulation are necessary for practical applications of BP. In particular, the lone pair electrons in
P atoms favor reaction with oxygen. The oxidation mechanism can be summarized as follows: first, the surface P atoms are oxidized to
form phosphorus oxide (PxOy); then the oxide reacts with the moisture to form
phosphoric acid on the surface. Experimentally, the BP oxidation can
be observed as the formation of small bumps shortly after exfoliation
followed by coalescence into large droplets, as shown inFigured. A quantitative
photo-oxidation investigation shows that the oxidation rate is linearly
proportional to both the oxygen concentration and the light intensity,
and oxidation increases significantly from thin film to monolayer.

Hence, to prevent the degradation of
BP devices, isolating BP from water and oxygen is of paramount importance.
Various encapsulation methods have been reported and can be summarized
into three categories: top encapsulation, full encapsulation, and inert gas
encapsulation. Top encapsulation only
involves one cover layer on top of the exfoliated BP flake. The top
layer can be atomic-layer-deposition oxide, 2D insulator hBN, or a
common sealing polymer such as parylene. This method is simple and
improves the device stability as shown inFiguree, but the results are not optimal, and
the substrate used for BP device fabrication should be hydrophilic
to reduce water diffusion. Full encapsulation
involves using both top and bottom cover layers, usually by exfoliated
hBN flakes or oxide grown by atomic layer deposition. Full-hBN-encapsulated
BP devices have shown stability over months under ambient conditions
and already exhibit great potential for applications such as photodetection
and spectroscopy.,An inert gas chamber has also
been utilized for the packaging for BP devices. This is usually combined
with the previous two methods to achieve superior passivation. Notably, Higashitarumizu et al. have tested the lifetime of fully encapsulated
BP-MoS2LED with Al2O3in a nitrogen
chamber. Under a high driving current density of ∼75 A/cm2and a temperature of up to 140 °C, the extrapolated
half-life time for their devices reaches ∼15,000 h.

40.2.2. Large-Scale Production. To fully unleash
the potential of BP in IR detection, it is essential to develop methods
for wafer-scale synthesis of high-quality crystalline BP films. Due
to the high chemical potential barrier, utilizing high temperature
and high pressure at several gigapascals (GPa) was a dominant way
to turn bulk red phosphorus or white phosphorus into large-scale BP
crystals. Li et al. reported successful
synthesis of a BP thin film at 1.5 GPa pressure on millimeter-scale
sapphire substrates with a carrier mobility of around 160 cm2V−1s−1and a grain size of
40−70 μm. Moreover, Higashitarumizu
et al. reported the successful conversion of a red phosphorus thin
film into a centimeter-scale BP film (∼18 nm thick) on mica
by applying 8 GPa pressure at room temperature and thermal annealing. Wu et al. demonstrated successful growth of
few-layers BP at centimeter-scale on mica by utilizing pulsed laser
deposition. No visible grain boundaries across the film have been
found under polarized Raman mapping. The number of BP layers can also be tuned by adjusting the laser
pulse during the growth.

Furthermore, with the introduction
of mineralizer assistants such as Sn, SnI4, and I2, the formation energy of the BP phase can be reduced and conversion
can be realized at high temperature without involving high pressure. Chen et al. have shown that, by using silica
sand as the diffusion matrix, as shown inFiguref, P4pressure can be lowered
for controllable growth of single crystalline BP thin films at subcentimeter-scale
with mineralizer. This strategy has
also been applied to synthesize large-scale b-AsxP1−xalloy. Moreover, lateral growth of BP thin films
has been demonstrated on silicon substrate starting with Au3SnP7flakes.

40.2.3. Reduced Light−Matter Interaction. Another challenge relates to the thin-film nature of the materials
utilized in device realizations. This property allows for flexibility
in device integration and reconfigurability. However, for vertically
incident light excitation, light−matter interaction is reduced
and the efficiency of such thin-film devices can be low. As discussed
in Section 40.3.2, integration of such thin-film materials with IR
waveguides could offer a low-loss solution and represents a direction
for future research.

40.3.1. Encapsulation and Large-Scale Device Fabrication
with Q-Press. Reliable encapsulation and heterostructure
stacking are key steps for the realization of large arrays of BP and
b-AsP optoelectronic devices. However, manual mechanical exfoliation
and stacking processes are labor-intensive and time-consuming, and
the reproducibility is poor. To overcome these obstacles, recently
the community is developing a new automatic process suitable for manufacturing
named Quantum Material Press (Q-Press). Q-Press comprises three core modulesexfoliator, cataloger,
and stackerintegrated with peripheral semiconductor processing
units like a reactive ion etcher, a physical vapor deposition (PVD)
system, and a high-temperature annealer within a glovebox filled with
inert gas. These components are connected by robotic sample transfer
systems, making process automation possible.

Each core module
addresses specific challenges in the manual fabrication process. The
mechanized exfoliator (Figureg) enables reliable, recipe-based exfoliation with
precise control over critical variables that can affect the exfoliation
result, such as time, pressure, temperature, and speed. The automated
cataloger pairs custom analysis software with an automated optical
microscope to perform rapid identification and categorization of flakes
based on thickness, size, and shape. Lastly, the robotic stacker equipped
with six-axis movement capabilitiesincluding
translation and rotationperforms linear motions with submicrometer
precision to eliminate bubbles in the stacking process. These modules
can be utilized to enable the fabrication of large arrays of devices
consisting of a wide range of 2D materials and heterostructures including
black phosphorus and b-AsP. Since synthesized large-area BP and b-AsP
thin films are already available, in the future these thin films can
be utilized in Q-Press systems for the manufacturing of photonic devices
in large quantities.

40.3.2. Mid- and Long-Wavelength Infrared Waveguide Integration. As discussed in Section 40.2.3, another key challenge in thin film
BP and b-AsP optoelectronic devices is the reduced light−matter
interaction. To effectively tune the electronic properties of BP or
b-AsP, the thickness of these narrow-gap semiconductors should be
small (less than 20 nm) to minimize screening effects, leading to reduced light−matter interactions
for vertically incidence light. A classic approach to resolve this
issue is through waveguide integration.,,In fact, classic semiconductors
such as silicon and germanium can cover spectral ranges of 3 to 5
μm and 8 to 12 μm, respectively. Moreover, thin-film black phosphorus has been previously
integrated with a chalcogenide glass waveguide platform for the detection
of mid-IR light. In the future, the
use of these prefabricated waveguide platforms in the Q-Press system
will enable the realization of complex mid- and long-wavelength photonic
integrated circuits through their integration with thin BP or b-AsP
films. Mid-IR light emitters, modulators, waveguides, and detectors
can be monolithically integrated within a unified platform for various
applications such as sensing, imaging, and surveillance. Integration
of thin BP or b-AsP films with other photonic platforms such as photonic
crystal cavities and plasmonic structures can also enhance their light−matter
interaction properties.

In the final block
of applications, we examine two disruptive directions:
the potential of 2D materials as a platform for photonic quantum information
and their emerging role in magnetic photonics.

41.1. Current State of the Art. Quantum protocols
are anticipated to pave the way for new technological advances, but
many essential components remain imperfect. 2D materials are emerging
as promising solutions to several of these challenges. Photonic quantum
information requires three main components: sources of single photons,
mechanisms to manipulate these photons (preferably with nonlinear
interactions), and efficient photon detectors. Here, we focus on how
2D materials may enhance photonic quantum information, particularly
in relation to photon sources and photon manipulation. Three main
research directions are highlighted: defect-based single-photon emitters
(SPEs) (Figurea),
spontaneous parametric photon pair production in vdW crystals (Figureb), and the use
of plasmons to manipulate quantum information (Figurec).

2D materials
have the potential to revolutionize photonic quantum
technologies. They are already making significant inroads in the development
of (a) single-photon emitters, (b) spontaneous parametric down-conversion,
and (c) nonlinear plasmonics, with potential applications in quantum
logic gates.

41.1.1. Single Emitters. Traditionally, photonic
quantum information has relied on spontaneous parametric down-conversion
(SPDC) to produce photon pairs. SPDC sources face limitations because
the emission is fundamentally nondeterministic. Thus, researchers
have increasingly turned their attention to SPEs in solid-state platforms,
such as III−V semiconductor quantum dots and NV centers. While
InGaAs quantum dots offer excellent performance in the near-IR range,
they have not reached the same level of performance at other wavelengths,
and their operation is confined to cryogenic temperatures.

The
discovery of defect-based SPEs in 2D materials opens new avenues for
quantum information processing, with monolayer TMDs and monolayer
or multilayer hBN currently being some of the most promising. These
materials can potentially operate at room temperature and offer tunability beyond existing platforms. SPEs have been observed in TMDs like MoS2, WS2, MoSe2, WSe2, and MoTe2. These TMD-based emitters cover a wide range of wavelengthsfrom
the visible to the telecom C and O bandsmaking them suitable
for integration with other quantum systems such as quantum memories
or repeaters. While the central wavelength is determined by the precise
defect, TMD emitters can achieve wavelength tunability through mechanical
and electric strain, surface acoustic waves, and electric field engineering.
While most TMD emitters currently require temperatures below 30 K
to operate, emission at 150 K has been demonstrated. SPEs in WSe2at cryogenic temperatures have
even allowed quantum key distribution (QKD) to be performed, highlighting their potential in practical
quantum communication.

While TMD single-photon emission has
been limited to 150 K, hBN
has achieved room-temperature operation. With a large bandgap of 6
eV, hBN emitters can generate photons in the visible spectrum and
achieve emission rates in the MHz range, competitive with leading
III−V quantum dots. In hBN, the defects can be deterministically
placed using methods such as thermal annealing, electron beam irradiation,
and strain engineering. Compatibility with integrated photonics has
been shown, and quantum protocols using hBN SPEs have been demonstrated. Moreover, the spin degree of freedom in hBN
shows quantum coherence even at room temperature, making it a potential
platform for spin qubits, quantum memories, and quantum sensors.

41.1.2. Spontaneous Parametric Down-Conversion. Although deterministic single-photon emission has advantages, nondeterministic
methods such as SPDC or spontaneous four-wave mixing remain essential
for generating multiphoton entangled states. SPDC sources continue
to play a key role in scalable photonic quantum computing, scattershot
boson sampling, and quantum communication. Additionally, since photon
pairs are generated in these processes, two-photon entanglement can
be directly created across various degrees of freedom, such as orbital
angular momentum or frequency.

In the context of 2D materials,
SPDC in ultrathin vdW materials, particularly TMDs, holds significant
potential, and for example, one of the
key advantages is the relaxed phase-matching condition, where the
two-photon state is defined primarily by energy conservation. This
allows for photon-pair generation across a wide spectral range, resulting
in continuous-variable energy−time entanglement. The nonlinear response in these materials
also enables direct control of the quantum polarization state, without
the requirement to consider phase-matching. This feature has been
utilized to create photon pairs with tunable, separable polarization
states in thin films, such as 400-nm-thick GaP and 46-nm-thick NbOCl2. TMDs can directly produce maximally entangled Bell states. Unlike most bulk polarization-entanglement
sources, TMDs do not require compensation crystals to correct temporal
walk-off, making them highly attractive for real-world applications
and integrated quantum systems.

Though efficiency is currently
modest, nonlinear coefficients in
2D materials are up to 1,000 times higher than those in conventional
nonlinear crystals, offering promising opportunities for future developments. Techniques such as periodic poling have been
shown to increase photon-pair rates by factors of up to 20 through
quasi-phase-matching in MoS2. Other approaches, such as cavity enhancement and coupling to intrinsic
resonances (e.g., excitons or plasmons), remain to be explored.

41.1.3. Plasmonics. Manipulating quantum information
encoded in photons is a key challenge for scalable photonic quantum
computing. Single-photon states are relatively easy to manipulate
using linear optical devices such as waveplates, beamsplitters, and
phase shifters, and they can also be readily created in integrated
settings. However, the resulting structures are still relatively large,
and further miniaturization would be desirable. Furthermore, even
in bulk settings, two-photon interactions, which are necessary for
two-qubit quantum logic gates, require nonlinear effects. Surface-plasmon
polaritons in 2D materials provide an innovative way to encode quantum
information in subwavelength structures with intrinsic nonlinearities.

Plasmons, which confine electromagnetic fields beyond the diffraction
limit, enhance light−matter interactions significantly. Quantum
plasmonicsa field that explores light−matter interactions
via collective electron excitationshas recently gained traction.
Photons and plasmons both exhibit bosonic behavior and demonstrate
wave-particle duality. In metal plasmonics,
it has been shown that quantum properties such as entanglement and
indistinguishability are preserved during the conversion from photons
to plasmons and vice versa. Analogously
to photonic systems, integrated linear plasmonic devices and superconducting
nanowire detectors have also been developed for metallic plasmons.
Although promising, Ohmic losses and mode distortion have limited
metallic quantum plasmonics. 2D materials, which exist as metals or
semimetals, can address these challenges, hosting long-lived plasmons and providing tunability through chemical or
electronic doping. Graphene plasmons, for example, have demonstrated
long lifetimes and tunable plasmon resonances. Other platforms, such as silicene and germanene, still
need to prove their potential for plasmonic applications.

An
exciting aspect of 2D plasmonics is the possibility of enhanced
nonlinear interactions. Graphene plasmons
can provide field confinement that is significantly stronger than
in metallic plasmons, amplifying weak nonlinearities. These interactions
hold immense promise for highly efficient frequency conversion and
ultrastrong nonlinear light−matter interactions beyond their
metallic counterparts. It has even been proposed that the nonlinearities
of graphene could be used for efficient quantum plasmonic logic gates
or as sources of single photons or
plasmons. Recently, ultrathin crystalline
noble metal films demonstrated significant plasmon loss reduction
and suggested strong nonlinearities, holding potential for a comeback
of metal plasmonics for efficient second-harmonic generation or SPDC.

41.2. Challenges and Future Goals. Despite their promise,
the integration of 2D materials into photonic quantum systems faces
important challenges. We shall now identify these for each of the
three research directions.

41.2.1. Single Emitters. Although SPEs in TMDs
and hBN are competitive in terms of single-photon purity and emission
rates, multiphoton quantum protocols require photon indistinguishability.
This comes at two levels: first, successively emitted photons from
the same SPE must be identical and, second, photons from different
SPEs should also be indistinguishable. Indistinguishability can be
measured through the Hong−Ou−Mandel (HOM) interference
visibility. III−V quantum dots have achieved nearly perfect
HOM visibility between successive photons from the same source, but
indistinguishability between different quantum dots remains a challenge.

In 2D materials, HOM visibility has remained low. Drawer et al.
reported 2% visibility in WSe2, likely due to spectral diffusion caused by environmental factors.
Fournier et al. achieved ∼50% visibility in hBN. Another hurdle in the creation of multiphoton
states is the direct generation of entanglement. In quantum dots,
photon entanglement can be generated via biexciton−exciton
cascades. A similar cascade has been identified in WSe2-based defects, but entanglement has yet to be demonstrated. Scaling beyond two-photon states has not yet
been explored in 2D materials.

Integrating 2D material-based
SPEs into photonic structures can
enhance the quality of the emitted photons, as observed in WSe2, wherein the emission properties have been improved by coupling
to different structures and resonances.

41.2.2. Spontaneous Parametric Down-Conversion. Current photon-pair sources based on 2D materials are primarily
limited by low conversion efficiency, with rates of about 10 Hz. Photonic
protocols typically require rates in the kHz or MHz range. Techniques
such as quasi-phase-matching, multipass systems, and cavity-based
enhancement, which have been used in bulk crystals, could help boost rates. Moreover, while standard bulk nonlinear
crystals do not typically take advantage of any material resonances,
2D materials possess exciton transitions and plasmonic resonances,
and can be readily integrated with metasurfaces, all of which could
provide significant enhancements to the conversion efficiency.

Another challenge relates to achieving
an efficient collection due to the high divergence angle of the emitted
photons, which results from the relaxed phase-matching. This can cause
coupling losses, while internal reflections within the material can
further reduce efficiency. One approach is to introduce cavities or
metasurfaces to enhance directional emission, which could also enhance the emission at specific frequencies.
Nonparametric background noise, which lowers the purity of two-photon
states, can be addressed by postprocessing techniques such as temporal
distillation.

41.2.3. Plasmonics. Implementing two-qubit plasmonic
logic gates is particularly challenging due to demanding fabrication
addressing the required high-quality plasmonic structures. This has
limited most experimental work in graphene to the mid-IR. However,
resonant graphene nanostructures have been recently achieved in the
near-IR. While promising, these methods rely on chemical etching,
resulting in randomly formed structures. Deterministic nanofabrication
of graphene nanostructures that are resonant in the visible or near-IR
has yet to be realized, though heterostructures may offer a solution. Other 2D platforms, such as buckled honeycomb
materials (e.g., silicene), also have potential, but further research
is required to prove their suitability as a competing plasmonic platform.

Finally, efficiently coupling photons from free space to highly
confined plasmonic modes remains a challenge, but classical light
has been coupled to graphene plasmons with 94% efficiency. Further development of these methods could
enable similar success at the single-photon level.

41.3. Suggested Directions to Meet These Goals. Photonic
quantum information processing is a relatively mature and advanced
field. Thus, if 2D materials are to be integrated into quantum experiments,
they will have to compete with well-established systems. For example,
while 2D materials show promise as photodetectors, superconducting nanowire detectors are arguably nearly
perfect, achieving close-to-ideal efficiency. A remaining challenge
lies in scaling up their production. This makes it unlikely for 2D
materials to make a large impact on single-photon detection unless
qualitatively better performance is demonstrated, such as efficient
detection at new wavelength regimes or operation at higher temperatures.
However, the situation for single-photon sources and nonlinear manipulation
is different. For these applications, quantum photonic technology
is being developed in various platforms to improve efficiency and
feasibility. Here, 2D materials could provide substantial breakthroughs
that would speed up the advent of photonic quantum information processing.

In this section, we describe the potential of combining
magnetic
2D atomic crystals (2D magnets) with photonic structures to study
novel states, answer long-standing questions, and create new devices.
For example, despite decades-old predictions of nontrivial quantum
correlations and entanglement in 2D frustrated magnets, these have
yet to be directly observed.,Furthermore, 2D magnets
offer a unique and widely explored ability to tune the magnetic properties
through strain, gating,,and heterostructures.,Thus, as shown inFigurea, 2D magnets can
be employed for tunable on-chip photonic sources of helical light.
However, the controls of 2D magnets employed to date are rather blunt
tools that do not finely tailor the interactions. Nonetheless, 2D
magnets possess the potential for strong light−matter interactions
resulting from placement in cavities and their inherent large excitonic
features. Thus, photonic structures offer exciting possibilities to
probe, control, and incorporate 2D magnets into novel device architectures
for future quantum applications: light sources, detectors, memories,
transduction, entanglement generation, and control.

Photonics meets magnetism
in 2D. (a) Exploiting the electrical
and strain control of 2D magnets for on-chip sources of helical light
needed for protected quantum communications. (b) Self-hybridized polaritons
optically read out the multilevel magnetization. (c) Various means by which optics is employed to probe
the magnetic properties of 2D atomic crystals. (d) Stokes/anti-Stokes
scattering, allowing for the detection of single magnetic excitations
and their quantum correlations. Incorporation into photonic structures
provides nonlocal corrections. (e) Combining optical, acoustic, and
magnonic cavities to enable fine-tuned control of 2D magnets toward
novel ground states.

42.1. Future Devices. Magnetism plays a significant
role in memory and computing applications. Compared to their 3D counterparts,
certain 2D magnets offer new opportunities via their strong light−matter
interactions. 2D magnetic semiconductors, such as CrI3and
CrSBr, host excitons strongly coupled to the interlayer magnetic order.
For instance, the magnetic state-dependent helical optical selection
rules of excitons in CrI3produce spin-polarized photovoltaic
effects, using spin-filtering in magnetic
tunnel junction (MTJ) devices,whose giant photomagneto
current is tunable by electrical bias. In CrSBr, the spin-dependent
interlayer exchange interaction produces a unique coupling between
excitons and magnons, whose energies differ by 5 orders of magnitude.,By integrating a 2D magnet with a photonic cavity, magnon-exciton
polaritons have also been realized. This
photon−magnon coupling enables the optical detection of coherent
spin waves for potential applications in hybrid quantum magnonics
and quantum transduction.

Expanding beyond these initial demonstrations
are possibilities relying on the control of the interlayer exchange
via electrical means,or mechanical strain. An example device concept is shown inFigureb, an electrical
write−optical read multilevel memory. The device concept follows
the recent demonstration of nonvolatile electric-field control of
magnetization of CrSBr with the added
role of the light emission from the bulk polaritons acting as the
read-out mechanism. Furthermore, the multiple polariton states in
bulk CrSBr provide wavelength multiplexing for free. The last example
utilizes the flexibilities of 2D materials to create artificial structures
on demand via vdW layer assembly.

Nonetheless, these techniques are also limited by
the long wavelength and small photon momentum. As such, they are not
sensitive to the translational symmetry at the lattice scale and,
hence, only probe theq= 0 magnetic excitations
along with the point and not the space group. This makes antiferromagnetic
phases belonging to the gray magnetic point groups typically invisible
to optics. To this end, the focus turned to magnetic circular/linear
dichroism (MCD/MLD) or birefringence (MCB/MLB). Here, MCD/B detects
the broken time reversal while MLD/B is sensitive to the broken rotational
symmetry due to the magnetic order parameter. As such, investigations
of 2D ferromagnetism (FM) relied on MCB and/or MCD.,In addition, MCD detected the layered AFM with a compensated magnetization,
for example, even-layer MnBi2Te4, and the noncollinear spins in moiré
magnets. Due to changes in hopping
upon entering the magnetically ordered state, MLD/B has probed zigzag
AFM and imaged their magnetic domains.
As MLD/B is proportional to the square of the Néel vector,
it is effectively capable of probing magnetic fluctuations and has
been applied to probe Potts nematicity. In addition, the onset of various magnetic orders and magneto-elastic
coupling can be observed via the phonons. For example, Raman scattering
revealed 2D intralayer AFM orders via the appearance of zone-boundary
phonons folded by the magnetic wave vectors,−tracking 2D FM orders through phonon symmetry reduction and resolving 2D interlayer AFM orders via
magnetism-assisted phonon scattering.

To expand the range of magnetic orders probed, second- and
third-harmonic
generation (SHG/THG) were applied due to their finer resolution into
the point groups. SHG has been applied in several cases to capture
the inversion-symmetry-breaking AFMs,,as the noncentrosymmetric magnetic phases turn on
the leading-order electric dipole (ED) SHG. Electric quadrupole (EQ)
SHG has been pushed to resolve inversion symmetric phases in 3D bulk
materials and in 3D CrSBr to separate
surface and bulk AFMs. While cavities
could enhance the low signal levels, SHG is forbidden under normal
incidence with an out-of-plane 2-fold rotational symmetry. This suggests
that future efforts to exploit well-tuned optical structures to enhance
the THG efficiency could address the symmetry limitations of SHG and
the inherent low signal levels.

Beyond static responses, magnetic
fluctuations and collective excitations
in 2D magnets provide the strength of various anisotropy and exchange
terms for loss mechanisms, detect hidden orders, and exploit novel
excitations for spintronics, quantum transduction, and computing.
For example, time-resolved MCB and reflectivity captured the in-phase
and out-of-phase magnons in 2D layered AFMs.,In addition, scanning time-resolved reflectivity microscopy measured
magnon propagation in CrSBr flakes. Real-time
MCD imaging captured the critical slow-down of spin fluctuations and
the divergent correlation length near the critical temperature for
a Heisenberg FM monolayer. Time-resolved
SHG has been used to detect and separate various electro-magnons in
vdW multiferroics. Alternatively, inelastic
light scattering spectroscopy provides the energy, lifetime, statistics,
and symmetry of the excitations. Magneto-Raman spectroscopy has been
used to show zone-center single magnons in 2D and vdW layered AFM, zone-boundary two magnons in 2D AFM,,quasi-elastic scattering in 2D AFM,,and fractional
excitations.

Recent developments
in measuring single-photon correlations via
Raman scattering, combined with on-chip photonics, could provide new
insights into the nontrivial classical and quantum correlations in
2D magnets. Specifically, consider the Stokes−antiStokes (SaS)
process shown inFigured. Here, awritephoton scatters, producing
a Stokes (S) photon and a magnon. This magnon is annihilated via an
anti-Stokes (aS) process with a second pump photon. To ensure the
S and aS photons originate from the same mode, one measures theg(2)correlation between them using single photon
detectors. This S−aS process has been successfully demonstrated
in water, diamond, graphene, and twisted bilayer graphene, where the size of the quantum correlations
induced by the mode on the S and aS photons was evaluated using the
Clauser−Horne−Shimony−Holt (CHSH) form of the
Bell inequality. Going forward, we
envision employing the S−aS process to probe individual magnons
directly in 2D materials. Such studies could open the door to using
2D magnets in future quantum memories and quantum photonic devices.
Furthermore, by studying their quantum dephasing as 2D magnets are
tuned through different magnetic orders, one could gain insights into
the evolution of their strong fluctuations in producing novel phenomena.

To explore novel spatial correlations in these systems, consider
a 2D magnet placed on a series of resonant photonic cavities to allow
for local excitation and probing of the S−aS process (seeFigured right). First,
one can measure how the CHSH parameter is modified as a function of
the distance between the read and write beam on length scales relevant
to 2D magnets. Next, one could explore the nonlocal quantum correlations
between magnons excited in different physical locations and times.
While such correlations are expected even in classical systems, an
open question is to what extent they exist in 2D systems where strong
quantum fluctuations destroy the long-range order. Lastly, since the
correlations could be tuned by local gates, strain, or magnetic fields,
this could provide a significant opportunity for generating and controlling
local entanglement or quantum memories in photonic settings.

42.3. Photonic Control of Magnetism. For 2D magnets,
the intrinsic magnetic anisotropy and relative strength of the exchange
terms are crucial for determining their ground states and the emergence
of novel quasiparticles. Noting that the anisotropy and specific forms
of exchange are highly sensitive to the local lattice symmetry, it
seems highly promising to manipulate 2D magnets by excitation of specific
phonon modes. Indeed, recent advances in nonlinear phononic pumping
have demonstrated the ability to control magnetism by exciting specific
optical modes or through Floquet renormalization. Nonetheless, such studies are limited by the
need for large-amplitude electric fields and are constrained to zone
centers and optical modes. Thus, future efforts could explore the
combination of optomechanics and photonics to allow for fine-tuned
dynamic control of 2D magnets. For example, as shown inFiguree, placing a 2D
material on a patterned substrate can create a cavity for both acoustic
modes and light. One could dynamically excite the strain using piezoelectric
substrates while using the optical cavity to monitor the acoustic
modes and magnetic properties simultaneously. Alternatively, one can
attempt to dynamically destroy long-range order or manipulate specific
wave vectors via magnonic cavities. Using the same setup but with
a magnetic substrate (e.g., yttrium−iron−garne), we
envision coherent optics exciting and the cavity focusing magnetic
excitations into the 2D material for direct control of the magnetism
via finite (q,ω) excitations. We note such
structures would also be helpful in future quantum transduction efforts
or as ultrasensitive probes of magnetism.

From the standpoint of the complexity
inherent in life and nature
and their astounding degree of dynamical evolution, interrelations,
and functionalities, materials science is still in its early infancy.
Moving from bulk to surfaces (famously described by Pauli as a devil’s
invention) has kept chemists and physicists engaged for decades, while
moving to higher surface densities (i.e., 2D materials) will probably
stimulate comparable efforts. Once the domain of surface science,
the combination of exfoliation, stacking, and twisting has now emerged
as a powerful alternative for creating atomically controlled structures.
In-plane complexity in 2D materials represents a natural extension
of this evolution, enabling the integration of increasingly more complex
structures, dynamics, and functionalities in atomically thin devices.
This evolution is already unfolding in the field of photonics.

We are witnessing a shift in our understanding of material response
functions and light−matter interactions, driven by concepts
such as topology and geometric phases. Quantum properties of light
and materials are being combined in an effort to identify intrinsically
joint quantum states. Additionally, hyperbolic media are broadening
our understanding of nanoscale photonics, previously focused on field
confinement, and now extending this concept to include propagating
rays, opening new possibilities for light manipulation at the nanoscale.

The wide range of topics covered in this Roadmap underscores the
transformative impact of 2D materials on photonics. These materials
not only provide better opportunities for exploring and practically
exploiting several previously known effects, but also facilitate the
discovery of new phenomena and the development of innovative applications.
These include 2D polaritonics (Sections−), excitons
with exceptional properties (Sections−), substantial
advances in nonlinear (Sections−) and magnetic (Section) nanophotonics,
insights into chirality and moiré systems (Sections−), new uses of metasurfaces and emerging materials (Sections−), and applications in integrated photonics (Sections−) and light emission/detection (Sections−). Tip-based nanoscopies (Sectionsand ) play a crucial
role in driving these discoveries, while electron microscopy also
provides valuable insights (Section). All in all, it remains impractical to compile a
fully comprehensive collection of topics, and certain important areas,
such as, for example, optical biosensing, neuromorphic computing,
and photocatalysis, are still underrepresented. These fields can also
benefit from the high surface-to-volume ratio of 2D materials, enabling
them to progress toward bioinspired applications with increased complexity.

We should continue to focus on designing materials with enhanced
nonlinearities, an area where 2D crystals have generated great expectations.
In parallel, the strong, tunable excitons featured by 2D semiconductors
pave the way for future applications in active nanophotonics. Additionally,
controlling the creation and placement of atomic defects is crucial
to harness their potential in integrated photonics, where they can
serve as elements with precisely defined light emission, absorption,
and scattering properties. From a fabrication perspective, the pursuit
of higher-quality materials remains ongoing. Atomically resolved images
of 2D materials often reveal a high density of defects, and therefore,
improved synthesis methods are essential. These methods must also
be scalable to enable massively parallelized fabrication and should
include standardized metrology to characterize these materials and
design well-defined and reproducible manufacturing protocols.

Advanced first-principles simulations should be adapted to facilitate
scientific exploration in these areas and provide deeper insights
into experimental findings, particularly those arising unexpectedly
from undesired disorder and adsorbates, as well as from surface-chemical
modifications and engineered atomic defects in a more controlled manner.

We conclude by extending our gratitude to the contributors who
have expertly summarized the state of the art in this dynamic field.
We believe this is an extraordinary outcome of the significant collective
efforts devoted so far to researching photonics of (and with) 2D materials.
They have identified future objectives and generously outlined strategies
to achieve them. This rapidly expanding area of research promises
breakthroughs in ultrafast, quantum, and nonlinear optics, as well
as in nanophotonics, light sources and detectors, optical sensing,
optomechanics, thermal management, and other emerging areas yet to
be fully defined. We believe that this effort will ultimately bring
substantial benefits to society as a whole, and therefore, we are
excited to present this Roadmap, hoping it will guide future endeavors
in photonics and pave the way for groundbreaking research in the years
to come.

Authors listed
at the beginning of each section are responsible for the content of
that section. The corresponding author in each section is the person
to be contacted if questions arise regarding the content of that section.
Each section has been independently authored by different research
groups. This Roadmap is a collection of opinions from these independent
groups and does not represent a collaborative effort.

This work has
been supported in part by the funding sources listed here (grant numbers
in parentheses). Section 2: European Research Council (ERC) (101141220
QUEFES); Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation, and Universities
(MICIN) (CEX2019-000910-S). Section 3: Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation
(GBMF) (12212); Generalitat de Catalunya and European Social Fund-FEDER.
Section 4: Italian Ministry of University and Research (PRIN 2020
2020JLZ52N); European Union (EU) (101131579, 873028). Section 5: Portuguese
Foundation for Science and Technology (UIDB/04650/2020, COMPETE 2020,
PORTUGAL 2020, FEDER, PTDC/FIS-MAC/2045/2021); Independent Research
Fund Denmark (IRFD) (2032-00045B); Danish National Research Foundation
(DNRF) (165). Section 6: Office of Naval Research (ONR) (N00014231270).
Section 7: U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy
Sciences (DOE) (DE-SC0019443). Section 8: Catalan CERCA; MICIN (CEX2021-001214-S,
PID2022-140845OB-C63, CNS2022-135658, TED2021-132388B-C41, PID2021-125309OA-100,
TED2021-129416A-I00); EU (PRTR-C17.I1); Comunidad de Madrid (TEC-2024/TEC-459,
SINMOLMAT-CM); CSIC (20226AT011); CSIC and Czech Academy of Sciences
(CAS) (BILAT23033/CSIC-24-10); CAS (GAČR 22-18718S). Section
9: French National Agency for Research (ANR) (ANR-20-CE42-0020). Section
10: F.D.: Emmy Noether Program (ENP) (534078167); H.D.: GBMF (10694),
ONR (N00014-21-1-2770); C.S.: German Research Society (DFG) (SPP 2244
project SCHN1376 14.2); V.M.M.: GBMF (12764), ONR (W911NF-22-1-0091).
Section 11: T.D.: DFG (426726249, DE 2749/2-1, DE 2749/2-2); A.C.:
DFG (314695032 (SFB 1277 B05), 417590517 (SFB 1415 B11), 390858490
(EXC 2147 ct.qmat)), ERC (101001764 CoulENGINE); K.S.T.: Novo Nordisk
Foundation Challenge Programme 2021 (BIOMAG NNF21OC0066526); K.S.T.:
VILLUM FONDEN (37789). Section 12: Y.A.: Air Force Office of Scientific
Research (AFOSR) (FA9550-23-1-0375), GBMF (12246); V.K.S. and M.C.H.:
Northwestern University (NSF DMR-2308691); M.T.: AFOSR (FA9550-23-1-0447),
National Science Foundation (NSF) (DMREF 2323296). Section 13: X.C.:
DOE (BES MSE QIS FWP #100740); T.F.H.: DOE (BES CSGB AMOS FWP #SCW0063);
L.Y.: DOE (Q-NEXT DE-AC02-76SF00515). Section 14: EU (IR0000016, ID
D2B8D520, CUP B53C22001750006, 101130384, HORIZONEIC-2023-PATHFINDEROPEN-01,
QUONDENSATE, M4C2-2022LA3TJ8 - CUP D53D23002280006, MSCA-2021 101066108,
NQSTI PE00000023-q-ANTHEM-CUP H43C22000870001). Section 15: DFG (Li
580/16-1, DE 3578/3-1, SFB1372/2-Sig01, RTG1885, INST 184/163-1, INST
184/164-1); Niedersächsisches Ministerium für Wissenschaft
and Kultur and Volkswagen Foundation (SMART, DyNano, Wissenschaftsraum
ElLiKo). Section 16: Research Council of Finland (RSF) (353364, 360411,
359009, 365686, 367808, 320167, PREIN); EU (MSCA-RISE-872049 IPN-Bio,
101155089, ALTOS); ERC (834742). Section 17: DOE (DE-SC0019443). Section
18: IRFD (0165-00051B); DNRF (165); ERC (101141220-QUEFES). Section
19: DFG (CRC 1375 NOA, 398816777 C4, IRTG 2675 ‘Meta-Active’
437527638 A4); Federal Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF)
(16KIS1792 SiNNER). J.W.: DFG (ENP 503985532, CRC 1277-314695032 A03,
RTG 2905-502572516). Section 20: National Key Research and Development
Program of China (NKRDPC) (2024YFA1409800); National Natural Science
Foundation of China (NNSFC) (12034003). Section 21: Singapore Ministry
of Education (MOE) (MOE- T2EP50222-0011, MOE- MOET32023-0003). Section
22: ERC (101125662 QinPINEM), Israel Science Foundation (385/23);
Hellen Diller Quantum Center; I.K.: GBMF (11473 iQCE); S.T.: Israeli
Academy of Science and Humanities (Yad Hanadiv Foundation Rothschild),
Israel Council for Higher Education (VATAT-Quantum), Technion (Viterbi).
Section 23: DFG; BMBF; Vector-Stiftung; Zeiss-Stiftung; EU. Section
24: MICIN (PID2023-146461NB-I00, CEX2023-001316-M). Section 25: J.D.:
Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Z240005), NNSFC (12474027); A.A.:
ONR, Simons Foundation (SF); J.DC. ONR MURI (N0001-23-1-2567); A.Y.N.:
MICIN (PID2023-147676NB-I00), Basque Department of Education (PIBA-2023-1-0007);
P.A.-G.: ERC (101044461 TWISTOPTICS), MICIN (PID2022-141304NB-I00).
Section 26: A.Y.N., P.A.G., and L.M.-M.: MICIN (PID2023-147676NB-I00,
PID2022-141304NB-I00, PID2023-148359NB-C); L.M.-M.: Aragon Government
(Q-MAD);. P.A.-G.: ERC (101044461, TWISTOPTICS); A.A.: ONR (N00014-2212448);.
J.D.C and T.L.: ONR MURI (N0001-23-1-2567). Section 27: Department
of Defense; NSF; SF. Section 28: J.v.d.G.: Dutch Science Foundation
(VI.Vidi.203.027), ERC (101116984); T.S.: 2D-TECH VINNOVA Competence
Center (ref.2019-00068); D.J.: ONR (N00014-23-1-203). Section 29:
I.V.B.: U.S. Army Research Office (W911NF2310206); A.B. and V.M.S.:
DOE (DE-SC0017717); AFOSR (FA9550-20-1-0124). Section 30: Purdue team:
ONR (N00014-21-1-2026); J.S.: NSF (Graduate Research Fellowship DGE-1842166).
Section 31: H.P.: NSF (CHE-2102601); S.T.: CAS (YSBR-054). Section
32: ERC (101141220 QUEFES); MCINN (CEX2019-000910-S, PID2022-137569NB-C42).
Section 33: RCF (353364, 360411, 359009, 365686, 367808, Flagship
Programme 320167 PREIN); EU (MSCA-RISE-872049 IPN-Bio); Jane and Aatos
Erkko Foundation; Technology Industries of Finland Centennial Foundation
(Future Makers 2022); ERC (834742); NNSFC (12374167, 12422406); NKRDPC
(2022YFA1403500). Section 34: NNSFC (51925203, U2032206, 52072083,
51972072, 2021YFA1201500). Section 35: Y.Z.: DOE (DE-SC-0022885).
Section 36: MOE (EDUN C-33-18-279-V12, I-FIM, MOE-T2EP50122-0012);
AFOSR and ONR (FA8655-21-1-7026); MAT-GDT Program at A*STAR (M24N4b0034).
Section 37: Swiss National Science Foundation (200021-227862). Section
38: ERC (101157731 Terascan); EU (EXTREME IR 944735, Graphene Flagship
core 3, 101070546, PE0000023-NQSTI. Section 39: Defense Science and
Technology Laboratory and Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council (EP/T019018/1, EP/X524967/1). Section 40: ONR; NSF; Government
of Israel. Section 41: P.W.: AFOSR (FA8655-20-1-7030 PhoQuGraph, FA8655-23-1-7063
TIQI); Austrian Science Fund (FWF 10.55776/F71); Austrian Federal
Ministry of Labour and Economy; Christian Doppler Research Association;
L.A.R.: Erwin Schrödinger Center for Quantum Science &
Technology (ESQ Discovery). Section 42: K.S.B.: NSF (EPMD EPMD-2211334),
DOE (DE-SC0018675); L.Z.: DOE (DE-SC0024145), NSF CAREER (DMR-174774);
V.M.M.: DOE (DE-SC0025302); X.X.: DOE (DE-SC0018171), AFOSR MURI (FA9550-19-1-0390).

Views, findings,
conclusions,
and recommendations expressed in this Roadmap are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies.
A preprint version of this paper is available in the arXiv repository
(ref ).

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.