The World Health Organization declared eating disorders a priority, considering the risks they pose to adolescents' health, especially girls, except for neurological and mental diseases. Knowing the factors related to this problem can be a basis for designing timely and effective interventions. Therefore, this study aimed to identify factors related to eating disorders among Iranian adolescent girls.

This scoping review was based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses (PRISMA‐SCR). A comprehensive literature search with related keywords was conducted on the Web of Science, PubMed, Scopus, and two Iranian databases, SID and Magiran, without a time limit. The articles were selected based on the entry criteria. After removing duplicates and checking titles, abstracts, and full text, 12 articles were included in the analysis.

Factors affecting eating disorders in Iranian adolescent girls were classified into two main categories: individual (lifestyle and diet, psychological factors, body shape, and menstrual age) and social (family's socioeconomic status, social pressures, and increased awareness).

Eating disorders in adolescent girls are related to several factors. This issue helps to understand the consequences of developing eating disorders and provides the possibility to increase the existing interventions and ultimately improve the treatment for adolescents. Interventions can include education about healthy nutrition, correct information about body image, family support, conducting psychological sessions, and encouraging girls to be physically active.

Transitioning from childhood to adolescence is a crucial stage in human life [1]. Meanwhile, unfavorable perception of the body is one of the common problems among adolescents [2]. Physical changes in adolescents affect their self‐image and eventually cause disorders such as eating disorders [3]. Eating disorders are severe psychiatric disorders characterized by maladaptive eating behaviors or excessive attention to food, body weight, and size [4]. Eating disorders are multifactorial psychiatric illnesses [5], which include anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating disorder, lead to greater physical and mental health disorders, disability, and mortality [6].

Adolescents are particularly vulnerable to developing eating disorders due to the significant developmental changes that influence their self‐perception [7]. These disorders commonly emerge during adolescence, typically between the ages of 14 and 19, a period characterized by the growing importance of peer relationships, the initiation of romantic connections, and a shift in reliance away from parental emotional and social support [5]. Research highlights that eating disorders are severe mental health conditions affecting individuals worldwide, transcending barriers of race, age, ethnicity, and gender. These conditions profoundly impact mental well‐being, interpersonal relationships, and the functioning of families and society as a whole [8,9].

The World Health Organization announced in 2020 that the formation of an attitude toward the body and a sense of competition with peers during adolescence increases the risk of developing eating disorders [10]. According to statistics, the weighted average prevalence of eating disorders in Asia, Europe, and North America was 8.4% for women and 2.2% for men in 2019 [11]. This disorder is one of the most common clinical complications among adolescent girls, which affects eating‐related behaviors and leads to physical and mental disorders [12]. Studies showed that female adolescents have a greater desire to be thin and slim than male adolescents, leading to feelings of bodily dissatisfaction that exacerbate eating disturbances. This indicates that being female and adolescent does trigger eating disturbances and the risk of eating disorders [13].

Almost 4% of adolescent girls have eating disorders that reflect a widespread public health issue [14]. Research indicates that eating disorders are becoming more prevalent across various non‐Western societies [15]. While these conditions have traditionally been viewed as primarily a Western issue, emerging evidence highlights their increasing occurrence in regions such as Iran [16]. Among these, Iranian adolescent girls are particularly at risk due to the influence of cultural, social, and environmental factors on their body image and eating habits. Studies reveal a rising prevalence of eating disorders among adolescent girls in Tehran, with rates comparable to those reported in Western countries [17,18]. Most of these girls suffer from food/calorie restriction, body dissatisfaction, overeating, and excessive exercise [19].

Body mass index (BMI), maturity status, the influence of parents, peers, and the media through comparison of appearance, and making a thin body look better are factors affecting body image concerns in adolescent girls [20]. Various factors affect eating disorders. For example, Wilksch et al. (2020) showed that 51.7% of adolescent girls and 45% of boys under the influence of social media skipped meals and did excessive sports [21]. According to Mohammadi et al.'s (2020) study, being a woman and being urban are the causes of eating disorders [22]. DeJong et al. (2013) found that eating disorders lead to a decrease in people's quality of life [23]. According to a study, eating disorders are directly related to short or poor sleep and sleep disorders in patients with binge eating disorders [24]. Menstrual disorders often occur in adolescents with eating disorders, indicating abnormal nutritional intake in them [25]. The study by Weber et al. (2005) showed that mood disorders and depression are more common in adolescents with mood disorders than in other adolescents [26].

So far, there has been limited research available on eating disorders in Iran, and more research is required to adequately assess the defining features of this population and unique risk factors attributable to Iranian individuals. Due to the sparse research on eating disorders in Iranian adolescent girls, alongside the increasing prevalence of such disorders in the country, the present review study aimed to bridge these gaps by determining the most important risk factors associated with eating disorders among this population. This study aims to summarize the sociocultural, psychological, and environmental determinants of eating disorders in Iranian adolescent girls through a scoping review. This knowledge will facilitate efforts to devise targeted interventions and preventative measures directed at this vulnerable population and provide insight for policymakers/healthcare providers/researchers into the scope of the problem.

A scoping review was conducted to map the literature in this field. This scoping review was conducted following the JBI Manual for Scoping Reviews (2024) and PRISMA‐ScR guidelines, including identifying the study area, understanding the indications for a scoping review, formulating a precise and informative title, presenting a comprehensive background or introduction of the review area, developing research question(s), defining inclusion criteria, executing a comprehensive search and study selection process, performing data extraction, analyzing and presenting data, and finalizing and publishing the scoping review protocol and report [27,28].

The research question was developed using the PCC. Population: Adolescent girls (aged 10–19) diagnosed with or at risk of eating disorders (e.g., anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, binge‐eating disorder). Concept: Biological (e.g., genetic predisposition), psychological (e.g., body image dissatisfaction), and sociocultural (e.g., social media influence) factors contributing to eating disorders. Context: Studies conducted in Iran or focusing on Iranian populations globally.

In this scoping review, eating disorders (EDs) were defined according to DSM‐5 diagnostic criteria, including anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, binge‐eating disorder, and Other Specified Feeding or Eating Disorder [29]. We included studies that: Used validated screening tools (EAT‐26 and EDDS questionnaires), clearly reported diagnostic criteria, and focused on clinical/subclinical ED presentations in adolescent populations.

The inclusion criteria were studies with at least one English or Persian abstract indexed in one of the mentioned databases, which pointed to factors affecting eating disorders based on selected keywords and their synonyms. No restrictions were defined regarding the year of publication and the language. Duplicate studies, opinion pieces, studies in which the full text was not available, and those that did not demonstrate the research results were excluded.

Search strategy to identify factors affecting eating disorders in Iranian adolescent girls.

Title/abstract screening: Two independent reviewers (M.G.H.‐J. and F.S.) assessed eligibility using predefined criteria. Full‐text review: Potentially relevant articles were evaluated against inclusion/exclusion criteria. Conflict resolution: Disagreements were resolved by a third reviewer.

Studies meeting all criteria were included in the final synthesis.

In the fourth step, a data graph form (TableS1in the Appendix) was used to extract data from each study. Thus, the first authors' names, titles, years, locations, types, participants, and study results were recorded in the data extraction form on Microsoft Word 2016 software. The summary forms for each article were completed. After both authors assessed all the articles, their evaluations were organized in a table. In cases where there was a disagreement between the two authors, the opinion of a third author was considered.

Finally, the data obtained from the previous step were classified using thematic analysis. Then, the results were entered in Table2and Figure2.

Factors affecting eating disorders in Iranian adolescent girls.

Factors affecting eating disorders in Iranian adolescent girls.

The quality of the studies included in the review was assessed with the Critical Appraisal Skills Program (CASP) framework, a well‐established tool to assess the methodological quality of the reviewed studies. The CASP checklist was chosen as it allows for a systematic appraisal of key components of study design, including the clarity and appropriateness of research aims, methodology, recruitment, data collection, and ethical considerations. Two reviewers independently applied the CASP criteria to each study, and disagreements were resolved through discussion or byconsulting a third reviewer if necessary. Of the 18 articles in the review, nine were rated as high quality, three as moderate quality, and six as low quality based on their CASP scores. Papers classified as low quality were excluded.

The scoping review process followed the PRISMA‐ScR guidelines (Figure1). From 270 records identified across five databases, 19 duplicates were removed. After screening 251 titles and 28 abstracts, 18 full‐text articles were assessed for eligibility. Ultimately, 12 studies met the inclusion criteria and were included in the synthesis. Exclusions were due to irrelevance to the research question.

The PRISMA flow diagram for the scoping review process.

The 16 included studies (see TableS1, Appendix) were original research articles conducted in provincial centers across Iran, with participants exclusively comprising female adolescents aged 13–17 years. Key trends revealed: A rising focus (2015–2023) on eating disorders (EDs) and their multifactorial influences in Iran. Data extraction followed the JBI Scoping Review Data Extraction Template, capturing: Study design, sample size, and geographical setting. Reported risk/protective factors (categorized below).

These factors were classified into social and individual categories. Social factors included the socioeconomic status of the household (with the two important factors of father's income and mother's education), social pressures (from family, peers, and media advertisements), and awareness (with the help of education and coping styles). Lifestyle (type of nutrition and mobility), psychological factors (such as anxiety or separation of parents), and body shape were among the aspects affecting the individual factor (Table2).

Figure2highlights two main categories of factors influencing eating disorders in Iranian adolescent girls: individual factors (lifestyle, psychological aspects, body shape, and menstrual age) and social factors (socioeconomic status, social pressures, and awareness). These factors collectively showcase the interplay between personal and environmental influences.

Eating disorders as a diverse, debilitating, and fatal psychiatric illness [41] are a global public health issue that has been less explored. This disorder is common in adolescents, leading to many medical and psychiatric problems [42]. Therefore, this scoping study was conducted to determine the factors affecting eating disorders in Iranian adolescent girls. The results showed that in the main category of social factors, socioeconomic status of the family, social pressures, and increased awareness, and the main category of individual factors, lifestyle and diet, psychological factors, body shape, and menstrual age were the most common subcategories leading to eating disorders in Iranian adolescent girls.

Mother's education in the family's socioeconomic status subcategory was one of the important issues that affected eating disorders in Iranian adolescent girls. In other words, with the increase in mothers' education, eating disorders in girls decrease [18,32]. However, the study by Sanaei et al. (2016) showed no relationship between eating attitude disorders in Iranian adolescent girls and their mothers' education [30]. Another study in Saudi Arabia (2023) showed that a mother's education was not associated with eating disorders [43]. Sundquist et al. (2016) also found a significant relationship between parents' education levels and eating disorders in adolescent girls [44]. The variance in results may be due to cultural and dietary differences among adolescent girls in different countries.

In studies, more attention has been paid to media advertising in the subcategory of social pressures. So, the media led to slim body advertisements in Iranian adolescent girls [33]. Dane et al.'s (2023) study found that social media use is a risk factor for eating disorders in young women [41]. Mento et al. (2021) found that the blogs Pro Ana and Pro Mia play a significant role in anorexia and bulimia in adolescent girls, causing body dissatisfaction and lower self‐esteem [45]. According to a study, social media causes eating disorders in women by inducing appearance anxiety and low self‐esteem [46]. Based on the evidence, adolescents have low social media literacy and poor recognition of eating disorder symptoms [47]. Adolescent girls are more prone to overeating because they are more exposed to aesthetic and social factors [48] Among which the media is an effective factor in ineffective eating behavior. It seems that improving media literacy, changing people′s acceptance of appearance, creating a positive body image, and planning social media content should be requirements of government programs.

Nutrition education was one of the other compelling factors in eating disorders in Iranian adolescent girls [49]. Nutrition education leads to the reduction of eating disorders in adolescent girls [34]. Hardman et al. (2015) [50], Celik et al. (2015) [51], and Bahadori Monfared et al. (2014) [52] showed that nutrition education for students has positive and significant changes in eating disorders. Students who participated in intervention programs for National Eating Disorders Awareness Week had higher levels of actual knowledge of university resources available for issues related to body image and eating disorder behaviors than students who did not participate in educational programs for Eating Disorders Awareness Week [53]. However, according to Wasuja et al.'s (2017) study, there was an inverse and nonsignificant relationship between the score of nutrition knowledge and eating attitude, which shows that nutrition knowledge does not entirely affect the eating attitude of adolescent girls and that various factors are influential [54]. Nutrition knowledge helps in creating new attitudes to improve nutritional habits. It enables sustainable behavioral changes, food intake, and other healthy habits. However, knowledge alone does not change behavior, and other influences can be more potent in consuming the correct type of diet and making food choices.

In the lifestyle subcategory, poor sleep quality was one of the most effective factors in eating disorders in adolescent girls [31]. According to the study of Almeida et al. (2023), overeating in adolescent boys and girls may be associated with poor sleep quality [55]. Rasouli et al. (2019) found that there was a statistically significant relationship between the sleep quality score and the risk of eating disorders in adolescent girls [56]. Yahia et al. (2017) showed that students with night eating disorders had shorter sleep duration and lower sleep quality [57]. According to another study in 2013, people with severe eating disorders often experience significant problems falling asleep and staying asleep [58]. Studies have shown that poor sleep may be associated with weight gain and delayed eating patterns called nocturnal eating syndrome (NES) [59,60]. It seems that low quality of sleep is a common problem among adolescents with eating disorders. Therefore, the necessary awareness should be given to teenagers in schools.

In the studies, the high level of stress caused by the current weight was one of the factors affecting eating disorders. In other words, an increase in stress was significantly related to an increase in the risk of eating disorders [31]. According to the study of Rosen et al. (1993), stress and psychological symptoms are related to eating disorders [61]. Stress also plays a significant role in night eating syndrome [31]. Another study showed that the increase in the prevalence of obesity leads to stress caused by weight and eating disorders among young people [62]. Padilla et al. (2019) showed that mental stress and automatic reactions were also higher in overweight adolescents than in normal‐weight adolescents [63]. In general, adolescent girls who have more psychiatric problems, such as anxiety and depression, may have negative feelings about their bodies. This can affect eating habits, lead to overeating, and affect anthropometric data [64,65]. It appears that some girls may be under pressure to conform to traditional gender roles, which often include maintaining an ideal weight that does not reflect their actual body weight. As a result, it causes stress that can lead to eating disorders.

One of the most frequent factors in studies was BMI. BMI influences weight control behaviors. Overweight girls engage in weight loss behaviors that may lead to eating disorders [66]. Eating disorders increase with increasing BMI [32,37,38,39]. Bohon et al. (2019) and Pereira et al. (2011) showed that binge eating is more common in adolescent girls and is associated with high BMI and body fat [67,68]. Other studies showed that the prevalence of obesity is higher in people with eating disorders [69,70]. However, Hughes et al.'s study (2019) showed that adolescent boys with obesity had a greater tendency to overeat and exercise excessively than their female counterparts [71]. Differences in results can be due to geographic and individual differences. The increase in obesity in people suffering from eating disorders can be due to inappropriate patterns of food intake [39] and also under the influence of genes that cause obesity and eating disorders, or physiological [72] of the body.

Menstrual age was another factor affecting eating disorders in adolescent girls. Adolescents suffering from eating disorders often experience irregular menstrual cycles due to unhealthy eating habits and poor nutritional intake [25]. Nadia Saldanha et al. (2022) showed that menstrual disorders may be seen in patients with bulimia nervosa (BN) [73]. According to the study of Daeie‐Farshbaf et al. (2021), the age of menstruation had a significant positive relationship with eating disorders [32]. However, Yannakoulia et al. (2004) [74] and Almuhlafi et al. (2018) [75] found that individuals with premature menstruation had higher scores of eating disorder behaviors. Differences in results can be due to individual and regional differences.

While previous studies have extensively examined eating disorders in Western populations, there is a paucity of research on non‐Western contexts, particularly in Iran. This study is among the first to comprehensively explore the sociocultural, psychological, and environmental determinants of eating disorders among Iranian adolescent girls, providing insights that are culturally specific and relevant to this population. A limitation of this study is that it did not include a review of articles from all databases.

This study showed that lifestyle and diet, psychological factors, body shape, and menstrual age in the category of individual factors, and family's socioeconomic status, social pressures, and increased awareness in the category of social factors are effective in eating disorders of Iranian adolescent girls. Lifestyle and food (poor sleep quality), psychological factors (high level of stress due to current weight), body appearance (body mass index), menstruation (menstrual age), socioeconomic status of the family (mother's education), social pressures (advertisements, media) Moreover, increasing awareness (nutrition education) was the most frequent factor that led to eating disorders in adolescent girls. Considering the importance of nutrition during adolescence and its impact on girls' future health, health policymakers must provide continuous and up‐to‐date education at the school and media levels.