This study investigated, mainly for quantitative99mTc explorations with a ring CZT SPECT system (GE HealthCare Starguide), the use of a narrow symmetric or a fully asymmetric energy window to reject scattered photons. The results were compared with the manufacturer’s post-acquisition dual energy window approach.

Two uniform and two cold and hot rod contrast cylindrical phantoms of various sizes were scanned with the Starguide system to acquire a very high number of counts. After rebinning the list-mode files for different energy windows, data were reconstructed with manufacturer’s iterative algorithm including attenuation correction, resolution recovery and eventually scatter correction, but without any regularization technique. Cold rod residual scatter fraction, hot and cold rod contrast recovery coefficient, coefficient of variation in phantom uniform areas and quantification accuracy using calibration with one of the homogeneous phantoms were, among others, computed.

Narrow symmetric photopeak-centred windows or fully asymmetric (≥ 140 keV) window led, on one hand, to decreased scatter residual fraction and sensitivity and, on the other hand, to increased noise, cold and hot recovery coefficients when compared to a standard 15–20% wide symmetric window. With a 6–7% wide symmetric window we obtained very comparable results to the dual energy window scatter correction used by the manufacturer for all measured parameters, but larger recovery coefficients especially for small hot objects in a cold background. Similar results were obtained with the fully asymmetric window at the cost of a higher noise level resulting from a drastic reduction of the sensitivity.

Narrow symmetric or asymmetric energy windows were found an interesting alternative to the standard dual energy window method to reject99mTc scattered photons. As a key feature, they allowed to avoid the erasing of small hot objects in a null background that was observed with the standard dual energy window scatter correction.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40658-025-00793-w.

Cadmium zinc telluride (CZT)-based detectors offer better energy resolution than the standard NaI scintillation detectors [1–4]. Nevertheless, manufacturers of SPECT systems equipped with this new detector generation still recommend 15–20% wide energy windows [4,5]. In their early software versions, they also used energy window-based scatter correction (SC) methods, namely dual (DEW) or triple (TEW) energy windows, that were validated for use with NaI systems [6–8]. However, the spectrum structures of the scattered photons are not similar for NaI and CZT [2,9]. Therefore, a simple transposition of the spectrum-based scatter correction techniques developed for NaI detectors to the new CZT systems is highly questionable [9].

Very recently, we extended our past comparative survey for quantitative99mTc imaging of SPECT-CT [10] to the three large field-of-view CZT-based SPECT systems available on the market [11]. The results seriously questioned the wide energy windows advocated by the manufacturers and even more so their scatter correction strategies, at least as they were at the time of the study. This was dramatically highlighted for the Starguide CZT ring systems by the absence, in the scatter corrected image, of the thinnest hot rods in a null background of our custom phantom [10,11], whereas they were well contrasted in the non-scatter corrected images [11].

For the Starguide system, the access to the list-mode rebinning software is free for any user. In the present study, Starguide data acquired in our previously mentioned comparative study [11] were reprocessed using the system's list-mode rebinning software to investigate the effects of narrower or asymmetric energy windows on scatter residual fraction, hot and cold contrast recovery coefficients, and quantification accuracy.

Three different cylinders were used to obtain four different phantoms (Table1) [10,11]. One phantom (NEMA) corresponded to the NEMA NU2-1994 attenuation and scatter correction accuracy phantom with its three air, water and Teflon inserts [12]. The second cylinder was used with custom cold and hot rod inserts (TOM) for contrast recovery evaluation (Figs.1,2) and filled with water without any object inside (XL) for calibration purposes. The third phantom (L) was a water-filled cylinder devoid of any other object, used as cross-check of the calibration factors when using phantoms of very different volumes (factor of 17 between L and XL). In TOM phantom (Figs.1,2), the largest cold and hot rods were located on the cylinder main axis whereas the other rods were equally angularly spaced with their centre at a distance of 50 mm from this axis. TOM also contained a 40 mm thick grid with square plastic elements of 22 mm side-spaced by 12 mm that was not further considered in this study. The three inserts of TOM left a uniform space of 65 mm height, and water could freely move across all parts, allowing to get an identical activity concentration in all hot areas of the phantom.

At start of acquisition, the activity was 330 MBq in L, 696 MBq in NEMA, 582 MBq in TOM and 789 MBq in XL. This corresponded within 10% to our standardized conditions (300 MBq in L and 740 MBq in the three large phantoms [10,11]), excepting in TOM where the activity was 22% lower due to a delayed acquisition start. Thorough shaking of the phantoms allowed to obtain a uniform distribution of activity in all hot compartments. The injected activities were carefully measured with the radionuclide calibrator (IBC Lite, Veenstra, Joure, The Netherlands) available in the department, and the time of measurement was recorded. This radionuclide calibrator undergoes daily and periodic quality controls as requested by the Belgian Federal Agency for Nuclear Control. In a national survey, these procedures have been shown to allow 5% accuracy for99mTc measurements [13].

The data of this study were recorded in list-mode with the ring CZT-based SPECT-CT Starguide (GE HealthCare, Haifa, Israel) fitted with its standard collimator and using the manufacturer standard acquisition software (version 1.003.407.0). Each phantom was scanned once. As TOM and XL were a little longer than the SPECT field of view, their upper part where screws are located was skipped. It was ensured that the scan procedure focussed as much as possible on the phantom. The heads positioning was guided by the built-in optical system. The focus mode [14] was enabled, with the focus percentage set to 100%. The number of rotations was left as automatically selected by the system. There were 6 rotations for the three large phantoms and 4 for the smaller L phantom. The heads sweep mode was continuous and the sweep step 2°. The pixel size was 2.46 mm. A standard low dose CT scan was also performed and used for attenuation correction.

List-mode data were rebinned in projections for six different main energy windows. Five were symmetric photopeak-centred (140 keV) and 20 (M20), 15 (M15), 10 (M10), 7 (M07) and 6 (M06) % wide, the sixth was fully asymmetric and 10% wide (MA), extending therefore from 140 to 154 keV. The first two widths were chosen because they are commonly used with NaI-based SPECT systems but also because of the manufacturer’s recommended widths. Rebinning was also performed for the 114–126 keV window (S10) used by the manufacturer as secondary window for scatter correction with DEW. The rebinning acquisition time used for all windows was the time necessary to get our standardized [10,11] total number of counts with NEMA, TOM and XL (100 Mcounts), and L (85 Mcounts) for the M20 rebinned projections. These times were 25 min for L, 35 min for NEMA and XL, 45 min for TOM. The real scan durations were a few minutes longer. This strategy of identical acquisition time for all energy windows allowed us to directly compare and quantify, for each phantom, the counts loss and the noise increase in the final reconstructed images due to the change of the energy window. Following GE Healthcare, no specific uniformity correction was required either for the symmetric windows or the asymmetric window.

The seven sets of rebinned projections were reconstructed with the manufacturer’s standard OSEM algorithm (software version 1.0.10.0), CT-based attenuation correction and resolution recovery for a total of 200 updates (10 subsets and 20 iterations). We previously observed that convergence was almost reached for this number of updates [11]. An additional set of images was also obtained using DEW scatter correction as implemented by the manufacturer. In particular, the weighting factor of the secondary window was not modifiable and the manufacturer’s default value was used. Eight sets of images were therefore available per phantom, seven without software scatter correction: M20img, M15img, M10img, M07img, M06img, MAimg and S10img; the eighth, DEWimg, was reconstructed with the manufacturer’s DEW scatter correction strategy. No pre-filter, post-filter, nor any noise reduction techniques were applied as in our previous studies [10,11].

The reported parameters were obtained by drawing regions of interest (ROI), on the reconstructed images, in the rods and in the uniform part of the phantoms using the methods described in detail elsewhere [10,11]. These ROIs were drawn on the nuclear medicine images but their positioning was checked on the CT images and eventually corrected. The mean number of counts (MNC) per pixel was obtained in each ROI. For the ROIs drawn in the uniform parts, the standard deviation (SDUniform) was also determined.

The free circulation of the radioactive liquid between all compartments of TOM allowed the use of this very simple parameter which did not need activity measurements.

RF, RCcold, RChot, and COV were expressed in percent.

M20 was taken as the reference because it is the main window used by the manufacturer in DEW scatter correction, as previously mentioned.

where k is a constant that is to be experimentally determined. In this study, we decided to use the k value which should lead to the same count subtraction than the manufacturer’s implementation of DEW. To this end, the above equation was first applied to the MNC values in the uniform parts of the four phantoms. It was found to be k = 1.10 ± 0.01. The above equation with this k = 1.1 was then applied to the MNC of ROIs drawn in the inserts of NEMA and TOM. Finally, PostReconDEW RF in NEMA and RC in TOM were computed as described above.

The images obtained with the largest and narrowest symmetric energy windows are illustrated in Fig.2together with the images obtained with the manufacturer implementation of DEW for scatter correction. Figure3illustrates the variations of R20 and COV in the uniform part of the four phantoms for the six main energy windows, the secondary window, and when using manufacturer’s DEW. In this figure, the results are given in L and XL for ROI − 2 whose borders are far away from the phantom walls in order to avoid any effect of the spatial resolution. The R20 values for the other ROIs in L and XL can be found in Additional file 1. The number of reconstructed counts systematically decreased when reducing the width of the symmetric window; for the narrowest windows, M06 and M07, the total number of reconstructed counts was only about 60–65% of the counts obtained with M20. A very similar reduction is observed when using DEW as implemented by the manufacturer. The reduction was more drastic for MA window with only about 30% of the counts obtained with M20. COV followed an inverse trend and increased when going from M20 to M06 and DEW. COV for DEW was very close to COV obtained with M07 and M06. MA was characterised by the largest COV with values about twice those observed with M20.

Decreasing the width of the photopeak-centred energy window from 20 down to 6% led to the following observations. In NEMA, RF (Fig.4) increased in the air insert and decreased in the water and Teflon inserts, reaching a very low value in this hard insert for the narrowest windows. In TOM, RCcold (Fig.5) and RChot (Fig.6) increased. It was also observed that RF, RCcold and RChot had generally almost identical values for M06 and M07.

Using MA, RF was larger than with M06 in air but lower in water and Teflon (Fig.4). RC of the largest (≥ 12 mm) cold rods (Fig.5) and of all hot rods (Fig.6) were equal or superior to the one obtained with any symmetric window.

With the manufacturer’s DEW scatter correction, RF (Fig.4) in water and Teflon inserts were the lowest and in the air insert ranked the second highest just below MA. RCcold were the highest for all but the smallest cold rods (Fig.5) and largely the lowest for the hot rods (Fig.6), reaching a null value when rod diameter was below 13 mm.

PostReconDEW RF (Fig.4) was slightly positive in air but largely negative in water and Teflon inserts. PostReconDEW RCold (Fig.5) and RChot (Fig.6) were superior to their DEWimg counterparts in all but the thinnest rods.

The calibration factor depended slightly on the phantom and ROI used (Additionnal File 2). They generally were the highest for the smallest ROI, the lowest for ROI0 and were always almost identical for the three ROIs larger than the phantom physical size.

Finally, the quantification error (Fig.7) in absolute value systematically decreased with the width of the symmetric energy window. It was the lowest with MA when L was used as calibration or activity measurement phantom, but almost as poor as with M20 for NEMA when using the calibration factor recorded with XL. The quantification accuracy (in absolute value) with manufacturer’s DEW was comparable to the accuracy with M06 or MA depending on the phantom pair and the ROI size in the calibration phantom considered.

For the recently introduced CZT detectors in SPECT, the use of similar width energy windows to those used with NaI scintillators is highly questionable with respect to the better energy resolution provided by these direct detectors [2–4,18]. Likewise, a simple copy and paste of energy window-based SC techniques developed for the NaI detectors can be regarded with suspicion in light of the aforementioned better energy resolution but also the structurally different scatter spectra between the two types of detectors [2,9].

As mentioned previously, SC as implemented by the manufacturers is not optimal and should be reconsidered [9,19]. In our previous study [11], we observed lower recovery coefficients for hot rods in a cold background with SC than without SC when imaging with the new full ring or dual-head CZT SPECT systems. Moreover, with two of the three CZT systems compared, namely GE Healthcare Discovery and Starguide, the thinnest hot rods were surprisingly erased from the final images when the manufacturer’s DEW was applied to correct for scatter.

The energy resolution at 140 keV of actual NaI detectors used in SPECT systems is about 9–10% full width at half-maximum, and energy windows of 15–20% width are usually adopted. As their energy resolution was measured to be 5–6% [4,20,21], simple reasoning would therefore lead to 8–10% width for the energy windows used with CZT detectors. A similar suggestion was already explored for a CZT dual head system [18]. A reduction of the energy width was the first approach of the present study. As the scatter spectrum of CZT is structurally different from NaI and with fewer scatter photons detected above the photopeak [2,9], an asymmetric energy window starting at 140 keV and extending up to 154 keV was the second approach of this study. The third approach was to apply the standard DEW technique used by the manufacturer for SC, but post-reconstruction whereas the manufacturer’s software performed the scatter correction in the iterative loop of the reconstruction. The manufacturer’s default, at the time of this investigation, energy windows (M20 and S10) and k value (see above DEW equation) were used. The residual fraction and recovery coefficients were computed using the DEW equation from the images reconstructed independently with attenuation correction and resolution recovery for M20 and S10 windows, and compared to their values obtained from the DEW images directly provided by the manufacturer’s software. This last approach was inspired from the DEW SC implemented by the manufacturer of the competitor ring CZT SPECT system, namely Spectrum Dynamics Veriton, at the time of this study: the images obtained from the photopeak main window and the scatter window are separately reconstructed and subtracted using the above DEW equation [11].

As expected, the reduction of the width of the main energy window or using a fully asymmetric one resulted in a decrease in the number of reconstructed counts and a concomitant increase of the noise in the reconstructed images for these data, corresponding to an identical acquisition time (Fig.3). The manufacturer’s scatter correction with DEW resulted in images with reconstructed counts and noise levels similar to those obtained with M06 or M07. The DEW technique is widely accepted for clinical use, therefore the noise level recorded with M06 or M07 should not be an obstacle to their use for clinical applications.

In water and Teflon inserts of NEMA (Fig.4), RF decreased with the main energy window width. A still lower RF was observed with MA and manufacturer’s DEW related to the lowest RF. These observations complied with the photon energy loss during Compton interaction and the reduction of the energy window extension in the low energy part of the spectrum. In the air insert the trend was reversed, with the narrowest symmetric windows and MA showing the largest RF. DEW led to RF in air between those obtained with M06 and MA. An important decrease of RF in water and Teflon but an increase in air when using scatter correction was previously observed with NaI as well as CZT-based detectors [10,11] for recordings made with the same NEMA NU2-1994 phantom.

In perfect agreement with RF behaviour observed in water and Teflon inserts of NEMA, RCcold (Fig.5) of the largest (≥ 12 mm) plastic rods of TOM increased when reducing the width of the symmetric window; this ranked the second highest with the asymmetric window and was the highest when performing the manufacturer’s DEW scatter correction. Nevertheless, the differences between M06, M07 and MA were small and the noise could have overridden these differences, especially in the case of the thinnest rods (≤ 10 mm) where the number of pixels in the ROI was small. An increase of RCcold with rod diameter was clearly evidenced (Fig.5) with possible saturation above 16 mm. However, a difference in image texture has been reported between the phantom periphery and central parts with this CZT ring SPECT [3,11] whose origin could not be defined. The SPECT resolution was also found to be about 1 mm larger at the centre of the field of view than the periphery [4]. The small RC decrease between the off-centre 20 mm rod and the central 25 mm rod could be related to these observations. The RCcold values observed for this ring CZT SPECT system with M20 and M15 or with DEW scatter correction were in the same range that RCcold obtained with NaI-based dual-head cameras or other CZT-based SPECT systems [10,11].

RChot (Fig.6) also increased when the width of the main symmetric window decreased. The highest RChot values were obtained with MA whereas they were the lowest, being equal to zero for most (≤ 13 mm) of the hot rods, when images were scatter corrected with the manufacturer’s DEW. This indicated a probable scatter over-correction by DEW. RChot also seemed independent on rod size for diameters above 6–8 mm, a behaviour quite different from the NaI dual-head systems [10,11]. Under the hypothesis of a classical partial volume effect on contrast recovery in hot cylindrical objects [22,23], this would indicate a full width at half maximum resolution in the range 3–4 mm (6–8 mm divided by 2). This estimation is in good agreement with the 3.6–4.1 mm SPECT resolution recently measured in scatter medium for this system [4].

In summary, the reduction of the photopeak energy window width had the expected results of a lower residual fraction in water and Teflon inserts of the NEMA phantom, an enhanced contrast recovery in both cold and hot rods of the TOM phantom, a decrease in sensitivity coupled to an increase of the noise in the phantom uniform parts. The decrease of RF and RC were not linear and seemed to saturate at 6–7% window width. This would indicate that scatter rejection by a photopeak-centred energy window is maximal with a 6–7% window width.

The asymmetric energy window targets the part of the spectrum where detected photons are the least likely to have scattered [2,9,18]. With this window, RF were slightly lower and RC slightly higher or equal to the values obtained with the 6% symmetric energy window. This reinforced the above conclusion that a large part of the scattered photons was discarded with a 6–7% wide photopeak-centred window, and that this is the best result for scatter rejection that can be obtained with energy windowing for this CZT detector.

DEW as implemented by the manufacturer behaved very strangely in this system. The thinnest hot rods disappeared from the scatter corrected images and the recovery coefficients for the larger rods were very low, and much lower than without the scatter correction. Moreover, the 3D views of Fig.2shows that the largest hot rods seemed to be eroded from periphery to centre in radial direction and were no more uniform in axial direction. This strange behaviour could be, at least partially, linked to the presence of hot areas (cold rods and grid) on either side of the rods [11].

The PostReconDEW RF (Fig.4) and RC (Figs.5and6) differed notably from those obtained from the DEWimg. Largely negative RF values were obtained in water and Teflon (Fig.4) showing a probable overestimation of scatter in these large cold rods. An overestimation of scatter in cold areas could also explain the highest RCcold observed for all but the thinnest cold rod when using DEW (Fig.5). The PostReconDEW recovery coefficients in the hot rods (Fig.6) reached values similar to those of M06img-M07img, again with the exception of the two thinnest rods. DEW is not a fully correct scatter correction technique. Moreover, the tailing should be taken into account [9] and this was not the case in the manufacturer’s software version used in this study. PostReconDEW results shows nevertheless that the hot rods should be present in the DEWimg contrary to what was observed. We only have access to the manufacturer’s software in standard user-mode, which precluded deeper analysis of the origin of the absence of most hot rods from the DEWimg.

Taken together, the results obtained with M06-M07, MA and PostReconDEW showed that a narrow 6–7% wide energy window could be used to efficiently reject scatter with this CZT detector when imaging with99mTc, while obtaining a final noise level very similar to the one observed when using a wider energy window and the standard DEW technique to correct for scatter. Moreover, the noise level could perhaps be reduced by the fusion of M06 and MA in a 136–154 keV (asymmetric 12%) window, as scattered photons are almost absent from the CZT spectrum above 140 keV [2,18].

Narrow windows will still contain scattered photons and an additional SC technique would remain necessary even with a single peak emitter like99mTc. However, thanks to a reduced scatter fraction in these windows compared to the conventional wider windows, the accuracy of the scatter correction technique would be less crucial. Therefore, the energy window-based scatter correction techniques [24], among them DEW or TEW, should not necessarily be discarded for CZT detectors. However, they need to be adapted and retuned according to the properties of CZT [9] that differ from NaI, for which these techniques were developed and validated. Such an adaptation has been for example proposed and shown successful for a cardiac dedicated CZT-based system [9]. Monte Carlo simulations would certainly also be very helpful, and efforts to develop Monte Carlo simulations of CZT SPECT systems [25] should be encouraged and supported.

Likely due to ease of implementation, until now SC in clinical SPECT was mainly performed using energy window-based techniques [24]. Now, SPECT is most often one component of a hybrid SPECT-CT system. Therefore, SC using CT data and the related tissue information should be considered as a viable alternative to energy window-based SC [24]. Effective scatter source estimation (ESSE) was, for example, used successfully by one manufacturer [10,24] for a NaI-based SPECT-CT system. The scatter point kernels used in ESSE should be redefined because of the specific characteristics of the CZT scatter spectrum. Analytical photon distribution interpolated (APDI) also uses tissue density. APDI was compared to TEW for SC in177Lu imaging with NaI SPECT, and was found to perform better in soft tissues [19].

In the course of this study, we were informed that a revised DEW implementation was under study for this ring CZT SPECT system by the manufacturer. For this, narrower main and secondary windows will be used and the correction will remain applied during the reconstruction in the iterative loop. We shared our list-mode files with the manufacturer and were informed that this new DEW implementation led to results approaching those obtained in this study with the narrowest windows and that all hot rods were present in the scatter corrected images. During the review process of this manuscript, we learned that the manufacturer had started the release of this new DEW implementation and we hope to have in the next future the opportunity to reconstruct our data with this modified software.

While this study was conducted with one particular ring CZT SPECT-CT, it is highly likely that its general conclusion on the use of a narrow main energy window could be extended to other CZT SPECT systems available on the market. This study focused on99mTc, but multi-peak emitters such as123I,111In,177Lu, to name a few, should be the subject of additional studies. Indeed, the down-scatter from the higher energy peaks contaminates the low energy windows [24]. Therefore, the narrowing of the energy window cannot successfully reject all the down-scattered photons, and an additional scatter correction strategy remains necessary. This study used OSEM without any noise reduction techniques. This was possible thanks to the high number of recorded counts. Before its transposition in clinics, complementary works on the use of a noise reduction technique would most probably be needed. This was however considered out of the scope of this methodology-oriented work. One of the reasons is that the technique parameters should generally be specifically tuned for each exploration type.

A narrow symmetric or a fully asymmetric energy window was shown to discard scattered99mTc photons from final reconstructed images in a way that was at least as efficient as the standard dual energy window with two wide energy windows recommended by the manufacturer of the ring CZT SPECT system at the time of this investigation. In particular, this window strategy avoided the absence of the smallest hot objects observed in images produced with the dual energy window scatter correction. These conclusions are very likely to also apply to other CZT SPECT systems present on the market today, but should not be directly extended to other isotopes, especially the multi-peak emitters.

The authors would like to thank Med Dr Gaetan Letesson, head of the nuclear medicine department of CHR Citadelle Liège, for providing access to the ring CZT SPECT system used in this work. The help of Dr Martina Stella (GE Healthcare Benelux) and Mr Vincent Bartholomé (GE Healthcare Benelux) during data acquisition and for the rebinning of list mode files is gratefully acknowledged. We are grateful to the reviewers whose detailed and critical reading and very constructive remarks have undoubtedly led to improvements of this report.

DEW scatter corrected data obtained from the reconstructed images of M20 and S10 windows.