This study seeks to determine incidence, comorbidities and drivers for new HIV infections to develop, test and validate a risk prediction model for screening for new cases of HIV.

The study has two components: a cross-sectional study to develop the prediction model using the HIV dataset from the Kenya AIDS and STI Control Programme and a 15-month prospective study for the validation of the model. Inferential analysis will be conducted using algorithms that perform best in disease prediction: Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) and Multilayer Perceptron. Model sensitivity and specificity will be examined using the receiver operating characteristic curve, and performance will be evaluated using metrics: accuracy, precision, recall and F1 score.

The study obtained ethical approval (JKU/ISERC/02321/1421) from the Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology Ethical and Research Board and a research licence (NACOSTI/P/24/414749) from the National Commission for Science, Technology and Innovation.

Existing HIV risk-scoring functions are developed using historical data with a myriad of quality challenges.

This study proposes a cross-sectional study to develop the risk-scoring function and a prospective study for the validation of the model considering data quality, performance and generalisability of the model.

This study aims to identify gaps in HIV screening and health systems to inform targeted interventions.

A recent review9identified a few studies that attempted to develop HIV risk-scoring functions using retrospective study designs. One10compared the performance of eight machine learning algorithms, and results had limitations such as a small sample size comprised of imbalanced classes. Also,7 11utilised large secondary datasets (87 000 and 83 000, respectively) characterised by a high degree of missing data12and model performance was inconclusive due to the fact that the dataset was self-reported.

This study seeks to determine the incidence, comorbidities and drivers for new HIV infections among persons 15 years and above attending outpatient clinics at selected hospitals in Kenya and develop, test and validate a risk-scoring function for screening for new HIV infections. Even though this study uses a retrospective dataset for the development of the ML model, we are planning to ensure that the dataset used in this study is both representative and of good quality. Unbalanced data results in skewed over-fitted models that are ungeneralisable, thus resulting in high recall. Therefore, our study aims to bridge these gaps in order to develop a predictive model for HIV screening that enhances performance while minimising low recall.

The first component of this study is a cross-sectional study for the development of a risk prediction model using the HIV dataset from the Kenya AIDS and STI Control Programme (NASCOP). The second component is a 15-month prospective study comprised of 1308 participants who meet the inclusion criteria for the validation of the predictive model.

The study population for the development of the HIV risk prediction model is comprised of records of patients who had sought HIV services in Kenya.

The sampled records will be balanced to ensure that male and female clients aged 15 years and above with no more than 10% missing information are sufficiently represented.

Participants must be able to communicate in English or Kiswahili.

Verbal assent from adolescents aged 15–17 years old.

Informed written consent from adult participants and caregivers to adolescents.

Previous use of pre-exposure prophylaxis or post-exposure prophylaxis services.

Inability to participate in the interview because of sickness or cognitive impairment.

The appropriate sample size will be determined considering the desired level of precision, confidence and variability. Therefore, this study will consider all the 88 284 records in the HIV dataset of clients 15 years of age and above.

A stratified sampling of male and female participants will be considered to ensure that the dataset is sufficiently balanced. For the development study, the dataset will be split as 80% for training the prediction function and 20% for testing the trained model.

Data for the development of the risk prediction model have been obtained from NASCOP after making a formal request. The data have been shared in three comma-separated value files.

Study participants will be subjected to a 10-min interview by research assistants using interviewer-administered questionnaire. The prospective validation study flow diagram is as shown infigure 1.

The output of this study will be used in the identification of potential new cases for HIV in primary healthcare, thus reducing costs that come with the universal screening of HIV. The results from this study will be submitted for publication in a peer-reviewed journal.

We appreciate Dr K. Muthoka for support during the process of acquiring data from NASCOP.