Precise control over the charge-state of radical molecules on surfaces is essential for engineering correlated electronic states in nanoscale architectures. Here, we demonstrate the supramolecular assembly of tetraazapyrene-based radicals on superconducting Pb(111), where anionic species formed through charge transfer from the substrate coexist with their neutral counterparts. These radicals can be dischargedviacapacitive coupling with the local electric field of the scanning probe tip, producing peaks (dips) in tunneling (force) spectra. Spatial mapping further reveals cascade discharging events and electron correlation between adjacent molecules of the lattice. Through tip-induced debromination, we achieve irreversible discharge enabling the creation of defect patterns. Our results establish a pathway towards gate-tunable spin arrays with ultra-high areal density, leveraging charge-state control and emergent electron correlations in molecular assemblies.

We demonstrate a gate-tunable electron spin superlatticeviasupramolecular assembly of tetraazapyrene radicals on Pb(111), enabling their controlled discharge and providing a scalable platform to study correlated electron and quantum phenomena.

Electron spin lattices on superconductors offer a promising platform for quantum technologies. They can serve as qubits in quantum computing or provide a basis for exploring exotic quantum phases, such as spin liquids and topological superconductivity. However, constructing and scaling up these artificial lattices while maintaining precise gate tunability remains a significant experimental challenge. In our work, we demonstrate the supramolecular assembly of 4,5,9,10-tetrabromo-1,3,6,8-tetraazapyrene (TBTAP) molecules on a superconducting Pb(111) surface, forming a compact electron (spin) superlattice consisting of coexisting neutral TBTAP and singly charged TBTAP˙−species. Using tunneling and force spectroscopy, we identify the signature of a discharging event in the charged TBTAP˙−molecules. This event is triggered by capacitive coupling between the molecular charge state and the local electric field from the STM/AFM tip, enabling a controlled transition from the anionic to the neutral state as a function of the applied tip voltage. Our results demonstrate a new pathway for the bottom-up construction of gate-tunable, high-density spin networks, offering a powerful platform for investigating electron correlation effects and emergent quantum phenomena at the molecular scale.

Interacting electrons on a lattice are ubiquitous and can develop strong quantum correlations, which are at the basis of many intriguing many-body ground states such as unconventional superconductivity,1metal–insulator transitions, topological phases,2–4or magnetism.5Periodic arrangements of quantum dots (QD), whose electron (spin) occupancy can be tuned by an external electric field, can host such correlated states due to the competition between on-site Coulomb interactionU(the energy to add/remove an electron to the QD) and hopping amplitudetdescribed by the Hubbard model. Various experimental platforms have been explored for realizing such fermionic Hubbard systems in optical lattices,6,7moiré superlattices,1–4,8,9and semiconductor quantum dot arrays.5,10,11Engineering correlated states must combine both an atomic-scale positioning of QDs into a well-defined lattice with a fine tuning of their charge-state individually and independently.12,13However, upscaling these artificial lattices while keeping a fine control over the gate tunability still remains a challenging experimental task.

Here, we report on the formation of an extended array of radical TBTAP˙−molecules (Fig. 1a) on superconducting Pb(111) using low temperature STM and density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Upon adsorption, neutral and singly-charged TBTAP molecules coexist in the assembly arranged into adjacent rows of charged (c) and neutral (n) molecules. Using differential conductance measurements dI/dV(V) and force-voltage spectroscopy Δf(V), we show the signature of the discharging event of the charged TBTAP˙−molecules triggered by a capacitive coupling with the electric field of the STM/AFM tip, allowing a transition from anionic to neutral state as a function of tip voltage. Spatial mapping reveals Coulomb rings centered on each molecular unit due to their electrical discharge. The rings evolve to a fused pattern at higher gating voltages, which is the manifestation of cascade discharge between the molecules and the electron correlation in the superlattice.

A Pb(111) single crystal was cleaned by several sputtering and annealing cycles in ultra high vacuum. TBTAP molecules34were sublimated in ultra-high vacuum (UHV) from a quartz crucible heated at 180 °C onto the sample kept at about 250 K.

The experiments were performed using a low-temperature STM/AFM microscope operated atT= 4.8 K in ultrahigh vacuum (p ≈ 1 × 10−10mbar). The force sensor is a tuning fork based on a qPlus design35operated in the frequency-modulation mode (resonance frequencyf0≈ 25 kHz, spring constantk≈ 1800 N m−1, quality factorQ≈ 14 000 and oscillation amplitudeA≤ 1 Å). The bias voltage was applied to the tip. STM images are taken in constant-current mode. AFM measurements were acquired in constant-height mode atV= 0 V. The tip mounted to the qPlus sensor consists in a 25 μm-thick PtIr wire, shortened and sharpened with a focused ion beam. A clean and sharp Au tip was then prepared at low temperature by repeated indentations into the surface. Scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) data acquired at low temperature with the lock-in technique at 4.8 K (Amod= 15 meV,f= 531 Hz).

Differential conductance spectroscopy dI/dV(V) spectra were acquired with superconducting tips at the University of Basel with a custom-made Joule-Thomson STM/AFM microscope. The microscope equipped with a 2.2 T dry magnet operates at 1.0 K with a SPECS-Nanonis RC5e electronics. STM tips were made from a 250 μm-thick Pb wire, which were sputtered for 2–3 hours in UHV to remove its native oxide. A superconducting tip was then prepared by repeated indentations into a clean Pb surface until a good superconducting gap is obtained. dI/dVspectra are acquired with the lock-in amplifier technique using a modulation of 610 Hz and a modulation amplitude of 15–50 μeV.

DFT calculations for Pb(111)-adsorbed molecules were performed using the Quickstep code36within the CP2K package,37employing a mixed Gaussian-planewave basis. The revPBE38density functional was employed in all calculations together with the Grimme-D3 correction39for van-der-Waals interactions. We used a molecularly optimized shorter range double zeta atomic basis40together with Goedecker–Teter–Hutter pseudopotentials,41employing 4, 5, 4, 1 and 7 valence electrons for Pb, N, C, H and Br respectively. Calculations with single molecules were performed on 6 × 6 supercells of the Pb(111) surface slab with 4 atomic layers. Calculations for the assembled monolayer were performed in the supercell with lattice parameters 12.125 Å × 19.489 Å and a cell angle of 98.948° with 4 atomic layers as used in our previous study.42Structures were relaxed until forces converged below 4.5 × 10−4Hartree per Bohr. While charging of the TBTAP molecules occurred spontaneously, this charging was controlled by inducing local magnetic moments on atoms of the different molecules.

TBTAP molecules were sublimated on a Pb(111) surface kept below room temperature (T≈ 250 K) leading to the formation of large molecular islands (Fig. 1c). STM imaging reveals a densely packed rectangular lattice showing alternating bright and dark rows (see inset ofFig. 1c). These two contrasts are observed across different rows, labeled as c (dashed line) and n (dotted line), which corresponds to rows of charged and neutral molecules, respectively.42Fig. 1bdepicts the experiment, which aims at the controlled discharge of individual TBTAP˙−molecules (represented by red and blue dots/arrows) by the local electric field of the probing tip. The discharge is obtained by applying a potential difference between tip and sample such as the sample voltageVsis greater than the threshold voltageVThreshrequired for the molecule's discharge. As we described in a recent work,42DFT calculations conclude that molecules self-assemble through hydrogen-hydrogen and halogen–halogen bonding between the peripheral Br atoms and the tetraazapyrene moieties (Table 1). The densely packed rectangular structure is in registry with the Pb lattice (Fig. 1e) with lattice parametersa1= 12.12 Å andb1= 19.48 Å. These values are comparable to the experimental STM images with lattice parametersa1= 12.3 Å andb1= 18.2 Å. The two TBTAP charge states are observed by STM imaging as dark and bright contrasts for charged (c) and neutral (n) molecules, which are systematically located in rows labeled by dotted lines and dashed lines inFig. 1. The charged array is also confirmed by DFT calculations ofFig. 1e, in which anionic TBTAP˙−are identified by their non-zero spin density.

Ramping up the voltage between tip and sample leads to the increase of the local electric field of the tip, which shifts the chemical potential of the substrateμsby ΔEtowards the SOMO level (Fig. 2c). WhenVs≥V−→0, the SOMO level aligns withμsand becomes empty by the transfer of its electron back to the substrate (black arrow inFig. 2c). As a result, the molecule undergoes a charge-state transition from the anionic TBTAP˙−to the neutral TBTAP0counterpart at the threshold voltageV−→0. The constant-height dI/dV(X,Y) map ofFig. 2bacquired at constant positive sample voltageVssuch asVs≥V−→0then shows the discharge as dots/rings of high conductance centered to the position of the TBTAP˙−molecule. The center of the ring also pinpoints the position of TBTAP˙−molecules (see red ring) where the charge was located prior to its removal. Conversely, the application of negative sample voltage may induce the charging of neutral TBTAP whenVs≤V0→−withV0→−is the threshold voltage to induce the charge-state transition from neutral to anionic. This is obtained by shifting the substrate chemical potentialμsas described inFig. 2f, in order to fill the LUMO orbital with an electron from the substrate.

The appearance of “Coulomb” rings is described inFig. 2g and hfor anionic TBTAP˙−, respectively. Each charge molecule behaves as a Coulomb-blockaded molecular quantum dot with on-site Coulomb interaction energyU. The paraboloid centered to the QD represents the discharge. When the tip scans the molecule at constant-heightZforVs=V2, an increase of the tunneling current occurs once the tip crosses the paraboloid. Accordingly, dI/dV(X,Y) maps exhibit a ring centered to the molecule (Fig. 2h), whereby the diameter depends onVs. This is represented by the series of concentric rings inside the paraboloid shown inFig. 2g. Inside the ring (Fig. 2h), the tip field induces the molecule's discharge by one electron (regione= 1), while outside the ring no charge is being removed (e= 0). Note finally that neutral TBTAP0molecules have no electrons sensitive to such discharging process observed for positive sample voltages. Thus, no such rings are visible at their positions in dI/dVmaps.

To shed light into the capacitive character of the discharge process, we employed dI/dV(V) and Δf(V) spectroscopic measurements as a function of the tip-sample separationZ.Fig. 3a and bshow an exemplary STM image of the assembly atVs= 1.2 V and the corresponding constant-height dI/dVmaps. Rings and dots of high conductance are unambiguously resolved centered on each TBTAP˙−molecule of c rows. The constant-height Δf(X,Y) map ofFig. 3cacquired at the same sample location reveals similar ring features, which demonstrates the successful control of the molecule's discharge using an AFM.27,43,45–47The rings have a dark contrast as compared to the gray background in the AFM image,27,43,45–47because discharging events are associated to a dip in Δf(V) curves (Fig. 3e) in contrast to a peak in tunneling spectra (Fig. 3d).

Fig. 3d and eshow the typical signature of the discharge denotedV* in a series of dI/dV(V) and Δf(V) spectra for increasing tip-sample separationsZ. In dI/dV(Δf(V)) spectra, the discharge is observed as a peak (dip) marked by an arrow. Their positions in voltage correspond to the discharge threshold (V−→0) and varies between 0.8 up to 1.3 V. By gradually increasing the tip-sample separationZ, we observe that these occurrences shift towards higher voltage values in both dI/dVand Δf(V) spectra. To better visualize this dependency,Fig. 3fshows a plot ofV* extracted from the dI/dV(red) and Δf(V) (blue) spectra as a function of the relative tip-heightZ. To extract the dips in Δf(V), we first extracted the local contact potential difference (LCPD) by fitting a parabola (red curve),21which was then subtracted from raw data as described in ref.43. Using a Gaussian function, we then extracted the voltage positions of each discharging event. The red and blue lines inFig. 3fare fits of both tunneling and force datasets. They clearly show the linear progression ofV* as a function ofZ, in agreement with the capacitive character of the discharge process induced by the tip field. Although the relative tip heightZdetermined by the STM setpoint is identical for both datasets, the fits are laterally shifted in voltage by ≈ 20 mV with respect to each other. We think that this arises from the oscillation of the sensor (Aosc≈ 50 pm) needed for force spectroscopic measurements, which induces an effectiveZoffset as compared to the dI/dV(V) measurements. Indeed, despite using the same tip-sample separationZ, the Δfmap ofFig. 3cshows slightly larger Coulomb rings as compared to those of the dI/dVmap.

We next investigated the spatial distribution of Coulomb rings within the supramolecular assembly as a function of the voltageVsin a series of dI/dVmaps (Fig. 4). As schematized inFig. 4a, the discharge of neighboring TBTAP˙−molecules acting as quantum dots follows a voltage-dependent paraboloid shape centered to each molecule.Fig. 4bshows an experimental dI/dV(X,V) cross-section acquired along two radical molecules of a c row. The dashed lines mark the positionsXof the molecule's center, relative to which parabolas are centered. The gray line marks the line-shape of the discharge voltageV*, which value depends on the lateral position of the tip with respect to the molecules. The parabola branches linearly expand asVsincreases and fuse at aboutVs=V2= 1.2 V when the tip is located between neighboring molecules. At this crossing point, the tip discharges the two molecules at the same time. This observation is similar to the work by Liet al.showing in dI/dVmaps complex Coulomb patterns from correlated electrons in WS2/WSe2moiré superlattices.8The electron correlation is schematized inFig. 4aby considering a non-null hopping amplitudetbetween two coupled Coulomb-blockaded molecular QD with on-site Coulomb interactionU. AtVs≥V2, the parabola shown with plain lines merge implying a cascade discharge, which can be visualized in two-dimensional dI/dV(X,Y) maps in the forms of fused Coulomb rings (depicted in red inFig. 4a).

Fig. 4d–fshow a series of dI/dV(X, Y) maps at various voltages at the area shown in the topographic STM image ofFig. 4c. ForVs= 1 V, a periodic pattern of dots starts to appear at molecules ofcrows. IncreasingVsfrom 1.15 V to 1.3 V (Fig. 4e and f) leads to the appearance of additional rings as well as an increase of their diameters. AtVs= 1.15 V, rings start to overlap as their radii are almost equal to the intermolecular distance. ForVs=V2= 1.3 V (Fig. 4f), the dI/dVmap shows the coalescence of these rings alongcrows. This observation differs from patterns with intersecting rings as expected from a non-interacting scenario, similar to that for the case of anionic TBTAP˙−on Ag(111).19Thus, it represents an experimental manifestation of the electron correlation in the supramolecular assembly.

ForVs≥ 1.3 V, the two-dimensional Coulomb superlattice emerges in the dI/dVmap. We used 2D-fast Fourier transform (2D-FFT) to compare the rectangular supramolecular lattice of parameters 1/a1= 0.81 nm−1(a1= 12.3 Å) and 1/b1= 0.53 nm−1(b1= 18.9 Å) (red arrows ofFig. 4c and g) with the charge superlattice of 1/a2= 0.25 nm−1(a2= 40 Å) andb2= 0.5 nm−1(b2= 20 Å) rotated by 45° (blue arrows ofFig. 4f and h). We infer this charge superlattice to a slight modulation of the surface potential induced by the commensurability of the molecular lattice with the substrate.

To probe ring fusing between neighboring c rows, gating voltagesVsgreater than 1.5 V should be employed for the dI/dVmaps. However, we found out that such high voltages also lead to cleavage of the C-Br bonds of the TBTAP molecule,48making this experiment inconclusive. We next used this controlled tip chemistry protocol to fabricate single defects in the supramolecular lattice.Fig. 5a and bshow a typical topographic STM image of the molecular network and the corresponding constant-height dI/dVmap atVs= 1.0 V revealing the charged superlattice. A short voltage pulse of about 10–100 ms (Vs= 2.0 V) was applied at the red dot ofFig. 5a, which induces a change of contrast in the subsequent STM image ofFig. 5c. The corresponding constant-height dI/dVmap atVs= 1.0 V (Fig. 5d) confirms the disappearance of one Coulomb ring as pointed out by an yellow arrow. As a result of this modification, the electron (spin) of the pristine TBTAP˙−molecule is irreversibly removed turning the molecule into a neutral state. This is also confirmed by comparing dI/dVpoint-spectra (Fig. 5f) before (red) and after (blue) the tip pulse, showing the disappearance of the YSR sub-gap states at ±εenergies originally present in the TBTAP˙−molecule. The comparison ofFig. 5b and cnear the pulse position also reveals that few discharge rings appear smaller than before the voltage pulse. We think that this phenomenon results from the controlled creation of such a defect within the charge superlattice, which may modify the modulation of the surface potential defined by the molecular lattice on Pb. This can influence the discharge threshold of the neighboring radical molecule, leading to a decrease in the size of the ring in dI/dVmaps.

Fig. 5gshows the DOS of TBTAP˙−obtained by DFT calculations. At 1.8 eV aboveEF, the presence of C-Br states indicates that splitting off one of the Br atoms from the tetraazapyrene backbone is induced by tunneling into them during the voltage pulse. DFT calculations of the debrominated TBTAP DOS (Fig. 5h) also confirm the shift of the molecular LUMO by about 0.1 eV aboveEFleading to a completely unoccupied LUMO as expected for a neutral molecule. This controlled tip chemistry is reproducible as shown inFig. 5eand thus offers an exciting prospect to create complex patterns and topological states by local probe chemistry in a supramolecular electron spin array.49This will be addressed in details in a future work.

In summary, the spontaneous assembly of TBTAP molecules on superconducting Pb(111) forms a compact electron (spin) superlattice with coexisting neutral TBTAP and singly-charged TBTAP˙−molecules. Using dI/dV(V) and force-voltage spectroscopy Δf(V) spectroscopic measurements, we demonstrate controlled and reversible discharging of anionic TBTAP˙−viacapacitive coupling between the STM/AFM tip and the singly-occupied molecular state. This tip-induced transition from an anionic to neutral state is further visualized in spatial dI/dVmaps as a pattern of Coulomb rings centered on charged molecules. At higher gating voltages, these rings merge, indicating cascade discharge events and strong electron correlation across the molecular lattice. Furthermore, we employ tip-induced chemistry to selectively debrominate individual TBTAP˙−molecules, causing an irreversible transition to the neutral state and enabling the controlled introduction of defects within the supramolecular lattice. These findings establish a platform for the bottom-up design of gate-tunable electron spin arrays with ultrahigh areal density, offering promising avenues for future applications in quantum computing and quantum sensing.