A microkinetic model
for ethylene hydrogenation on Pd that includes
the presence of subsurface hydrogen (H’) was developed by adapting
the existing Horiuti–Polanyi framework. This reaction mechanism,
known as the Dual Subsurface Hydrogen (2H’) mechanism, is an
extension of a reaction model that was initially proposed to resolve
inconsistencies in the Langmuir–Hinshelwood mechanism for the
H2-D2exchange reaction. The 2H’ mechanism
accurately characterizes surface reactions on Pd-based alloy surfaces
by accounting for the presence of H’ in the subsurface, which
activates the adsorbed H atoms on the top surface, causing them to
react. In this work, we derive a 2H’ mechanism for the hydrogenation
of ethylene to ethane and compare the implications of the model to
experimental results obtained on a AgxPd1–xComposition Spread Alloy
Film (CSAF). The ethylene hydrogenation reaction order in H2predicted by the 2H’ mechanism,nH2, was consistent withnH2= 0.69 ±
0.18 measured on Pd within the temperature range 345–405 K.
In addition, the 2H’ rate law for ethane production was fit
to experimental measurements of ethane production on Pd to estimate
the effective hydrogenation rate constant,keff, and the energy barriers for ethylene adsorption and desorption.
Kinetic parameter estimation bounded the effective hydrogenation rate
constant,keff, to between 1010and 1014mol/m2/sec and predicted that the
ethylene adsorption energy,ΔEadsE, is on the
order of ∼10 kJ/mol.
Development of the 2H’ mechanism for more complex reactions,
like ethylene hydrogenation, shows the necessity for considering the
presence of subsurface hydrogen in properly modeling surface reactions
on Pd.

Catalytic
hydrogenation reactions performed on transition metal
catalysts are critically important to industrial research and development.
The hydrogenation of ethylene (C2H4) has been
widely studied because it is the simplest alkene and can serve as
an effective probe reaction for understanding the mechanism and kinetics
of the hydrogenation of more complex olefins and aromatics.,Ethylene hydrogenation is a relatively straightforward reaction
to study because it occurs at room temperature and atmospheric pressure
with fast turnover rates (∼10 site–1s–1). Ethylene hydrogenation
has been characterized on several transition metals, with Pt and Pd
being particularly active for the reaction.−Experimental studies conducted on Pt and Pd have reported that the
apparent activation energy for the production of ethane (C2H6) is between ∼33 kJ/mol and ∼46 kJ/mol;,,,however,
the energy barrier for each mechanistic step is not fully characterized.

There have been several investigations into the reaction mechanism
for ethylene hydrogenation,,−which attempt to enumerate the elementary steps occurring on the
surface. The most well-known mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation
(Figure) was proposed
by Horiuti and Polanyi in 1934, which considers adsorbed ethylene
in its di-σ-bonded configuration and as a partially hydrogenated
ethyl (C2H5) species. Since the proposal of the Horiuti–Polanyi mechanism, it has
been discovered that ethylene can transform into several other surface
intermediates, including π-bonded ethylene, ethylidyne (CCH3), and vinyl (CHCH2),,which
make the surface chemistry much more complex than originally anticipated.
While adsorbed ethylene can be converted into other surface species,
not all intermediates contribute to the reaction pathway for ethylene
hydrogenation. For example, it was observed that, when present, ethylidyne
only exists as a spectator species and does not undergo direct conversion
to ethane.,,However, it
has been shown that under experimental conditions where the hydrogen
pressure greatly exceeds the ethylene pressure, i.e.,PH2≫PE, the surface
is saturated with hydrogen atoms, making the formation of ethylidyne
unlikely.,In addition, it has been shown using Pt
catalysts that both π-bonded and di-σ-bonded ethylene
have reaction pathways that lead to the production of ethane.,Consequently, the complex surface chemistry involved in the hydrogenation
of adsorbed ethylene molecules can be somewhat simplified when kinetic
analysis is performed under certain reaction conditions.

Schematic diagram
of the Horiuti–Polanyi mechanism for ethylene
hydrogenation. H2adsorbs dissociatively, and ethylene
adsorbs molecularly in a di-σ-bonded configuration, with each
−CH2group interacting with the surface. The reaction
between adsorbed H atoms and adsorbed ethylene molecules occurs stepwise
in two hydrogenation steps, after which the fully hydrogenated ethane
molecule desorbs instantaneously into the gas phase.

The interaction of H2with transition metal surfaces
is fundamental to understanding the process by which ethylene hydrogenation
occurs. Previously, we have proposed a reaction mechanism for the
interaction of H2with Pd and AgxPd1–xalloy catalysts, known
as the Dual Subsurface Hydrogen (2H’) mechanism. The 2H’
mechanism incorporates the effect of two subsurface hydrogen atoms,
denoted as H’, in facilitating the adsorption and desorption
of H2occurring on the top surface.,The 2H’ mechanism includes a surface-to-subsurface diffusion
equilibrium constant,Kss, that describes
the exchange of adsorbed surface H with absorbed subsurface H’.
Once equilibrium is established between the surface and the subsurface,
the 2H’ mechanism stipulates that two H’ are present
in the immediate subsurface in order to activate surface H atoms for
H2adsorption and desorption.

The 2H’ mechanism
was first applied to the H2-D2exchange reaction
on Pd in order to resolve inconsistencies
between experimental measurements and the kinetic behavior predicted
by the previous framework, the Langmuir–Hinshelwood (LH) mechanism.
In particular, the H2-D2exchange reaction order
with respect to hydrogen predicted by the LH mechanism isnH2LH=−1whenPH2≫PD2, which arises
from the competition between
H2and D2for adsorption sites on a nearly saturated
surface, i.e., θ ≅ 1. However, experimental measurements
by Sen et al. using a AgxPd1–xComposition Spread Alloy Film (CSAF) showed thatnH2= 0 at all catalyst compositions when θ
≅ 1 andPH2≫PD2. WhilenH2= 0 is inconsistent
with LH kinetics under these conditions, it aligns with the prediction
obtained using the 2H’ mechanism for H2-D2exchange. This non-LH result for the
reaction order is supported by a similar study involving H2-D2exchange on Pd (111)
and Pd nanoparticles, wherenD2= 0 when
θ ≅ 1 andPD2≫PH2.

Subsequent to analyzing the reaction
order with respect to H2, the rate law for H2-D2exchange given
by the LH and 2H’ mechanisms was fit to experimental measurements
of HD production using the AgxPd1–xCSAF at different reaction temperatures and inlet
partial pressures of H2and D2.,These studies allowed us to extract estimates for the kinetic parameters
describing the H2-D2exchange reaction using
different reaction mechanisms. Kinetic parameter fitting revealed
another inconsistency in the LH mechanism, as it predicted that Pd
operates in an adsorption-limited regime, with low surface coverage
and a high energy barrier to H2adsorption,ΔEads−H2‡= 51.1 ± 0.6
kJ/mol. This prediction disagrees with
numerous studies of H2adsorption on Pd surfaces, which
have shown that it adsorbs
with a negligible barrier to dissociation and a high heat of adsorption.−On the other hand, the 2H’ mechanism correctly predictedΔEads−H2‡= 0 kJ/mol and was
also able to match density
functional theory (DFT) predictions for the surface-to-subsurface
diffusion energy, ΔEss, of adsorbed
H on Pd(111) and Pd(100). Fitting the
rate law from the 2H’ mechanism to experimental measurements
of H2-D2exchange across AgxPd1–xcomposition space
yielded nearly identical kinetic parameters for all alloys withxPd≥ 0.64, indicating that catalysts
rich in Pd behave as if they were pure, bulk-like Pd. For AgxPd1–xalloy compositions withxPd≥ 0.64, the kinetic parameter ranges given by the 2H’
mechanism areΔEads−H2‡= 0–10 kJ/mol
for dissociative H2adsorption,ΔEdes−H2‡= 30–65
kJ/mol for associative H2desorption, and ΔEss=
20–35 kJ/mol for surface-to-subsurface H atom diffusion. The fact that the kinetic parameters for H2-D2exchange vary minimally with respect toxPdat Pd-rich compositions suggests that the
reaction only occurs on bulk-like Pd domains and that Ag merely serves
as a diluent, restricting the total surface area available for reaction.
This result is consistent with several studies that have predicted
that H2adsorption onto Ag single crystal surfaces is endothermic
and does not occur spontaneously at room temperature.−Thus, kinetic parameter estimation combined with the observed reaction
order in H2across AgxPd1–xcomposition space provides strong
evidence that the 2H’ mechanism is currently the most accurate
model for describing H2-D2exchange, and more
broadly, for characterizing H2adsorption and desorption
onto/from Pd surfaces.

Similar to the improvements made to the
Langmuir–Hinshelwood
mechanism, the inclusion of subsurface hydrogen has the potential
to improve the existing Horiuti–Polanyi framework. For nearly
a century, the Horiuti–Polanyi mechanism has been the standard
for describing hydrogenation reactions in heterogeneous catalysis.
However, recent works using density functional theory (DFT) have shown
a preference for a non-Horiuti–Polanyi mechanism in the hydrogenation
of small-chain molecules, such as acrolein and acetylene.−DFT calculations have shown that the non-Horiuti–Polanyi
mechanism is favored on metallic surfaces having high energy barriers
to H2dissociation. For example, on inactive Au and Ag
surfaces, the H atom adsorption energy is weak, leading to a preference
for the molecular adsorption of H2from the gas phase. When H2is molecularly adsorbed onto
catalyst surfaces, the reaction must proceed via a non-Horiuti–Polanyi
mechanism since the stepwise addition of H atoms is no longer possible.
However, on active catalysts with facile H2dissociation,
such as Pt and Pd, the classic Horiuti–Polanyi mechanism is
still expected to be dominant. Unfortunately, these DFT studies only
consider adsorbates on the top surface when calculating energy states
for the proposed hydrogenation mechanisms and fail to incorporate
the effect of subsurface hydrogen, H’, which is likely present
just below the surface. The incorporation of H’ into these
energy calculations is particularly important for Pd catalysts, as
DFT studies have shown that the presence of H’ boosted acetylene
hydrogenation activity on Pd (111), (100), and (211) by lowering the
energy barrier for hydrogenation.,Therefore,
it is possible that accounting for the presence of H’ in calculating
the adsorption and reaction energies of surface species might improve
the consistency of the classic Horiuti–Polanyi mechanism. In
other words, the non-Horiuti–Polanyi behavior observed by others
might be more appropriately explained by the effect of subsurface
species on the reaction rate and not by a change in the nature of
H2adsorption.

In this work, we extend the 2H’
framework established for
H2-D2exchange to obtain a microkinetic model
for ethylene hydrogenation on AgxPd1–xalloy catalysts that incorporates
the presence of subsurface hydrogen, H’, into the reaction
mechanism. The traditional Horiuti–Polanyi mechanism, shown
inFigure, is simplified
and adapted to preserve the dissociative adsorption of H2and molecular adsorption of ethylene onto catalyst surfaces while
incorporating the presence of subsurface H’, which is necessary
to activate surface H atoms and facilitate the hydrogenation of ethylene
molecules. Ultimately, we derive a rate law for ethylene hydrogenation
using the 2H’ framework and compare the implications of the
proposed mechanism with previous experimental measurements of ethylene
hydrogenation taken across an AgxPd1–xCSAF. In particular, the equation for the rate law derived from the 2H’
mechanism is used to obtain predictions for the reaction order with
respect to H2,nH2, under
different experimental conditions. Comparison of these model-predicted
values ofnH2show good agreement with
the experimental measurements that were taken over an order-of-magnitude
change in the H2partial pressure. Additionally, the rate
law obtained for ethane production,rC2H6, when applying the 2H’ framework is fit to the measured ethane
production rate on the pure Pd catalyst (i.e.,xPd= 1) to estimate the key kinetic parameters defining the
reaction mechanism. Kinetic parameter fitting yields estimates for
the energy barriers for ethylene adsorption,ΔEads−E‡, ethylene desorptionΔEdes−E‡, and the effective hydrogenation rate constant,keff, by fixing the kinetic parameters for H2adsorption, desorption, and surface-to-subsurface diffusion
to the values previously determined from our study of H2-D2exchange.,The consistency of
the 2H’ mechanism with experimental measurements of ethylene
hydrogenation on Pd shows the potential for developing subsurface
models to describe increasingly complex reactions.

Note that the experimental data set
for ethylene hydrogenation,
collected using an AgxPd1–xCSAF, comes from a previous publication whose primary
objective was to compare the difference in ethylene conversion resulting
from the presence or absence of a trace amount of O2in
the reactant feed. The presence of O2drastically boosted the ethylene hydrogenation activity,
and this effect was attributed to the creation of a restructured catalyst
surface due to the simultaneous resegregation and activation of Pd
atoms. In the absence of O2, equilibrium AgxPd1–xcatalyst
surfaces were exposed, resulting in ethylene conversion at uniformly
low conversion. In this work, only the data set collected without
O2present in the feed is used to evaluate the predictions
of the 2H’ mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation, which are
derived below. The choice for using the low conversion data set without
O2stems from the fact that the exact extent of the interaction
between O2and the restructured AgxPd1–xcatalyst surfaces
has not been fully characterized, and therefore, it is unclear how
the 2H’ mechanism should be applied in this case. Consequently,
to adhere to the framework established for the 2H’ mechanism,
we limit ourselves to reaction systems where only H2and
C2H4molecules interact with the catalyst surface.

Detailed descriptions of CSAF preparation, CSAF characterization,
and measurement of the ethylene hydrogenation activity using a multichannel
microreactor array can be found in our previous publication. Below, we briefly summarize theExperimental sections pertinent to the collection of the high-throughput
data set analyzed in this work.

The
bulk alloy composition and overall film thickness of the AgxPd1–xCSAF
were measured using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) in
a Tescan VEGA3 scanning electron microscope equipped with an automated
stage. The electron beam energy was set to 20 keV, and an EDX scan
area of 50 × 50 μm2was performed across a grid
of 13 × 13 evenly spaced points spanning the 12 × 12 mm2area at the center of the substrate. Quantification of the
bulk alloy composition corresponding to each measurement site was
performed using the Oxford Instruments INCA ThinFilmID software package,
which accounted for the morphology of a thin AgxPd1–xfilm deposited on
a Mo substrate. EDX measurements across a grid of points at the center
of the CSAF confirmed that the area spanned by the microreactor array
contained all of binary composition space fairly uniformly, i.e.,xPd= 0 → 1. The film thickness was determined by comparing the overall signal
intensity at each point to that of a Ni reference material.

The
ethylene hydrogenation activity of the AgxPd1–xCSAF was measured
at 100 different alloy compositions using a high-throughput multichannel
microreactor array, which has been described in detail elsewhere. Reactant mixtures of H2, ethylene
(C2H4), and Ar were delivered continuously to
100 isolated regions on the AgxPd1–xCSAF surface, and the reaction
products were continuously withdrawn from each region for analysis
using a Stanford Research Systems quadrupole mass spectrometer (RGA-200).
The ethylene hydrogenation activity of the AgxPd1–xcatalysts contained
on the CSAF was measured at atmospheric pressure (Ptot= 760 Torr) with the ethylene partial pressure fixed
atPE= 25 Torr, over an H2inlet partial pressure range spanningPH2= 70–690 Torr, and a temperature range fromT= 300–405 K in increments of 15 K.

The total reactant
flow rate of 10 mL/min was split equally between the 100 channels
of the microreactor array and two reference channels having 0% ethylene
conversion and 100% ethylene conversion, respectively. The 0% conversion
reference channel delivered the reactant gas mixture directly to the
gas sampling system, while the 100% conversion reference channel sent
the mixture to an independent reactor loaded with a high surface area
of Pd wire that completely converted the ethylene to ethane. The extent
of ethylene hydrogenation, ξ, in the microreactor channels was
determined by linear interpolation of the mass spectrometer signal
intensities atm/z= 29 and 30 amu
(corresponding to the product ethane molecule) between the signal
intensities measured inside the 0% and 100% conversion reference channels.
The experimental data set was collected by keeping the reaction temperature
constant and varying the H2inlet partial pressure. Three
consecutive scans through all 102 outlet channels were taken once
the system had reached steady-state after changing the reaction conditions.
The average ethylene conversion across the three scans is reported
at all AgxPd1–xcompositions, reaction temperatures, and inlet hydrogen pressures,
i.e., ξ­(xPd,T,PH2).

The entire data set showing the ethylene hydrogenation
activity of the AgxPd1–xCSAF as a function of alloy composition, reaction
temperature, and inlet hydrogen pressure can be found in our previous
publication. The ethylene hydrogenation
activity of the AgxPd1–xCSAF was measured by flowing H2, C2H4, and Ar mixtures into the microreactor at a
constant reaction temperature, inlet pressure, and total flow rate,
and measuring the product gas composition in the 100 outlet channels
by mass spectrometry. In total, the extent of ethylene hydrogenation
was obtained for 100 different AgxPd1–xcatalyst compositions spanningxPd= 0–1, at 8 different reaction temperatures
fromT= 300–405 K, and 5 different hydrogen
partial pressures fromPH2in= 70–690 Torr, i.e., ξ­(xPd,T,PH2).

Figureshows a subset
of the data set consisting of the extent of ethylene conversion (ξ)
versusxPdandTwhenPH2in= 690 Torr, which is the inlet hydrogen
partial pressure with the highest overall activity. As shown inFigure, the ethylene hydrogenation
activity of the AgxPd1–xCSAF was generally low, with the maximum conversion
of ξ ≈ 0.4 only being achieved on pure Pd (i.e.,xPd= 1) at the highest reaction temperature,T= 405 K. As expected, the ethylene conversion decreases
when decreasing bothxPdandT. In fact, no ethylene hydrogenation activity was observed for alloys
withxPd≤ 0.9 at anyTorPH2. This inactivity forxPd≤ 0.9 is presumed to result from the
saturation of Ag atoms on the top surface of the alloy. The segregation
of Ag atoms from the bulk to the top surface minimizes the surface
free energy of the system and presumably leaves no Pd domains of appreciable
size accessible for catalysis, rendering the alloy inactive. This is due to the fact that the surface free
energy of Ag(100) is only 0.71 J/m2, while that of Pd(100) is nearly twice as large at 1.37 J/m2. The significant difference in the surface free energies
leads to predictions of Ag surface segregation in Ag/Pd(111) alloy
slabs, resulting in inactive Ag-film covered surfaces. On the other hand, bulk alloy compositions withxPd> 0.9 appear to be sufficiently Pd-rich
to
ensure that there is enough Pd present on the top surface to convert
ethylene to ethane, despite the fact that the surface is likely still
Ag-enriched. From a kinetic modeling perspective, the ethylene hydrogenation
data set with generally low conversion, i.e., ξ ≤ 0.4,
is advantageous since it allows us to neglect the readsorption of
ethane molecules from the gas phase onto the catalyst surface. In
order to justify this simplification to the reaction mechanism, only
those data points with less than 10% ethylene conversion (i.e., ξ
< 0.1) were used in our analysis. As derived inSection, the rate law for ethane
production resulting from this simplification allows us to evaluate
the proposed 2H’ mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation using
these experimental measurements at sufficiently low conversion.

Extent of ethylene
conversion, ξ , versusxPdand reaction
temperature (K) at the inlet hydrogen
partial pressure with the highest activity. The inlet partial pressures
of the reactant stream werePH2in= 690 Torr andPEin=
25 Torr, with Ar composing the balance
to achievePtot= 760 Torr at a total
flow rate of 10 mL/min. The maximum conversion of ξ ≈
0.4 is achieved whenxPd= 1 andT= 405 K. DecreasingxPdandTboth result in decreases in ξ. No conversion is
observed whenxPd≤ 0.9 or whenT≤ 330 K. The entire data set showing ξ versusxPdandTat all other values
ofPH2incan be found in our previous publication. Figure adapted with permission from ref. Copyright 2023 American Chemical Society.

Using the ethylene hydrogenation
data set (shown partially inFigure), we can estimate
the reaction order with
respect to hydrogen,nH2, (eq) since the measured ethylene conversion,
ξ, is proportional to the total rate of ethane production,rC2H6, in the limit of low conversion (i.e.,
ξ < 0.1). Thus, finding the change in log­(ξ) with respect
to log­(PH2) allows us to approximate nH2for each alloy catalyst across the range of reaction temperatures.

Estimates ofnH2were determined by plotting log­(ξ) versus log­(PH2) for each alloy composition at all reaction
temperatures and calculating the slope of the line of best fit.Figure S1shows plots of log­(ξ) versus
log­(PH2) for the 14 most Pd-rich catalysts
on the AgxPd1–xCSAF, ranging fromxPd= 1–0.93,
several of which have nominally identical bulk compositions. InFigure S1, all data points of the same color
were measured at the same reaction temperature and are fitted by a
line of best fit, the slope of which isnH2shown at the right of each subplot. Note thatFigure S1contains all possible estimates fornH2that can be obtained from this low conversion data
set, since catalysts withxPd≤
0.9 were inactive for ethylene hydrogenation. Note also that some
data points were excluded fromFigure S1either because the conversion was below the noise level, ξ
< 0.02 (i.e., log­(ξ) <−1.7), or because there was
insufficient data to fit a line (i.e., <3 data points).

An
important observation fromFigure S1is
that there is good agreement innH2for
alloys with nominally identical bulk compositions. This indicates
a high level of reproducibility and internal consistency of the data
set. The value ofnH2predicted across
all alloy compositions is positive, i.e.,nH2> 0 and appears to increase gradually as the reaction temperature
increases. For example, the minimum value ofnH2= 0.33 occurs on Ag0.05Pd0.95at 360
K, and the maximum value ofnH2= 1.09
occurs on Ag0.03Pd0.97at 405 K. Since only
AgxPd1–xcatalysts withxPd≥ 0.93 displayed
sufficient activity for ethylene hydrogenation, it can be assumed
that Pd bears the entire catalytic load for the reaction and that
Ag merely acts as a diluent. The same phenomenon was observed when
performing H2-D2exchange on an AgxPd1–xCSAF similar
to the one used in this work, in which the kinetic parameters predicted
using the 2H’ mechanism were statistically indistinguishable
from those predicted on pure Pd whenxPd≥ 0.64. Given that the energy
barriers to H2adsorption, desorption, and surface-to-subsurface
diffusion were all equivalent for alloy compositions withxPd≥ 0.64, this suggests that these Pd-rich
alloys behave catalytically as if they are pure Pd. The lower surface
free energy of Ag relative to Pd results in a high probability that
Ag atoms are present on the top surface of the alloy even at dilute
Ag bulk concentrations, and this is observed in the gradual decrease
in activity asxPddecreases (Figure). However, our results
suggest that the Pd domains remaining on the surface are large and
continuous enough to behave as if they are pure, bulk-like Pd. Support
for this claim comes from a related work studying the catalytic activity
of Ag-rich AgxPd1–xnanoparticles, which found that large clusters of
Pd behaving like pure, bulk-like Pd were present and well-dispersed
on the surface whenxPd≥ 0.33. Since this composition threshold is far belowxPd≥ 0.93 for the active AgxPd1–xcatalysts
in this work, we expect that the changing bulk composition of the
AgxPd1–xCSAF only reflects the reduction in the total Pd surface area accessible
for catalysis. Consequently, the estimates ofnH2can be averaged across alloy composition to obtain the average
ethylene hydrogenation reaction order on Pd at different reaction
temperatures.

Figureshows the
ethylene hydrogenation reaction order in H2,nH2, averaged over AgxPd1–xcatalyst compositions withxPd≥ 0.93 (shown inFigure S1) versus the reaction temperature,T. A slight dependence onTis observed, as the averagenH2increases from 0.53 at 345 K to 0.91 at 405
K. The red line inFiguredescribes the relationship betweennH2andT, the slope of which isdnH2dT= 0.006 and characterizes the increase
innH2per K increase in the reaction
temperature. Since the error bars inFigure(representing one standard deviation from
the mean value ofnH2) are almost all
overlapping, it can be concluded thatnH2has a real, but weakTdependence over the range
of reaction temperatures used in this study. The most useful information
to note fromFigureis that the H2reaction order for ethylene hydrogenation
on Pd is a positive value between12and 1 (i.e.,12≤nH2≤1)across this range of reaction temperatures.
Limitations of the 2H’ mechanism prevent us from distinguishing
between minor changes in nH2with respect toT(as discussed further inSection). Therefore, we take the average reaction order over
all temperatures,nH2= 0.69 ± 0.18,
to use for comparison with the predictions of the 2H’ mechanism
that are derived in the following section. This value ofnH2= 0.69 ± 0.18 within the rangeT= 345–405 K represents the global average obtained from the
experimental data set, with the understanding that ethylene hydrogenation
only occurs on large bulk-like Pd domains and acknowledging the limitation
that only broad trends innH2can be evaluated.

Average
ethylene hydrogenation reaction order in H2,nH2, over all AgxPd1–xcatalyst compositions shown
inFigure S1versus the reaction temperature,T, with error bars showing the standard deviation. Averaging
over all catalyst compositions withxPd≥ 0.93 is justified by the fact that Pd is expected to bear
the entire catalytic load for ethylene hydrogenation and that Ag merely
serves as a diluent. A slight dependence onTis
observed as the averagenH2increases
from 0.53 at 345 K to 0.91 at 405 K. The red line of best fit describes
the relationship betweennH2andT, the slope of which isdnH2dT= 0.006, characterizing
the increase innH2per K increase in the reaction temperature.
SincenH2only weakly depends onTwithin this range, an average over all reaction temperatures
yieldsnH2= 0.69 ± 0.18, which represents
the global average for ethylene hydrogenation on Pd in the rangeT= 345–405 K.

In this section, we derive a microkinetic
model for ethylene hydrogenation
by extending the framework of the Dual Subsurface Hydrogen (2H’)
mechanism that was originally applied to the H2-D2exchange reaction. In doing so, we preserve the key elements of
the Horiuti–Polanyi mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation, as
shown inFigure,
while simplifying the two stepwise hydrogenation steps into one simultaneous
hydrogenation step, followed by instantaneous ethane desorption.

Figureshows a schematic
of the proposed 2H’ mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation. The
surface and subsurface of the catalyst are divided into discrete adsorption
sites that can be populated with either zero or one species per site.
InFigure, the dissociative
adsorption of H2molecules from the gas phase into independent
H atoms populates two adjacent surface sites. Similarly, the molecular
adsorption of ethylene from the gas phase occupies two adjacent surface
sites in order to preserve the di-σ-bonded configuration proposed
by the Horiuti–Polanyi mechanism. This can be understood by
considering that each half of the adsorbed ethylene molecule (E) inFigurerepresents the interaction
of a −CH2group with the surface. It is important
to note that H2and ethylene adsorption are in competition
with one another in this interpretation of the mechanism. While both
competitive and noncompetitive adsorption pathways are possible for
ethylene hydrogenation, the low ethylene pressure (i.e.,PEin= 25 Torr) and high reaction
temperatures
(i.e.,T≥ 290 K) used in our experiments
are more consistent with a competitive adsorption model.,To incorporate subsurface hydrogen, H’, into the reaction
mechanism, adsorbed surface H can populate vacant subsurface sites
through the process of surface-to-subsurface diffusion. The balance
between adsorbed surface H and absorbed subsurface H’ is governed
by the equilibrium constant,Kss, which
is determined by taking the ratio of the diffusion rates of H atoms
into and out of the subsurface.

Schematic diagram of the proposed 2H’
mechanism for ethylene
hydrogenation. H2and ethylene (E) adsorb competitively
on the catalyst surface into two adjacent empty sites. The equilibrium
constantKH2=kadsH2/kdesH2describes
the dissociative adsorption and
associative desorption of H2, and the equilibrium constantKE=kadsE/kdesEdescribes the molecular
adsorption and
desorption of ethylene. The surface-to-subsurface diffusion equilibrium
constant,Kss=kssin/kssout, describes the exchange of adsorbed H atoms
on the top surface with absorbed H’ in the immediate subsurface.
The presence of H’ in the subsurface facilitates both the adsorption
and desorption of H2and the hydrogenation of adsorbed
ethylene. The hydrogenation of ethylene is represented as a single
step with an effective hydrogenation rate constant,keff. The reaction occurs when two adsorbed H atoms are
influenced by two subsurface H’ in the vicinity of an E molecule
and combine to form ethane (HEH), which desorbs instantaneously. In
the limit of low conversion, the readsorption of ethane on the surface
is negligible.

From the 2H’ mechanism
established for H2-D2exchange, H2adsorption and desorption on the
top surface are facilitated by the presence of two H’ atoms
in the immediate subsurface. The presence of H’ can also influence
the hydrogenation of adsorbed ethylene by interacting with surface
H in the vicinity of adsorbed E, causing them to react. Similar to
H2adsorption and desorption, this mechanism for ethylene
hydrogenation requires the simultaneous interaction of two subsurface
H’ with two surface H to fully hydrogenate the ethylene molecule
to ethane (HEH inFigure), which desorbs instantaneously. In this case, however, the
two H’ need not be adjacent (as was assumed for H2adsorption and desorption) as long as they are present in subsurface
sites in the vicinity of each surface H participating in hydrogenation.
It is worthwhile to mention that there is likely a range of interactions
between the surface and the subsurface that extend beyond the site
immediately below a given surface species. The most important factor
is that there is one H’ present for every surface H participating
in the reaction and that the species are close enough to create strong
interactions between the two layers. Note that, in this way, the proposed
2H’ mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation preserves the influence
of H’ on H, which was shown to be essential for accurately
modeling the H2-D2exchange reaction. In summary, all transformations of surface H,
including adsorption, desorption, and reaction through the hydrogenation
of ethylene, require activation from the presence of subsurface H’.
While it is also possible that the presence of H’ has the potential
to influence the adsorption and desorption of ethylene molecules,
we assume that the effect is much less significant than for H due
to the fact that the size of an ethylene molecule (E) is ∼4
times greater than that of an H atom.

In the schematic of the
2H’ mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation
given inFigure,
H2and ethylene (E) adsorb competitively onto the catalyst
surface. The equilibrium constantKH2=kadsH2/kdesH2is the ratio between the rate constant
for dissociative H2adsorption,kadsH2, and the rate constant for associative
H2desorption,kdesH2, under the influence of 2H’. The
surface-to-subsurface diffusion equilibrium constantKss=kssin/kssoutis the ratio
between the rate constant
for H absorption into the subsurface,kssin, and the rate constant for
H’ reemergence
on the top surface,kssout. The equilibrium constantKE=kadsE/kdesEis
the ratio between the rate constant
for molecular E adsorption,kadsE, and the rate constant for
molecular E
desorption,kdesE. The effective ethylene hydrogenation
rate
constant is given bykeff, which incorporates
the two stepwise hydrogenation steps shown inFigureinto a single step that results in the instantaneous
desorption of ethane (HEH) from the surface. We define the variables
θH, θE, and θ’Hto be the coverage of H on the surface, the coverage
of E on the surface, and the coverage of H’ in the subsurface,
respectively. At the steady-state reaction conditions experienced
inside the microreactor, the change in the coverage of each species,i, with respect to time, is zero, i.e.,dθidt=0. The steady-state
equations describing
θH, θE, and θ’Hfor the 2H’ mechanism are given byeqs–.

The coverage terms
in the rate expression can be calculated using
the steady-state mass balance,eqs–. A full solution to
the 2H’ mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation is shown in theSupporting Information, including explicit derivation
of the expressions for θH, θE, and
θ’Hin terms of equilibrium constants
and reactant partial pressures. Substitution of these coverage terms
intoeqyields the
ethane production rate,rC2H6, ineqin terms of experimental
parameters (PH2andPE) and rate and equilibrium constants (KH2,KE,Kss, andkeff).

Eqshows the rate
of ethane production using the 2H’ mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation.
It is important to note that the effective hydrogenation rate constant,keff, incorporates both hydrogenation steps and
the molecular desorption of ethane into a single step, which is an
oversimplification of the actual hydrogenation process. Nonetheless,
the rate law ineqcan
be understood to represent the rate-limiting step for ethylene hydrogenation,
which, for Pd surfaces−is often believed to be the addition of the first
H atom to adsorbed ethylene to create the ethyl intermediate shown
inFigure. Thus,
the implicit assumption is that the other steps in the reaction, namely
the addition of the second H atom and the desorption of ethane, occur
very fast relative to the addition of the first H and are thus not
as kinetically relevant.

The reaction
order with respect to H2,nH2, describes the dependence of the ethane production rate ineqon the hydrogen partial
pressure,PH2. WhilePH2appears in both the numerator and the denominator ofeq, the expression can be
simplified based on which terms in the denominator are expected to
be dominant. Each term in the denominator ineq,(1+KH2PH2+KEPE)3and(1+KssKH2PH2)2, can be analyzed based on the
relative
magnitude of the quantities within the parentheses, which are determined
by the product of kinetic parameters (i.e., equilibrium constants)
and experimental conditions (i.e., reactant partial pressures). For
example, under conditions whereKH2PH2/(1+KEPE)≪1(i.e.,KH2PH2≪(1+KEPE))andKssKH2PH2≪1, both terms containingPH2in the denominator ofeqare negligible, and the dependence ofrC2H6onPH2simplifies torC2H6∼PH22, which results innH2= 2. It is important to note that obtaining a prediction
fornH2by analyzing the rate expression at different
reaction conditions carries implicit assumptions about the surface
H coverage (θH) and subsurface H’ coverage
(θ’H). For example, whenKssKH2PH2≪1, it implies that the rate of adsorbed
H
diffusion into the subsurface is much slower than the rate of H’
resurfacing on the top surface, leading to a subsurface that is nearly
vacant, θ’H≈ 0. Similarly,
whenKH2PH2/(1+KEPE)≪1, it implies that
the rate of H2adsorption on the surface is much slower
than either the rate of
H2desorption and/or the adsorption equilibrium established
for ethylene, resulting in a top surface that is H-depleted, θH≈ 0. Full analysis of the rate expression under different
reaction conditions and their corresponding implications fornH2can be found in theSupporting Information.Tablepresents a summary of different reaction conditions influencing
the ethane production rate, their corresponding θHand θ’H, and their prediction
for the ethylene hydrogenation reaction order with respect to H2,nH2.

Tableshows the
predictions fornH2that can be obtained
from the 2H’ mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation at the extremes
of H and H’ coverage. These predictions can be compared with
the experimentally measured values ofnH2that were obtained by performing ethylene hydrogenation on the AgxPd1–xCSAF
using the high-throughput microreactor array. FromFigure, the average experimentalnH2for ethylene hydrogenation on Pd varied from
0.53 at 345 K to 0.91 at 405 K, with a global average ofnH2= 0.69 ± 0.18. These measurements ofnH2are consistent with the middle columns ofTable, predicting eithernH2=12when θH≅ 1 and
θ’H≅ 0 ornH2= 1 when θH≅ 0 and θ'H≅ 1 . It is important to note that
the
2H’ mechanism is unable to distinguish between these two scenariosa prioridue to the form of the rate equation, in which
interchanging the values ofθH2andθH′2ineqyields the same value ofrC2H6. This is a known limitation of the 2H’
mechanism, which we
reported previously for H2-D2exchange. In essence, the 2H’ mechanism is unable
to distinguish between surface and subsurface sites due to their equivalence
with respect to H atoms. Thus, despite the fact that the experimental
values ofnH2lie between two predictions
of the 2H’ mechanism, only one set of conditions can be applied
to our system, while the other is merely a symmetric solution resulting
from swapping the surface and subsurface layers. In this case, it
is necessary to use other predictions of the 2H’ mechanism
and the adsorption behavior of H2and ethylene in order
to determine whether H atom saturation occurs in the surface or in
the subsurface, while the other layer is nearly vacant.

In analyzing
which set of reaction conditions and coverages is
more consistent with our experiments, it is important to remember
that ethylene hydrogenation was performed under conditions wherePH2ranged from 70 to 690 Torr whilePEremained fixed at 25 Torr. In other words,PH2≫PEat
all experimental conditions, and thus we expect the surface coverage
of H to be dominant over E, i.e., θH≫ θE. Taking this into account, the scenario where θH≅ 1, corresponding tonH2=12, is much more probable than the scenario
where θH≅ 0, corresponding tonH2= 1. Furthermore, the coverages θH≅ 1 and θ’H≅ 0
predicted whennH2=12are also consistent with the
surface and
subsurface coverages that were calculated when applying the 2H’
mechanism to the H2-D2exchange reaction. For H2-D2exchange, the
2H’ mechanism’s prediction ofnH2= 0 consistent with experimental measurements whenPH2≫PD2requires a nearly saturated top surface,
θ ≅ 1, and a vacant subsurface, θ’≅ 0. It is reasonable to expect that the surface H
and subsurface H’ coverages predicted by the 2H’ mechanism
would be similar for H2-D2exchange and for
ethylene hydrogenation on Pd, especially due to the high H2pressure used in both experiments. Therefore, the 2H’ prediction
ofnH2=12with θH≅ 1 and
θ’H≅ 0 is most strongly
supported by the experimental data.

Beyond analysis ofnH2, the 2H’ mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation
can be evaluated by fitting the ethane production rate ineqto the experimental data
set collected using the AgxPd1xCSAF to obtain estimates
for the kinetic parameters defining the reaction mechanism. Measurements
of the fractional ethylene conversion, ξ, can be converted to
a molar flow rate of ethane exiting the microreactor,FC2H6exp, using the inlet volumetric flow rate of
ethylene,V̇(m3/s), and the molar
volume of an ideal gas (eq).

It is important to note that there
is a slight reduction in the total flow rate as ξ increases
due to the consumption of two moles of reactants for every mole of
ethane produced (i.e., H2+ C2H4→
C2H6). However, due to the low partial pressure
of ethylene (PE= 25 Torr) with respect
to the total (Ptot= 760 Torr), the maximum reduction in
the flow rate is only ∼3% when ξ = 1. Thus, the reduction
in the flow rate is negligible, especially since the data set used
for the fitting was collected in the low conversion regime (i.e.,
ξ < 0.1).

The ethane production rate,rC2H6(mol/m2/s), predicted by the 2H’
mechanism ineqcan
be converted to a model-predicted
molar flow rate,FC2H6model(mol/s), since the catalyst
surface area
is defined by the dimensions of the gasket holes (700 × 800 μm2) that divide the surface of the CSAF into independent reaction
volumes. The ethane flow rate predicted by the 2H’ model, therefore,
is given byeq, whereArepresents the exposed catalyst surface area of 5.6 ×
10–7m2.

The unknown kinetic parameters in the
reaction mechanism for ethylene
hydrogenation can be found by fitting the analytic expression for
the ethane flow rate predicted by the 2H’ mechanism,FC2H6model, to the measured ethane flow
rate,FC2H6exp, using an optimization routine, as was
done previously in our study of H2-D2exchange.,This optimization routine involves minimizing the relative sum of
squared errors,χ2, betweenFC2H6modelandFC2H6exp(eq) by varying the unknown kinetic parameters
inFC2H6modelover a well-defined search
space.

To properly define the kinetic parameter estimation
problem, one
must first evaluate the analytic expression forFC2H6modeland reduce the degrees
of freedom by determining
all of the known quantities. For example, the inlet partial pressures
of H2and ethylene,PH2andPE, respectively, are known based upon the experimental
conditions with which the data set was collected. In addition, the
equilibrium constants for H2adsorption(KH2)and surface-to-subsurface H diffusion
(Kss) can be taken from our previous study
of
H2-D2exchange on Pd using a similar AgxPd1–xCSAF.,The 2H’ mechanism for H2-D2exchange
predicted that the energy barrier for dissociative H2adsorption
isΔEads−H2‡= 0 kJ/mol, the energy
barrier for associative
H2desorption isΔEdes−H2‡= 43 kJ/mol, and the
surface-to-subsurface
diffusion energy is ΔEss= 25 kJ/mol
for pure Pd catalysts. These fitted parameters,
along with their pre-exponential factors obtained from transition
state theory,vadsH2= 102mol/m2/s/Torr,vdesH2= 106mol/m2/s, andvssH2= 100, are sufficient to determineKH2andKssusingeqsand .

WithPH2,PE,KH2, andKssknown,
the only unknown variables ineqare the effective hydrogenation rate constant,keff, and the ethylene adsorption equilibrium
constant,KE. As shown ineq, while there are 4 kinetic parameters(vadsE,vdesE,ΔEads−E‡,ΔEdes−E‡)embedded inKE(as forKH2),
the pre-exponential factors
for ethylene adsorption and desorption can be estimated using transition
state theory. Transition state theory calculations for molecular adsorption
and desorption givevadsE= 102mol/m2/s/Torr
andvdesE= 1014mol/m2/s,
respectively. Fixing the pre-exponents
for ethylene adsorption and desorption results in only 3 unknown kinetic
parameters in the model-predicted ethane production rate:keff,ΔEads−E‡, andΔEdes−E‡. Usingeq, an optimization routine can now be implemented to
fitkeff,ΔEads−E‡, andΔEdes−E‡to the experimental data set collected
using the AgxPd1–xCSAF.

To simplify our application
of the 2H’ mechanism to the
experimental data set, we limit our estimation of kinetic parameters
to the ethane production of the pure Pd catalyst on the AgxPd1–xCSAF, i.e.,xPd= 1. In this way, we can neglect the effects
of alloying Ag with Pd, even though our prior investigation of H2-D2exchange on a similar AgxPd1–xCSAF suggests that
H2is likely only activated through interactions with Pd
for alloys withxPd≥ 0.64. Using the single catalyst compositionxPd= 1, the size of the experimental data set
for ethylene hydrogenation consists of 40 data points comprising 8
reaction temperatures fromT= 300–405 K and
5 inlet hydrogen pressures fromPH2in= 70–690 Torr. However, using only
the data with ξ < 0.1 reduces the size of the data set used
in the fitting to 28 points. The model-predicted ethane production
rate,FC2H6model, was fit toFC2H6expfor the Pd catalyst withequsing the MATLAB minimization toolfmincon. The optimization was performed by generating 500
initial guesses for the ethylene adsorption energy barrier(ΔEads−E‡), the ethylene desorption energy barrier(ΔEdes−E‡), and the effective hydrogenation rate constant
(keff), and then varying the parameters
within their respective search space until the error betweenFC2H6expandFC2H6modelwas minimized. The parameter
space forΔEads−E‡andΔEdes−E‡was constrained between 0 and 100 kJ/mol,
while the search space forkeffranged
from 10–20to 1020mol/m2/s/Torr.
The set of parameter values forΔEads−E‡,ΔEdes−E‡, andkeffthat
yielded the lowest value of χ2among the 500 optimizations
was chosen as the optimal solution.

The optimal fit obtained
for the Pd catalyst is shown inFigure, which plotsFC2H6versusTat each value
ofPH2in. The data points showing the experimental
measurements of the ethane production rate,FC2H6exp, are fitted with curves
of the same color
showing the model-predicted ethane production rate,FC2H6model, at the optimized kinetic parameters.
The
best fit is achieved withΔEads−E‡= 42 kJ/mol,ΔEdes−E‡= 38 kJ/mol, andkeff= 1012mol/m2/s, which correspond
to the global minimum in χ2, χ2min= 3.6.Figureshows that the values ofFC2H6predicted by the 2H’ mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation
closely match the experimental measurements at lowPH2across most reaction temperatures; however,FC2H6is underestimated at highPH2, especially asTincreases. It is
possible that this discrepancy can be accounted for by adding more
complexity to the mechanism, for example, a second term inrC2H6(eq) that includes the readsorption of ethane on the surface
as the conversion increases beyond a certain threshold. Adding a readsorption
term toeqwould add
more flexibility to the 2H’ mechanism by allowingFC2H6to remain low at lowPH2(through ethane readsorption) while increasingFC2H6at highPH2(through
a decrease inΔEads−E‡, for example). The performance of the 2H’
mechanism might also be improved by allowing the pre-exponential factors
for the rate constants parametrizing ethylene adsorption and desorption
to vary around their transition state theory estimates. However, with
an experimental data set consisting of only 28 points used for fitting,
the addition of kinetic parameters for ethane readsorption and/or
allowing the pre-exponential factors to vary would make the model
incapable of converging on a unique solution. Nonetheless, the 2H’
mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation with only 3 degrees of freedom
is able to reproduce the low conversion measurements ofFC2H6with reasonable accuracy. Therefore, the estimates
obtained forΔEads−E‡,ΔEdes−E‡, andkeffare
meaningful given the assumptions with which the 2H’ mechanism
was derived.

Flow rate of ethane,FC2H6(mol/s),
produced by the pure Pd catalyst (i.e.,xPd= 1,
Ag0Pd1) versus
the reaction temperature,T(K), at hydrogen pressures
ranging fromPH2= 70 to 690 Torr. Experimental
measurements ofFC2H6are shown by the
data points, and the curves show the best fit solution ofeqto the data set withΔEads−E‡= 42 kJ/mol,ΔEdes−E‡= 38 kJ/mol, andkeff= 1012mol/m2/s. The values ofPH2at the right of the graph correspond to the
data points and the fitted curve of the same color.FC2H6predicted by the 2H’
mechanism for
ethylene hydrogenation closely matches the experimental measurements
at lowPH2across nearly all reaction
temperatures; however,FC2H6is underestimated
at highPH2, especially asTincreases. It is possible that this discrepancy
can be accounted for by adding more complexity to the model, namely
a second term inrC2H6that includes the
readsorption of ethane on the surface as the conversion increases.
Nonetheless, at low conversion the model-predictedFC2H6is able to reproduce the experimental measurements
with reasonable accuracy.

The
kinetic parameters predicted by the 2H’ mechanism can be evaluated
based on the agreement of the reaction conditions obtained at the
best fit solution with experimental measurements. As explained inSection, the average
ethylene hydrogenation reaction order in H2,nH2= 0.69 ± 0.18 in the rangeT=
345–405 K, is consistent with the predictions of the 2H’
mechanism under reaction conditions where θH≅
1 and θ’H≅ 0 , withnH2=12, and conditions where θH≅ 0 and θ’H≅ 1
, withn= 1 . Previously, we had proposed thatnH2=12was the more likely scenario based upon
the excess of H2in the reactant mixture (i.e.,PH2≫ PE) and
our expectations from the 2H’ mechanism for H2-D2exchange, in which the subsurface was nearly vacant (i.e.,
θ’H≅ 0)
. With estimates forΔEads−E‡,ΔEdes−E‡, andkeffobtained
through fitting the experimental data set, all of the quantities parametrizing
the 2H’ mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation are now known.
Thus, the coverages of surface H (θH) and subsurface
H’ (θ’H) can be explicitly
calculated to check these assumptions and the consistency of the model.

The kinetic parameters defining the 2H’ mechanism for ethylene
hydrogenation(vadsH2,vdesH2,vss,vadsE,vdesE,ΔEads−H2‡,ΔEdes−H2‡,ΔEss,ΔEads−E‡,ΔEdes−E‡, andkeff)
were used in the equations derived in theSupporting Informationto find θHand θ’Has a function ofPH2andT, as shown inFigure. The top row of subfigures inFigureshows that at all 40 combinations ofPH2andT, applying the best-fit
kinetic parameters results in a top surface that is H-saturated, i.e.,
θH≅ 1, and a subsurface that is nearly vacant
in H’, i.e., θ’H≅ 0. This is consistent with the coverages necessary
for the 2H’ mechanism’s prediction ofnH2=12. The bottom row of subfigures inFigureshows the relative
magnitude of the terms in the denominator of the rate equation for
ethane production (eq), which were analyzed to obtain the predictions fornH2. At allPH2andT,KH2PH2/(KEPE+1)≫1andKssKH2PH2≪0, which is consistent with the
second column
inTablehaving θH≅ 1 , θ’H≅ 0 , andnH2=12. Therefore, using the best-fit solution
of the 2H’ mechanism to the experimental data results in a
Pd surface that is highly saturated in H atoms, and consequently,
highly depleted in adsorbed ethylene molecules (θE≈ 0). This is consistent with the relatively strong interactions
between H2and Pd, which are expected to dominate the catalyst’s
behavior, especially in H2-rich environments. The key takeaway
from this analysis is that the values ofΔEads−E‡= 42 kJ/mol,ΔEdes−E‡= 38 kJ/mol, andkeff= 1012mol/m2/s found through
kinetic
parameter estimation on pure Pd yield surface H and subsurface H’
coverages that are consistent with the values ofnH2measured experimentally.

Coverages of H on the
surface (θH) and H’
in the subsurface (θ’H) (top row), and values ofKH2PH2/(KEPE+1)andKssKH2PH2(bottom row) calculated usingΔEads−E‡= 42 kJ/mol,ΔEdes−E‡= 38 kJ/mol, andkeff= 1012mol/m2/s found from the best
fit ofeqto the experimental
data for Ag0Pd1across allTandPH2. At all experimental
conditions, the 2H’
mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation predicts θH≅
1 andθ’H≅
0, meaning that the surface is nearly saturated in H atoms and that
the subsurface is nearly vacant in H’. In addition,KH2PH2/(KEPE+1)≫ 1 by approximately 2 orders of
magnitude, andKssKH2PH2≅0. WhenKH2PH2/(KEPE+1)≫1andKssKH2PH2≪1, the rate law for ethane production
(eq) predictsnH2=12with θH≅ 1 and
θ’H≅ 0 through simplification
of the terms in the denominator. This prediction ofnH2=12by the 2H’ mechanism is consistent
with the experimentally measured values fornH2shown inFigure, which predicts an overall average ofnH2= 0.69 ± 0.18 on Pd in the rangeT= 345–405 K.

The kinetic parameters
predicted for ethylene hydrogenation can
also be evaluated by comparing the fitted values ofΔEads−E‡,ΔEdes−E‡, andkeffto
expectations of ethylene adsorption and desorption onto/from Pd single
crystal surfaces. Before this comparison can be made, however, it
is important to quantify the uncertainty of the fitted kinetic parameters
by visualizing the regions of parameter space that are capable of
achieving a similar fit to the data as at the global minimum. In this
way, we determine the level of confidence that can be obtained in
the fitted solution. This is done by visualizing the hyper-ellipsoid
encompassing the region of 95% confidence around the optimal parameter
values(ΔEads−E‡= 42 kJ/mol,ΔEdes−E‡= 38 kJ/mol, log­(keff) = 12) within(ϵads−E,ϵdes−E, andlog(keff))parameter space. This methodology was developed
in our previous exploration of the kinetic parameters describing the
H2-D2exchange reaction using the 2H’
mechanism.,In brief, the 95% confidence
region around the fitted solution is constructed using the Hessian
matrix returned by the solver, which is comprised of all of the second
derivatives of the objective function (eq) with respect to the fitting parameters at
the global minimum. The matrix of second derivatives showing the curvature
ofχ2within parameter space allows construction
of a 3D hyper-ellipsoid bounding the regions of(ϵads−E,ϵdes−E, andlog(keff))parameter space that are capable of producing
equivalent fits to the data as the solution at χ2minwithin the limit of 95% confidence. The 3D hyper-ellipsoid
can be visualized in any 2D plane by taking the cross-section of the
hyper-ellipsoid when the third parameter is fixed to its value at
the global minimum, as inFigure.Figureshows the three 2D contour plots of ln­(χ2) within(ϵads−E,ϵdes−E, andlog(keff))parameter space with the fitted solution
marked by the blue dot at(ΔEads−E‡= 42 kJ/mol,ΔEdes−E‡= 38 kJ/mol, and log­(keff) = 12) and the cross sections through the hyper-ellipsoid
marked by the solid red error ellipses.

Grayscale contour plots
of the sum of squared errors, log­(χ2) , within(ϵads−E,ϵdes−E, andlog(keff))parameter space when fitting the
2H’
mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation to the experimental data for
the Ag0Pd1catalyst. In all three plots, the
blue dot marks the solution found by the solver atΔEads−E‡= 42 kJ/mol,ΔEdes−E‡= 38 kJ/mol, andkeff= 1012mol/m2/s with χ2min= 3.6. In each plot, one kinetic parameter
is held constant at the value found by the solver while the other
two are varied, i.e., (a) log­(keff) =
12, (b)ΔEdes−E‡= 38 kJ/mol, and (c)ΔEads−E‡= 42 kJ/mol. The solid red error
ellipses
are 2D cross sections through the 3D hyper-ellipsoid that bounds the
region of 95% confidence around the solution. The red dotted lines
highlight the contour levels of constant ln­(χ2) found
after performing a Taylor expansion from the solution found by the
solver to any point on the solid red ellipses. The area bound by the
dotted red lines serves as a conservative estimate for the 95% confidence
interval within parameter space. In (b) and (c), the range log­(keff) ≈ 10–14 yields solutions
with the same quality of fit as at the global minimum. On the other
hand, (a) shows strong coupling betweenϵadsandϵdesto the point where an
increase in one parameter
can be compensated by a corresponding increase in the other parameter
across the entire search space. In this case, the uncertainty ofΔEads−E‡andΔEdes−E‡is large enough that the best-fit kinetic
parameters do not sufficiently outperform the other possible solutions
bounded by the red dotted lines. Nonetheless, (a) shows conclusively
that all solutions haveΔEads−E‡>ΔEdes−E‡since the region bounding the
minima in
ln­(χ2) lies underneath the line of parityϵdes−E=ϵads−E. This implies that the ethylene adsorption
energy, i.e.,ΔEadsE=ΔEads−E‡−ΔEdes−E‡, is always >0 and, therefore,
slightly
endothermic.

Since the contour plots of ln­(χ2) inFigureexhibit nonquadratic
behavior within parameter space around the global minimum, the overlaid
red error ellipses cannot be directly used to define the regions of
parameter space included in the 95% confidence region. Instead, a
Taylor expansion can be performed from the global minimum atχmin2to any point on the red ellipses to identify
the constant contour level in χ2that bounds the
regions on the contour plot where all combinations of(ϵads−E,ϵdes−E, andlog(keff))produce an equivalent fit to the data within
the limit of 95% confidence. InFigure, the red dotted lines surrounding the error ellipses
mark the contour level at ln­(χ2) = 7.5 within which
the landscape of χ2does not change appreciably with(ϵads−E,ϵdes−E, and
log­(keff)). Inside this contour level
lies narrow trenches in the plots
of ln­(χ2) where the quality of the fit using different
combinations of kinetic parameters is virtually indistinguishable.
It is the extremes of these regions within parameter space that more
accurately define the 95% confidence interval around(ΔEads−E‡,ΔEdes−E‡, log­(keff))
found by the solver. FromFigureb,c, the 95% confidence interval forkeff≈ 1010–1014mol/m2/s, which is a symmetric range around the fitted solution,keff= 1012mol/m2/s. An
uncertainty range spanning 4 orders of magnitude for the apparent
rate constant for ethylene hydrogenation is reasonable given that
several mechanistic steps were combined in order to simplify the rate
law for the 2H’ mechanism. On the other hand,Figurea shows that the uncertainty
range forΔEads−E‡andΔEdes−E‡is very large, as it spans the entire parameter
search space from 0 to 100 kJ/mol. In this case, the degree of coupling
betweenΔEads−E‡andΔEdes−E‡in the 2H’ mechanism prevent us
from accepting the solutionsΔEads−E‡= 42 kJ/mol andΔEdes−E‡= 38 kJ/mol as the true global
minimum.
since other combinations ofϵads−Eandϵdes−Ewithin
the diagonal contour framed inFigurea can produce fits
that are statistically equivalent to the solution shown inFigure. It is possible
that more certainty around the optimized parameters could be achieved
if the fitting had been performed over a data set that included a
broader temperature and pressure range.

Despite the fact that
the estimates forΔEads−E‡andΔEdes−E‡cannot be accepted as unique solutions,Figurea nonetheless reveals
an important implication about the adsorption behavior of ethylene
on Pd. In particular, the diagonal contour level indicating the region
of(ϵads−E,ϵdes−E)parameter space capable of fitting the
data lies parallel to, but slightly below the line of parity,ϵdes−E=ϵads−E. This
means that no matter where the true
solution lies within this region, the parameters will always haveΔEads−E‡>ΔEdes−E‡. In other words, the ethylene
adsorption
energy on Pd, defined asΔEadsE=ΔEads−E‡−ΔEdes−E‡, is always >0 and therefore,
slightly endothermic.
Based on the values ofΔEads−E‡= 42 kJ/mol andΔEdes−E‡= 38 kJ/mol found by the solver,
it is
expected thatΔEadsEis on the order of ∼ 10 kJ/mol.

Density functional theory (DFT) investigations of ethylene adsorption
on Pd surfaces have predictedΔEadsEas high as ∼ 90 kJ/mol depending
on the geometry of the adsorption site and the tilt of the −CH2groups with respect to the surface.,However, DFT predictions of the ethylene adsorption energy decrease
to as low as ∼ 30 kJ/mol when considering ethylene molecules
adsorbed in the π-bonded configuration.,It is worthwhile to note that whether ethylene is adsorbed in the
di-σ-bonded configuration or in the π-bonded configuration,
it does not influence our derivation of the 2H’ mechanism since
both molecules occupy the same number of surface sites and have reaction
pathways leading to the production of ethane.,Changing from two di-σ-bonds occupying one surface site each
to one π-bond occupying two surface sites would not change the
equations for the model derived in theSupporting Information. The discrepancy in the ethylene adsorption energy
can be reduced further since it has been shown that the interaction
between H2and ethylene is repulsive at short-range. Hence, at the high H2coverage nearing
saturation present in our experiments, the ethylene adsorption energy
is expected to decrease below its DFT-calculated value in both adsorption
modes. Thus,ΔEadsEon the order of ∼10 kJ/mol is a
reasonable approximation, especially since the presence of subsurface
H’ in Pd-rich alloys possibly destabilizes ethylene adsorption
even further.

In this
work, we extended the 2H’ framework established
for H2-D2exchange to obtain a microkinetic
model for ethylene hydrogenation on AgxPd1–xalloy catalysts that incorporates
the presence of subsurface hydrogen, H’, into the reaction
mechanism. The traditional Horiuti-Polanyi mechanism was simplified
and adapted in a way that allowed us to preserve the molecular adsorption
of ethylene and dissociative adsorption of H2while incorporating
the effect of subsurface H’ that is necessary to activate surface
H atoms and facilitate ethylene hydrogenation. We derived a rate law
for ethylene hydrogenation using the 2H’ framework and compared
the implications of the proposed mechanism with experimental measurements
of ethylene hydrogenation taken across a AgxPd1–xCSAF. The 2H’
mechanism for ethylene hydrogenation on Pd was consistent with the
average reaction order in H2measured experimentally,nH2= 0.69 ± 0.18. The 2H’ mechanism’s
prediction ofnH2=12under conditions of high H surface coverage
(θH≅ 1) and low H’ subsurface coverage(θH′≅0)closely matches the reaction order obtained
using the AgxPd1–xCSAF, especially at low reaction temperatures, e.g.,nH2= 0.53 at 345 K. Finally, the ethane production
rate given by the 2H’ mechanism was fit to the experimentally
measured ethane production rate on the pure Pd catalyst to estimate
the remaining kinetic parameters defining the reaction mechanism.
Kinetic parameter estimation bounded the effective hydrogenation rate
constant,keff, to between 1010and 1014mol/m2/sec and predicted an endothermic
ethylene adsorption energy(ΔEadsE)on the order of ∼10 kJ/mol. Kinetic
parameter estimates confirm that the surface H coverage (θH) and subsurface H’ coverage (θ’H) predicted by the model are consistent with the
experimental conditions necessary to obtain the measured values ofnH2. The consistency of the 2H’ mechanism
with experimental measurements of ethylene hydrogenation on our AgxPd1–xCSAF
shows the potential for including the influence of subsurface hydrogen
in modeling increasingly complex surface reactions.

The authors would like to acknowledge
financial
support for this work from NSF CHE 1954340.

The Supporting Information
is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jpcc.5c02240.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.