cAMP-induced intestinal chloride secretion plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of secretory diarrheas.

In this study, we investigated the antisecretory effects of α,β-dehydromonacolin K, a derivative of lovastatin fromAspergillus sclerotiorum, on cAMP-induced chloride secretion in human T84 cells and fluid secretion in human colonoids.

Short-circuit current analyses and swelling assays were used to investigate the effects of α,β-dehydromonacolin K on chloride transport and fluid secretion, respectively. Proteomic analyses were performed to determine the potential anti-diarrheal mechanisms of α,β-dehydromonacolin K.

In T84 cells, α,β-dehydromonacolin K inhibited cAMP-induced chloride secretion with an IC50of ∼ 6.32 μM. Apical chloride current analyses demonstrated that α,β-dehydromonacolin K inhibited CFTR chloride channels stimulated by cAMP agonists with an IC50of ∼ 1 μM. Basolateral potassium current analyses indicated that α,β-dehydromonacolin K had no effect on basolateral potassium channel activities. In a three-dimensional (3D) model of human colonoids, α,β-dehydromonacolin K (20 µM) suppressed both cAMP-induced and calcium-induced fluid secretion by ∼ 70%. Proteomic analyses of human colonoids revealed that α,β-dehydromonacolin K interacted with 33 proteins, including those associated with non-sense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD). Notably, the inhibitory effects of α,β-dehydromonacolin K on cAMP-induced chloride and fluid secretion were significantly diminished in the presence of SMG1i, an inhibitor of serine/threonine-protein kinase SMG1 involved in NMD, suggesting that α,β-dehydromonacolin K inhibits cAMP-induced chloride-driven fluid secretion in human intestinal epithelial cells by mechanisms involving SMG1-dependent NMD pathways.

α, β-Dehydromonacolin K represents a promising class of natural compounds that exert antisecretory effects in human intestinal epitheliaviaa novel mechanism of action involving SMG1 in NMD pathways.

Secretory diarrhea is a common intestinal disorder that causes morbidity and mortality in children with a mortality rate of approximately 78.4 deaths per 100,000 (Guerrant et al.2013). Common causes of secretory diarrheas are intestinal infections with pathogens and adverse effects of drugs including anticancer drugs. Anticancer agents cause diarrheas in 60% of patients, with approximately 10% of patients experiencing severe diarrheas (Stein et al.2010). The main driver of secretory diarrhea is the overactivity of cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), a cAMP-dependent chloride channel expressed in the apical membranes of intestinal epithelial cells (Keely and Barrett2022). Excessive flow of chloride through CFTR leads to efflux of sodium (Na+) and water into the intestinal lumen, resulting in intestinal fluid secretion. This ultimately leads to significant fluid loss, dehydration, and, in severe instances, hypovolemic shock (Muanprasat and Chatsudthipong2013; Thiagarajah et al.2015). Mainstay therapy of secretory diarrheas is an oral rehydration solution, which has limited efficacy in patients with severe diarrhea or compromised health status. Therefore, CFTR inhibitors have been proposed as potential adjunctive therapies of secretory diarrheas. Recent studies using bothin vitroandin vivomodels have demonstrated the therapeutic potential of various CFTR inhibitors derived from synthetic chemical libraries and natural resources for the treatment of secretory diarrheas (Ma et al.2002; Muanprasat et al.2004; Cil et al.2017; Akrimajirachoote et al.2020). Although several compounds have been discovered and demonstrated to hold promise for the treatment of secretory diarrheas, identification and evaluation of novel anti-diarrheal drug candidates, especially anti-secretory agents from natural sources, are still required to offer novel drug candidates, ensuring the successful development of anti-secretory therapy.

Lovastatin, a natural compound derived from red yeast rice, is produced by fermenting cooked rice withMonascus purpureusmold. This compound has a long-standing history in East Asian countries, where it has traditionally been used to enhance blood circulation, alleviate indigestion and diarrheas, and reduce muscle weakness (Zhu et al.2019). Interestingly, α,β-dehydromonacolin K (Figure 1(A)), a lovastatin derivative, has been shown to possess anti-diarrheal effectsin vitroandin vivo(Noitem et al.2022). It was isolated from the soil-derived fungusAspergillus sclerotiorum(Phainuphong et al.2016). However, the anti-secretory effect and exact molecular mechanism of action of α,β-dehydromonacolin K in the human intestinal epithelial cells remain unknown.

Evaluation of cytotoxicity of α,β-dehydromonacolin K andeffect of α,β-dehydromonacolin K on forskolin-induced short circuit current (Isc) in T84 cells. (A) Chemical structure of α,β-dehydromonacolin K. (B) Cytotoxic effect of α,β-dehydromonacolin K. T84 cells were seeded at a density of 1 × 105cells per well in 96-well plates. T84 cells were then incubated for 24 h with culture media containing either 0.5% DMSO, α,β-dehydromonacolin K at concentrations ranging from 1 to 100 µM, or 10% DMSO as a positive control. Colorimetric quantification was obtained. (n= 5) (***,p< 0.001; ****,p< 0.0001 versus vehicle group) (C) (left panel) Iscwas attributed to the CFTR channel, verified by CFTRinh-172 (20 µM). (right panel) effect of α,β-dehydromonacolin K on forskolin-induced Isc. α,β-dehydromonacolin K was accumulatively added to both apical and basolateral solutions. Representative Isctracings are shown (n= 3). (D) The half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of α,β-dehydromonacolin K. (E) Effect of α,β-dehydromonacolin K on basal Iscin T84 cells. α,β-dehydromonacolin K was accumulatively added at concentrations ranging from 0.1 µM to 5 µM. Representative Isctracings are shown (n= 5).

Human mini-intestines, referred to as human enteroids/colonoids (miniature models of the small intestinal and colonic epithelia, respectively), are derived from crypt cells that contain a mixture of cell types (Sato et al.2011). Studies have shown that the functions of human enteroids/colonoids closely mimic those of human intestinal epithelial cells, including their capabilities for intestinal fluid secretion, sodium-hydrogen exchange activity, and glucose absorption (Foulke-Abel et al.2016; Cil et al.2017; Hasan et al.2021). Therefore, the human enteroid/colonoid model is particularly suitable for investigating intestinal function, particularly fluid secretion. This study aimed to explore the anti-secretory effect of α,β-dehydromonacolin K synthesized from lovastatin in T84 cells, a human colon cancer cell line suitable for studying chloride secretion, and in human colonoids, in which its effect on fluid secretion and mechanisms of action were investigated using both functional assays and proteomic analyses.

α,β-Dehydromonacolin K was synthesized from lovastatin by the following method. Acetic anhydride (6 equiv.) and triethylamine (77 equiv.) were added to a solution of lovastatin (1 equiv.) in dichloromethane (0.4 M) at 0 °C. The reaction mixture was then stirred overnight at room temperature. The completion of the reaction was monitored using thin-layer chromatography. The mixture was diluted with dichloromethane and washed with sodium bicarbonate and water. The organic layer was dried over anhydrous Na2SO4, filtered, and concentrated under reduced pressure to give the crude product, which was purified using column chromatography (20% EtOAc/hexane) to give α,β-dehydromonacolin K as a white solid (91% yield). The structure was confirmed by1H and13C NMR data, which are in accordance with those previously reported by Vederas et al. (Sorensen et al.2003). The1H and13C NMR data of α,β-dehydromonacolin K are inSupplemental File 1. CFTRinh-172 was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (catalog number 219670, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Isobutylmethylxanthine (IBMX) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (catalog number 410957, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). 8-(4-chlorophenylthio) adenosine 3′,5′-cyclic monophosphate (CPT-cAMP) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (catalog number C3912, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Genistein was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (catalog number 345834, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Compound C was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (catalog number 171260, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Sodium orthovanadate was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (catalog number 567540, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Sodium fluoride was purchased from Merck Millipore (catalog number 106449, Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany). GlyH-101 was purchased from R&D Systems (catalog number 5485, R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA). SMG1i was purchased from MedChemExpress (catalog number HY-124719, MedChemExpress, Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA). Carbachol was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (catalog number 212385, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA).