Adaptation studies have evaluated ankle instability (AI) across various cultures and sports.

The Cumberland Ankle Instability Tool (CAIT) is a valid patient-reported outcome measure used to assess the presence and severity of AI. The current study aimed to adapt the CAIT to the Turkish language, test its psychometric properties, and determine cutoff scores in a Turkish population with AI compared with observations in their healthy counterparts.

To evaluate the Turkish version of the CAIT (CAIT-TR), data obtained from 236 recreationally active participants with and without AI were examined. Test-retest reliability, internal consistency, cutoff score, and ceiling and floor effects were assessed.

The test-retest reliability of the CAIT-TR was excellent, with an intraclass correlation coefficient of 0.968 and 0.978 for the right and left ankles, respectively. Cronbach α values for the CAIT-TR were calculated as 0.855 and 0.852 for the right and left ankles, respectively. The discriminative ability and cutoff score of the CAIT-TR were determined by defining the receiver operating characteristic curve and calculating the Youden index for the left and right ankles (0.579 and 0.551, respectively), with a cutoff score of 23.5 and threshold of ≤23.

Our study demonstrates that the CAIT-TR is a valid and reliable tool for assessing the presence and severity of AI in recreationally active Turkish-speaking individuals. These data should help in providing a practical assessment tool for care in this population.

Patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs) convert qualitative attributes—such as anxiety, pain, or social functioning—that cannot be directly observed or are impractical to measure directly (eg, performance of daily activities)—into quantitative scores that allow for mathematical analysis, including patient perceptions of specific aspects of one’s own health.3,17Translating and adapting PROMs from one language to another is necessary when a local language–adapted version of a specific PROM does not exist for clinical or academic research.

Given the rising demand for PROM scales that can be widely used in both clinical and scientific research, this study aimed to adapt CAIT into Turkish (CAIT-TR) and Turkish culture, as well as to examine its psychometric properties in recreationally active participants with and without AI. We hypothesized that recreationally active participants with CAI would have significantly higher scores on the CAIT-TR than their non-CAI counterparts, with the calculated cutoff score indicating the presence or absence of CAI.

In the process of adapting the CAIT to the Turkish language and culture, forward and backward translation methods were used, taking into account the International Quality of Life Assessment standard.1In line with this method, the original version of the measurement tool was first translated into Turkish by 2 independent translators who were familiar with the Turkish language and culture. It was confirmed that the translators had no previous knowledge of the CAIT or current research. The resulting Turkish draft translation was evaluated by the translators and field experts (1 sports physician and 1 sports scientist (E.A., C.K.)). During the evaluation process, the most appropriate wording among the alternative expressions was selected by consensus. Two translators fluent in English then translated the final Turkish version of the measurement tool back into English. The meanings of the items were evaluated by comparing the Turkish translations with the original CAIT. To evaluate the validity of the translation, the resulting draft version was pretested by applying it to 20 participants. In line with participant feedback, a final version of the measurement tool was prepared to ensure clarity. Data were collected from the participants using the Turkish version of the questionnaire. Ethical approval for this study was obtained from Eskişehir Technical University. The study protocol was registered at clinicaltrials.gov. Before data collection, participants were informed in writing.

Participants consisted of 122 (51.7%) women and 114 (48.3%) men aged ≥18 years (mean ± SD, 25.81 ± 7.85). Recreationally active individuals were included in the study. Participants were considered recreationally active if they engaged in ≥20 minutes of physical activity 3 times per week. Individuals who had undergone lower-extremity surgery and those with lower-extremity injuries or musculoskeletal conditions unrelated to ankle sprains were excluded from the study. Additionally, individuals with balance disorders due to inner ear conditions were excluded. Participants were divided into 2 groups. The CAI group (n = 126) consisted of participants who had experienced ≥1 ankle sprain ≥2 months prior and had sought treatment previously or were undergoing treatment at the time of the study. These participants were required to have a history of “giving way,” recurrent sprains, and/or a “feeling of instability” in the injured ankle joint. They were also required to have a history of CAI with no pain, swelling, or physical activity limitations for ≥2 months before the study. Participants were evaluated individually by a sports medicine physician (E.A.) for the presence or absence of CAI in accordance with the specific diagnostic criteria of the International Ankle Consortium.20The control group (n = 110) included individuals who had no history of ankle sprains and were not seeking treatment for related issues. Participant characteristics are presented inTable 1.

Data are presented as n (%) or mean ± SD. CAIT, Cumberland Ankle Instability Tool.

The questionnaire used for data collection consisted of 3 parts. The first part contained information on research ethics and voluntary participation. In the second part, the original questionnaire developed by Hiller et al11was adapted to the Turkish language and culture. This section consisted of 9 items. A score between 0 to 3, 0 to 4, or 0 to 5 could be obtained for each item using predefined options. The CAIT score was calculated as the sum of all item scores. Accordingly, the lowest possible total score was zero, and the highest was 30. A high CAIT score indicated greater ankle stability. The third part of the questionnaire included participant demographic data, including age, sex, height, weight, number of sprains, and time since last sprain.

The pretest reliability of the CAIT-TR in 36 participants demonstrated of ICC of 0.968 (95% CI, 0.938-0.984;P< .001) and 0.978 (95% CI, 0.957-0.989;P< .001) for the right and left ankles, respectively, indicating excellent reliability. The mean first-test score for the right ankle was 18.47 ± 6.30, and the mean second-test score was 17.94 ± 5.58. The mean difference in CAIT scores for the right ankle was 0.53. The mean first-test score for the left ankle was 17.97 ± 5.68, and the mean second-test score was 17.03 ± 5.21. The mean difference in CAIT scores for the left ankle was 0.94. The CAIT SEM value was 1.06 and 0.81 for the right and left ankles, respectively, whereas the MDC value was 1.51 and 1.14 for the right and left ankles, respectively. All values are listed inTable 2. These findings confirm that the measurement tool has strong test-retest reliability.

ICC, intraclass correlation coefficient; MDC, minimal detectable change.

In the reliability analysis (n = 236), Cronbach α value for the Turkish version of the CAIT was 0.855 and 0.852 for the right and left ankles, respectively. These values indicate that the measurement tool had good internal consistency for both ankles.

To evaluate the discriminative ability of the Turkish version of the CAIT, data from 236 participants were analyzed, an ROC curve was constructed (Figure 1), and Youden index values were calculated.

Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve of left and right Cumberland Ankle Instability Tool scores.

As shown inTable 3, the maximal Youden index values were 0.579 and 0.551 for the left and right ankles, respectively. The cutoff score for distinguishing individuals with and without AI was 23.5. Thus, individuals with CAIT scores of ≤23 were classified into the AI group. As a result of the analysis, the following values were obtained. Right ankle: sensitivity, 0.836; specificity, 0.714; area under the ROC curve, 0.810; LR+, 2.93; and LR−, 0.229. Left ankle: sensitivity, 0.809; specificity, 0.770; area under the ROC curve, 0.834; LR+, 3.52; and LR−, 0.248.

CAIT, Cumberland Ankle Instability Tool; Sn, sensitivity; Sp, specificity; LR+, positive likelihood; LR–, negative likelihood; NA, not applicable.

The major findings of this study demonstrated that the CAIT-TR exhibited good internal consistency and excellent test-retest reliability for both ankles, with no evidence of ceiling or floor effects. For the Turkish-speaking individuals, the CAIT-TR demonstrated a cutoff score of 23.5, with scores ≤23 indicating AI. These findings support the validity and reliability of the CAIT-TR as a tool for assessing the presence and severity of AI in recreationally active Turkish-speaking individuals.

The rise in recreational sports participation has led to a notable increase in musculoskeletal injuries, particularly ankle sprains.5,8Ankle sprains are highly recurrent and often lead to mechanical and/or functional instability, resulting in CAI.6Mechanical AI results from physical changes such as pathological laxity and degenerative joint disease and is clinically assessed through physical examination methods such as manual testing and stress radiography.6,18In contrast, functional AI arises from neuromuscular alterations and is associated with deficits in neuromuscular control, proprioception, and muscle strength.18Unlike mechanical instability, functional instability is more difficult to assess and is typically evaluated using PROMs.6,18CAIT is a validated PROM used to identify and quantify the severity of functional AI.11This study was conducted to investigate the reliability and validity of the Turkish version of the CAIT questionnaire in identifying and evaluating patients with CAI. The English CAIT was translated into Turkish and then back-translated into English to ensure accuracy. The meaning of all items was preserved, and no modifications were applied. Based on the results of this study, the CAIT is valid for use in the Turkish population for the evaluation of AI.

The internal consistency of PROMs is assessed by calculating the Cronbach alpha coefficient. A high internal consistency value for the CAIT represents a high degree of intercorrelation among all items. Cronbach α for the original version of the CAIT was reported as 0.83.11In the Turkish version, this value was approximately equal to that of the original version.11Previous studies validating the CAIT have reported internal consistency coefficients ranging from 0.77 to 0.92.2,4,9,11,24,29When the Cronbach α values for the right and left ankles obtained in this study are compared with those reported in other cross-cultural adaptation studies, the Brazilian-Portuguese version (0.86-0.88)4and the Korean version (0.92-0.90)15demonstrated slightly higher values, whereas the Persian version showed lower internal consistency (0.81-0.79)9for the right and left ankle. This study focused on recreationally active individuals, whereas differences in sample composition in other studies, including general population, university students, or elite athletes, may explain the variability in findings.4,9,15The test-retest reliability results for the Turkish version of the CAIT were excellent for both the right and the left ankles.

The CAIT generates a total score between 0 and 30, with higher scores reflecting greater ankle stability.11While the original validation study identified a cutoff score of ≤27 for detecting instability, a recalibrated analysis of the English version recommends the use of ≤25 as a more appropriate threshold.11,31The discriminative ability and cutoff score of the CAIT-TR were determined by analyzing the ROC curve and calculating the Youden index (0.579 and 0.551 for the left and right ankles, respectively) with a cutoff score of 23.5. The ideal cutoff point in the Turkish population was lower than the English cutoff (≤27),11slightly lower than the recalculated English cutoff (≤25),31and equal to the French cutoff (≤23).6The cutoff score of the Turkish version was also comparable with those of other versions of the CAIT.18,28This difference in cutoff scores may be due to the distinct characteristics of the study populations. As an example, the Dutch version, which was administered to patients hospitalized in an orthopaedic outpatient setting, identified a cutoff score of 11.5.29Unlike previous studies that recruited athletes, university students, or general population samples, the current study focused on recreationally active individuals, who are at increased risk for ankle injuries.4,9,15In Turkish-speaking populations, a cutoff value of ≤23 can be used to assess AI in recreationally active individuals.

The SEM was used to calculate the minimum difference between 2 measurements that can be considered clinically significant. These values were similar to those of the Dutch version (0.82)29but lower than those reported in other versions of the CAIT.6,9,15,30The MDC represents the smallest score change that can be considered a true change, unaffected by measurement error. In this study, MDC values were calculated as 1.51 and 1.14 for the right and left ankles, respectively, whereas previous studies reported a wide range of values (2.2,294.8,30and 5.6-6.59). Researchers and clinicians should consider observed change scores to be indicative of a clinically meaningful difference in instability only when they exceed the MDC value. Changes below this threshold should be interpreted as falling within the limits of measurement error and therefore disregarded in clinical interpretation.

The CAIT-TR can be considered a valid and reliable self-reported instrument with demonstrated psychometric properties for the assessment of AI. For clinicians, it offers real-time and objective data regarding patients’ AI, enabling the assessment of recurrent sprain risk, and the implementation of effective patient monitoring. For researchers, it may facilitate the selection of more homogeneous control and instability groups, potentially enhancing the internal validity and consistency of study results. CAIT-TR serves as a valuable tool for the assessment of AI in both clinical practice and academic research.

As a limitation of this study, it can be noted that the inclusion of only recreationally active individuals may result in variations in the identified cutoff values when applied to elite athletes, individuals assessed before and after treatment, or different age groups. Future research should be conducted to determine cutoff scores in specific age groups and different sports. If these values differ across groups, using appropriate cutoff scores for each group may improve clinical assessment. As a second limitation, there was some loss of participants due to exclusion criteria and loss to follow-up. However, the sample size remained sufficient for statistical analysis.

Our study demonstrates that the CAIT-TR is a valid and reliable tool for assessing the presence and severity of AI in recreationally active Turkish-speaking individuals. The cutoff score for identifying CAI was determined to be ≤23. These data should help in providing a practical assessment tool for care in recreationally active individuals.

Puanlama ölçeği sağdadır. Puanlama sistemi katılımcı versiyonunda görünmemektedir.