Several distantly related, deep‐branching lineages within the eukaryotic tree of life share what is known as the “typical excavate” morphology. This cell architecture includes a suspension‐feeding ventral groove, supported by complex and specific structures of the cytoskeleton, and a vane‐bearing posterior flagellum. Within Discoba, such characteristics were found only in the deepest branch, Jakobida, also famous for having the most gene‐rich and bacterial‐like mitogenomes. Some members of the discoban lineage Heterolobosea also possess a ventral groove. However, they lost many other typical excavate characteristics, including the flagellar vane and some flagellar root elements. We have established a clonal culture of a free‐living freshwater flagellate from Malaysia, strain NY0229, described here under the provisional nameMultisulcus malaysiensisnom. prov. Electron microscopy observations show a conspicuous ventral groove reinforced with microtubules of the flagellar apparatus and a vane on the posterior flagellum. Strain NY0229 has typical excavate biflagellated forms but also exhibits very atypical multiflagellated and multigrooved forms. The kinetid consists of two orthogonally oriented kinetosomes; both flagella of biflagellate cells display proximal and distal projections. Molecular phylogenetic analyses support a deep‐branching position of the new strain within Heterolobosea, as the sister lineage to all previously known Eutetramitia.

Excavates are a phylogenetically diverse group of single‐celled eukaryotes distinguished by their peculiar ventral (excavated) feeding groove and its associated complex flagellar apparatus. This group encompasses several notable lineages, including both free‐living and parasitic species, with adaptations allowing them to thrive in environments ranging from aquatic habitats to animal hosts. Within this group, “typical excavates”, that is, jakobids, malawimonads,Trimastix,Paratrimastix, “Carpediemonas‐like organisms” and retortamonads, showcase characteristic similar cellular structures, most especially encompassing unique combinations of the complex flagellar apparatus elements, such as vane(s) on the posterior flagellum, I fiber, B fiber, C fiber, split R2, singlet root and a composite fiber (Bernard et al.1997; O'Kelly1993; O'Kelly and Nerad1999; O'Kelly et al.1999; Simpson2003; Simpson and Patterson1999).

Excavates are currently treated more as a convenient grouping of certain protists with similar morphological traits rather than a strict monophyletic lineage. Their phylogeny remains unresolved, and many studies suggest them to be polyphyletic (Baldauf2003; Burki et al.2020; Derelle et al.2015; Torruella et al.2025). Since typical excavates may thus belong to distinct eukaryotic lineages, which might even lie on opposite splits of the eukaryotic tree according to the likely place of its root, some scientists suggest that the typical excavate cell structure may be ancestral to all eukaryotes (Simpson2003; Suzuki‐Tellier et al.2024; Torruella et al.2025; Williamson et al.2024).

Among excavates, the Discoba represents a particularly intriguing clade. Discoba members exhibit distinctive discoidal mitochondrial cristae and include important model organisms (Gibson2017; Leander et al.2017; Pánek et al.2017). This clade encompasses different lineages with specialized characteristics and ecological roles. Only the deepest branching discoban lineage, the jakobids, exhibits a typical excavate morphology (Simpson2003). Another discoban lineage, the Heterolobosea, is evolutionarily important because of its unique morphological and genetic characteristics (Pánek et al.2017). Members of this group are single‐celled, flagellated protists known for their diverse life stages and cellular structures. They are notable for having a flexible amoeboid form at some stages of their life cycle and can transition between amoeboid, flagellate, and cyst stages (Harding et al.2013; Pánek et al.2017,2025). Heteroloboseans are predominantly free‐living, although some are endobionts or facultative pathogens of animals and humans (Pánek et al.2017). They are found in very diverse environments, and many lineages independently adapted to anoxic and/or extreme environments, such as hypersaline, acidic, and thermal habitats (Pánek et al.2017). They have retained some of the ancestral excavate characteristics, including the suspension‐feeding groove, the I fiber, the split of the right root R2, and ancestrally the C fiber (Hanousková et al.2019; Park and Simpson2011; Simpson2003). However, they are not generally recognized as typical excavates because they lack other characteristic traits such as the vane on the posterior flagellum, the B fiber, a singlet root, and a composite fiber (Pánek et al.2017; Simpson2003). Root R1 was thought to be lost in the majority of heterolobosean lineages, but it is found in the deep‐branching generaPharyngomonasandDactylomonas, and presumably also inCreneis carolina(Hanousková et al.2019; Pánek, Simpson, et al.2014; Pánek et al.2017; Park and Simpson2011). OnlyPharyngomonashas retained the C fiber supporting the R1 root (Park and Simpson2011).

A characteristic cellular structure found in all heterolobosean lineages is the absence of classical stacked Golgi dictyosomes (Pánek et al.2017). Mitochondria, if present, contain flattened or discoidal cristae and are usually enveloped by endoplasmic reticulum (Pánek et al.2017). The heterolobosean flagellar apparatus has a characteristic “double bikont” structure in which all flagellar elements are doubled (Pánek et al.2017), and kinetosomes are oriented nearly parallel to each other in most lineages, except in the deep‐branchingPharyngomonasspp. andDactylomonasspp. (Hanousková et al.2019; Park and Simpson2011).

Heterolobosea are known for their complex life cycles, which exhibit alternations between amoeboid, flagellated, and cyst stages (Pánek et al.2017). One or two life stages may be missing in some lineages, often within the same clade. For example,Selenaion koniopesis a typical heterolobosean amoeba with eruptive pseudopodia and cysts (Park et al.2012), while its sister lineageDactylomonasis a typical flagellate with unknown amoeboid and cyst stages (Hanousková et al.2019). By contrast, all three stages of the life cycle are found in the deepest‐branching lineage,Pharyngomonas, suggesting that this feature may have been present in the last common ancestor of Heterolobosea (Harding et al.2013).

Heterolobosea comprise two sister subphyla, Pharyngomonada and Tetramitia (Yang et al.2017). The species‐poor Pharyngomonada includes the single genusPharyngomonas, with halotolerant or halophilic representatives (Park and Simpson2011,2016). A rare fusion of two key genes coding for peroxisomal β‐oxidation enzymes (MFP and ACCA1) was recently identified as an autapomorphy for the subphylum Pharyngomonada (Pánek et al.2025). Members of the taxonomically diverse Tetramitia exhibit a wide range of morphologies, including typically tetraflagellated and amoeboid cells, but also the multiflagellated pseudociliateStephanopogonspp. (Lee et al.2014; Patterson and Brugerolle1988; Yubuki and Leander2008), and the aggregative slime moldsAcrasisandPocheinawith multicellular fruiting bodies (Brown et al.2010; Hohl and Hamamoto1969). The presence of an extra helix (17_1) in the 18S rRNA molecule is considered a synapomorphy for the subphylum Tetramitia (Nikolaev et al.2004). The phylogenetic relationships among the subgroups of Tetramitia remain not fully resolved due to the lack of massive sequence data for some representatives (Pánek, Simpson, et al.2014; Pánek et al.2017,2025). Pánek, Simpson, et al. (2014) divided Tetramitia into eight subgroups (I–VIII) plus the speciesC. carolina. Recently, the new class Selenaionea, uniting Selenaionida and Neovahlkampfiida, was found to be the first to diverge based on molecular and morphological data, thereby distinguishing them from the class Eutetramitia (Hanousková et al.2019; Pánek, Simpson, et al.2014; Park et al.2012).

In this study, we isolated a free‐living freshwater bacteriotrophic flagellated strain (NY0229) from Malaysia. The new strain was characterized by a typical excavate‐like biflagellated form but also exhibited unusual multiflagellated and multigrooved forms, constantly present in our culture. Unfortunately, the strain NY0229 died after 2 years of cultivation, leaving some gaps in its morphological characterization. Therefore, we do not formulate here its formal taxonomic diagnosis but provide a provisional name (Multisulcus malaysiensisnom. prov.) that can be used for future research. The provisional name is an unusual formulation within Zoological nomenclature (in particular) and has no status within Zoological nomenclature, nor any other code. Both 18S rRNA gene and multigene molecular phylogenetic analyses supported a very deep position of the new strain within Tetramitia (Heterolobosea), sister to Selenaionea and Eutetramitia.

Water samples were collected from a freshwater body in the palm oil factory Seri Ulu Langat Palm Oil Mill Sdn Bhd, Batu 34, Jalan Banting, Dengkil, 43800, Dengkil, Selangor, 43800, Malaysia, on February 18, 2018. The clonal culture strain NY0229 was obtained by isolating individual cells using a glass micropipette and transferring them to Volvic mineral water (Danone, France) supplemented with 1% YT (100 mg of yeast extract and 200 mg of tryptone in 100 mL of distilled water as described in the protocol from the National Institute for Environmental Studies, Japan). The nonaxenic culture was maintained at 15°C, with the medium renewed every 2 weeks. Unfortunately, the strain NY0229 died after 2 years of cultivation.

Light microscopy (LM) observations of strain NY0229 were conducted using an inverted Zeiss Axiovert 40 CFL microscope equipped with phase contrast objectives (20× and 40×) and an upright Zeiss Axioplan 2 microscope equipped with an oil‐immersion DIC objective (100×). Videos were recorded with a Sony α9 digital camera.

For scanning electron microscopy (SEM), a concentrated cell culture was mixed with 4% glutaraldehyde (resulting in a final concentration of 2%) diluted in 0.2 M sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.2). The mixture was deposited on a 9‐mm circular coverslip coated with poly‐l‐lysine and fixed for 1 h. After fixation, cells were washed with 0.2 M sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.2) and dehydrated through a graded series of ethanol baths (30%, 50%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 100% three times for 10 min each). Subsequently, coverslips with cells were washed in 100% hexamethyldisiloxane three times for 15 min and then dried at room temperature. The dry coverslips were mounted on aluminum stubs, coated with platinum, and observed using a GeminiSEM 500 (Carl Zeiss, Germany) scanning electron microscope.

For transmission electron microscopy (TEM), aliquots of cell‐rich cultures were mixed with glutaraldehyde (2.5% final concentration) and paraformaldehyde (2% final concentration) diluted in 0.2 M sodium cacodylate buffer and fixed for 1 h at room temperature. After fixation, the cell pellets were collected by centrifugation for 10 min at 1000g, washed with 0.2 M cacodylate buffer (pH 7.2) and then fixed with 1% osmium tetroxide diluted in phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS) for 1.5 h at room temperature. Following fixation, the cells were dehydrated through a series of alcohol baths (30%, 50%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 96%, 100% twice for 10 min each) and acetone (100% twice for 10 min); the pellets were subsequently embedded in Low Viscosity resin (EM 0300 Sigma‐Aldrich). Ultrathin sections (70 nm) were prepared using a Leica EM UC6 ultramicrotome (Leica Microsystems, Germany), double‐stained with 2% uranyl acetate and 2% lead citrate, and observed using a JEM‐1400 transmission electron microscope (JEOL, Japan).

For DNA extraction, a 100 μL volume of cell culture was centrifuged at the maximum speed (13,400g) for 5 min, and the supernatant was removed. Then, 30 μL of 0.1 M Tris buffer (pH 8) were added to the pellet. The mixture was microwaved at low intensity three times for 5 s each to lyse the cells. Finally, the cell lysate was stored at −20°C. PCR amplification of the 18S rRNA gene was performed using a nested approach. In the first PCR reaction, 2 μL of the cell lysate was added to a Platinum Taq polymerase reaction mix (Promega, Lyon, France) with one of these two combinations of universal eukaryotic primers: (A) EK‐1F (5′‐CTGGTTGATCCTGCCAG‐3′) and EK‐1269R (5′‐AAGAACGGCCATGCACCAC‐3′) and (B) EK‐1F and 18S‐1379R (5′‐TGTGTACAAAGGGCAGGGAC‐3′). The resulting PCR products from primer set A were then reamplified using primer set 555F (5′‐AGTCTGGTGCCAGCAGCCGC‐3′) and 1269R, while the products from primer set B were reamplified with the primer set 18S‐42F (5′‐CTCAARGAYTAAGCCATGCA‐3′) and 1379R. The amplification steps were as follows: initial denaturing period at 95°C for 3 min, followed by 35 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 45 s, annealing at 55°C for 45 s, extension at 72°C for 2 min, and a final extension period at 72°C for 5 min.

Sanger sequencing of amplification products was performed by GENEWIZ (Leipzig, Germany). We used MAFFT (Katoh et al.2002) with default settings to align the two overlapping sequences and obtain a consensus sequence using the cloud‐based platform Benchling (https://www.benchling.com/). The resulting 1451 bp long 18S rRNA gene fragment sequence was used to determine the preliminary phylogenetic position of strain NY0229. Subsequent transcriptome analysis (see below) allowed us to extract the complete 18S rRNA gene sequence, 2531 bp long, which was submitted to GenBank under accession numberPQ627902.

We updated the 18S rRNA gene datasets created by Hanousková et al. (2019) and Pánek et al.2025by including our complete 18S rRNA gene sequence of strain NY0229, resulting in a total of 53 heterolobosean species and including jakobids andTsukubamonasas outgroups. A multiple sequence alignment was prepared using MAFFT v7.427 (Katoh and Standley2013) and trimmed with Trimal v1.5 (Capella‐Gutiérrez et al.2009) by removing sites with gaps in more than 20% of the sequences (‐gt 0.8), resulting in a total of 1436 nucleotide positions. To infer Bayesian phylogenetic trees, the parallel MPI version of MrBayes v.3.2.7a (Ronquist et al.2012) was used with the GTR model with four gamma‐distributed among‐site rate variation categories (GTR + I + GAMMA4). To calculate posterior probabilities of individual branches, four independent Metropolis‐coupled Markov chains were run for 20 million generations and summarized after the 50% burn‐in. The convergence of log‐likelihood values and model parameters for chains was verified using a plot and convergence diagnostics provided by the MrBayes sump utility. A maximum likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree was inferred with IQ‐TREE (Minh et al.2020) v.2.2.2.6 with the GTR + F + I + R5 substitution model chosen by the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) using the in‐built ModelFinder (Kalyaanamoorthy et al.2017) option and 1000 non‐parametric bootstrap pseudoreplicates for statistical support. Trees were visualized and edited with the cloud‐based platform iTOL (Letunic and Bork2024).

For the reconstruction of the secondary structure of 18S rRNA molecules, we used the RNAstructure WebServer (https://rna.urmc.rochester.edu/RNAstructureWeb/Servers/Predict1/Predict1.html).

Cells from grown cultures were collected by centrifugation for 15 min at 15,000gand 10°C. Total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy mini Kit (Qiagen) following the manufacturer's protocol, including a DNAse treatment, and quantified using a Qubit fluorometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). After polyA mRNA selection, cDNA Illumina libraries were constructed, tagged, and paired‐end (2 × 150 bp) sequenced with NovaSeq 6000 S2 (Eurofins Genomics, Germany). Raw reads were submitted to the SRA NCBI database under the Bioproject PRJNA1188566. High‐quality reads, checked with FastQC v0.11.8 (Andrews2010), were used for de novo assembly with the default version of Spades v3.13.1 (Bankevich et al.2012) with ‐rna mode.

Prior to the multigene phylogenetic analyses, transcripts were translated using TransDecoder v5.5 (https://github.com/TransDecoder/) with the LongOrfs option. Gene completeness was investigated using BUSCO v4 (Simão et al.2015) with the eukaryota_db10 dataset. The peptides were included in a paneukaryotic phylogenomic dataset, as in a previous study (Torruella et al.2025), using BLASTp (Altschul et al.1990). Briefly, homologs of 351 conserved protein markers were identified using sequences fromHomo,Saprolegnia,Spizellomyces, andDiphylleiaas queries. Non‐orthologous sequences were removed after manually inspecting the single marker alignments with 230 taxa [with Aliview v1.26 (Larsson2014)] and single‐gene trees [with FigTree v1.4.3 (Rambaut2016)], done with MAFFT v7.427 (Katoh and Standley2013) L‐INS‐i with 1000 iterations, trimmed with Trimal v1.4.rev22 (Capella‐Gutiérrez et al.2009) with the automated1 option, and inferred with FastTree v2.1.11 (Price et al.2010). For the final dataset, most taxa were removed, keeping the 12 outgroup representatives from most eukaryotic supergroups, 8 metamonads as sister to 17 discobans, resulting in a dataset of 350 markers for 37 species. After realigning and trimming with the same software and parameters, the markers were concatenated with alvert.py from the barrel‐o‐monkeys (http://rogerlab.biochemistryandmolecularbiology.dal.ca/Software/Software.htm#Monkeybarrel), yielding 112,451 amino acid positions. A ML phylogenetic tree was inferred using IQ‐TREE (Minh et al.2020) v1.6 under the LG + C60 + G mixture model as chosen by BIC (‐mwopt flag) with 1000 ultrafast bootstraps, and used as a guide tree for the posterior mean site frequencies (PMSF) approximation (Wang et al.2018) to calculate 100 non‐parametric bootstraps as statistical support.

We used the 14 mitochondrial protein dataset from Galindo et al. (2023) and updated it with the sequences Cox1 and Nad5 from the NY0229 inferred proteome. These two proteins were the only complete mitochondrial proteins that we could retrieve from our data. The dataset was aligned with MAFFT v7.427 (Katoh and Standley2013) and trimmed with Trimal v1.4.rev22 (Capella‐Gutiérrez et al.2009) using the automated1 option, resulting in a final dataset with 26 species and 4524 amino acid positions. An ML phylogenetic tree was inferred with IQ‐TREE (Minh et al.2020) v1.6 under the LG + C60 + F + R6 model, as chosen by BIC using the ‐TESTNEW option, with 1000 ultrafast bootstraps (‐mwopt flag). This tree was then used as a guide tree for the PMSF approximation (Wang et al.2018) to calculate 1000 ultra‐fast bootstraps as statistical support.

To check for the presence of a fusion of the peroxisomal multifunctional protein (MFP) and peroxisomal ketoacyl‐CoA thiolase (ACCA1), we used the fused sequence ofPharyngomonas kirbyias a query in a BLAST search (Altschul et al.1990) to screen theMultisulcusproteome predicted from the sequenced transcriptome. Transcriptome assembly, predicted proteome, and all phylogenetic information, including sequence datasets and trees, can be found at:https://figshare.com/projects/Multisulcus_malaysiensis/220201. Transcriptome raw read sequence data have been submitted to GenBank in the form of SRA under accession number PRJNA1188566.

We were able to determine some features of the cell morphology and characteristics of movement based on LM observations of living cells. However, due to the unexpected death of the culture, we could not conduct more extensive LM observations. Accordingly, the external morphology of the cells was mainly described based on fixed cells and SEM observations (see below).

M. malaysiensisnom. prov. strain NY0229 exhibited biflagellated and multiflagellated stages, both equally represented in all our cultures. Biflagellated cells (Figure1A–G) were ovoid, measuring about 7–8 μm in length, with a concave ventral side and a visible ventral groove (Figure1A–C). The posterior part of the cell was elongated and sometimes pointed (Figure1A). The right side of the ventral groove was more pronounced (Figure1B). A single nucleus, with a central nucleolus, was situated near the flagellar bases, in the anterior part of the cell (Figure1D). Some cells had irregular pseudopodia, extending from different parts of the cell (Figure1G). Tetraflagellated cells with two differently originated sets of flagella were ovoid and did not have a clearly visible ventral groove (Figure1H,I). Multiflagellated cells were varied in shape depending on their size; smaller cells (8–12 flagella) were generally rounded (Figure1J–L), while the larger cells were usually irregular in shape (Figure1M–O). Multiflagellated cells contained several nuclei located peripherally, close to the associated flagella (Figure1J–O). All types of cells possessed many large round vacuoles, which were larger in multiflagellated forms (Figure1L,M).

Light microscopy images ofMultisulcus malaysiensis: (A–G) Biflagellated cells with a prominent ventral groove (A, B, D), with a pointed posterior end (A), and pseudopodia (G); (H, I) Tetraflagellated cells; (J–M) Multiflagellated cells with rounded (J–L) and irregular (M–O) cell bodies. fl, flagella; n, nucleus; ps, pseudopodia; vg, ventral groove. Scale bars: 5 μm.

The cells were always swimming and vibrating, and could be found in various parts of the water column (VideoS1). The direction of movement constantly changed, rarely moving in a straight line or in a circle, sometimes exhibiting slow rotation around the cell axis. The flagella moved quickly and were poorly visible under LM. We did not observe any amoeboid or cyst stages.

Biflagellated cells had a non‐flattened ovoid body with a concave ventral side and a convex dorsal side (Figure2A–C). They measured 5.2–8.2 μm in length (mean ± SD of 6.7 ± 0.8 μm,n= 38) and 2.8–5.2 μm in width (mean ± SD of 3.6 ± 0.4 μm,n= 38). The average ratio of cell length to cell width was 1.9 (range: 1.3–2.6). The posterior part of the cell was more elongated and pointed, often slightly curved (Figure2B,C). The anterodorsal part of the cell was concave, probably due to the support of microtubules beneath the plasma membrane (Figure2A,B). Observed tetraflagellated cells with a single ventral groove (Figure2D) had a similar cell size to biflagellated cells, measuring 5.8–8.4 μm in length (mean ± SD of 7.3 ± 1.0 μm,n= 6) and 4.2–5.6 μm in width (mean ± SD of 4.9 ± 0.6 μm,n= 6). The average ratio of cell length to cell width for those cells was 1.5 (range: 1.0–1.7). Spherical tetraflagellated cells were also found, featuring two ventral grooves on the opposite sides of the body (Figure2M). Multiflagellated cells had a more flattened shape (Figure2N,O), typically rounded in outline, and measured 9.8–14.8 μm in diameter (mean ± SD of 11.5 ± 1.6 μm,n= 17). The largest observed multiflagellated cells reached up to 42.3 μm and were irregular in shape (not shown).

Scanning electron microscopy images ofMultisulcus malaysiensis: (A–C) “Typical excavate‐like” biflagellated cells; (D) “Typical excavate‐like” tetraflagellated cell; (E–L) Variability of flagellated vanes and projections including proximal projections on the AF (E), typical vane on the PF (F), vane and projections on the opposite sides of the PF (G), merged vane and projections on the same side of the PF (H), typical semicircular distal projections (I), rectangular distal projections (J), small distal projections (K), two distal projections on the opposite sides; (M) Rounded tetraflagellated cell; (N, O) Multiflagellated rounded cells with multiple ventral grooves. a, acronema; af, anterior flagellum; mt, microtubules under plasmalemma; pf, posterior flagellum; vg, ventral groove; white arrow, projections; black arrow, vane on the PF; black arrowhead, putative extrusomes; white asterisk, cytostome. Scale bars: (A–D, M–O) 5 μm, (E–L) 0.5 μm.

The conspicuous ventral groove extended for almost the entire cell length in biflagellated forms (Figure2A–C). The ribbed inner surface of the ventral groove (Figure2B,C) was probably due to the microtubules of the flagellar roots reinforcing it underneath the plasma membrane. The right side of the ventral groove was more pronounced and bent (Figure2A–D,M). The margins of the ventral groove were very prominent and thickened. A small opening, measuring 0.3 ± 0.1 μm in diameter (possibly the cytostome), was sometimes visible in the posterior part of the ventral groove (Figure2A–C). Multiflagellated cells exhibited multiple ventral grooves on the cell surface, with the characteristic ribbed inner surface (Figure2N,O). From what can be discerned from SEM images, these ventral grooves were mainly oriented in one direction (parallel to each other and aligned with the anterior–posterior direction).

The flagella emerged subapically from the most anterior end of the ventral groove. The anterior flagellum (AF) was directed perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the cell body at the site of its emergence (Figure2A–C), while the posterior flagellum (PF) was usually directed backward and passed within the ventral groove (Figure2A–C,E,F). The AF measured 4.3–21.4 μm in length (mean ± SD of 14.9 ± 3.8 μm,n= 35), making it 2.2 times longer than the cell body. The PF ranged from 7.9 to 29.2 μm in length (mean ± SD of 19.1 ± 4.6 μm,n= 35), 2.8 times longer than the cell body. Both flagella had a noticeable acronema, measuring 0.6–5.8 μm long (mean ± SD of 2.7 ± 0.9 μm,n= 77). Tetraflagellated cells with shorter flagella (4.6–4.8 μm long) were occasionally observed (Figure2D), most likely indicating the process of cell division.

The PF had a prominent ventral vane (directed away from the cell) that measured 1.8–4.0 μm in length and 0.2–0.3 μm in width (n= 22) (Figure2A–C,F–H). In addition to the posterior vane, both flagella bore semicircular or semioval flattened projections at the most distal (Figure2A,I–L) and at the proximal (Figure2E,M) parts of the axonema. The proximal and distal projections were mostly similar in shape, measuring 0.2–1.7 μm in length (mean ± SD of 0.9 ± 0.3 μm,n= 55) and 0.2–0.8 μm in width (n= 55). Length to width ratio was 1.9 (range 1.0–3.6). When located in the proximal part of the PF, such projections were merged with the vane (Figure2B,H), although projections were sometimes found on the opposite side of the PF (Figure2G) and, occasionally, on both sides of the distal part of the AF (Figure2L). Vanes and both types of projections were also present in the tetra‐ and multiflagellated cells (Figure2M–O). Occasionally, projections appeared very small and almost circular in outline (Figure2K). A slight thickening in the proximal part of the AF was rarely observed (Figure2A, white arrow), which probably represented folded projections. Apart from the structures described above, the flagella were naked and did not carry additional elements such as mastigonemes or scales.

The cell surface was usually covered with extrusome‐like structures (Figure2A–C,E,F,M–O) measuring 0.1–0.4 μm in diameter (n= 57). They were very similar in size and shape and found on almost every cell (except in those poorly fixed), including bi‐, tetra‐, and multiflagellated forms. The cell surface also displayed some very small holes (Figure2A,B), most probably fixation artifacts.

Thin sections ofM. malaysiensisrevealed some characteristic features, despite suboptimal fixation. The nucleus (1.14–2.26 μm in diameter,n= 24) usually occupied an anterior position in the cell, closely associated with the flagella, and appeared generally round or irregular (Figure3A,B), likely due to fixation artifacts. A large single round nucleolus was situated in the center of the nucleus and had a diameter of at least 0.39 μm (n= 22). In some cells, the nucleolus had a more electron‐dense rounded area located on its periphery (Figure3A,Bindicated by white asterisks). This region was 0.22–0.41 μm in diameter (n= 12).

Transmission electron microscopy images ofMultisulcus malaysiensis: (A) transverse section through the anterior part of the cell with the apical nucleus and central nucleolus, note the presence of a densely stained eccentrical area in the nucleolus indicated by a white asterisk; (B) longitudinal section of the whole cell showing apical nucleus and numerous mitochondria concentrated near the nucleus, the insets show magnified parts of the cell with dense bodies (putative extrusomes); (C) transverse section through the middle part of the cell showing numerous food vacuoles and the developed ventral groove; (D) magnified part of the cell from (A), showing the anterior part of the ventral groove reinforced with microtubules; (E) magnified part of the cell from (C) with microtubular rows supporting the margins of the ventral groove, and rarely spaced microtubules (indicated by black arrowheads) underlying the floor of the ventral groove, the inset shows a magnified part of the groove margin with double rows of microtubules (black asterisks indicating beginning and end of the external row); (F–H) orientation of basal bodies and flagella; (I) proximal part of microtubular root with Z‐shape, note cytoplasmic microtubules probably directed to support the dorsal side of the cell, black arrowheads pointing out microtubules; (J) longitudinal section of the anterior part of the cell with posteriorly directed microtubules; (K) mitochondria with discoidal cristae and dense body (putative extrusome); (L) rounded “empty” vesicles; (M) probable pinocytosis; (N) anterior part of the cell with numerous mitochondria surrounded by rough ER. af, anterior flagellum; db, dense body (putative extrusome); fv, food vacuole; mt—mitochondria; n, nucleus; nu, nucleolus; pf, posterior flagellum; v, vacuole. Scale bars: (A–C) 2 μm, (D–N) 0.5 μm.

We did not observe a conspicuous Golgi body. Numerous elongated mitochondria were mostly located in the anterior part of the cell (Figure3A–C,E,J,K,N), surrounded by rough endoplasmic reticulum (Figure3E,K,N). Mitochondrial cristae were discoidal in shape, rather than flattened (Figure3E,K). Rarely, round electron‐dense bodies (putative extrusomes) were found in the vicinity of the plasma membrane (Figure3B,J,K). These bodies had a paracrystalline appearance and a single‐layered binding membrane (Figure3B, insertions). Such electron‐dense bodies were 0.11–0.4 μm in diameter (n= 62). One of them was always situated near the flagellar insertion (Figure3J). Food vacuoles containing partially digested bacteria were located in the posterior part of the cell, often along the ventral groove (Figure3A–C). Round and elongated electron‐lucent vesicles of variable size (between 0.18 and 0.91 μm,n= 53) occupied a peripheral position in the cell (Figure3B,G,J,L). Smaller vesicles were generally round, while larger vesicles were usually more elongated.

In the biflagellate cells, two kinetosomes appeared oriented nearly orthogonal to each other (Figure3F–H). We could not observe the kinetosomal structure, but we found microtubules of the flagellar apparatus reinforcing the ventral groove from the inside. We also observed a Z‐like orientation of microtubules in the proximal part of the cell (Figure3I). The middle part was formed by 11 microtubules in a flat row, with three additional microtubules from each side. There were at least 14 microtubules located on one side of the groove (Figure3D,E), and two closely adjusted parallel rows of microtubules on another side of the groove (Figure3E, insertion): seven microtubules located closely to the plasma membrane, and about 20 microtubules located more internally. In addition, there were several rarely spaced microtubules lining the floor of the ventral groove (Figure3E, indicated by black arrowheads). Thin sections also showed the vane on the PF (Figure3E), but fine details were not discernible.

We amplified and Sanger sequenced the 18S rRNA gene of strain NY0229. The length of the resulting sequence was 1451 bp. Preliminary BLAST (Altschul et al.1990) searches against the nonredundant (nr) GenBank database did not help to determine the precise phylogenetic affiliation of the new strain. We therefore prepared a multiple 18S rRNA gene sequence alignment containing a wide range of eukaryotic lineages; a preliminary phylogenetic analysis revealed that the new strain was related to Heterolobosea (not shown). Based on this result, we carried out a more targeted maximum likelihood (ML) and Bayesian Inference (BI) phylogenetic analyses using a comprehensive set of heterolobosean 18S rRNA gene sequences, including sequences representing all known lineages of two subphyla, Pharyngomonada and Tetramitia, based on Hanousková et al. (2019) and Pánek et al. (2025), and rooted usingTsukubamonas globosaand jakobid sequences as an outgroup. For these phylogenetic analyses, we used the complete 18S rRNA gene sequence (2531 bp) extracted from transcriptome data (see below). Both phylogenetic analyses showed thatM. malaysiensisrepresents a distinct deep‐branching lineage within the Tetramitia, sister to both Eutetramitia and Selenaionea, with a high statistical support (Figure4).

Phylogenetic tree generated from Bayesian analysis of 18S rRNA gene sequences showing the phylogenetic position ofMultisulcus malaysiensisstrain NY0229 within Heterolobosea. The tree was reconstructed using an updated version of the dataset from Hanousková et al. (2019) for a total of 53 species and 1436 nucleotide positions. Bayesian posterior probabilities (GTR + I + GAMMA4 model) and ML (GTR+ F + I + R5 model) bootstrap values are indicated at branches; black dots indicate values of BPP = 1.00 and ML bootstrap = 100%; dt: different topology.

Interestingly, we retrieved the monophyly of Selenaionea (Selenaionida and Neovahlkampfiida), although with a low statistical support. This topology was previously obtained by multigene phylogenetic analysis with full statistical support (Pánek et al.2025). Another unexpected result was the position of Creneidae, branching within Tetramitia VI, notably as a sister to Psalteriomonadidae (Psalteriomonas,Harpagon,Pseudoharpagon,Monopylocystis). This topology also had a low statistical support. In all other respects, the topology that we obtained within Tetramitia was congruent with Hanousková et al. (2019).

To verify this main result using more data, we isolated total RNA fromM. malaysiensisand sequenced its transcriptome to carry out a multigene ML phylogenetic analysis. The resulting multigene tree was based on 350 conserved proteins and included 37 species. It robustly placed the new strain within Tetramitia with 100% support (Figure5A) as an individual branch sister to the Eutetramitia clade (containingNaegleria gruberi,Percolomonas cosmopolitus, andSawyeria marylandensis) with 100% support.P. kirbyibranched as the deepest branching heterolobosean lineage with maximal support.

(A) ML phylogenomic tree reconstructed from a dataset of 350 conserved proteins. The tree was reconstructed using 37 species and 112,451 amino acid positions with the LG + C60 + G model using the PMSF approximation and 100 non‐parametric bootstraps as statistical support. (B) ML phylogenomic tree based on six conserved mitochondrion‐encoded proteins from Galindo et al. (2023). The tree was reconstructed using 26 species and 4524 amino acid positions under the LG + C60 + F + R6 model using the PMSF approximation and 1000 ultra‐fast bootstrap replicates as statistical support.

Finally, we analyzed mitochondrial proteins. An ML phylogenetic analysis based on 14 conserved mitochondrion‐encoded proteins from Galindo et al. (2023) also placedM. malaysiensissister to Eutetramitia (containingStachyamoeba lipophora,Acrasis kona,Pleurostomum flabellatum,N. gruberi, andN. fowleri) with strong support (98%), whereas Pharyngomonada (containingP. kirbyiand Heterolobosea sp. BB2) emerged as the first heterolobosean branch (Figure5B).

In agreement with its phylogenetic relation with Tetramitia, we found the characteristic helix 17_1 of the 18S rRNA sequence, which is a synapomorphy of Tetramitia (Harding et al.2013; Nikolaev et al.2004), inM. malaysiensis(FigureS1). This helix is missing in Pharyngomonada. To check if the MFP‐ACAA1 gene fusion, which was recently found to be an autapomorphy of Pharyngomonada (Pánek et al.2025), was present, we searched it in theMultisulcusproteome predicted from the sequenced transcriptome using the fused sequence ofP. kirbyias query in a BLAST search. We found MFP and ACAA1 as individual proteins encoded by two different transcripts. Thus,M. malaysiensislacks this characteristic autapomorphy of Pharyngomonada. Altogether, our molecular phylogenetic analyses support the phylogenetic position ofM. malaysiensisas a distinct deep‐branching lineage at the class level within Tetramitia.

M. malaysiensisnom. prov. has biflagellated and multiflagellated stages in the life cycle. Remarkably, the biflagellated forms are superficially reminiscent of jakobids, the deepest branching lineage of Discoba, and other typical excavates. This is most apparent at the level of the highly developed deep ventral groove, which extends along the entire cell length, and a probable vane on the PF. Heteroloboseans lost the vane, and some flagellated lineages have even completely lost the ventral groove, for example,Dactylomonasspp.,Euplaesiobystra hypersalinica,Naegleriaspp.,Willaertia magna,Stephanopogonspp., andC. carolina(Hanousková et al.2019; Pánek et al.2017). As for other discobid lineages, they either lost it completely, as in Euglenozoa, or highly reduced it to a shallow temporal groove, as inT. globosa(Gibson2017; Leander et al.2017; Yabuki et al.2011).

The main and original function of the ventral groove is facilitating suspension feeding by creating a water flow thanks to the PF undulating within it (Suzuki‐Tellier et al.2024). Moreover, the ventral groove is most efficient when combined with a vane‐bearing PF. It has been shown that the energy efficiency of suspension feeding is significantly reduced both by beating a vaned flagellum outside the ventral groove or by beating a naked flagellum inside the ventral groove (Suzuki‐Tellier et al.2024). Therefore, both structures (the ventral groove and the PF vane) usually co‐occur because of their synergetic function, leading to increased feeding efficacy.

Many typical excavates remain attached to the substrate during suspension feeding. This is achieved by the attachment of the AF, the distal part of the PF, the posterior end of the cell, or even with the stalk of loricated jakobids (Suzuki‐Tellier et al.2024). At the same time, the swimming efficiency of typical excavates is low. It is interesting to note that our strain NY0229 did not attach to the substrate during feeding and constantly swam, despite having a fully developed ventral groove. In typical excavates, the ventral groove is usually accompanied by one to three vanes on the PF. These PF vanes were previously thought to be lost in heteroloboseans (Pánek et al.2017). We therefore describe here the first observation of a PF vane in Heterolobosea. The presence of two oppositely directed flagellar vanes is the most common configuration in excavates and is considered to be ancestral (Simpson2003). The ventral vane (directed away from the cell) is the most prominent and better developed (wider and longer) in most excavates, including most “Carpediemonas‐like organisms,” the deepest jakobid branch Ophirinina, and some species in the deep‐branching Preaxostyla lineage Paratrimastigidae (Galindo et al.2023; Hampl2017; Kulda2017; Yabuki et al.2018). By contrast, the core jakobids have a single dorsal vane. In each excavate group, the PF vane is supported internally by striated lamella, which strongly suggests the homology of this structure (Simpson2003). We did not obtain good transverse sections of theMultisulcusvane to see if it also contains striated lamella. Obtaining this data in future studies would help to better understand its origin and evolution.

In addition to the PF vane,Multisulcushad projections located proximally and distally on both flagella, which is a unique feature of this species. We observed these projections on most flagella, although some were very small and even absent on recently divided cells with short flagella (Figure2D). The proximal projection on the PF could be found on the same side as the vane, and thus both structures merged, or alternatively, the proximal projection and the vane could also be on opposite sides. This indicates that the location of the projections is not strictly determined. Similar projections, but only on the PF proximal part, were found inDactylomonas(Hanousková et al.2019). They are supported by striated fibers similar to the striated lamella of typical excavates. The projections onDactylomonas venustaare similar in size (0.5 μm wide) to the projections we observe (0.5 ± 0.15 μm wide), whileDactylomonas crassahas much wider projections (1–1.5 μm wide).

It is remarkable that very similar flagellar projections have been identified in three distantly related lineages of Heterolobosea, but are unknown outside this phylum. These projections probably have a common origin, although this hypothesis will need further testing. Since we observe both projections and PF vanes inMultisulcus, the idea that the projections are reduced excavate vanes (Hanousková et al.2019) seems unlikely. Most probably, these structures evolved independently and perform different functions.

A unique character ofMultisulcusis the presence of multiflagellated stages. We observed multiple well‐developed feeding grooves on these multiflagellated forms, each groove being associated with its own pair of flagella. Moreover, in LM, we observed many nuclei, each located near the associated pair of flagella. The flagellar apparatus and nucleus inMultisulcusseem closely connected to one another, thus representing a single morpho‐functional complex, a karyomastigont. This assumption needs to be confirmed by transmission electron microscopy of thin sections of multiflagellated forms.

Karyomastigonts are only known in one heterolobosean species,Psalteriomonas lanterna, but are widespread in many metamonads, including oxymonads, trichomonads, cristamonads, and diplomonads (Adam2017; Broers et al.1990; Čepička et al.2017; Hampl2017). The evolution of these groups often involved the polymerization of a karyomastigont, sometimes reaching tens and even hundreds in a single cell (Čepička et al.2017). Diplomonads represent the simplest version of karyomastigont polymerization, a duplication. Interestingly,Trepomonas agilishas two narrow lateral grooves, one on each cell side (Eyden and Vickerman1975). Two ventral grooves, each associated with its own pair of flagella, have also been observed in the dividing cells of the otherwise normally biflagellated “Carpediemonas‐like organism”Kipferlia bialata(Yubuki et al.2013). Spheroidal “monster” cells, up to 50 μm in diameter, with several nuclei and flagellar pairs, have been observed inMalawimonas jakobiformis, an organism with a typical excavate morphology (O'Kelly and Nerad1999).

P. lanternacells normally have four karyomastigonts, each containing a single nucleus, four kinetosomes, four flagella, four sets of associated microtubular roots, and four fully developed feeding grooves, one on each side of a fourfolded cell (Broers et al.1990). This form persists during ontogenesis, unlike inMultisulcus, for which multiflagellated forms are as common as biflagellated ones.

Unfortunately, the life cycle ofMultisulcuscould not be studied in detail due to the culture death. Therefore, changes undergone by multiflagellated forms to return to the biflagellated state remain to be determined. Since we always observed both types of cells in culture, we assume that this process takes place continuously. We hypothesize that the multinucleated forms undergo cellularization, a coordinated cytokinesis that results in cleavage into individual biflagellated cells, similar to what is observed in ichthyosporeans and some other eukaryotes with uni‐ and multinucleated life cycle stages (Lamża2023; Olivetta and Dudin2023).

M. malaysiensishas two orthogonally oriented kinetosomes. The flagellar apparatus of most heteroloboseans consists of two kinetosomes or four kinetosomes arranged in two pairs, and has a peculiar doubled structure (Pánek et al.2017), in which each of the two kinetosomes or two pairs of kinetosomes is associated with broadly similar sets of microtubular and non‐microtubular elements (Brugerolle and Simpson2004; Pánek et al.2017). Moreover, the deepest heterolobosean branch,Pharyngomonas, displays the least developed “double bikont” flagellar apparatus: R2 and R2′ roots are identical at the base and have the same set of non‐microtubular fibers, but R2′ microtubules are much shorter and do not directly support the groove (Park and Simpson2011). Thus, at some point during the evolution of Heterolobosea, a duplication of the flagellar apparatus might have occurred, probably due to some cell division impairment. Curiously, theMultisulcus' flagellar apparatus divides repeatedly during the life cycle, which can be seen as evolutionarily associated with, or a prerequisite of the “double bikont” flagellar apparatus of Heterolobosea.

The orthogonal arrangement of kinetosomes is another atypical feature of heteroloboseans, as most of them have a parallel kinetosome orientation. An orthogonal orientation of kinetosomes was found only in the deepest‐branching flagellated lineages,PharyngomonasandDactylomonas(Hanousková et al.2019; Park and Simpson2011), but it is the most common arrangement among excavates, including the deepest branching discobid lineages jakobids andT. globosa(Galindo et al.2023; Yabuki et al.2011,2018).

Unfortunately, we were unable to obtain sufficient data to make comparisons for other elements of the flagellar apparatus. Future studies should help clarify many intriguing details. In particular, it would be interesting to know whether the left root R1 has been retained byMultisulcus; this root is present inPharyngomonasandDactylomonas, but was lost in Eutetramitia (Brugerolle and Simpson2004; Hanousková et al.2019; Park and Simpson2011; Simpson2003). In addition to the R1 root,Pharyngomonas, like typical excavates, retains a multilayered C fiber. The R1 root (and possibly the C fiber) is likely to be found inMultisulcus, since all three groups (Multisulcus,Pharyngomonas, andDactylomonas) share many ancestral characteristics.

According to 18S rRNA and multigene phylogenetic analyses,M. malaysiensisoccupies a distinct deep‐branching position within the phylogeny of Heterolobosea, sister to the known Tetramitia classes—Eutetramitia and Senenaionea (Figures4and5). Morphological studies also show features typical of heteroloboseans, such as the absence of discrete Golgi dictyosomes, discoid mitochondrial cristae, ventral groove, microtubular corset, and mitochondria surrounded by endoplasmic reticulum.

Multisulcusshares many features with the deepest branching heterolobosean lineage, the halophilic or halotolerant Pharyngomonada (Park and Simpson2011,2016). Given the deep‐branching phylogenetic position ofMultisulcuswithin Tetramitia, these characters are of evolutionary interest and can be considered ancestral.Pharyngomonas, likeMultisulcus, has a ventral groove, orthogonally oriented kinetosomes, and discoid mitochondrial cristae. However,Multisulcuslacks the MFP‐ACAA1 gene fusion, recently found in members of Pharyngomonada (Pánek et al.2025), but possesses the helix 17_1 typical of the 18S rRNA gene sequences of Tetramitia (FigureS1).Pharyngomonasmitochondria are not surrounded by ER, although this is also observed in some representatives of Tetramitia, includingP. cosmopolitus,Stephanopogonspp.,P. flabellatum, andPsalteriomonas vulgaris(Pánek et al.2017).Pharyngomonaspossesses a cytostome, which may also be present inMultisulcus(Figure2C, asterisk).Pharyngomonashas flagellated cells with four flagella and four kinetosomes arranged in pairs, and it has amoeboid and cyst stages in its life cycle (Park and Simpson2011). Pharyngomonada has neither a flagellar vane nor projections (Park and Simpson2011).

Common features ofMultisulcusand Tetramitia include the mitochondria (or mitochondria‐like organelles in anaerobic species) surrounded by endoplasmic reticulum, a specific helix 17_1 in the secondary structure of the 18S rRNA molecule, and the presence of processes on flagella inDactylomonasandP. lanterna(Broers et al.1990; Hanousková et al.2019; Nikolaev et al.2004; Pánek et al.2017). However, Tetramitia lost the flagellar vane, and only two lineages preserved the proximal flagellar projections,DactylomonasandPsalteriomonas(Broers et al.1990; Hanousková et al.2019), while distal projections are presumably unique forMultisulcus. The ventral groove of Tetramitia is less developed and even lost in some lineages (Pánek et al.2017).

Within the Tetramitia,Multisulcushas more similarities with the deepest‐branching lineage, Selenaionea, than with Eutetramitia. The latter have a “double bikont” structure of the flagellar apparatus with two sets of flagellar roots, and kinetosomes mostly arranged in parallel (Pánek et al.2017).Multisulcusand flagellated representatives of Selenaionea,S. koniopesandDactylomonasspp., have similar bikinetosomal kinetids with orthogonal kinetosomal orientation. However,Dactylomonascompletely lost the ventral groove and possesses an anterior rostrum supported by microtubules of the flagellar apparatus (Hanousková et al.2019). Another difference withDactylomonasis its anaerobic or microaerophilic lifestyle and acristate mitochondria (Hanousková et al.2019).

Distinctive unique features ofM. malaysiensisare the combination of a vane on the PF with distal and proximal projections on all flagella, and the presence of multinucleated stages (coenocyte) with multiple ventral grooves, which result from multiple polymerizations of the whole karyomastigont. By contrast, the polymerization of the karyomastigont inP. lanternawas maintained at the state of tetrakaryomastigont, whereas in diplomonads it was maintained at the state of bikaryomastigont.

Many heteroloboseans possess a three‐phase asexual life cycle that includes amoeboid, flagellated, and cyst stages. The amoeboid stage is considered to be the central, as flagellates and cysts are usually formed from amoebae (Pánek et al.2017). Although we observed inMultisulcusthe formation of long and morphologically variable, but never eruptive, pseudopodia in flagellated cells, we did not observe any fully amoeboid stage under our culture conditions.

The flagellated or amoeboid forms of many species of Heterolobosea were only observed after several years of cultivation or under certain culture conditions. For instance,P. kirbyiandPseudoharpagonspp. were considered exclusively flagellates for a long time until amoeboid forms were observed (Harding et al.2013; Pánek, Ptáčková, and Čepička2014). On the contrary, the amoeboflagellatedP. lanterna,Heteramoeba clara,W. magna, and someTetramitusspecies lost the ability to form flagellated stages after several years of cultivation (Pánek et al.2017). The type of bacterial prey seemed to drive the dominance of the flagellate or amoeboid stages inOramoeba fumaroliacultures (De Jonckheere, Baumgartner, et al.2011). Likewise, adding a small amount of oxygen to an anaerobic culture of tetranucleatedP. lanternaflagellates led to the formation of amoeboid uninucleated stages (Broers et al.1990). AlthoughC. carolinapredominantly exhibits uniflagellated amoeboid phenotypes, extremely rare elongated, fast‐swimming, multiflagellated cells have also been observed (Pánek, Simpson, et al.2014).

Although an amoeboid stage was probably lost in some heterolobosean lineages, it has been observed in each of the main Tetramitia clades (Hanousková et al.2019; Pánek et al.2017) and in the deepest‐branching heterolobosean lineage, Pharyngomonada (Park and Simpson2011,2016). This supports that the amoeboid‐to‐flagellate transformation in the life cycle evolved early in the Heterolobosea, probably before the radiation of Pharyngomonada and Tetramitia (Harding et al.2013; Park and Simpson2016). The isolation of new strains and experiments on different culture conditions (media composition, temperature, pH, etc.) will help to determine whether amoeboid stages can be induced under certain conditions or are truly absent inMultisulcus.

Taxonomy: Eukaryota; Discoba; Heterolobosea; Tetramitia.

Multisulcus malaysiensisProkina et al., nom. prov.

Etymology: Genus name after life stage with multiple ventral grooves. Species name after the locality of the type strain, Malaysia.

Type locality: freshwaters of the palm oil factory Seri Ulu Langat Palm Oil Mill Sdn Bhd, Batu 34, Jalan Banting, Dengkil, 43800, Dengkil, Selangor, 43800, Malaysia.

Gene sequence: The complete 18S rRNA gene sequence of the strain NY0229 has the GenBank Accession NumberPQ627902.

Figure S1:(a) Inferred secondary structures of the 18S rRNA region containing the helices 17 and 18 inPharyngomonas kirby,Psalteriomonas lanterna, andMultisulcus malaysiensis. Notice the additional helix 17_1 present inP. lanternaandM. malaysiensis. (b) Multiple sequence alignment of the 18S rRNA region containing the helices 17 and 18. Uppercase positions are those shown in panel a. Some additional conserved positions are shown on lowercase. The green positions inP. lanternaandM. malaysiensissequences correspond to the additional helix 17_1.

Video S1:Live biflagellated cells ofMultisulcus malaysiensisstrain NY0229. DIC × 100 oil immersion.

D.M. and P.L.‐G. were supported by grants from the European Research Council (ERC Advanced grants 787904 and 101141745). L.J.G. was funded by the Ramón y Cajal Programme (Grant RYC2022‐035282‐I, funded by MCIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and FSE+). The TEM work has benefited from the Imagerie‐Gif core facility supported by l'Agence Nationale de la Recherche (ANR‐10‐INBS‐04/FranceBioImaging; ANR‐11‐IDEX‐0003‐02/Saclay Plant Sciences). The sampling trip in Malaysia was supported by the “Tree of Life” research project of the University of Tsukuba, Japan. Permit for sample collection was obtained from the Research Promotion and Co‐ordination Committee, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Malaysia [permit no. UPE 40/200/19/3548(11)].

Prokina, K. I.
, Yubuki N., Galindo L. J., et al. 2025. “A Deeply Branching Lineage in Heterolobosea (Discoba) With Multiflagellated and Multigrooved Life Stages.” Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology
72, no. 5: e70037. 10.1111/jeu.70037.

Funding:D.M. and P.L.‐G. were supported by grants from the European Research Council (ERC Advanced grants 787904 and 101141745). L.J.G. was funded by the Ramón y Cajal Programme (grant RYC2022‐035282‐I, funded by MCIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and FSE+).

David Moreira, Email: david.moreira@universite-paris-saclay.fr.