Sequence motifs or patterns found in natural antimicrobial
peptides
(AMPs) have a great impact on their microbicidal activities. Here,
through database inquiries and biological assays, we explore the enhanced
antibacterial function associated with poly arginine (poly-R) motifs
that typically occur as 3–5 concatenated R residues in many
natural AMPs. Using a suite of biophysical techniques, we explore
the structural consequences of a C-terminal poly-R motif at membranes
and correlate our findings with the functional assays. We use natural
peptides, such as Tilapia piscidin 4 (TP4), as an example of how various
segments in an AMP play separate and synergistic roles to achieve
unmatched bactericidal effects. The function of the poly-R segment
is highly consequential since the simple addition of a five-arginine
(R5) tail to an otherwise inert and weakly binding helical peptide
creates a potent AMP. We investigate interactions of AMPs with lipid
bilayers mimicking bacterial membrane compositions, including lipopolysaccharides,
to show that the poly-R tail has a key role in initiating membrane
destabilization through lipid segregation and water sequestration
effects, all of which facilitate insertion and translocation of the
amphipathic, α-helical N-terminal segment through the membrane.
We compiled a large set of natural AMP sequences and MIC values to
show that, statistically, the poly-R sequence motifs have, in average,
a greater impact on the overall antimicrobial efficacy than equivalent
sequences with poly-K motifs and similar charge densities. We discuss
our observations in light of the unique structural and hydration properties
of arginine residues.

Natural AMPs, also known as host-defense peptides
(HDP), are key
components of all living organisms’ innate immunity. HDPs offer
starting models of the structure–function relationships of
AMPs at microbial lipid membranes. Drawing general principles from
the relationships between sequence, structure, and activity is paramount
for developing accurate prediction (computational) tools for rationally
designing AMP-based antibiotics.

All
evidence suggests that the poly-R motif plays an important
role in host immunity during bacterial infection. However, the role
of poly-R segments found in natural AMPs in interactions with bacterial
membranes has been only broadly addressed under the general concept
of “cationicity”. Here we are addressing the specific
role of poly-R segments in interaction with membranes and in relation
with the more hydrophobic segments that occur in AMP peptides. We
also make the distinction between poly-R segments found in synthetic
AMPs or cell penetrating peptides (CPP) with antimicrobial properties,
and natural antimicrobial peptides that carry poly-R motifs and are
the focus of this work. We explore the specific role of such charged
segments, often found at the N- or C-termini of the most potent natural
AMPs, in the mechanisms of action at bacterial membranes.

Understanding
the molecular basis for AMP actions at bacterial
membranes requires examination of specific interactions within the
complex milieu presented by various bacterial species. Gram-positive
bacteria are surrounded by a thick layer of peptidoglycan that forms
a protective shell around the cytoplasmic, inner membrane (IM). The
IM of different bacterial species can vary substantially in composition,
but typically include large amounts of anionic lipids, such as phosphatidylglycerol
(PG) and cardiolipin (CL). All these membrane layers constitute strong
attractors for cationic peptides. Gram-negative bacteria have a more
complex structure, with a double membrane (outer and inner) and a
thin peptidoglycan layer in the periplasmic space. The outer membrane
(OM) is asymmetric, with the inner monolayer made of glycerophospholipids
and the outer monolayer composed mainly of lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The inner membrane is made of a mixture of anionic
and zwitterionic phospholipids, such as PG and phosphatidylethanolamine
(PE). While the complexity cannot be reproduced in vitro, model membranes
designed in the laboratory can offer useful insights into specific
interactions and events that lead to bacterial membrane destabilization
and permeabilization. Biophysical and structural studies in model
membranes are especially useful when matched with cell-based assays
in bacterial cultures.

To couple measurement results with statistical
data derived from
AMP sequences containing poly-R motifs, we gathered and analyzed a
large amount of sequence information and bioactivity data from several
sources (Table S1). Our statistical analysis
focuses on natural AMP sequences, although we also touch on synthetic
AMPs. Experimentally, this study explores the structural basis for
the added functionality of AMPs by poly-R segments by using TP4 and
P1 (a close homologue of TP4, that naturally lack the R5 tail) peptides
from teleost fish as models. We utilized peptide sequence variants
with and without five consecutive Arginine (TP4, TP4-noR5, P1, P1-R5)
at the C-terminal end. Furthermore, to parse out the contribution
of the R5 tail alone, we examined the antimicrobial properties of
a model peptide inspired by the work of Baldwin et al., herein called neutral peptide (NP). NP is an
alanine-rich peptide that adopts a stable, helical structure in solution
and binds very weakly to lipid bilayers.,We modified the NP peptide by appending an R5 motif at its C-terminus,
producing “NP-R5”, to observe the changes to the antimicrobial
efficacy and its interaction with model membranes. Antimicrobial assays
were performed on both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria to
assess minimum inhibitory concentrations of the peptides. A wide range
of biophysical and structural measurements were conducted on bacterial
membrane mimics (liposomes and flat lipid bilayers of varying composition,
includingSalmonellarough LPS) to examine the correlation
between the antimicrobial efficacies and the structural perturbations
inflicted on bilayers, with emphasis on the poly-R motif contributions.

The peptides (TP4, TP4-noR5, NP, NP-R5) were
chemically synthesized, purified to >95% purity and converted to
HCl
salt, by Biomatik (Wilmington, Delaware). The peptides were dialyzed
to eliminate all the salts, and their concentration was determined
using amino acid analysis. A NanoDrop UV–vis spectrometer was
also used with absorbance recorded at 205 nm for peptides without
tryptophan and at 280 nm for those containing tryptophan using the
previous stocks as standard. The TP4, P1-R5, and P1 peptides used
for the dye leakage assays and NMR experiments were synthesized and
purified by the Peptide Chemistry Technology Center at the University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center. The labeled Gly (15N, 98%) was purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (Tewksbury,
MA, USA). Each peptide was dissolved in dilute HCl to neutralize trifluoroacetate
ions and generate the chloride salt form of the peptide. Dialysis
was performed to remove excess chloride ions. Following extensive lyophilization, the peptide was dissolved in
Nanopure water and sent for amino acid analysis at the Protein Chemistry
Center located at Texas A&M (College Station, TX). All peptides
used were carboxyamidated.

Phospholipids including 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(POPC), 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-(phospho-rac-(1-glycerol))
(POPG), 1,2-dipalmitoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoglycerol,
sodium salt (DPPG), 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine
(POPE), and 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine
(DOPE) were sourced from Avanti Polar Lipids (Alabaster, AL). Lipopolysaccharide
(LPS-Re) derived fromSalmonella Minnesota R595(Ultrapure-LPS,
free of lipoprotein) was purchased from InvivoGen (San Diego, CA).
By Mass Spectrometry, we found a major peak corresponding to a molecular
mass of 2523 g/mol. and the presence of a few other species. Bacterial
strains were purchased from Microbiologics (San Diego, CA). Mueller-Hinton
broth (MHB) was bought from Hardy Diagnostics (Santa Maria, CA). Bacto
agar was purchased from Becton Dickinson and Company (Sparks, MD).
Tryptic soy broth (TSB) and reagents like sodium hydroxide, sodium
phosphate monobasic monohydrate, sodium phosphate dibasic, propidium
iodide, calcein, and sodium chloride were all purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
(Rockville, MD).

To analyze the effect of positively charged amino acid motifs on
the antimicrobial activity of peptides, we compiled a data set of
AMP sequences along with their respective MIC values.Table S1in theSupporting Information(SI) provides a list
of the databases and online sources we utilized for data collection.
The data was initially sourced from three different databases: (i)
GRAMPA, which includes information from
other databases such as the Antimicrobial Peptide Database (APD), Database of Antimicrobial Activity and Structure
of Peptides (DBAASP), YADAMP, and DRAMP; (ii)
StarPep;,and (iii) DBAASP3. We identified all naturally occurring peptide sequences along with
their MIC values using the ‘Ribosomal’ Keyword in DBAASP.
All MIC data were standardized to μmol/L.Table S2in theSIpresents the
statistical data on both naturally occurring and synthetic peptide
sequences. In total, we curated 7812 sequences, of which 2486 are
natural, and 5326 are synthetic sequences. Data processing and statistical
analysis was done using Python programming language.

Minimum
inhibitory concentrations were determined by broth microdilution technique. Two bacterial species were used: Gram-positive
bacteria (), derived from ATCC
14990 and Gram-negative bacteria () MG1655, respectively. was grown in TSB, and was grown in MHB. Both were stored at 4 °C
on their respective growth medium agar plates. Before the assay, bacteria
were grown overnight in 5 mL of growth medium at 37 °C. The grown
bacteria were further subcultured in 3 mL of growth medium by diluting
to 1% until the O.D. reached 0.4–0.6 within 2.5–3 h.
After the bacteria reached the mid log phase, further dilution was
made to attain an O.D. of 0.001 to get a final of ∼105CFU/mL in each well of a 96-well plate. An Opentron OT_2 robot pipetting system was used to automatically
prepare serial dilutions of peptides and add the bacteria to attain
a total volume of 100 μL in each well. The wells containing
only medium served as a negative blank. The plate was then incubated
for 24 h at 37 °C, and the O.D. of the plate was recorded at
600 nm using a BioTek (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) microplate reader
(Figure S1). The lowest concentration at
which no bacterial growth was observed was considered the MIC of the
peptide.

() O1 El Tor strain C6706
cultures were grown in CM9-Hepes (pH 7.4) minimal media (100 mmol/L
Hepes, 0.4% glucose, 0.4% casamino acids) to OD600of approximately
0.8–0.9. Cultures were centrifuged, washed with media, and
used to create the inoculum for the assay. Dilutions of each antimicrobial
peptide were prepared in LoBind tubes in CM9-Hepes. Polypropylene
microtiter plates were prepared by adding 30 μL of either media
or one of the antimicrobial peptide dilutions followed by 170 μL
of prepared cultures to wells at the standard inoculum (5 × 105cfu/mL) for microtiter broth dilution MIC determination. Plates were incubated shaking at 37 °C
for 20 h. Cultures were transferred to polystyrene microtiter plates
before reading on a BioTek Synergy microplate reader at 600 nm. Experiments
were performed in triplicate and repeated with three biological replicates.
Bacterial viability and death were further verified by sampling individual
wells at each antimicrobial concentration for growth on Luria agar.

Propidium
iodide (PI) dye was used in this assay to test the permeabilization
of bacterial membranes or bactericidal activity. The dye was mixed
with the bacterial cells (∼108cells/well) in a
96-well plate. The final concentration of propidium iodide was 4 μmol/L
in each well, along with the peptides at 5 μmol/L in 10 mmol/L
sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7. For this assay, the bacteria were grown
overnight, and then a secondary culture was grown to reach an optical
O.D. of ∼0.6, as described above. The obtained bacterial culture
was centrifuged for 10 min at 4000 rpm and 4 °C and then resuspended
in buffer (10 mmol/L sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7). The process was
repeated to remove any residual growth medium, and the final O.D.
was determined to be close to 0.5. The fluorescence intensity of propidium
iodide was measured at 617 nm when excited at 535 nm using a BioTek
plate reader. Control (blank) measurements of bacteria alone and buffer
alone (without dye) were also done. The fluorescence intensities were
normalized with that of the intensity obtained for buffer alone.

whereIxis the fluorescence intensity in a peptide-containing well,I100%is the intensity of the positive control
(100% leakage obtained with 20 μL of 1% Triton-X detergent),
andI0%is the intensity of the negative
control (0% leakage obtained with 20 μL nanopure water). P1
was run in parallel for comparative purposes. The dose–response
curves were fitted in GraphPad Prism using a modified version of the
Hill equation to extract the EC50as the P/L where half
of the dye has been released. GraphPad
Prism also provided the 95% confidence interval (CI) for the EC50values.

Lipids were codissolved
in chloroform or mixtures of methanol and chloroform at the desired
molar ratio. The solvent was removed under a gentle stream of nitrogen
gas, followed by residual solvent removal under a vacuum to obtain
a dry lipid film. The dried lipids were then hydrated with water or
10 mmol/L sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7 and vortexed repeatedly to
form multilamellar vesicle suspensions of desired concentrations.
Small unilamellar vesicles (SUVs) were obtained by sonication of the
vesicle suspension for 15–20 min using a bath sonicator and
gentle heating at a temperature above the gel-to-fluid phase transition
of the lipid, when necessary, until a clear solution was obtained.
LUVs were obtained by extruding the vesicle suspension 11–21
times through a polycarbonate membrane of 100 nm pore size using a
mini-extruder (Avanti Polar Lipids).

SUV suspensions
were prepared as above, creating stocks of lipids in pure water, which
could be further diluted with the buffer of interest. Peptide stocks
in water were produced by solubilizing a small amount of peptide powder
in pure, doubly distilled water, followed by dialysis against pure
water and concentration determination by amino acid analysis. Samples
of higher concentration than the initial stock were prepared by lyophilizing
desired amounts of peptide and resuspending in water/buffer at the
desired new concentration. Absorbance at 205 nm was employed, with
extinction coefficients calculated according to, to verify the new concentration using the initial stock
as a standard for calibration. Peptide was added to a concentrated
solution of lipid vesicles (5–10 mg/mL) in the same buffer
at the desired P/L and allowed to incubate before spreading the mixture
on thin glass coverslips. The bulk water was allowed to slowly evaporate
by allowing the samples to sit overnight at room temperature. This
procedure creates oriented bilayer stacks (lamellar samples), typically
made of 1000–2000 bilayers, with peptides populating both sides
of the bilayers (Figure) through vesicle fusion, transient pore formations and exchange,
and molecular exchanges. The same stock solution of lipid was used
as blank (neat lipid, without peptide). Before performing the diffraction
experiments, the samples were placed in an enclosed chamber and annealed
at 93% relative humidity and room temperature for several hours.

Illustration
of sample preparation platforms used for measurements
in model lipid membranes. (A) Sample used for spectroscopic and thermodynamic
measurements (CD, fluorescence, and DSC) were in the form of lipid
vesicles (SUVs or LUVs). (B) Oriented multilayers (lamellar samples)
were produced from lipid vesicles incubated with peptides, as shown
in (A), see Methods. Diffraction data were taken by varying the incidence
angle (θ) and the detector angle (D) at the
same time, thus probing the structure on thez-axis,
normal to the bilayer plane.Qzis the
momentum transfer for the diffracted photons,dis
the repeat spacing of the multilayered system (see below). (C) Supported
single bilayer system used for neutron reflectometry measurements.

Lipids
in powder form were stored at −80 °C prior to use. Stocks
were made immediately prior to the experiment (10 mg/mL DOPE in isopropanol
and 1 mg/mL POPG in ethanol) and mixed to 75% DOPE, 25% POPG at a
total lipid concentration of 1 mg/mL in isopropanol. The final concentration
of ethanol from the POPG was 25%. Buffers used were 10 mmol/L Tris
pH 7.4 in either H2O or deuterium oxide (heavy water, D2O), and 10 mmol/L tris pH 7.4 with 150 mmol/L sodium chloride
in either H2O or D2O. Peptide was dissolved
in the tris buffers (without sodium chloride) to a concentration of
3 μmol/L. Bilayers were formed by the solvent assisted bilayer
formation method (SALB).−Flow cells were filled with 1
mg/mL 3PE:1PG lipid mixture in 75% isopropanol, 25% ethanol. With
the flow cell maintained in a vertical orientation to ensure complete
fluid exchange, 10 mmol/L tris (pH 7.4)
with 150 mmol/L sodium chloride in D2O was flown in from
the bottom of the cell at a rate of 0.04 mL/min. After bilayer formation
(FigureC), subsequent
buffer exchanges were performed manually or via syringe pump at 2
mL/min. For peptide additions, at least 4 mL of 3 μmol/L peptide
was injected (to avoid depletion of the peptide solution) over the
course of 10 min.

SUVs prepared as above from one single
lipid or mixture of lipids were sonicated using a bath sonicator for
15–20 min at temperatures above the gel-to-fluid transition
temperature of all the components. The vesicle suspensions were allowed
to further hydrate overnight in the refrigerator. The samples were
measured at a lipid concentration in the range of 1–2.5 mg/mL.
DSC measurements were made on VP-DSC microcalorimeter (MicroCal Inc.,
Northampton, MA). For samples containing peptides, the peptide was
added to the lipid vesicles suspension in water at room temperature,
allowed to equilibrate on the bench with gentle mixing, followed by
degassing and precooling to the desired starting temperature of the
first DSC scan. At least four consecutive scans, two heating and two
cooling, were taken for each sample, at a scan rate of 30 °C/h.
There was a delay of 5 min between sequential scans to allow for thermal
equilibration. DSC curves were analyzed (corrected for baseline and
normalized to concentration) by Origin, version 7.0 (OriginLab Corporation).

CD spectroscopy was
employed to study the secondary structure of peptides in the absence
and presence of lipid vesicles (FigureA). CD spectra of TP4 and TP4-noR5 were recorded in
the presence of LPS-Re and LUVs of POPC/LPS-Re at a molar ratio of
5:1, a peptide concentration of 10 μmol/L and a P/L molar ratio
of 1:30 in both the cases. The quality of the spectra and the subsequent
analysis is impaired by light scattering effects, therefore, the lipid
and peptide concentrations were kept to a minimum and only the region
between 190 and 260 nm were analyzed. The CD spectra were recorded
over a wavelength range of 190–260 nm, with a spectral bandwidth
of 1 nm and the time per point set at 5 s. All the measurements were
done at 25 °C. The background contributions (lipid in buffer)
were subtracted from sample spectra (with peptide). CD data, measured
in units of millidegrees, were converted into molar ellipticity per
residue (MRE) to calculate fractional helical content:fα = (MRE – MRERC)/(MREH–
MRERC), where MRERCand MREHare
the limiting values for a completely random coil and a completely
α-helical conformations at 222 nm. Here, the following values
were considered: MRERC= −1500 deg/cm–2dmol and MREH= −33,400 deg/cm–2dmol.

Oriented samples were prepared as described
previously.−Briefly, 3:1 POPC/POPG lipid films (∼20 mg
lipid total) were prepared using stocks of the lipids dissolved in
chloroform. The organic solvent was removed using N2gas,
and the samples were placed under vacuum overnight. Each film was
then hydrated with 10 mL of Bis-tris buffer (3 mmol/L, pH 7.4), and
the resulting suspension was incubated overnight at 40 °C. The
next day, the suspension was centrifuged at 8 °C for 1.5 h using
a Beckman Optima-90K centrifuge and a Beckman SW40Ti rotor set at
23,700 rpm. After removing the supernatant, the pellet was spread
on 15–20 thin glass slides (dimensions 5.7 × 12 ×
0.03 mm3from Matsunami Trading Co., Japan). The sample
was equilibrated in a chamber maintained at a relative humidity >90%
using a saturated solution of potassium sulfate. Each slide was rehydrated
with the supernatant to achieve 40% hydration by weight. Following
stacking, the slides were inserted in a glass cell (6 × 20 ×
4 mm3, Vitrocom Inc., NJ) before sealing with beeswax (Hampton
Research, Aliso Viejo, CA). The sample was incubated at 40 °C
until it appeared homogeneously hydrated.

2D heteronuclear correlation (HETCOR) spectra
were obtained on a 750 MHz wide bore Bruker instrument with Avance
1 console at William & Mary. The data were collected at 32 ±
0.1 °C using parameters typically used on piscidin samples, including a recycle delay of 5 s and 32–48t1increments, and 896 transients each. A1H radiofrequency amplitude of 83.0 kHz was used during the
MSHOT1H homonuclear decoupling in thet1(1H) dimension
and SPINAL decoupling in thet2(15N) dimension. By setting the delay τdto
6.3 μs, a dwell time of 42.6 μs was used in the indirect
dimension. To enhance the detection of the15N/1H dipolar coupling, the1H carrier frequency was centered
on the amide proton region of the peptide (i.e., ∼15 ppm).
Magnetization transfer from the amide proton to its closest15N spin was accomplished using a WIM-12 (windowless
isotropic mixing) sequence featuring a1H and15N radiofrequency amplitude of 55 kHz and a short mixing time (∼100
μs). Processing was done using 50 Hz of Gaussian line-broadening
in the15N dimension. The spectra were referenced to a
saturated aqueous solution of (15NH4)2SO4set at 26.8 ppm with respect to liquid NH3.

XRD measurements were
carried out with a 3KW Rigaku Smartlab diffractometer, located at
IBBR, Rockville, Maryland. Lamellar samples were produced as described
above (FigureB).
Diffracted intensities were recorded as a function of angle by maintaining
the incidence angle and the detection angle equal to each other (θ–2θ
mode,FigureB), which
probes the bilayer structure projected along the normal to the bilayer
plane (z-axis). Repeat spacings (d) and their uncertainties were determined by a linear fit of the
Bragg peak position versus diffraction order for the most prominent
peaks. Bragg peaks are observed at angles where momentum transferQz= 4πλ–1sin­(θ)
is equal toh(2π/d), wherehis the diffraction index, and λ is the photon wavelength,
here 1.54 Å. Structure factors were calculated from the integrated
Bragg intensities after removing the background and applying Lorentz,
polarization, beam footprint, and absorption corrections for all observable
peaks. Phases of the structure factors were determined using the swelling
method,(seeFigure S4A–Cfor an example). The one-dimensional electron density profiles of
the hydrated bilayers along thez-axis were calculated
on an arbitrary scale using direct Fourier reconstruction.

Neutron reflectometry
experiments were performed on the LIQREF horizontal reflectometer
at the Spallation Neutron Source at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
Liquid flow cells consisted of a silicon backing wafer and sample
wafer (each 5 mm thick and 2 in. in diameter) separated by a nominally
thin Viton gasket, forming a reservoir with an estimated volume of
0.22 mL. Holes were drilled in the backing wafer for the inlet and
outlet. Sample wafers were single-crystal silicon with a native oxide
surface.

A polychromatic beam of neutrons impinged on the interface
between the surface of the sample wafer and the liquid in the sample
cell reservoir. Each measurement covered a range in scattering wavevectorQ= 4πλ–1sin­(θ) from
0.010 to 0.287 Å–1, binned to maintain a constant
bin width equal to 1.0% of the bin center.

Four measurements
were performed on each bilayer, one in each D2O and H2O before the peptide was added, and the
same two contrasts thereafter. NR data were analyzed using composition
space modeling described previously. Briefly,
the composition space model arranges the known molecular components
of the bilayer and protein at the substrate surface; any unfilled
space is filled with water. Because the neutron scattering length
density (nSLD) of each component is known from its elemental composition
and molecular volume, an average nSLD profile can be calculated as
a function of distance from the substrate surface. This nSLD profile,
in turn, corresponds to a predicted R­(Q), and can be optimized to
fit the experimental data, using as parameters the spatial arrangement
of the molecular components. Replacing all H2O in the membrane-bathing
buffer with D2O provides scattering contrast and allows
for an unambiguous determination of the nSLD profile. Here, all four conditions (H2O and D2O, before and after peptide addition) were simultaneously analyzed,
with additional parameters describing the spatial distribution of
the peptide and its structural effect on the bilayer. Model construction,
statistical analysis, and image generation were performed using themolgroups(https://github.com/reflectometry/molgroups) plugin toRefl1Dsoftware (https://github.com/reflectometry/refl1d). Model optimization was performed using the DREAM Markov Chain
Monte Carlo algorithm. Confidence intervals
(CI) on parameters and model predictions were calculated from parameter
distributions derived from 5000 DREAM samples after the optimizer
had reached a steady state.

We conducted
a statistical analysis for naturally occurring AMP sequences in order
to find relationships between the amount of positive charge carried
by AMPs and their antimicrobial efficacies, with an emphasis on clustered
charge motif effects. We have collected MIC data for 2486 natural
and 5326 synthetic sequences with reported MIC values for various
types of bacteria (Table S2), as discussed
in Methods. For each AMP in our collection, we calculated an average
MIC, by taking the mean of all available MIC values for that particular
AMP and various bacteria species (Bacteria Averaged). Furthermore,
in order to match the analysis with our experimental data, we separated
MIC values for specific targets ( and ). We focused on
three separate segments of each peptide sequence: the N-terminal third
(START), the second third (MIDDLE), and the C-terminal third (END).
For each segment, we identified all sequences containing either poly-R
or poly-K motifs of a given size (n) and we computed
mean and standard error of the associated MIC values accordingly.
We included sequences withn= 1 in the analysis,
for comparison and considering the higher availability of catalogued
sequences in that category.Tables– summarize the results of the analysis for the MIC values, along
with their standard error and p-values, as a function of poly-R or
poly-K motif length, for Bacteria Averaged, and , respectively.
The p-value is the output of thettest for the null
hypothesis that the mean value associated with poly-K motifs is less
than that of poly-R motifs. Ap-value less than 0.05
indicates that the mean MIC values associated with poly-R motifs are
statistically lower than the ones associated with poly-K motifs (p-values
equal to 1 are not reported in the tables for brevity). For instance,
as far as the END segments are concerned, the MIC values associated
with poly-R motifs are statistically lower than poly-K motifs of sizes
1 and 2, for both bacteria averaged and , but not the case for . A similar trend is seen for the MIDDLE segments, but not for the
START segment. In contrast, no clear trends emerge for any of the
segments in the case of synthetic peptides (Tables S3–S5andTable).

The mean and standard error of the
mean (the standard deviation σ, divided by the square root of
the number sequences containing the specified motif as listed in parentheses).
‘n.a.’ indicates that there are no sequences found with
the specified motif size. We listp-values reporting
the probability that the mean of the MIC is larger for R than K. For
cases when the T-statistics return a negative value, we do not report
thep-value. R/K: Reporting MIC values by selecting
sequences with R motifs and K motifs individually. Similarly, we report
MIC values for RR/KK and RRR/KKK. Note: * Indicatesp-value is less than 0.05 and ** indicatesp-value
greater than 0.05.

To understand the influence of charge density on the
average MIC
values, as well as the difference in effects between poly-R and poly-K,
we mapped the distribution of naturally occurring AMP sequences, on
the two-dimensional space (ρ+/MIC) where the two
axes were binned into reasonably small ranges. In this case, only
the Bacteria Averaged was considered, for generality and because a
lot more sequences were available in that category. We first identified
the subset of sequences containing at least a poly-R or poly-K motif
of size >1. Then, for each sequence we computed the charge density
as follows: ρ+=NR|K/NAA, where ρ+is the
charge density,NR|Kis the number of
R or K residues in a sequence, andNAAis the total number of residues. For each charge density bin, the
distribution of poly-R (poly-K) sequences were normalized to their
corresponding total. Subsequently, for each ρ+and
MIC value range, we computed the difference in relative frequency
between sequences with poly-K versus poly-R. A negative value for
the difference means there are more poly-R sequences than poly-Ks
populating that space. As shown inFigure, the space with lower MIC values is predominantly
populated by sequences containing poly-R motifs.

Distribution of poly-R
versus poly-K sequences as a function of
MIC and charge density (ρ+). The heat map shows the
difference in relative frequency of occurrence (poly-K minus poly-R)
of natural AMPs in a (ρ+/MIC) two-dimensional space.
Red (blue) boxes imply dominance of sequences containing poly-R (poly-K)
motifs, respectively.

For reference, the average values (±SEM) for
all natural AMPs
used in this analysis, that have an MIC not exceeding 100 μmol/L
are peptide length (23 ± 0. 4), peptide charge (3 ± 0.1),
charge density (0.148 ± 0.003), and MIC (17 ± 0.9).

We determined the MIC values of four peptides (TP4,
TP4-noR5, NP, and NP-R5) against two species of bacteria, the Gram-positive and Gram-negative (Table). TP4 was found to be the most efficient against both bacteria.
TP4-noR5, which lacks the arginine tail, is less effective than TP4,
since four and two times higher concentrations were required for TP4-noR5
to inhibit the growth of and , respectively. Similarly, we find
that the terminal poly-R tail enhances the efficacy of NP-R5 compared
to NP. While NP shows no antimicrobial properties for the concentrations
tested here, NP-R5 shows an efficacy comparable to other AMPs. In
separate experiments (Figure S2) using
the Gram-negative ,
we found that P1 (FFHHIFRGIVHVGKTIHRLVTG-NH2), a natural
homologue of TP4 minus the R5 tail, was 16 times less effective than
TP4 (MIC of 16 μmol/L for P1 and 1 μmol/L for TP4). This,
together with the MIC values inTableand our statistical analysis, indicate that the poly-R
motif boosts the effectiveness of these peptides against bacteria.

Molecular weights were evaluated
using the online software Peptide 2.0 (https://www.peptide2.com/peptide_molecular_weight_calculator.php).

Since bacterial membranes are the main barriers to
the entry of
foreign molecules, and the major targets for AMPs, the determined
MIC values provide the first clues into how the compositions and structures
of various bacterial cell membranes may affect the antibacterial potencies
of AMPs. For all peptides studied here, the concentrations required
to inhibit Gram-negative were
higher than those for Gram-positive , hinting to the important structural role of the LPS-rich OM in
opposing the permeabilization of Gram-negative bacterial cells by
AMPs. To test whether the observed trend is related to differences
in permeabilization efficiency of the significantly different bacterial
envelopes and lipid compositions of Gram-positive and Gram-negative
bacteria, we report on permeabilization assays in the next section.

We performed
a biological assay based on propidium iodide (PI), a nonpermeabilizing
dye that can enter a bacterial cell only when both the outer and inner
membranes of the bacteria are compromised through the action of AMPs
or cell death. When membranes are permeabilized, the dye can diffuse
into the cell, where it can bind to the bacterial DNA, resulting in
an enhancement of the fluorescence of the dye. Likewise, when cells die, their membranes become permeable,
and DNA becomes accessible to the dye, regardless of the mechanism
of killing. The fluorescence intensity
is therefore used as a reporter on cell death or membrane permeability
associated with AMP activity.

FigureA,B shows the normalized
fluorescence intensities of PI in the presence of and , respectively, treated with the different peptides. The intensities
were normalized by the value of fluorescence intensity of PI alone
in buffer. TP4 was found to induce the maximum permeabilization in
all cases, seen here as the highest relative increase in the fluorescence
intensity. At the other extreme, NP was found to cause little or no
permeabilization, as the fluorescence intensity in remained close to that of the control. In
the order of increasing PI binding, the following trend emerges, NP
< NP-R5 < TP4-noR5 < TP4, which is consistent with the MIC
values for the bacterial susceptibility assay results inTable. We also observe
that the PI fluorescence increases on different time scales for the
two bacterial species: it saturates quickly for (FigureA), but it continues to increase for up to 30 min for (FigureB). Taken together, the differences in inhibitory and
permeabilization efficacy can be attributed to differences in the
membrane structures between the Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria,and the ability of the peptides to target and bind to those membranes.
For the Gram-positive, , the permeabilization rates and efficacies between TP4 and TP4-noR5
are similar, despite a two times lower MIC for TP4 than TP4-noR5.
This suggests that, once inside the cell, TP4 may be more effective
in binding and disrupting intracellular targets, such as bacterial
DNA, than TP4-noR5. For the Gram-negative, , the difference in the permeabilization efficacies is more obvious,
and consistent with a four times lower MIC for TP4 than TP4-noR5.

Normalized
fluorescence intensities of propidium iodide with time
after addition of peptide. (A) and (B) . Error bars represent
one standard deviation in the fluorescence intensities from two measurements.

Regarding the different permeabilization rates,
one may assume
that the thick LPS layer of Gram-negative bacteria hinders OM permeabilization
and delay access to the inner membrane. This can, at least partly,
explain the slower permeabilization of than . Overall, the
R5-containing peptides exhibited stronger permeabilization or bactericidal
effects than their counterparts without R5, and are particularly effective
against Gram-negative bacteria.

To further investigate permeabilization, as pertains
to cytoplasmic bacterial membranes and the role of poly-R motifs,
we performed calcein release assays with 3:1 POPC:POPG LUVs used to
mimic the charge content of bacteria. The calcein release assay is a robust method to determine the permeabilization
strength of AMPs.−The dose–response curves provide the threshold
at which a given peptide breaks the bilayer seal, by various mechanisms,
leading to leakage.Figureshows the calcein release data obtained when vesicles were
exposed to TP4, P1, and P1-R5. We observed sigmoidal curves consistent
with a cooperative effect.Tablelists the L/P values yielding 50% leakage (EC50). TP4 is 2.5 more active (EC50= 71.3 ±
2.6) than P1 (EC50= 28.8 ± 1.3), and adding the R5
motif to P1 to generate P1-R5 (EC50= 97.2 ± 3.4)
boosts its activity by a factor of 3.4. Overall, these assays show
that the R5 motif plays a major role in the membrane activity of piscidin,
as adding it to P1 enables the peptide to perform similarly to TP4.

Permeabilization effects of TP4, P1, and P1-R5 on 3:1 POPC/POPG
LUVs. LUVs were exposed to increasing amounts of TP4, P1, and P1-R5.
The fractional leakage of calcein from the LUVs is plotted as a function
of the lipid-to-peptide ratio (L/P). The assays were repeated three
times in triplicates. The data shown is the mean ± SD for a representative
data set. The error bar, in some cases, is smaller than the symbols
used to represent the data points.

CD spectroscopy was used to investigate the secondary structure
of TP4 and TP4-noR5 in the presence of LPS-Re representing the first
barrier that AMPs are presented with in Gram-negative bacteria. Rough
LPS (Re chemotype) contains the minimum number of sugar groups necessary
for bacterial survival and plays a critical role in the outer membrane
integrity. Given the known heterogeneous chemical nature of LPS, which increases with the size of the carbohydrate
chains, we used LPS-Re (free of lipoprotein) in the hope of a more
homogeneous LPS molecular species.FigureA shows the CD spectra of pure peptides in
buffer, including the control peptides NP and NP-R5. Both TP4 and
TP4-noR5 reveal spectral features of random coil structures, while
both synthetic peptides NP and NP-R5 display significant α-helical
structures, characterized by negative bands at 208 and 222 nm and
a positive band at 198 nm.

Secondary structure determination in the presence
of LPS-Re. (A)
CD spectra, showing the mean residue ellipticity (MRE), for four peptides
in buffer (10 mmol/L sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7). (B) CD spectra
of TP4 and TP4-noR5 in LPS-Re micelles. (C) Same as in (A) for the
four peptides in the presence of LPS-Re/POPC (1:5 molar ratio) LUVs.
All samples were prepared at 10 μmol/L peptide and 300 μmol/L
lipids and measured at 25 °C.

We found that upon binding to LPS-Re micelles,
both TP4 and TP4-noR5
experience transitions into structures of low helical content, lower
for TP4 than TP4-noR5 (Table), as calculated from their mean ellipticities per residue
(MRE) (FigureB).
LPS is known to form micelles in aqueous solution at certain critical
concentrations and can gather into aggregates.
We found that the aggregates were difficult to disperse into small,
defined objects at reasonable work temperatures. Henceforth, we will
refer to these dispersions as LPS-Re micelles.

Peptides were measured in 10 mmol/L
sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7 and in the presence of LPS micelles
and LPS-Re/POPC LUVs, 1:5 molar ratio. n.m. = not measured.

Both TP4 and TP4-noR5 showed the formation of helical
structures,
with helical contents of 12 and 21% for TP4 and TP4-noR5, respectively,
after interaction with LPS-Re micelles. Because mixtures of LPS-Re
and POPC resulted in spectroscopically clearer dispersions, especially
after extrusion, they were used here as models for the OM. The fractional
helical contents achieved by both peptides increased to 25% for TP4
and 44% for TP4-noR5 when the peptides were exposed to vesicles prepared
from a mixture of LPS-Re with POPC, 1:5 molar ratio (FigureC). NP and NP-R5 also gain
a higher helical content in LPS-Re/POPC relative to buffer (Table). The lower helical
content in both TP4 and NP-R5, relative to their shorter counterparts
(without R5), reflects the contribution from the, presumably unstructured,
R5 tail.

The phase behavior of rough LPS-Re
extracted fromSalmonella Minnesotastrain R595 was
studied before,as a function of temperature,
water content, and Mg2+concentration, showing a gel-to-fluid
(Lβ↔ Lα) acyl chain melting transition
temperature (Tm), generally, between 30
and 37 °C. LPS-Re used in this study shows only a very broad
transition at ∼55 °C (Figure S3A), which fades with repeated heating–cooling cycles. It is
not clear whether this is a chain melting transition or a type of
morphological change, but previous X-ray diffraction studies showed
that LPS-Re can display a rich morphological behavior that includes
hexagonal II or cubic phases at >50 °C.,Further, LPS is known to harbor structural heterogeneity that results
from biosynthesis and extraction conditions, starting with the basic
unit of LPS (Lipid A). Therefore, we
added POPE for our DSC measurements, a well-studied zwitterionic lipid,
which shows a gel-to-fluid transition at ∼25 °C. LPS-Re/POPE
gives a single transition peak, which indicates that a single, homogeneous
phase was obtained when mixing.

Differential scanning
calorimetry of LPS-Re/POPE and POPE/DPPG
with TP4 and TP4-noR5. (A) Heating scans for pure POPE (black-dashed,Tm= 25.5 °C), LPS-Re/POPE 1:5 molar ratio
(orange,Tm= 25.0 °C), TP4-noR5
in LPS-Re/POPE (blue,Tm= 24.5 °C),
and TP4 in LPS-Re/POPE (red,Tm= 24.7
°C). The third heating scans are shown here, from a series of
consecutive heating/cooling scans. (B) Raw DSC scans for LPS-Re/POPE
(molar ratio 1:5) with TP4. Three consecutive heating (red) and cooling
(blue) scans were recorded (in the order from light to dark shades)
and were shifted from each other along the vertical axis for better
visibility. (C) Same as in (B) for TP5-noR5. All samples were prepared
in water at P/L 1:50 molar ratio. Lipid concentration was 2.08 mmol/L
in the case of pure lipid solution and 1.04 mmol/L in the presence
of peptide. The scan rate was 0.5 °C/min. (D) Second heating
scan for POPE/DPPG at 1:1 molar ratio (yellow) and in the presence
of TP4 (red) and TP4-noR5 (blue), at P/L of 1:50. The spectra for
POPE (dashed, black) and DPPG (solid black,Tm= 41 °C) are overlaid. (E) Raw DSC heating and cooling
scans for POPE/DPPG with TP4. (F) Same as in (E) for TP5-noR5. All
samples were prepared in water at a lipid concentration of 3.4 mmol/L.

Oriented sample solid-state NMR (OS SS-NMR) was employed to investigate
the effect of TP4 on the membrane organization as well as the structural
features of the peptide. Samples featuring aligned 3:1 POPC/POPG bilayers
were prepared, and the15N-Gly13 labeled TP4 peptide incorporated
at P/L = 1:60 and 1:30. Due to its high abundance in phospholipid
headgroups,31P is readily detected.31P OS
SS-NMR provides useful insight into peptide-lipid interactions.−As shown inFigure, neat POPC/POPG bilayers display two nonfully resolved31P resonances following the expected 3:1 ratio and resonance values
of 29 and 26.5 ppm for POPC and POPG, respectively. A minor signal appears near −15 ppm, corresponding
to unaligned lipids on the edge of the glass plates. When the TP4
concentration is increased, the POPG resonance moves upfield while
that of POPC is unaffected. Since the PC headgroup is more sensitive
than PG to the membrane surface charge that occurs when charged molecules
are added, the lack of response from
PC strongly supports the conclusion that TP4 mostly interacts with
the PG headgroups.

Solid-state NMR studies of oriented TP4-bilayer samples.
Left:
TP4 was incorporated in aligned POPC/POPG bilayers at P/L = 1:60 and
1:30, and the31P NMR data were collected at a frequency
of 242.9 MHz, with the bilayer normal parallel to the static magnetic
field. The red and blue lines correspond to the POPC and POPG signals
in the lipid-only sample, respectively, while the green line highlights
the area of the spectrum consistent with lipid headgroups adopting
a disrupted orientation. The purple arrow points at the POPG signal,
which is shifted upfield by TP4, while the green arrow features the
increased signal in the region associated with disrupted headgroups.
Right: A 2-D HETCOR solid-state spectrum is shown for TP4 in the sample
prepared at P/L = 1:60. The peptide was15N-labeled at
Gly-13.

The LPS-Re used in these studies did not show any lamellar or other
forms of long-range, organized structure by itself, which suggests
that it is heterogeneous and forms amorphous aggregates or micellar
structures. On the other hand, LPS-Re
could be homogeneously incorporated into phospholipid bilayers such
as POPC to obtain strongly diffracting lamellar stacks from which
electron density profiles could be calculated (FigureA), based on structure factors with phases
determined by the swelling method (Figure S4A–C, Table S6).

X-ray diffraction data from oriented multilayer (lamellar)
samples
of LPS-Re/POPC with TP4 and TP4-noR5. (A) Electron density profiles
of a bilayer from a lamellar sample of POPC (black) and LPS-Re/POPC,
1:5 molar ratio (orange). The repeat distance (d)
includes the bilayer thickness and the water of hydration (Figure). The electron density
profiles are shown on an arbitrary scale, with amplitudes adjusted
to match in the middle of the bilayer (z= 0) for
an easier comparison. (B) Variations in the repeat distances (d) and headgroup-to-headgroup distances (dHH) as a function of relative humidity (RH) for lamellar
samples made of POPC (black), LPS-Re/POPC (orange), LPS-Re/POPC +
TP4-noR5 (blue), and LPS-Re/POPC + TP4 (red). All samples were produced
from LPS-Re/POPC (1:5), at P/L = 1:50 and measured at 25 °C and
various hydrations.dHHfor LPS-Re/POPC
+ TP4 at 97% RH could not be calculated unambiguously due to broadened
Bragg peaks (Figure S4D). (C) Diffraction
data from lamellar samples of LPS-Re/POPC (black), LPS-Re/POPC + TP4-noR5
(blue), and LPS-Re/POPC + TP4 (red), for P/L = 1:50. (D) Same as in
(C) for P/L = 1:25. (E) Bilayer electron density profiles (±
peptides) were calculated from the data in (C) andTable S7(the inset is a cartoon interpretation of the bilayer/peptide
assembly, showing a bilayer with peptide bound to surfaces shown as
yellow cylinders and hydrated R5 segments in red). (F) Same as in
(C) for P/L = 1:25. A bilayer density profile could not be calculated
for LPS-Re/POPC + TP4 from the distorted diffraction signal. Profiles
shown here are for 93% RH and 25 °C.

Of note is the slight relative increase in the
density in the flanks
of the POPC bilayer in the presence of LPS-Re (FigureA). This is due to the sugar groups and associated
water protruding outward, past the lipid phosphate line. This increase
in density at the bilayer surfaces is accompanied by an increase in
the repeat spacing (d) of the lamellar stack. The
increase is most noticeable at higher hydrations and in the presence
of peptides, especially TP4 (FigureB, top) and is due to the additional water accrued
by the sugar moieties of LPS-Re and by the peptides bound to bilayer
surfaces. In contrast tod, the headgroup-to-headgroup
distance (dHH), which broadly defines
the hydrocarbon region thickness, shows a slight decrease with hydration
and peptide addition (FigureB, bottom). These changes are the first indicators of the
effects of membrane-active AMPs partitioning in bilayers and exhibiting,
in some cases, opposite and concomitant effects, such as hydrocarbon
thinning and swelling due to water retention. Both peptides produce
an increase ind, concomitant with a decrease indHH, compared to both POPC and POPC/LPS-Re. However,
all changes are much more pronounced for TP4 than TP4-noR5 and more
noticeable for higher hydrations (FigureB). For instance, at 97% RH and a P/L = 1:50
molar ratio,dreaches 65.1 Å for LPS-Re/POPC
in the presence of TP4, compared to 60.5 Å for TP4-noR5 and 58.6
Å for LPS-Re/POPC without peptides.

For a better comparison
of the bilayer structural effects caused
by TP4 and TP4-noR5, the two peptides were incorporated into LPS-Re/POPC
bilayers at various P/L ratios and the electron densities of the bilayer/peptide
complexes were constructed, where possible. At a P/L of 1:50, the
density profiles (FigureE) reveal only slight perturbations to the LPS-Re/POPC bilayer
structure in the presence of TP4-noR5. Interestingly, the profile
with TP4 shows similarly small perturbations in the hydrocarbon region,
at this P/L, but a significant density increase at the bilayer boundaries
and in between adjacent bilayers. The pronounced increase indand rise in electron density at the bilayer surfaces for
TP4, but not for TP4-noR5, indicates that the R5 tails of TP4 populate
the space at the surfaces of LPS-Re/POPC bilayers, where it interacts
with the LPS carbohydrate and the lipid phosphate groups and also
recruits significant amounts of water.

Increasing P/L from 1:50
to 1:25 causes a dramatic bilayer disruption
(FigureD), seen here
as a loss of lamellar diffraction signal for TP4, but not for TP4-noR5.
This is consistent with the fact that strong membrane perturbation
effects, often associated with permeabilization, are detected only
above a certain P/L threshold, here ∼1:25. The preferential
interactions of TP4 with a particular lipid component, here LPS-Re,
can cause a slew of effects, such as separation of lipids in domains
of different thicknesses and hydrations and morphological bilayer
transformations, seen here as a loss of lamellar diffraction signal
(FigureD). At this
higher P/L, TP4-noR5 itself shows a significant broadening and shift
of the profiles maxima inward as the bilayer thins, relative to the
unperturbed bilayer (FigureF). Taken together, XRD data reveals that the N-terminal hydrophobic
segment and the C-terminal R5 tail act in concert to disrupt the bilayer
barrier, through different interactions with the hydrocarbon and the
surface-exposed molecular groups of the multicomponent bilayer.

We conducted further investigations into the interactions of these
peptides with POPE/POPG (3:1), a mixture that mimics the lipid composition
of the inner bacterial membranes. When
measured at 30 °C, above the gel–fluid phase transition
temperature of POPE, the POPE/POPG (3:1) mixture displays one set
of equidistant Bragg peaks (signature of a homogeneous blend, in a
single lipid phase) and up to eight orders of diffraction (FigureA). Both TP4 and
TP4-noR5 alter the diffraction pattern, but their effects are significantly
different. TP4 shows pronounced broadening of the diffraction peaks
and an increase in the repeat distance by approximately 10 Å
relative to the neat POPE/POPG bilayer. By contrast, TP4-noR5 causes
a very large decrease in the repeat spacing, by ∼5 Å in
bothdanddHH(FigureA), also seen as
an inward shift of the headgroup regions in the electron density profile
(FigureB). In an
attempt to isolate the effect caused by the R5 tail, we investigated
the bilayer (POPE/POPG) interactions with the inert, helical peptide
NP, and its poly-R variant, NP-R5. NP shows minimal perturbations
to the diffraction signal (FigureA inset, blue), while the resulting bilayer profile
(FigureB) indicates
superficial binding at best, as previously reported for this peptide and observed here as a slight broadening and
shift of the profiles maxima outward, with no thinning of the hydrocarbon
region. This is expected if small amounts of NP peptide attach to
the bilayer surface without significant insertion. In contrast, NP-R5
displays a pronounced broadening of the diffraction signal (FigureA inset, red),indicative of lipid segregation effects as seen for TP4.

X-ray
diffraction data from oriented multilayer samples of POPE/POPG
with peptides. (A) Diffraction data for POPE/POPG 3:1 without peptide
(black), with TP4-noR5 (blue) and with TP4 (red), at P/L was 1:2.
Samples were measured at 97% RH and 30 °C. The repeat spacing,d, the headgroup-to-headgroup distances,dHH, and their uncertainties (one standard deviation) are
given in Angstrom: neat POPE/POPG (black,d= 51.7
± 0.1;dHH= 40.5 ± 0.1), with
TP4-noR5 (blue,d= 47.2 ± 0.4;dHH= 35.4 ± 0.5), and with TP4 (d= 61.4 ± 1.3). Inset: the same POPE/POPG system, with NP (blue,d= 55.1 ± 0.1;dHH= 44.3
± 0.2) and with NP-R5 (red). (B) Electron density profiles calculated
from diffraction data shown in (A), respectively. The profiles for
the TP4 and NP-R5, and hence, values fordHHcould not be unambiguously determined due to the pronounced deformations
of the peaks. See alsoFigure S5Afor other
measurement conditions. The amplitudes of the profiles were adjusted
by arbitrary scale factors until they matched atz= 0 for an easier comparison. Structure factors are given inTable S8.

Overall, the XRD results indicate that the disordered
poly-R tail
has a separate role from the helical, hydrophobic body of the AMP
in their action at membranes. In particular, the R5 tail in TP4 exacerbates
preferential interactions with LPS-Re and PG groups at bilayer surfaces,
causing vulnerable boundary regions and membrane ruptures due to lipid
segregation in domains of different thicknesses and hydrations. This
can predispose the bacterial membranes to the attachment and insertion
of hydrophobic, helical segments into the exposed acyl chains, as
a prerequisite for pore formation.

Neutron
reflectometry is an interfacial scattering technique that reveals
the structure of bilayers adsorbed at solid interfaces. Neutrons have
good contrast between lipid acyl chains and proteins, such that the
individual componentsprotein, lipid acyl chains, and lipid
headgroupsof a protein/bilayer complex can be discriminated.
Neutron reflectometry data are shown inFigure S6, whileFigureshows the fractional volume occupancy of each of the components
in a DOPE/POPG (3:1 molar ratio) bilayer adsorbed on natural oxide-terminated
silicon (FigureA,B) and subsequently exposed to TP4 (FigureC) and TP4-noR5 (FigureD).

Volume occupancy distributions representing
the structure of the
bilayer/peptide complex following the exposure of DOPE/POPG (3:1)
lipid bilayers adsorbed on silicon wafers (A, B) to TP4 (C) and TP4-noR5
(D) dissolved at 3 μmol/L in 10 mmol/L tris buffered at pH 7.4.

Full-length TP4 is found throughout the bilayer
structure, with
(58 ± 5)% (68% confidence) found in the acyl chains and (29 ±
2)% (68% confidence) in the headgroups and the balance in the buffer.
TP4 causes significant thinning of (4.1 ± 0.2) Å (68% confidence)
of the hydrophobic region. This is sufficient to increase the bilayer
completeness from about 85% without peptide to almost 98% with peptide.
The excess lipid appears to form multilamellar structures that appear
as a peak nearQz≈ 0.13 Å–1, which is excluded from the analysis (Figure S6). Using the periodictable software
(https://github.com/python-periodictable/periodictable), the
peptide volume is estimated to be 3955 Å3, based on
the sum of the volumes of the individual amino acids, and the molecular
weight is as inTable. The integrated protein density profile is 318–35Å3per lipid area (about 72 Å2averaged over the two
leaflets), for a total lipid/protein ratio of about 12 across the
two leaflets.

TP4-noR5 causes a similar thinning effect but
has its density concentrated
in the hydrophobic region of the bilayer. Following exposure to TP4-noR5,
the volume occupied by lipids at the surface is reduced by about half;
the excess lipids appear as a thick incomplete overlayer above the
original disrupted bilayer, as well as in a more pronounced multilayer
peak aroundQz≈ 0.13 Å–1that was also removed from the NR pattern before
analysis. We observe some TP4-noR5 at the silicon dioxide surface
underneath the lipid bilayer. The dimensions of this layer match those
of a control experiment with TP4 on a bare silicon dioxide surface
(Figure S7). This finding suggests that
TP4-noR5 may penetrate the hydrocarbon core of the lipid bilayer to
a greater extent than full length TP4.

The increasing availability of sequences
of AMPs (both natural
and synthetic), in vitro antimicrobial activity parameters, and biophysical
data, allows for examining the correlations between AMP sequences
and their bioactivities and identifying important sequence motifs
that endow natural AMPs with selectivity and potency in the environment
displayed by bacterial membranes. Fish AMPs, for example, are rich
in motifs that make them extremely effective bacterial killers. These
include the presence of the ATCUN motif that binds and transports
the ROS-promoting Cu2+/Ni2+ions into the bacterial
cells; the broken helix at G13, which allows the two halves to maximize
their hydrophobic moment for maximum insertion into the bilayer hydrocarbon−and, for several of them, a cluster of R residues at the C-terminus.,,The poly-R motif is rather elusive
among the natural AMPs identified or cataloged in databases. However,
it is prevalent in CPPs. The TAT protein transduction domain (PTD)
of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1), an arginine-rich, naturally
occurring CPP has served as a model for
both CPP and AMP design. For instance, the addition of a cluster of
arginines (R2, R8 and dendrimeric R) to Vancomycin was shown to improve
its antimicrobial profile and help with combating bacterial resistance.,,Thus, it is interesting and important
to explore the functionality of the poly-R segments in CPPs and AMPs,
from a structural perspective.

In the following sections, we
discuss how: (1) AMP database analysis
and experiments on specific peptides (NP, TP4, P1) confirm bactericidal
efficacy conferred by poly-R segments; (2) poly-R affects the structures
of the lipids and peptides; and (3) possible models of interaction
of poly-R with lipid membranes that can reconcile structural and functional
observations.

The importance of clustered cationic residues in natural AMPs and
in particular, poly-R motifs is established in several studies of
AMPs from all kingdoms of life.−




,,For instance, hLF(1–11), a highly efficient antibacterial and antifungal peptide
derived from human lactoferrin, carrying four R residues in the N-terminal
side, was found to be less effective in the killing of bacteria and showed decreased binding to bacterial lipopolysaccharide when those N-terminal residues were removed.

Similarly, in this work, removing the poly arginine (R5) C-terminal
segment from the natural TP4 peptide causes a reduction in antimicrobial
efficiency, seen here as a 4-fold increase in MIC values against the
Gram-negative and a 2-fold
increase against the Gram-positive (Table). P1, lacking
the R5 tail, also shows a 16-fold lower antimicrobial efficacy against than TP4. As an additional control, simply
adding an R5 segment to a broadly inert peptide (NP) imbues the construct
with strong antimicrobial properties (Table). Interestingly, despite the fact that TP4
contains a more strongly amphipathic, hydrophobic and helical N-terminal
segment than NP-R5, the MIC is only 2 times lower for TP4 than NP-R5.
Propidium iodine uptake reveals that bactericidal efficiency follows
the same pattern as with MIC values: NP < NP-R5 < TP4-noR5 <
TP4, with the neutral peptide showing almost zero permeabilization.
Clearly, both segments of TP4 (the amphipathic N-terminal body and
the disordered poly-R, C-terminal segment), through their very different
chemical nature, have separate roles in bacterial membrane interactions
and permeabilization. We assessed those functions through structural
measurements.

The database analysis of AMPs containing polycationic
motifs confirms
that this result can be generalized across a wide range of peptide
sequences (Tables–). The widespread in MIC values observed
from naturally occurring AMPs, even with similar polycationic motifs,
suggests that the mechanism of action of the polycationic motif is
synergistic with the uncharged regions of the peptide.

CD measurements of the secondary structures of four investigated
peptides reveal that, when exposed to membranes, the -R5 variants
are less helical, overall, than the -noR5 counterparts (Figure), but have stronger antibacterial
activities (Table). Thus, the helical content of these AMPs does not necessarily correlate
with antimicrobial efficacy. By extrapolation from the high-resolution
NMR structure of piscidin P1, which is
almost completely helical in lipid bilayers, the lower helical content
(per residue) of an -R5 variant is most likely due to the contribution
from the disordered poly-R segment. Interestingly, studies of lysine-rich
peptides showed that peptide constructs that are not prone to aggregation
when bound to LPS, and concomitantly display larger unstructured regions,
highly favor LPS permeabilization. By
analogy, the highly charged and disordered R5 can reduce the chance
of aggregation at surfaces, thus facilitating peptide navigation through
the LPS and access to the hydrocarbon core. Indeed, our CD data show
that TP4 maintains a flexible, mostly disordered, conformation outside
and inside LPS-Re. The helical content expands in a mixture of LPS-Re/POPC.
This increase can be explained considering that, once past the LPS-Re
polysaccharide groups, the peptide has immediate access to a (POPC)
bilayer-water interface, which is a trigger to the “partitioning-folding”
phenomenon for amphipathic helices. In
the case of TP4, once recruited to the anionic surfaces through the
Coulombic attraction of the R5 segment and hydrogen bonds, the hydrophobic,
helical segment of the peptide can then be expected to insert into
the hydrocarbon region of the membrane promoting further destabilization.

Evidence for the importance of recruitment of peptide to the bilayer-water
interface, as well as for insertion of the peptide into the hydrocarbon
region, is present in the DSC, NMR, and NR data. The DSC results suggest
that the presence of peptide can lead to chain melting and mixing
in an LPS-Re/POPE mixture (FigureA–C); in fact, TP4-noR5 appears to be more effective
than full length TP4, assuming that the quantity of TP4 on the surface
is equal to or exceeds that of TP4-noR5. In POPE/DPPG, DSC provides
evidence of phase separation (FigureD–F). This can be attributed to the preferential
interaction of TP4 with the PG headgroups, which is confirmed by NMR
in POPC/POPG (3:1) mixtures (Figure). These results are consistent with the NR results
on DOPE/POPG mixtures, which show that both peptides reside in the
bilayer and, to a large extent, in the hydrocarbon region (Figure). TP4 displays
a broad, continuous distribution across hydrocarbon and outside the
outer leaflet surface. TP4-noR5 shows narrower distributions, one
in the acyl chains and one at the substrate surface, indicating that
TP4-noR5 can translocate more easily across the hydrocarbons.The strong
association of the R5 segment with the PG headgroups on the surface,
coupled with the opposite tendency of the hydrophobic segment to immerse
and translocate though the hydrocarbon, may impose greater stress
and a richer morphological landscape of the TP4-bilayer complex, then
any of the two segments taken separately.

The XRD results on
multilayer stacks provide further structural
detail (Figuresand ). Overall, the signals from bilayer stacks were
strongly distorted by NP-R5 and TP4, the constructs containing poly
arginine motifs. Some of these distortions, which manifests as a strong
increase in lamellar spacing and water layer thickness and broadening
of the peaks, may arise from salt effects. Assuming the area density
of TP4 observed in the NR experiments (one molecule per 12 lipids
at 72 Å2per lipid), the effective concentration of
TP4 bound to two leaflets enclosing an interlamellar spacing of 10
Å is about 0.4 mol/L. Because TP4 has a +7 charge, the effective
ionic strength is above 1 mol/L. It has previously been observed that
even at mmol/L salt concentrations, the salt environment of charged
bilayers has a strong effect on the multilayer adhesion−and, under some circumstances, can lead to unbinding of lamellae.

Peak broadening can also arise from peptide-induced lipid segregation.
At temperature close to lipid phase transitions, a lipid phase separation
can occur concurrent with lipid segregation for which there is evidence
in the DSC and XRD results (Figures, D and A). This can occur if the peptide preferentially attaches to one
of the lipid headgroups, causing the formation of a domain enriched
in that headgroup across multiple layers. In this case two sets of
peaks, each with its own repeat spacing, contributes to the distorted
diffraction peak. For POPE/POPG (3:1) bilayers, for example (Figure), peak broadening
may indicate the formation of TP4/PG-rich domains, separate from POPE-rich
domains, across multiple bilayers. At temperatures ∼25 °C,
the segregated POPE can exhibit a gel phase characterized by a thicker
bilayer. TP4-noR5 does not produce the broadening effect in POPE/POPG
bilayers, suggesting that any domain formation is charge-driven. Interestingly,
the broadening effect is not observed for POPC/POPG (3:1) bilayers
(Figure S5B) with either peptide; this
may be due either to a higher selectivity of TP4 for POPG relative
to POPE than to POPC, or a higher propensity for phase separation
between POPE and POPG than between POPC and POPG.

In both POPE/POPG
(3:1) and POPC/POPG (3:1) bilayers, TP4-noR5
decreases the repeat spacing (by ∼5 Å in bothdanddHH). A bilayer thinning
effect, due to the immersion or intercalation of the peptide body
between lipid headgroups, causing a bilayer area expansion at constant
hydrocarbon density, has often been observed with AMPs,,but not to this extent. Notably, NP does not thin the bilayers.
Hydrophobicity and the degree of separation into hydrophobic and hydrophilic
sides around the folded peptides (hydrophobic moment) influence the
depth of insertion of a hydrophobic segment. Notably, TP4-noR5, just
like P1, contains multiple membrane-anchoring phenylalanines that
promote a strong hydrophobic interaction with the bilayer hydrocarbon
core and a high hydrophobic moment. These features are less pronounced
in the alanine-rich NP variants, which could be the reason for the
reduced bilayer thinning and, ultimately, their significantly lower
antibacterial efficacy than TP4 variants.

Our DSC and X-ray
diffraction data, taken together, indicate that
the poly-R segments dominate the initial interactions with membrane
surfaces as they target PGs, LPS-Re (and less so, PEs). Once established
at the membrane surface, they can induce morphological transformations
and lipid segregations in domains or phase separations. At the boundaries
between such domains, the hydrocarbon region may become exposed through,
e.g., curvature and hydrocarbon thickness mismatches. This can facilitate
anchoring of the amphipathic, helical peptide segment in the membranes,
as a prerequisite for pore formation.

Clustering of anionic
lipids with AMP, through preferential interactions,
has been argued to be an important mechanism of membrane disruption
and bacterial killing,,and we see here that it is mainly
charge driven. The stronger effects of TP4 on mixed bilayers containing
LPS-Re or POPG, in comparison to TP4-noR5, is most clearly seen in
the X-ray diffraction data, which reveals drastic morphological changes
occurring in LPS-Re/POPC or POPE/POPG bilayers in the presence of
TP4, culminating with an almost complete loss of lamellar signal at
a P/L ratio of 1:25 (FiguresD and A). While it is difficult to
assess the identity of the newly formed structures, both micellization
of the LPS-Re under the effect of TP4, and nonlamellar structures are likely to occur. Electron microscopy images captured such a micellization
process of the OM of Gram-negative bacteria , under the action of TP4 at less than 1 μmol/L concentrations.

The concentration ranges needed to inhibit
bacterial growth (MIC
values) in culture media is expected to be correlated with the P/L
ratios at which permeabilization is detected in model membranes. In
previous studies, addition of P1 at 3 μmol/L resulted in a P/L
in the range of 1:10 to 1:8 of tightly bound peptide helices and complete
surface coverage in model bilayers.,Also, a P/L
of 1:10 corresponds to 100% calcein leakage from POPC/POPG liposomes
treated with TP4, P1-R5 and ∼75% with P1 (Figure). In a culture broth, we expect
that much of the AMP molecules are sequestered by binding to various
broth components, making it difficult to determine the actual fraction
of peptide that reaches the bacterial membrane. It would appear as
if larger concentrations are needed to efficiently inhibit bacteria.
We can think of a few reasons why this is not the case for TP4 or
P1, which show MIC values of <1 μmol/L. First, the concentration
of the peptide accrued at membranes will be orders of magnitude greater
than that in bulk solution, probably
reaching the surface coverage sufficient for membrane destabilization.
The anionic bacterial membranes act as effective concentrators. Second,
the most potent piscidins can penetrate and inflict significant damage
to bacteria, by interfering with normal cellular processes, including
membrane protein function, at well below
the concentrations needed for complete coverage. This could happen through various mechanisms including
endocytosis, direct translocation, and transient, local pore formation.,In any case, membrane destabilization, which is usually seen at
high P/Ls in model membranes, is aided
by AMPs creating and exploiting membrane heterogeneity (e.g., regions
of high curvature stress and domain boundaries) for entry.

As we discover here, the R5 segment of
TP4 is the main promoter
of segregation in mixed anionic-zwitterionic lipid systems specific
to bacterial membranes, through preferential surface interactions
and binding to the anionic headgroups. Nevertheless, the structure
and chemical nature of the hydrophobic, helical segment is also an
important predictor of antibacterial efficacy, as has been discussed
in numerous studies of helical AMPs. Here, for instance, TP4-noR5
shows a lower MIC than NP. This can be interpreted as being due to
the more hydrophobic and amphipathic TP4-noR5 helix (compared to the
NP), which could promote a stronger helix anchoring between lipid
headgroups and insertion into the hydrocarbon region and, thus, cause
more profound and irreversible damage to the membrane. This has also
been observed with neutron reflectometry and discussed in detail,
in our previous studies of P1. Overall,
TP4 is a remarkable example of how two different segments of an AMP
play separate yet synergistic roles at bacterial membranes, to achieve
an unmatched microbial killing ability.

While the total positive charge of AMPs has
been acknowledged as an important parameter in membrane activity, the present study emphasizes the roles that
segments of clustered arginines can hold in natural AMPs. We have
seen that for TP4, NP-R5 and P1-R5, the polycationic segment has important
functions for recruitment to membranes and membrane restructuring
through lipid segregation with the consequence of increasing bioactivity.
These observations are augmented by our statistical analysis of natural
AMP sequences carrying concatenated cationic residues (including lysines)
and the reported MIC values for various bacterial species. Interestingly,
we found that, clustered R’s positioned either toward the middle
or at the C-terminal end of natural AMP sequences, improve the antimicrobial
efficacy more than clustered K’s positioned similarly in the
peptide chains (Tables–). The same trend is not immediately
apparent from the gathered data, if the clustered charge segment in
at the N-terminus. This could be due to the lack of catalogued sequences
with those characteristics. Indeed, a few isolated examples of highly
potent AMPs from all kingdoms of life display clustered R’s
at the N-terminus or middle of the sequence, and show MIC values significantly
lower than the average AMP. Examples include Myticalins from mollusks, hLF(1–11) from humans, protegrin-1 from pigs and
EcAMP3 from grass seed. Furthermore,
the statistical analysis also shows that sequences with clustered
R’s are more effective at inhibiting bacteria (lower MIC values)
than those with clustered K’s of equivalent charge density,
independent of the position of the charges (Figure). What molecular features could be responsible
for the improvements in bioactivity of clustered R’s versus
K’s? A striking feature of arginine is its side-chain, guanidinium
ion, with its unique bidentate structure and hydration properties.,Neutron diffraction was used to show that the protonated planar
guanidinium ion is poorly hydrated (i.e., hydrophobic) above and below
the molecular plane while retaining in-plane hydration. This enables it to easily shed those water
molecules and translocate through hydrophobic gaps - a property important
for the movement of voltage-sensing segments of ion channels in bilayers,and, probably, equally important for AMPs and CPPs. By comparison,
the amino group of the side chain of lysine maintains a spherical
hydration structure, impeding translocation.
Indeed, it was shown that poly-R peptides can enter cells, while poly-K
cannot. Furthermore, through synchrotron
X-ray diffraction studies, peptides with clustered poly arginines,
such as TAT peptides, were shown to generate “saddle-shaped”
deformations, enabling a richer structural
polymorphism in lipids (and thus, more opportunities to form pores),
compared to poly lysines which only generates negative mean curvature
leading to “cylinder-shaped” deformations.

Based on all the above, we can surmise
that clustered poly-R segments, owing to the unique structural and
chemical properties of the guanidium ion, can greatly improve the
antibacterial profiles of AMPs by efficient recruitment at bacterial
membranes, followed by membrane destabilization through lipid clustering,
water retention and intricate local deformations. Notably, the R5
segment is a macro-cation that carries a significant amount of water
with it as it penetrates the various layers, opening channels of access,
displacing small monovalent and divalent cations and disrupting both
the LPS stability and the homeostatic equilibrium of bacteria. It is likely that the terminal poly-R segment
exposed to the membrane surface is targeted for degradation by enzymes
like trypsin. The resulting separate fragments could still work independently
by releasing a shorter, more hydrophobic segment for faster translocation
through the membrane.

Clustered Arginine (poly-R) segments found
in natural and synthetic
AMPs are shown here to significantly boost the antimicrobial efficacies
of AMPs against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria. This
enhancement in bioactivity can be traced back to preferential interactions
of the poly-R motifs of AMPs with lipid components commonly found
in bacterial membranes, such as LPS and PG lipids. These favored interactions
cause lipid segregation and membrane destabilizations, as revealed
by X-ray diffraction. The lipid segregation in domains caused by poly-R
segments creates line defects that facilitate anchoring of hydrophobic
segments into the hydrocarbon region, thus assisting peptide insertion
and translocation. Through database searches and analyses, we show
that the presence of poly-R motifs in natural sequences reduces, on
average, the minimum inhibitory concentration of AMPs relative to
sequences with equivalent charge density but sparsely distributed
charged residues, as well as sequences containing clustered poly lysine
motifs. The rather limited collection of cataloged natural AMP sequences
with recorded bioactivity and biophysical properties makes the poly-R
motif rather elusive compared to other, more commonly discussed structural
features of AMPs. Finding and harnessing the advantages brought by
such impactful sequence motifs circumvents extensive efforts in developing
and testing peptide libraries for antibiotic discoveries. TP4 is a
remarkable example of how various segments or sequence motifs present
in one AMP play separate roles and act synergistically at membranes
to achieve unmatched bactericidal effects.

We thank Dr. Alexander I. Greenwood for maintenance
of the NMR instrument, and Qiaoyue Kuang, Kia Taylor, Kameron Sullivan,
and Yawei Xiong from Willam & Mary for their contribution to the
NMR sample preparation and dye leakage assays. MLC acknowledges support
from the National Science Foundation (MCB 1716608). This work was
supported by an Innovation in Measurement Science (IMS) grant from
the National Institute of Standards and Technology. F. H. acknowledges
support from the U.S. Department of Commerce Awards 70NANB17H299 and
70NANB24H248. The research was performed in part at the National Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST) Center for Nanoscale Science and
Technology. Certain commercial materials, equipment, and instruments
are identified in this work to describe the experimental procedure
as completely as possible. In no case does such an identification
imply a recommendation or endorsement by NIST, nor does it imply that
the materials, equipment, or instruments identified are necessarily
the best available for the purpose. A portion of this research used
resources at the SNS, a Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science
User Facility operated by ORNL. Neutron reflectometry measurements
were conducted on the Liquids Reflectometer at the SNS, sponsored
by the Scientific User Facilities Division, Office of Basic Energy
Sciences, DOE. UT-Battelle LLC manages ORNL for DOE under Contract
DE-AC05-00OR22725.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.5c00084.

The antimicrobial
susceptibility tests for and , the PI assays, and the CD measurements
were done by N.K. The XRD and DSC measurements were done by M.M. and
N.K. The P1-R5 peptide used in the dye leakage assays was designed
by M.L.C., and the dye leakage and NMR data collected and processed
by M.T.R. and M.L.C. The assays on the bacteria were performed by D.K.G. and C.H. NR measurements were
performed by M.E.M., D.P.H., E.W., and F.H.; data reduction and analysis
were done by M.E.M., E.W., D.P.H. Database searches, data collection,
preprocessing, and statistical analysis were done by K.M. and S.P.
and supervised by A.C., J.B.K., and M.M. The study was initiated by
M.M. All authors contributed to writing and editing the manuscript.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.