The goal of this study was to investigate clinical and hemodynamic differences in moyamoya disease patients underwent direct bypass using one donor-one recipient (1D1R), one donor-two recipients (1D2R), and two donors-two recipients (2D2R) bypass. To the authors’ knowledge, this represents the largest series reported to date. Clinical and radiographic data were collected for 98 patients using 1D1R (28 cases), 1D2R (46 cases), and 2D2R (24 cases) bypasses. The patients’ demographic information, clinical presentations, associated medical conditions, intraoperative hemodynamics, and postoperative hemispheric perfusion were obtained from reviewing medical records, intraoperative microvascular Doppler ultrasonography, and CT perfusion scans. There was no significant difference in the incidence of postoperative complication, bypass vessel patency, and good neovascularization among the 3 groups (P> 0.05). When postoperative complications occurred, patients in the 1D2R group had a lower modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score and a shorter duration of symptoms compared to those in the 1D1R group (P< 0.05). A significant difference was observed in the intraoperative mean velocity values of the donor vessel and the recipient artery (RA) in the parietal lobe among the three groups, with the 1D1R group showing the highest values (P< 0.05). Under blood pressure control, there was significant difference in the volumes of the hypoperfusion area, infarct core, and penumbra among the three groups (P< 0.05). The application of 1D1R, 1D2R, and 2D2R techniques resulted in distinct clinical and hemodynamic outcomes. Patients containing dual RAs were likely to have more extensive perfusion changes and better prognosis in the event of surgical complications.

Moyamoya disease (MMD) is a rare cerebrovascular disease, defined as progressive stenosis of bilateral terminal portion of internal carotid artery (ICA) and spontaneous formation of moyamoya vessels at the base of brain1. Extracranial-intracranial (EC-IC) bypass, characterized by superficial temporal artery–middle cerebral artery (STA-MCA) utilizing end-side (ES) anastomosis, is considered as an effective treatment for MMD, which has been reported to reduce stroke recurrence and improve long-term survival2–4. Recent reports suggest that modifications to bypass technique, including side-to-side (SS), ES combined with SS (ES/SS), and double ES anastomosis, are beneficial to reduce incidence of cerebral hyperperfusion syndrome (CHS) and hemorrhage after direct bypass5–7. Optimizing the regulation of cerebral blood flow and achieving an ideal distribution ratio remains a critical clinical issue.

In recent years, there has been an increasing modification of bypass techniques in carious centers5,6,8. However, the safety and efficacy of these new procedures have yet to be fully established. In our center, various direct bypasses options are employed, including one donor-one recipient (1D1R), one donor-two recipients (1D2R), and two donors-two recipients (2D2R), of which clinical and hemodynamic outcomes were recorded. In this research, we analyzed intraoperative hemodynamics, the incidence of newly developed complications, changes in hemispheric perfusion, and short-term follow-up outcomes with 1D1R, 1D2R, and 2D2R bypass in 98 adult MMD patients, seeking for disparities between these 3 bypass techniques. To the authors’ knowledge, this is the largest series reported to date.

This research was approved by the ethic committee of Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital (2022-172-03), and informed consent was obtained. The inclusion criteria were as follows (Fig.1): 1) patient met the guideline of MMD proposed by the Research Committee on Spontaneous Occlusion of the Circle of Willis of the Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare, Japan9; 2) operated hemisphere harbored more than two ischemic lobes (Time to max, Tmax> 6 s) as evaluated by CT perfusion (CTP) scans preoperatively; 3) patient was treated by one of the three STA-MCA bypass techniques: 1D1R, 1D2R, and 2D2R anastomosis; 4) ipsilateral hemisphere was evaluated using intraoperative microvascular doppler ultrasonography (MDU) and FLOW 800 Indocyanine Green (ICG) Color-Coded Maps; 5) postoperative CTP scans were performed prior to discharge, and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was conducted at 6 months postoperatively; and 6) patient aged over 18 years. Patients mismatched inclusion criteria were excluded. A total of 98 hemispheres (98 patients) operated by three surgeons (Y.B.Y., C.H.H., and W. Y) at our hospital between January 2023 and December 2023 were enrolled. The general demographic, clinical characteristic, radiological images, postoperative complication incidence, and clinical follow-up outcomes were compared among the 1D1R, 1D2R, and 2D2R groups.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria of this research. 1D1R: one donor-one recipient, 1D2R: one donor-two recipients, 2D2R: two donors-two recipients.

Patients’ data was collected including gender, age, onset symptoms, hypertension, diabetes, smoking history, thyroid function (hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, and normal), infarcted hemisphere (left, right, or both), infarct location (anterior or posterior circulation or no infarction), modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score, intracranial aneurysm, Suzuki stage, operated hemisphere, and operation time.

CTP examinations were performed for MMD patients enrolled using a GE 256-row CT scanner (80 kV, 150 mA), with a 0.625 mm slice thickness and a 256 × 256 of matrix. The patient was injected with iodine imaging agent intravenously (5 ml/ s, total 60 ml). Two independent neuroradiologists, blinded to each other, analyzed the CTP results using Neuro CT aw4.7 software (Siemens Medical System Workstation). Parameters recorded included cerebral blood flow (CBF), cerebral blood volume (CBV), mean transit time (MTT), and Tmax. The cerebellum was selected as reference region, and relative value was calculated, focusing on Tmax, rCBV, and rCBF as main indices.

We defined infarct core as rCBF value < 30%, and hypoperfusion area as Tmax> 6 s, with the penumbra calculated as the volume difference between the hypoperfusion zone and infarct core11. The mismatch ratio was determined as the volume ratio of hypoperfusion area to the infarct core. Severe hypoperfusion area was defined by Tmax> 10 s. The hypoperfusion index was defined by volume (Tmax> 10 s) / volume (Tmax> 6 s). Collateral vessel density was determined by the CBV index (Tmax> 10 s) / CBV index (Tmax> 6 s) (Fig.2). Volume of rCBF < 30%, Tmax> 6 s, Tmax> 10 s, Tmax> 10 s / Tmax> 6 s, penumbra, collateral vessel density, and mismatch ratio were compared before surgery and at discharge. The percentage of volume change (△ %) after surgery was artificially calculated as [volume (medianpost)– volume (medianpre)] / volume (medianpre) *100%.

Schematic of hypoperfusion, severe hypoperfusion, infarct core, and penumbra based on CT perfusion scan.STAsuperficial temporal artery,CVDcollateral vessel density.CBVcerebral blood volume.

The assessment of moyamoya vessels and Suzuki stage were resemble to previous report12. Suzuki stage was classified into three grades: (1) early stage, hemisphere with Suzuki I and II; (2) middle stage, hemisphere with Suzuki III and IV; (3) advanced stage, hemisphere, hemisphere with Suzuki V and VI. According to Matsushima grades13, neo angiogenesis exceeding 2/3, 1/3 ~ 2/3, and < 1/3 of the MCA territory was classified as grade A, B, and C. The patency rate of bypass was also recorded.

The bypass selection was determined through multidisciplinary evaluation by three neurosurgeons based on STA anatomy, with each surgeon performing their most specialized technique: Dr. Wang (1D1R), Dr. Yang (1D2R), and Dr. Hang (2D2R). Selection criteria incorporated both bifurcation location relative to the zygomatic arch (< 2 cm: 1D1R/1D2R preferred; 2–4 cm: 1D2R/2D2R; > 4 cm: 1D1R/2D2R) and STA diameter (< 1 mm: 2D2R recommended; 1–2 mm: 1D1R/1D2R suitable; > 2 mm: particularly favorable for 1D2R configuration. However, the surgeon’s experience also played an important role in the decision-making process. When the STA diameter exceeded 2 mm, the 1D2R technique was preferred to minimize postoperative hemorrhage risk, whereas for diameters below 1 mm, the 2D2R technique was primarily selected to optimize bypass patency.

The MDU studies were performed with a standard ultrasonography probe (DWL MultiDop X, 16 M), in pulsed-wave mode with a handheld transducer following a standardized protocol14. Craniotomy was performed to expose the PSCAs in the frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes. Thereafter, the operator placed MDU coupler on each recipient artery (RA) at an angle of 30 degrees within craniotomy. During MDU measurement, cut flow of each RA was measured, which was recorded as mean velocity value (MVV). After that, the patient was operated by STA-MCA bypass involving anastomosis site of M4 segment in the ipsilateral hemisphere. In 1D1R cases, RA of parietal lobe was usually targeted. In 1D2R cases, S–S for temporal lobe and E-S for parietal lobe were selected. In 2D2R cases, double E-S anastomoses were performed on the parietal and temporal lobe. Usually, the time needed for bypass anastomosis was recorded, and patency was subsequently confirmed using intraoperative Flow 800 ICG.

Before anastomosis, flow direction and MVV of RA were recorded. The RA was classified as entering sylvian (ES) and leaving sylvian (LS) type based on flow orientation of MDU assessment relative to the sylvian fissure. After bypass, RAs was reclassified as entering sylvian (RA.ES) and leaving sylvian (RA.LS). Donor vessels were categorized as primary artery (PA) and secondary artery (SA). In 1D1R cases, PA was parietal branch of STA, and SA was absent. In 1D2R cases, PA and target SA were proximal and distal portions of STA parietal branch. In 2D2R cases, PA was the trunk of STA, with the parietal branch (frontal branch was recorded but not shown) serving as the target SA. MVV fold changes of RA were defined as MVV (RA.ES) / MVV (RA) and MVV (RA.LS) / MVV (RA). Flow distribution rate (FDR) within lobe was calculated as the MVV ratio of RA.ES / RA.LS. The FDR between lobes was defined as MVV ratio of (RA.ES + RA.LS)temporal/ (RA.ES + RA.LS)parietal. The MDU studies were conducted and interpreted by two experienced neurosurgeons, with details of the assessment shown in Fig.3.

Schematic illustration of 1D1R (A), 1D2R (B), and 2D2R (C) bypass procedure.Atrunk of STA,bparietal branch of STA (b1: proximal portion, b2: distal portion),cfrontal branch of STA,dRA of parietal lobe,eRA of temporal lobe,fRA.ES of parietal lobe,gRA.LS of parietal lobe,hRA.ES of temporal lobe,iRA.LS of temporal lobe,1D1Rone donor-one recipient,1D2Rone donor-two recipients,2D2Rtwo donors-two recipients,STAsuperficial temporal artery,RA.ESrecipient artery entering sylvian,RA.LSrecipient artery leaving sylvian. The green dotted line represented the exposure of craniotomy.

All patients received standardized postoperative care, including systolic BP 10% lower than preoperative levels, rehydration (30 ~ 50 ml/kg), antiplatelet therapy (aspirin, 100 mg/d), prevention of epilepsy attack, and emergent CT scans. Repeat CT or MRI scans were prescribed for patients with new neurological symptoms postoperatively. Postoperative complications mainly focused on cerebral hemorrhage, ischemic stroke, CHS, and seizure attack. For patients with newly developed discomfort, they were treated carefully and discharged in stable condition.

The mRS was conducted at 6 months after surgery via clinic visits or telephone to evaluate neurological status. The mRS score > 3, 2 ~ 3, and 0 ~ 1 were defined as severe disability, slight to moderate disability, and normal, respectively15. Functional improvement or deterioration was determined by decrease and increase of mRS score self-comparison before and after surgery.

Statistical analysis was performed with IBM SPSS 22.0 (IBM Corp.). Pearson’s chi-square test and Fisher’s exact test were used for categorical variables. One-way ANOVA was applied for continuous variables with normal distribution, and rank test for skew distribution. For variable with statistical significance, LSD or Kruskal–wallis subgroup analysis was performed, where adjustedPvalue was calculated. Apvalue of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

The baseline characteristic of the 98 MMD patients were summarized in Table1. The cohort consisted of 46 females and 52 males, with age ranging from 19 to 62 years old (mean 50.8 years). The clinical presentations were varied: 10 patients presented with hemorrhage, 15 with headache, 69 with ischemia, and 4 were asymptomatic. Among the cohort, the prevalence of comorbid conditions was as follow: hypertension in 60 cases (61.2%), diabetes in 36 cases (36.7%), smoking history in 22 cases (22.7%), hyperthyroidism in 3 cases (3.1%), hypothyroidism in 5 cases (5.1%), and intracranial aneurysms in 9 cases (9.2%). There was no significant difference between the 1D1R, 1D2R, and 2D2R groups regarding gender, age, onset symptom, hypertension, diabetes, smoking history, thyroid function, infarcted location, pre mRS score, Suzuki stage, operated hemisphere, and aneurysm location (P> 0.05). However, the operation time differed significantly among the three groups, with the 1D2R group having the longest operation time (P< 0.001).

Characteristics of the 98 patients (98 hemispheres) in the research (n, %).

ACAanterior cerebral artery,MCAmiddle cerebral artery,PCAposterior cerebral artery,1D1Rone donor-one recipient,1D2Rone donor-two recipients,2D2Rtwo donors-two recipients.

Before bypass, there was no significant difference in MVV and flow direction of RA among the three groups (P> 0.05). After bypass, ICG angiography confirmed immediate rate of bypass patency was 100%. There were significant differences in the MVV of PA, target SA, RA.ES (parietal lobe), and RA.LS (parietal lobe) across the 3 groups, with the 1D1R group showing the highest values (P< 0.05). However, there was no statistical difference in the MVV of RA.ES (temporal lobe), RA.LS (temporal lobe), FDR of parietal lobe, FDR of temporal lobe, and FDR between parietal and temporal lobes among the three groups (P> 0.05). Additionally, no significant difference was observed in the MVV fold changes in the RA.ES and RA.LS for both parietal and temporal lobes among the three groups (P> 0.05) (Table2,Fig.4).

Comparison of intraoperative MDU results among the three groups.

ESentering sylvian,LSleaving sylvian,RA.ESrecipient artery entering sylvian,RA.LSrecipient artery leaving sylvian,FDRflow distribution rate,FDR(within lobe) RA.ES/RA.LS,FDR(between lobes) (RA.ES + RA.LS)temporal/ (RA.ES + RA.LS)parietal,1D1Rone donor-one recipient,1D2Rone donor-two recipients,2D2Rtwo donors-two recipients.NAnot applicable. “*” wasP< 0.05, “**” wasP< 0.01.

Subgroup comparison of intraoperative MDU results.RA.ESrecipient artery entering sylvian,RA.LSrecipient artery leaving sylvian,FDRflow distribution rate,FDR(within lobe) RA.ES/RA.LS,FDR(between lobes) (RA.ES + RA.LS)temporal/ (RA.ES + RA.LS)parietal.MDUmicrovascular doppler ultrasonography,1D1Rone donor-one recipient,1D2Rone donor-two recipients,2D2Rtwo donors-two recipients. “*” wasP< 0.05, “**” wasP< 0.01.

A total of 29 out of 98 cases (29.6%) developed postoperative complications, including new infarction in 8 cases (8.2%), hemorrhage in 3 cases (3.1%), CHS in 19 cases (19.4%), and epilepsy in 3 cases (3.1%). Of 8 cases developing new infarction, 2 cases (7%) were in the 1D1R group, and 6 cases (13.0%) were in the 1D2R group. The ratio (percentage) of ipsilateral to contralateral infarctions was 1:1 (3.5%:3.5%) in the 1D1R group and 1:2 (4.3%:8.7%) in the 1D2R group. As for infarcted lobes, 5 (5.1%) cases of anterior and 3 (3.1%) cases of posterior circulation developed. Notably, no new infarctions occurred in the 2D2R group, and no hemorrhages were observed in the 1D2R group. There was no statistical difference in the incidence of postoperative infarction, hemorrhage, and CHS among the 1D1R, 1D2R, and 2D2R group. However, for cases experiencing new infarction, the mRS score at discharge was significantly higher in the 1D1R group compared to the 1D2R group (4.5 ± 0.7 vs 2 ± 1.1,P= 0.026). For cases harboring CHS, the duration of symptom varied significantly, with the 1D2R group having the shortest duration (P= 0.014) (Table3).

Comparison of postoperative complication incidence and follow-up results among the three groups (n, %).

CHScerebral hyper-perfusion syndrome,ACAanterior cerebral artery,MCAmiddle cerebral artery,PCAposterior cerebral artery,FU= follow up,NAnot applicable,mRSmodified Rankin Scale. “*” wasP< 0.05, “**” wasP< 0.01.

Before surgery, there were no significant differences in the volume of rCBF < 30%, volume of Tmax> 6 s, volume of Tmax> 10 s, volume of penumbra, hypoperfusion index, collateral vessel density, and mismatch ratio among 1D1R, 1D2R, and 2D2R group (P> 0.05). Under BP control after bypass, significant difference emerged in the volume of rCBF < 30%, volume of Tmax> 6 s, volume of Tmax> 10 s, hypoperfusion index, and penumbra volume among the three groups (P< 0.05). However, there was no significant difference in collateral vessel and mismatch ratio among the three groups (P> 0.05). After bypass, the percentage increase in infarcted volume (ΔrCBF < 30%) was 436% in the 1D1R group, 1.17% in the 1D2R group, and a reduction of 85% in the 2D2R group. The percentage change in hypoperfusion volume (ΔTmax > 6 s) showed an increase of 58.24% in the 1D1R group and reductions of 54.76% and 76.74% in the 1D2R and 2D2R groups, respectively. The penumbra volume decreased by 12.19% in the 1D1R group, 70.42% in the 1D2R group, and 95.16% in the 2D2R group (Table4,Fig.5).

Comparison of postoperative hemispheric perfusion among the three groups.

△ = (medianpost–medianpre) / medianpre*100%. “*” wasP< 0.05, “**” wasP< 0.01.

Subgroup comparison of postoperative hemispheric perfusion.1D1Rone donor-one recipient,1D2Rone donor-two recipients,2D2Rtwo donors-two recipients. “*” wasP< 0.05, “**” wasP< 0.01.

At clinical follow-up, no patient experienced a recurrent ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke since discharge. The overall bypass patency rate was 84.7%, with no significant differences among the three groups: 24 out of 28 cases (85.7%) in the 1D1R group, 39 out of 46 cases (84.8%) in the 1D2R group, and 21 out of 24 cases (87.5%) in the 2D2R group (P= 0.954). The achievement of good neovascularization (Matsushima grade A) was observed in 9 out of 24 cases (37.5%) in the 1D1R group, 27 out of 40 cases (67.5%) in the 1D2R group, and 16 out of 21 cases (76.2%) in the 2D2R group, although these differences were not statistically significant (P= 0.054). Additionally, there was no significant difference in mRS scores among the three groups (Table3).

The technique of using 1D1R, 1D2R, and 2D2R for EC-IC bypass procedures have been previously described5–7. However, the safety and efficacy remain unclear. Our study, representing the largest single-center series to date, provides a comprehensive evaluation concerning on clinical, hemodynamic, and radiological experience of these three techniques in adult MMD patients with multi-lobar ischemia. Clinical outcomes in our cohort appear to be encouraging, suggesting protection against recurrent stroke events such as transient ischemic attacks (TIAs), infarction, or hemorrhage, at least within the short-term follow-up periods described.

Previous studies have suggested that modification to classic 1D1R (E-S) anastomosis, such as unconventional 1D1R (S–S), 1D2R (S–S combined with E-S), and 2D2R (double E-S), is beneficial to reduce perioperative stroke events5–8. However, our case series demonstrated the incidence of postoperative new infarction, CHS, and epilepsy did not differ significantly among 1D1R, 1D2R, and 2D2R groups. Although the incidence of new infarctions was slightly higher in 1D2R group (13.0%) compared to the 1D1R group (7.0%), it is noteworthy that 8.7% of these cases occurred in the contralateral hemisphere. Interestingly, despite the higher infarction rate, the 1D2R group demonstrated better postoperative mRS scores, suggesting a more favorable prognosis than 1D1R group. Moreover, the duration of CHS events was slightly shorter in the 1D2R group, indicating this technique may offer advantages in mitigating CHS and improving overall outcomes when ipsilateral infarction and CHS occur. Encouragingly, there were no cases developing new cerebral hemorrhage in the 1D2R group and no cases experiencing new cerebral infarction in the 2D2R group. This had no similar report before. In addition, we observed that the 1D1R group had the shortest occlusion time, followed by the 2D2R group, while the 1D2R group required the longest occlusion duration. Unfortunately, these differences reached statistical significance (P< 0.05). However, due to the limited sample size in our study, we were unable to perform multivariate analysis to adjust for this potentially important confounding factor, as acknowledged in the study limitations section. In future studies with larger sample sizes, intraoperative occlusion time could be incorporated as a covariate in multivariate analyses to further delineate its impact on postoperative complications across these three surgical techniques.

While prior studies have primarily utilized intraoperative ICG color maps, our research builds on earlier findings by incorporating intraoperative ultrasonography to monitor hemispheric hemodynamics16,17. In our last report, intraoperative TCD demonstrated MVV fold changes of RA.ES as the risk of CHS14. In this research, we observed significant differences in MVV of PA, target SA, and recipient arteries (RA.ES and RA.LS) in parietal lobe, with the highest MVV in the 1D1R and the lowest in the 1D2R group. We speculated that the higher MVV in the donor vessels might predispose 1D1R cases to dramatic flow changes during anesthesia resuscitation and postoperative BP control, increasing the risk of hemispheric hypoperfusion and poor prognosis. This finding is novel and warrants further validation.

Moreover, there was no significant difference in the MVV of RA.ES and RA.LS in the temporal lobe when comparing 1D2R and 2D2R group. Similarly, there was no significant difference in FDR within or between parietal and temporal lobes. Moreover, there was no significant difference in MVV fold changes of RA.ES and RA.LS in both parietal lobe and temporal lobe. These findings suggest that flow distribution within or between lobes was primarily governed by the inherent vascular resistance system of the hemisphere rather than by specific bypass technique modifications. The preferential distribution of blood flow to the proximal temporal lobe and RA.ES, with subsequent shunting to the distal parietal lobe and RA.LS, appears to be a self-regulating process within the recipient vessels to achieve an optimal flow distribution, which did not indefinitely increase with donor vessel flow. This concept, which is novel in the literature, requires further exploration.

Previous reports have demonstrated that EC-IC bypass can enhance blood flow of ipsilateral hemisphere18–20. However, the impact of clinical proactive hypotension to prevent CHS on hemispheric perfusion has not been well documented. In our series, active systolic BP reduction by 10 ~ 15% was employed postoperatively. The infarct core (rCBF < 30%) and hypoperfusion volume (Tmax> 6 s) increased by 436% and 58.24% in the 1D1R group, but decrease by 86% and 76.74% in the 2D2R group. The regional infarction and hypoperfusion volumes tended to be higher in the 1D1R group compared to 1D2R and 2D2R groups under active BP control. Notably, the 2D2R group demonstrated a greater capacity for reducing infarction and hypoperfusion volumes than the 1D1R group. We agreed that cerebral hemispheric perfusion after bypass represents a concurrent state where hemispheric ischemia and regional risk of hyperperfusion coexist21,22. This implies a higher potential ischemic risk in the 1D1R group than that in 1D2R and 2D2R groups when postoperative BP is lowered to prevent CHS. This finding has not been previously reported.

In cases harboring 2 RAs (1D2R vs 2D2R), a significant difference was observed in infarcted volume (rCBF < 30%), but not in hypoperfusion (Tmax> 6 s) volume. We speculated that more recipient vessels might favor more significant reduction of hypoperfusion volume, while more donor vessels might be more effective in reducing infarcted volume. Consequently, ischemia tolerance in the ipsilateral hemisphere varied among the three groups. Cases using 1D2R and 2D2R exhibited significantly greater resistance to ischemia than cases using 1D1R during ischemic strokes in the ipsilateral hemisphere, which we speculated was associated with clinical prognosis at discharge. However, more widespread flow distribution might be associated with higher incidence of postoperative CHS, with 2D2R group being the most susceptible. This observation, which has not been previously reported, warrants further investigation. In future studies, Vessel-selective 4D MRA based on arterial spin labeling (ASL)23could be employed to specifically label the donor arteries in all three groups, enabling more precise postoperative evaluation of cerebral perfusion volume changes induced by bypass vessels. This approach would allow for better comparative assessment of the differences among the three surgical techniques.

According to previous reports, EC-IC bypass could contribute to promote neovascularization and improve clinical prognosis24–27. However, differences in neovascularization, bypass patency, and clinical follow-up outcomes between cases using 1D1R, 1D2R, and 2D2R techniques have not been previously reported. In our study, no patients experienced recurrent ischemia or hemorrhage event at the latest follow-up. The 1D2R and 2D2R groups demonstrated higher rates of achieving Matsushima grade A, bypass patency, and favorable clinical outcomes compared to the 1D1R group, though there was no significant difference in short-term mRS scores among 1D1R, 1D2R, and 2D2R group. Notably, Matsushima grade A was achieved in 67.5% of the 1D2R group and 76.2% of the 2D2R group, compared to only 37.5% in the 1D1R group. We consider the current results to be encouraging, suggesting that wider flow perfusion could promote more neovascularization. Further research is needed to determine if these benefits persist on in the long term.

This study had some limitations. First, the sample size was relatively small, particularly in the 1D1R and 2D2R groups, which limited the ability to fully account for potential confounding variables, such as intraoperative occlusion time. We would enroll more patients in future. Second, the diameters of donor and recipient vessels were not measured, and blood flow data were unavailable. This research used MVV measurements via MDU technique to compare MVV rather than cut flow, which was not intuitive and inaccurate. Future ultrasound flow probe was needed16. Third, CT perfusion was a semiquantitative blood flow measurement, which was less precise than single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) or positron emission tomography (PET)28. Fourth, the current follow-up period was relatively short, with no significant differences observed among the three groups. The long extension of follow-up period was necessary. Fifth, the high incidence of new contralateral infarctions in the 1D2R group (8.7%) required further investigation to clarify the mechanisms and potential interventions that may reduce this risk, such as improving bypass technique details, shortening operation time, and personalizing perioperative management. Finally, we acknowledged that this study did not employ complete randomization in patient allocation, as both the surgeon’s clinical experience and the patient’s overall condition served as critical determinants in the decision-making process. As we expand our case series in future studies, randomized grouping can be implemented to enable more objective and precise evaluation of the comparative advantages and limitations among these three surgical approaches.

The application of 1D1R, 1D2R, and 2D2R techniques in MMD patients harbor distinct clinical and hemodynamic outcomes following EC-IC bypass. Patients with dual Ras (1D2R and 2D2R) tended to experience more extensive perfusion changes and better prognosis in the event of complications. Based on our findings, a recommended sequence of 2D2R, followed by 1D2R and 1D1R, may be preferable for case multi-lobal ischemia. Ultimately, the choice of EC-IC anastomosis procedure should be individualized, considering the specific clinical and patient characteristics.