The climate crisis poses a serious threat to octocorals in the Mediterranean Sea as marine heatwaves (MHWs) not only impair coral metabolism but also disrupt the complex symbiosis between the coral host and its microbiome. Since octocorals are the foundation species of the Mediterranean animal forests, understanding their resilience, i.e. ability to recover and survive to MHWs, is crucial to predict their viability under future climatic conditions. Using amplification of16 Sand18 S rRNAgenes for metabarcoding andqPCRanalyses to follow the changes in bacterial microbiome and eukaryome as well as host response under stress and recovery conditions, this study provides the first comprehensive assessment of the resilience of an iconic Mediterranean octocoral (the red coralCorallium rubrum) to a mild (19 °C) and more severe (23 °C) heat stress.

The results of this work indicate a stress response of the host to elevated temperatures, even under mild temperature. The eukaryome was highly sensitive to heat stress and underwent rapid structural changes among the dominant microeukaryotes. In contrast, the relative and absolute abundance of the major bacterial symbionts remained stable throughout the stress. However, heat stress led to a significant increase in the abundance of some taxa such as Vibrionaceae that persisted after a week of recovery.

While the host recovered from the stress, and the microbiome largely returned to its original composition during recovery, the results highlight the persistent presence of some taxa that might compromise the short-term resilience of octocoral holobionts. This study provides new information on how octocoral holobionts respond to MHWs in the Mediterranean Sea. This knowledge is crucial for the development of effective, science-based strategies for coral protection and restauration.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40793-025-00765-8.

Corals are foundational species that build complex three-dimensional habitats supporting rich marine biodiversity. In tropical regions, scleractinian corals form the basis of coral reefs [1], while in temperate waters, gorgonian octocorals such asParamuricea clavataandCorallium rubrumshape coralligenous assemblages, key components of Marine Animal Forests (MAFs; [2]). These benthic systems, composed of large sessile invertebrates, provide structural complexity and support essential ecological processes [3,4]. However, they are increasingly threatened by climate-driven stressors, with seawater warming and marine heatwaves posing major risks for coral health and biodiversity [5–10]. Corals are complex functional units known as holobionts, which consist of the animal host and its microbiome (i.e., bacteria, archaea, viruses, protists and fungi). The microbial partners provide a wide range of benefits to the host, but the specific functions that drive these benefits are still largely unexplored [11–16]. Some bacteria, for example, can support coral resistance to environmental stressors by producing antioxidants, osmolytes or antimicrobial compounds [14,15,17–20]. However, temperature stress may disrupt microbial community structure, leading to a loss of symbiotic partners and the proliferation of opportunistic microbes, including potentially pathogenic species such as those of the genusVibrio[20–27]. These shifts, known as dysbiosis, can lead to temperature-dependent diseases and may precede tissue loss and coral mortality [20,24–29]. Although microbiome shifts in various coral species during heat stress have been well characterized [20–22,24–26,28,30–32], several knowledge gaps persist to fully understand the response of the coral holobiont to heat stress. For example, our understanding of microbiome resilience, the ability to withstand and recover from stress, remains limited. While many studies have shown that the composition of coral microbiomes changes significantly under thermal stress, fewer investigated the ability to recover their original state [32–37]. Since the microbiome may play a key role in the overall health and resistance of the host, its recovery capacity is a critical factor in coral health under heat stress. Therefore, the ability of the microbiome to restore homeostasis after disturbance may be central to predicting coral survival in the face of climate-driven stressors. A second major knowledge gap lies in the fact that most research has focused on the dynamics and recovery of bacterial communities, while the response to heat stress of other microbes, such as microeukaryotes, remains poorly understood. Most studies focused on the photosynthetic dinoflagellates from the family Symbiodiniaceae but the coral eukaryome contains other microeukaryotic members that have been poorly investigated despite their likely relevance for the coral holobiont [38–40]. Some of these microeukaryotes such as the dinoflagellates Dino Group I Clade I have been linked to thermally tolerant corals, suggesting they may play a role in host’s stress response [41]. However, excluding the ones on Symbiodiniaceae, fewer than ten studies have investigated changes in coral-associated microeukaryotic communities under thermal stress [30,41,42]. Without a clearer picture of how these communities respond, our understanding of how coral holobionts will face rising temperatures remains incomplete. Finally, attention has been focused mainly on tropical corals, while the microbiome of other important coral species, such as temperate octocorals forming the Mediterranean MAFs, is largely unexplored.

The potential of Mediterranean octocorals to recover from temperature stress is a key topic as the Mediterranean Sea is warming 20% faster than the global average, with frequent and intense marine heatwaves (MHWs; [43–45]). Recurrent MHWs induce disease outbreaks and mass mortality of octocoral species, such asParamuriceaspp.,Eunicellaspp. andCorallium rubrum, even in marine protected areas [46–49]. These Mediterranean octocorals are good models to investigate dysbiosis and resilience to thermal stress, because they harbor a highly specific bacterial microbiome, that is normally stable across seasons, geographic locations and depths, and dominated by bacteria from the Endozoicomonadaceae or Spirochaetaceae family [50,51]. Recent studies have begun to investigate the changes in bacterial communities of these coral species during heat stress events [24,26,52,53]. However, several important questions remain unanswered, including the potential recovery of bacterial communities after the stress event, and the response of other holobiont-associated microbial members, such as microeukaryotes. Addressing these gaps is crucial for a better understanding of the resistance and resilience of octocorals to heat stress.

In this study, we used the emblematic red coralCorallium rubrumas an octocoral model, due to its ecological and structural importance in Mediterranean marine ecosystems [54]. As a long-lived, habitat-forming octocoral,C. rubrumcontributes significantly to local biodiversity by providing complex three-dimensional structures that provide refuge and substrate for approximately 10% of marine Mediterranean species [55]. Its population is already on the verge of collapse as overfishing by the jewelry industry [56] and environmental stressors, such as ocean acidification and global warming, reduce the density and biomass ofC. rubrumpopulations [10,47,57–59]. Due to late sexual maturity, slow growth rates, and low recruitment rates, the ability ofC. rubrumto recover from mortality events is low [59,60]. However, the decline ofC. rubrumand other habitat-forming species rapidly disrupts community structure and poses a significant threat to the ecological functioning of Mediterranean animal forests (MAFs) and the organisms that depend on them [61–63]. To test the effect of thermal stress onC. rubrumholobiont, colonies were exposed to two short-term temperature increases (i.e., 8 days at 19–23 °C instead of the control temperature of 15 °C) simulating thermal anomalies experienced by Mediterranean octocorals during MHWs down to 40 m depth. To assess the impact of these treatments, we analyzed changes in the composition of the associated bacterial and microeukaryotic communities using amplicon sequencing of16 Sand18 S rRNAgenes and taxon-specific qPCR analyses. The concomitant coral host response was also assessed by measuring expression levels of two stress-response genes:TNFR1, involved in the regulation of the apoptosis cascade, andHSP70, a stress-response gene associated with cellular repair processes. Our findings provide insights into the short-term recovery capacity of octocoral holobionts after thermal anomalies and highlight how MHWs may contribute to disease outbreaks and mass mortality of octocoral populations in the Mediterranean Sea.

Nine distinct multi-branched colonies ofCorallium rubrum(7–8 cm long) were collected at 40 m depth in Villefranche-sur-Mer (France), with the permission of the Direction Inter-Régionale de la Mer Méditerranée (France). The seawater temperature near the colonies at the time of collection in June was 15 °C (divers’ computers and SOMLIT;www.somlit.fr). After collection, the colonies were transported to the aquarium facility of the Centre Scientifique de Monaco. Each colony was divided into 9 nubbins (3 cm long) which were tagged according to their original colony. The 81 nubbins were suspended on fishing lines and maintained in open-flow aquaria at 15 °C in darkness for 2 weeks to acclimate before being distributed over the experimental aquaria.

The experimental setup consisted of nine 25 L aquaria, which were kept in the dark throughout the experiment to reflect their natural habitat conditions [64]. Each aquarium received a continuous flow of seawater (15 L/h) pumped from a depth of 50 m and filtered through a 5 μm pore size filter, to prevent large particles or algae from entering the tanks. Nevertheless, it was possible to maintain the natural bacteria and microeukaryotes as under in situ conditions. Inside each aquarium, a pump ensured continuous mixing of the seawater, while a heater, regulated by a temperature controller, maintained a constant temperature. Nubbins were fed with freshArtemia salinanauplii twice a week. Three aquaria were assigned for each of the three thermal regimes as detailed below. Each aquarium contained 9 nubbins, i.e. 3 nubbins originating from 3 distinct colonies, ensuring that the 9 colonies were represented in each of the thermal regime, allowing statistical correction for colony.

Nubbins were exposed to 3 thermal regimes: a control condition (15 °C; Supplementary FigureS1), a moderate increase (+ 4 °C, reaching 19 °C), which corresponds to an automnal temperature at 40 m depth in Villefranche-sur-Mer, and a high increase (+ 8 °C, reaching 23 °C), simulating maximum temperatures reached during and after summer heatwave episodes (Supplementary FigureS1). In contrast to surface waters, the warmest temperatures at this depth occur in the fall following the seasonal mixed layer depth deepening (Supplementary FigureS1; [65,66]). In this experiment, colonies, acclimatized at 15 °C, were exposed to 23 °C for 8 days only. This limited exposure period was chosen to avoid tissue loss and mortality while eliciting a response from the host and its microbiome. As expected, colonies showed no sign of tissue loss or mortality in either thermal treatment, in agreement with previous studies indicating that the red coral shows partial mortality after 3 weeks at 23 °C [25].

For simplicity, the different treatments are referred to as Control, C + 4 treatment, and C + 8 treatment, respectively, throughout the study. Except for the control aquaria, temperature was gradually heated to 19–23 °C in 8 days (+ 0.5 °C or + 1 °C per day, respectively), maintained during the subsequent 8 days, followed by a gradual temperature decrease (-0.5 °C or -1 °C per day, respectively) in order to reach the control temperature condition of 15 °C after 8 days (Fig.1). The rate of temperature increase differed between the two thermal treatments (0.5 °C/day and 1 °C/day) to ensure that corals across both conditions reached their respective target temperatures simultaneously. This design allowed all samples to be exposed to thermal stress over the same time frame and under the same water supply. Three nubbins per aquarium (originating from different colonies), were sampled at 3 time points during the experiment (Fig.1): just after the peak temperature was reached (t1), 8 days after the peak temperature was reached (t2) and finally 8 days after the temperature returned to normal (i.e., 15 °C;t3). None of the nubbins presented signs of tissue necrosis or polyp retraction. At each sampling point, nubbins were immediately rinsed with 0.22 μm filtered seawater to avoid introducing transient microorganisms from the surrounding water into the DNA extraction and placed in separate Ziploc®plastic bags and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen (~ 190 °C, ©CX100 Worthington Industries). Two seawater samples were collected for each thermal treatment att2by filtering 2 L of seawater per sample through a 0.2 μm Nuclepore Track-Etch Membrane filter (Whatman, diameter of 47 mm). Both coral and seawater samples were then stored at − 80 °C until further processing.

Total RNA and DNA were extracted from approximately 1 cm of tissue or 1 seawater filter using the AllPrep®DNA/ RNA Micro kit (Qiagen) with the following modifications: samples were transferred in pre-filled bead tubes (Qiagen) containing 346.5 µL of Buffer RLT Plus and 3.5 µL of beta-mercaptoethanol, followed by 2 times 2 min of bead beating using the CryoMill (Retch, Germany) at a frequency of 30 Hz. Two negative extraction control samples (i.e., extraction without sample material) were processed at the same time as the rest of the samples to account for contaminants. DNA and RNA concentrations were measured using a Qubit fluorometer, DNA samples were stored at − 20 °C and RNA samples at -80 °C.

The V3-V4 region of the16S rRNAgene was amplified to assess the composition of the bacterial communities using the forward primer 341F (5’-CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG-3’) and the reverse primer 785R (5’-GACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC-3’), as described by Klindworth et al. (2013; [67]). To assess the composition of the microeukaryotic communities, customized primers 18 S-NonMet_Cr-F (5’-AAGTCTGGTGCCAGCASCC-3’) and 18 S-NonMet_Cr-R (5’-TTTAAGTTTCAGCCTTGCGAT-3’) were used, targeting the V4 region of the18 S rRNAgene. These primers were derived from the UNonMet-PCR primers designed to minimize signals from metazoan hosts, as initially described by Bower et al. (2004; [68]). Their efficacy for Illumina amplicon sequencing was further validated by del Campo et al. (2019; [69]) and Prioux et al. (2025; [30]).

PCR amplifications were conducted on both coral and seawater samples, along with the two negative controls, in a total reaction volume of 25 µL. Each reaction contained 5 µL of 5X Q5®reaction buffer, 0.5 µL of dNTPs, 1.25 µL of each forward and reverse primers (10 µM) with Illumina adapters, 0.25 µL of Q5®High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase, and 2 µL of template genomic DNA (or DNA-free water for the controls). The thermocycling program included an initial denaturation at 98 °C for 30 s, followed by 35 cycles comprising denaturation at 98 °C for 10 s, primer annealing at either 55 °C (for16 S rRNAgene primers) or 63 °C (for18 S rRNAgene primers) for 30 s, and extension at 72 °C for 30 s, with a final extension at 72 °C for 2 min. The success of amplification was verified by running the PCR products on an agarose gel. Bands corresponding to the target sizes were cut from the gel and purified using the GFX™ PCR DNA and Gel Band Purification Kit (Illustra™). DNA concentration was measured with a Qubit fluorometer, and amplicons were sent to STAB-VIDA (Portugal) for paired-end sequencing (2 × 300 bp, 600 cycles) on an Illumina MiSeq platform. All subsequent library preparation steps followed Illumina’s “16S Metagenomic Sequencing Library Preparation” protocol [70]. The raw sequencing data (fastq files) have been submitted to the NCBI Short Read Archive (SRA) under the BioProject accession number PRJNA1211024.

The amplicon data were processed using the DADA2 pipeline (version 1.16;https://benjjneb.github.io/dada2/index.html; [71]). Samples with less than 15,000 reads were removed from the dataset, resulting in 74 and 71 samples for the bacterial and microeukaryotic communities, respectively. Sequencing of the16 S rRNAgene amplicons resulted in 3,142,312 reads ranging from 21,901 to 109,992 reads per sample (Supp. File 1, TableS1). Sequencing of the18 S rRNAgene amplicons resulted in 2,401,825 reads ranging from 15,955 to 109,874 reads per sample (Supp. File 1, TableS1). From both sequencing, negative controls contained from 12,337 to 92,207 reads per sample. Primer sequences were trimmed at the 5′-end of each read using Cutadapt v3.1 [72].

Read quality profiles were inspected, and reads were filtered and trimmed with the following settings: maxN = 0, rm.phix = TRUE, maxEE = c(2), truncLen = c(295, 230) for the16 S rRNAreads and truncLen = c(298, 200) for the18 S rRNAreads. For both datasets, error rates were computed and used for sequence inference. For the16 S rRNAgene sequencing, sequences were merged, and those smaller than 390 bp and longer than 450 bp were removed. For the18 S rRNAgene sequencing, as the expected size of some amplicons exceeded 600 bp, R1 and R2 sequences were not merged but concatenated using mergePairs(justConcatenate = TRUE) following procedure choices from Prioux et al. (2025; [30]). Amplicon sequence variant (ASV) tables were created. Chimeras were detected and removed from the table using the removeBimeraDenovo() function. The number of reads and sequences per sample passing through the different steps of the pipeline for both datasets is presented in Supp. File 1, TableS1.

Taxonomy was assigned to the 5,034 ASVs (16 S rRNAgene) and 8,617 ASVs (18 S rRNAgene) using the assignTaxonomy() function and the SILVA SSU reference database (version 138.1) or the PR2 reference database v4.13.0 [73] for the16 Sand18 S rRNAgene sequencing, respectively. For the16 S rRNAgene sequencing, ASVs corresponding to Archaea were removed, resulting in 4,991 ASVs. For the18 S rRNAgene sequencing, ASVs corresponding to Metazoa and Embryophyceae were removed, resulting in 1,556 ASVs (Supp. File 1, TableS1). The ratio between the number of sequences assigned to microeukaryotic ASVs (i.e., removing sequences corresponding to Metazoa ASVs) and the total of sequences was calculated. The ASV tables, the taxonomic annotation and metadata tables are available in Supp. File 1 as Tables S2, S3, S4, S5 and S6 respectively, and the sequences of the ASVs are available as Supp. File 2 and 3.

All statistical analyses were conducted in the R environment (version 4.2.1) using the R-packagephyloseq[74]. The R-packagedecontam[75] was used to identify contaminant ASVs in the samples based on the negative control samples (isContaminant function), however, no ASV was identified as contaminant. Observed species richness and evenness (Shannon index) were calculated using the R-packagevegan[76]. Alpha diversity analyses were performed on the unrarefied ASV count table, according to the ongoing debate about the use of unrarefied versus rarefied data [77,78]. To examine differences in observed richness and evenness, generalized linear mixed effects models were fitted including thermal treatment and sampling time as fixed factors and colony as random factor to assess whether an effect of colony existed. As no significant random effect was observed, alpha diversity data were analyzed using generalized linear models (GLM) with thermal treatment and sampling time as fixed factors (observed richness ~ sampling time * thermal treatment; Supp. File 1 Table S7). Post-hoc tests were conducted to identify potential pairwise differences using a corrected α for multiple hypothesis testing of < 0.05 (Supp. File 1 Table S7; R-packageemmeans, [79]).

The composition of the bacterial and microeukaryotic communities associated withC. rubrumexposed to the thermal treatments C + 4 (increase to 19 °C) and C + 8 (increase to 23 °C) was compared to the 15 °C control condition at the three sampling times:t1or when the temperature of 19 °C and 23 °C was reached;t2or after 8 days of thermal exposure; andt3or after 8 days of recovery time (i.e., temperatures back to 15 °C). As no differences in community composition were detected in the 15 °C control condition over time (i.e.,t1tot3), control samples of the three sampling times were pooled and used for statistical analyses. Differences in microbial community composition were also tested between the two thermal treatments C + 4 and C + 8. To examine compositional changes, compositional data based analyses (CoDA; [80,81]) were used, following the same data manipulation as in Prioux et al. (2023, 2025; [26,30]) (R-packagescompositionsandzCompositions[82,83]). After these procedures, an Aitchison distance matrix was generated by calculating the Euclidean distance between samples from a clr-transformed data table. To evaluate differences in the microbial community structure across sampling times and thermal treatments, principal component analysis (PCA) and permutational multivariate analysis of variance (using the adonis() function from the R-package vegan) were done (Supp. File 1 Table S8). Following this, potential pairwise differences were analyzed using the permanova_pairwise() function from the R-packageecole[84], with p-values adjusted for false discovery rate (Supp. File 1 Table S8). Differential abundance analyses were conducted to detect differentially abundant ASVs between sampling times within each thermal treatments, using the R-packageANCOM-BC(ancombc2() function, using prv_cut = 0.1 and alpha = 0.01; pairwise = TRUE for sampling sites; version 02–2023; Supp. File 1 Table S9 and S10; [85]). The core microbiome of the bacterial and microeukaryotic communities in the control samples was identified at the ASV level using the core_members() function (arguments: detection = 0.0001, prevalence = 0.99, include.lowest = FALSE) of the R-packagemicrobiome(Supp. File 1 Table S9 and S11; [86]).

Co-occurrence patterns between microorganisms (i.e., between bacteria, between microeukaryotes and between bacteria and microeukaryotes) were analyzed across all samples, regardless of temperature treatment, to identify general patterns of co-presence or exclusion among taxa, reflecting potential ecological interactions rather than direct responses to thermal stress. It was performed using the R-packageSpiecEasi(Sparse Inverse Covariance Estimation for Ecological Association Inference; [87]). Spiec-Easi is a statistical method developed specifically for compositional data. Network inference is done under the assumption of sparsity, using sparse neighborhood and inverse covariance selection algorithms [87]. Non-normalized count ASV tables from both datasets were first filtered to remove low-abundant ASVs (i.e., < 0.3%). A multi-sample sparse inverse covariance estimation was done using the multi.spiec.easi() function of the R-packageSpiecEasi. The method used for this analysis was ‘mb’ (Meinshausen-Bühlmann), which infers sparse graphical models by solving neighborhood selection problems. The parameters included sel.criterion = “stars” to use the StARS (Stability Approach to Regularization Selection) model selection criterion and pulsar.select = TRUE to enable automatic model selection using the Pulsar framework. The regularization path was determined with a minimum lambda ratio (lambda.min.ratio) of 1 exponential and nlambda set to 10. The adjacency matrix of the network was obtained using the “symBeta” function, and an undirected graph was created with the R-packageigraph[88]. Edge weights, representing the strength and type of associations between ASVs, are available in Supp. File 1 Table S12. The network was then visualized in a circular layout to display relationships.

The host response to thermal stress was assessed following the gene expressions ofHSP70andTNFR1using the primers designed in Haguenauer et al. (2013; [89]), respectively (details on primer pairs including primer efficiencies provided in Supp. File 1 Table S13). Additionally, a pair of primers targeting thebeta-actingene ofC. rubrum[26] was used to serve as internal control (Supp. File 1 Table S13). The efficiency of the different primer pairs was verified using a tenfold dilution series of a combined DNA sample mix. The amplification results were plotted as Ct vs. log10[DNA] and amplification efficiency was calculated using the formula E = 10(−1/slope)(Supp. File 1 Table S13; [90]).

For the reverse transcription qPCR analyses, cDNA was synthesized from 500 ng of total RNA in a final reaction volume of 20 µL using the SuperScript IV Reverse Transcriptase (ThermoFisher). Quantitative PCR reactions were performed in duplicate in a total volume of 10 µL with 1:10 dilution of cDNA template aliquots and 1 µM of primers using SYBR-green-based detection (SensiFAST™ SYBR®No-ROX kit, ThermoFisher) on a QuantStudio3 qPCR machine (Applied Biosystems). Cycle parameters were 95 °C 5 min then 40 cycles 95 °C 10 s/60°C 30 s. Following amplification, the specificity of the product was assessed from a melting curve program.

Comparative qPCR was used to follow the changes in the abundance of total bacteria, the abundance of bacteria belonging to theSpirochaetaceaefamily and theVibriogenus in the red coral cells. The three primer pairs including the universal16 S rRNAgene primers (total bacteria; [91]), primers specific to theSpirochaetaceaegroup [92] and theVibriogenus [93] had their specificity and efficiency forC. rubrumtested in Prioux et al. (2023; details on primer pairs including primer efficiencies provided in Supp. File 1 Table S13; [26]).

qPCR assays were conducted in duplicate using a QuantStudio3 qPCR machine (Applied Biosystems). Each reaction consisted of 0.4 µL of each primer (4 µM), 10 µL of SensiFAST SYBR master mix (ThermoFisher), and 2 µL of DNA (10 ng/µL), in a total volume of 20 µL. The thermal cycling protocol included an initial denaturation at 95 °C for 10 min, followed by 40 cycles 95 °C 15 s/60°C 1 min.

Relative gene expression was calculated using the Pfaffl method [90], normalized to thebeta-actinreference gene. Fold changes in gene expression under the thermal treatments were calculated relative to the control conditions. Statistical differences in total bacterial abundances as well as ofSpirochaetaceaeandVibrio, as well as inHSP70andTNFR1gene expression across sampling times and thermal treatments were evaluated using two-way non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis tests (Supp. File 1 Table S14).

A higher richness was observed in the seawater microbial communities (on average 671 bacterial ASVs and 117 microeukaryote ASVs) compared to the coral communities, (on average 241 bacterial ASVs and 51 microeukaryote ASVs; Supp. File 1 Table S7;p= 2.1 × 10− 8and estimatep= 3 × 10− 3for the bacterial and microeukaryotic communities, respectively; Supp. File 1 Table S7). There was no significant differences in alpha diversity of the bacterial and microeukaryotic communities in the coral samples between sampling times or thermal conditions (observed richness and Shannon index; p values > 0.05; Supp. File 1 Table S7). Although the limited number of samples did not allow statistical testing, the observed richness of microeukaryotic ASVs in seawater increased by 4 times with temperature (31, 60 and 260 ASVs on average at 15 °C, 19 °C and 23 °C, respectively; Supp. File 1 Table S7).

No significant difference in community composition was found between the different sampling points in the control condition. The bacterial communities were therefore dominated by the Spirochaetaceae (representing on average 70% of the total community) and the Vibrionaceae family (10%), while the microeukaryotic communities were dominated by the Labyrinthulomycetes order (Labyrinthulaceae and LAB1/6/8 families; 25%), the Philasterida (15%) and the Ostreobiaceae family (10%; Fig.2). At the ASV level, the core microbiome was composed of three bacterial ASVs (ASV1 and ASV2 from the Spirochaetaceae family and ASV3 from the Vibrionaceae family; Supp. File 1 Table S11) and 145 microeukaryotic ASVs (comprising 30 ASVs from the Labyrinthulomycetes order, 13 ASVs from the Philasterida family and two ASVs from the Ostreobiaceae family; Supp. File 1 Table S11). The composition of the bacterial and microeukaryotic communities was different between the negative control, seawater and coral samples (Supp. File 1 Table S8). Although present at low abundances, dominant coral-associated taxa such as Spirochaetaceae, Vibrionaceae, Labyrinthulomycetes, and Philasterida were detected in the seawater samples (FigureS2and S3).

The composition of the bacterial and microeukaryotic communities significantly changed between temperature treatments and sampling times.

There was no difference in betadispersion between temperature treatments (p= 0.2; Supp. File 1 Table S8) and sampling times (p= 0.3; Supp. File 1 Table S8). However, the composition of the bacterial communities was different between temperature treatments (p= 1 × 10− 3; Supp. File 1 Table S8) and sampling times (p= 1 × 10− 3; Supp. File 1 Table S8), and an interaction between temperature and time was detected (p= 0.058; Supp. File 1 Table S8). Compared to the control condition, the bacterial community composition changed after 8 days at 19 °C (C + 4 treatment att2) and immediately at 23 °C (C + 8 treatment att1;p= 0.04 for both; Supp. File 1 Table S8). In addition, at 23 °C, the composition changed over time (C + 8 treatment att1versust2;p= 0.006; Supp. File 1 Table S8). After 8 days of recovery (i.e., temperatures back to 15 °C;t3), the bacterial community composition in both temperature treatments was no longer different compared to the control condition (post-hoc tests p values > 0.05; Supp. File 1 Table S8).

At the family level, and compared to the control condition, we observed an increase in Vibrionaceae at 19 °C and 23 °C, as well as in Pseudoalteromonadaceae at 19 °C and Rhodobacteraceae at 23 °C (Fig.2). At the ASV level, several ASVs were differentially abundant between the control condition and the C + 4 treatment (Fig.3and Supp. File 1 Table S9). In particular, 22 ASVs (including Vibrionaceae and Rhodobacteraceae ASVs) increased att1and 6 ASVs (including Vibrionaceae and Pseudoalteromonadaceae ASVs) increased at t3. In contrast, 5 ASVs (including Colwelliaceae, Flavobacteraceae, and Nitrincolaceae ASVs) decreased att2and ASV17 (Arenicellaceae) decreased att3. Several ASVs were also differentially abundant between the control condition and the C + 8 treatment (Fig.3and Supp. File 1 Table S9). In particular, 10 ASVs (including Vibrionaceae and Cellvibrionaceae) increased att1and 13 ASVs (including Vibrionaceae) att2while ASV30 (Rhodobacteraceae), decreased att1and 14 ASVs (including Rhodobacteraceae and Colwelliaceae) decreased att2.

There was no significant difference in the betadispersion between temperature treatments (p= 0.3; Supp. File 1 Table S8) or sampling times (p= 0.6; Supp. File 1 Table S8). However, the composition of the microeukaryotic communities showed significant changes across temperature treatments (p= 5 × 10− 3; Supp. File 1 Table S8) and sampling times (p= 1 × 10− 3; Supp. File 1 Table S8), with an interaction between these two factors (p= 0.002; Supp. File 1 Table S8). The composition of the microeukaryotic communities changed as soon as the temperature reached 19 °C (C + 4 treatment att1) and 23 °C (C + 8 treatment att1) in comparison to the control condition (p-values < 0.05; Supp. File 1 Table S8), and changed over time (t1versust2;p= 0.003 andp= 0.002, respectively). After 8 days of recovery (C + 4 and C + 8 treatments att3), the composition of the microeukaryotic communities was no longer different compared to the control condition (post-hoc tests p-values > 0.05; Supp. File 1 Table S8).

At the family level, both C + 4 and C + 8 treatments induced a relative decrease of Ostreobiaceae (t1,t2,t3) and Labyrinthulaceae (t1andt2), compared to the control condition (Fig.2). On the contrary, there was a relative increase in Holostichidae (t1,t2,t3) and in a specific Labyrinthulomycetes group (LAB1/6/8;t1andt2). Additionally, in the C + 8 treatment, the relative abundance of the Philasterida family decreased over time while the relative abundance of the Endomyxa family increased and members of the Massiteriidae family appeared briefly att2before decreasing att3(Fig.2). At the ASV level, several ASVs were differentially abundant between the control condition and the C + 4 treatment (Fig.3and Supp. File 1 Table S10). 6 ASVs (including Labyrinthulomycetes LAB1/6/8 and Euplotidae ASVs) increased att1, 10 ASVs (including Labyrinthulaceae, Holostichidae, and Philasterida ASVs) increased att2and one ASV (ASV33-Holostichidae) increased att3. Several ASVs were also differentially abundant between the control condition and the C + 8 treatment (Fig.3and Supp. File 1 Table S10. Three ASVs (including Labyrinthulomycetes ASVs) increased att1, 4 ASVs (including one Endomyxa and one Eurotiomycetes ASVs) increased att2and ASV62 (LC104-lineage) increased att3. Only ASV56 (Philasterida) decreased att2.

Co-occurrence analysis of the 60 and 56 most abundant bacterial and microeukaryotic ASVs, respectively, revealed 33 negative correlations (weights ranging from − 0.0004 to -0.1; Supp. File 1 Table S12) and 134 positive correlations between taxa (weights ranging from 0.0002 to 0.05; Supp. File 1 Table S12). Correlations were more prevalent among bacterial taxa than among microeukaryote taxa (91 and 49 correlations for bacterial and microeukaryotic ASVs, respectively; Fig.4and Supp. File 1 Table S12). In addition, 27 interactions were found between bacterial and microeukaryotic ASVs (Fig.4and Supp. File 1 Table S12).

The two strongest positive correlations were between ASV40 and ASV10 (Pseudoalteromonadaceae; weight = 0.57; Supp. File 1 Table S12), and between ASV73 and ASV59 (Vibrionaceae; weight = 0.56; Supp. File 1 Table S12). ASVs from the Vibrionaceae family were present in several positive and strong co-occurrence correlations (27% of the correlations with 46% of the weights higher than 0.1; Fig.4and Supp. File 1 Table S12). Furthermore, members of the Vibrionaceae family frequently co-occurred with each other (84% of the co-occurrences including the Vibrionaceae family were between two Vibrionaceae ASVs), as for the Rhodobacteraceae family (30% of the co-occurrences including the Rhodobacteraceae family were between two Rhodobacteraceae ASVs; Fig.4and Supp. File 1 Table S12).

The two strongest positive correlations were between ASV283 and ASV657 (Ostreobiaceae), and between ASV250-Eurotiomycetes and ASV177-Sordariomycetes (weight = 0.49 and 0.47, respectively; Supp. File 1 Table S12). Labyrinthulomycetes (including Labyrinthulaceae and Labyrinthulomycetes LAB1/6/8) represented 15% of the positive co-occurrence relations. Furthermore, 28% of the co-occurrences which included the Labyrinthulomycetes class were between two Labyrinthulomycetes ASVs (Fig.4and Supp. File 1 Table S12). The Philasterida family represented 9% of the positive co-occurrence relations, and Philasterida ASVs mostly co-occurred with each other (56% of the co-occurrences including the Philasterida family were between two Philasterida ASVs; Fig.4and Supp. File 1 Table S12).

Among the 27 cross-domain interactions between bacteria and microeukaryotes, we observed 25 positive co-occurrences, with the four strongest associations between ASV47-Acanthopleuribacteraceae and ASV266-Protocruziidae, ASV53-Vibrionaceae and ASV191-Chaetocerotaceae, ASV60-Idiomarinaceae and ASV113-Dothideomycetes, and ASV30-Rhodobacteraceae and ASV394-Cafeteriaceae (weights ranging from 0.080 to 0.34; Supp. File 1 Table S12).

While negative correlations were not dominant, both intra- and inter-kingdom interactions were still observed. For example, a negative correlation was identified between the abundant ASV2-Spirochaetaceae and the microalgae Chlorarachniophyceae LC104 lineage (ASV62; weight = -0.07; Supp. File 1 Table S12). However, the overall strength of these negative interactions was low, with weights ranging from − 0.0004 to -0.1 (Fig.4and Supp. File 1 Table S12).

The gene expression ofHSP70did not change att1andt2in the C + 4 treatment, compared to the control condition (p= 0.7 andp= 0.3, respectively; Fig.5and Supp. File 1 Table S14), but significantly increased att3, during the recovery (p= 0.01; Fig.5and Supp. File 1 Table S14). In the C + 8 treatment, mRNA levels ofHSP70increased with a mean log fold change of 4 att1(p= 0.01) and 2.3 att2(p= 0.009; Fig.5and Supp. File 1 Table S14). No significant difference with the control condition was observed att3(recovery;p= 0.7, respectively; Fig.5and Supp. File 1 Table S14). The gene expression ofTNFR1increased att1in both the C + 4 and C + 8 treatments, with mean log fold changes of 1.9 (p= 0.05) and 3.4 (p= 0.01), respectively (Fig.5and Supp. File 1 Table S14). Att2andt3, mRNA levels ofTNFR1did not change in the C + 4 treatment (p= 1 andp= 0.1, respectively; Fig.5and Supp. File 1 Table S14), while they first increased (t2) then decreased in the C + 8 treatment compared to the control condition (mean log fold change of 2.8,p= 0.02 at t2; mean log fold change of 0.7,p= 0.01 att3; Fig.5and Supp. File 1 Table S14).

Att1, the total concentration of bacteria per host cell was not different between the control condition and the temperature treatments (p> 0.05; Fig.6and Supp. File 1 Table S14). Att2, the concentration significantly increased in the C + 8 treatment compared to the control condition (p= 0.02; 3.2 times higher on average; Fig.6and Supp. File 1 Table S14). Att3(recovery), the total concentration of bacteria was higher only in the C + 4 treatment (p= 0.01; 2 times higher on average; Fig.6and Supp. File 1 Table S14).

Under both temperature treatments, the concentration ofVibrioper host cell was not different compared to the control condition att1(p> 0.05; Fig.6and Supp. File 1 Table S14). However, att2andt3,Vibrioconcentrations were higher under both temperature treatments compared to the control condition (p-values between 0.006 and 0.05; Supp. File 1 Table S14). In the C + 4 treatment, concentrations were 9 times higher att2and 6 times higher att3, while under the C + 8 treatment, concentrations were 17.5 times higher att2and 6 times higher att3(Fig.6and Supp. File 1 Table S14). The concentration of Spirochaetaceae per host cell did not differ compared to the control condition att1,t2andt3for both temperature treatments (p> 0.05; Fig.6and Supp. File 1 Table S14).

In this study, we investigated the resilience of the Mediterranean octocoralCorallium rubrumexposed to moderate (15 °C to 19 °C) and severe (15 °C to 23 °C) heat stress. The results of this work indicate that both the coral host and its associated eukaryome responded rapidly to a temperature increase, while the bacterial microbiome showed a delayed response to the moderate heat stress. The magnitude of the responses was stress-dependent, with larger changes observed in the microbiome at 23 °C compared to 19 °C. qPCR analyses also showed that the concentration of opportunistic or potentially pathogenic bacteria, such asVibrio, increased significantly during heat stress. Although the overall eukaryome and bacterial microbiome returned to their original composition after a week of recovery at control temperature, some stress-emergent microbes, Holostichidae ciliates, Endomyxa protozoa and Vibrionaceae bacteria, remained present at the same relative abundance. Future studies should therefore investigate the duration required for complete microbiome recovery, the impact of repeated heat stress on the resilience of the microbiome ofC. rubrum, and whether the persistence of stress-associated microbial taxa influences the coral’s resistance to successive heat stress as observed during MHWs.

Both the eukaryome and the animal host responded promptly to temperature fluctuations. At 19 °C, host gene expression ofTNFR1, involved in the regulation of the apoptosis cascade, increased twofold. At 23 °C, the expression ofTNFR1but alsoHSP70, a stress-response gene associated with cellular repair processes, increased 4-fold and 3.4-fold, respectively. The rapid upregulation of these stress-induced genes is consistent with previous studies on heat-stressed colonies ofC. rubrum[25] and tropical corals [94]. TheTNFR1signaling pathway likely plays a critical role in regulating immune and stress responses in corals by leading to caspase activation and apoptosis [94–98]. Concomitantly, the upregulation ofHSP70might help colonies maintain protein structure and function under thermal stress. Heat shock proteins are commonly overexpressed in stressed corals, providing resistance to bleaching or serving as a protective mechanism during infection and disease progression [94,99,100]. In particular, expression ofHSP70increased significantly in corals exposed to pathogens such asVibrio coralliilyticusandAlteromonasspecies [100].

Structural changes occurred in the microeukaryotic community immediately after the increase in temperature from 15 °C to 19 °C and 23 °C. This contrasts with the response of the bacterial microbiome, which only showed compositional changes at 23 °C or after 8 days of incubation at 19 °C (see below). These results suggest that the coral eukaryome might be an early responder to environmental change, likely affecting the overall functional dynamics of the holobiont [38]. Still, the changes in the coral eukaryome under environmental stress, whether beneficial or detrimental, remain poorly understood as only a few studies investigated this part of the coral microbiome [30,39–42,101]. ConcerningC. rubrum, the eukaryome appears to be closely linked to the physico-chemical environment in which the colonies live. In particular, differences in community composition were observed between corals maintained in the laboratory and those in situ. In colonies cultured in laboratory (this study), members of Philasterida and Ostreobiaceae dominated the eukaryome, whereas members of Dino-Group-I and Licnophoridae were the dominant microeukaryotes associated with colonies living in a natural environment [30]. Some microeukaryotic orders, such as the Labyrinthulomycetes, were found in both conditions, but showed differences in relative abundances and were represented by different ASVs [30]. Overall, these observations emphasize the need for broader geographical and temporal studies to assess the dynamic of the coral eukaryome across seasons and at different sites in the Mediterranean Sea.

The response of the holobiont was stress and time dependent, although some major changes were common across heat treatments. In the microeukaryotic community, a shift within the dominant order of Labyrinthulomycetes from the Labyrinthulaceae to the LAB1/6/8 group was observed in both thermal treatments. This shift could indicate that the less abundant members of the community proliferate, while other members lose their competitive advantage. Interestingly, both Labyrinthulomycetes orders were detected in the seawater microbial community (FigureS3). This suggests a potential exchange between the coral microeukaryotic community and the surrounding seawater, involving either the release or integration of certain symbionts in the eukaryome based on environmental conditions. Further investigation is needed to explore this phenomenon. While Labyrinthulomycetes are often found in dense communities in the mucus of some coral species [102–104], their precise role within coral holobionts is still unknown and requires further study. It has been shown that free-living marine members of Labyrinthulomycetes produce polyunsaturated fatty acids [105] and carotenoids [105,106], and can have a bacteriolytic activity on dead bacterial cells [107]. These predatory protists have been shown to develop opportunistically on diseasedC. rubrumcolonies and sea fans [30,108], where they might grow on bacterial invaders. Compared to the mild stress of 19 °C, additional changes were observed in the dominant microeukaryotes at 23 °C, with a significant decrease in the relative abundance of members of the Philasterida family. A study on free-living Philasterida species showed that these ciliates were more abundant in deep (below 200 m) than in surface waters, suggesting that they might be thermosensitive and more adapted to living at low temperatures and stable environments [109].

In the bacterial microbiome, compositional changes were detected immediately upon reaching 23 °C, whereas at 19 °C, changes only appeared after 8 days. This could either be due to the temperature stress or to the fact that the temperature rose much faster at 23 °C than at 19 °C, triggering a faster reaction of the bacterial microbiome. Although the specific changes in the bacterial community differed depending on the heat treatment, common changes occurred, characterized by the increase in the relative and absolute (qPCR-based) abundance of Vibrionaceae ASVs, as frequently observed in heat-stressed corals [25,26,110,111]. Although severalVibriospecies, such asV. coralliilyticus, are known coral pathogens capable of inducing tissue necrosis [27,110,112–114], we cannot confirm that the ASVs detected here correspond to pathogenic strains. Nonetheless, their proliferation in heat-stressed corals is potentially concerning and warrants further investigation to assess possible impacts on coral health. Furthermore, it is worth noting that quantifying bacterial abundance using qPCR with universal16 S rRNAgene primers can be affected by variation in rRNA operon copy numbers across the different bacteria. In addition to the apparent increase in Vibrionaceae, Rhodobacteraceae tended to proliferate at 23 °C. While members of the Rhodobacteraceae family are not exclusively associated with stress or disease and can be part of the microbiome of healthy corals [115], an increase of their relative abundance has frequently been reported in corals experiencing thermal stress [23,25,26,29,116,117]. Recent work suggest that some Rhodobacteraceae may play a protective role under stress, for example by mitigatingVibrio coralliilyticusinfections [118–120]. Here again, the impact of their proliferation in heat-stressed red corals remains to be investigated. In contrast to the changes observed in the abundance of several bacterial symbionts, the Spirochaetaceae, which are the dominant symbionts of the red coral (constituting up to 70% of the bacterial community), appeared to be highly thermoresistant, as neither their relative abundance nor their qPCR-based absolute abundance were affected by heat stress, as previously observed [25,26].

Some changes observed in the eukaryome and bacterial microbiome co-occurred, suggesting that members of the coral microbiome may have specific relationships. Close and interactive relationships, including predation, niche competition or mutualistic and symbiotic relationships, are expected between microbes from different kingdoms like bacteria and microeukaryotes. The strongest co-occurrences were observed within bacteria. Vibrionaceae ASVs as well as Rhodobacteraceae ASVs co-occurred positively with each other. This might be because both are more heat-tolerant than other microbes in the community. The proliferation of one species can drive the growth of other species from the same taxonomic group, potentially mediated by quorum sensing as already observed inVibriobacteria [112]. Prioux et al. (2025; [30]) proposed putative relationships and nutritional dynamics between the major microeukaryotic taxa associated withC. rubrum. However, our co-occurrence analyses did not reveal these relationships, as the dominant microeukaryotic symbionts identified in our study differed from those reported by Prioux et al. (2025; [30]).

In contrast to the 19 °C treatment, the stress marker genes remained overexpressed in the colonies throughout the 23 °C treatment. Although colonies showed no visible signs of disease or tissue loss, due to the short-term stress (i.e., 8 days) applied in this experiment, these results suggest that the coral holobiont was under stress at this temperature and if the stress persisted, health problems and tissue loss could have occurred, as it has been observed with long-term heat stress (≥ 2 weeks) in the laboratory [25]. However, after one week of recovery time at the initial temperature of 15 °C, bothHSP70andTNFR1gene expression levels returned to baseline. These results highlight the sensitivity ofC. rubrumto temperature fluctuations, whereby even short-term exposure to suboptimal temperatures (23 °C) can induce stress. Still, as signs of coral stress disappeared after a week of recovery time, it suggests a rapid resilience capacity of the red coral to short-term thermal anomalies.

Within the coral holobiont, the eukaryome showed a rapid responsiveness to thermal fluctuations. It was highly sensitive to both moderate (19 °C) and high (23 °C) temperature increase, with notable shifts in community structure. These included changes in the dominant microeukaryotes from the Labyrinthulomycetes, Ostreobiaceae and Philasterida taxa. In contrast, the bacterial microbiome showed a more graduated response. While an acute thermal stress at 23 °C induced immediate changes, the response to the milder stress at 19 °C was delayed. Interestingly, the abundance of dominant bacterial symbionts, such as Spirochaetaceae, remained stable under these conditions. After the end of the thermal stress, both the eukaryome and the bacterial microbiome partially returned to their initial compositions, though certain temperature-induced changes persisted. In the eukaryome, Ostreobiaceae, a group of boring endolithic algae which dominated under control conditions, completely disappeared, even after a week of recovery following the stress. In the bacterial microbiome, opportunistic taxa such as Vibrionaceae, a family with known pathogenic potential, proliferated and persisted, raising concern about their role in enhancing coral vulnerability to heat stress. The persistent changes in the coral microbiome could undermine coral resilience, especially during repeated heat stress events such as occurring during MHW events in the Mediterranean Sea.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

We thank CHANEL and the Government of the Principality of Monaco for financial support. We thank Lorenzo Bramanti (CNRS, Banyuls‑sur‑Mer, France) and Stéphanie Reynaud (CSM, Monaco) for assistance with the collection of coral fragments. We also thank SNO SOMLIT for providing seawater temperature data in Villefranche‑sur‑Mer (France).