The development of high-performance reamers made of Cemented carbide and coating materials is an important direction in mechanical finishing. Due to the complex structure of reamers, it is difficult to manufacture reamers with good performance in practice. This paper takes the high cutting- speed and high feed-rate mechanical finishing of 45 steel as the experimental condition and the production site machining as the background to scientifically investigate the factors affecting the performance of the TiN/TiAlN coated Integral Cemented carbide reamer. Firstly, the TiN/TiAlN coated cemented carbide reamer was designed and manufactured. During the experimental processing, shrinkage hole over-tolerance problems occurred rapidly. By analyzing the cutting characteristics of the reamer, the mechanical model of the cutting edge of the reamer was established, and the principle of chipping was analyzed. The results were consistent with the magnified fracture morphology of the cutting edge. In response to the accelerated wear caused by poor cooling and lubrication, an internal cooling reamer structure was adopted, and the fluid mechanics model of the Integral reamer was constructed. The important structural parameters were determined, and the importance of adequate cooling and lubrication was clarified. By clarifying the factors affecting the processing performance, the machining capacity of this type of reamer was maximized.

A reamer is a complex and precise cylindrical cutting tool. The circumference of the reamer is equipped with multiple cutting teeth, and at the end of each tooth there is a small inclined cutting edge responsible for cutting the material of the workpiece. Due to its high machining accuracy and small material allowance (less than 0.2 mm), the cutting edges involved are very fine, which brings significant difficulties to the research. Ordinary reamers are generally made of high-speed steel, and their structure is shown in Fig.1a. This type of reamer has low hardness, poor wear resistance, a low cutting speed (about 350 revolutions per minute), low machining efficiency, and is generally not used for cutting difficult-to-machine materials.

(a) Integral high-speed steel reamer (b) welded cemented carbide coated reamer.

There have been numerous studies on the fabrication of cutting tools using TiN (TiCN, TiAlN, etc.) coatings deposited on the surface of cemented carbide materials through physical vapor deposition (PVD) or chemical vapor deposition (CVD) methods. Therefore, cemented carbide coated inserts are widely used in the manufacturing of cutting tools due to their low friction coefficient, high hardness, high wear resistance, and high efficiency1–4.

The cemented carbide coated reamer, due to its fine cutting edge and complex structure, and the closed machining environment, the influence of cutting heat, cutting force and wear on machining accuracy is comprehensive. The research is quite challenging. There are few studies on the reamer system aimed at improving the durability of the reamer. Only Ye et al.13studied the chip-breaking principle of the cemented carbide coated reamer, but it adopted a welding structure, as shown in Fig.1b. Zhang et al.14. conducted an experimental comparison of the cutting performance of two integral cemented carbide reamers with different helix angles, and only studied the effect of individual reamer parameters. These studies ignored the influence of high cutting-speed and high feed-rate machining conditions on the performance of the reamer, and had limited guidance for the design of the reamer system.

With the improvement of the comprehensive performance of cemented carbides15–17, it has become possible to manufacture integral cemented carbide reamers with complex shapes. However, under the high cutting-speed and high fast-rate machining conditions, the impact of cutting heat is significant, so internal cooling technology is needed to solve the problem. The application of internal cooling technology becomes extremely important. Xu et al.18studied the internal cooling technology in cutting tools, analyzed the role of internal cooling technology in reducing cutting force and improving cooling effect during milling, and Farhana Diba et al.19, Guo et al.20studied the implementation and analysis of internal cooling structures in drills. These technologies provide technical support for the cutting research of integral cemented carbide coated reamers. As shown in Fig.2.

The research method we adopted is different from the experimental method. By setting a high rotational speed and a large feed rate to machine a certain difficult material, and ensuring the machining accuracy as the prerequisite, we comprehensively studied various factors that affect the machining capability of this type of tool. Only by adopting this relatively strict machining environment can the advantages of this high-performance tool be maximally exploited, and the obtained data will have true reference value.

Two positioning holes need to be precision machined on the 45 steel workpiece. The reaming tool will cut the hole with a diameter of Φ17.8 to Φ18. The precision requirements are an upper deviation of + 0.011, a lower deviation of -0.008, a hole depth of 15, and a surface roughness of Ra1.6. The machining process is carried out on a CNC machine. The reaming tool’s rotational speed is set at 3000 r/min, and the feed speed is 30 mm/s. Cooling and lubrication are achieved through external spraying.

According to the cutting requirements, the cemented carbide round bar ETM210 produced by ETM Company was selected as the tool base. The parameters of this material are shown in Table1. Firstly, an integral reamer was manufactured according to the parameters in Table2, and then a TiAlN material was coated on it. The shape of this reamer is shown in Fig.2.

During the testing process, after the reamer had machined 70 qualified workpiece holes, the 71st hole showed an error that exceeded the standard and failed to meet the machining accuracy, thus the tool became ineffective. It was difficult to find the reason for the failure of the micro-cutting edge visually. The micro-cutting edge of the reamer was photographed under an electron microscope, and the image of the failure of the micro-cutting edge is shown in Fig.3. By observing the images of these three cutting edges, it was found that the cutting edges involved in the cutting had become wavy and rough, significantly different from the straight edges that did not participate in the cutting. This damage should be a fracture at the edge, with low cutting ability. It can be inferred that the reduction in the diameter of the workpiece hole was caused by the reduction in the material of the cutting edge.

By analyzing the reasons for the breakage of the reamer, it is preliminarily concluded that the angle of the main cutting angle (Kr) is too small, which results in a shortened cutting edge and an excessively large load per unit length, causing the edge to break.

To increase the length of the cutting edge involved in cutting the workpiece material, the angle of the main cutting angle (Kr) can be changed. The machining schematic diagram is shown in Fig.4.

Machining schematic diagram of changingKr(a)Kr= 30º (b)Kr= 75º.

As can be seen from Fig.4a, the length of the cutting edge involved in the cutting process is related toH,Krand the cutting edge lengthHis expressed by Eq. (1).

WhenKris changed to 75º, the cutting diagram of the tool is shown in Fig.4b. The length of the cutting edge has significantly increased, approximately doubling.

When the reamerKr= 75º and other parameters remain unchanged, after machining 150 qualified workpieces with this reamer, the minimum limit size of the hole exceeds the tolerance and the tool fails. The failure image of the cutting edge is shown in Fig.5.

The enlarged view of the cutting edge failure whenKr= 75º.

As can be seen from Fig.5, there are gaps on the edge lines of the cutting edge or the calibration edge, and the material has broken off. The failure mode remains as a broken edge. Because more parts are being processed, the areas near the edge have darkened, which is a discoloration caused by high temperatures.

The parameters of the reamer cutting process are shown in Fig.6a.

(a) Parameter diagram (b) stress diagram of cutting edge.

According to Fig.6a, the reamer rotates at a speed ofnand moves along the axial direction of the hole at a speed off. The cutting edge area mainly bears the forces from the workpiece, including the main cutting force and the feed force. Among them, the main cutting forceFcis closely related to the reamer’s rotational speedn, feed speedf, and cutting layer depthap, and can be expressed by the function f(n,f,ap), which is the total cutting force. Since there areZcutting teeth involved in the cutting process, the main cutting forceFcon a single cutting edge can be represented by Eq. (2).

Ref13indicates thatFcis a relatively large constant at high rotational speeds, and its fluctuation is not significant as the feed rate f increases. The feed forceFfis mainly the reaction force of the workpiece along the direction opposite to the feed direction. Based on13, the calculation Eq. (3) for the feed forceFfcan be derived.

Among them,Ksis the chip layer coefficient,Kfis the friction coefficient,Dis the reamer diameter, andCis a constant. The forceFvperpendicular to the cutting edge is a component ofFf, which directly affects the fracture of the cutting edge and can be obtained by Eq. (4).

According to Eq. (4), ifKrincreases,Fvwill decrease.

Figure6b is an enlarged schematic diagram of section A-A in Fig.6a, which shows the direction of the force and the area. The forward forceFvis mainly due to the elastic recovery of the surface of the machined hole. This elastic recovery is generated by the interaction between the elastic recovery material and the rear cutting surface of the tool. It is a kind of contact force, produced on the side, and the direction of the force should be perpendicular to the contact surface. The range of the force is the elastic contact area, and its size is represented byB, and can be calculated using Eq. (5).

The elastic responseδis mainly determined by the workpiece material and the thickness of the chip layerap. The contact area is mainly determined by the gap angleα.

The main cutting forceFcmainly consists of the deformation force of the chip and the friction force. Due to the coating on the surface of the tool material, the friction coefficient is small, and the proportion of the friction force is small. In other words, the component ofFcin the direction parallel toFvis relatively large, and its effect range is mainly the areaWwhere the rake face contacts the chip. This is mainly related to the material of the workpiece, and the influence of the tool’s rake angle is not significant.

Based on the positions, areas of action and blade structure characteristics ofFcandFv, the section where theCposition line is located is considered a dangerous section. TheCposition line is perpendicular to the lower end of theBline, so it is related to the size of the contact areaB. TheCline can be calculated using Eq. (5).

According to Fig.6a, the length of the cutting edge isH. The cutting edge is divided into several small segments along the direction of the cutting edge, and a section with a length ofΔHis selected for analysis. Based on the cross-sectional Fig.6b, the stress model of this section of the cutting edge is established, Fig.7a. Since the cutting edge is composed of severalΔH, the main cutting forceFccan also be regarded as the sum of the cutting forcesΔFciof each section of the cutting edge, which is expressed by Eq. (6).

Schematic diagram of a single-stage micro-cutting edge. (a) Stress diagram (b) fracture diagram.

Assuming that the thrust force of each section cutting edge isΔFvi, their relationship with the total thrust forceFvcan be expressed by Eq. (7).

According to Eq. (6), the larger theFcis, the greater theΔFciwill be; according to Eq. (7), ifFvincreases,ΔFviwill also increase. According to Fig.7a and Fig.6b, the range ofΔFciis the stress areaA, with a length ofW; the range ofΔFviis the stress areaD, with a length ofB, and their width isΔH.

According to Eq. (8), when the feed componentΔFviincreases or the Clearance angleαincreases, theεvalue will increase. For the cutting condition of high feed-rate, according to Eq. (3), (4), (7),ΔFviis of course larger; If the Clearance angleαincreases again, according to Eq. (5), the length of lineBwill be reduced, the length of lineCwill also be reduced, and the shear stress area will be reduced, so that theεvalue will be greatly increased.

On the contrary, if the Clearance angleαis reduced, it will increaseB, or the included angleΦbetween the rake face and the flank face will increase, which will make theCline longer and theεvalue will decrease.

Assumingεbis the strength limit of the material, due to manufacturing defects, theεbvalues at different cross-sectional positions may vary. When theεvalue at theCsection on a certainΔHon the cutting edge satisfies ε > εb, the cutting tool material at the upper part of theCsection on this part of the cutting edge will fracture, Fig.7b, resulting in the first small-scale fracture and shortening of the cutting edge. However, the cutting continues. The shortening of the cutting edge causes an increase in the load on other parts, and theΔFvion otherΔHsegments increases, causing the shear stressεat theCsection to increase, and the brittle section material continues to fracture and detach. The cutting continues, and the cutting tool material fractures successively until the entire cutting edge of the cutting tool breaks, resulting in chipping and tool failure. This is the process of the cutting edge fracture and failure of the integral cemented carbide coated reamer. Based on the previous analysis, the fracture of the cutting edge occurs intermittently, and the length of each singleΔHsegment for the fracture is different. Additionally, when some cutting edges fracture, the force conditions of other cutting edges will change, so the position of theCline for subsequent fractures will also change, thus resulting in the fracture shapes as shown in Figs.3and5. It can be seen that the fracture morphology of the cutting edge conforms to this mechanical model.

Selecting a harder cemented carbide material with a largerεbvalue can reduce the probability ofε>εboccurring. Reducing the rake angleγof the cutting tool to even be negative can increase the angleφ, allowing theCline to extend, which is beneficial for reducing theεvalue. Reducing the relief angleαcan increase the contact lengthBbetween the cutting tool’s flank face and the workpiece, thereby increasing the effective area ofΔFviand the included angleφ, which has a significant effect on reducing theεvalue. Although increasingKrhelps to reduceFvandΔFvi, the reduction is not significant, and the number of machined workpieces slightly increases, but it does not change the result of the edge break. The design of the integral cemented carbide coated reamer can comprehensively consider the above factors.

Change the rake angle of the reamerγto 0°, the clearance angleαto 5°,Krto 75°. Other machining conditions remain unchanged. Manufacture a integral cemented carbide coated reamer and conduct on-site machining again.

Using this reamer, 500 qualified workpieces were machined continuously. However, when it was used again, the size error of the holes exceeded the tolerance range, and the tool failed. By observing the micro-edge of the reamer under an electron microscope, the failure form of the micro-edge was obtained, as shown in Fig.8.

Refer to Fig.8. The reamer does not have a broken cutting edge. The failure mode is wear on the rake face. Moreover, part of the coating on the rake face has been worn away. The number of machined workpieces is not satisfactory. Such rapid wear failure should not occur1–3.

Further magnification of the failed cutting edge under the electron microscope was conducted to obtain a more detailed profile of the rake face wear, as shown in Fig.9.

An enlarged image of the worn front cutting surface.

It can be observed that the worn area on the rake face is not smooth and there are ablation spots. The worn area is not smooth, which should be caused by the built-up edges during the cutting process. The sequence, size and scraping depth of the built-up edges on the rake face are different. The presence of ablation spots indicates that the temperature in the processing area has risen too high, causing an oxidation reaction in the tool material. Both of these situations indicate that the cooling effect during the machining process is too poor, which is the reason for the rapid wear and failure of the reamer. The external cooling method involves the coolant flowing through the left and right nozzles to spray the cutting fluid onto the outside of the reamer, and then flowing into the hole to cool and lubricate the cutting edge, as shown in Fig.10. However, due to the fact that the upper part of the reamer’s cutting edge is the alignment edge, pressing against the surface of the hole wall, and the tool rotating at high speed, it is difficult for the cutting fluid to flow into the cutting part of the cutting edge in time for cooling. The accumulation of cutting heat will cause the cutting area to rise in temperature too high, making the tool material become soft and oxidize, accelerating the wear. Therefore, this cooling method is ineffective.

schematic diagram of cutting fluid cooling for Reamer.

According to the research results in refs18–21, designing an internal cooling type reamer is beneficial for enhancing the cooling and lubrication effects and reducing the wear rate. We drilled a hole with a diameter ofD1at the center of the reamer, connected the cutting fluid to the center of the tool handle, and then the cutting fluid flowed out through a branch hole with a diameter ofDj, spraying at a certain speed and pressure onto the cutting edge of the tool. Each tooth corresponds to a branch hole, and the angle between the main flow hole and the branch hole isβ. The diameter and inclination angleβof each branch hole are the same. The structural form is shown in Fig.10. To fully cool and lubricate the cutting edge, the cutting fluid at each branch outlet needs to have a certain speedVjand pressurePj.Therefore, the parametersD1,Djandβneed to be optimized. Usually, based on the parameters of the machine tool, the flow rateQ, speedV1and pressureP1of the cutting fluid flowing into the input port of the reamer can be calculated and determined. Equation (9) can be obtained based on the “Law of Conservation of Fluid Mass”.

Here:Zrepresents the number of branch holes, which is also equal to the number of teeth;Vjis the outlet speed of the branch;A1is the cross-sectional area of the input port, which can be calculated using Eq. (10).Ajis the cross-sectional area of the output port, which can be calculated using Eq. (11).

Based on Eqs. (9), (10) and (11), the Eq. (12) for calculatingVjcan be obtained.

According to the “Bernoulli energy conservation law”, the liquid energy at the output port plus the loss is equal to the energy at the input port. The liquid energy relationship between the input port of the cutter’s main flow hole and each branch hole is obtained (Eq.13).

Among them,H1jrepresents energy loss, which is mainly related toβ. The largerβis, the smallerH1jwill be. The appropriate range ofβis 135º to 160º.Δhis approximately the tool length;ρis the density of the cutting fluid;gis the gravitational acceleration. The Eq. (14) for calculating the output pressurePjof the branch can be obtained from Eqs. (12) and (13).

In practice, the values of parametersD1andDjfall within a certain range. The value ofDjshould at least cover the cutting edge area. IfD1is large, the cutting fluid flow is sufficient, but it is prone to deformation when clamped, which affects the accuracy. After determining the structural parameters of the tool, combined with the parameters of the machine tool cooling system, Eqs. (12) and (14) can be used to check the flow velocityVjand pressurePjof the cutting fluid at the output port, which can help analyze the cooling effect.

In order to ensure the machining accuracy, various factors analyzed in the previous section were comprehensively considered to design an integral cemented carbide coated reamer, and its machining was verified. The main structure and parameters are shown in Fig.11; Table3. The coated material is TiN4.

Some geometric information of the reasonable reamer.

Using this sample reamer, more than 2000 qualified workpieces were continuously machined under high cutting-speed and high feed-rate conditions. This indicates that the wear of the tool has not exceeded the limit, the wear degree is small, and it proves that the tool wears slowly. The optimization results have significantly improved the durability and production efficiency of the tool, and fully demonstrated the superior cutting performance of this reamer, as well as verified the scientific nature of our research content.

After machining 1200 workpieces with this reamer, an analysis and study were conducted on the wear of the cutting edges. Figure12shows the wear condition on the side at the cutting edge position. In the figure, the white band position represents the wear area of the flank face, with uniform wear, shallow wear marks, and similar wear on the flank face of each cutting edge, reflecting that the flank face had a large area of contact during the processing. Due to the good wear resistance of the material, the flank face was subjected to uniform force, so the wear was slow.

Figure13shows the wear condition of the rake face at the cutting edge position. The worn area is relatively wide, resembling a rectangle, and the wear is uniform with shallow scratches. This also reflects the uniform friction between the chip and the rake face, and the slow surface wear, which is closely related to the good wear resistance of the surface material and the good lubrication. Additionally, in the cutting areas of Figs.12and13, there are no blackened or dimmed areas, indicating good cooling. This kind of graphic appearance is also an important reference to reflect the rationality of cutting tools.

From this, it can be seen that for this type of reamer that is machined under high cutting-speed, high feed-rate and in a closed environment, adequate lubrication and cooling for the cutting edge, as well as reasonable tool structure parameters, are important factors for maximizing its cutting performance.

Although the cutting edge of the cemented carbide coated reamer is fine, it is still prone to rapid edge breakage during high feed-rate machining. Reducing the rake angleα(preferably less than 8°) or increasing the included angleφbetween the front and rear cutting surfaces (preferably greater than 80°) is an important means to avoid edge breakage. The main cutting angleKrshould not be too small to avoid excessive concentration of cutting edge load and fracture.

When the reamer is externally cooled at high cutting- speed, the cutting fluid is difficult to reach the cutting edge, resulting in poor cooling and lubrication effect, and the cutting edge will accelerate wear. Good cooling and lubrication are important means to slow down wear failure.

In the internal cooling method, it is necessary to ensure that the cutting fluid has a certain pressure and speed when it is sprayed out from the branch holes, and can reach the cutting edge position.

A well-designed reamer must have an appropriate contact between the rake face and the chip, and between the flank face and the workpiece surface, so that the wear morphology of the front and rear cutting surfaces is regular and uniform, and the wear area is large, which can slow down tool wear and improve durability.

The magnified images of the wear and failure of the cutting edge of the reamer obtained in this scientific investigation are different from the magnified wear images of the cemented carbide coated inserts obtained under the experimental environment1–12. They are important reference materials for studying the micro-edge cutting of cemented carbide coated tools.