Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

Received 2025 May 15; Accepted 2025 Jun 16; Issue date 2025 Sep.

This is an open access article under the terms of thehttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Approximately one in four older patients in hospital are living with dementia and up to two thirds of these patients experience behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) during their hospital stay.1Behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia, such as agitation, aggression, resistance to care, sleep disturbance and wandering develop from disease‐induced vulnerabilities to a variety of internal (physiological and psychological) and external (social and physical) stressors.2In hospital, multiple factors, including acute illness (with or without delirium), unmet needs, unfamiliar and complex patient–carer relationships and physical environments, may trigger new or exacerbate preexisting BPSD. Despite BPSD being highly prevalent and associated with poor patient outcomes and occupational violence, it remains a relatively under‐studied topic.

Pajaro, To and Whitehead,3in theAustralasian Journal on Ageing, make a valuable contribution to the evidence base regarding BPSD in hospital. Their 1‐year retrospective evaluation of admissions from a residential aged care facility (RACF) to a tertiary hospital's acute geriatrics multidisciplinary team identified 608 patients with dementia, 82 of whom presented to hospital due to BPSD. Approximately half of these patients were admitted to a subacute geriatrics or psychogeriatrics unit for ongoing care. Changed behaviours, including agitation/aggression and resistance to care, were common to all patients and did not determine whether patients were discharged from hospital by the acute geriatrics team or admitted to a subacute unit. However, factors, including younger age, male sex, independent mobility, previous specialist input for BPSD, higher psychotropic use and ‘code blacks’ in hospital, were associated with admission to a subacute unit (and a significantly longer length of stay), highlighting that patients with more severe BPSD that may be less responsive to non‐pharmacological strategies and carry a higher risk of harm to others are likely to require specialist inpatient care. Pajaro, To and Whitehead3acknowledge their study's limitations, including its retrospective nature, small sample size and lack of BPSD severity measures. It also examined admissions of RACF residents only, when a recent prospective Australian study revealed that 50% of patients presenting with severe BPSD were from home and not RACFs.4Nevertheless, it is one of only a handful to report on hospitalisation directly related to BPSD, and it compels us to consider how our hospitals meet (or do not meet) the needs of these patients and support the well‐being of the staff caring for them.

While clinicians working in this field recognise that there is great variability in the nature and severity of BPSD, which translates to a need for highly individualised risk assessment and management by specialist teams, the current approach to BPSD management in hospitals is overwhelmingly one ofdispersion. Allocation of patients with BPSD to wards is generally ad hoc and piecemeal, determined by bed availability rather than capacity to deliver appropriate care. Patients are commonly allocated to single rooms or four‐bed close observation bays with no specific environmental modifications or staff with expertise in BPSD management. Research shows that the dispersed approach is inadequate, contributing to poor patient outcomes, overuse of restrictive practices and psychotropic medications, increased patient‐to‐staff violence, longer hospitalisations and high readmission rates.1Hospitals must be encouraged to invest in models of care that can accommodate variation in BPSD severity and risk of harm to patients and staff.

With this emerging evidence base, we propose that hospitals should have an SCU for patients with severe BPSD. However, an SCU should be just one component of a tiered hospital‐wide approach to high quality and safe care for patients with BPSD. While many hospitals now offer rapid comprehensive geriatric assessment by a specialist team to facilitate early discharge of patients with BPSD back to the community, and more hospitals are opening SCUs for management of severe BPSD, we need to see greater investment in developing and implementing models of care for patients with BPSD who require more intensive psychosocial and physical resources than are currently available on standard hospital wards. At the very least, patients with BPSD and the staff who care for them stand to benefit from optimised ward environments and training and support to build workforce capability in delivering person‐centred dementia care. Benefits may then be realised by all older patients in hospital as the principles of excellent geriatric care extend across the acute care setting.6Redesigning hospitals to meet the care needs of patients with dementia and BPSD demonstrates a commitment to age‐friendly, dignified care for all.

Open access publishing facilitated by The University of Queensland, as part of the Wiley ‐ The University of Queensland agreement via the Council of Australian University Librarians.