The utility of hematological ratios in immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) in dogs has seldom been investigated.

Hematological ratios are associated with disease severity and outcome in dogs with IMHA.

Two hundred and six client‐owned dogs with non‐associative IMHA.

Retrospective multicenter study. Medical records were reviewed to identify dogs with non‐associative IMHA. The neutrophil‐to‐lymphocyte (NLR), neutrophil‐to‐monocyte (NMR), band neutrophil‐to‐segmented neutrophil (BNR), platelet‐to‐lymphocyte (PLR), monocyte‐to‐lymphocyte (MLR), neutrophil‐to‐platelet (NPR) and red blood cell distribution width‐to‐platelet (RDWPR) ratios were retrospectively calculated. Their association with hematological variables, number of blood transfusions, and survival at discharge, 1 month, and 6 months was evaluated.

Of the 206 dogs included, 164 (80%, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 74–85), 144 (70%, 95% CI: 64–76), and 114 (55%; 95% CI: 48–62) were alive at discharge, one month, and six months, respectively. The hematological ratios were not associated with survival at any time point, regardless of treatment before referral. Only the RDWPR was associated with blood product requirement (odds ratio [OR], 0.70; 95% CI: 0.54–0.91;p< 0.01). Dogs that had received glucocorticoids before referral had a higher 1‐month mortality rate compared with glucocorticoid‐naïve dogs (73% and 67%, respectively; OR, 2.2; 95% CI: 1.1–4.5;p= 0.03).

Hematological ratios had limited value in predicting outcome or disease severity in a large population of dogs with non‐associative IMHA. Glucocorticoid treatment before referral was independently associated with decreased survival, likely reflecting selection bias toward dogs with more severe disease.

In critical illness, biomarkers allow tailored treatment and help decision‐making by identifying dogs with severe disease or at increased risk for death [1].

Leukocyte and platelet ratios (LPR) are readily available biomarkers that have been consistently identified as prognostic factors and markers of disease severity in numerous conditions [2]. In human medicine, LPR are notably useful in hematological disorders such as sickle cell anemia and thromboembolic disorders [3,4]. In addition, the red blood cell distribution width (RDW) has been shown to be increased in dogs with various illnesses [5]. The red blood cell distribution width‐to‐platelet ratio (RDWPR) also has proven relevant in inflammatory conditions [6,7]. In veterinary medicine, hematological ratios are associated with disease severity or prognosis in a few critical illnesses including canine parvovirosis, severe hemorrhage, and sepsis, as well as other inflammatory, neoplastic, or metabolic conditions [8,9,10,11,12].

Immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) is an immune‐mediated disorder resulting in intravascular or extravascular red blood cell destruction [13]. In dogs, the mortality rate is high within the first month of diagnosis (18%–44%), and thromboembolic complications are a common cause of death [14,15,16,17]. Markers of disease severity or prognostic factors are of relevance in the management of IMHA in dogs [18]. Hematological variables such as leukocytosis, band neutrophilia, monocytosis, and thrombocytopenia previously have been associated with disease severity or prognosis, likely because they reflect severe inflammation or thromboembolic events [19,20,21]. Consequently, in dogs with IMHA, the assessment of readily available hematological ratios could be clinically relevant for treatment decisions. A small study previously showed that lower monocyte‐to‐lymphocyte ratio (MLR) and higher neutrophil‐to‐monocyte ratio (NMR) were associated with increased mortality on discharge [22].

Therefore, our main objective was to assess whether hematological ratios, including MLR, NMR, neutrophil‐to‐lymphocyte (NLR), band neutrophil‐to‐segmented neutrophil (BNR), platelet‐to‐lymphocyte (PLR), neutrophil‐to‐platelet (NPR), and red blood cell distribution width‐to‐platelet (RDWPR) ratio were associated with survival at discharge and at one and six months postdiagnosis. A second objective was to assess the association between hematological ratios and blood product requirement, used as a surrogate for disease severity. A third objective was to assess the association between hematological ratios and changes in other hematological variables at presentation in a large population of dogs with non‐associative IMHA. The hypothesis was that hematological ratios would be associated with the number of blood transfusions and outcome.

Ours was an observational multicenter study using data from two university teaching hospitals (UCD Veterinary Hospital, Dublin, Ireland: center 1; Ontario Veterinary College, Guelph, Canada: center 2) between January 2008 and December 2022. The study design was approved by our institutional ethics committee (AREC‐E‐21‐02).

Medical records were reviewed to identify dogs diagnosed with IMHA. The records were searched through the hospital's databases using the keywords “IMHA”, “AIHA”, “autoimmune hemolytic anemia”, “autoimmune hemolytic anemia”, “autoimmune hemolytic anemia”, or “immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia”. Using the American College of Veterinary Medicine (ACVIM) consensus statement, inclusion criteria included the presence of anemia (hematocrit < 0.37 L/L), evidence of hemolysis such as hyperbilirubinemia, hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria, or presence of ghost cells on blood film examination; and evidence of immune‐mediated erythrocyte destruction such as prominent spherocytosis, direct antiglobulin test (DAT) ≥ 1:16, with or without positive slide agglutination test (SAT) with 1:4 dilution [23].

Dogs with incomplete medical records or with associative conditions were excluded. Investigations for associative conditions consisted of body cavity imaging (thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasound examination or thoracoabdominal computed tomography), appropriate testing for vector‐borne diseases by serology, PCR, or a combination of these depending on the travel history and clinical presentation, necropsy examination, or additional tests dictated by the clinical presentation (e.g., echocardiography, cytological examination).

The likelihood of IMHA diagnosis (diagnostic, supportive, or suspicious) was retrospectively assessed using the ACVIM consensus statement diagnostic algorithm [23]. When the level of evidence for IMHA diagnosis was deemed only suspicious, several additional variables were taken into account to determine final inclusion. These variables were the following: signalment, available investigations performed before referral, prior immunosuppressive treatment that may have affected results upon referral, complete diagnostic investigation for exclusion of other causes of anemia, and follow‐up documenting response to immunosuppressive treatment.

For all included dogs, the following information was collected: age, sex, neuter status, breed, body weight, administration of glucocorticoids or blood transfusion before and after presentation, and clinical signs. Blood transfusions were either packed red blood cells or whole blood transfusions. The type of transfusion and the volume administered were not recorded.

Hematology and blood film review at the time of presentation had to be available. The automated hematology analyzer was identical in both institutions (Advia 2120i, Siemens Healthcare GmbH, Munich, Germany). The blood films were reviewed by a laboratory technician, a clinical pathologist, or both. The hematological ratios were retrospectively calculated from the CBC and manual platelet count obtained upon admission. The NLR was obtained by dividing the total neutrophil count by the lymphocyte count, the NMR by dividing the total neutrophil count by the monocyte count, the BNR by dividing the band neutrophil count by the total neutrophil count, the PLR by dividing the platelet count by the lymphocyte count, the MLR by dividing the monocyte count by the lymphocyte count, the NPR by dividing the total neutrophil count by the platelet count, and the RDWPR by dividing the red blood cell distribution width (RDW) by the platelet count.

Presence of a regenerative response was defined as a reticulocyte count > 60 × 109/L (based on the reference interval of the analyzer at both centers and according to previous publications assessing the regenerative response in immune‐mediated anemia) or blood film findings consistent with regeneration (e.g., polychromasia) [24].

Follow‐up data, including the date of death, was obtained by contacting the referring veterinarians when such data was not available in the medical records.

Data analysis was performed using commercially available statistical software (Stata StataCorp LLC version 17.0). Continuous data were represented as median and minimum‐maximum. Categorical data were expressed as frequencies. The two centers were compared using Mann–Whitney test (for age), Fisher's exact test (for sex and prior blood transfusions), andχ2test (for prior glucocorticoid treatment). Ordered logistic regression was used to study variables associated with number of transfusions received during hospitalization. Approximate likelihood‐ratio test of proportionality of odds was performed to ensure that model assumptions were not violated. Logistic regression was used to study variables associated with erythrocyte regeneration and with survival at discharge, at 1 month and at 6 months after diagnosis. To take into account the confounding effects of “center”, “prior glucocorticoid treatment”, and “prior transfusion” on survival, these variables always were integrated as covariates in the model. All of the variables withp< 0.2 on univariable analysis and all potential confounding variables were entered into a multivariable model. Specification errors and goodness‐of‐fit of the logistic regression were assessed using the “linktest” and “lfit” functions of the statistical software. The ratios were log‐transformed if the odds ratio (OR) 95% confidence interval was very large in order to improve stability of the model output or if the values were skewed (for RDWPR). Significance level was set atp< 0.05 unless otherwise specified.

Two hundred and twenty‐seven dogs met the inclusion criteria for a diagnosis of non‐associative IMHA. Twenty‐one dogs were excluded because of incomplete medical records or incomplete diagnostic evaluation where associative causes or alternative diagnosis could not be ruled out. Eleven of the 21 excluded dogs had a likelihood of IMHA diagnosis that was suspicious only. Of the 206 remaining dogs, 81 and 125 dogs were included from center 1 and center 2, respectively. The median age at diagnosis was 6.5 years old (range, 10 months–14 years). There were 121 female dogs (59%), of which 105 were spayed (51%) and 16 were intact (8%). There were 85 male dogs (41%), of which 64 were neutered (31%) and 21 were intact (10%). There were 64 mixed‐breed dogs and 142 pure‐breed dogs including 52 breeds (TableS1). The most common pure breeds were Shih Tzu (20 dogs), Miniature Schnauzer and Cocker Spaniel (nine dogs each), and Border Collie, Jack Russell Terrier, and Springer Spaniel (six each).

The likelihood of IMHA diagnosis was considered definitive in 98 dogs (48%), supportive in 71 dogs (34%), and suspicious for the remaining 37 dogs (18%). Spherocytes were identified in 162 dogs (79%), positive slide agglutination after saline dilution (one drop of blood in four drops of saline) in 81 dogs (75%) of the 108 dogs for which results were available, and positive Coombs test in 113 dogs (73%) of the 155 dogs for which results were available. Hyperbilirubinemia was identified in 97 dogs (67%) of the 144 dogs for which bilirubin concentration was available. Ghost cells were identified in 66 dogs (32%). Erythrocyte regeneration was documented in 161 dogs (78%).

The hematology results and hematological ratios are summarized in Table1.

Hematology results and hematological ratios of 206 dogs with nonassociative IMHA.

Before presentation, 96 dogs had received glucocorticoids (47%) and 24 (12%) had received at least one blood transfusion. From center 1, 59 dogs had received glucocorticoids (75%) and 22 had received a blood transfusion before referral (28%) whereas from center 2, 37 dogs had received glucocorticoids (30%) and two had received a blood transfusion (2%) before referral.

All dogs received glucocorticoid treatment after diagnosis. Second‐line immunosuppressant treatment was administered variably, with different agents and protocols, and the reason for immunosuppressive treatment escalation was not always documented in the medical record. Therefore, the use of second‐line immunosuppressant drugs was not assessed in our study. Clopidogrel treatment was initiated in 190 dogs (92%). The remaining 16 dogs did not receive clopidogrel because of severe thrombocytopenia (platelets < 30 × 109/L) or signs of overt bleeding. After admission, 162 dogs received at least one blood transfusion (79%). The median number of blood transfusions was 1 (range: 0–9).

One hundred and sixty‐four dogs were alive at discharge (80%; 95% CI: 74–85), 144 one month after diagnosis (70%; 95% CI: 64–76) and 114 six months after diagnosis (55%; 95% CI: 48–62). Four dogs were lost to follow‐up, including one between discharge and one month after diagnosis and the remaining three dogs between one month and six months after diagnosis.

Several significant differences were found between the two centers. Dogs were younger in center 1 (median age, 6 years; range: 1–14) than in center 2 (median age, 7 years; range: 10 months–13 years;p= 0.04). There were fewer castrated males (15% vs. 42%;p< 0.01) and more intact dogs (32% vs. 7%;p< 0.01) in center 1. More dogs had received glucocorticoid treatment (75% vs. 30%;p< 0.01) and blood transfusions (28% vs. 2%;p< 0.01) before referral at center 1 compared with center 2, and dogs received fewer blood transfusions while hospitalized at center 1 (OR, 0.45; 95% CI: 0.26–0.80;p< 0.01). Finally, a higher survival rate was noted at discharge at center 1 compared with center 2 (90% vs. 73%;p< 0.01). Center 1 survival rates were 90% (95% CI: 86–94), 75% (95% CI: 69–81), and 51% (95% CI: 44–58) at discharge, one month, and six months after diagnosis, respectively. Center 2 survival rates were 73% (95% CI: 67–79), 66% (95% CI: 60–72), and 58% (95% CI: 51–65) at discharge, one month, and six months after diagnosis, respectively.

The hematological ratios were not associated with survival at discharge (Table2), nor at one month (Table3) and six months after diagnosis (Table4).

Variables associated with survival at discharge (multivariable analysis).

Note:Variables indicated with *represent variables for whichpvalue was < 0.05.

Variables associated with survival at one month after diagnosis (multivariable analysis).

Note:Variables indicated with *represent variables for whichpvalue was < 0.05.

Variables associated with survival at six months after diagnosis (multivariable analysis).

Note:Variables indicated with *represent variables for whichpvalue was < 0.05.

The RDWPR was the only ratio associated with the number of blood transfusions administered in the hospital (Table5). A higher RDWPR was associated with a lower number of transfusions (OR, 0.70; 95 CI: 0.54–0.91;p< 0.01).

Association between hematological ratios and the number of blood transfusions (univariate analyses).

Note:Variables indicated with *represent variables for whichpvalue was < 0.05.

Finally, a higher NLR (OR, 1.04; 95 CI: 1.002–1.1;p= 0.04) and a higher MLR (OR, 1.96; 95 CI: 1.3–3.0;p= 0.03) were associated with erythrocyte regeneration (Table6). Other variables associated with erythrocyte regeneration included leukocyte count (OR, 1.05; 95 CI: 1.02–11;p< 0.01), total neutrophil count (OR, 1.08; 95 CI: 1.03–1.1;p< 0.01), band neutrophil count (OR, 1.25; 95 CI: 1.02–1.5;p= 0.03), and monocyte count (OR, 1.9; 95 CI: 1.3–2.7;p< 0.01).

Association between erythrocyte regeneration and the hematological ratios (univariate analyses).

Note:Variables indicated with *represent variables for whichpvalue was < 0.05.

Variables associated with survival at discharge, one month, and six months after diagnosis based on the univariate analysis are summarized in TableS2.

On the multivariable analysis (Tables2,3and4), being presented to center 1 as opposed to center 2 was associated with better survival at discharge (OR, 6.8; 95% CI: 2.1–22;p< 0.01), having received glucocorticoid treatment before referral was associated with decreased survival at one month (OR, 2.2; 95% CI: 1.1–4.5;p= 0.03), and blood product requirement was associated with decreased survival at six months. This included receiving one blood transfusion (OR, 0.34; 95% CI: 0.11–0.98;p= 0.05), receiving two blood transfusions (OR, 0.27; 95% CI: 0.08–0.90;p= 0.03), and receiving three or more blood transfusions (OR, 0.30; 95% CI: 0.093–1.001;p= 0.05) as opposed to none.

In this population of 206 dogs diagnosed with non‐associative IMHA, the hematological ratios were not associated with outcome. Only the RDWPR was associated with blood product requirement. Total neutrophil count, band neutrophil count, monocyte count, NLR, and MLR were associated with erythrocyte regeneration. Finally, variables independently associated with decreased survival included prior glucocorticoid treatment and having received a blood transfusion, which has not been reported previously.

The hematological ratios were not associated with outcome in our study. This finding conflicts with a prior study in which leukocyte and platelet ratios were assessed in 77 dogs with non‐associative IMHA [22]. In that study, lower MLR and higher NMR were associated with increased mortality on discharge [22]. The discrepancy between the two studies may be explained by various factors. First, glucocorticoid treatment can affect hematology results through different mechanisms, including causing a stress leukogram characterized by leukocytosis, neutrophilia, and lymphopenia, as well as thrombocytosis and causing immunomodulation that may dampen inflammatory changes [25]. Additionally, blood transfusion not only naturally interferes with the erythrocyte count, but also may have immunomodulatory effects, which could affect leukocyte counts and ratios [26]. Therefore, treatment before referral may influence the hematological ratios, confounding their effect on survival or disease severity. Indeed, a previous study identified that some hematological ratios were associated with survival at discharge. The association was found only after excluding dogs that had received glucocorticoids and blood transfusion before referral [22]. Limitations of the previous study included a low number of glucocorticoid and transfusion‐naïve dogs (42), lack of standardized diagnosis for IMHA between centers, different hematology analyzers between centers, and only one time point to assess outcome (survival on discharge). In our study, with a larger number of dogs, the use of the ACVIM consensus criteria to standardize the diagnosis of IMHA and the use of the same hematology analyzer, the hematological ratios were not associated with survival at any time point, and regardless of glucocorticoid treatment or blood transfusions before referral.

In contrast with the earlier study, the association between the ratios and disease severity was assessed in our study as well. It was decided to use blood product requirement as a surrogate for disease severity. The MLR, NMR, BNR, PLR, and NPR were not associated with blood product requirement. This observation may be due to the fact that the hematological ratios are truly not associated with disease severity in IMHA. Alternatively, it may be due to the fact that blood product requirement may not have been a reliable surrogate for disease severity. Indeed, because of the cost or lack of availability of blood products, some animals may not have received as many blood transfusions as required, making it possible that some dogs with severe disease did not receive an adequate number of blood transfusions. In addition, the type of blood transfusion (packed red blood cells vs. whole blood) and the volume of blood administered were not assessed in our study. This lack of standardization may have been a confounding factor. However, blood product requirement was associated with decreased survival in our study. This finding suggests that the number of blood transfusions may have been an accurate surrogate for disease severity. Regardless, combining other criteria such as clinical severity score (e.g., Canine Hemolytic Anemia Objective Score [CHAOS], Tokyo score), rapidity of decrease of the PCV, presence of known negative prognostic factors, or duration of hospitalization may have provided a different reflection of disease severity and possibly shown an association with hematological ratios [17,18,21,27]. A higher RDWPR was associated with a lower number of blood transfusions. Although the RDWPR was not associated with regeneration, this finding likely reflects the fact that dogs with features of erythrocyte regeneration (e.g., higher RDW) may be less likely to require multiple transfusions.

The NLR and MLR were associated with erythrocyte regeneration. This result most likely resulted from the fact that the neutrophil and monocyte counts also were associated with erythrocyte regeneration. Because IMHA in dogs is characterized by systemic inflammation, and because more severe regeneration may be expected with more severe disease and more severe inflammation, it is not surprising that neutrophilia and monocytosis are linked with regeneration [19,28]. Additionally, several cytokines or chemokines (interleukin [IL]‐2, IL‐10, keratinocyte‐derived cytokine =[KC], and IL‐17) have been determined to be increased in IMHA [29]. Notably, an association with cytokines responsible for monocyte activation has been reported (monocyte chemoattractant protein [MC‐1) [30]. Therefore, the association between erythrocyte regeneration, monocytosis, and neutrophilia might have been mediated through increased cytokines or chemokines, which may cause nonspecific bone marrow stimulation of both erythroid and granulocytic myeloid lines in IMHA. There is no consensus on the reticulocyte count that should be used to define appropriate regeneration. In our study, we used a previously published threshold that also matched the reference interval of our hematology analyzer. However, using a higher reticulocyte count cut‐off may have yielded different results. Regardless, although interesting from a pathophysiology point of view, these findings may not be clinically relevant because erythrocyte regeneration was not associated with outcome in our study.

Glucocorticoid treatment before referral was associated with decreased survival one month after diagnosis, which might reflect a selection bias. Glucocorticoid treatment may delay referral, and dogs referred after receiving glucocorticoids may be more likely to have severe or refractory disease and therefore may be more likely to die. This association with survival was identified inconsistently (only at one month after diagnosis and not at discharge or six months after diagnosis), which raises the question of its relevance. Nevertheless, the impact of prior glucocorticoid treatment on survival has not been reported previously. In a referral setting, where dogs are likely to have received different treatments including glucocorticoids before referral, this finding is therefore relevant.

Our study had some limitations, mainly related to its retrospective design. Notably, several significant differences were found between the populations of the two centers in terms of signalment, sex, and number of blood transfusions administered in hospital. These differences likely explain the significant difference that was identified regarding survival at discharge. Combining these two different populations therefore may have introduced heterogeneity that may have affected the power to detect an association between the hematological ratios and prognosis. The administration of additional treatments such as second‐line immunosuppressants was not recorded, which may have introduced bias in disease severity or survival assessment. In addition, the presence of complications such as thromboembolism, as well as the cause of death, also was not recorded. It would have been interesting to evaluate a potential association between thromboembolism and the hematological ratios. Finally, additional ratios previously reported to be associated with disease severity in inflammatory conditions in humans, such as the platelet‐to‐albumin ratio, were not assessed in our study [31].

In this large population of dogs with non‐associative IMHA, the leukocyte and platelets ratios were not associated with survival at discharge, at one month, and at six months, regardless of glucocorticoid treatment or blood transfusion before referral. Only a higher RDWPR was associated with lower blood product requirement, likely reflecting the fact that dogs that had features of erythrocyte regeneration were less likely to require multiple blood transfusions. Overall, the hematological ratios appear to have limited value to assess outcome or disease severity in dogs with non‐associative IMHA.

Glucocorticoid treatment before referral was independently associated with decreased survival at one month after diagnosis. Although likely due to a selection bias with dogs having refractory disease being more likely to be referred, this finding has not been reported previously.

Total neutrophil count, band neutrophil count, monocyte count, NLR, and MLR were associated with erythrocyte regeneration, likely through cytokine‐mediated nonspecific bone marrow stimulation in dogs with IMHA.

Authors declare no off‐label use of antimicrobials.