In order to focus light at a desired depth, wavefront shaping of the incident light is required. Light focusing is used in applications such as medical imaging, sensing, power dividers, etc. For this purpose, various phase plates can be exploited, but we propose a periodic phase plate. The reason for considering periodic structures is to profit from wavefront shaping of several periods to focus light at larger depths, which can be a challenging task without a periodic phase plate. Using this method, the focus quality is such that its Full Width at Half Maximum (FWHM) reaches in the order of the diffraction limit, while maximizing power concentration. We also assume that the phase plate elements are of micron-scale, so that it does not require nanofabrication. The modelling and analysis method used in this paper accurately takes the coupling among adjacent phase plate elements into account, i.e., it does not rely on local phase approximation. Since the introduced phase plate has a periodic structure, the focusing is repeated periodically, which finds several applications. Using our computational technique, one is able to rigorously analyze and design phase plates as wide as. In a sample design, we show thatof the illuminated power reaches a depth ofor 1mat a wavelength of. Approximatelyof the incident power is focused within onlyof the unit cell width. Moreover, despite large depth of focusing, its FWHM is in the order of the diffraction limit. In this paper, in addition to achieving light focusing at larger depths, we also demonstrate that the proposed methodology can be utilized for focusing with a FWHM close to the diffraction limit down to, double focusing, and focusing with a high Numerical Aperture (NA) of 0.97.

Metasurfaces are arrays of subwavelength scatterers that are thin, lightweight, multifunctional, and capable of integration into optical systems1–5. These structures, often referred to also as metalenses, metamasks, or phase plates, have attracted significant attention for their applications in optical wavefront manipulation leading to light focusing at a given depth6–8. Furthermore, they also serve as phase correction elements in Spatial Light Modulators (SLM)9,10. They are widely used in other applications such as ultrathin lenses11, biological imaging12–14, hyperthermia15, sensing16, power dividers17, optical tweezers18–20, photonic jet21, and optical communication22to name a few. This article focuses on periodic phase plates the periodicity of which enables light focusing at significantly large depths through the contribution of several unit cells. Without such contribution, achieving deep focusing would be considerably challenging. To analyze these structures, we employ the rigorous and full-wave Transmission-Line Formulation (TLF) method which is specifically designed for periodic structures. Our goal is to design a periodic phase plate capable of focusing light at depths as large as 1 m (equivalent toat a wavelength of) through leveraging the contribution of several unit cells. The aim of this design is to maintain a FWHM in the order of the diffraction limit while maximizing power concentration.

To take fabrication simplicity into account, we concentrate on the design of those periodic phase plates which have a binary structure. We name them as Binary Periodic Phase Plate (BPPP). Unlike most methods that use nanometer-scale scatterers in their structure, our design employs micron-scale scatterers, eliminating the need for complex nanofabrication23. We are also aware that the usually small spacing of the phase plate scatterers creates significant coupling effects. Existing analysis methods often approximate structure modelling through ignoring interactions among adjacent elements. For example, the unit cell approach11,24, is a method where one assumes that the electromagnetic field is highly confined to the interior of the scatterers due to their high refractive index. This reduces coupling among nearby scatterers, allowing the phase at each position of the structure to depend only on the scatterer existing at that position. Other methods, such as Locally Periodic Approximation (LPA)25and Overlapping-Domain Approximation (ODA)26, model the problem using local phase approximation. Modelling large-scale structures while exactly considering the mutual interaction of their elements can be difficult, which is why there are limited exact methods that take the coupling of adjacent elements into account. The Coupled-Mode Theory (CMT)27is one such exact modelling methods. In the present work, to address this issue, we use the TLF, a technique that accurately models dielectric periodic structures. The TLF has been successfully applied to various problems28–30.

Table1presents a comprehensive comparison of focusing performance metrics such as focusing depth (d), focusing efficiency (), and FWHM between our study and other reported papers which often use nanometer-scale phase plates. FWHM is a significant parameter that directly influences image resolution. The key achievement highlighted in this Table is the depth of Design 1 () while maintaining high efficiency () and low FWHM (). Furthermore, we have achieved finer focusing (higher resolution) such as that in Design 3 with FWHM=725 nm. Notably, while conventional approaches employ nanometer-scale wavefront shapers2,4,6,26,27,31–35, our micrometer-scale design attains comparable performance with significantly fewer degrees of freedom. The advantage of our proposed focusing solution is, on the one hand, the accuracy of the computational technique, and on the other hand, the relative ease of fabrication due to using micrometer-scale features. However, due to the limited degrees of freedom in the assumed binary structure, we face certain limitations in achieving demanding design goals. Moreover, our BPPP provides periodically repeated focused beams which has applications such as simultaneous multiple-imaging and power division. Existing full-wave designs of phase plates are generally limited to widths of tens or hundreds of wavelengths, in spite of some exceptions25,27,36. In contrast, our phase plates are as wide as, showcasing the capability of our method. We demonstrate that, for an incident plane wave with an intensity of, the peak intensity of the focused light beam reaches. Additionally,of the incident power reaches the desired depth, with approximatelyof the power being focused within justof the width. These results were verified using COMSOL simulations.

Comparison of focusing depth (d), focusing efficiency (), and FWHM in three-dimensional (3D) and two-dimensional (2D) structures.

We have organized this paper as follows: “Materials and methods” begins with the problem modelling, the full-wave TLF numerical method, and the step-by-step BPPP design procedure using TLF-analysis combined with Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO). In “Results”, we examine the results of various designs. This section includes two designs for single light focusing per period at large depths: The first design being for the lower range of periods is discussed to verify our method, while the second design is for the higher range of periods and demonstrates the capability of the design approach. Additionally, we present three other designs: light focusing with a FWHM close to the diffraction limit down to, double focusing, and focusing with a high NA of 0.97. In “The role of several unit cells in focusing”, we explore the role of several unit cells in light focusing, and in “Conclusion”, some concluding remarks are presented.

In Fig.1, the BPPP under study is seen. Its unit cell has a width ofwith a periodicity along thex-axis. It is symmetric with respect to thez-axis and invariant along they-axis. The unit cell has a simple structure consisting of a layer of teeth with a height ofplaced on a substrate with a height of. The teeth pattern is specified as either full or empty (binary). TLF modeling supports analysis of arbitrary periodic structures (e.g., triangular37, square and circular38), but binary designs uniquely combine fabrication simplicity with mechanical robustness, making them ideal for low-cost applications. Obviously, an incident plane wave will be diffracted by this structure into several diffraction orders. In this paper, we show that through adjusting the amplitude and phase of these diffraction orders, we can shape the wavefront passing through the BPPP and focus the incident light at a given depth. To facilitate manufacturing, the teeth dimensions are assumed to be on the micron-scale. As shown in Fig.1, a TE-polarized plane wave, represented aswith a time variation of, is incident on the structure. The goal is to focus the incident plane wave to equally spaced spots with a FWHM in the order of the diffraction limit at a depth ofd. The BPPP design is carried out by means of a rigorous full-wave computational technique without relying on local phase approximation. We will show that increasing the contribution of several unit cells results in stronger light focusing along with high transmittance, and appropriate focusing efficiency. The main goal of the present research work is to conduct a feasibility study whether a micron-scale structure can perform similar to nano-scale structures to focus electromagnetic waves almost arbitrarily. To this end, 2D structures are chosen as the starting point. Note that the computational technique used in our study, i.e., TLF, is capable to analyze 3D problems where periodicity is in two directions. See, for instance,38. We would like to add that using 3D phase plates with 2D periodicity for focusing purposes is the subject of our current research.

Schematic of the proposed BPPP and its operating principles. BPPP cells can shape the wavefront to focus the light at a depth ofd. This light focusing is achieved with the contribution of several unit cells repeated with a period of. Therefore, we can focus at large depths while keeping FWHM in the order of the diffraction limit.

As shown in Fig.2a, when a TE-polarized plane wave illuminates the periodic structure, several reflected and transmitted diffraction orders are generated. According to a matrix representation governing the Fourier coefficients of various electromagnetic field components, one can accurately replace this diffraction problem by an equivalent circuit analysis. This electric circuit consists of transmission lines and transformers as shown in Fig.2b. The complex amplitude of them-th reflected order is equivalent to the amplitude of the wave traveling along them-th transmission line denoted byin Fig.2b. This transmission line has a characteristic admittance ofthe value of which depends on the propagation direction of them-th reflected order. Similarly, the complex amplitude of them-th forward traveling diffraction order represented byis equivalent to the complex amplitude of the wave propagating along them-th transmission line whose characteristic admittance is. The voltages and the currents of each transmission line are, respectively, the tangential field componentsandwhose continuity is realized by connecting the corresponding transmission lines at the boundary of each layer. Since the transmission lines corresponding to the periodic layer are coupled, we may use a matrix diagonalization technique to decouple these transmission lines. This decoupling is equivalent to the function of the transformersandappearing on the upper and lower boundaries of the periodic layer in Fig.2b. By solving the equivalent circuit of Fig.2b, one obtains the rigorous solution to the diffraction problem.

(a) Reflected and transmitted diffraction orders of the BPPP structure. (b) Equivalent circuit of the structure shown in (a), where each diffraction order is modelled as a transmission line with characteristic admittances of eitheror. The voltage and current waves of them-th transmission line are theandcomponents of them-th diffraction orders.

which are comparable to the governing equations for a multi-conductor transmission line. To determine the matrices [L] and [C] and for more details of the formulation, one is referred to37,39. This formulation which may be called Transmission-Line Formulation (TLF) ends in Fig.2b that is in the equivalent circuit of the phase plate depicted in Fig.2a. Compared to other full-wave numerical methods, the TLF requires fewer computational resources28,29,39, making it suitable for accurate analysis and optimization of large-scale periodic structures.

As shown in Fig.3, the BPPP design process is performed in three stages and involves combining of full-wave and rigorous TLF-analysis and the PSO-algorithm. In the first stage, the structure modelling and analysis is performed using TLF, as explained in the previous section. The modeling process starts with the input parameters listed in Block 1 of Fig.3. It concludes by computing output parameters, including the reflected and transmitted diffraction orders for each layer of the structure. Using these diffraction orders, all characteristics related to electromagnetic (EM) fields can be extracted. In the second stage, the PSO-algorithm is used. The PSO configuration is set to population size: 150, convergence criteria: 0.001 and no limit on the number of iterations. A small population size reduces search accuracy, while a large population size increases computation time. Our experiments in the present problem show that by selecting a population size of 150, we strike a balance among various effects, achieving optimal results. The number of teeth is scaled with the structure period while maintaining a minimum feature size greater thanto satisfy standard fabrication constraints. Due to the symmetric nature of the BPPP, only half of the structure is designed. For instance, periods ofandcorrespond to 30 and 240 teeth per half-period, respectively. The optimization process begins with an initial guess of binary variables (representing tooth states) and iteratively refines them to converge toward the optimal pattern. Additionally, both the substrate () and tooth heights () are treated as optimization variables. In terms of convergence behavior, convergence is achieved in approximately 10 minutes for a period ofand 27 hours for a period of. As a resonant structure, the optimized BPPP exhibits strong sensitivity to the tooth filling pattern while demonstrating robustness against variations in both substrate and tooth heights. Our sensitivity analysis confirms that amanufacturing error (a realistic tolerance) results in merely less thanvariation in peak field intensity, demonstrating robustness of the design to fabrication inaccuracies. During the iterative optimization process, a high-speed solution method like TLF is essential. One reason for the time-efficient solution of this method is its use of analytically calculated Fourier series coefficients required for the BPPP structure; hence, there is no need to calculate them numerically.

BPPP design process in three stages. The first stage is modelling and analysis of the structure using the full-wave and rigorous TLF; while the second stage is the PSO-algorithm. The final or the third stage is obtaining the optimal BPPP parameters and light focusing characteristics.

In the optimization process, a Gaussian mask with a beam waist ofis placed at a desired depth behind the BPPP. The power of the Gaussian mask is set equal to the incident power. Then, the difference between the numerically calculated field distribution and the desired mask is computed. If the optimal response is not obtained, the search process is repeated to achieve the minimum error. After determining the optimal BPPP, in the third stage, the diffraction orders are determined. Using them, the field distribution, transmittance, and focusing efficiency can be evaluated.

whereis the numerically calculated field andis the desired Gaussian field. The Gaussian mask used in the optimization process has two key parameters. The first parameter is the beam waist, which is set toto achieve light focusing in the order of the diffraction limit. The second parameter is the equality of the desired Gaussian beam power to the incident power to attain the maximum possible power at the desired depth.

Designing BPPP, i.e., determining its teeth pattern after considering a Gaussian mask for the focused beam at an arbitrary depth ofd.

In this section, BPPPs are designed for various purposes. One purpose is single focusing for periods in the lower and higher ranges at a large depth of over, i.e., 1mat a wavelength of, while keeping FWHM in the order of the diffraction limit. Additionally, single focusing is assumed as our goal to operate close to the diffraction limit, with a FWHM down to. The other designs also include double focusing and focusing with a high NA of 0.97. We are able to analyze the BPPPs unit cell as wide as. In our computations, the focusing efficiency parameter,, is defined as the power focused within an aperture of radiusFWHM relative to the incident power43. It should be noted that the BPPP transmittance is calculated within one period, and the structure is assumed to be lossless. Furthermore, the relative permittivityof the material is assumed to be that of, with a value of approximately 2.15. By keeping the relative permittivity low, one can maximize BPPP transmittance.

Figure5shows the intensity produced by a single focusing BPPP for a periodof, equivalent tofor a working wavelength of. The optimization is performed using 100 diffraction orders. It is designed for a large focusing depth of overor 1 m while maintaining the FWHM in the order of the diffraction limit. In Fig.5a, the intensity in the focusing region, with dimensions equal to the structure period, is shown. Figure5b provides a magnified view of (a) within aarea to illustrate the light focusing details more clearly. The intensity profiles along the cross-sectionand the longitudinal sectionof (a) are shown in Fig.5c, d, respectively. In (c) or cross-section cut, the intensity, i.e.,, reaches a maximum offor an incident plane wave with an intensity of. The longitudinal intensity profile in (d) shows that the light focusing occurs only at the desired depth, with no significant focusing at other depths. The significant increase in the intensity is attributed to the proper wavefront shaping by BPPP and the contribution of several unit cells. The optimized substrate height and teeth height arem andm, respectively. The light focusing is achieved with a transmittance of, focusing efficiency of, and FWHMm or.

Intensity produced by a single focusing BPPP for a period of. (a) Intensity in the focusing region with dimensions equal to the structure period. (b) Magnification of (a) within aarea. Intensity in the cross-sectionand the longitudinal sectionare shown in (c,d), respectively.

For verification, Fig.6shows the field magnitude calculated by TLF in the BPPP region and compares it with the numerical results generated by COMSOL. In order to make the comparison possible, the incident wave in both TLF and COMSOL is modelled as a plane wave with a 2D power density of 1[W/m]. The BPPP structure and the Perfectly Matched Layer (PML) are shown in Fig.6. The height of the PML in the COMSOL simulation is set to. Note that unlike COMSOL, TLF does not require a PML. Instead, through setting the reflected diffraction orders of the last layer to zero, an infinite environment can be effectively modelled. To ensure a valid verification, the field magnitude is examined precisely at the edge of the teeth, where significant diffraction occurs. This comparison is shown in Fig.7, which demonstrates excellent agreement between the TLF and COMSOL responses. Due to the limitations of the available system RAM for the authors, COMSOL simulations were carried out for periodic structures with periods of up to approximately. Due to this verification, we believe that TLF is still valid for larger periods if the number of assumed spatial harmonics is proportionally increased. Obviously, one reason for the memory limitation in COMSOL simulations is the need for extensive meshing in structures with larger periods. This highlights another advantage of the TLF method: it does not require meshing to take the geometrical features of BPPP into account. As a result, TLF is capable of accurately and efficiently solving large-scale periodic structures composed of fine geometrical features.

Comparison of field magnitude in the BPPP region by TLF and COMSOL for verification. Note that TLF does not require any PML.

Comparison of field magnitude exactly at the edge of BPPP teeth computed by TLF and COMSOL.

It is important to note that the field distribution in the focusing region cannot be used for verification due to the extremely large depth of focus. Instead, the field distribution in the BPPP region is compared. The COMSOL simulation calculates approximately 21 5000 nodes for the structure in about 3 min, while the TLF simulation withdiffraction orders obtains the solution in just 1.68 s28,29,39.

In inverse-designed metasurfaces optimized to reflect or transmit a specific diffraction order, the target diffraction order typically exhibits near-unity diffraction efficiency, while all other orders are suppressed (close to zero). Figure8illustrates the diffraction efficiency for our Design 1, quantifying the percentage of incident power transferred to each diffraction order. Unlike conventional designs that maximize diffraction efficiency for a single diffraction order, our approach leverages a large number of diffraction orders to achieve fine focusing with a strong intensity peak. Figure8demonstrates that diffraction orders up toin our design have significant magnitude instead of being suppressed. The cumulative efficiency across all diffraction orders, representing the total transmitted power, reaches. This multi-diffraction order strategy enables subwavelength wavefront shaping, which is of prime importance for applications such as high-resolution imaging or optical trapping.

Diffraction efficiency for Design 1. Diffraction orders up toin our design have significant magnitude required to achieve high spatial focusing.

Let us consider a similar principle in the time domain, and this is the principle behind generation of laser pulses of short duration. In those lasers, one typically employs mode-locking of a large number of optical modes inside the laser cavity to achieve short pulses. The coherent participation of these modes enables generation of intense pulses with ultrashort temporal width and precise periodicity. In our research, we apply a similar principle, but instead of operating in the time domain, we work in the spatial domain. By leveraging a large number of diffraction orders in the spatial frequency domain, we achieve high-intensity focal spots with fine spatial resolution and precise periodicity. Furthermore, by controlling the amplitude and phase of these diffraction orders, we demonstrate light focusing with a given characteristic.

Figure9shows the intensity produced by a single focusing BPPP with a period of, while keeping FWHM in the order of the diffraction limit. The period of the structure ism for a working wavelength ofm. The optimization is performed to achieve focusing at a large depth of overor 1m using 900 truncated diffraction orders. The intensity in the focusing region is shown in Fig.9a, whereas Fig.9b provides a magnified view of this region. The cross-section intensity peak in Fig.9(c) reachesfor an incident plane wave with an intensity of. Figure9d demonstrates that focusing is achieved only at the desired depth. Figure9e shows the cross-section intensity in a smaller region to highlight its details with greater accuracy. After approximately 27 hours of optimization (on a system with 20-core CPU@3.4 GHz, 64 GB RAM), the optimal BPPP parameters, including the substrate height and the teeth height are obtained asandm, respectively. The light focusing achieves a transmittance of, a focusing efficiency of, and a FWHMm or.

Intensity produced by a single focusing BPPP for a period of. (a) Intensity in the focusing region with dimensions equal to the structure period. (b) Magnification of (a) within aarea. Intensity in the cross-sectionand the longitudinal sectionare shown in (c,d), respectively. (e) Cross-section intensity is shown in a smaller region to see its details more accurately.

Figure10illustrates periodic focusing across two adjacent periods on each side. The profile of the BPPP unit cell, made out of SiO, is shown in Fig.11. A notable observation in this scenario is that approximatelyof the incident power is focused within aboutof the width (exactly) at a large depth of 1m. Through examining the results of the two scenarios, a transmission coefficient greater thanis obtained, indicating high transmittance. Additionally, although the same incident plane wave is used in both scenarios, increasing the structure period leads to a significant increase in peak intensity and a reduction in FWHM.

Periodically focused light up to two periods on each side.

To demonstrate the capability of our method, Fig.12shows the results produced by a single focusing BPPP with a periodof, equivalent tofor a working wavelength of. The order of results in Fig.12is similar to Fig.9. In Fig.12c, the cross-section intensity peak reaches a value ofwhen illuminated by an incident plane wave ofintensity. Utilizing 1800 diffraction orders, after approximately 80 h (on a system with 20-core CPU@3.4 GHz, 64 GB RAM), the optimal BPPP parameters are obtained asandm, respectively. The achieved performance for this light focusing include a transmittance of, the focusing efficiency of, and FWHMm or. Figure13shows this symmetrical BPPP unit cell that shapes the wavefront and achieves the beam focusing visualized in Fig.12. Two parts of this phase plate have been magnified to show more details of the BPPP features.

Intensity produced by a single focusing BPPP for a period of. (a) Intensity in the focusing region with dimensions equal to the structure period. (b) Magnification of (a) within aarea. Intensity in the cross-sectionand the longitudinal sectionare shown in (c,d), respectively. (e) Cross-section intensity is shown in a smaller region to see its details more accurately.

Symmetrical profile of the BPPP unit cell made out of. The magnifications of the dashed areas are also seen in this figure.

In Fig.14a, single focusing is performed at a depth ofm whose FWHM is close to the diffraction limit. The transmittance for this design is. The diffraction limit, i.e.,, is minimized tofor a maximum NA of 1. In this scenario, the FWHM is 725.2nmor, making it suitable for high-resolution imaging applications.

(a) Single focusing at a depth ofm with a FWHM of, which is close to the diffraction limit. (b) Double focusing at a symmetrical spacing ofm with respect to the symmetry plane of the BPPP and at a depth ofm.

In Fig.14b, the BPPP structure is designed to achieve double light focusing at a depth ofm. This figure shows symmetrical spacing ofm with respect to the symmetry plane of the BPPP. The transmittance coefficient is. This scenario shows that various focusing shapes can be achieved, with potential applications in optical devices such as power dividers.

Figure15demonstrates single focusing with, which is commonly considered as a large value. The BPPP cell period is, and the light is focused at a depth ofm. The FWHM parameter amounts tom or, while the transmittance is. The cross-section intensity peak isfor an incident plane wave with intensity of. It is well known that a high value of NA is favorable for enhancing contrast and achieving higher image resolution.

Single focusing forwith BPPP unit cell period equal toand at a depth ofm.

To demonstrate the contribution of several BPPP cells in increasing the intensity of the focused light, the BPPP is now illuminated with a wide Gaussian beam. This beam can be generated using the setup of Fig.16a where a narrow Gaussian beam generated by a light source is transformed by a lens of focal lengthfto a wide Gaussian beam that illuminates several cells of the BPPP. In TLF, to implement this kind of excitation for the proposed periodic phase plate, the input Gaussian beam is repeated periodically as shown in Fig.16b. The period of this repetition is a large multiple of the BPPP period to avoid any interference between two adjacent Gaussian beams. The input Gaussian beam has a beam waist radius of. As mentioned above, the beam waist radiusis greater than.

Illustration of how several BPPP cells contribute to focusing. (a) Practical modell and (b) simulation modell. (a) An incident Gaussian beam passes through a lens with a focal length off. After passing through the lens, it is transformed into a broader Gaussian beam with a beam waist of, covering a group of BPPP cells. Interaction of these cells produce a series of focused intensities at the target depth. (b) Since the modelling is periodic, the entire structure, including the incident wave, BPPP unit cells, and focused points, is repeated at a certain distance. To align the simulation with real-world conditions, the distance between adjacent incident waves in the simulation modell is set to be sufficiently large. This ensures that each incident remains independent, preventing any interference or influence between them.

As explained in the previous sections, BPPP cells are designed for a normally incident plane wave. To demonstrate the contribution of BPPP cells in increasing the intensity of the focused light, we excite the BPPP with a Gaussian beam with different beam radii. This is visualized in Fig.17where we show that as the beam waist increases and more BPPP cells are involved, the peak intensity of the focused light increases and gradually approaches the state achieved under plane-wave illumination. If the incident wave is a plane wave, the focused beams are formed periodically with identical amplitudes. However, when the incident wave is a Gaussian beam, the generated beams are not identical; the strongest beam is at the center and the neighboring beams gradually decrease off the center, as can be seen in the typical TLF calculation of Fig.16b.

Increase in peak focused light intensity with increasing Gaussian beam waist and with more BPPP cells contributing. The beam waist starts at 6 cm and increases to 25 cm and 100 cm, which illuminates 1200, 5000, and 20000 BPPP cells. Finally, it approaches the focused intensity for plane wave excitation. Adjacent Gaussian beams are sufficiently spaced at 4 m apart.

In Fig.17, as the beam waist of the incident Gaussian beam increases, the intensity of the focused light also increases. The Gaussian beam waist starts at 6cmand increases to 25 cm and 100 cm, covering 1200, 5000, and 20000 BPPP cells, respectively. Eventually, it approaches the focused intensity achieved under plane wave excitation. In this study, the period of the BPPP unit cell is, and the desired depth of focus is 1 m. The distance between adjacent Gaussian beams is set to 4 m, which is large enough to ensure that they are almost mutually independent. As the beam waist expands and more BPPP cells contribute, the peak intensity of the focused light becomes stronger.

Fig.18shows verification of the obtained results using COMSOL. In this figure, depending on the available RAM, eleven BPPP unit cells are placed side by side and illuminated by a Gaussian beam with several beam waists:,, and, as shown in Fig.18a, c, d, respectively. Each unit cell has a period of, and the focusing is achieved at a depth of. This figure demonstrates that through increasing the number of illuminated BPPP cells, a stronger light focus can be achieved. Fig.18b shows the field magnitude obtained by TLF and COMSOL exactly at the edge of the BPPP teeth for the right half of the BPPP, i.e., for, as seen in (a). The agreement between these responses validates our computation results and serves as proof of concept regarding the contribution of several unit cells.

Eleven BPPP unit cells are illuminated by a Gaussian beam with several beam waists of,, andis shown in (a,c,d), respectively. With increasing contribution of BPPP cells, a stronger light focusing is achieved. The field magnitude obtained by TLF and COMSOL exactly on the edge of the BPPP teeth is shown in (b) for the right half of the BPPP, i.e., for, as seen in (a).

In this paper, we introduced a simple structure called BPPP, which could be used to shape the incident wavefront and to focus it at an almost arbitrary depth without the need for nanofabrication. The main idea of this paper was to utilize the contribution of several unit cells to focus the electromagnetic field at depths as large as. In most existing metalens optimization methods the coupling between adjacent elements is often ignored, and the structure is typically modeled using the local phase approximation. However, in this work, we account for all the couplings between adjacent elements without relying on the local phase approximation, resulting in significantly higher accuracy. Consequently, this leads to numerical results that align more closely with experimental expectations. Furthermore, to fully exploit the benefits of our accurate inter-element coupling model, we intentionally increased the period to enhance the number of diffraction orders. As a result, we showed that by using a large number of diffraction orders and also with the help of adjacent cells, we can achieve strong focused spots at large depths, which would have been challenging otherwise. Additionally, our precise modeling of coupling effects allowed for extremely fine field focusing, achieving a FWHM near the diffraction limit at a significant distance from the metalens. Furthermore, the high number of diffraction orders and their accurate computational treatment facilitated new functionalities such as double focusing. The proposed method is promising for several applications in realization of complex passive optical components.

Morteza Khoshhal thanks Mohammad Khoshhal for his valuable discussions.