Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people aged 15–24 years of age often encounter challenges accessing and utilising primary health care (PHC). Providing health care responsive to the needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people requires the active involvement of healthcare providers (HCPs), who play a central role in healthcare delivery. This study explored perspectives of HCPs working in urban Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Community-Controlled Health Organisations (ATSICCHOs) on the factors that facilitate Aboriginal and Torres Strait young people accessing and utilising PHC services.

Thirteen research yarns were conducted with HCPs in urban southeast Queensland (SEQ), Australia. Inductive thematic analysis was used to identify factors facilitating health care access and utilisation and were mapped to a social-ecological framework model.

Three overarching strength-based themes that facilitate access to health care were common across research yarns: (1) The ATSICCHO model of care addresses the needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people; (2) Family and community play a key role in facilitating Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people’s access to healthcare services; and (3) The characteristics of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people that support health-seeking behaviour. Specific factors identified included targeted programs and initiatives specifically for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people; equitable access to holistic, comprehensive and culturally safe PHC; characteristics and skills of the ATSICCHO workforce that support young people’s engagement and access; and young people’s motivation to be healthy and to seek care. Barriers contrasting these themes were also identified.

HCPs from urban ATSICCHOs provide a unique perspective on the healthcare experience of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people and the factors that facilitate and/or challenge their access to PHC services. Improving PHC access among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people should focus on multilevel strategies across all three levels of the social-ecological model, with a particular focus on increasing opportunities for equitable access to PHC services for young people, enhancing target programs and initiatives for young people, and supporting the knowledge, skills and capacity of HCPs to delivery appropriate, culturally safe and holistic care.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12875-025-02959-y.

Health is a human right, and everyone has the right to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health [1]. Universal health coverage, rooted in primary health care (PHC) [2], enables countries to uphold the right to health by ensuring affordable and equitable access to health services for all [3]. In Australia, Medicare, Australia’s universal health insurance scheme, guarantees that all Australians have access to health services [4]. Despite this, not all Australians have the same level of healthcare access [5–7]. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people aged 15–24 years, especially males, were less likely to access PHC services than non-Indigenous young people [8]. Injury and mental health conditions were the leading causes of the burden of disease among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people [8]. Access to timely, high-quality, and appropriate PHC is essential for addressing the disease burden and improving health outcomes [9]. Eighty percent of excess mortality among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people is preventable within the current health system [10], highlighting opportunities for timely interventions to improve health outcomes and support intergenerational health.

Healthcare access is influenced by various multilevel factors related to healthcare systems and organisations, population and community, households, and individuals [11]. Generally, these factors have been identified among young people; [12,13] however, they differ depending on social, economic, and cultural factors like education, housing and employment, income, social support, environment and geographical location [14]. These factors are often categorised into two groups: demand for services, factors at the individual, household, or community level that influence access to services, including knowledge of services, family and community support, and young people’s participation in decision-making; and supply, factors such as types of and quality of services, health facilities and characteristics, and provider competencies [15,16]. Among Indigenous young people, enablers and barriers to accessing PHC have been identified, although these were limited to specific contexts [17]. These include access to and availability of services, facility characteristics, provider competencies and characteristics, cost of services, health literacy, and cultural and social determinants of health [17]. Additionally, in the Australian context, most of the evidence is from the perspectives of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people and based on studies conducted in rural and remote settings, and less so from the perspective of healthcare providers (HCPs) and in urban settings where there were physically more PHC services available serving a much larger population of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples [17].

Providing healthcare that is responsive to the health and wellbeing needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people requires the active involvement of HCPs, who play a central role in healthcare delivery by offering clinical care, guidance, and support to individuals seeking care [18,19]. Their responsibilities vary across professions and settings; however, all healthcare professions have a set of standards that define their practice and behaviours, including codes of conduct and competencies [20–23]. In Australia, these standards acknowledge the impact of colonisation and the unique cultural, health and wellbeing needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and outline the provision of safe and quality healthcare that is responsive to the needs of all people [20–22]. The evidence regarding the effectiveness of these standards, codes of conduct, and competencies is limited, particularly in relation to their application in delivering culturally safe care to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples [24]. However, existing research indicates that cultural competence education and training can enhance healthcare providers’ knowledge, skills, attitudes, and confidence [24].

HCPs provide a unique perspective on how individuals access, interact, and experience healthcare. This perspective can provide great insight into the supply-side factors influencing Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people young people’s access to PHC services. Furthermore, HCPs can be a part of the solution, by being actively involved and reflecting on their practice [25–28] when delivering healthcare that meets the unique health and wellbeing needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people. This study explores the perspective of HCPs from urban Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community-controlled health organisations (ATSICCHOs) on the enablers and barriers to Aboriginal and Torres Strait young people accessing PHC. Although literature does exist on the enablers and barriers to young people accessing healthcare services and, to a limited extent, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people [17], this study adds to the evidence by privileging the views of HCPs from urban ATSICCHOs, taking a strengths-based approach and focusing on the factors that facilitate Aboriginal and Torres Strait young people accessing PHC, to understand the levers of change.

The study was conducted in partnership with urban-based ATSICCHOs in southeast Queensland (SEQ), Australia, and guided by a young people’s advisory group of four Aboriginal individuals (two males and two females, aged 19–24). They provided input on the design, recruitment, analysis, and interpretation of the research, as well as advising on the most suitable term to describe the cohort. Given the focus on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people aged 15–24, “young people” was chosen as the most culturally appropriate term, particularly for those who may have undergone ceremonial initiation associated with the transition from childhood to early adulthood.

The overall study has been guided by Indigenist research methodologies that centre Indigenous knowledge and worldviews [29] and integrate Western research approaches. The centring of Indigenous ‘ways of knowing, ways of being and ways of doing’ privileges and empowers Indigenous peoples [29–32], particularly Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people, ATSICCHOs, and their knowledge and experience.

The study was conducted by SH, a Narungga and Ngarrindjeri researcher from South Australia with over 10 years of research experience with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, communities and health services. JAD is a non-Indigenous clinician and qualitative researcher with over 25 years of experience in sexual and reproductive health. PA is a non-Indigenous researcher and clinician with 20 years of experience in adolescent and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health and wellbeing. GDM is a non-Indigenous researcher with over 25 years of experience in life course epidemiology and women’s health. JW is a Pitjantjatjara and Narungga researcher, infectious diseases epidemiologist, and a national leader in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health research.

Participants were HCPs, including doctors, nurses, Aboriginal Health Practitioners, youth and social workers, community liaison officers, and practice managers from three ATSICCHOs in SEQ. Purposive sampling was used to identify potential participants. Eligibility criteria included HCPs who provided healthcare to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people aged 15–24 years at participating ATSICCHOs. The Clinical Director from two services and the Chief Executive Officer from one service identified potential participants to engage who met the eligibility criteria. Potential participants were invited to participate via email and were provided with copies of the Participant Information Sheet and Consent Form, which outlined that participation was voluntary and confidential. Two of the three services requested that an information session be given to potential participants to inform them about the study and the requirements of participating. Once an HCP consented to participate, a research yarn was organised for a time convenient for the participant.

Research yarns were conducted by SH in a one-on-one setting with participants online using Microsoft Teams. Research yarns are a form of yarning, a qualitative research method rooted in Indigenous practices [33]. It is employed in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander research to centre and privilege the perspectives of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander participants [33–35]. This method of knowledge exchange is deeply relational, relying on shared experiences and understanding, where participants share their stories and insights [33–35]. Research yarns can be described as ‘a conversation with a purpose’,33 p. 40as it aims to gather valuable information relevant to the research topic. A yarn guide was created to allow interviewer flexibility, featuring open-ended, strengths-based questions about the factors that facilitate Aboriginal and Torres Strait young people accessing PHC services (Supplementary File 1). Before each research yarn, participants were asked to provide informed consent by completing the Consent Form and the Participant Demographic Form, which collected information about the participant’s demographic characteristics, including gender, age, Indigenous status, and HCP role. Research yarns were conducted between May and August 2023, and recordings were manually transcribed verbatim by SH and were then anonymised by removing names and identifying characteristics of HCPs, including the names of people, locations, and workplaces they spoke about, which were changed to maintain anonymity. Transcripts were sent to participants for review and approval.

Research yarn transcripts were imported into qualitative data analysis software NVivo 14, and all analyses were conducted using this software. Following the method developed by Braun and Clarke, inductive thematic analysis was used to generate themes from the data [36]. Data were initially coded and sorted into themes before being reviewed and further refined. Refinement led to the development of overarching strength-based themes, specifically focusing on the factors that facilitate Aboriginal and Torres Strait young people accessing PHC services. A modified social-ecological model was used to categorise the overarching themes, across three levels: systems and organisation, family and community, and individual [37]. A social-ecological approach allows for identifying opportunities where comprehensive and multileveled interventions can be implemented [38–40]. This strength-based approach supports Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander empowerment and self-determination [41,42], countering the deficit-based discourse often used to describe their health and wellbeing [41]. To protect participants’ identities, no identifiable information is included alongside participant’s quotes.

Thirteen research yarns were conducted with HCPs, on average, lasting 27 min (range 12–41 min). The demographic characteristics of participants are shown in Table1.

To ensure a strengths-based approach was taken in this study, during the research yarns and data analysis phases, emphasis was placed on identifying the enablers that facilitate Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people accessing PHC services. However, during the research yarns, participants identified various barriers to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people accessing PHC services. While these barriers were not the primary focus of this study, they have been included and presented in Table2, accompanied by illustrative quotes where they contrast with the strength-based overarching themes. The enablers identified have been summarised into three strength-based overarching thematic statements that align with the three levels of the social-ecological model (1) Systems and organisation: The ATSICCHOs model of care addresses the needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people; (2) Family and community: The role of family and community in facilitating Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people’s access to healthcare services; and (3) Individual: The characteristics of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people that support health-seeking behaviour.

HCPs identified the overarching theme of the ATSICCHO model of care addresses the needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people. Features of the model of care include targeted programs and initiatives specifically for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people, equitable access to holistic, comprehensive and culturally safe PHC, and characteristics and skills of the ATSICCHO workforce that support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people’s engagement and access.

Participants discussed how targeted programs and initiatives for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people facilitate young people’s access to PHC services. These programs and initiatives included the Institute for Urban Indigenous Health’s (IUIH)Deadly ChoicesEducation Program, an eight-week preventative health program delivered at schools, which includes a health check (Medicare item 715 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health check); school-based clinics that provide one-day-a-week access to a doctor, an Aboriginal Health Worker and or nurse; and youth services and programs that provide social-emotional wellbeing, case management, outreach services, and link Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people with clinical services. Participants described how these programs and initiatives address Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people’s health and wellbeing needs by focusing on key areas.

The school-based clinics have also increased Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people’s access to PHC services. A HCP discussed how many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people engage more regularly and for non-urgent issues.

Participants also discussed how these programs and initiatives promote services and link Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people to the broader services available at the PHC service.

The school clinics also provide Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people with independence, allowing them to seek healthcare without parental/guardian supervision.

Part of the success of the school-based clinics has been the services and HCPs immersing themselves into the school, with both teachers and students.

Another aspect of the model of care was the dedicated youth services and programs that engage with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people who need additional support, either group support or one-on-one case management and counselling.

Participants discussed the need to provide equitable access to holistic, comprehensive, and culturally safe PHC and that it is essential for enabling and supporting access to PHC services. Factors considered enablers by participants were access to a range of services, including health checks, the capacity to provide continuity of care, the ability to offer bulk-billing services, clinic opening hours, and the provision of culturally safe care. Participants discussed how Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people had access to a range of services and programs, such as general practice, allied health, dentistry, social health, care coordination, and specialist services, which were considered to enable access.

Similarly, health checks were a positive mechanism for engaging Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people and establishing current levels of health and wellbeing, identifying health needs, and linking clients to holistic and comprehensive healthcare. Health checks were provided to all clients, including young people, and were conducted as part of the IUIHDeadly Choicesinitiative and school clinics. For Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people who are not regular clients of the ATSICCHO, participants described how health assessments were used to engage and promote services to young people and their families.

Another aspect of equitable access to holistic, comprehensive, and culturally safe PHC was continuity of care. Participants described this as having a ‘familiar face’ that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people recognised and felt comfortable with but also knew them and their circumstances (HCP2, HCP5, HCP12). Some clinics have an integrated model of care that enables clients to see the same group of HCPs each time they visit the service. Despite this, it may not always be possible for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people to see the same person and receive that continuity of care if they were not considered a regular client (HCP1).

The cost of healthcare services was described as both an enabler and a barrier. Participants discussed and recognised that while the cost of healthcare services at an ATSICCHO was not an issue as ATSICCHOs bulk bill under Medicare, some participants suggested Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people who were previously seeking care outside the ATSICCHO sector were returning to ATSICCHOs due to the lack of bulk billing and increased cost of seeking care in mainstream general practice sector.

Many clinics across the three ATSICCHOs in the study have extended opening hours, including Saturdays, and some clinics have the flexibility of walk-in appointments in addition to the standard Monday to Friday 8 am to 5 pm pre-booked appointments. These extended hours and the flexibility of walk-in appointments were important for minimising barriers Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people may normally encounter when accessing PHC services, particularly for young people studying or working (HCP3).

While it may not always be possible for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people to get an appointment immediately, participants recognised the importance of acknowledging their need to see someone and taking action, such as getting them triaged.

To address the lack of available appointments, one ATSICCHO, introduced a triaging process at the end of 2022 to minimise wait times for clients needing to see someone for a more pressing health concern and to minimise those foregoing care. If the client discloses or the receptionist senses that the client needs to see someone urgently, a phone triage was booked that day with the nurse. During the triage process, the nurse determines what care was needed and the urgency of the concern. The introduction of the triaging process acknowledges the needs of clients, including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people, and provides options as to what the client wants to do.

Additionally, knowledge of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health and wellbeing and culture was important for delivering culturally safe healthcare. Non-Indigenous participants discussed how they received cultural awareness training when first commencing their role at the ATSICCHO and how it has provided them with the knowledge to take a strength-based approach to Aboriginal health and wellbeing (HCP1) and understanding cultural protocols.

Participants identified several enablers related to the characteristics and skills of the ATSICCHO workforce to support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people’s engagement and access, such as experience working with young people, and knowledge of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health and wellbeing and culture, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff, age and gender of HCPs, and communication and building rapport and trust with young people.

Experience working with young people was important for enabling HCPs to deliver healthcare to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people. Most participants did not have any specific formal qualifications related to the health and wellbeing of young people, even those in a young people-specific role. However, a few participants did have formal qualifications. One participant had a Certificate IV in Youth Work and a Diploma in Child Youth and Family Intervention, and another was undertaking a Diploma in Child and Adolescent Health. Generally, participants gained experience from working with young people, whether in their current role or from previous experience, even if they had no formal qualification. Experience ranged from 1 to 2 years to 15 plus years and across a diverse range of health and wellbeing needs.

For one Aboriginal participant, they discussed how their personal and life experience was just as valuable to their role as their formal qualification or professional experience.

For Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander participants, knowledge of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health and wellbeing was gained through formal qualifications or experience. Some Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander participants also identified having had training on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health and wellbeing, and culture during their time at ATSICCHOs. However, most Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander participants had gained awareness through their lived experiences.

That’s probably more just life experience,just being an Aboriginal man and growing up(HCP7).

Additionally, the presence of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff, including HCPs, within the clinics was discussed by participants as an important enabler for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people accessing PHC services. The presence of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff was described as making Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people feel welcomed and enabled young people to make connections with HCPs who worked at the clinic.

Participants were uncertain whether the age or gender of HCPs mattered to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people. However, participants noted that it depended on a young person’s previous experience with an older person or the concern they would be seeking help for (HCP1, HCP2, HCP4). Often, young people were asked if they had a preference for a HCP of a particular gender (HCP4). What was considered important by participants was the connection the HCP made with a young person (HCP2).

Participants suggested that having younger HCPs at the ATSICCHO provided a welcoming environment for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people, as they would be able to connect more with someone of a similar age.

One participant identified that it made it easier for them to connect as they shared similar musical interests and knew of social media commonly used by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people.

Several participants discussed the need to have clear communication with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people. Whether it was having a yarn or discussing personal or medical needs, being clear, straightforward, honest, and free from medical jargon was considered an enabler and important for communicating with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people.

Similarly, participants spoke about being mindful of their language and communication style and wanting to ensure they do not offend or come across as direct in their communication.

All participants discussed the importance of connecting with and building rapport with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people, as it was regarded as critical to engaging with young people, building trust, and making them feel comfortable and safe (HCP2, HCP3, HCP10, HCP12). Most participants identified that rapport needs to be built over time (HCP3, HCP6). Building rapport with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people was discussed as being important because it allows them to express their concerns and feelings to someone they trust.

Building rapport was particularly important for those participants who provide care or work with at-risk Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people who were disengaged from healthcare, education, or family. Building rapport with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people often allowed participants to step into that guardian role when required and provide advocacy and support when seeking care.

Overarching theme: Family and community play a key role in facilitating Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people’s access to healthcare services.

The second overarching theme identified was the role of family and community in facilitating Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people’s access to healthcare services. Factors such as being taken to an appointment by family or a supportive parent or ‘good guardian’ (HCP10) who advocated for the needs of their young person assisted with engagement and access.

Additionally, participants discussed that including family and support for families was equally as important as engaging and providing care to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people.

The third overarching theme is the characteristics of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people that support health-seeking behaviour. Participants described how health promotion activities and an individual’s motivation to be healthy were why some Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people engaged with PHC services. They also suggested theDeadly Choicesprogram and messaging could be linked to promoting health literacy and healthy behaviours.

One participant discussed how they believed theDeadly Choicesmessaging provided the knowledge and motivation for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people to access services. Additionally, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people receiving positive feedback about their health and wellbeing appeared to facilitate their engagement with services.

Participants also recognised that more health promotion and prevention should be delivered to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people. They believed that if Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people were more aware of their health and wellbeing needs, they were more likely to engage with health services.

Barriers identified by HCPs have been presented in Table2, along with supporting illustrative quotes where they contrast with the strength-based overarching themes. Including these barriers provides insight into areas that need attention within models of care at ATSICCHOs and identifies possible opportunities for interventions while also providing context to the enablers that facilitate Aboriginal and Torres Strait young people’s access to PHC services, as already discussed.

The study was conducted in an urban setting, where there is an increasing focus on improving health outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people. The mapping of enablers and barriers across three overarching themes identified from research yarns with HCPs provided a unique perspective on how Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people access, interact, and experience healthcare, particularly in relation to supply-side factors. This study identifies several enablers of access to PHC. However, HCPs discussed the ATSICCHO model of care, specifically targeted programs and initiatives for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people, and the characteristics and skills of the ATSICCHO workforce as essential for facilitating Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people’s access and utilisation of PHC services. Our findings highlight that the targeted yet comprehensive approach developed and refined over a decade by established and renowned ATSICCHOs in SEQ aims to increase access, ongoing engagement, and service uptake, enables Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people in the region to access quality, culturally safe, holistic, and comprehensive PHC services [43–45]. This multilevel approach encompasses engagement strategies such as education, health promotion, and social health programs [46–48]. It is a flexible and comprehensive model of care that is mindful of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people’s health needs and social situations and inclusive of families and communities [48,49].

These findings were consistent with existing literature and fill in the gap in evidence from studies conducted in an urban setting and with HCPs from ATSICCHOs [17]. Other studies have identified the role of the ATSICCHO model of care and its importance in providing culturally safe, holistic, and comprehensive PHC services, often in the absence of mainstream services to meet the needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people [50–53]. Similarly, targeted programs addressing Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people’s needs improve access and health outcomes. For example, in Australia,headspace, a national mental health organisation tasked with providing primary care-based mental health support to young Australians aged 12–25, aims to bridge the gap between the high prevalence of mental health problems in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people and the availability of services [54,55].

While the focus of this study was on the enablers of Aboriginal and Torres Strait young people accessing PHC, participants did identify a range of barriers to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people accessing PHC services. These barriers should not be ignored; if anything, they provide insight into areas that need attention within models of care at ATSICCHOs while also providing context to the enablers that facilitate Aboriginal and Torres Strait young people’s access to PHC services. The availability of appointments was the most significant barrier discussed by all participants, which impacted Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people’s ability to access services. Wait times to see a primary HCP have been identified as barriers to access in other studies for both Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people and adolescents generally [56–61]. One study by Warwick et al. [57] identified targeted clinics and outreach as possible solutions that could address wait times for Aboriginal young people. The service involved in that study had trialled a young person’s clinic, which was described as successful; however, no further detail on this success was provided.

This study demonstrates that ATSICCHOs are best placed to provide culturally safe, holistic, and comprehensive PHC services to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people. Investing in the ATSICCHO model of care to increase their capacity to deliver PHC to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people is possibly the most feasible and effective way to increase young people’s access to and use of PHC services. Likewise, mainstream services that embody the principles and values of ATSICCHOs, such as the Inala Indigenous Health Service, are also best placed to provide these services to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people [62–64]. Further investment should focus on enhancing target programs and initiatives for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people and strengthening the capacity of the healthcare workforce to provide accessible healthcare. The additional needs of young people including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people have been recognised nationally and internationally in key documents, such as theNational Agreement on Closing the Gap[65] and theNational Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Plan 2021–2031[66], and The World Health Organization’sGlobal standards for quality health-care services for adolescents[16], andCore competencies in adolescent health and development for primary care providers[67]. Governments, healthcare systems, and health services are responsible for ensuring these strategies and policies are enacted. Investing in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people’s health is critical if there are to be any improvements in their health and wellbeing. Others have also advocated for investing in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people’s health and wellbeing, noting that investments will lead to improved health outcomes as young people, as adults, and future generations of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people [68].

The strengths of the study were that the study was conducted in partnership with ATSICCHOs and used Indigenous methodologies employed by an experienced Aboriginal researcher that centred the knowledge and experience of HCPs from ATSICCHOs. A limitation of the study was that only 13 HCPs participated across three ATSICCHOs. The increased demand for and shortage of HCPs limit their capacity to participate in research. Purposive sampling was used to identify and recruit participants who provided care to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people. As such, there may have been other HCPs who could have contributed. These factors should, therefore, be taken into consideration when interpreting the results of this study.

Healthcare providers from ATSICCHOs identified system and organisational, family and community, and individual factors that enable Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people’s access to PHC services. Efforts to improve PHC access among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people should focus on multilevel strategies across all three levels of the social-ecological model, with a particular focus on increasing opportunities for equitable access to PHC services for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people, enhancing target programs and initiatives for young people, supporting the knowledge, skills and capacity of HCPs to delivery appropriate, culturally safe and holistic care, and increasing funding and resources to assist these strategies. Importantly, any strategy should centre HCPs and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people in their design and implementation.

The authors wish to acknowledge the traditional custodians of the Brisbane area, the Country where this study was conducted, the Turrbal and Jagera people, and pay respect to their ancestors and descendants. We would also like to acknowledge the healthcare providers and their Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community-controlled health organisations who agreed to participate in this study.

SH: conceptualisation, design, data collection, analysis, and interpretation, and writing the original and final drafts of the paper. JAD: analysis and interpretation of data, and review of original and final drafts. AP, GDM & JW: conceptualisation, review of original and final drafts, and supervision.

SH was supported by the Australian Government Research Training Program Scholarship– Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Research Training Program, a UQ Poche Centre for Indigenous Health Research Top-Up Scholarships, a Lowitja Institute Higher Degree Research Top-Up Scholarship, and a Top-Up Scholarship from the Australian Longitudinal Study on Women’s Health, funded by the Australian Government Department of Health and Aged Care.