Ferric chloride (FeCl3) in sulfuric acid cloud droplets
has been proposed to explain the inhomogeneous near-ultraviolet (UV)
absorption visible at the Venusian cloud tops. However, the absorption
spectrum of FeCl3in concentrated sulfuric acid does not
appear to have been measured previously; here we report measurements
under appropriate conditions of temperature and H2SO4/H2O solution strengths. The choice of solvent
has a significant effect on the measured spectrum. The reaction of
FeCl3in aqueous H2SO4to form ferric
sulfate (Fe2(SO4)3) was shown to
be suppressed by adding HCl to the solution (as would occur in the
Venusian atmosphere). The FeCl3spectrum in sulfuric acid
is shown to be in good agreement with observations of the unknown
absorber in Venus’ atmosphere. The presence of Fe2(SO4)3, which absorbs strongly below 320 nm,
should be considered when reconstructing Venusian spectra to avoid
misattribution of absorption in this spectral region to SO2, potentially leading to an overestimation of the SO2cloud
top concentrations.

Observation of the Venusian
cloud tops at near-ultraviolet (NUV)
wavelengths reveals inhomogeneous absorption, the cause of which has
remained one of the largest unanswered questions in Venusian research
since its original detection in 1927.,The Venusian
clouds are composed of UV-bright aqueous sulfuric acid (approximately
80 wt %, though some local variation may
occur), which is produced from photochemical
oxidation of gas-phase SO2in the presence of H2O. Near the cloud tops, two cloud particle size modes have been detected,
with modal radii of 200 nm (“mode 1”) and 1.05 μm
(“mode 2”).

The cause
of the NUV absorption (“the unknown absorber”
hereafter) is generally accepted to be located within the upper cloud
layer (∼57–70 km,), although the precise
altitude range is not known.−Models generally cannot distinguish
between gaseous and particulate candidates for the unknown absorber,
or identify which cloud mode(s) a particulate candidate for the absorber
is expected to be in. All retrievals of the shape of the absorption
spectrum require the use of models to compare to observations,−and as such the retrieved shape of the absorption spectrum is dependent
on the assumptions made regarding the altitude profile of the absorber.
Probably the best spectrum of the unknown absorber was measured by
the MASCS instrument on the MESSENGER spacecraft during a gravity-assist maneuver at Venus (Figure).

MASCS/MESSENGER spectrum
of the unknown absorber (black line and
gray uncertainty region) compared with
the FeCl3spectrum measured in ethyl acetate (blue dashed
line), which shows poor agreement, and
an example FeCl3spectrum resulting from this work (red).

A large number of species have been proposed as
possible causes
of the NUV absorption since its detection (e.g., refs,). Many candidates are sulfur-based due to
the extensive sulfur chemistry on Venus, including OSSO,,polysulfur,−and polysulfur oxide,,though concentrations
of these are generally modeled to be too low to account for the observed
absorption.−Jiang et al. proposed that iron–sulfur
minerals matching the observed absorption spectrum would form in cloud
droplets following the uptake and dissociation of ferric chloride
(FeCl3) and reaction with the sulfuric acid.

FeCl3itself has also been proposed as a possible cause
of the absorption: it was included in a list of possible transition
metal candidates for the unknown absorber by Kuiper due to its yellow color. The strongest evidence for FeCl3as the unknown absorber comes from Zasova et al., who reported that 1 wt % FeCl3in
mode 2 cloud droplets provided a good match to the observed spectrum
of Venus. However, they did not publish an absorption spectrum of
FeCl3, only the predicted spherical (Bond) albedo of the
planet. In the absence of an available absorption spectrum of FeCl3in sulfuric acid, recent research has used an alternative
spectrum, measured in ethyl acetate, for comparison.,The FeCl3spectrum in ethyl acetate bears little similarity
to the reported Venusian absorption spectrum (Figure). Given that FeCl3can react
with ethyl acetate, the validity of using
this spectrum to model FeCl3in the Venusian atmosphere
is in doubt. The objective of the present study was therefore to measure
a representative FeCl3absorption spectrum for use in atmospheric
modeling of Venus, and examine the expected chemical equilibrium of
the iron-chloride-sulfur system.

Liu et al. measured
UV–vis
spectra of FeCl3in ultrasaline solutions of HCl and LiCl.
They found five absorbing iron and iron chloride ion complexes (which
they identified as Fe3+, FeCl2+, FeCl2+, FeCl3(aq), and FeCl4–) by principal component and “model-free” analysis,
and reported that the variety in shape with chloride concentration
was due to the dominance of different complexes at different chloride
concentrations.

For
full consideration of the system, the
formation of iron sulfate ions (e.g., FeSO4+, Fe­(SO4)2–, and FeOH2+) or minerals (rhomboclase (H5O2)­Fe­(SO4)2·3H2O, acid ferric sulfate (H3O)­Fe­(SO4)2, and copiapite Fe2+Fe43+(SO4)6(OH)2·20H2O) should also be considered, along with the possible
formation of iron chloride sulfates (generic formula FeCln(SO4)m3–n–2m). H2O can also form cluster ions with any of the other species.
In this study we attempted to identify the end products of these reactions.

We theorize that at high FeCl3concentrations, as proposed
Zasova et al., a small amount of the
FeCl3partially dissociates until the solution is saturated
with respect to Cl–, reaching an equilibrium in
which the rest of the ferric chloride does not fully dissociate. The
aqueous ferric chloride (FeCl3(aq)) and ferric chloride
ions (FeCln3–n) in the solution may therefore persist for long periods as
the rate of reaction is effectively limited by the rate of escape
of HCl from the solution into the gas phase above the solution, and
from there into the wider atmosphere. At low concentrations of FeCl3, the majority of the ferric chloride must dissociate before
chloride saturation of the solution occurs, resulting in a rapid reaction
to form iron–sulfur ions or minerals.

We performed
scoping experiments to measure the real component of the refractive
index, to observe the behavior of the solutions over time and to determine
what concentration regime would be required to measure absorption
coefficients. Initially, high concentrations (∼1 wt %) of anhydrous
FeCl3were added to ∼75 wt % sulfuric acidthe
concentrations reported by Zasova et al.and the refractive index measured over 35 days. The sample
separated into a liquid phase over a colorless precipitate which was
resuspended on mixing. Samples of the pure liquid were taken periodically
to measure the absorbance using an ultraviolet–visible (“UV–vis”)
Spectrophotometer (SeeSection), but all samples saturated the detector in the NUV,
and no spectra could be recorded.

All experiments
use laboratory grade reagents: H2SO4(>95%,
Fischer Scientific), HCl (∼37%, Fischer Scientific), anhydrous
FeCl3powder (MP Biomedicals, stored under nitrogen and
in the presence of desiccants), and Fe2(SO4)3·(H2O)5powder (Aldrich Chemical
Co.).

Absorbance spectra were recorded using an Agilent Cary
100 Ultraviolet–visible Spectrophotometer. Samples were placed
in 10 mm optical path length quartz cuvettes and the absorbance measured
from 600 to 200 nm with 1 nm resolution. All spectra were recorded
relative to a deionized water control with automatic baseline correction.
The sides of the cuvettes were cleaned with deionized water and dried
with optical lens tissue or acetone when required.

Spectra of
FeCl3in H2SO4with
addition of HCl to drive equilibrium away from ferric sulfate and
toward ferric chloride species were measured. To facilitate analysis
of the spectra of three component solutions, spectra of FeCl3in HCl and Fe2(SO4)3in H2SO4were also measured.

Two sets
of 15 samples (sets “x” and “y”) were produced containing
approximately 77 wt % (12.9 M) and 78 wt % (13.3 M) H2SO4, respectively. Samples contained varying initial concentrations
of HCl (∼0.1, 0.01, and 0.001 M, sample sets 0, 1, and 2, respectively)
and FeCl3(9 × 10–5–5 ×
10–4M, samples B–F). The preparation method
is described inSection S1.1of the Supporting
Information (SI), and precise concentrations of each sample are provided
inTable S1. Gas bubbles nucleated in the
samples during the experiment; this is assumed to be HCl that was
released from the sample when Cl–dissociation from
FeCl3increased Cl–concentrations above
the saturation concentration of the solution (the HCl concentration
could not be measured during the experiment). UV–vis spectra
of the samples were measured periodically for 99 days (setx) and 114 days (sety) relative to a deionized
water background.

Twenty-one
samples of ∼2.2
× 10–4M Fe2(SO4)3in 15–98 wt % (1.6–18.3 M) H2SO4were measured periodically for 118 days. No significant change
in shape with time was seen, and the resulting solution was assumed
to be at equilibrium. Precise concentrations of the samples are listed
inTable S2in Section S1.2 of the SI.

Samples
of 2 × 10–5–1.4 × 10–4M FeCl3in 1.5–2.2 M HCl and samples
of 5 × 10–5–3 × 10–4M Fe from Fe2(SO4)3in 73–80
wt % (12.1–14.1 M) H2SO4were measured
and the molar absorptivity of each species calculated. The initial
preparation and subsequent dilution of the samples to produce a series
of different iron concentrations at a given acid concentration are
described inSection S1.3of the SI. The
precise concentrations of FeCl3and HCl and Fe2(SO4)3and H2SO4in the
sample sets are provided inTables S3 and S4.

Principal component
analysis, as used by Liu et al., was
unable to separate the species in the H2SO4/HCl/FeCl3sample spectra. Linear combinations of the spectra reported
by Liu et al. could approximate the measured
spectra, but not fully reproduce them. This is assumed to be due to
the temperature dependence of the precise shapes of the absorption
spectra.

Instead, a fitting algorithm was developed to combine
the measured chloride and sulfate spectra. By selecting combinations
of the measured spectra, a broader range of complex ion ratios could
be modeled. The measured molar absorptivities of the five FeCl3/HCl samples, the absorptivity of the Fe2(SO4)3/H2SO4samples closest
in total iron concentrations to the FeCl3/H2SO4/HCl samples (Sample 77 for sample setxand Sample 79 for sample sety; seeTables S3 and S4in the SI), and average absorbance
spectra of H2SO4and HCl (and a baseline correction
if required) were fitted to the FeCl3/H2SO4/HCl absorption spectra.

whereciare the fitting
parameters andyi(λ)
are the functions being fitted: the average absorbances of HCl and
H2SO4and molar absorptivities of the Fe sulfate
and chloride species, andbis a constant baseline.
The fitting parametersciwere constrained to be strictly positive with two exceptions: the
baseline and HCl concentration were constrained to be strictly negative.
The baseline takes a negative value to allow for zero values where
necessary (as all spectrayi(λ) and fitting parametersciare positive, except HCl). The HCl is strictly negative
to offset the HCl contribution that could not be fully removed in
the chloride reference spectra.

When the functionsyi(λ) are the absorptivities of
each species (multiplied by a
path length of 1.0 cm), the fitting parameters are, following the
Beer–Lambert law, their concentrations in the mixture. Fitting
was performed using python’s nonlinear least-squares minimization
(“lmfit”) module.

Ferric chloride
can exist as either hydrated (FeCl3·6H2O,Figurea) or anhydrous
(Figureb) powders,
which have very different appearances and behaviors. The hydrate is
a yellow crystal, while the anhydrous form is a highly deliquescent
black powder, which absorbs ambient water from the air and turns yellow
(see the yellow stains on the filter paper inFigureb).

(a) FeCl3·6H2O powder
(Fisons Scientific
Equipment), (b) Anhydrous FeCl3powder (MP Biomedicals),
(c) 0.95 ± 0.03 wt % anhydrous FeCl3in 76.03 ±
0.02 wt % sulfuric acid (Fischer Chemical, ≥95%) immediately
after sample preparation and mixing. The second and third rows show
the same sample before inversion (top row) and after inversion (bottom
row) after (d, e) 1 day, (f, g) 6 days, (h, i) 13 days, and (j, k)
35 days. Decrease in sample volume over time is due to removal of
small volumes for testing.

A solution of ∼1 wt % anhydrous FeCl3in ∼75
wt % sulfuric acid was producedthe concentrations reported
by Zasova et al. The particles initially
partially dissolved, producing a strongly yellow-colored liquid with
a combination of black and yellow particles suspended (Figurec). After 1 day, the solution
had formed a clear yellow liquid and a small amount of colorless precipitate
(Figured). The sample
flask was inverted to mix the solution, producing an opaque yellow
liquid (Figuree).
The solution was then left for 35 days. The volume of the precipitate
increased over time (Figuref,h,j). Inverting the flask to mix produced opaque liquids
throughout (Figureg,i,k). Small amounts of the solution were removed frequently (resulting
in the volume decrease visible inFigured–k) to measure the real refractive
index throughout the experiment. The real refractive index (measured
at 589 nm) became consistent with aqueous H2SO4after 10 days, while a yellow color was still apparent by eye. After
20 days, the real refractive index was measured to be lower than that
of aqueous H2SO4.

The absorbance
spectra of the samples were measured
over time. Seven spectra taken after different time periods for each
of six samples (FeCl3∼ 1.7–2.1 × 10–4M, “C” samplesseeTable S1in the SI for precise concentrations)
are shown inFigure(spectra were measured more frequently, but only a subset are shown
for legibility; the full set of spectra are shown in the SI,Figure S1). The ordinate scale is constant across
all plots to aid comparison.

Absorbance spectra measured over time for representative
H2SO4/FeCl3/HCl spectra. Samples
have
initial concentrations of approximately 77 wt % (12.9 M) H2SO4for sample setx(a, c, e) and 78
wt % (13.3 M) H2SO4for sample sety(b, d, f), ∼2 × 10–4M FeCl3for all samples, and 9 × 10–2M, 9 ×
10–3M, 10 × 10–4M HCl for
sample batches 0 (a, b), 1 (c, d), and 2 (e, f), respectively. The
reader is referred toTable S1for precise
concentrations for each sample.

At low HCl concentration (Figuree,f), the spectra show minimal changes with time and
are consistent with Fe2(SO4)3spectra,throughout the course of the experiment. The samples with intermediate
HCl concentrations (Figurec,d) are consistent with Fe2(SO4)3at long times, but early spectra show higher absorbance in
the 350–400 nm region, which decreases with time. This is more
apparent for samplex1C (Figurec) thany1C (Figured), which is not consistent
with Fe2(SO4)3even after 114 days.
The high HCl concentration samples (Figurea,b) show the clearest change in spectral
shape. As for all setysamples, the reaction proceeded
slowly and had not completed after 114 days, so sampley0C was not consistent with Fe2(SO4)3within the length of the study. Samplex0C initially
shows a decrease in absorption at all wavelengths above ∼220
nm (days 1–4), followed by a change in shape that sees a decrease
in absorption above 350 nm throughout the experiment; an increase
near 300 nm from day 4 onward, with a shift in the peak wavelength
from 305 to 286 nm, and a decrease in absorbance near 230 nm with
a shift of the peak from 237 to 219 nm. The same pattern of behavior
with HCl concentration was seen in all samples at different FeCl3concentrations (Figure S1).

By comparison with measured spectra of FeCl3in HCl
(Section) and
in high Cl–concentration solutions reported in
the literature, we identify the cause
of the higher absorption at the beginning of the experiment as being
due to aqueous FeCl3and ferric chloride ions, FeCln3–n.

The absorption spectra of samples
were measured periodically for 118 days. No significant changes in
the absorption spectrum of each sample were observed; also, there
was no indication of the formation of solid mineral phases as reported
by Jiang et al. Measurements continued
for the same period of time as the H2SO4/FeCl3/HCl samples (Section) to be confident that no further reactions were taking
place after the formation of Fe2(SO4)3ions.Figureshows
the average spectrum of each sample across the experiment.

Absorbance
measured for ∼2.2 × 10–4M Fe2(SO4)3in different concentrations
of H2SO4. Samples at 44.7 wt % (darker orange)
and 54.7 wt % (lighter orange) do not obey the otherwise universal
trend of increasing absorbance in the longer-wavelength peak with
increasing H2SO4concentration.

With the exception of 44.7 wt % (dark orange) and 54.7 wt
% (light
orange) H2SO4, the spectra show a clear trend
of increasing peak height near 300 nm and blue shift of the peak as
the concentration increases. The difference near 50 wt % is interpreted
as the change from a sample dominated near 300 nm by FeSO4+(which has an absorptivity maximum of ∼2200 L
mol–1cm–1at 300 nm) at low sulfuric
acid concentration to a spectrum dominated by Fe­(SO4)2–(maximum of ∼3000 L mol–1cm–1at 289 nm).,Increasing
absorption with decreasing wavelength near 200 nm for the 14.7 and
23.8 wt % samples may indicate the presence of small amounts of a
third species, possibly FeOH2+, which Saunders et al. reported contributes at low acid concentrations.
We conclude that the ferric sulfate spectrum must be measured at the
relevant H2SO4concentration in order to support
interpretation of Fe species in a mixed chloride/sulfate solution.

Each
sample spectrum was analyzed relative to the corresponding pure
acid. The linearity of sample concentration to absorbance was checked
at various wavelengths (SI,Figures S2 and S3) and all sample spectra were shown to be linear in concentration.
The molar absorptivities of ferric chloride and ferric sulfate at
each acid concentration were calculated and are shown inFigure. Greater relative
uncertainty near 210 nm in the ferric chloride spectra is due to incomplete
removal of HCl signal near 200 nm due to the very high absorbance.
The impact on the spectra is minimal; in any case the effect of any
remaining HCl spectrum is accounted for in the fitting algorithm (Section).

Calculated
molar absorptivities of (a) FeCl3in different
concentrations of HCl and (b) Fe2(SO4)3in different concentrations of H2SO4. Shaded
regions show uncertainties resulting from a weighted fit to sample
concentrations. Ferric chloride ion spectra are labeled by letter
for ease of identification in future figures.

The shapes of the chloride absorptivity spectra vary significantly
with HCl concentration. The general trends are similar to those reported
by Liu et al., who found that the variety
in shape with chloride concentration (HCl concentration in this case)
was due to the dominance of different complexes at different chloride
concentrations. Their spectra and concentrations were found to be
temperature dependent, so this experiment is not expected to agree
exactly with their results. Nevertheless, there is a qualitative similarity
in the change in shape, from a single peak above 300 nm at low chloride
concentration (FeCl2+), becoming broader and stronger with
increasing chloride concentration (FeCl2+),
followed by the formation of two separate peaks (FeCl3),
which then develop a more pronounced minimum and overall higher absorbance
(FeCl4–) at the highest chloride concentrations.

Fitting
was performed using python’s nonlinear least-squares minimization
(“lmfit”) module. The reported uncertainties result
only from the fitted concentrations of each component, and not from
uncertainties in the molar absorptivities shown inFigure. The fitting method is not
exact, as not all ratios of ions are achievable as weighted sums of
their relative concentrations. Nevertheless, this method should provide
a reasonable approximation of the concentration of iron chlorides,
though individual iron chloride complex ion concentrations are not
considered to be quantitatively reliable. The change in total iron
chloride concentration over time was used to estimate the rate of
conversion of FeCl3to Fe2(SO4)3ions, which is affected by the concentration of HCl in the
solutions.

In this study more than 400 spectra were measured,
soFigureshows only
a small sample of fit results. Given the necessary simplification
of a highly complex system for this fitting, the fitted spectra compare
very satisfactorily with the measured spectra. The total iron concentration
in each sample (Figure S4) is generally
within or just outside the experimental error of the initial concentrations
in the sample, with agreement slightly worse in samples dominated
by ferric chloride. Due to the known imprecision of the ferric chloride
spectra, this is expected.

Examples of the fitting algorithm. The measured
spectrum (gray
line) is fitted by least-squares minimization to produce a total spectrum
(black dashed line). Components fitted to the spectrum with concentrations
of >10–8M are plotted (different colors) with
uncertainties
from the fitting algorithm (shaded regions). The reader is referred
toTable S1(SI) for details of each experiment,
and toTable S3andFigurefor definition of the iron chloride component
names.

The quality of the fit is slightly
lower in spectra dominated by
chlorides (Figurea,j–l), as the fit cannot capture the precise ratio of the
∼240 and ∼305 nm peaks. In spectra with small chloride
contributions, i.e., dominated by sulfate (all other subplots), the
agreement is clear. In addition to the uncertainty in the shape of
the ferric chloride spectra, it is unrealistic to assume that ferric
chloride ions would dissociate and react to directly form ferric sulfate
ions with no intermediate iron chloride-sulfate complexes. Such complexes
would presumably have spectra similar to the pure chlorides and sulfates,
though not identical, and would also contribute to the disagreement
between measured and fitted total iron.

Using the fitted
total iron chloride concentration throughout the experiment, the overall
rate of loss of FeCl3was determined. The reaction was
found to be first order in all cases, and the rates for experiments
using each sample batch were consistent (Figure S5). Note that there was a significant difference between the
two batches, withk= (5.2 ± 1.6) × 10–7s–1for batch x and (7.1 ±
4.2) × 10–8s–1for batch
y at 298 K, which is most likely due to the HCl escaping from the
batch stock solution at different rates, thereby changing the Cl–concentration in the liquid that ‘protects’
the FeCl3. This could affect not only the rates of specific
reactions but also which process is the rate-limiting step in the
transformation from chlorides to sulfates, leading to a significant
change in the measured rate constant.

Figureshows the
measured absorbance spectrum of FeCl3in samples with a
high fitted ferric chloride fraction (Samplex0C
on day 1, with a fitted total iron chloride to iron sulfate ratio
of 82:18%, orange line) and a medium ferric chloride fraction (the
same sample on day 18, with a fitted total iron chloride to iron sulfate
ratio of 40:60%, yellow line) compared to the absorption spectrum
of the unknown absorber estimated from observations and models.−
,All spectra have been normalized
to a maximum of 1 in the 300–400 nm region for comparison of
the shapes of the spectra, with the exception of the day 18 measured
spectrum (yellow), which is normalized to 1 at 325 nm for better comparison
with the shape of the spectrum reported by Crisp, based on observations taken during the Pioneer Venus mission.

Spectrum
of the unknown absorber from models and observations taken
during the Pioneer Venus, MESSENGER, Bepi-Colombo, and Venus Express
missions−
,compared to spectra
measured in this work (Samplex0C, day 1, orange,
and day 18, yellow), and the fitted ferric chloride contribution to
the day 1 spectrum (red, also shown inFigure). All absorbances have been scaled for comparison
of spectral shapes. SeeFigurefor the fitted sulfate/chloride spectra andTable S1(SI) for initial concentrations of all components.

The shape of the measured spectrum with a high
concentration of
ferric chloride (Figure, orange line) shows better agreement with the observations than
prior FeCl3spectra presented in the literature (Figure);,however,
the high absorption near 300 nm, partly due to the presence of ferric
sulfate ions (Figurea), makes comparison of the shapes difficult. Reflecting the lower
temperatures in the upper clouds on Venus than the room temperature
of the laboratory and the gas-phase HCl concentrations available to
maintain a higher HCl droplet saturation, the formation of ferric sulfate at early times is likely faster
in this experiment than would be expected on Venus.

In addition,
the similarity in the absorption regions of the ferric
sulfate ions and SO2may have led to misattribution of
ferric sulfate absorption to SO2, underestimating the absorption
due to the unknown absorber (and related species) in the region below
310–320 nm.,To account for both of these
factors, we reconstruct the absorption spectrum of the ferric chloride
alone from the results of the fitting algorithm (Figure, red line). This removal of
the ferric sulfate improves the agreement between the measured spectra
and the observations from Pérez-Hoyos et al., using MASCS/MESSNEGER spectra recorded during its 2008
Venus gravity assist, and Lee et al., using
measurements taken during the 2020 Bepi-Colombo Venus observation
period. The inclusion of ferric sulfate in models may also explain
reported correlations between the 283 and 365 nm channels of the Akatsuki
UV Imager and the findings by Lee et
al. that the unknown absorber must be
modeled to absorb strongly at 283 nm to account for measured phase
curves.

The spectrum reported by Crisp, based
on observations recorded during the Pioneer Venus mission, differs
significantly from more recent observations and models. The sharp
decrease at 310 nm is due to attribution of all absorbance below this
value to SO2, leaving a single
peak at 325 nm and a “shoulder” in the slope of the
absorption at 370 nm. This shape is reminiscent of that of the experimental
spectra at longer times (Figurea) or intermediate HCl concentrations (Figurec) when the spectrum becomes
a combination of ferric chloride and ferric sulfate (Figureb,d). When a spectrum with
comparable concentrations of ferric chloride and ferric sulfate (Sample
x0C, measured on day 18,Figure, yellow line) is compared to the spectrum reported
by Crisp, there is a clear similarity
in the shapes.

The absorption spectrum calculated for the unknown
absorber is
highly dependent on the altitude profile that is assumed for it. The
precise shape may therefore vary. This is most clearly seen in the
work of Haus et al., who modeled two possible
altitude profiles for the unknown absorber, and report very different
spectra in each case (Figure, solid and dashed purple lines). The agreement of the spectra
will therefore be affected by the difference in altitude profile,
and the agreement of the measured spectra with observations may be
significantly improved by atmospheric modeling. Nevertheless, inspection
ofFiguresand  show that the spectra measured in this work provide
a much improved fit to the observations, compared with the FeCl3spectrum measured in ethyl acetate.,This
demonstrates the importance of using the appropriate solvent when
measuring the absorption spectrum of ferric chloride for atmospheric
modeling purposes.

Good agreement with the spectral shape of
the observations indicates
that FeCl3, if present in sufficient concentrations in
the Venusian atmosphere, would largely explain the NUV absorption.
However, it is important to note that this does not exclude the existence
of other near-UV absorbing species (for example, polysulfur,−polysulfur oxide,,or iron–sulfur minerals) that may contribute in some wavelength regions.

Experiments were
carried out at ambient laboratory temperature and
pressure. At the expected pressure of ∼0.01–1 bar in
the Venusian clouds, the effect of pressure on the reaction within
the cloud droplet will be negligible compared to the effects of the
liquid phase concentrations of reactants,,and this work is therefore expected to be applicable to the full
cloud layer without corrections for pressure. Similarly, changes in
the shape of the absorption spectrum due to complexation of FeCl3with water ligands at lower acid concentrations are expected
to result in only small changes to the absorption spectrum (see SI,Section S3 and Figure S6).

Despite the adoption of a simple model for what
is clearly a complex
system, the measured spectra when FeCl3is added to H2SO4with HCl can be reproduced satisfactorily with
a combination of FeCl3and Fe2(SO4)3spectra. The limitations of the modelsuch as
the lack of single-component chloride spectra for fitting and the
assumption of direct conversion from pure ferric chloride complexes
to pure ferric sulfate complexesundoubtably contribute to
uncertainties in the concentrations of the different components. This
study shows that the HCl concentration in the solution has a significant
effect on the rate of loss of FeCl3.

The resulting
spectra when FeCl3is added to H2SO4solutions are much more similar to observations of
the unknown absorber than previous FeCl3spectra which
were measured in ethyl acetate (Figure).,The greater applicability of
FeCl3spectra measured in sulfuric acid is self-evident,
and these spectra should be used to model FeCl3absorption
in the Venusian atmosphere. The exact shape of the absorption spectrum
predicted from observations is highly dependent on the assumed altitude
profile of the absorber. While the comparison of the measured spectrum
to predicted spectra of the unknown absorber are an important first
step, and clearly demonstrate that FeCl3is a potential
candidate for the unknown absorber, the altitude profile, possible
formation pathways, lifetime, and transport through the atmosphere
must all be considered through extensive atmospheric modeling to be
able to confidently identify FeCl3as the absorber.

The reaction of FeCl3to form Fe2(SO4)3has been known since FeCl3was proposed
as the cause for the absorption. However,
modeling tends to define the wavelength range of the unknown absorber
as only that over which absorption cannot be explained by other species,
such as SO2. Fe2(SO4)3, if present, absorbs in a very similar region in the UV to SO2, so the automatic assumption that all absorbance below ∼320
nm is due to SO2may distort the predicted spectral shape
of the unknown absorber. When the modeled concentration of Fe2(SO4)3is removed from the broadly FeCl3-dominated spectra measured at early times in this work, the
agreement of the measured spectra with the observations improved.
If absorption below 320 nm is being misattributed to SO2rather than ferric sulfate, correlations between observations at
283 and 365 nm,would be readily explained.

The measured spectrum of the unknown absorber has been predicted
very differently over time. This can be seen clearly inFigure, with the marked difference
between the modeled absorption from the Pioneer Venus campaign compared to more recent observations−clearly apparent. In fact, the general shapes of the earlier and
more recent absorption spectra can be reproduced with spectra measured
in the present study, if the ratio of FeCl3and Fe2(SO4)3are different and some absorption
below 320 nm has been misattributed to SO2, rather than
Fe2(SO4)3.

We wish to thank B. Cooper for access to the instrumentation
used and D. Stone for his advice on the development of the fitting
algorithm.

Data for all
figures are available at 10.5281/zenodo.15364165.

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsearthspacechem.5c00132.

The manuscript
was written by J.V.E., with significant editing by all authors. The
laboratory work was performed by J.V.E. under the supervision of A.D.J.
and J.M.C.P.. All authors have given approval to the final version
of the manuscript.

We thank the
U.K. Science and Technology Research Council for funding this study
(project ST/T000279/1). J.V.E. acknowledges funding for a PhD studentship
from the U.K. Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council through
the Center for Doctoral Training in Aerosol Science (EP/S023593/1).

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.