Understanding how different forms of supramolecular curvature arise during assembly is crucial to designing and tuning the microstructure of hierarchically self-assembled materials. Here, we show that in crystalline phases of mesogenic oligomers, the oligomer length is a critical parameter that determines the type of curvature (Gaussian or cylindrical) exhibited by the self-assembled structures. We use iterative exponential growth to synthesize monodisperse mesogenic oligomers ranging from dimer to octamer. By analyzing their phase behavior and microstructure, we elucidate how length-dependent thermodynamic and kinetic effects tune their hierarchical degree of ordering. The oligomers’ length-dependent crystalline order drives the formation of scrolled sheets in shorter oligomers and twisted ribbons in longer oligomers. These studies highlight how oligomer length interplays with mesogen geometry and crystalline packing to drive self-assembly, introducing oligomer length as a powerful design parameter toward tailored applications of mesogenic systems.

Oligomer length-dependent curvature drives the hierarchical assembly of mesogenic oligomers into scrolls and twisted ribbons.

A grand challenge in understanding and designing material self-assembly is to elucidate the material properties and processing parameters that direct the type of supramolecular curvature exhibited by hierarchically self-assembled structures. Mesogenic oligomers, which are composed of calamitic mesogens connected by flexible linkers, serve as an ideal system to probe the connection between material design and supramolecular curvature due to their vast design space. In this space, parameters such as oligomer length (defined bynconnected mesogens), mesogen sequence, and spacer length can be independently tuned. Through them, molecular design can control both the local molecular geometry, such as the conformational ensemble between adjacent mesogens (described here as the average bend angle), and the overall oligomer chain dimensions (chain conformation). These parameters of mesogen geometry and chain conformation can be tuned to achieve programmed liquid crystalline (LC) phases and transition temperatures (1,2). Mesogenic oligomers with bent intermesogen geometry, often considered “flexible” bent-core mesogens (3), further exhibit LC phases featuring geometry-induced frustration, such as nematic ordering in which the inability of a pure bend deformation to uniformly fill space results in the emergence of modulated nematic phases (4,5). The phases that arise from a bent intermesogen geometry have potential uses as materials for ultrafast electrooptical switching (6) and lenses with tunable refractive indices (7).

In small-molecule bent-core liquid crystals, certain smectic (Sm) phases with a higher degree of ordering, most notably the B4 phase, display interlayer mismatch, which is known to drive saddle-splay deformation and supramolecular curvature (8). The B4 phase is described within the literature as a highly ordered Sm or crystalline phase (9). Likewise, short (n= 2 and 3) calamitic mesogenic oligomers have exhibited highly ordered phases with unique optical signatures otherwise only observed in bent-core liquid crystals (10,11). Similarly, the crystalline phases of mesogenic oligomers are expected to reflect the impact of local molecular bend on the deformation and supramolecular curvature of the assembled structures. Furthermore, molecular length is known to affect the degree of undercooling required to initiate nucleation and growth and tunes the kinetics of molecular diffusion and packing, ultimately tuning crystalline ordering (12,13). Leveraging these mechanisms—primarily kinetic, as opposed to thermodynamic, in nature—may pose a previously unexplored approach to tuning supramolecular ordering and microstructural curvature in the crystalline assemblies of mesogenic oligomers.

To elucidate the design rules that link oligomer length, crystallization behavior, and supramolecular curvature, we must access monodisperse oligomers with tunable molecular weights. However, synthesizing mesogenic main-chain oligomers of high molecular weight with low dispersity (Ð) is challenging, with only a few reports preparing monodisperse oligomers longer than tetramers (14–17). Typical step-growth polymerization methods used to prepare main-chain LC polymers, such as thiol-ene reactions (18) and hydrosilylation (19), can access high molecular weights relatively easily but face limitations in dispersity (typically Ð > 2) (20). While several strategies have emerged to prepare monodisperse mesogenic oligomers through either the sequential addition of monomers (1,21) or the coupling of two identical fragments (22), several challenges remain. The former method becomes increasingly inefficient for longer oligomers, and the latter precludes chain extension. To access long oligomers of low dispersity in an efficient and scalable manner (without resorting to chromatographic separation) (23,24), an alternative method is required.

A promising method is iterative exponential growth (IEG) synthesis, a stepwise strategy for the preparation of monodisperse oligomers using orthogonally deprotectable functional groups, enabling access to a high degree of polymerization (DP) through an exponential increase in molecular weight with each step (25–27). This approach was first used in LC systems by Percec and Asandei (14) to prepare precise polyether LCs. However, their synthetic strategy is intolerant of many chemical moieties, including the ester linkages prevalent in many mesogens. To accommodate a wider range of functional groups, a variety of IEG-compatible strategies have been developed, including those for ferroelectric nematic ester-linked oligomeric mesogenic cores (28). Here, we use a robust IEG strategy based on protected alkyne and azide functional groups (26,27), thereby enabling an efficient copper-catalyzed azide-alkyne coupling (CuAAC) reaction to prepare monodisperse oligomers of precise lengths. Their phase behavior and crystalline morphologies can then be studied to determine the effect of oligomer length on the hierarchical self-assembly of mesogenic oligomers.

Here, we demonstrate the role of oligomer length and local geometry on the assembly of the LC and crystalline phases for a series of monodisperse mesogenic main-chain oligomers with DPs up ton= 8 prepared by IEG synthesis. We elucidate the factors that determine how oligomer length affects phase transitions and the degree of crystalline order. This length-dependent degree of order moderates the impact of a bent intermesogen geometry in driving the hierarchical self-assembly of crystalline architectures. The crystalline morphology is controlled by oligomer length, adopting scrolled lamellae with cylindrical curvature in short oligomers and twisted ribbons formed through saddle-splay deformation in long oligomers. This systematic study of length-dependent self-assembly of mesogenic oligomers enables us to leverage oligomer length as a design parameter to control self-assembly without changing the mesogenic core or the spacer. This work demonstrates that tuning oligomer length, combined with the more traditional approach of designing local mesogen geometry, is a powerful design parameter for tailoring oligomeric phase behavior, microstructure, and curvature.

To probe the effect of mesogenic oligomer length on LC and crystalline assembly, we synthesized a series of monodisperse oligomers using an asymmetric monomeric building block. To address the synthetic challenge of preparing these monodisperse oligomers, we leveraged an IEG strategy that is amenable to the synthesis of precise mesogenic main-chain materials (14). Instead of a conventional difunctional monomer as used in step-growth synthesis, IEG requires an asymmetric monomer with selectively deprotectable end groups (25–27). To extend the chain (Fig. 1A), we selectively deprotected and recombined the monomer, yielding a doubly protected dimer. This process is repeated formcycles to obtain an oligomer with 2munits and, in theory, can be used to access any length by combining appropriate fragments. Here, we designed and synthesized an IEG-compatible monomer based on apara-phenyl benzoate core (figs. S1 to S7 and section S1). This mesogenic core, a common building block in LC systems with a library of well-studied derivatives (29), serves as an excellent model system to study the length-dependent properties of mesogenic main-chain oligomers. To ensure compatibility with IEG (Fig. 1B), we installed atert-butyl dimethyl silyl (TBDMS)–protected alkyne on one side of the mesogen, while on the other side, a chloride group is added as an electrophilic functional handle. The silyl protecting group is selectively removed by fluoride treatment, while an azide group is installed on the opposite end through nucleophilic substitution. Subsequently, the IEG cycle is propagated through the formation of 1,2,3-triazole linkages using an efficient CuAAC process to yield precise mesogenic oligomers (figs. S8 to S21 and section S1). The low Ð of the synthesized oligomers is confirmed by the sharp peaks in the gel permeation chromatograms (GPC) (Fig. 1Cand fig. S22). While monodisperse oligomers up to the octamer (n= 8) were prepared, two challenges currently preclude higher–molecular-weight materials (section S2 and table S1): (i) solubility decreases as oligomer length increases, and (ii) the reaction conditions (with a very reactive fluoride source) necessary to remove the TBDMS protecting group lead to a small amount of chain scission in longer oligomers due to cleavage of internal esters (25,30). The accessible molecular weight using IEG in this system is lower than that synthesized by conventional step-growth polymerization of a mesogenic monomer (RM82). We achieve polymers (~20 kg mol−1) following 30 hours of reaction time, compared to only 3.7 kg mol−1for the IEG oligomers. However, compared to the calculated Ð for these IEG-synthesized oligomers (<1.2) (fig. S22 and table S1), the Ð of mesogenic polymers prepared by step-growth polymerization are much higher. For a step-growth polymerization of RM82, Ð can exceed 1.5 even at early stages of polymerization and reach ~2.2 near full conversion (fig. S23).

(A) Schematic representation of an IEG strategy. In each cycle, selective deprotection is followed by coupling, leading to precise chain extension. (B) Scheme for the chemical strategy to perform IEG on a mesogenic monomer, highlighting the steps required for deprotection and coupling: (i) NaN3inN,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) at 60°C, (ii) tetrabutylammonium fluoride (TBAF) inN,N-dimethylacetamide (DMAc) at room temperature, and (iii) CuCl withN,N,N,N,N-pentamethyldiethylenetriamine (PMDETA) and ascorbic acid in DMF at 50° to 60°C. (C) Molecular weight distributions of the mesogenic monomer (n= 1) and IEG-synthesized oligomers (Pn) ranging from the monomer (n= 1) to octamer (n= 8), indicating the narrow dispersity of the compounds. All molecular weights are measured using gel permeation chromatography (GPC) and calibrated relative to polystyrene (PS) standards. The theoretical molecular weight (Mtheo) is listed for comparison. a.u., arbitrary units.

To ensure that the mesogenic system exhibits LC and crystalline behavior of interest, we probe the thermal transitions and optical textures of these materials, beginning with the monomer. Despite having unusual end groups for a mesogen, the IEG-compatible monomer (with TBDMS group removed for analysis; structure shown inFig. 2A), denoted here asP1, exhibits a monotropic (metastable) nematic (N) transition on cooling from the isotropic melt (Iso), followed by crystallization, a common sequence for small-molecule LCs (29). Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) highlights this monotropic isotropic-to-nematic (Iso-N) transition at 62°C on slow cooling (2°C min−1) (Fig. 2Band fig. S24). This transition is reversible if crystallization is prevented by limiting the undercooling (Fig. 2B, inset), as unlike crystallization, LC phase nucleation typically requires negligible undercooling (31). The texture of a thin-filmP1sample was visualized using transmission polarized optical microscopy (POM; ~5-μm cell; sample preparation detailed in fig. S25). When observed on cooling from the Iso melt at 2°C min−1, a schlieren texture with both four- and two-brush point singularities forms (Fig. 2C) (32). However, additional radial defect patterns are observed; the origins of these remain unclear (fig. S26). On further cooling, the material crystallizes, with spherulites nucleating from the centers of the noted radial defect patterns. During cooling (2°C min−1), two crystalline spherulite forms (denoted Cr1and Cr2inFig. 2D) are observed. Cr1can be isolated by either very slow cooling (0.2°C min−1) or by annealing the mixed spherulites [heating (2°C min−1) from 20°C followed by isothermal anneal at 40°C] (fig. S27, A and B), leading to plate-like crystallites as observed through scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (fig. S27, C and D). Because of the faster growth rate of Cr2, the ratio of Cr2relative to Cr1increases at a faster cooling rate (figs. S28A and S29A), although when quenched, crystallization can be suppressed to result in a short-lived metastable N phase, which eventually crystallizes (fig. S30). Overall, the IEG-compatible monomer prefers to form thermodynamically stable crystalline phases, with a metastable N observable in the undercooling window for crystallization. The balance between thermodynamically favorable crystalline order and its associated kinetic barrier to formation is a recurrent feature of assembly across this family of precise mesogenic oligomers.

(A) Chemical structure and schematic representation ofP1. (B) DSC trace ofP1measured at a cooling/heating rate of 2°C min−1, highlighting the monotropic Iso-N transition followed by crystallization on cooling. If crystallization is prevented by limiting undercooling, then the N-Iso transition is reversibly observed on heating (inset). (CandD) Optical micrographs recorded between crossed polarizers during cooling (2°C min−1) from the Iso melt, demonstrating the (C) metastable N and (D) crystalline forms ofP1. The N phase is characterized by a schlieren texture, while the differing morphologies of the crystalline spherulites suggest two polymorphs. Regions from these two forms are labeled Cr1(encircled by white dotted line) and Cr2, respectively, in (D). a, analyzer, p, polarizer.

Using these monodisperse oligomers, the effect of oligomer length on their phase transitions can be mapped using calorimetric and optical techniques. Similar to the monomer, the mesogenic oligomers exhibit both metastable LC and crystalline phases. The nucleation and growth of these phases are often temporally overlapped, resulting in multimodal peaks in the DSC traces that are challenging to deconvolute and unambiguously assign. In contrast, during in situ cooling in POM, each phase transition can be decoupled from and correlated with its respective optical textures. Therefore, we identify the onset temperature for each transition through direct observation from a time-lapse series of POM images instead of DSC traces. These materials exhibit cycle-to-cycle drift (figs. S31 to S35), which we attribute to the loss of trace solvent or limited thermal fragmentation during sequential heating cycles (section S3, table S2, and fig. S36).

The complete sequence of observed phase transitions fornup to 8 is summarized inFig. 3A. Under slow cooling conditions (2°C min−1in ~5-μm cells), only the formation of a crystalline (Cr) phase is observed (with the exception ofP3). Both the crystallization temperatures (Tc) and melting temperatures (Tm; calculated from DSC traces) increase sharply fromP1toP2(fig. S37). Subsequent increases fromP2toP8for bothTcandTmare comparatively modest. Forn≥ 4,Tmreaches an asymptotic value of ~140°C, which is similar to that of a polymer (n> 40) synthesized using the same monomer through uncontrolled polymerization (fig. S38). At faster cooling rates (20°C min−1), the slower nucleation and/or growth rate and higher thermal hysteresis of Cr phases reveal metastable N phases (figs. S39 to S44). TheTIso-Nmeasured at 20°C min−1increases fromP1toP2, and then becomes oligomer-length invariant forn≥ 2 (fig. S45). This invariance is unusual, asTIso-Nis predicted to increase rapidly with oligomer length (TIso-N−1∝n−1for a rigid rodlike polymer) and only approach a plateau at large molecular weights (14,33–35). While these N phases all ultimately crystallize, understanding these N phases can provide valuable insight into local intermesogen geometry and therefore crystallization behavior. The fast cooling rate (20°C min−1) was used instead of quenching, as this rate is readily accessible using most controlled heating stages and reduces variability associated with heat transfer depending on sample size and geometry.

(A) Onset transition temperatures for N and Cr phases of the oligomers during cooling from the Iso melt at both slow (2°C min−1) and fast (20°C min−1) cooling rates. All transition temperatures are derived from POM during cooling of a thin sample (~5 μm). The phase transitions in brackets denote a monotropic Iso-N transition, which is observable if crystallization is incomplete atTIso-N. The Cr phase here describes local crystallinity on the mesogen length scale. (BandC) Optical micrographs ofP3recorded between crossed polarizers during cooling (10°C min−1) from the Iso melt, demonstrating (B) the formation of an N phase alongside Cr spherulites (example of small nuclei indicated by dotted circle) and (C) an N-N transition indicated by a rapid change in birefringence color. (D) Temperature-dependent bulk effective viscosity ofP3measured at a shear rate of 10 s−1during cooling (10°C min−1). The viscosity is an average over three cooling cycles, with the shaded regions indicating the SD between these runs. The dotted lines highlight the changes in viscosity attributed to each phase change inP3.

To probe the nematic phases of these mesogenic oligomers during fast cooling, we focus on the metastable N phases ofP3, as the shorter oligomer length allows for faster coarsening and easier visualization of the N textures. The formation of these N phases can be monitored optically through POM at cooling rates of 10 and 20°C min−1(Fig. 3, B and C, figs. S41 and S46, and movie S1). At these cooling rates, a metastable N phase forms alongside the Cr phase, which eventually grows through the entire N region. Cr nucleation can be completely suppressed by rapid quenching (at a nominal rate of 150°C min−1), stabilizing the N phase at room temperature (fig. S47). POM further reveals a rapid change in the birefringence of the fluid phase at ~80°C for both cooling rates of 10 and 20°C min−1. Sharp changes in N texture have been proposed to arise from a temperature-dependent change in surface alignment (36). However, we also observe an increase in the bulk effective viscosity at a comparable temperature (~80°C) upon cooling from the Iso melt at 10°C min−1(Fig. 3D), suggesting a phase change between two nematic phases (N-N). During cooling under a 10-s−1shear rate, the decrease in viscosity at the Iso-N transition is followed by a marked increase in viscosity (attributed to a subsequent N-N transition) that plateaus upon continued shear. The observed viscosity changes are similar to those reported for a mesogenic dimer with an Iso-N transition, followed by a nematic to twist-bend nematic transition (37). WhenP3is subjected to constant shear stress (20 Pa), the plateau is observed, and the viscosity continues to increase, as the chosen stress is insufficient to align the N phase (fig. S48). Notably, similar to the observed cycle-to-cycle drifts in DSC, shifts inTN-NandTN-Crare observed in the rheological data.

The observed changes in birefringence and viscosity as a function of temperature are consistent with those of an N-N transition. N-N transitions necessitate the presence of an N phase with lower symmetry, of which a modulated N phase (such as a twist-bend nematic) is most likely given the mesogenic oligomer design (4,5,38). A similar change in birefringence indicative of an N-N transition is also observed inP2(fig. S40). Although the textures of the N phases forn≥ 4 coarsen too slowly (relative to crystallization) for the identification of N-N transitions, small peaks in the DSC traces ofn≥ 4 suggest additional phase transitions, possibly those of N phases with lower symmetry. The observation of N phases with lower symmetry is consistent with the phase behavior of mesogenic oligomers adopting an ensemble-averaged bent intermesogen geometry. Despite the uncommon triazole moiety in the linker, these oligomers appear comparable to “classical” mesogenic oligomers with odd parity (methylene or ether) linkers (39,40), which have been demonstrated to exhibit modulated nematic phases (4,22). Gas-phase density functional theory (DFT) calculations ofP2further suggest that a bent intermesogen geometry is favorable, with local energy minima observed at intermesogen bend angles of ~110° and ~155° (fig. S49 and section S4). A recent study of mesogenic dimers forming both twist-bend nematic and B4 phases has demonstrated that the bent intermesogen geometry driving the formation of a nonuniaxial nematic phase can persist when a mesogenic dimer crystallizes (41). In addition, for a homologous series of mesogenic dimers, only dimers with odd parity linkers and therefore a bent intermesogen geometry exhibit the B4 phase (42). Hence, it is likely that the bent ensemble-averaged intermesogen geometry observed in the nematic phase is maintained during crystallization for the mesogenic oligomers studied here. This bent intermesogen geometry of the oligomers is key to rationalizing the formation of supramolecular curvature in their crystalline phases.

When oligomers are cooled slowly (2°C min−1) such that crystallization dominates, the texture under POM differs markedly, asnincreases fromP3toP4(Fig. 4). Short oligomers (n≤ 3) demonstrate classical crystalline spherulites characterized by a Maltese cross extinction pattern, while long oligomers (n≥ 4) exhibit periodic banding of alternating colors divided by dark extinction rings. Longer oligomers exhibit similar optical textures, although the spherulites are smaller and the banding is slightly less concentric forP6andP8. This banded spherulite texture is closer in appearance to those formed by nonmesogenic organic small molecules (43,44) and polymers (45–48) compared to other banded spherulites reported previously in mesogenic systems (49–51). Here, for ease of description, we adopt the nomenclature typically used to describe organic small molecules with similar textures, denoting classical and banded spherulites as “straight” and “twisted” crystals, respectively. We emphasize, however, that unlike typical spherulites composed of small molecules, a straight crystal does not imply that the spherulite is composed of flat, plate-like or needle-like crystallites.

Optical micrographs captured between crossed polarizers of the most common characteristics of the optical texture adopted by the Cr phases ofPn(top row) and their magnified regions (bottom row). Forn≤ 3, straight crystalline spherulites preferentially form, while forn≥ 4, banded spherulites are primarily observed. All micrographs were recorded at room temperature following cooling (2°C min−1) from the Iso melt, except those ofP1, which were cooled at 2°C min−1to room temperature from the Iso melt and subsequently annealed at 40°C for 20 min.

Figure 4highlights an apparent dividing line between predominantly straight and predominantly twisted crystals betweenP3andP4. However, we note that spherulites of the monomer and short oligomers (n≤ 3) display banding under certain experimental conditions, while one of the long oligomers (n= 4) displays features of straight crystals. InP2, a small number of banded spherulites form by isothermal crystallization when quenched to 47° to 52°C (fig. S50).P3displays multiple types of banded textures during the initial stages of spherulite growth: Some of the banding is periodic and similar in appearance to that in other oligomers, while other banded regions are disordered or aperiodic (fig. S51). Aperiodicity and other distortions to the periodicity of banded spherulites have been attributed in polymeric and small-molecule systems to confinement effects (52) or bending deformations of the microstructure (43). In addition, given that forP3, aperiodic banding is only observed during cooling (instead of during isothermal crystallization), the aperiodic banding may arise due to temperature dependence of the banding periodicity. In this study, we focus on the periodic banded structures ofP3. The proportion of these banded spherulites (relative to straight crystals) can be altered by tuning the isothermal crystallization temperature (fig. S52). In contrast,P4forms predominantly banded spherulites with regions of straight crystals, often at the centers of banded spherulites (fig. S53). Rather than a sharp divide existing betweenP3andP4, the balance between straight and twisted crystals shifts as oligomer length increases, with long oligomers favoring twisted structures.

By examining freeze-fractured spherulites via SEM, we directly visualize that the optical textures in these oligomers arise from microstructures with bend and twist deformations. InFig. 5, the characteristic optical texture forP2toP4is compared to the microstructure. Unlike the flat, plate-like crystallites ofP1(fig. S27, C and D) and typical straight crystals composed of small molecules, the straight crystals ofP2andP3exhibit bent and scrolled sheets with substantial internal curvature (Fig. 5, G and H). In addition, the freeze-fracture process results in radial fracture patterns (Fig. 5, D and E). In contrast, the twisted crystals ofP4exhibit ridges and troughs (Fig. 5F), which propagate through the bulk of the sample (Fig. 5I) and directly correlate to the bands observed in POM. The ridges display regions of right- and left-handed coiling coexisting within each spherulite (fig. S54). This morphology is most consistent with a twisted ribbon–like building block, where the ridges trace the thin edges of the ribbons. This type of ribbon has been observed across a large range of materials, including bent-core liquid crystals (helical nanofilament phase) (8,53), small-molecule twisted crystals (43,54), and double ring–banded spherulites of biaxial semicrystalline polymers (55,56). The SEM micrographs ofP6andP8banded spherulites similarly reveal a twisted ribbon–like morphology (fig. S55). However, the periodic ridges and troughs are more difficult to visualize in the SEM micrographs ofP8. The formation of scrolled sheets, such as those observed inP2andP3, is comparatively unusual but has been observed in semicrystalline polymer systems such as the γ-phase of poly(vinylidene fluoride) (47,48). However, because of the low molecular weight and high stiffness of these mesogenic oligomers compared to standard polymeric systems, the mechanisms driving the formation of these structures (57) are likely to differ from those in polymers.

(AtoC) Optical micrographs recorded at room temperature between crossed polarizers of the most common optical textures exhibited by (A)P2, (B)P3, and (C)P4when cooled at 2°C min−1from the Iso melt. (D) Top-down and (G) cross-sectional SEM micrographs of a straight crystalline spherulite formed byP2, indicating the formation of scrolled sheets. (E) Top-down and (H) cross-sectional SEM micrographs of a straight crystalline spherulite ofP3annealed at 100°C, indicating a radial fracture pattern and scrolled sheets similar to those in (D) and (G). (F) Top-down and (I) cross-sectional SEM micrographs of banded spherulites formed byP4.

Elucidating the mechanism behind the transition between scrolled sheets and twisted ribbons requires understanding the oligomer packing at the molecular length scale, which can be probed directly through x-ray scattering.Figure 6Adisplays the length dependence of the azimuthally integrated scattering pattern forP1toP8.P1toP4were measured at 30°C during in situ cooling at an effective rate of 2°C min−1from the Iso melt (figs. S56 to S59), whileP6andP8were measured at room temperature after ex situ cooling from the Iso melt at a rate of 2°C min−1. The methodology for the in situ cooling x-ray experiment and the extraction of peak positions from the azimuthally integrated one-dimensional (1D) scattering pattern is shown in section S5 and figs. S60 to S67.

(A) Azimuthally integrated 1D x-ray scattering profiles ofP1toP8, indicating both the in-plane and out-of-plane orders. The scattering peaks associated with out-of-plane order on the oligomer and mesogen length scales are marked by the purple and orange dotted lines, respectively.P1toP4were measured at 30°C during in situ cooling from the Iso melt at an effective rate of 2°C min−1, whileP6andP8were measured at room temperature after ex situ cooling (2°C min−1) from the Iso melt. (B) Schematic showing the transition from nonintercalated to intercalated Sm ordering, usingP2andP4as respective examples, as the oligomer length increases while maintaining crystalline order on the mesogen length scale. Select oligomers are highlighted in pink to emphasize the difference between nonintercalated and intercalated ordering. (C) Comparison of thed-spacing corresponding to the first-orderqoreflection with a predicted molecular length of the oligomers. The close match suggests that the average molecular axis is normal to thea-bplane of the unit cell shown in (B). Exp., experimental.

Within the mesogen-mesogen plane (thea-bplane as drawn inFig. 6B),P1andP2display a high degree of crystalline order, indicated by a large number of sharp peaks in the high-qregime. BeyondP2, the peaks broaden with fewer higher-order reflections, indicating that the degree of order decreases with increasing oligomer length. Similar behavior is observed in the low-qregime, which describes the periodicity along thecaxis. Here, two length scales can be ascertained, described respectively byqmandqo(corresponding length scales tabulated in table S3). Theqmpeaks represent ordering on the length scale of the end-to-end distance of an individual monomer (dm). The primaryqmpeak and its higher-order reflections (orange lines inFig. 6A) are nearly invariant with oligomer length, indicating crystallization with strong periodicity on the length scale of each monomer. Conversely,qo(purple lines) is correlated to the total length of the oligomer, as the associatedd-spacing (do) scales linearly with the number of mesogens (Fig. 6C) and matches the estimated molecular contour length (section S6, tables S4 and S5, and fig. S68). This linear scaling demonstrates that rather than exhibiting chain folding (which characterizes the crystallization of flexible polymers) (58,59), the oligomers adopt an extended chain conformation while retaining a bent intermesogen geometry.

As oligomer length increases, the degree of layer-like ordering on the oligomer length scale decreases, shown by a reduction in the number of higher-orderqopeaks fromP2toP4. OnlyP2andP3exhibit clear higher-order reflections ofqo. InP2, the high intensity of the first-orderqmpeak (which coincides with 2qo) relative toqoreflects a strongly ordered lattice where the primary electron density periodicity is on the mesogen length scale (60). Forn≥ 3, theqocorrelation and its higher-order reflections become extremely weak relative toqm. The presence of these two length scales in the x-ray scattering pattern, with strong periodicity forqmand weaker correlation forqo, extends toP6andP8(fig. S69).

On the basis of this analysis, we propose a structural picture for the oligomers (Fig. 6B). At the mesogen (monomer) scale, the ordering is crystalline.P1, composed of only one monomer unit, is best described as a classical small-molecule crystal (with periodicity in all three dimensions) with individual plate-like crystallites forming aP1spherulite (fig. S27, C and D). This mesogen-scale ordering is present regardless of oligomer length, although the broadening of peaks in the high-qregime (reflecting in-plane crystalline order) forn≥ 3 indicates that the degree of periodicity on the mesogen scale reduces with increasing length. On the oligomer scale, the large number of higher-order peaks forqoinP2and (to a lesser extent)P3indicates nonintercalated (or “monolayer”) Sm ordering (61), in which layers of dimers or trimers are stacked along their long axis.

In long oligomers (n≥ 4), the higher-order peaks ofqoare no longer distinguishable, indicating that long oligomers do not neatly stack into layers. Instead, we propose that long oligomers adopt an intercalated Sm ordering (61,62). A schematic for this arrangement, with select oligomers colored pink to highlight the intercalation, is illustrated inFig. 6B. Here, the oligomers are offset randomly with each other, and instead of representing a layer spacing,qorepresents the short-range correlation due to the length of these rigid oligomeric rods, analogous to the “core-core” correlation length observed in discotic columnar phases (63–65). Instead of an abrupt transition from nonintercalated to intercalated Sm ordering, it is likely that as the oligomer lengthens, the Sm layers become more disordered until individual layers can no longer be defined. The transition is further supported by the appearance of a weak scattering peak comparable to the length of the dimer (qd) inP6andP8(figs. S66 and S67), which is not present inP3andP4. This correlation, previously reported for mesogenic trimers and tetramers in uniaxial or twist-bend nematic phases (22,66), indicates packing that allows for increased periodicity of one bent “unit.” We note that the values ofqdfor bothP6andP8are larger thanqoforP2, asqoadditionally accounts for end group interactions, any interlayer distance between nonintercalated Sm layers, and possible out-of-plane tilt of the mesogen (66).

Similar to the optical texture, the x-ray scattering patterns of these oligomers are strongly dependent on the processing conditions. Notably, for bothP3andP4, when melt recrystallized from the quenched state, the higher-order reflections ofqobecome more numerous and well defined (fig. S70), reflecting more defined Sm layers at the oligomer length scale. Despite the presence of higher-order reflections, clear long-range crystalline structures cannot be observed in the optical and SEM micrographs of the recrystallizedP4sample (fig. S71). Thus, we conclude that crystallization kinetics play an important role in defining the resultant order, and we consider the intercalated Sm ordering inn≥ 4 under cooling (2°C min−1) to be a kinetically trapped Cr phase. This reduction of ordering as oligomer length increases is consistent with calorimetric data. Most notably, the specific (mass-normalized) enthalpy of the melting peak, which approximates the lattice enthalpy per mesogen, decreases with increasing oligomer length and ultimately plateaus atn= 6, at which the specific melting enthalpy is similar to the uncontrolled polymer (fig. S37A). The decreasing enthalpy indicates a reduction in the packing efficiency, as the inclusion of each additional mesogen results in, on average, a lower lattice energy per mesogen.

This reduction in packing efficiency is supported by the initial increase inTmwithn, followed by a plateau fromn= 4 (fig. S37C). Typically, theTmof an oligomer increases with oligomer length (67), only reaching a plateau corresponding to the onset of chain folding, in which caseTmis correlated with the lamella thickness. In contrast, although the oligomers in this study are fully extended and far from the chain folding regime, their trend inTmplateaus atn= 4. This behavior is consistent with the change in local crystalline packing with oligomer length. For oligomers with predominantly nonintercalated Sm ordering (n≤ 3), if we consider a single Sm layer as a 2D crystal, then the chain ends, which effectively serve as defects, are excluded from the crystals. Following this model, the increase in oligomer length and, accordingly, crystal thickness will increase crystalline stability, resulting in a higherTm. However, in the proposed intercalated Sm order for the longer mesogenic oligomers, the defects are incorporated within the crystallites, causingTmto plateau. Any increase inTmwith oligomer length is additionally moderated by the reduction in the enthalpy of crystallization per mesogen. As a result, the longer oligomers approach the melting behavior of the polymer analog. The transition from nonintercalated and intercalated Sm ordering is further manifested in the crystallization rates of the mesogenic oligomers (figs. S28, B and C, and S29B). Nucleation of spherulites forn≤ 3 is slow compared to that forn≥ 4. In contrast, the growth rate decreases with oligomer length, as a result of the slower diffusion rate and a reduced crystallization driving force in longer oligomers. Combined, these two factors, namely slow nucleation for nonintercalated Sm ordering and decreasing growth rate with oligomer length, lead to an anomalously slow overall crystallization rate forP3.

Through understanding the ensemble-averaged oligomer conformation and the mesogen- or oligomer-level packing within these Cr phases, we can examine the origins of the bending and twisting that drive the hierarchically self-assembled microstructures ofPn. Although these microstructures and optical textures most resemble those of bent and twisted polymeric morphologies, the mechanisms proposed for polymers do not apply neatly to the mesogenic systems studied here. The most common theory for twisting in polymers, proposed by Keith and Padden (57), involves surface stresses induced by chain folding at a tilt relative to the growth plane. However, the mesogenic oligomers here are fully extended and do not adopt the chain folding of the Keith-Padden model. Instead, for mesogenic systems with an ensemble-averaged bent intermesogen geometry, the driving force for deformation is directly correlated with the bent shape of the molecule.

The most widely observed deformation mode arising from a bent intermesogen geometry is the saddle-splay deformation, which results in Gaussian curvature and macroscopic twisting. For bent-core mesogens assembled into a strongly stratified system, when the projections of the two “arms” onto the layer midplane are mismatched, the layers become frustrated (68,69). This frustration can then be relieved locally by a saddle-splay deformation. However, given that a system with saddle-splay curvature cannot uniformly fill 3D space (8), a higher-order macroscopic deformation is required, leading to a range of twisted morphologies (70,71). In an achiral system such as the oligomers studied here, the twist deformation leads to spontaneous symmetry breaking, causing the formation of (locally) homochiral domains (fig. S54) (10,68,72,73). While the structural model becomes more complex with the inclusion of multiple kinks in a molecule, this saddle-splay deformation has been used to account for spontaneous chirality in flexible trimeric systems (10,72) and is likely to be the mechanism driving the formation of twisted ribbons here.

Within the banded spherulites here, to satisfy the requisite geometry for a saddle-splay deformation, the average mesogen director must be aligned or slightly tilted relative to the layer normal and therefore perpendicular to the spherulite growth direction [schematic of mesogen alignment and saddle-splay curvature shown inFig. 7 (A and C)] (42,68,69). The mesogen alignment relative to the growth direction was verified through an x-ray micromapping experiment (with a microfocused x-ray beam of dimensions 25 μm by 2.5 μm). Through analyzing the spatially resolved 2D x-ray scattering patterns of aP4spherulite, we find that the long axis of the unit cell (dminFig. 6B) is aligned along the spherulite growth direction, suggesting that the mesogens, on average, lie tangentially to each spherulite (Fig. 7Aand fig. S72). This orientation is exemplified in the 2D scattering patterns (Fig. 7A, inset), in which the scattering vectors corresponding toqmpoint perpendicular to the spherulite growth direction. This mesogen alignment, in combination with the observed morphology in SEM, correlates well with a twisted ribbon arising from saddle-splay deformation (Fig. 7C).

(AandB) Local x-ray scattering pattern measured with a microfocused x-ray beam, demonstrating the mesogen alignment relative to the growth direction of the spherulite in (A)P4and (B)P2. (CandD) Schematic showing the crystalline organization of the oligomers within (C) a twisted ribbon and (D) a scrolled sheet. While twisted ribbons originate from a saddle-splay deformation (leading to Gaussian curvature), the scrolled system exhibits cylindrical curvature with oligomers aligned radially to the scroll.

Next, we aim to elucidate howP2andP3pack into structures with cylindrical curvature. While cylindrical structures have been primarily reported for rigid bent-core mesogens (74–79), as well as calamitic (nonbent) mesogens in organic solvents (80), Oikawaet al.(81) have reported nanocylinder formation in a family of flexible mesogenic trimers, which the authors postulate to arise from the helical rotation of a Sm phase around its layer normal. To examine whether this model can be applied here to the local orientation of mesogenic oligomers in scrolled lamellae and nanocylinders, we performed x-ray scattering experiments using a microfocused beam on a straight crystalline spherulite ofP2(similar to those performed inP4) and confirmed that, similar to the banded systems, the average mesogen orientation is perpendicular to the spherulite (and cylinder) growth direction (Fig. 7Band fig. S73). Hence, the alignment of the mesogens is either tangential or radial to the scrolled cylinders (fig. S74) and therefore incompatible with the structural model proposed by Oikawaet al., for which the mesogens must align closely to the long axis of the nanocylinders. For a highly ordered nonintercalated Sm system in a curved cylinder, tangential alignment is unlikely, as it would necessitate substantial bend deformation that can only be relieved by a nonuniform layer thickness (82). In comparison, bending in a radial alignment allows the layer thickness to remain constant, and stress can be further relaxed through interlayer slippage, which occurs readily for Sm systems under shear stress (82–84). This more favorable conformation, which corresponds to the structural picture previously postulated for rigid bent-core nanocylinders (74,75), is illustrated in the schematic inFig. 7D.

Adopting a scrolled morphology (cylindrical curvature) necessitates a bending deformation, which is unfavorable for an intercalated Sm system. In the geometry proposed inFig. 7D, the bending associated with cylindrical curvature leads to a substantial amount of splay, which increases with the Sm layer thickness (80,82). In the nonintercalated Sm phase, the stress can be relieved by slippage between layers, although slippage in more ordered Sm phases (with a higher level of registry between layers), such as SmBphases, results in an additional energy penalty (82). In the case of intercalated Sm phases, registry between monomer layers is enforced by the intercalation. As a result, bending stress can only be relieved through splay or the introduction of dislocations, thereby incurring a higher elastic cost. Thus,P2andP3, which primarily adopt nonintercalated Sm ordering, are able to support a bending deformation, while the long oligomers with intercalated Sm ordering favor the formation of a twisting saddle-splay curvature.

Thus, here, the factors that select either Gaussian or cylindrical curvature can be attributed to the oligomer length-dependent degree of ordering. The rules that determine whether Gaussian or cylindrical curvature is adopted are typically referred to as “shape selection” rules. In macroscopic materials that deform by design, such as programmed hydrogels and liquid crystal elastomers, the choice of curvature is associated with geometric parameters, such as ribbon thickness or width (85–88). Here, the curvature adopted by the oligomers results from the interplay between a bent intermesogen geometry and the ordering on the oligomer length scale (nonintercalated versus intercalated Sm ordering). Besides a favorable relaxation mechanism caused by interlayer slippage, the formation of heliconical layered nanocylinders instead of helical microfilaments can be encouraged by a smaller core-chain bend angle in chiral rigid bent-core mesogen systems (74,75). For the mesogenic oligomers here, estimates of the intermesogen bend angles usingqmsuggest that the intermesogen bend angle varies with oligomer length, although potential out-of-plane tilt of the mesogens limits quantitative comparison of bend angles (fig. S75). The combination of molecular-level curvature (defined by intermesogen bend angle) and oligomer length scale ordering (nonintercalated/intercalated Sm) enables a previously unreported shape selection mechanism to direct the supramolecular curvature of the self-assembled microstructure (Gaussian/cylindrical).

In this study, we have synthesized monodisperse mesogenic oligomers of precise length via an IEG strategy. By analyzing a series of mesogenic oligomers with increasingn, we have elucidated their length-dependent assembly into crystalline and metastable LC phases. Broadly, these oligomers form spherulites with in-layer crystalline ordering, where these layers stack into sheets with macroscopic curvature to form assemblies of scrolls (in short oligomers) and twisted ribbons (in long oligomers). This oligomer length-dependent morphology appears to arise from differences in Sm ordering on the length scale of the oligomer. Short oligomers strongly organize into Sm layers, allowing the layer slippage necessary to support a bending deformation, while long oligomers adopt an intercalated Sm ordering and undergo a twist deformation.

Through this study, we examined the role of length and intermesogen geometry on assemblies of mesogenic oligomers. However, because most oligomers in our study have an even number of mesogens, the effects of odd versus even parity remain unclear. Notably,P3exhibits unique morphologies not observed in the other oligomers; additional studies on the assembly of mesogenic oligomers with odd parity would be of interest. In conjunction, computational studies would allow us to directly examine the evolution of molecular geometry with oligomer and linker length as well as the role of linker chemistry, such as the triazole used here. These studies would lead to additional mechanistic insight into the relationship between molecular-level shape and microstructural morphology.

The synthetic scheme developed in this study has allowed us to prepare discrete mesogenic oligomers and enables the study of length-dependent effects in mesogenic oligomers. Extending beyond this relatively simple homooligomeric system, this synthetic strategy is easily amenable to more functional mesogenic cores, such as compounds used for organic electronics, and precise sequence-defined oligomers with multiple monomers. Thus, this approach will both serve as a flexible testbed to understand the assembly of mesogenic oligomers and provide a path toward designer mesogenic materials.

All chemicals, unless mentioned specifically in the synthetic schemes, were purchased commercially and used without further purification. Detailed synthetic methodology and characterization data, such as1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), are provided in section S1.

DSC was performed using a TA Discovery differential scanning calorimeter (TA, Discovery DSC 2500). Samples were deposited into aluminum DSC pans (TA, Tzero pans), hermetically sealed, and subsequently pinholed to allow for active nitrogen flow. During the DSC heating/cooling cycles, which were carried out at 2°C min−1unless specified explicitly, the sample was maintained under a nitrogen environment to mitigate thermal degradation. To analyze the degradation behavior after DSC, the pan was subsequently submerged in CDCl3to dissolve the sample for1H NMR. Enthalpy and peak temperature associated with each transition were calculated through the TRIOS software.

1H NMR was performed using a 500-MHz NMR spectrometer (Bruker), while13C NMR was performed at 126 MHz. All NMR spectra were performed in CDCl3with the spectra referenced using the solvent peaks (residual CHCl3for1H NMR). Because of the number of protons in mesogenic oligomers, the relative integrals of peaks in1H NMR were very sensitive to small errors, which might arise due to the presence of impurities or differences caused by phasing or baseline corrections. Thus, the predicted ratios of protons in these mesogenic oligomers from1H NMR reported in section S1 can deviate from the theoretical ratio, especially for methylene protons on the linker and tail chains.

GPC was measured at a flow rate of 1 ml min−1using a Shimadzu GPC system equipped with a refractive index detector (RID-20A). The mobile phase consisted of tetrahydrofuran doped with 2 vol % of ethanol to limit peroxide formation. To characterize the molecular weight distribution of the oligomers, the oligomers were passed through two GPC columns (PSS 10000 A SDV) in series, and the elution times were compared to those of monodisperse polystyrene (PS) standards. However, the molecular weight calculated relative to PS resulted in a substantial overestimation of the molecular weight, likely due to the relative stiffness of the mesogenic oligomers compared to the styrenic analog. The theoretical molecular weight (Mtheo) can be related to the experimental peak molecular weight (Mpeak) through a combination of the Fox-Flory and Mark-Houwink equations (13),KPSMpeakaPS=KOMtheoaO, whereKPS,aPS,KO, andaOare the Mark-Houwink coefficients for the PS calibrants and mesogenic oligomers, respectively. A linear fit betweenlnMpeakandlnMtheoallows us to derive combinations of Mark-Houwink coefficients that convert the measured molecular weight relative to PS to that specific to the mesogenic oligomers. The calibrated molecular weight distributions, along with their calculated dispersity values, are shown in fig. S22 and table S1.

High-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS) was performed using a liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (Agilent, 6230 Time-of-Flight LC/MS 1260 LC) system using electrospray ionization with positive ionization mode solvents (1:1 mixture of acetonitrile and water with 0.1% formic acid). Because the oligomers were insoluble in the available chromatography solvents, HRMS was only performed on compounds or fragments easily soluble in the acetonitrile/water mixture.

POM was performed in transmission mode under a bright-field configuration using an upright optical microscope (Zeiss, Axioscope A1), equipped with 5× (EC Epiplan 5×/0.13 HD), 10× (EC Epiplan Neofluar 10×/0.25 HD DIC), 50× (EC Epiplan 50×/0.75), and a long working distance 50× (LD Epiplan Neofluar 50×/0.55 DIC) objectives. In situ heating/cooling was performed using a controlled heating stage (Linkam FTIRSP600 equipped with Linkam T95PE) placed on top of the sample stage with active cooling with liquid nitrogen used when required (Linkam, LNP95). Samples requiring long periods of heating (for example, in very slow cooling cycles) were placed in a nitrogen atmosphere to limit oxidation. For measurements performed with in situ heating/cooling, the microscope configuration deviated slightly from standard Köhler illumination, as the additional height of the heating stage precluded the appropriate positioning of the condenser.

The glass sandwiches in which the mesogenic oligomers were imaged were prepared as follows: A suspension of monodisperse silica beads (Sigma-Aldrich; 5.16 ± 0.15 μm in diameter as measured by Beckman Coulter Multisizer III by the supplier) in water was diluted into ultraviolet (UV) glue (UV curable resin for protective coatings from Sigma-Aldrich, part 900156) to yield a suspension of silica beads in UV glue. Small amounts of the silica/glue were deposited onto the corners of a cover slip before a second cover slip was placed on top. The sample was gently compressed to form a thin layer between the cover slips and reduce clumping by the silica beads. The sandwich was then cured by a UV lamp (MelodySusie UV Gel Nail Polish Dryer DR-301C or Thorlabs M365L3 UV LED) for a minimum of 10 min, before being dried in an oven (90°C for >1 hour) to remove the residual water in the glue. The mesogenic oligomer sample was subsequently melted and wicked into the glass sandwich by capillary forces. This procedure is illustrated in fig. S25. To achieve thinner cells, samples were melted and gently compressed between two cover slips. While this method led to thinner samples that allowed the texture to be more easily visualized (especially for long oligomers), an accurate and consistent thickness could not be maintained. This method was used to prepare theP4sample shown inFig. 5Cto better visualize the banding. In contrast,P2andP3inFig. 5 (A and B), respectively, were sandwiched in 5-μm spaced cells.

Crystallization kinetics were determined from time-lapse POM images ofP2throughP8during cooling (2°C min−1) andP1during cooling (both 2 and 20°C min−1) from the Iso melt. Crystallization kinetics were quantified through the parameters of fractional crystallized area and normalized crystallized area as a function of the difference between crystallization onset temperature and the temperature of each frame (Tnucleation–T).Tnucleationwas determined from a time-lapse series of POM images during cooling (either 2° or 20°C min−1), depending on the cooling rate of the crystallization kinetics data. ForP1,Tnucleationwas defined as the crystallization onset temperature of Cr1, the crystalline form with the higher nucleation temperature. Here, we define fractional crystallized area as the crystallized area divided by the area of the microscope field of view (excluding holes) and normalized crystallized area as the crystallized area divided by the number of nuclei within the microscope field of view. Crystallization kinetics were also quantified by the radial growth rate of nonimpinged spherulites (spherulites with boundaries that do not touch adjacent spherulites or the edges of the microscope field of view) as a function ofTnucleation–T. The radial growth rate was determined by the change per time step in the effective radius calculated from the area of a spherulite. For radial growth rate only,Tin the parameterTnucleation–Twas defined as the average between the initial and final temperatures of each time step. ForP2throughP8, the crystallized area of each frame was determined through a MATLAB algorithm by applying a brightness threshold to binarize the image, segmenting the binary image, excluding segments below an area threshold, and summing the area of all segments. For radial growth rate calculations, the area of each spherulite was determined from the segmented binary image. ForP4throughP8, due to the relatively low linear birefringence of the spherulites and the dark disclination lines within the spherulites due to their banded texture, a low brightness threshold was applied to binarize the image. Because of this low brightness threshold, the crystallized area is overestimated forP4throughP8. ForP1, due to the difficulty of distinguishing crystalline spherulites from the surrounding N phase and further distinguishing Cr1from Cr2, the crystallized areas were determined by hand in ImageJ by approximating each crystallized region with the polygonal selection tool.

X-ray scattering in both the small-angle (SAXS) and wide-angle (WAXS) configurations was performed using a benchtop x-ray beamline system (Xenocs, Xeuss 3.0) equipped with a high-intensity Cu Kαx-ray source and a 2D detector system (DECTRIS, EIGER2 R 1M pixel 2D). All measurements were conducted in the “high resolution” configuration, which corresponds to a beam size of 0.3 mm by 0.3 mm. In situ heating/cooling was performed using a controlled heating stage (Linkam HFSX equipped with Linkam T95-S) with active cooling with liquid nitrogen used when required (Linkam, LNP96-S). Although the detector position was calibrated before each measurement using the (100) reflection of a lanthanum hexaboride (LaB6) standard (d-spacing = 4.157 Å) (89), any difference in the calibrant and sample plane could result in errors. To ensure that theqvalues between each measurement are comparable, all measurements were internally calibrated by aligning the most prominent scattering peak of the polyimide substrate to an internal reference position. Detailed description of this calibration process is delineated in section S5.

Samples for x-ray scattering were prepared by either ex situ or in situ heat treatment. For in situ heating/cooling experiments, the mesogenic oligomers were enclosed between two layers of polyimide film (Kapton; 8 μm in thickness) using a brass washer (M3; 0.5 mm in thickness). The procedure, illustrated in fig. S60A, is as follows: The washer was glued onto a polyimide sheet using heat-resistant epoxy. After the epoxy had set, the sample was placed within the washer and melted on a hot plate. This process was repeated until the washer was completely filled. Afterward, the second polyimide sheet was glued on top of the sample to completely seal the sample within the cell. The polyimide-enclosed sample was subsequently enclosed within a metal gasket, which can be attached to the Linkam heating stage. For samples prepared ex situ, the mesogenic oligomers were melted between two layers of the polyimide film and then heat treated on a controlled heating stage (Linkam FTIRSP600 equipped with Linkam T95PE) to achieve the targeted morphology.

In situ heating/cooling experiments were performed at an effective rate of 2°C min−1. Given that the exposure time required for comparable intensity differs between detector positions, the actual cooling rate depends on the measurement configuration. In the WAXS configuration, x-ray patterns were collected every 5°C with a collection time of 60 s, resulting in a cooling rate of 3.33°C min−1. Conversely, in the SAXS configuration, data were collected every 10°C with a collection time of 4 min. Accordingly, the cooling rate was increased to 10°C min−1. A sample cooling program is shown in fig. S60 to illustrate the variation of cooling rates to ensure a uniform effective rate. After the measurement, azimuthal integration was performed using the XSACT software (Xenocs). Details about further data processing, including peak picking and substrate subtraction, are presented in section S5.

X-ray scattering micromapping experiments to characterize the mesogen alignment inP2andP4were conducted at the 12-ID beamline of the National Synchrotron Light Source II. A beryllium compound refractive lens was used to focus the x-ray beam, with an energy of 16.1 keV, to a spot size of 2.5 μm (vertical) by 25 μm (horizontal) at the sample position. The sample was mounted ~280 mm from the PILATUS3 900 K-W detector, which was configured for 16.1-keV beam energy with a threshold setting of 11.5 keV. The detector exposure time was set to 2 s per frame forP2and 1 s per frame forP4. Measurements were taken in transmission mode inside a vacuum chamber maintained at a pressure of ~10−3torr. Grid-based mapping was performed with vertical steps of 2.5 μm and horizontal steps of 25 μm. ForP2, a 400 μm–by–400 μm region was measured while a larger 700 μm–by–700 μm region was measured forP4. Details of the processing of these micromapping experiments, in particular, the alignment of micromapped data to optical micrographs, are provided in section S7.

Viscosity as a function of temperature was measured using a cone-plate geometry (25-mm diameter and 103-μm truncation gap) on a rheometer (Anton Paar, MCR501) equipped with a water-cooled heating plate (P-ETD200) and hood (H-ETD200). The sample was first melted onto the bottom plate of the rheometer to ensure good initial contact between the geometry and the plate. Experiments were performed at constant shear rate (10 s−1) or constant shear stress (20 Pa).

SEM was performed using a scanning electron microscope (Quanta 200 FEG Environmental SEM). Freeze-fractured samples were prepared by first sandwiching the oligomer between two glass cover slips and then performing the appropriate heat treatment. Typically, for ease of processing, no spacers were used to prepare these samples, and hence, the thickness of these cells was less controlled relative to those used for optical measurements. The glass cells were dipped into liquid nitrogen to enable separation of the top and bottom glass cover slips with minimal damage to the sample. The freeze-fractured sample was then affixed to a stub using carbon tape and sputtered with iridium (~4 nm; Leica, EM ACE600 Sputter Coater) before imaging.

Conformational energies ofP2were calculated as a function of intermesogen bend angle using DFT. The intermesogen bend angle was defined by the angle between the heavy atoms (C, N, and O) closest to the center of mass of the mesogenic core and triazole ring. Initial structures with bend angles ranging from 90° to 175° (in increments of 5°) were generated by rigidly rotating a nearly linear configuration of theP2dimer. These structures were subsequently relaxed using the universal force field (90) implemented in RDKit (91), using soft harmonic restraints with a force constant of 1 kcal rad−2mol−1to maintain the target bend angle. Using Gaussian 16, each conformer underwent a constrained geometry minimization using the semiempirical PM7 method (92), followed by a DFT geometry minimization at the ωB97XD/6-31G(d,p) level of theory, which has previously been applied to LC systems (93,94). These optimized structures seeded a series of constrained DFT optimizations scanning the bend angle from 90° to 175° to derive the conformational minimum energy landscape ofP2as a function of intermesogen bend angle. Additional calculation details are provided in section S4.

This research used beamline 12-ID of the National Synchrotron Light Source II, a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science User Facility operated for the DOE Office of Science by Brookhaven National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-SC0012704. We acknowledge the use of Princeton’s Imaging and Analysis Center (IAC), which is partially supported by the Princeton Center for Complex Materials (PCCM), a National Science Foundation (NSF) Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC; DMR-2011750). In addition, the quantum chemical calculations and processing of the x-ray scattering micromapping experiments reported here were substantially performed using the Princeton Research Computing resources at Princeton University, which is a consortium of groups led by the Princeton Institute for Computational Science and Engineering (PICSciE) and the Office of Information Technology’s High Performance Computing Center and Visualization Laboratory. We would like to thank R. Priestley for the use of the group’s DSC; Y. Seo for the discussions on thermal characterization; T. White, M. Lerch, and F. Leibfarth for synthetic guidance; J. Goodby and S. Lee for the discussions on phase transitions and morphologies; A. Fergerson for computing support; and J. Cedar and A. Ambrosio for assistance with chemical synthesis and polymer characterization.

Funding:This work was funded by the Department of Energy grant DE-SC0023023 (E.C.D.), the National Science Foundation GRFP (E.C.O.), and the US Department of Energy DE-SC0012704 (P.W.).

Competing interests:The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Data and materials availability:All data relating to this publication are openly available from Princeton DataSpace (DOI:10.34770/7410-bj79). Materials are not subject to any transfer restrictions.