Theranostic nanoparticles (NPs) have been designed for simultaneous therapeutic and diagnostic purposes, thereby enabling personalized cancer therapy andin vivodrug tracking. However, studies thus far have focused on imaging NP tumor accumulation at the macroscopic level and correlating results withex vivohistology. Limited evidence exists on whetherin vivoNP tumor contrast enhancement on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) correlates within vivoNP tumor accumulation at the microscopic level. To address this gap, the purpose of our study was to correlate quantitative MRI estimates of NP accumulation within vivoNP signal quantification as measured through two-photon intravital microscopy (IVM) in an orthotopic murine glioblastoma multiforme model (GBM). To enable multimodal imaging, we designed dual-mode NPs, composed of a carbohydrate-coated magnetic core (Ferumoxytol) as an MRI contrast agent, and a conjugated fluorophore (FITC) for IVM detection. We administered these NPs with or without a conjugated vascular disrupting agent (VDA) to assess its effect on NP delivery to GBM. We correlatedin vivoMRI contrast enhancement in tumors, quantified asT2relaxation time, with IVM fluorescence spatial decay rate. Results demonstrated a significantly lower tumorT2relaxation time and spatial decay rate in tumors targeted with VDA-conjugated NPs compared to unconjugated NPs.Postmortemhistological analyses validated thein vivoobservations. The presented multimodal imaging approach enabled a quantitative correlation between MRI contrast enhancement at the macroscopic level and NP accumulation in the tumor microenvironment. These studies lay the groundwork for the precise evaluation of the tumor targeting of theranostic NPs.

Magnetic resonance imaging and two-photon intravital microscopy metrics were correlated to track Ferumoxytol-based theranostic nanoparticles targeting glioblastoma multiformein vivoat both macroscopic and microscopic levels.

Ferumoxytol is a NP formulation (Feraheme™) which is FDA-approved for the treatment of anemia in patients with chronic kidney disease.10–12It is composed of superparamagnetic iron oxide NPs coated with a semi-synthetic carbohydrate.11Ferumoxytol has been proposed as an MRI contrast agent13,14and was demonstrated to provide negative (dark) contrast enhancement of glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) onT2-weighted MRI scans in patients.15,16Gillet al.demonstrated the activity of an matrix metalloproteinase 14- (MMP14-) cleavable vascular disrupting agent (VDA), azademethylcolchicine, against several tumor types supporting its activation in clinical tumors associated with MMP14 expression.17,18However, the direct effects on tumor vasculature were not shown.

Ansariet al.reported that Ferumoxytol conjugated to azademethylcolchicineviaan MMP14-cleavable linker (Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA) induced significant necrosis in MMP-14 expressing glioblastomas and not normal brain.19Furthermore, Mohantyet al.demonstrated that Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA significantly impaired tumor growth and improved survival of experimental mice.20None of these studies correlated NP-mediated tumor contrast enhancement on MRI within vivoNP tumor accumulation at the microscopic level.

Two-photon intravital microscopy (IVM) is an optical imaging technique designed to study living organismsin vivoat the microscopic level, which can detect specific cells and drug carriers relying on fluorescent molecular probes that are bound to the target.21Recently, IVM has been used to investigate NP interactions within the biological environment,22,23Naumenkoet al.studied biodistribution of PEGylated magnetic NPs in kidney with IVM.24Donget al.employed IVM to study the delivery of therapeutic NPs to the brain in real-time.25Pellowet al.performed simultaneous intravital optical and acoustic monitoring for studying nanobubble extravasation.26Zhanget al.investigated the use of FITC-labeled silicon NPs in a syngeneic orthotopic glioma mouse model to assess their tumor-targeting abilities with IVM.27None of these studies correlate the findings within vivocontrast MRI. Therefore, the purpose of our study was to correlate quantitative MRI estimates of theranostic NP accumulation in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) within vivoNP signal on two-photon intravital microscopy (IVM) in an orthotopic murine GBM model.

Ferumoxytol-FITC and Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA were characterized with transmission electron microscopy (TEM,Fig. 1a). Both NPs exhibited the characteristic morphology of Ferumoxytol (Fig. S1a†), showing dispersed NPs with diameters ranging from 5 to 10 nm. Ferumoxytol-FITC and Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA yielded emission peaks at 521 and 517 nm, respectively, under an excitation wavelength of 480 nm (Fig. 1c). Dynamic light scattering (DLS) and polydispersity index (PDI) demonstrated the variation of the hydrodynamic size following surface functionalization of Ferumoxytol. The unconjugated Ferumoxytol exhibited a size of 25.4 nm (PDI 0.102). Upon conjugation with the sole fluorophore (FITC, Fig. S1b†), the hydrodynamic size of the conjugated Ferumoxytol-FITC coherently increased to 30.6 nm (PDI 0.106). The hydrodynamic diameter of Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA (Fig. S1c†) was estimated as 34.4 nm (PDI 0.151), consistent with the conjugation of a larger molecule (ICT3105) than FITC.

To assess the dual-mode properties of the designed NPs, we conducted a series of phantom tests using both MRI and optical fluorescence techniques. By varying the concentrations of the NPs in dispersion, their performance was evaluated (Fig. 2).

The transverse relaxivities (r2) of Ferumoxytol-FITC and Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA were 65 ± 28 s−1mM−1and 77 ± 14 s−1mM−1, respectively. Their difference was not statistically significant at the 5% significance level. The transverse relaxivity of the bare Ferumoxytol was 88 ± 14 s−1mM−1(Fig. 2a and b). The estimated values of the longitudinal (r1) relaxivities were 1.9 ± 0.4 s−1mM−1and 1.6 ± 0.3 s−1mM−1for Ferumoxytol-FITC and Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA, respectively. Ther1relaxivity of Ferumoxytol alone was 2.6 ± 0.7 s−1mM−1(Fig. S4a and b†). Ferumoxytol-FITC and Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA exhibited a linearly increasing fluorescence intensity with increasing iron concentration, with Pearson correlation coefficients of 0.990 and 0.997, respectively (Fig. 2c and d).

Pre-contrast MRI did not show a significant difference of the tumorT2signal (P> 0.05) between control (pre-Ferumoxytol-FITC) and treatment (pre-Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA) groups (t= 0 h), as expected (Fig. 3a), with a mean tumorT2relaxation time of 69 ± 4 ms and 67 ± 4 ms, respectively (Fig. 3b). At 24 hours after intravenous administration of Ferumoxytol-FITC and Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA, all brain tumors demonstrated hypointense (dark) contrast enhancement on theT2-weighted images, indicating NP accumulation in the tumor. Mice administered with Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA demonstrated a significant (P< 0.05) negative contrast enhancement in the tumor (42 ± 4 ms) compared to tumors of mice injected with Ferumoxytol-FITC (50 ± 5 ms).

IVM enabledin vivoimaging of the tumor microenvironment after intravenous injection of Ferumoxytol-FITC or Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA (Fig. 4). With the laser mode-locked at 920 nm, NPs were imaged through two-photon excitation of FITC, leading to green emission (Fig. 1b). Red fluorescent protein- (RFP-) labeled C6 tumor cells could be detected with a band-pass filter (595/50 nm) in the red spectrum (Fig. 4a).

The vasculature architecture was indirectly observed from the FITC signal of the NPs. The control group (Ferumoxytol-FITC) highlighted typical vasculature (Fig. 4b). Tumors treated with Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA led to a pronounced breakdown of the vascular architecture, observed as structural irregularities or branching tumor vessels and leak of green fluorescent NP signal into the tumor interstitium. Furthermore, withz-stacking, it was possible to observe a more diffused signal of the theranostic NPs compared to the control. In this respect, NP extravasation was quantitatively investigated by analyzing the exponential decay rate of the fluorescent signal from intensity profiles across the blood vessels (Fig. S5a and b†).

The fluorescence spatial decay rate of Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA (0.8 ± 0.4 μm−1) was significantly lower than Ferumoxytol-FITC (1.3 ± 0.6 μm−1), indicating that Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA diffused further away from the blood vessels (Fig. 5a,P< 0.05). The tumorT2-relaxation time (MRI) correlated significantly with the spatial decay rate (IVM) with a positive association between the two variables and a Pearson correlation coefficient of 0.915 (Fig. 5b).

CD31, a marker for endothelial cells was used to identify the blood vessels in the tumor tissue at 24 h after intravenous injection of Ferumoxytol-FITC or Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA. Tumor sections stained with CD31 demonstrated typical vasculature in the former and altered vasculature with fragmented CD31-positive staining and brown particulate in the latter (Fig. 6a). Fluorescence microscopy images of unstained tumor tissue sections demonstrated the presence of diffused FITC signal after administration of Ferumoxytol-FITC and Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA (Fig. 6b). The green fluorescence signal was, on average, 2.6 times higher (P< 0.005) in tumors from mice injected with Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA than in those from mice administered Ferumoxytol-FITC (Fig. 6c).

MMP14-immunostains revealed low MMP14 expression of the healthy brain and strong MMP14 expression of GBM (Fig. S6a†), with fluorescence intensity 6.5 times higher than healthy tissue, on average (Fig. S6b†).

Data showed a strong correlation of quantitative MRI estimates (T2relaxation time) of theranostic NP accumulation in GBM within vivoNP signal on two-photon IVM. The correlation could take advantage of the specific characteristics of two complementary techniques: MRI facilitates the detection of NP accumulations and anatomic soft tissue features, by intensity variations, enabling an easy macroscopic localization within the tissue;34Ferumoxytol was selected as the MRIT2contrast agent due to its status as an FDA-approved NP formulation for the treatment of iron deficiency in patients with anemia.35We used Ferumoxytol off label as an MR contrast agent in pediatric patients and found very limited adverse effects in pediatric patients.36IVM can provide advanced studies of thein vivobiodistribution of NPs with multiple channels and multiplexed images, differentiating between several fluorescent targets at a microscopic level, here exemplified by the tumor cells and NPs. Denket al.highlighted the advantages of two-photon microscopy, including the minimization of tissue autofluorescence, compared to single-photon microscopy, owing to the longer excitation wavelengths (in the near-infrared spectrum) and localized excitation (at the focal point).37For this reason, we hereby chose two-photon excitation with IVM.

The transverse relaxivity (r2) was not significantly affected by the conjugation of the Ferumoxytol surface with either ICT3105 or FITC, when compared to bare Ferumoxytol. In fact, Zhanget al.demonstrated that the transverse relaxivity depends largely on the magnetization of the contrast agent, rather than its surface.38On the other hand, the longitudinal relaxivity (r1) was more strongly affected by the conjugation of FITC and ICT3105. It is known that accessibility of water to the paramagnetic center of the NPs is crucial forT1contrast enhancement,38which was partially hindered by the conjugated molecules. We utilized the similarr2relativities of Ferumoxytol-FITC and Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA for comparison between the treatment and the control groups, within vivoMRI studies.

The optical fluorescence properties were provided by the conjugated FITC, leading to fluorescent NPs with emission peaks in agreement with FITC characteristic peak.39Ferumoxytol-FITC and Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA had slightly larger hydrodynamic diameter than Ferumoxytol, which was ascribed to the FITC conjugation, and the unaltered PDI indicates that NPs did not undergo agglomeration upon the conjugation and washing steps. Together, the magnetic and fluorescence characterizations demonstrated the potential of the conjugated NPs for multiscale dual-mode imaging with MRI and IVM.

Ferumoxytol biodistribution and biosafety have been extensively studied and established in preclinical and clinical trials prior to its approval by the FDA for the treatment of iron deficiency.40Furthermore, clinical studies have investigated Ferumoxytol metabolism and clearance in the liver of healthy adults.41T2-signal of the liver on MR images was back to baseline between 3–11 months after NP administration. Mohantyet al.studied the Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA distribution through longitudinal studies over the course of 2 weeks.20In the present work, we investigated Ferumoxytol delivery to GBM orthotopic tumors.

The accumulation of Ferumoxytol-FITC in brain tumors was ascribed to the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect (passive targeting),42,43yielding only limited NP accumulations within the tumor area, mainly affecting the tumor margins, as visualized with the MRI axial brain slices. Ansariet al.used a combination ofin vivoMRI andex vivohistology, and reported that Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA induced tumor-selective accumulations and tumor necrosis, thus qualifying as a theranostic agent.19Ansariet al.also demonstrated that the MRI tumor contrast enhancement 24 hours after NP administration was higher than that observed 1 hour post-administration.19Therefore, we selected the 24-hour time point for our correlative IVM-MRI studies. Future longitudinal studies could provide further insights into the biodistribution of theranostic NPs and enable the assessment of the IVM-MRI correlation at different timepoints.

MRI alone could not provide mechanistic evidence of the microscopic NP distribution within the brain vasculature and tumor microenvironment. Tissue histology includes fixation, embedding, and sectioning potentially introducing artifacts and, thus, it may not reflect the tissue's true state. The presentedin vivomultimodal imaging approach could correlate results between macroscopic observations and changes in the tumor microenvironment, where IVM enabled the observation of tissues in the native state.

Mohantyet al.demonstrated that Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA significantly impaired growth of GBM and induced apoptosis of GBM-initiating cells. Furthermore, the combination therapy with Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA and temozolomide achieved tumor remission and increased survival of mice by more than two folds, compared to treatment with only temozolomide.20In the present work, IVM could track NP accumulation in tumor as diffused FITC signal in the perivascular regions, indicating NP diffusion through the disrupted endothelial barriers provoked by the VDA. The compromised vascular integrity, hence, facilitated the NP leakage into the surrounding tissue. This observation provided direct evidence of the successful release and action of the active VDA (ICT3105), which was delivered to the tumor and activated by MMP14.

To validate the observations made with IVM within the tumor microenvironment, the extracted brain tissue was processed for histopathological analysis with the CD31 marker for endothelial cells, which was employed for the identification of the blood vessels. Tumor vasculature, following the action of the MMP14-cleavable VDA, showed fragmented and irregular CD31-positive staining together with brown particulate (endothelial cell debris), indicating significant endothelial cell damage and vessel collapse.49These observations validated the findings made with IVM, confirming the impact of VDA on tumor blood vessels and theranostic properties of Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA. The green fluorescence signal from unstained tissue slides of tumor slices confirmed that the increased NP extravasation detected with IVM and lower relaxation times in MRI reflect a larger NP uptake by the tumor. In future experiments, Evans blue (EB) or horseradish peroxidase (HRP) leakage assays could quantify the extent of the blood–brain barrier (BBB) permeability.

Immunohistochemistry results for MMP14-staining proved a strong upregulation of MMP14 in the tumor microenvironment,50and causally validated the targeted action of the theranostic NPs, Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA, towards GBM, with its MMP14-cleavable VDA. Together, the presentedpostmortemanalyses with the CD31 marker and MMP14 staining confirmed the observations made through IVM, thus emphasizing the robustness of the presentedin vivomultimodal correlative imaging approach. In the future, this approach could facilitate the study of the relationship between tumor heterogeneity and the targeting efficacy of theranostic NPs.

We found a strong correlation of quantitative MRI estimates of theranostic NP accumulation in a murine model of GBM within vivoNP signal on IVM. MRI and IVM techniques together allowed one to visualize the fate of NPsin vivoat different scales, attributing a crucial role to dual-mode imaging of nanomedicines, which hereby provided evidence of the successful delivery and activation of the prodrug (VDA). In the future, the presented correlative imaging approach with MRI and IVM could be employed to investigate other theranostic platforms and commercial formulations. Understanding the mechanisms underlying enhanced delivery can provide valuable insights for selecting the most effective diagnostic and therapeutic strategies using theranostic NPs thus facilitating clinical translation.

Ferumoxytol (Feraheme®) was purchased from AMAG Pharmaceuticals. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH), succinimidyl-([N-maleimidopropionamido]-4-ethyleneglycol)ester [SM(PEG)4], sodium carbonate, sodium bicarbonate, ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH), epichlorohydrin, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) were purchased from Fisher Scientific. Diethyl ether, Fmoc-O-tert-butyl-l-tyrosine (Fmoc-Tyr(OtBu)-OH), and triisopropyl silane (TIS) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Colchicine and 1,2-ethanedithiol were obtained from Alfa Aesar and Fluka Analytical, respectively. 2-Chlorotrityl chloride and trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) were purchased from Novabiochem and Fluorochem, respectively.

The Ferumoxytol surface was aminated with epichlorohydrin, as previously described,51with slight modifications: briefly, a mixture of Ferumoxytol (3.5 mgFe per mL), NaOH (2.4 M), and epichlorohydrin (2.5 M) was prepared in distilled water (total volume, 20.5 mL). The dispersion was shaken for 24 h and subsequently filtrated with dialysis (12–14 kDa cutoff) against water for 3 days. The dispersion was then mixed with NH4OH (10 mL) and kept stirring at 37 °C for 24 h. Finally, the dispersion was dialyzed against water for 3 days, leading to amine-functionalized Ferumoxytol (Ferumoxytol-NH2).

Ferumoxytol nanoparticles were conjugated to FITC by adding a FITC solution (1 mg mL−1, DMSO) to Ferumoxytol-NH2in a carbonate–bicarbonate (Na2CO3/NaHCO3) buffer (pH 9) and incubating it at 4 °C for 8 h. The reaction was quenched by adding NH4OH and further incubated for 2 h. Finally, the sample was dialyzed against saline (2 days) to remove excess FITC and NH4OH.

The vascular disrupting agent ICT3105 was synthesized employing a combination of solution and solid phase peptide synthesis methodologies, as previously reported:17,18in brief, azademethylcolchicine, synthesized from amination of colchicine, was conjugated to commercially-available Fmoc-Tyr(OtBu)-OH, followed by selective acidic hydrolysis of the side-chaintert-butyl group and loading onto 2-chlorotrityl-chloride resin. The resin was then used to prepare ICT3105 by Fmoc solid phase peptide synthesis, followed by simultaneous hydrolysis of side-chain protective groups and resin cleavage using a mixture of TFA : TIS : water : 1,2-ethanedithiol (94 : 1 : 2.5 : 2.5, 4 mL per 100 mg resin) at room temperature for 4 h. The solvent was subsequently evaporated, and ICT3105 (Fig. S7†) was precipitated from diethyl ether.

The concentration of iron (Fe) in Ferumoxytol-FITC and Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA solutions was determined using an inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer iCAP 6300 (Thermofisher Scientific, USA). The hydrodynamic sizes of Ferumoxytol, Ferumoxytol-FITC, and Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA were measured with dynamic light scattering (DLS) using a Nanobrook Omni (Brookhaven Instrument, USA). The infrared spectra were collected with a Nicolet iS50 FT/IR Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The optical fluorescence spectra were acquired with a FluoroLog Fluorimeter (Horiba, USA). Transmission electron micrographs were acquired with a Tecnai G2 F20 X-TWIN (FEI, USA) at 200 kV. Ferumoxytol, Ferumoxytol-FITC and Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA were dispersed in Eppendorf tubes with increasing concentrations (0.0625 mM–1 mM); these were scanned on a 7T MRI scanner (Bruker Biospin, Billerica, MA) witht1-w rapid acquisition with relaxation enhancement (RARE) sequence (TR = 1500 ms, TE = 10 ms, FOV = 60 mm × 60, 256 × 256 acquisition matrix),t2RARE sequence (TR = 2200 ms, TE = 21 ms, FOV = 60 mm × 60, 256 × 256 acquisition matrix),t1map variable TR (VTR) saturation recovery sequence (TE = 10 ms, TR = 300, 500, 700, 1000, 1500, 2000, 2500, 4000, and 5500 ms, RARE factor = 2, FOV 60 mm × 60 mm, 256 × 256 acquisition matrix, 2 averages), and a multi-slice-multi-echo (MSME) sequence fort2map (TR = 2200 ms, TE = 7, 14, 21, 28, 35, 42, 49, 56, 63, 70, 77, 84, 91 and 98 ms, FOV 60 mm × 60 mm, 256 × 256 acquisition matrix, 3 averages).T1- andT2maps were generated with ImageJ software. Transverse and longitudinal relaxation rates as a function of NP concentration were plotted and the relaxivities (r1andr2) were estimated from the mono-exponential signal decay using a linear regression analysis. The optical fluorescence properties were studied as a function of iron concentration with the Synergy H1 hybrid reader (BioTek, USA), using diluted dispersions of Ferumoxytol-FITC and Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA (0.0625 mM–1 mM), in a 24-well plate. The excitation and emission windows were set to 490 nm and 520 nm, respectively.

Cell viability was assessed using the CCK-8 assay (Dojindo Laboratories, Japan), following the manufacturer's protocol. Briefly, C6 tumor cells were seeded in 96-well plates (104cells per well) and incubated under standard conditions (37 °C, 5% CO2). The cells were treated with either of the three NP types, Ferumoxytol, Ferumoxytol-FITC, and Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA, at different concentrations (1000, 500, 200, 100, 50, 20, 10, 0 μg mL−1). After 24 h incubation, the CCK-8 reagent was added, and the absorbance was measured at 450 nm using a microplate reader. All experiments were done in triplicates. Cell viability was expressed as a percentage relative to (negative) control, calculated by normalizing absorbance values from treated wells to those of untreated control wells.

The animal experiments were approved by the Administrative Panel on Laboratory Animal Care (APLAC) and conducted according to protocol #24965. 5-Month-old female NSG mice (NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ,n= 8) were housed at room temperature (20–22 °C) with 30–70% humidity, and a 12 h light–dark cycle, with free access to food and water. For tumor cell transplantation into the brain, the mice were anesthetized with isoflurane (3–5% induction, 1–2.5% maintenance) and positioned in a stereotactic frame for precise placement, and the surgery was conducted under sterile conditions. To avoid any intra- and post-operative pain or infection, carprofen (5–20 mg kg−1), sustained-release buprenorphine (1 mg kg−1), cefazolin (20 mg kg−1), and dexamethasone (0.2 mg kg−1) were administered subcutaneously before the surgery. A 3 mm section of the right parietal scalp and bone was removed, and 106tumor RFP-labeled C6 tumor cells were injected at a depth of 1 mm below the brain surface, with intrathecal injection coordinates medial to lateral (M–L): −1.2 to −1.6 mm, and dorsal to ventral (D–V): −2.6 to −3.5 mm. The brain was covered with a glass plate and secured to the skull using an MRI-compatible frame and cyanoacrylate glue.52For recovery, animals were provided with DietGel (ClearH20 Inc., ME, USA) to ensure hydration and nutrition.

All mice underwent MRI on a 7T MR scanner (Bruker Biospin, Billerica, USA) before and at 24 hours after intravenous injection of either Ferumoxytol-FITC (50 mgFe per kg,n= 4) and Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA (50 mgFe per kg,n= 4). Mice were anesthetized with isoflurane (3–5% induction, 1–2.5% maintenance) and placed in a prone position. The anesthetized mice received venous accessviathe tail vein for NP administration. During the imaging session, the body temperature (37 °C) and respiratory rate were constantly monitored. Brain tumors were imaged withT2-weighted fast spin echo (FSE) using a field of view of 2 cm × 2 cm and a slice thickness of 0.5 mm and the following protocol: repetition time (TR): 4500 ms, echo time (TE): 42 ms, flip angleα: 90° andT2multi-slice multi-echo (MSME): TR: 3000 ms, TE: 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, 48, 56, 64, 72, 80, 88 and 96 ms,α: 90°.T2relaxation times were measured to evaluate changes in signal perturbations in the tumor microenvironment post-treatment.

Mice were anesthetized and secured to a custom-built stage to minimize breathing artifact during image acquisition. Images were acquired with a 25× water immersion objective (NA 0.9) on a Leica SP8 2p microscope equipped with a tunable pulsed chameleon infrared multiphoton laser (Coherent, USA) and two high-sensitivity hybrid-PMT (HyD) detectors (Leica, USA). The employed mode-locked excitation wavelength was 920 nm, for the 2P-excitation of FITC and RFP. Two GaAsP photomultiplier tube detectors were employed for detection, with band passes at 525/50 (FITC) and 595/50 (RFP). High-resolutionXYZstack images (1024 × 1024 pixels perZstep) were taken with a step size of 2.5 μm. Fluorescence intensity profiles (525/50) were acquired perpendicularly to the vessels. The decaying signal was fitted with an exponential curve [a·exp(±bx)], and the decay rate (b, μm−1) was recorded.

Mice were euthanized by CO2inhalation followed by cervical dislocation, and the brain was extracted and fixed in 10% formalin, paraffin-embedded, and sectioned at 5 μm. Slides were deparaffinized with xylene and rehydrated. Unstained slides were employed for the fluorescence intensity estimation of FITC within the tumor area. Stained slides with the CD31 marker were employed for blood vessel identification. The sections were counterstained with Giemsa staining. For immunohistochemistry with MMP14 staining, paraffin-embedded healthy and tumor tissue sections from the extracted mouse brains were deparaffinized, rehydrated, and then incubated with a recombinant anti-MMP14 antibody (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), followed by a secondary staining using goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor™ 488 conjugated antibody (Thermo Fisher, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Images were acquired with an optical fluorescence microscope (Keyence BZ-X700 Series, Japan) and the green (FITC filter) fluorescence intensity in the tumor was analyzed with ImageJ.

T2relaxation time distributions (violin plots) of the tumors were calculated as a quantitative measure of tumor contrast enhancement. The Wilcoxon rank-sum test was performed to verify statistically significant difference between the two groups (P< 0.05). For the correlation study, the average value of the decay rates (n= 10 per mouse) were compared between the two groups (Ferumoxytol-FITCvs.Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA) and correlated with the tumorT2relaxation times estimated through contrast MRI, followed by a linear regression fit. The Pearson correlation coefficient was estimated to verify the linear dependence of the fluorescence intensity as a function of the iron concentration and the positive correlation between relaxation time and decay rate. Optical fluorescence analysis of tissues was evaluated with the Student'st-test.

To enable tumor cell localization with IVM, red fluorescent protein (RFP) expressing C6 tumor cells were xenografted into the right parietal lobes of female NOD SCID gamma (NSG) mice (day 0,Fig. 7a), and an MRI-compatible glass window (5 mm diameter) was installed for intravital imaging. The xenografted tumors were allowed to develop for 15 days, followed by a baseline MRI (Fig. 7b). Directly after the baseline MRI, mice were randomized into two groups, which received a single intravenous injection of either the VDA-functionalized NPs (Ferumoxytol-FITC-VDA, 50 mgFe per kg) or Ferumoxytol-FITC (50 mgFe per kg,Fig. 7c). 24 hours later,in vivodual mode imaging was achieved by scanning mice with both MRI (Fig. 7d) and IVM (Fig. 7e), exploiting the superparamagnetic properties of the iron oxide core (T2contrast enhancer) and the conjugated fluorophore (fluorescein-5-isothiocyanate, FITC), respectively. The employed fluorophores, FITC and RFP, were chosen to match the two photomultiplier tube detectors with band passes at 525/50 nm and 595/50 nm, respectively. The combination of the two imaging techniques provided macroscopic (whole tumor) and microscopic (cellular) overview of NP tumor delivery (multiscale imaging). After the imaging sessions, the animals were euthanized, and the tumor tissue was excised for corroborative histological analysis.