Oxygen loss is a common defect type in perovskites which is caused by a low oxygen background pressure during growth. BaBiO3-δthin films are grown by molecular beam epitaxy on SrTiO3-buffered Si(001) substrates. Although activated oxygen is supplied during growth, large amount of oxygen vacancies is created in the thin film depending on the cooldown process. Perovskite structure is obtained when the cooldown process includes an extended period during which activated oxygen is supplied. Another way for inducing the structural transformation is enabled via an ex-situ anneal at molecular oxygen. The transformation into BaBiO3is manifested as reconstructed octahedra based on transmission electron microscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and photoluminescence. Additionally, smaller out-of-plane lattice constant is observed for the perovskite phase supported by X-ray diffraction. Thermal mismatch and multivalency-facilitated tensile strain exerted on the layers by the underlying Si substrates are presented as the driving force behind the creation of oxygen vacancies.

Oxygen loss in perovskite oxides, often caused by low oxygen pressure or strain, poses challenges in thin film growth. Here, the authors use molecular beam epitaxy and controlled cooldown processes to transform BaBiO_(3-δ) thin films into a stable perovskite structure, revealing enhanced structural properties with potential implications for electronic and photonic applications.

Complex oxides have gained much research interest over the past few decades owing to their special properties, which enable a variety of technologies. This includes, but is not limited to, memory applications based on the ferroelectric BaTiO3and PbTiO3, superconducting devices based on K-doped BaBiO3and BaSbO3, and water splitting utilizing the photocatalytic activity of NaTaO31–4. However, the challenging part for unveiling an improved device performance lies in developing high-quality material stacks with intrinsic properties5. Various techniques have been widely applied for growing perovskite oxides with high quality, such as physical vapor deposition (PVD), pulsed laser deposition (PLD), sputtering, and molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). High-quality thin films with intrinsic properties have been developed by using conventional MBE, which is an important technique for the growth of perovskites with improved crystallinity and high purity. For instance, thin films of BaSnO3were reported to reach mobilities as high as those of the single crystals only when grown by MBE6.

MBE utilizes an ultra-high vacuum environment to enable the long free path necessary for the molecular beams heading toward the substrate and for the electron beam required for in-situ reflection high-energy electron diffraction (RHEED)7. Upon optimizing the co-deposition parameters, the epitaxial growth proceeds in a controlled fashion thanks to the lack of high-energy species. However, one of the widely known challenges for conventional MBE is the complete oxidation of certain cations6. Oxygen needs to be activated to form dissociated oxygen radicals, which reach higher reactivity not possible with molecular oxygen. This is fundamentally a requirement for adsorption-controlled growth of BaBiO3,where a volatile element such as bismuth has to be provided in large quantities in the presence of an aggressive oxidizing agent8. Applying a suitable oxidant environment can tackle the issue of the low sticking coefficient of bismuth; however, the formation of oxygen vacancies is still an issue because it also depends on the residual strain energy built up within the thin film9. Loss of oxygen can transform the perovskite into a sub-stoichiometric oxide, with different properties, which is common among complex oxides with a multivalent cation10.

SrCoO(3n-1)/n, LaNiO2, and LaCoO3-δare examples of oxygen sponge materials that exhibit reversible intercalation/deintercalation of oxygen anionic planes11–13. Among common reasons for such occurrence of ordered oxygen vacancies are strain experienced by the thin films, growth in a reducing environment, or ionic liquid gating14,15. According to a density functional theory (DFT) study, SrFeO2.5is obtained as oxygen vacancies ordered parallel to the surface under tensile strain, as this configuration maximizes the distance between the tetrahedral chains under that strain state16. As earlier reported, our BaBiO3-δthin films demonstrated a modulation of a BiO4tetrahedron every three BiO6octahedra due to the formation of ordered oxygen vacancy channels, resulting in an oxygen-deficient phase17. These ordered oxygen vacancies are formed for the as-grown thin film with an MBE recipe described in our previous work, which supplies activated oxygen radicals during the formation of the crystalline layer8. This structure possesses a mild breathing distortion, which is responsible for gapping the band structure18.

In this context, the present work investigates the physical transformation occurring upon further oxidizing BaBiO3-δthrough different oxidative pathways. Cooldown at different activated oxygen conditions, as well as post-annealing in molecular oxygen processes, are checked for their capabilities in causing a transformation into a stoichiometric perovskite structure. The influence of the potential filling up of oxygen vacancies on the electronic structure, breathing distortion, and the optical response of the thin films is also studied. First-principles calculations were performed to gain a better understanding of the perovskite matrix’s oxygen loss pathway.

To investigate the effect of process control over the formation of ordered oxygen vacancies, BaBiO3-δthin films of 25 nm were epitaxially grown on Si(001) with a buffer layer of SrTiO3(001). During growth, the temperature was fixed at 600 °C while supplying activated oxygen species to the growth surface with a plasma power of 600 W, at a base chamber pressure around 1E-6 Torr. Bismuth was evaporated in higher quantities compared to barium to satisfy the adsorption-controlled growth conditions6. During the cooldown process, three samples had either molecular oxygen (0 W), activated oxygen (200 W), or activated oxygen (600 W) supplied for 5 min, and the rest of the cooldown down process was carried out at a cleaner vacuum. For another set of samples, the plasma power remained fixed at 600 W but the time during which the activated oxygen is supplied was extended to 10, 20, or 40 min instead of only 5 min, as elucidated in Fig.1a.

aTemperature in a function of time for the growth process of 20 min and the cooldown process for the different samples at different oxygen conditions, as stated next to the colored bars. Colored bars represent the time during which the cooldown is carried out in a vacuum.bPressure data as a function of time for both the growth and cooldown processes for the different samples.

Additionally, sample A (cooled down in activated oxygen for 5 min with plasma power of 200 W) was ex-situ annealed in a molecular oxygen environment in an Annealsys AS-One 150 oven. Annealing was carried out at 600 °C at 760 Torr. The ex-situ annealing in molecular oxygen is carried out to compare the anneal step with the 40-min cooldown process at plasma power of 600 W (sample B).

The obtained layers are studied by XRD, and the results are shown in Fig.2. Samples which were entirely cooled down in vacuum and partly in molecular oxygen have amorphous layers with no diffraction. For the 5-min cooldown process with activated oxygen at 200 W and 600 W, both layers have an out-of-plane lattice constant of 4.36 Å. Another interesting observation is that as the time during which the surface is provided with activated oxygen at 600 W increases, the out-of-plane lattice constant shrinks, as clarified in Table1. This effect is observed only for BaBiO3-δlayers, while the out-of-plane lattice constant for SrTiO3remains unchanged at 3.91 Å.

XRD’s out-of-plane symmetric scans showing diffraction from Si substrates’ (004), SrTiO3buffer layers’ (002), and BaBiO3-δactive layers’ (002) planes. XRD data highlights the effect of both the oxidative environment during the cooldown process as well as the time during which activated oxygen is supplied at 600 W.

Figure3a, dshows the time evolution of RHEED patterns along the <100> crystallographic directions during the first 120 s of the growth with a step of 20 s as well as the RHEED patterns after cooling down for sample A (5 min/200 W) and sample B (40 min/600 W), respectively. It is noticed that the in-plane lattice constant does not evolve with time since the beginning of the growth as compared to that at the surface of the 25 nm thin films after cooling down. This confirms that both sample A and sample B have domain matching epitaxy as the mechanism for the growth of BaBiO3-δon SrTiO3, given the large lattice mismatch (f≈11.77%), where 8 unit cells of BaBiO3-δare accommodated on 9 unit cells of SrTiO3as illustrated in our previous TEM study17. Despite the difficulty in obtaining images of low noise levels due to the fragility of this material upon e-beam exposure19, TEM still gives important insights about the crystal structure. In the TEM images in Fig.3b,c, it is obvious that the cooldown for 5 min at 200 W of oxygen plasma results in a layer of BaBiO3-δwith ordered oxygen vacancies, as observed based on the darker contrast areas aligned parallel to the substrate surface. Upon extending the time, during which activated oxygen is supplied at a higher plasma power of 600 W, to 40 min, the oxygen vacancies are sufficiently filled up to retrieve the perovskite structure.

aanddshow the time evolution of the RHEED patterns along [100] crystallographic direction during the first 120 s of the growth as well as after cooling down of the thin film for sample A and sample B, respectively. White dashed lines are drawn vertically for reference.bandcillustrate TEM images of the heterostructures: 25-nm-BaBiO3-δ/15-nm-SrTiO3/Si(001) and 25-nm-BaBiO3/10-nm-SrTiO3/Si(001), respectively, with a 5-nm-long scale bar.

Monoclinic charge ordering is a characteristic property for BaBiO3, which results in the occurrence of breathing lattice distortion due to the double valency on the bismuth ionic sites (Bi3+& Bi5+). The breathing distortion on the BiO6octahedra is manifested in the layer as a Raman spectral response at 565 cm−1. According to Fig.4a, there is a correlation between the lattice constants of the layers and the Raman spectral intensity. The highest intensity response is recorded when activated oxygen is provided for 40 min during the cooldown process, which results in the smallest out-of-plane lattice constant layer (perovskite structure). This distortion is fundamentally responsible for opening a Peierl’s gap in the band structure of around 2.07 eV, according to a DFT study20. Therefore, the influence of the cooldown process on the PL is like that observed for the Raman spectra. The layers go from a mild optical response at 2.19 eV when ordered oxygen vacancies exist in the structure to a more pronounced response when the perovskite structure is retrieved. While no response is recorded for the amorphous layers, as expected.

aRaman spectra (λ = 633 nm) normalized based on Si active mode at 521 cm−1, andbPL spectra (λ = 532 nm), showing the response for BaBiO3-δat 2.19 eV. Both measurements were carried out at room temperature for all the different samples.

Results presented so far are based on the in-situ cooldown process in the MBE chamber. However, the ex-situ anneal process at molecular oxygen is also discussed in this study. Interestingly, as presented in Supplementary Fig.S1a, the annealing process at molecular oxygen results in a reduction in the out-of-plane lattice constant of 1% for sample A (going from 4.36 Å down to 4.32 Å). Upon comparison with sample B, the ex-situ anneal for 5 min at 600 °C in an atmospheric pressure molecular oxygen environment has the same effect on the layer. The reduction in the out-of-plane lattice constant for BaBiO3-δis accompanied by approximately a 30% increase in the layers’ quality according to the FWHM of the RC, as demonstrated in Supplementary Fig.S1b. Ex-situ anneal process also results in an enhancement in the breathing distortion and the optical response, according to Supplementary Fig.S2b, c, due to the transformation into the perovskite structure with higher octahedral content.

To further evaluate the crystal structure, RSMs are collected for sample A, sample B, and sample A after the ex-situ anneal process. The RSMs reported in Fig.5show the (103) reflections from BaBiO3-δand SrTiO3thin films. (Qx&Qz) axes are normalized based on SrTiO3lattice parameters. The scattering vector componentsQxandQzwere calculated and plotted using MATLAB, according to the geometric definitionQ=kout-kin, wherekoutandkinare the diffracted and incident wavevectors, respectively. Additionally, the scattering vectors in terms of real lattice vectors for a monoclinic cell are represented as:Qx=ka,Qz=lc.sin(β). The information provided by the out-of-plane scattering vector (Qz) component has contributions both from the out-of-plane lattice constant (c) and the angle between the c-axis and the ab-plane (β). Indeed, evaluatingβis important for BaBiO3-δsince the material’s monoclinicity is closely attributed to the spectroscopic data via the breathing distortion. To evaluate the two parameters separately, additional measurements were conducted, and a mathematical procedure described in subsection C in the supplementary information was developed. Based on the identified position of the BaBiO3-δ’s (103) peaks in the RSMs, the in-plane, out-of-plane, andβparameters of the cells for the different samples are evaluated and tabulated in Table2.

RSMs around BaBiO3-δ(103) and SrTiO3(103) reflections for.asample A,bsample B, andcsample A –ex-situ annealed in a molecular oxygen environment at 600 °C. Red dashed line is plotted to show the degree of deviation of the BBO structure as compared to that of STO.

For the three samples, the RSMs show totally relaxed BaBiO3-δlayers with respect to SrTiO3, confirming the presence of domain-matching epitaxy. Sample A has lattice parameters closest to a cubic structure withβ=89.5∘. The result of both the long cooldown process at 600 W and the ex-situ anneal is manifested as two effects: contraction in the out-of-plane lattice constant by 1% and an increased monoclinicity withβ=93.3∘&92.1∘for sample B & sample A after the ex-situ anneal step, respectively.

BaBiO3-δis observed for the first time in thin film form; however, it was observed in the past in bulk form and enabled an intensive topic of research, as researchers were investigating it as a candidate material for selective oxidation catalysis21,22. Based on thermogravimetric experiments, at a fixed partial pressure and as a function of increasing temperatures, three distinct regions were established for BaBiO3-δ: 0 ≤ δ ≤ 0.03, 0.13 ≤ δ ≤ 0.27, and 0.42 ≤ δ ≤ 0.45, where expansion of the lattice constant upon oxygen loss was also observed22. The mechanism for the loss of oxygen for the thin films has not been investigated yet. However, it is possibly related to the thermal mismatch between the Si substrate and the BaBiO3-δthin film. A way to release the strain energy built up in the thin film upon cooling down rapidly could be via losing oxygen to the vacuum in an ordered fashion.

Due to the large lattice mismatch (11.77%), immediate misfit dislocation formation takes place at the earliest stage of epitaxy, which is confirmed by the delay in the RHEED streaky diffraction pattern formation, in Fig.3a, d, as the growth starts. For domain matching epitaxy, due to the large lattice mismatches, misfit strain does not play a major role in the accumulated residual strain. The grown thin films are fully relaxed at the high growth temperature, sustaining their unstrained bulk lattice parameters23. As the thin film cools down, thermal strain has a major effective role in the relaxation process, in case there exists a thermal mismatch between the layer and the underlying substrate24. In our case, as Si has a thermal expansion coefficient of 2.6 × 10−6°C−1, while that of BaBiO3-δis 1 × 10−5°C−1(74% thermal mismatch), a tensile strain is built up within the thin film as it cools down from elevated temperature.

Tensile strain’s relationship to the formation of oxygen vacancies is known for perovskite oxides; even with a small amount of tensile strain, the oxygen vacancy formation barrier is significantly lowered by reducing the efficiency of oxygen intercalation25–27. Additionally, tensile strain on CaFeO2.5stabilizes the formation of ordered oxygen vacancies parallel to the substrate surface9. In another reduction reaction (CaFeO2.5to CaFeO2), ordered oxygen vacancies are arranged perpendicularly regardless of the strain state of the thin film9. As reported in a DFT work, tensile strain not only results in increased bond length and octahedral rotation but also induces oxygen vacancy ordering because of the anisotropy of the energy of vacancy formation28.

Stoichiometric Ba2Bi3+Bi5+O6normally has an equivalent amount of Bi3+and Bi5+, which results in the monoclinic charge ordering. Studying the oxidation state of bismuth cations experimentally is important, as it is the reason behind the monoclinic charge ordering. XPS measurements were carried out to have a closer look at the bismuth core levels for sample A, sample B, and sample A after the ex-situ anneal process. Supplementary Fig.S2adisplays the core-level spectra for bismuth for the three different samples, fitted by the two doublets, while each doublet accounts for an electronic angular momentum: 4f5/2and 4f7/2(with a 5.3 eV shift). All samples possess Bi3+and Bi5+oxidation states with an energy separation between the two peaks of around 0.75 eV. However, with careful data fitting, it turns out that the ratio Bi5+/Bi3+is different when comparing one sample with another. Bi5+/Bi3+goes from 0.95 for sample A to 1.17 after annealing the sample in high oxygen pressure. Indeed, this could be associated with the bismuth ions’ environments being different according to the presence or absence of oxygen vacancy channels, which accordingly change the ionic coordination from tetrahedral to octahedral, respectively. The occurrence of oxygen vacancies triggers an imbalance of charge neutrality within the thin film, as each vacancy releases a charge of +2 (V⚫⚫0). Due to the multivalent nature of Bi ions, the thin film of BaBiO3-δcan accommodate oxygen vacancies with high concentrations, in an ordered fashion, via what is so-called automatic charge neutralization. This strengthens the relationship between the strain state and the creation of ordered oxygen vacancies, similarly to perovskites containing transition metal ions28.

As pointed out previously, according to the XRD data, this filling up of oxygen vacancies process is accompanied by a reduction in the out-of-plane lattice parameter and increased monoclinicity. This shrinkage is due to the reduced coulombic repulsion between the neighboring cations when oxygen vacancies are filled29. Additionally, Bi3+ions are oxidized into Bi5+ions, which have smaller ionic radii (Bi3+−O → 2.28 Å & Bi5+−O → 2.12 Å)30. The increased monoclinicity is in place because, as ordered oxygen vacancies are gotten rid of, the material retains its original structure, which has an expected higher monoclinic charge ordering, as the octahedra are reconstructed.

Formation energies of the bulk oxygen vacancies at different concentrations ranging from 2% up to 14% in BaBiO3with c2/m crystal symmetry were evaluated by DFT calculations and presented in Fig.6a. Formation energies of oxygen vacancies in BaBiO3seem to be increasing as the defect concentration increases in the structure. An energy barrier of around 2.20 eV is calculated for BaBiO3-δwith δ≈0.07. This low energy of formation contributes alongside with the low oxidative environment at the MBE chamber to the spontaneous occurrence of ordered oxygen vacancies. Additionally, the formation energies of oxygen vacancies close to the terminated surface of a 40-atom slab are compared to those deeper into the layer. In Fig.6b, it can be observed that the formation energy of a vacancy at the surface is lower than its formation deeper into the film (with an energy barrier of around 1.5 eV). This indicates that oxygen vacancies are more likely to form at the surface region or migrate there if oxygen mobility is sufficiently high, which drives the diffusion of the vacancies to the surface layer. This result leads to the formulation of a plausible pathway for the oxygen vacancy formation.

DFT calculations showingaformation energies at different defect concentrations for BaBiO3bulk,bevolution of the formation energies of V0at the surface of the slab compared to deeper into the film (red dashed line represents the formation energy of the bulk at this concentration).

This pathway is described as follows: at such a low oxidative environment during the cooldown process: Bi−O bonds are broken; oxygen ions diffuse to the surface and combine there as oxygen molecules, which are released to the vacuum. This happens when the samples have a limited period during which activated oxygen is provided during the cooldown process. As observed in Fig.1b, the pressure built up during 5 min for sample A quickly drops to below the pressure attained during the growth (below 1E-6 torr). However, when the cooldown process includes an extended period during which activated oxygen is provided (sample B), the pressure built up is well maintained and even increases (up to 4E-6 torr) until the sample is cooled down already well below 200 °C. This process seems to create an energy barrier for the formation of the oxygen vacancies within the film. This is, however, not the case for the sample, which is cooled down entirely in a vacuum or partly in a molecular oxygen environment, that’s the reason why the crystallinity is lost soon after the samples are completely cooled down.

In summary, we throw light on the importance of the MBE in-situ cooldown process in regards of the oxygen vacancies formation in bismuthate perovskites. When the limited duration of supplying activated oxygen during the cooldown process is used, the thin film contains a large amount of oxygen vacancies. As domain matching epitaxy is in place, the thermal strain largely constitutes the residual strain built up during the cooldown process, especially with the 74% thermal mismatch between BaBiO3and Si. The relaxation process for this tensile strain tends to take place in the form of oxygen loss in perovskite oxides, mainly in the presence of double-valent cations, which is the case for BaBiO3-δwith Bi3+& Bi5+. Perovskite structure is still obtainable, though by elongating the duration of supplying activated oxygen during the cooldown process or via an ex-situ anneal step an atmospheric pressure environment of molecular oxygen. Structural transformation from BaBiO3-δinto BaBiO3is validated by XRD data, which show a reduction in the out-of-plane lattice constant and increased monoclinicity, as expected for BaBiO3. The progressive correlation between the decrease in the out-of-plane lattice constant and the increase in the octahedral content based on the measured breathing distortion Raman signature suggests a quantitative oxygen vacancy filling up via controlling the in-situ cooldown process. Fluorine-alloyed BaBiO3-δhas gained research value as a material system because of the predicted topological insulating behavior, according to DFT, and the consequent development of Majorana-fermion-based devices in case experimentally realized31. Regulating oxygen vacancy formation is a crucial step, as it will enable the incorporation of fluorine on the oxygen site in a well-controlled manner32.

Growth mode and film morphology were monitored in real time by in-situ RHEED diagnostics with an electron gun operating at 20 kV. Crystalline structure of the thin films was assessed using a Phillips X’Pert Panalytical high-resolution X-ray diffraction (HR-XRD) setup, equipped with Cu-Kαradiation of 1.54 Å wavelength. Evaluating the full width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the rocking curve (RC) measurements allows for assessing the layers’ crystalline quality. Reciprocal space maps (RSM) were also collected to gain a better understanding of the crystal structure and the possible strain field experienced by the layers. The crystalline structure was also evaluated based on transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images. A Titan tool with a 200 kV operating voltage was used, with a very low electron beam intensity to minimize the material damage as much as possible. For quantifying the known breathing distortion in the thin films, Raman spectroscopy was utilized with a laser of 633 nm wavelength in backscattering configuration on a Horiba Jobin-Yvon LabRAM HR800 tool. The optical band gap was investigated by the photoluminescence (PL) responses, which were collected at room temperature utilizing the same Raman tool. X-ray photoemission spectroscopy (XPS) for the samples is carried out using monochromatized Al Kα1radiation with a beam energy of 1486.6 eV, in the angle-integrated mode using a Physical Electronics Quantes instrument.

DFT calculations were performed utilizing the widely known CP2K software packages, which take into account the mixing of a Gaussian basis set with an auxiliary plane-wave basis set to solve the Kohn–Sham equations33,34. The DZVP-MOLOPT-SR basis sets were employed on barium, bismuth, and oxygen atoms in conjunction with the GTH pseudopotential35,36. The plane-wave cutoff was set to 900 Ry, which guarantees a convergence on the total energy. Additionally, to avoid the bond length overestimation typical for GGA functionals, the PBEsol exchange-correlation functional was used instead, which is known for resulting in lattice constants with a relatively higher accuracy compared to the PBE functional37,38. BaBiO3-δcell was constructed from the fully relaxed structure as a BiO2-terminated 40-atom supercell.

This work is part of IMEC’s Industrial Affiliation Program. The authors would like to thank process and hardware engineers Hans Costermans and Kevin Dubois for their dedicated support on the MBE cluster tool. The authors express their gratitude to Stefanie Sergeant, Thomas Nuytten for Raman spectroscopy measurements and analysis, and to Ilse Hoflijk, Thierry Conard for XPS measurements and analysis. This work has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement No 864483).