Notwithstanding nursing's emphasis on equity, social justice and respect for human rights, racism continues to prevail in healthcare. Healthcare professionals are ethically bound to design and implement methods of antiracist practice to ensure equity of care. We created an antiracism learning intervention using a Collaborative Online International Learning (COIL) module, where a multicultural learning environment was developed by bringing together students from different countries. The COIL module promoted discussion and reflection among students to address this sensitive topic. Students engaged in forums that challenged their existing biases and preconceived notions.

To describe students' learning about an antiracist international online learning initiative between Sweden and the USA, designed to raise awareness about racism in healthcare.

A qualitative inductive research design was chosen to analyse 46 students' (27 Swedish students and 19 American students) reflections on the learning module using content analysis.

One main category that emerged was “Learning about racism cross‐culturally enhances awareness contributing to mindfulness”. Students' experiences were further described in two generic categories: (a) Learning about racism contributes to new knowledge, and (b) Reflecting with others challenges one's attitudes. Within each of the generic categories, two sub‐categories were identified.

Engaging in cross‐cultural discussions focusing on racism in healthcare seemed to enhance students' awareness and broaden their perspectives on racism and antiracism. Their perceived sense of responsibility for advocating for racialised minority patients and peers also seemed to expand. These findings not only potentially aid healthcare professionals in recognising racism within healthcare but also emphasise the need for increased awareness of methods addressing racism in clinician education curricula.

Although the International Council of Nurses (ICN) Code of Ethics highlights the importance of equity, social justice and respect for human rights when caring for patients [1], racism persists as a public health crisis [2,3]. We define racism as a structural system of social stratification embedded in institutions in which groups of people are hierarchically ordered through a historical process of racialisation [4]. It is well documented that racism causes health inequalities, results in suboptimal care and negatively affects interactions within healthcare settings where racial bias and racialisation are evident [5]. This suboptimal care in healthcare because of racism is at times fatal, resulting in increased mortality rates, such as increased maternal and perinatal mortalities among racialised minorities across Western settings [6], as well as the increased mortality risk from COVID‐19 among minorities [7]. Racialised minorities' experience of racism erodes trust in healthcare, leading to postponed care, further exacerbating racial inequalities [8].

While racial inequalities are caused by various factors connected to societal racism and cannot be addressed by individual efforts alone, there is a need for healthcare professionals to contribute to health equity and to acknowledge and understand how racialisation manifests within healthcare settings. This is particularly important as research has highlighted the prevalence of colourblind racism in healthcare. Colourblindness has been theorised as the pervasive racial ideology post‐WWII, where explicit scientific racism has been largely substituted by more subtle forms of racism and a discourse that minimises the effect of racism in society through viewing racism as individual aberrations rather than a structural ideology [4]. In healthcare, this colourblindness has been researched as resistance to acknowledging racial bias and racism's role in healthcare while stressing patients' culture and individual characteristics as the sole basis of racial inequalities [9]. This is particularly problematic since it has been shown that healthcare professionals who deny racism and who adhere to a colourblind racial ideology are more likely to use ‘race’ in medical decision‐making [10].

While we acknowledge that undoing racism must entail a societal political change, critical self‐awareness and reflection by healthcare professionals on racism in healthcare settings is a contributing factor. Particularly important is a focus on caring and solidarity as core ethics of healthcare [11]. According to Swanson, caring is defined as“a nurturing way of relating to a valued other towards whom one feels a personal sense of commitment and responsibility”[11], p. 165. Due to the pervasive nature of racism in healthcare, reflective seminars can be one way to raise awareness, increasing understanding of racism in healthcare [12] and, as articulated by Swanson [11], develop nurturing as a way to promote equity in care. While we acknowledge that undoing racism requires a greater societal and political change, there is evidence that reflective seminars deepen students' understanding of caring science, patients and themselves [13,14,15], enhance their professional development and strengthen students' reflective attitudes [14]. Gadamer [15] highlights that we bring our historical, cultural and social context with us into our professional lives, so when engaging in reflection as part of professional education, our existing meanings and values are challenged, and new versions of our experience and values are discovered [16]. Thus, we implemented an antiracism educational intervention for nursing students in Sweden and the USA as part of Collaborative Online International Learning (COIL). COIL is a networked learning model for virtual exchange in higher education that facilitates meaningful interactions between educators and students [17] from different geographical and cultural contexts [18]. This multicultural learning environment [19] provides a forum where nursing students can share their experiences with peers from other countries, thereby enhancing their intercultural competence and ability to embrace an increasingly diverse world [20]. However, it is important to keep in mind contextual historical differences regarding how racism is perceived in different countries. In Sweden, there is a political and public reluctance to admit that racism is relevant to society [21], whereas in the USA, racism is more readily debated both publicly and politically [22,23], notwithstanding the prevalence of colourblindness. While the USA's modern state was constructed through settler colonialism, Chattel slavery and imperialism, Sweden's racialising processes were constructed through scientific racism, colonial complicity and settler colonialism of the Sami [24]. Further, in Sweden, the collection of demographic data based on ethnic and racialised categories is illegal, unlike in the USA.

Despite these differences, research has shown some commonalities in the way racism manifests in healthcare, such as minorities' dismissal from decision‐making, inadequate care and lack of organisational support regarding complaints of racism [8]. Further, there is a lack of research that describes antiracism interventions in healthcare [8], which is important to conduct, reflect on and evaluate to further develop these interventions. In this article, we describe students' learning about an antiracist collaborative online international learning initiative between Sweden and the USA, designed to raise awareness about racism in healthcare.

A COIL initiative [17] between two schools of nursing, one situated in Sweden and one in the USA, was conducted. Data were collected utilising students' written individual reflections [25] after having taken part in the COIL learning module. An inductive qualitative design was used, and data were analysed using content analysis [26].

This COIL initiative aimed at increasing students' knowledge about racism through using case studies/vignettes illustrating different scenarios of racism in healthcare, providing opportunities to reflect on racism within healthcare. These scenarios were deduced from data collected through a research project on racism in healthcare conducted in Sweden [27]. The study was part of a post‐graduate nursing curriculum. Seminars were held in English on Zoom. The entire COIL initiative is described in detail in an unpublished manuscript (Raphael‐Grimm et al., in manuscript). It consisted of reading assignments, two pre‐recorded lectures, three synchronous seminars and four written reflections. Two of the seminars had large (whole) group and breakout group segments. Two of the breakout groups were facilitated by a faculty member. In the final seminar, study groups met without a faculty facilitator.

In Sweden, students from two graduate nursing programmes (paediatric and public health) (n= 38 students) and in the USA, students from one graduate program (psychiatric mental health practitioners) (n= 19 students) participated in the COIL initiative. Of the 57 students, 27 students from Sweden and 19 students from the USA agreed to allow their written reflections to be used in this study. Most of the Swedish and American students were White. Students from both countries came from a range of geographical areas (rural areas, small towns and big cities). Most of the students were women, as reflected in the overall student body from which they were drawn. All students were registered nurses with at least one year of clinical experience.

All students from each country were verbally informed about the COIL initiative and the study by members of their faculty. They also received written information on the student web platform about the purpose of the research study and that only reflections from those who agreed to participate in the research study would be included. Voluntariness and confidentiality were emphasised. Participants were assured that their participation or lack there of would not affect their course grades. Before giving informed consent, the participants were given time to ask questions and reflect on their participation. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants before starting the COIL initiative. The reflections collected for analysis in this manuscript are responses to reflection questions one to five (see Table1), used in the COIL initiative (Raphael‐Grimm et al., in manuscript).

Overview of the final reflection questions with evaluation of the COIL experience.

Written reflections were analysed using qualitative content analysis [26]. All authors of this study were involved in the analysis and validated the categories. Reflection questions one to five were used in the analysis (see Table1). An inductive approach was applied to the reflections to identify categories, phrases, and keywords that represent the phenomena being described. This process included three steps: open coding, creating categories and abstraction analysis [27]. First, the data were read and re‐read, and notes and headings were written in the margins to describe the content. Second, after open coding, the data were grouped into categories. A list of categories was developed. Depending on how they were related, sub‐categories were identified. Definitions for these sub‐categories were developed and named by content‐specific words. Third, to achieve the confirmability of the findings, the researchers individually reviewed the data and developed the categories, agreeing on the categories through consensus [27]. Lastly, to ensure credibility, member checking was undertaken within the research group [28].

Ethical approval was obtained from the Regional Ethics Board (Dnr 2018/201) in Sweden and from the UNC Institutional Review Board. To protect the confidentiality of the participants, we have given the students pseudonyms, which are largely gender‐neutral, to avoid identifying the small number of men.

A main category was identified through the analysis:Learning about racism cross‐culturally enhances awareness, contributing to mindfulness. Further, two generic categories were identified: (a) Learning about racism contributes to new knowledge, and (b) Reflecting with others challenges one's attitudes. Within the generic categories, four sub‐categories were identified as shown in Figure1.

Presentation of main category, generic categories and sub‐categories.

Learning about racism cross‐culturally enhances awareness, contributing to mindfulness was the first generic category built on two sub‐categories: learning about new concepts deepens the discussion about racism and learning that racism is expressed in various ways in different cultures discussed below.

The COIL initiative has truly opened the eyes of people who might not have considered that racism is present in Sweden. This has been achieved by exposing them to the experiences of others who have encountered racism in Sweden and by illustrating how it manifests in the USA. (Chandler, from Sweden).

Comparing how racism is experienced in Sweden versus the USA provided insight into how cultural and historical factors shaped racialisation in these countries, hence examining the dynamic nature of racism. Students emphasised how they obtained a deeper understanding of colourblindness and the subtlety of racism and its insidious nature. They discussed how they would be able to readily identify and address racism at their workplaces based on this gained knowledge.

One thing that made me think a little more was the concept of person‐centred care and the idea that the care provided in Sweden must be equitable. The question is, how equitable and person‐centred is the care we provide when incidents like this are allowed to occur. (Sinclair, from Sweden).

After attending these seminars, I have certainly noticed how my colleagues discuss patients and the choice of words they use. It is quite common for them to say things like “you know how they are” or “she will probably create a scene to get what she wants”. (Ricki, from USA).

It is important to have discussions on race because silence is not the answer. Bringing this to the surface by discussing and addressing it will help reduce both subtle/implicit and explicit racism in the workplace. (Aubrey, from USA).

After participating in the racism in healthcare module, I have learnt about the difference between covert and overt racism. I learned about racism without racists, that is, racism that is subtle and structured. (River, from USA).

Learning about these different concepts and their own biases and prejudices led to self‐reflection and enhanced their willingness to listen and learn from people from other cultures.

Now I see that racism is integrated in the US health care system, but also in other countries. Surprisingly, the form of racism is much the same in Sweden as it is in the United States. For example, nursing students from different ethnicities in Sweden shared experiences of discrimination by White, older adult patients. (Jaime, from Sweden).

I was surprised to learn from the Swedish students that racism was just as rampant and common in healthcare settings in Sweden as it is in the US. The students explained that racism often occurs in Sweden, but it is not talked about. (Rory, from USA).

It was said by the Swedish students that it is a taboo topic, and it is not usually discussed among each other. I do not know of a workplace or clinical site that is influenced by racism, but if I did, I would certainly share. (Dale, from USA).

On the other hand, Swedish students explained that even though racism often occurs in Sweden, it is seldom openly discussed. After hearing the USA students' experiences of racism in healthcare, Swedish students noted that racism seemed to be taken more seriously in the healthcare system in the USA than in Sweden. Swedish students also mentioned that the USA students were more comfortable discussing ‘race’ (e.g., White and Black) and ethnicity, which is considered taboo in their Swedish workplace and society. Students described enjoying the conversations with their student counterparts, as it allowed them to hear about experiences from other parts of the world. Further, being engaged in the discussions gave students, particularly Swedish students, the opportunity and space to self‐reflect on racism. However, some Swedish students expressed that they found it difficult to express their views during the seminars due to language difficulties, a lack of knowledge regarding racism, as well as a lack of a common discourse to talk about racism.

Reflecting with others challenges one's attitudes; it was the second generic category built on two sub‐categories: shifting your own pre‐understanding about racism and gaining the courage to discuss racism.

My view has changed now in that I believe firmly that racism and race‐related issues are highly important and that we all must be dedicated to protecting and guarding the feelings of our fellow coworkers and patients. (Sage, student from USA).

As students became more aware of the “hidden” racism within the health care system, they experienced that their perspective evolved, which led to a deepened understanding of racism, recognising it in a different manner than before. Students also expressed that they recognised racism as a “taboo” subject seldom brought up in discussions with colleagues. It also became evident to students that colleagues often did not want to address racism and, consequently, chose to remain silent. After completing the COIL initiative, students shared how their preunderstandings had shifted, and how they intended to engage in more discussions about racism.

My thoughts about racism in the workplace have changed somewhat after participating in the COIL initiative, in that I feel better equipped and more motivated to talk about racism with my colleagues. (Malone, student from Sweden).

I particularly appreciate that this experience involved nurses from two different countries. I wouldn't have reflected on that or taken the initiative if it weren't for the COIL initiative. The initiative has increased my awareness of racism and how it manifests in everyday life, as well as how to address it. (Pacey, student from Sweden).

Students reported that this type of education, which entails students from different countries discussing racism, is crucial because all of them will, in some way, encounter racism both in their professional work and daily lives. According to the students, the ability to address and contemplate racism during one's educational journey is of utmost importance.

Our study delved into students' learning experiences within an international online learning initiative between Sweden and the USA aimed at addressing racism in healthcare. Apart from Odzakovic et al. [29], who explored racism in healthcare within an educational intervention, our research stands as the first qualitative study to analyse how students from Sweden and the USA experience their learning regarding the politically loaded topic of racism through taking part in a COIL initiative.

The results showed that students initially found it hard to discuss racism. Swedes encountered challenges when discussing racism within their country, as emphasised by Bradby et al. [22], is due to Sweden's idea of itself as non‐racist. Further, much of the literature on racism primarily originates from the USA [30], and the lack of discourse on race in Europe often leads Europeans to perceive themselves as non‐racists [31]. A COIL approach, where students from different countries discussed racism, aided in creating a context where students were able to share their experiences regarding racism in health care and enhanced students' understanding of the topic. Our findings show that students are willing to discuss racism and racial bias in healthcare, reflect and share their own experiences of racism, as well as the racism they have witnessed. This seemed to contribute to increasing their awareness of the role that racism plays in healthcare, which may aid in their significant professional growth [32]. Students in this study experienced it as valuable to reflect with peers from diverse countries regarding racism in healthcare. Being part of the COIL initiative may enable students to confront their own biases related to racism and may empower them to recognise their responsibility in advocating for racialised minority patients under their care.

Further, the experiences shared by students from this current study highlight the need to discuss racism within healthcare. This aligns with Swanson's emphasis on the importance of caring and the need for healthcare professionals to strive to know, be with, do for, and enable the patient to attain, maintain or regain meaning in their experiences of health and illness [11]. This emphasis on caring entails being aware of implicit racial biases in healthcare interactions [33,34]. Therefore, to develop in caring, it is of importance to reflect on different person's lifeworlds as this contributes to thoughtfulness and comprehensibility [14]. Additionally, using reflection has been proven to be powerful in relation to mitigating racist behaviour, in particular, during healthcare professionals' ongoing education. This is important to counteract the prevailing idea of colourblindness in healthcare, which constructs healthcare as inherently neutral and objective, consequently denying the existence of racism. Reflection can be used both by the individual and within healthcare as an organisation [35]. Using reflective seminars facilitates students to gain a profound understanding of the caring sciences as well as develop students' reflective skills [12,13,14]. In the present COIL initiative, students could share both the racism they have witnessed and/or experienced, as well as discuss cases developed from research. By sharing and reflecting on experience and knowledge in relation to caring science, a new understanding about the patient emerges, and students can experience significant professional growth [35]. These findings emphasise the need for healthcare educators to address racism as an element that can influence how patients are being cared for [35,36,37]. While our intervention may have resulted in increased reflection, it is limited in terms of the students and the cases presented, partly because it was intended as an introductory reflexive learning experience that could later be developed. We recommend incorporating various reflective antiracism interventions during healthcare students' education and syllabi as well as across workplaces, as a reflection of this kind needs to be continuous. Additionally, we recommend that these types of interventions be evaluated, as there is a lack of such evaluations. There is also a need to continuously develop these interventions based on students' reflections. Consequently, future research should identify and explore areas in caring where nurses initiate discussions about racism within the profession or practice effective methods of verbalising their concerns about another's racist behaviour.

Several limitations need to be considered in this study. First, the findings might be influenced by the proportion of students who participated in the seminars and granted permission to access their written reflections. Out of the total 57 students from Sweden and the United States, 46 students allowed their written reflections to be read and analysed. However, a notable strength lies in the fact that the data is derived from these 46 students' distinct reflections. In qualitative studies, having this number of participants is considered reasonable, especially given the diverse healthcare experiences of these registered nurses in two countries. This diversity enhances the credibility and transferability of the results. On the other hand, the 11 Swedish students who refused consent to use their reflections offer something of a contrast with none of the 19 students from the United States who refused consent. The absence of these 11 reflections has not altered the outcome of the content analysis. It is worth acknowledging this possible bias that these non‐consenters could represent. Second, the use of written reflections, although lacking visual cues present in face‐to‐face interviews, allows students to explore new meanings and values, revealing different versions of their experiences. This methodological choice provides valuable insights. However, when using written reflections, there is a lack of the ability to pose follow‐up questions to further test the phenomenon at hand. Third, a potential limitation could be the power dynamics between teachers and students in that the students might want to highlight thoughts that would enhance their value in their professor's eyes. However, teachers constantly encouraged them to voice their ideas candidly and tried to facilitate a safe learning environment where this could be done. This was also highlighted in students' reflections stating that they felt safe talking about this sensitive topic. Despite these limitations, the study has several strengths: Data analysis yielded rich and varied descriptions, adding depth and enhancing the reliability of our findings. Furthermore, all authors engaged in thorough discussions during the final data analysis, ensuring the dependability of our results.

This study underscores the significance of students discussing and reflecting upon racism within healthcare. Our research, conducted through the COIL initiative, revealed that these discussions enhanced students' awareness and mindfulness, empowering them to recognise their responsibility in advocating for racialised minority patients and acknowledging the presence of racism in healthcare. These findings not only aid healthcare professionals in recognising racism within healthcare but also emphasise the need for increased initiatives in nursing education curricula to address this critical issue. There is a clear demand for future research to explore how nurses confront wrongs and protect racialised minority patients from health disparities, such as racism, in alignment with the ICN Code of Ethics for Nurses [1]. Such research can further inform educational strategies and foster a more inclusive, caring and empathetic healthcare environment.