The electronic quality of two-dimensional systems is crucial when exploring quantum transport phenomena. In semiconductor heterostructures, decades of optimization have yielded record-quality two-dimensional gases with transport and quantum mobilities reaching close to 108and 106cm2V−1s−1, respectively1–10. Although the quality of graphene devices has also been improving, it remains comparatively lower11–17. Here we report a transformative improvement in the electronic quality of graphene by employing graphite gates placed in its immediate proximity, at 1 nm separation. The resulting screening reduces charge inhomogeneity by two orders of magnitude, bringing it down to a few 107cm−2and limiting potential fluctuations to less than 1 meV. Quantum mobilities reach 107cm2V−1s−1, surpassing those in the highest-quality semiconductor heterostructures by an order of magnitude, and the transport mobilities match their record9,10. This quality enables Shubnikov–de Haas oscillations in fields as low as 1 mT and quantum Hall plateaux below 5 mT. Although proximity screening predictably suppresses electron–electron interactions, fractional quantum Hall states remain observable with their energy gaps reduced only by a factor of 3–5 compared with unscreened devices, demonstrating that many-body phenomena at spatial scales shorter than 10 nm remain robust. Our results offer a reliable route to improving electronic quality in graphene and other two-dimensional systems, which should facilitate the exploration of new physics previously obscured by disorder.

Screening by a graphite gate placed at 1 nm proximity to graphene produces transformative improvement in its electronic quality, reducing charge inhomogeneity by two orders of magnitude.

Among two-dimensional systems, those based on GaAlAs heterostructures have continuously maintained the record for electronic quality1–10. Their latest milestone—transport mobilitiesµup to 5.7 × 107cm2V−1s−1at subkelvin temperatures (T) and electron densities of approximately 1.5 × 1011cm−2—came after three decades of painstaking work that yielded a fivefold improvement in mobility9,10. Graphene, despite being a relatively recent addition to two-dimensional systems, has also advanced in three big leaps. Starting fromµ≈ 104cm2V−1s−1in early devices on oxidized Si wafers11, its mobility first rose to approximately 105cm2V−1s−1and then to approximately 106cm2V−1s−1, which was demonstrated for graphene both suspended12,13and encapsulated in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)14–17. These mobilities have been observed for carrier densitiesn≈ 1010–1012cm−2at liquid-heliumT. Although graphene holds the room-Tmobility record among all known materials (µexceeds 0.15 × 106cm2V−1s−1atn≈ 1011cm−2, limited by phonon scattering)16–18, its mobility at lowTis, at present, constrained by two extrinsic factors: edge scattering and charge inhomogeneity. Indeed, hBN-encapsulated graphene devices are typically less than 10 µm in size, making edge scattering dominant at high densities, whereas the charge inhomogeneity δn(exceeding a few 109cm−2in the best-quality devices) limits transport at lown. A recent study17using devices up to 40 µm wide showed that charged impurities also restrictedµat highnto a few 106cm2V−1s−1. Another key measure of electronic quality is quantum mobilityµq, which determines the onset of Landau quantization and related phenomena, such as Shubnikov–de Haas (SdH) oscillations and the quantum Hall effect (QHE). The highest-quality semiconductor heterostructures exhibit SdH oscillations in magnetic fieldsBdown to approximately 10 mT (refs.9,19,20), which translates intoµq≈ 106cm2V−1s−1. State-of-the-art graphene devices require several times higherBif we are to observe SdH oscillations. Below we show that proximity gates21enable an unprecedented level of quality: they allowµq≈ 107cm2V−1s−1and reduce inhomogeneity to 3 × 107cm−2, that is, approximately 100 times lower than in the best devices with remote graphite gates and equivalent to one charge carrier left at the neutrality point per few micrometres squared. At lown, where edge scattering does not limit the mean free pathℓ, transport mobilities exceed  108cm2V−1s−1.

Our devices were double-gated multi-terminal Hall bars fabricated from graphene monolayers sandwiched between two hBN crystals. The top hBN (20–70 nm thick) served as a gate dielectric for an evaporated Au/Cr electrode. A graphite crystal was used as the bottom gate (left inset of Fig.1a; for details of fabrication, seeMethodsandSupplementary Information). A distinguishing feature of our devices is the ultrathin bottom hBN (3–4 atomic layers). Such a small thicknessd≈ 1 nm was chosen to reduce the background electrostatic potential through image-charge screening, thereby suppressing electron–hole puddles and scattering. Indeed, in the presence of a metal gate, the background potential should be reduced proportionally to [1 − exp(−2παd/L)], whereLis the characteristic size of the external potential variations andα≈ 1.5 accounts for the anisotropy of the dielectric constant of hBN21. Given the large value of 2πα, potential variations larger in size than approximately 10 nm should be strongly suppressed ford= 1 nm. We could not employ thinner hBN because quantum tunnelling causes considerable electrical leakage. Even with trilayer hBN, to avoid leakage when varyingn, we could only use the top gate. The use of atomically flat graphite crystals as proximity gates was also essential, as it prevented interfacial charges from becoming trapped and electric-field fluctuations caused by surface roughness (‘Device fabrication’ inMethods). The applied gate voltage was converted intonusing Hall measurements, which was essential because of the large contribution from quantum capacitance for smalld(‘Converting gate voltages into carrier density’ inMethods). The main challenge in fabricating the described devices was to obtain sufficiently large (several hundred micrometres squared), few-layer hBN crystals, which limited the widthWof our Hall bars and, consequently, enhanced the role of edge scattering. We studied seven such devices withWfrom 6 to 10 µm (inset of Fig.1b). For comparison, reference devices were also made using the same procedures but with remote graphite gates (d≳ 20 nm) and standard Si-wafer gates.

a,ρxx(n) characteristic of state-of-the-art devices with remote graphite gates (red curve) and our proximity-gated devices (blue, device S1);B= 0 andT≈ 2 K. Although the curves might look like many curves in the literature, the blue one is approximately 100 times narrower than for any previously reported device. The blue curve reaches approximately 100 kΩ but is cut off for clarity. Left inset, schematic of proximity-gated devices. Right inset, illustrates how δnwas evaluated.b, Temperature dependence of δnfor devices with proximity and remote gates (colour-coding as ina). The black parabola is δnexpected for perfect graphene. The red curve is the expected combined effect of residual inhomogeneity and thermal excitations18. Open blue circles indicate the low-Tregime affected by the metal–insulator transition discussed in theMethods. Inset, optical micrograph of one of our proximity-gated devices. White dashed lines outline the graphite gate underneath. Scale bar, 10 µm.

The impact of proximity screening on electronic quality is evident from Fig.1a, which compares the longitudinal resistivityρxxmeasured for devices with proximity and remote graphite gates. The reference device exhibitedµ≈ 106cm2V−1s−1, and the peak inρxx(n) was narrower than 1010cm−2, characteristics rarely achievable without the use of graphite gates. Notably, our proximity-gated devices exhibited much sharper peaks (Fig.1a), indicating even higher mobility and better homogeneity. This observation qualitatively agrees with the previous reports that found that placing graphene monolayers directly on graphite or graphene improved the optical and tunnelling spectra22,23. To quantify charge homogeneity in our devices, we used the standard approach24,25and plotρxx(n) on a log–log scale (inset of Fig.1a). At lowT, graphene starts responding to gate doping only above a characteristic carrier density δnbecause of electron–hole puddles. Although the reference device exhibited δn≈ 2 × 109cm−2(Fig.1and Extended Data Fig.2), matching the lowest δnreported in the literature, proximity screening reduced δnby as much as 100 times (Fig.1and Extended Data Fig.3). With increasingT, δnincreased (Fig.1b) because of thermally excited electrons and holes, which appeared at the neutrality point in densitiesnth= (π/6)(kBT)2/(ħvF)2, wherekBandħare the Boltzmann and reduced Planck constants andvFis the Fermi velocity of graphene. The extra carriers broadened theρxx(n) peak, with their contribution described18,25by δn≈nth/2, in agreement with our measurements on proximity-gated devices (Fig.1band Extended Data Fig.3b). For reference devices, residual inhomogeneity meant that δnconverged with the theoretical dependence only above 150 K (Extended Data Fig.2c).

aZero-fieldρxx(n) at 10 and 300 K.bSame data on a log-log scale. Dashed lines show our evaluation ofδn.cTemperature dependence ofδn. Symbols: Experimental data. Black curve: Expected broadening due to thermally excited carriers. Grey region indicates that electron-hole puddles dominate. The region’s upper bound corresponds toTat which thermal broadening becomes twice that given by the puddles.

aρxy(n) near the NP at 10 and 40 K (color-coded curves). Measurements at 3 mT provided sufficiently large Hall voltages for high accuracy. The full width between the dashed lines corresponds to 2δnfor the case of 40 K.bTemperature dependence ofδn(symbols). Black dashed curves: ½nth(T). Grey region indicates theTrange affected by electron-hole puddles.

Note that, below 10 K, proximity-gated devices often exhibit a logarithmic-kind increase inρxx(T) at the neutrality point, with values reaching well above the resistance quantumh/e2, indicating the emergence of a low-Tinsulating state that could be destroyed by smallB≈ 1 mT (‘Metal–insulator transition’ inMethods). As this insulating state may have affected our evaluation of δnbelow 10 K if we were using the standard procedure, we verified the values obtained in the low-Tregime using measurements ofρxy(n). The Hall resistivity switched sharply between electron and hole doping (‘Charge inhomogeneity from Hall measurements’ inMethods), and the width of the switching region provides an alternative quantitative measure of charge inhomogeneity18, whereasρxyis expected to be less sensitive to localization effects. We found close agreement between δnextracted using both Hall and longitudinal resistivities over the entireTrange, corroborating the threefold decrease in δnbetween 2 and 10 K (Fig.1b).

To evaluateµ, we first employed the standard expressionµ= 1/neρxx. Its use necessitates a cutoff at a finitenof a few δn, where electron–hole puddles start contributing to transport18. For the reference devices, this means that the cutoff was at approximately 1010cm−2and it placed a limit on the maximum achievable mobility asµ= (eℓ/ħ)(πn)−1/2≲ 107cm2V−1s−1, assuming edge scattering dominates (ℓ≈W≈ 10 µm). At thesen, our limited-size proximity-gated devices could also not exceed this limit. However, their exceptional homogeneity pushed the cutoff to much lowern. Figure2ashows thatρxxcontinues to scale approximately asn−1/2into the densities below 1010cm−2. Forn≳ 3–5 × 109cm−2, the extractedℓclosely matchesW(red curve in Fig.2a), as expected for ballistic transport. This also yieldsµ≈ 107cm2V−1s−1. For even lowern, but well outside the electron–hole puddle regime emerging below 108cm−2, the mobility evaluated fromρxx(n) continued to increase with decreasingn, reaching above 2.5 × 107cm2V−1s−1atn≈ 109cm−2, a very high value for graphene. However, at such lown, the standard approach for evaluatingµcan be questioned because the extractedℓare comparable to or start exceedingW(Fig.2a). Although specular reflection at graphene edges can lead toℓ>W(feasible because the Fermi wavelengthλFexceeds 1 µm), the estimate may be skewed by interference (‘mesoscopic’) fluctuations (Fig.2aandMethods).

a, Conductivity and mean free path (black and red curves, respectively). The blue dashed curve shows then1/2dependence expected for transport limited by edge scattering (the best fit yieldsℓ≈ 9 µm). The red line indicates the actual device width of approximately 8.5 µm.b, Ballistic transport probed by magnetic focusing. Left, map of focusing resistanceR21,34(n,B) =V34/I21(blue-to-red scale, −5 Ω to 5 Ω). The currentI21is driven between contacts 2 and 1 as shown in the inset. The voltageV34is measured between 3 and 4.L≈ 13.5 µm. Black dashed curves are the expected positions of the first two focusing peaks (corresponding trajectories shown in the inset). Right, vertical cuts at fixednmarked in the map by colour-coded dashed lines.c, Example of bend-resistance measurements. Insets, measurement geometry (left) and an optical micrograph of the device (right). Colour map showsR61,42(colour scale as inb). The dashed curve isW=Dc/2, the condition where the bend resistance is expected to reverse its sign15,26. Data inaare for device S4 at 2 K. Data inbandcare for device S6 (at 20 K to suppress mesoscopics). Scale bar, 10 µm.

As an alternative means of determiningℓand, therefore,μ, we employed measurement geometries that can probe ballistic transport directly. One of them is magnetic focusing, in which charge carriers injected from one contact are collected by another contact at distanceL(inset of Fig.2b). A magnetic field bends the trajectories, creating caustics that lead to focusing resonances26,27. We found that their positions accurately matched those expected theoretically (Fig.2band Extended Data Fig.5). Importantly, the focusing resonances in proximity-gated devices survived down ton≈ 109cm−2(Fig.2b), whereas in our best reference device withµ≈ 7 × 106cm2V−1s−1, magnetic focusing could be observed only above 1011cm−2, and even highernwere required for Si-gated devices (Extended Data Fig.5). For the proximity-gated device in Fig.2b, the observation of magneto-focusing peaks implies that charge carriers haveℓ≳ πDc/2 = πL/2 ≈ 21 µm (Dcis the cyclotron diameter). Using the semi-quantitative criterion detailed inMethods(‘Magnetic focusing in reference devices’), we found that the persistence of focusing peaks down to 109cm−2yieldsµ≳ 6 × 107cm2V−1s−1, consistent with our above estimates from theρxx(n) dependence.

aandbMeasurements for reference devices with remote Si and graphite gates, respectively. Insets: Device micrographs and measurement configurations (currentI21between contacts 2 and 1; voltageV34between 3 and 4; scale bars: 20 µm;T= 20 K). Color maps: Focusing resistanceR21,34(n,B). Dashed curves indicate the expected position of magneto-focusing peaks (peak numbersPare labelled). Right panels: Vertical cuts from the maps at the labelled densities (in units of 1012cm−2).cTransport mobilities found in our magneto-focusing experiments for devices with the three types of gates. The error bars indicate uncertainty in our evaluation of the extractedμ.

Next, we employed the bend-resistance geometry15,26(Fig.2c). In zeroB, the measured bend resistance remained negative at alln, showing that carriers travelled ballistically between the injector and collector (ℓ>W≈ 9 µm). Even at the neutrality point, where Dirac fermions formed a Boltzmann rather than Fermi gas and experienced frequent Planckian scattering25(‘Metal–insulator transition’ inMethods), the transport in our proximity-gated devices remained ballistic. The carrier density in the Dirac plasma is given bynthand was approximately 3 × 108cm−2for the 20-K measurements in Fig.2c. This yieldsµ= (eℓ/ħ)(πn)−1/2≥ 5 × 107cm2V−1s−1, in close agreement with theµfound above in the Fermi regime. The negative bend resistance at the neutrality point was observed down to 10 K, indicating that, in the low-TDirac plasma,µcould exceed 108cm2V−1s−1. However, interference fluctuations (λF≳ 3 µm) emerging at theseTstarted criss-crossing the colour map near zeron, making the last estimate less reliable. Independent evidence for ballistic transport in the Dirac plasma atTclose to 10 K comes from theρxx(T) dependence at the neutrality point (Extended Data Fig.4). Above 50 K, proximity-gated devices exhibited the expected constant resistivity of approximately 1 kΩ, characteristic of Planckian scattering25,28. At lowerTbut before the onset of the insulating state at approximately 10 K,ρxxwas found to evolve as 1/T(Extended Data Fig.4c). TheTdependence yields scattering times shorter than the Planckian limit and given byW/vF(‘Metal–insulator transition’ inMethods), thus confirming ballistic transport limited by edge scattering down to 10 K. This supports our above estimate forµ≳ 108cm2V−1s−1in the low-TDirac plasma of proximity-gated devices.

aZero-fieldρxx(n) at 0.5 and 2 K (color-coded curves offset by 30 kΩ for clarity).bArrhenius plot ofρNP(T).cSame data on linear scale (orange curve). Red dashed curve: Fit toρNP∝ 1/T, characteristic of ballistic Dirac-fermion transport in the Boltzmann regime. Black curve: Logarithmic fit below 10 K.dEvolution ofρNP(n,T) near the NP (dark blue to yellow: 0 to 80 kΩ).eρNPas a function of perpendicularBat 2 K, showing suppression of the insulating state by small magnetic fields.fTemperature dependence ofρNPat 0 and 5 mT (color-coded). The magnetoresistance changes sign around 10 K. Data for device S1 (W≈ 9 μm).

A direct comparison of graphene with other two-dimensional systems in terms of their transport mobilities was unfortunately hindered by the very different density ranges where ballistic transport is observed. The record mobilities for GaAlAs heterostructures were achieved in a narrow range ofn≈ 1–2 × 1011cm−2, whereas, at such densities, the mobility even in our reference devices was limited by theirW. Additionally, the scattering mechanisms fundamentally differed between the two systems. Transport in high-quality hBN-encapsulated graphene is primarily limited by edge scattering and background fluctuations (‘Sources of disorder’ inMethods), whereas mobilities in GaAlAs heterostructures are limited by ionized impurities6,8,9. The different electronic spectra (linear versus parabolic dispersion) also affect the scattering efficiency. Nonetheless, asµgenerally increases withndue to improved self-screening17, even higher mobilities are probably achievable in graphene at the densities typical of GaAlAs heterostructures, if larger proximity-gated devices become available to reduce edge scattering.

A more direct comparison between graphene and other two-dimensional systems was made using quantum mobility, which is insensitive to device size and geometry. Our proximity-gated devices demonstrated Landau quantization in strikingly lowB(Fig.3a). For example, at 50 mT and 2 K, we observed more than 15 SdH oscillations (filling factorν> 60; cyclotron gaps between neighbouring levels down to 1.1 meV). This indicates that there were extremely narrow Landau levels, in excellent agreement with the measured δn, that yielded spatial variations of the Dirac point ofħvF(πδn)1/2≈ 0.5 meV. Furthermore, the SdH oscillations became apparent at the onset fieldB* ≈ 1–2 mT (Fig.3band Extended Data Fig.6), much lower thanB* in reference devices with remote graphite and Si-wafer gates (approximately more than 35 and 80 mT, respectively). To ensure that the observed minima inρxx(n) originated from Landau quantization rather than interference fluctuations, we not only checked their positions in then–Bparameter space (Fig.3b) but also shifted mesoscopic features by cycling up to roomTand varying the electric field across the graphene using both the top and bottom gates. These procedures altered both the rapidly rising background near the neutrality point and the positions of the fluctuations but left the SdH oscillations unaffected, confirming that the 1-mT minima were, indeed, due to Landau quantization. We believe that SdH oscillations in our proximity-gated devices appeared at even lowerBbut were obscured until their amplitude became comparable toρxx(background subtraction revealed features down to approximately 0.5 mT). Note that, with a constant background, SdH oscillations typically become visible at amplitudes of just several per cent ofρxx(‘Onset of SdH oscillations’ inMethods). The use of higherTto suppress mesoscopic fluctuations was unpractical as it smeared the cyclotron gaps (1.2 meV forν= ±2 at 1 mT), whereas reducingTbelow 2 K amplified the fluctuations (Extended Data Fig.4a).

a, Landau fan diagramρxx(n,B) (white-to-blue scale, 0 to 4 kΩ). Numbers with blue dashes denoteν.b, Horizontal cuts fromaat differentB. Inset, details of the fan diagram in lowB(white-to-blue, 0 to 40 kΩ). Arrows: expected positions forν= −2. Note thatρxx(n) changes rapidly near the neutrality point, which results in a wide dark region that obscures the onset of SdH oscillations. They are better resolved on the horizontal cuts (also, see Extended Data Fig.6).c, Map forρxy(blue-to-red scale, ±h/2e2). The superimposed curves showρxy(n) traces at 5 mT and 10 mT (offset for clarity). Arrows mark the full transition width at half-height, approximately 6 × 107cm−2. All data are for device S1 at 2 K.

a,c,eMapsρxx(n,B) near the NP for devices S2, S3 and S4 (white-to-blue scales: 0 to 40, 25 and 3 kΩ, respectively).b,d,fHorizontal cuts from the maps above. All measurements at ∼2 K. Note that the early SdH oscillations appear superimposed on the pronounced resistivity peak at the NP, creating a broad dark region below a few mT in the color mapsa,c,ethat obscures the onset of Landau quantization. The onset becomes apparent at lower fields using horizontal cuts as inb,d,f.

Quantum mobility can be estimated from the onset of SdH oscillations using expressionµqB* ≈ 1. Although this criterion is widely used in the literature, we validated its quantitative accuracy through studying SdH oscillations as a function ofB(Extended Data Fig.7). Their amplitude followed the Dingle formula exp(–π/µqB), and we foundµqB* = 1 to hold within 10–20%, if the first discernible oscillation was considered asB* (‘Determination of quantum mobility’ inMethods). Thus, the Landau quantization visible on our plots atB= 1 mT yieldsµqof at least 107cm2V−1s−1, setting a lower bound for quantum mobility in proximity-gated devices. (As discussed inMethods, magnetic fields larger than the actualB* were required to resolve oscillations against the rising background and mesoscopics). As Landau quantization involves completed cyclotron orbits, this impliesℓ≥ πDc, even if small-angle scattering (which disrupts the quantization but has a lesser effect on transport) is ignored. Using thisℓin the expression for transport mobility givesµ≥ 2πµq> 6 × 107cm2V−1s−1, consistent with our estimates fromρxx(n).

aOscillatory part of resistivity Δρxxfor two representative densities (smooth background subtracted; curves are offset for clarity). Empty diamonds mark the first visible oscillations.bQuantum mobilities extracted using the rule-of-thumb criterion for the onset of SdH oscillations (diamonds) and using Lifshitz-Kosevich theory fits (red symbols). Inset: Data fromareplotted as a function of 1/B. Dashed curves show Lifshitz-Kosevich fits through resistance maxima and minima.

In line with the early onset of SdH oscillations, the QHE fully developed atB≤ 5 mT (Fig.3cand Extended Data Fig.8a). The transition between electron and hole plateaux at the neutrality point had a half-width at half-height of approximately 3 × 107cm−2(Fig.3c), providing an independent measure of charge inhomogeneity in proximity-gated devices. Importantly, the emergence of QHE plateaux was not constrained by the quality of the graphene but depended on the widthwof the voltage probes, with plateaux developing earlier in devices with largerw(Extended Data Fig.8b). This is attributed to the fact that, at such lowB, bothDc≈ 0.7 µm at 5 mT and the magnetic lengthℓB=Dc(ν/8)1/2were comparable tow≤ 1 µm, causing edge states to be partially reflected from the contacts and preventing the development of quantized plateaux29.

aHall resistivityρxy(n) at differentB(color-coded curves) for device S1. Hall plateaus emerge below 5 mT.bMagnetic field required for their emergence versus voltage probes’ width (blue symbols). Error bars indicate uncertainties in determiningw(from optical micrographs) and the quantization onset. Red curve: CriterionDc=w. The pink area shows wherewexceedsDc, allowing entry of edge states into ohmic contacts.

The achieved electronic quality comes with a trade-off. Many-body phenomena, which are of considerable interest and tend to emerge with each order-of-magnitude improvement in quality, are unavoidably suppressed by enhanced screening21,30. To assess how proximity screening affects many-body phenomena in graphene, we studied the fractional QHE in our devices (Bup to 12 T andTdown to 50 mK). Figure4ashows distinct Hall plateaux and the corresponding resistivity minima atν= 2/3, 5/3, 8/3, 10/3 and 11/3. Notably, no signatures of the 1/3 state could be observed, despite it usually being most profound. We attribute its absence to negative quantum capacitance, which can suppress this state in gate voltage measurements31(‘Fractional QHE under proximity screening’ inMethods). We extracted fractional QHE energy gaps (Fig.4b) and compared them with those in our reference devices, which exhibited gaps consistent with those reported in the literature32–34(Fig.4c). Although proximity screening reduced the fractional gaps by a factor of 3–5 compared to unscreened devices, the gaps remained substantial, larger than those typical of other two-dimensional systems.

a,ρxyandρxxat 12 T and 50 mK (red and blue curves; left and right axes, respectively). Data are plotted as a function of proximity gate voltage, as an accurate conversion to the carrier density was unfeasible due to the 2.5-dimensional QHE in the graphite gate36and negative quantum capacitance31.ρxyis plotted in terms ofν= (h/e2)/ρxy. Horizontal lines mark expected positions of fractional plateaux. Arrows indicate the correspondingρxxminima.b, Arrhenius plots for resistance minima (normalized by values at 2 K) atν= 2/3 and 5/3 were used to extract the activation energies.c, Comparison of fractional QHE gaps in proximity-gated device S1 (red symbols) and a remote-gate device (blue symbols with error bars). Blue rectangular symbols are the expected gaps after proximity screening, calculated using theℓB/2dsuppression factor withd= 1 nm andℓB≈ 7.5 nm for 12 T.

The suppression factor can be understood as follows. The interaction energy responsible for the fractional QHE scales ase2/εℓB(two electrons at distanceℓBsignifying the spatial scale of electron–electron interactions in a magnetic field, andεis the effective dielectric constant), whereas proximity screening changes this expression toe22d/εℓB2(two interacting dipoles each with an electron and its image charge at distance 2d)30. This yields a suppression factor ofℓB/2d≈ 4 at 12 T, in good agreement with our observations (Fig.4c). The fractional states first appeared above 7 T and became more pronounced at higher fields whereℓBdecreased below 10 nm. This length scale matches the spatial range over which the proximity screening withd≈ 1 nm suppressed background electrostatic potential because of the discussed large factor 2πα. The same 10-nm scale was previously noticed in the suppression of two other types of interaction phenomena (electron viscosity and Umklapp scattering)21. These observations indicate that, although proximity screening does reduce the interaction strengths, many-body physics involving scales shorter than 10 nm should remain accessible in proximity-gated devices.

Our study demonstrates that proximity screening can improve the electronic quality of graphene by up to two orders of magnitude. The resulting charge homogeneity is unprecedented (Dirac point fluctuations of less than 10 K), enabling extremely narrow Landau levels and the QHE in a few millitesla. Although the quality achieved comes at the expense of suppressing many-body phenomena, interactions involving relatively short spatial scales (less than 10 nm) remained strong, indicating that proximity screening may be particularly valuable for studying short-range correlated states and many-body physics in high magnetic fields. We anticipate that the approach will prove especially beneficial for studying graphene multilayers and superlattices. As the quality of two-dimensional semiconductors continues to improve, proximity screening may also be relevant for these systems where richer band structures and stronger interactions than in monolayer graphene may reveal new physics enabled by reduced disorder. Alternatively, our approach could be used to intentionally suppress many-body interactions while simultaneously delivering superior electronic quality, as demonstrated by the observation of the helical QHE35in our proximity-gated devices at fields below 80 mT (‘Helical quantum Hall transport’ inMethods).

The devices were fabricated using the standard van der Waals assembly and electron-beam lithography, following procedures established in the literature without introducing critical modifications. Our detailed protocols are provided inSupplementary Informationand summarized below.

Monolayer graphene, hBN crystals (both 30–70 nm thick and 3–4 layers thin) and relatively thick graphite (5–50 nm) were mechanically exfoliated onto an oxidized Si wafer (290 or 70 nm SiO2). Their thicknesses were determined using optical contrast, atomic force microscopy and Raman spectroscopy (Supplementary Information). For most of the reference devices with remote graphite and Si gates, we assembled the exfoliated crystals using polymer-free flexible silicon nitride membranes17. For all proximity-gated devices and some reference devices, we employed polydimethylsiloxane stamps with polypropylene carbonate as a sacrificial layer. Although not critical, we found the latter method preferable for proximity-gated devices as it imposes fewer constraints (Supplementary Information).

We began the assembly of encapsulated graphene by picking up a selected top hBN crystal and then using it to sequentially collect graphene and bottom hBN crystals. Crucially for achieving ultrahigh electronic quality, the stacking process required the slow deposition of two-dimensional crystals onto each other, as this minimized the formation of bubbles and wrinkles and, consequently, allowed the sufficiently large final devices (Supplementary Fig.1). All assembly procedures were conducted in air. Exfoliated flakes were either used within an hour or stored in a glovebox for assembly within 2–3 weeks. The completed trilayer stacks were transferred onto either a graphite crystal (for graphite-gated devices) or an oxidized Si wafer.

Following the assembly, we used electron-beam lithography to define the top gate region and we deposited Cr–Au metallization by electron-beam evaporation. In the subsequent lithography step, we created electrical contacts by first exposing graphene edges using reactive-ion etching and then depositing Cr–Au to form one-dimensional contacts. The typical contact resistance was 2–5 kΩ µm at the neutrality point and decreased down to 0.1–0.3 kΩ µm at high doping. In the final step, we used the metallic top gate as an etching mask and defined multi-terminal Hall bars, as shown in the micrographs throughout the main text,MethodsandSupplementary Information.

Although some devices failed during fabrication (typically because of poor one-dimensional contacts), all successfully fabricated proximity-gated devices demonstrated consistently ultrahigh quality, with SdH oscillations always emerging below 4–5 mT and sometimes below 1 mT. The primary determinants of our device quality were interface cleanliness and careful, slow stacking (as described above and detailed inSupplementary Information).

Magnetotransport measurements were carried out in two cryogenic systems. A liquid-He cryostat with a variable temperature insert was used to study transport from 1.7 K up to roomT. For measurements in the fractional QHE regime, we used a dilution refrigerator (Oxford Instruments) withTfrom 6 K down to 50 mK and magnetic fields up to 12 T.

For resistance measurements, we used the standard low-frequency lock-in technique at 30.5 Hz. Typically, the a.c. currents were between 1 and 5 nA, which allowed us to avoid heating and self-gating effects. Higher currents were required in magneto-focusing and bend-resistance experiments to achieve sufficient signal-to-noise ratios: up to 1 µA for devices with remote gates and up to 0.1 µA for proximity-gated devices.

To control the carrier densityn, we applied gate voltages using a Keithley Sourcemeter-2636B. For proximity-gated devices, in most cases we used only the top Au gate while keeping the bottom graphite or Si gate grounded. This approach prevented tunnelling through and possible breakdown of the few-layer hBN dielectric between the graphene and the proximity gate. However, for measurements of the fractional QHE, we found it advantageous to use the proximity gate to varyn. This strategy allowed us to avoid insulating QHE states inside the graphite gate (due to the 2.5-dimensional QHE in graphite36). Simultaneously, we applied a large bias to the bottom Si gate to suppress insulating states in regions of the graphene electrical leads that were not covered by the graphite gate.

For devices with relatively thick gate dielectrics, the carrier densitynin graphene exhibits a practically linear dependence on gate voltageVgbecause the geometric capacitance dominates (approximately 12 nF cm−2for our Si-gated devices). The linearity holds because typical shifts in the chemical potential of graphene are small compared witheVg. However, the simple relationn∝Vgbreaks down notably in proximity-gated devices with their ultrathin dielectrics, as high-quality graphene exhibits a vanishingly small density of states near the neutrality point and in quantizing magnetic fields. This phenomenon is conventionally described in terms of quantum capacitanceCq=e∂n/∂µ, which contributes in series with the geometric capacitance and consequently dominates if the density of states and, hence,Cqbecome sufficiently small37,38. The resulting nonlinearities in then(Vg) dependence become particularly pronounced in ultrahigh-quality graphene, as elucidated by Extended Data Fig.1. Below we describe our methodology for converting the gate voltage into a carrier density.

aGate voltageVtas a function of carrier densityndetermined fromρxymeasurements at 1 and 10 mT (left and right panel, respectively). Symbols: Experimental data. Solid curves: Best fits using our quantum capacitance model with Landau level broadeningΓ= 0.25 meV. Bottom panel: Device schematics. Applied voltagesVtandVbcreate electric fieldsEtandEbin hBN layers (thicknessesdtanddb). Charge densitiesntandnbat the gates induce the carrier densitynin graphene.bLandau fan diagramρxx(Vt,B) measured at 2 K for proximity-gated device S1 (white-to-blue scale: 0 to 4 kΩ). Dashed curves: Calculated positions of peaks inρxxfor the labeled filling factors.

This equation is generally applicable to any double-gated field-effect device that uses a two-dimensional material as a conducting channel. In most of our measurements, we used only the top gate to varynwhile keeping both graphene and the proximity (bottom) gate grounded (Vb= 0). It is important to note that, according to the above equations, electric fields will still develop in the gate dielectrics, even when the graphene is electrically connected to one of the gates, provided the other gate shiftsµ(n) from zero. Indeed, ifVb= 0, we obtainEb= −µ(n)/edb, which shows that, despite being grounded, the proximity gate with its ultrathin dielectric actively participates in the device electrostatics and, asEb∝ 1/db, strongly contributes to the nonlinear behaviour ofn(Vt).

This equation is written for the general case of a finite magnetic field. Here,Eiis the energy of theith Landau level, andD(E) depends not only on energyEbut also on magnetic fieldBand level broadeningΓdue to both temperature and disorder37,38. We solved equation (1) numerically (using an energy cutoff of 0.5 eV in all computations). Examples for non-quantizing and quantizing fields are illustrated in Extended Data Fig.1aby black solid curves.

Experimentally, we determined the carrier densitynas a function ofVtby measuring the Hall resistivityρxy(Vt) at zeroVband employing the standard expressionn=B/eρxy. The latter is valid only outside the mixed electron–hole regime near the neutrality point (see, for example, Extended Data Fig.3aand ‘Charge inhomogeneity from Hall measurements’ inMethods), which resulted in gaps on our experimental curves for very lown≲ δn(Extended Data Fig.1a). For the known thicknessesdbanddt, we fitted our experimental data using the numerical model described above, with broadeningΓas the only fitting parameter. Extended Data Fig.1ashows good agreement between the experimentaln(Vt) dependences and the model, yieldingΓ≈ 0.25 meV. This shows that, for the presented device, the energy broadening was dominated primarily byT. Our model accurately described the experimental curves in both non-quantizing and quantizing fields (left and right panels, respectively). We applied these fitted dependences (using theΓvalues determined for each device) to convertVtintonand present the experimental data for proximity-gated devices as a function ofnfor differentBandT.

We assessed the accuracy of our conversion procedure by examining how well it describes theρxxpeak positions on the Landau fan diagram measured over a wide range ofVtandB(Extended Data Fig.1b). For monolayer graphene in moderateB, these peaks should appear at filling factorsν= 0, ±4, ±8, ±12, … and follow the immutable relationB(ν) =nh/eνon the fan diagram. Using our model with the extractedΓvalues, we calculatedn(Vt) and used this to determine theB(Vt) dependences for different filling factors, as shown by dashed curves in Extended Data Fig.1b. The excellent agreement between measured and predicted Landau-level positions confirms the accuracy of our procedure for converting gate voltages into carrier densities. Using the same procedure, we transformed the nonlinear fan diagrams obtained as functions ofVt(such as shown in Extended Data Fig.1b) into the standard fan diagrams where Landau levels appear as straight lines radiating from the origin, as required by theory (Fig.3and Extended Data Fig.6). These linear fan diagrams provide further confirmation of the accuracy of our approach.

In the main text, we compared our proximity-gated devices with reference devices that used remote graphite gates. Extended Data Fig.2provides further details about our best remote-gated device. Its zero-Bresistivityρxx(n) near the neutrality point is shown for two representativeT(Extended Data Fig.2a) and replotted on a log–log scale so that we could evaluate the residual charge inhomogeneity δn(Extended Data Fig.2b). With increasingT, the resistivity peak broadened because of thermally excited carriers. The extracted δn(T) is shown in Extended Data Fig.2c. Above 150 K, the experimental data follow the expected parabolic dependence δn=nth(T)/2 ∝T2within our measurement accuracy, as discussed in the main text. Below 10 K, δnsaturates because electron–hole puddles dominate the transport properties.

An alternative way to evaluate the charge inhomogeneity δnis to use Hall measurements18. Extended Data Fig.3ashowsρxy(n) for one of our proximity-gated devices at two representativeT. The density range between the extrema inρxy(n) marks the regime of mixed electron–hole transport where the Hall response no longer follows the standard single-carrier dependenceρxy(n) =eB/n. The distance between the extrema is given bynth≈ 2δnand provides another quantitative measure of charge inhomogeneity18. On increasingTfrom 10 to 40 K, the extrema moved apart and broadened. Extended Data Fig.3bcompares the extracted δnwith that expected from thermal excitations at the neutrality point. Above 10 K, δnfollows the parabolic dependencenth(T)/2 ∝T2(within measurement accuracy), matching the results from the broadening of theρxx(n) peak shown in Fig.1c.

At lowT, our proximity-gated devices exhibited a highly resistive state at the neutrality point, which showed signatures of strong localization and quantum interference. Extended Data Fig.4ais a plot ofρxx(n) under zeroB. There is a pronounced peak at the neutrality point, which reached approximately 100 kΩ at 0.5 K, that is, 5 times larger than expected for charge-neutral ballistic graphene in its minimum conductivity state39. This behaviour indicates a metal–insulator transition, probably of Anderson type, as previously observed in double-layer graphene heterostructures40. The resistivity overshoots the maximum metallic value39of πh/4e2≈ 20 kΩ atn≲ 108cm−2. This corresponds to the Fermi wavelengthλF≳ 3.5 µm, which becomes comparable to the device widthW. In this regime, the number of electronic channels fittingWis reduced to less than 5, whereas the Fermi energy is only 10–15 K. Under these conditions, quantum confinement effects become significant and open energy gaps between quantized sub-bands, which can become comparable tokBT. The onset of spatial quantization could contribute to the observed insulating state, although Anderson-type localization is probably the dominant mechanism given the observedBandTdependences40. Away from the neutrality point, other ‘mesoscopic’ features appeared on theρxx(n) curves at subkelvinT(Extended Data Fig.4a). Given the longλF, these features can be attributed to interference (Fabry–Pérot) resonances caused by standing waves in our ballistic devices.

To elucidate the nature of the observed insulating state, we analysed theTdependence of resistivity at the neutrality point (ρNP). Extended Data Fig.4cshows an example of the measuredρNP(T). The same data are replotted in Arrhenius coordinates in Extended Data Fig.4b. The complete evolution ofρxx(n) withTis presented in Extended Data Fig.4d. These plots rule out the presence of simple thermal activation over an energy gap at the Dirac point, which would manifest as a straight line in the Arrhenius plot. Instead,ρNP(T) has two distinct regimes: (1) logarithmically increasing with decreasingTbelow 10 K (black dashed curve in Extended Data Fig.4c) and (2) a 1/Tdependence at higher temperatures (red curve). The 1/Tbehaviour can be understood as follows. The density of thermally excited electrons and holes at the Dirac point is given bynth∝T2(Fig.1c), whereas their effective massesmth∝T(refs.18,25). Consequently, the observed dependenceρNP∝ 1/Timplies a temperature-independent scattering time,τ=mth/(e2nthρNP), consistent with the ballistic transport of Dirac fermions limited by edge scattering andτ≈W/vF, as discussed in the main text.

The magnetic field dependence provides further insight into the metal–insulator transition. Extended Data Fig.4eshowsρNP(B) at 2 K. The insulating state was suppressed by fields of approximately 1 mT, resulting in pronounced negative magnetoresistance. We attribute this suppression to the breaking of time-reversal symmetry for interfering electron trajectories, a mechanism analogous to the destruction of weak localization in normal metals and which is expected to play a role in strong (Anderson-type) localization18. On increasingTabove 10 K, the magnetoresistance changed sign from negative to positive, as evident from comparingρNP(T) at 0 and 5 mT in Extended Data Fig.4f. This positive magnetoresistance is characteristic of a charge-neutral Dirac plasma in the Boltzmann regime25. The sign change occurs at approximately 10 K, providing independent confirmation of the regime change from the insulating state to the ballistic Dirac plasma, which was inferred above from changes in the functional form ofρNP(T) (Extended Data Fig.4c). The negative magnetoresistance also rules out an excitonic gap at the Dirac point. If present, such a gap would be enhanced by the magnetic field due to stronger confinement and increased exciton binding energy, contrary to our observations.

Extended Data Fig.5a,bpresents magneto-focusing measurements for hBN-encapsulated graphene devices with a Si-wafer gate (approximately 350 nm below the graphene) and a graphite gate (approximately 70 nm below), which are analogous to the measurements in Fig.2for proximity-gated devices. The focusing peaks appear at the expected positions given by26,27B(n,P) = 2ħ(πn)1/2P/eLwherePis the peak number andLthe distance between injector and collector (dashed curves in Extended Data Fig.5a,b).

We define the ‘first appearance’ of magneto-focusing peaks as the carrier densitynwhere theP= 1 peak becomes clearly distinguishable above a noisy or fluctuating background, typically exceeding it by a factor of over 2. Importantly, the peak grows very rapidly as a function ofn, so that the exact threshold factor is relatively unimportant and, in our experience, led to variations of less than 30% in the estimated onset density. Using this criterion, the magneto-focusing peaks in Extended Data Fig.5a,bfirst appeared atn≈ 0.5 and approximately 0.1 × 1012cm−2for the devices with Si and remote graphite gates, respectively. For the measurement geometries shown in the figure insets with injector–collector separationsL≈ 19 and 22.5 μm, this yielded transport mobilitiesµ= (eℓ/ħ)(πn)−1/2≈ 2 and 7 × 106cm2V−1s−1, respectively. These values are in good agreement with the mobilities extracted from theρxx(n) dependences of the devices at the same densities, which validates the criterion suggested for estimating transport mobilities from the appearance of the first peak in magneto-focusing measurements. Accordingly, we have used this criterion to estimateµalso in proximity-gated devices. The surprising accuracy of this rule-of-thumb criterion stems from the very rapid development of magneto-focusing signals with increasingn, which resembles the similarly simple criterion for estimating the quantum mobility as discussed in ‘Determination of quantum mobility’ inMethods.

Extended Data Fig.5csummarizes our findings for mobility in all three types of device. Remote graphite gates improveµseveral fold compared to Si-gated devices (which explains why graphite gates have become common in the recent literature), whereas proximity screening provides another order-of-magnitude enhancement in electronic quality. Note that the achieved mobilities in Extended Data Fig.5chave to be compared at different carrier densities because magnetic focusing became observable only atnthat exceeded δnby 30–100 times, with δnvarying significantly between device types.

We studied seven graphene devices with proximity gates, and results for three of them with remnant δn< 108cm−2are presented below. Extended Data Fig.6shows their Landau fan diagrams near the neutrality point, along with horizontal cuts at several fields in the millitesla range. Quantization becomes clearly visible below 1, 2 and 3 mT for devices S2, S3 and S4, respectively, so thatµqexceeded 10, 5 and 3.3 × 106cm2V−1s−1, respectively. The quantum mobility in device S2 matched or exceeded that of device S1, as described in the main text. To ensure reliable identification of SdH oscillations, we considered them to emerge only if the resistivity minima atν= ±2 became pronounced enough to rule out any possible quantum-interference features (main text and ‘Metal–insulator transition’ inMethods). This required fields notably higher than those needed for the criterionµqB* ≈ 1, where SdH oscillations with amplitude less than exp(−π) ≈ 4% of totalρxxappear atB* (‘Determination of quantum mobility’ inMethods). Accordingly, the above values provide only lower bounds forµq.

Although the expressionµqB* ≈ 1 is widely adopted in the literature, to justify its use in our study, we performed a quantitative analysis of SdH oscillations. To avoid complications arising from the metal–insulator transition, QHE and interference resonances, the measurements were carried out on devices with remote graphite gates at an elevatedTof 5 K. Under these conditions, the SdH oscillations exhibited clear sinusoidal behaviour, with their amplitude exponentially increasing withB(examples are shown in Extended Data Fig.7a).

whereωcis the cyclotron frequency. For each carrier density, we replotted the oscillatory part of the resistivity Δρxxas a function of 1/Band fitted it using the Lifshitz–Kosevich expression, withµqas the only fitting parameter (inset of Extended Data Fig.7b). Extended Data Fig.7bcompares the quantum mobilities extracted from these fits with those obtained using the rule-of-thumb criterionµqB* ≈ 1 withB* being the field at which SdH oscillations first become clearly discernible (empty diamonds in Extended Data Fig.7a). Within our experimental accuracy (10–20%), the two methods yield identical values ofµq, validating our use of the simpler criterion.

Although in our proximity-gated devices quantum Hall plateaux appeared in fields as small as several millitesla, we found that contact geometry, rather than disorder, limited QHE onset. Extended Data Fig.8ashows the Hall resistivityρxy(n) at different magnetic fields. AsBwas increased, the peaks ofρxygrew until they reached the quantized value ofh/2e2at 4–5 mT. At these fields, the cyclotron diameterDcwas comparable to the widthwof our voltage probes (for Dirac fermions atν= ± 2,Dc= 2ℓB≈ 1.6 µm/B(mT)1/2). Consequently, cyclotron orbits at lowerBwere reflected, preventing edge states from reaching the contact regions and, thus, destroying the quantization29.

To corroborate this geometric effect, we examined QHE onset in devices with differentw. Extended Data Fig.8bplots the onset field versusw(blue symbols). Hall plateaux developed systematically at lowerBfor wider contacts, following qualitatively the criterionDc≲w. This indicates that, in our proximity-gated devices, the onset of full quantization was still limited by the dimensions of the voltage probe rather than the homogeneity of graphene or mobility, and we expect the QHE in proximity-gated devices to fully develop in fields as low as 1 mT, if we use contacts wider than 2 μm.

To assess how the fractional QHE develops in our proximity-gated devices, we studied in detail its evolution with increasingB, as shown in Extended Data Fig.9. No fractional states could be observed below 6 T. Their signatures atν= 2/3 and 5/3 first appeared above 7 T and became more pronounced at higher fields (Extended Data Fig.9a,b). Notably, no signatures ofν= 1/3 were observed in any of our devices, which we attribute to the large negative quantum capacitance, which increases the total capacitance near incompressible states and can lead to a complete collapse of visible gaps when measurements are performed as a function of gate voltage31.

aandbρxxandν= (h/e2)/ρxyas functions of proximity gate voltage at differentBfrom 6 to 12 T. Vertical arrows indicate minima inρxx. Horizontal dashed lines mark emerging Hall plateaus forν= 2/3 and 5/3.cMap ofρxxas a function ofBand proximity gate voltage. Numbers indicate different filling factors with red lines serving as guides to the eye.

The emergence of fractional states corresponds to the magnetic lengthℓBdecreasing below 10 nm. This is consistent with the fact thatℓBrepresents the spatial scale of electron–electron interactions responsible for the fractional QHE. This critical scale of 10 nm inferred from the emergence of fractional states at 7 T aligns well with the characteristic scale 2παd≈ 10 nm at which proximity screening ford≈ 1 nm becomes effective in suppressing electron–hole puddles, as discussed in the main text. The systematic appearance of fractional QHE states only whenℓB< 10 nm confirms that proximity screening primarily affects long-range interactions while preserving the short-range ones essential for many-body phenomena in high magnetic fields.

Despite considerable progress in improving the quality of graphene devices over the past decade, the primary sources of disorder limiting mobility and charge homogeneity in hBN-encapsulated graphene remain poorly understood. Our current experiments and the existing literature allow us to rule out several potential disorder sources. First, atomic-scale defects in the graphene itself or at graphene/hBN interfaces are unlikely to be the dominant scatterers. Scanning probe experiments would have revealed individual short-range defects that were clearly visible on the corresponding images42and did not occur within areas as large as over 10 µm2. Graphene/hBN interfaces are known to be atomically clean and flat, with minimal interfacial contamination43(except for bubbles and wrinkles, which, however, were absent in our devices;Supplementary Information). Second, charged impurities at the metal/hBN interface of the top gate also appear to play a minimal role. Further experiments demonstrated no significant improvement when using graphite for both top and bottom gates (placed at distances of more than 10 nm). The latter observation is in line with previous studies using double-gated devices with two graphite gates, which found that mobilities were comparable to those in our remote-graphite-gated devices. Furthermore, attempts to use other atomically flat metallic crystals as proximity gates (including Bi2Sr2CaCu2O8+xand TaS2) failed to yield high mobilities21, presumably due to charged impurities in contact with hBN at their surfaces. Third, elastic strain in graphene can generate electron–hole puddles, but our observations indicate this to be an improbable primary source of disorder. Indeed, strain-induced puddles cannot be suppressed by proximity gating, yet we observed a notable reduction in the charge inhomogeneity.

Beyond edge scattering, which obviously dominates in our limited-width devices, charged impurities within hBN represent the most probable source of both residual disorder and charge inhomogeneity. The hBN crystals used in our devices (from the National Institute for Materials Science) contain impurities at concentrations of approximately 1015cm−3, primarily carbon substituents (T. Taniguchi, private communication). In comparison, state-of-the-art GaAlAs heterostructures8,9contain impurities at concentrations of less than 5 × 1013cm−3. However, this comparison requires nuanced interpretation. Impurities in hBN typically lie deep within the bandgap and remain predominantly neutral, whereas impurities in GaAlAs heterostructures (such as Si used for doping) are mostly ionized. Nonetheless, it is plausible that a fraction of deep impurity states in hBN become charged, creating a background electrostatic potential in graphene. The observed effectiveness of proximity gating (particularly in suppressing charge inhomogeneity by two orders of magnitude) strongly supports this interpretation. Proximity screening specifically targets long-range electrostatic disorder while having a minimal impact on short-range scattering mechanisms. Although this analysis provides useful insights, a definitive conclusion about the dominant source(s) of disorder in hBN-encapsulated graphene demands further systematic investigation. This will probably require larger devices, as the mobilities achieved in our proximity-gated devices have been limited by edge scattering due to their finite size.

Although proximity screening suppresses electron–electron interactions, it can enable quantum phases that are otherwise difficult to observe in remote-gate devices. A notable example is the helical quantum Hall phase in the zeroth Landau level, which arises if a spin-polarized ferromagnetic phase is stabilized either by very large in-plane magnetic fields (approximately 30 T)44or by screening Coulomb interactions using high-εsubstrates35. In standard graphene devices, the zeroth Landau level typically exhibits an antiferromagnetic ground state, resulting in an insulating bulk and insulating edges. By contrast, the ferromagnetic phase leads to a quantum Hall topological insulator with an insulating bulk but conducting helical edge channels where the current propagation direction is locked to electron spin polarization35,44(Extended Data Fig.10a).

a, Left: Schematic of the zeroth Landau level in the ferromagnetic phase leading to helical edge states. Colors indicate spin-up and spin-down valley-degenerate Landau level pairs (red and blue, respectively). Right: Two-terminal measurement schematics. Yellow rectangles represent ohmic contacts. Arrows along edges indicate helical edge state propagation directions.NLandNRdenote the numbers of helical-conductor sections at the left and right edges, respectively.b-eTwo-terminal conductanceG2tas a function of top gate voltageVtat 80 mT for different measurement configurations:NL=NR= 2 (b),NL=NR= 1 (c),NL= 1 andNR= 2 (d), andNL=NR= 3 (e). Dashed lines indicate the expected conductance values nearVt= 0 for each geometry. All measurements at 2 K.

To test for helical edge transport in proximity-gated graphene, we measured the two-terminal conductance in different contact configurations under a perpendicular magnetic field. In our multi-terminal Hall bar geometry, each ohmic contact acts as an equilibration reservoir for counter-propagating edge states, and therefore, each edge section between two contacts represents an ideal helical quantum conductor with resistanceh/e2. Considering conduction along both device edges, the two-terminal conductance can be written asG2t= (e2/h)(NR−1+NL−1), whereNRandNLare the numbers of helical-conductor sections for the right and left edges, respectively (Extended Data Fig.10a, right panel).

Extended Data Fig.10bshows the measured two-terminal conductance versus top gate voltageVtatB= 80 mT, a relatively small but sufficient field for suppressing the insulating state at the neutrality point (‘Metal–insulator transition’ inMethods). As expected, well-defined conductance plateaux appeared at 2e2/hand 6e2/h, corresponding to the filling factorsν= ±2 andν= ±6, respectively. Additionally, a quantized plateau emerged at the neutrality point (Vt= 0) withG2t=e2/h, consistent with helical edge conduction and matching the expected value for our geometry withNL=NR= 2. Geometry-dependent measurements (Extended Data Fig.10c–e) further support the presence of helical transport, as altering the number of contacts along the edges between the source and drain changed the conductance, as expected from the above formula. In all configurations, the observed conductance at the neutrality point showed quantized plateaux matching theoretical predictions.

These results demonstrate helical edge states in proximity-screened graphene at magnetic fields more than an order of magnitude lower than previously required (more than 1 T) using a high-εsubstrate35. This highlights the potential of proximity-gated devices for accessing exotic quantum Hall phases at reduced magnetic fields by suppressing electron interactions.

This file contains the Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Fig. 1.

We acknowledge financial support from the European Research Council (grant nos. 2XPLO2D, QTWIST and 2DSIPC), the Lloyd’s Register Foundation and the EPSRC (grant nos. EP/V007033, EP/V026496 and EP/Z531121). M. Sellers and D. McCullagh provided invaluable technical and theoretical support. K.W. and T.T. were supported by the Elemental Strategy Initiative of Japan and JSPS KAKENHI.