Humanity could descend into a pre-antibiotic world as a result of antimicrobial resistance (AMR). Phage defenses are considered “vintage heroes” in the battle against multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacteria. However, phage resistance continues to evolve, necessitating alternative strategies. A potential solution is combining phages with antimicrobials like silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) to enhance the phage therapy. This study focuses on a combination therapy usingBauhinia variegata L.-mediated AgNPs andPseudomonasphage M12PA to target multidrug-resistant (MDR)Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The antibacterial properties of this combination were evaluated through comprehensive characterizations and assays. As a proof of concept, the AgNP-phage combination delayed phage resistance by 6–12 h, reduced mutation, and enhanced antibacterial efficiency. Anti-biofilm activity improved by ~ 40% compared to AgNPs alone at sub-inhibitory concentrations. AgNPs and phages have demonstrated excellent compatibility, and the phage titer did not drop noticeably over 30 days. Biocompatibility assessments, including cell viability and hemolysis assays, highlighted the safety of biosynthesized AgNPs. Wound healing efficacy was also demonstrated in mouse fibroblast cells and anin ovoangiogenesis model. This study underscores the efficiency of phage-AgNPs synergy to be a potential therapeutic approach for MDR bacterial wound infection, showing effective anti-biofilm activity, delayed phage resistance, and minimal toxicity.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-00449-w.

Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) seriously threatens human, animal, and environmental health, as highlighted by the “One Health” approach. This issue has been exacerbated due to resistance genes transmission among the bacteria by horizontal gene transfer1. The irrational use of antibiotics has driven microbes to develop resistance, endangering treatment efficacy and contributing to widespread health challenges. Management of MDR bacterial infections has become more challenging, leading to fatal outcomes. More than 1.2 million people have died directly as a result of antimicrobial resistance since 20192. Following heart disorders, more deaths are caused by bacterial infections and account for one fatality out of every eight deaths, which alarms the rapid progression of drug resistance and calls for the development of alternative solutions3. In healthcare settings, more than any other MDR pathogens, ESKAPE (Enterococcus faecium,Staphylococcus aureus,Klebsiella pneumonia,Acinetobacter baumannii,Pseudomonas aeruginosa,and Enterobacter species) bacterial pathogens causing numerous deaths and diseases4. One of the most common isolates among ESKAPE from chronic wound infections across Southeast Asian nations like India and Malaysia isP. aeruginosa5. In chronic wound conditions,P. aeruginosaoften undergoes genetic mutations that enhance its pathogenicity and persistence. A mutation may lead to more antibiotic resistance, formation of biofilm, and altered metabolic pathways, thus enabling the bacteria to survive in combative environments such as infected wounds. Additionally, mutations in regulatory genes contribute to the production of virulence factors, which exacerbate tissue damage and delay wound healing. These adaptive changes highlight the complexity of treating chronic infections caused byP. aeruginosa6. Practical and feasible treatment options are a necessity to contend with the AMR pathogens.

In the early 20th century, phages were initially employed to combat bacterial infections, but their use declined with the advent of antibiotics7. The rise in drug-resistance infections has again renewed the interest in phage therapy. Unlike antibiotics, phages exhibit high host specificity, targeting specific bacterial strains, and do not adversely impact the commensals8. Yet, this specificity also leads to phage resistance in targeted bacteria. Phage-antimicrobial synergy has the potential to overcome phage resistance and combat AMR by eliminating pathogens at the infection site. Phage-antibiotics combinations have been tested and exhibited prominent efficiency against drug-resistant pathogens9–12. However, recent studies suggest that antibiotics may reduce the efficacy of phages; selective pressure of antibiotics often leads to resistance in the bacteria when used in combinatorial treatments13,14. In our previous studies, we isolated and characterized bacteriophage vB_PaeM_M12PA (M12PA), demonstrating promising antibacterial activity againstP. aeruginosa(ATCC-15442). The International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) classified phage vB_PaeM_M12PA belongs to the realmDuplodnaviriawithin the kingdomHeunggongviraeand the phylumUroviricota. It is further classified under the classCaudoviricetesand the genusPbunavirus15,16. We investigated the efficacy of phage in combination with wound healing-promoting agents for chronic wound infections. The phage incorporated in ointments and hyrdrogels, and demonstrated stability and effective in inhibiting bacteria. The wound-healing potential of platelet lysate incorporated with phage in a nonionic cetomacrogol cream was assessed in a mouse model showing significant improvement in wound healing16.

This study primarily focuses on preventing bacterial resistance to phages using combination therapy. Ancient civilizations had a history of using silver as an antibacterial agent to prevent infection18. AgNPs’ large surface area to volume ratio confers broad-spectrum antibacterial, antifungal, and antiviral properties19. AgNPs’ killing mechanisms include increasing cell membrane permeability, damaging the cell membrane, producing ROS, and damaging the bacterial DNA inside the cell, which helps combat drug-resistant pathogens20. Biosynthesized AgNPs exhibit comparatively less or no toxicity toward normal human cells21, and plant extract-derived nanoparticles are more suitable for biomedical applications due to their reduced toxicity and enhanced antibacterial activity22,23.

In this study, we propose a synergy of nanotechnology and phage therapy as a promising alternative treatment.P. aeruginosawas used as a test organism to evaluate the efficacy of highly specific phages and their combinatorial effects with biosynthesized silver nanoparticles (AgNPs). The AgNPs synthesized from methanolic extracts ofBauhinia variegataexhibited wound-healing properties24. Additionally, this plant is reported to possess anti-inflammatory, anticancer, antioxidant, hepatoprotective, nephroprotective, and antimicrobial properties25. The stability of the bacteriophage, as well as antibacterial efficacy and delayed phage resistance, were analyzed in this study using a time-killing curve assay. This study explored how the phage-AgNP combination effectively reduces biofilm formation and eradicates mature biofilms by assessing biomass and cell viability across different biofilm phases. The stability of the phages in AgNPs and AgNP’s biocompatibility with the animal cells have been evaluated using mouse fibroblast cells (L929). Moreover, L929 cells were exploited in studying the cell viability and in vitro wound healing assays, as they are commonly used to assess biosynthesized AgNPs in wound healing studies26,27. This study demonstrates the ability of AgNPs-phage synergy to increase the phage’s efficiency in controlling wound infections while promoting wound healing.

The appearance of dark green color from pale yellow indicates the successful biosynthesis of plant extract-mediated silver nanoparticles (PE-AgNPs), the Ag+ion of AgNO3is reduced to Ag0by the plant extract (S. Figure 1). The biosynthesized PE-AgNPs were extensively characterized using following analytical techniques; UV-visible spectroscopy, Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), Energy Dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy, Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, and Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS).

The successful synthesis of AgNPs was confirmed by the distinct Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) at ~ 420 nm in the UV-visible spectrum of the PE-AgNPs (Fig.1a). This SPR absorption is consistent with the characteristic feature of metallic silver nanoparticles and aligns with the visual observations made during the synthesis process.

Characterization of PE-AgNPs, (a) UV-visible spectrum showing the characteristic SPR peak of PE-AgNPs at ~ 420 nm, (b) EDX spectrum confirms the presence of Ag and other trace elements; in the insert, the TEM micrograph represents the shape and size distribution of NPs (13.5 ± 4 nm) indicated, (c) Zeta potential measurement indicates the stability of PE-AgNPs with a value of -19.51 mV, (d) FTIR shows the functional group responsible for the reduction and stabilization of PE-AgNPs.

The TEM images of PE-AgNPs (Fig.1b, insert) indicate that spherical nanoparticles with a size range of approximately 10–50 nm are distributed evenly. The corresponding EDX spectrum (Fig.1b) further validates the presence of silver (Ag) and confirms the reduction of AgNO₃ to AgNPs by the plant extract. The prominent Ag peaks in the EDX spectrum substantiate the successful synthesis of AgNPs.

The zeta potential of the PE-AgNPs, measured as -19.51 mV (Fig.1c), indicates their good colloidal stability over an extended period, suggesting that the nanoparticles are well-dispersed and resistant to aggregation.

The FTIR spectrum of the PE-AgNPs (Fig.1d) displayed several notable peaks: a broad absorption between 3600 and 3200 cm⁻¹ corresponding to the H-bonded O-H stretch, attributed to methanol/water used in the plant extraction process; a peak in the 2260–2100 cm⁻¹ range indicating C ≡ C (alkyne) stretching vibrations; a variable intensity band between 1680 and 1600 cm⁻¹ representing C = C (alkene) stretching; and a strong C-OH stretch within the 1250–1020 cm⁻¹ range, these properties can be attributed to the plant extract’s functional groups. Functional groups could be the reason for the stabilization of AgNPs and reduction from AgNO3. Overall, the comprehensive characterization confirms the successful synthesis, stability, and structural properties of the PE-AgNPs.

The antimicrobial spot assay is a preliminary test that qualitatively determines the antimicrobial activities of samples. In this assay, PE-AgNPs exhibited clear inhibition zones on the bacterial lawn ofP. aeruginosaandE. faecalis. In addition, AgNO3and plant extract were also spotted and used as controls. While AgNO3was reduced by bacteria on the lawn, creating a zone around the bacterial colony, which also turned brown, theBauhinia variegataplant extract showed no antimicrobial activity, as seen in S. Figure 2a.

The AgNPs synthesized throughBauhinia variegataextract exhibited excellent antimicrobial activity with the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of ~ 5.28 µg/mL forP. aeruginosa. The resazurin dye assay determines the viability of bacterial cells in a 96-well plate that contains a series of concentrations of PE-AgNPs, which also confirms the MIC value (S. Figure 2b).

The results indicate that phages were stable at higher concentrations of PE-AgNPs for more than 30 days. After the incubation of 30 days at room temperature, the phage mixed with the MIC of PE-AgNPs titer was 1.7 × 1010PFU/mL. Phage alone without samples titer was 1.9 × 1010PFU/ml (Fig.2a).

Stability and antibacterial efficiency of phage and PE-AgNPs combination (a) Stability of phage in the presence of PE-AgNPs after 30 days of incubation at room temperature, showing no significant reduction in phage titer (log10PFU/mL) compared to the initial day (0th day), (b) Time-kill curve assay ofP. aeruginosatreated with PE-AgNPs, phage, and their combinations (MIC, ½ MIC, and ¼ MIC). Statistical significance of the groups was determined using an unpaired t-test and indicated as ns, no significance; *≤0.05, **≤0.01; ***≤0.005; ****≤ 0.0001.

The combination of phage and PE-AgNPs demonstrates higher antibacterial efficacy due to their synergistic activity. The 24-hour time-killing assay curve illustrated the enhanced antimicrobial activity of PE-AgNPs at their ½ MIC and ¼ MIC when combined, resulting in a delay (6 h to 12 h) in bacterial resistance to phage, attributed to the addition of PE-AgNPs (Fig.2b).

The efficacy of PE-AgNPs and phage-AgNP combinations in biofilm inhibition and disruption was evaluated using CV staining. Biofilm biomass was quantified using CV assay, which could not quantify cell viability. PE-AgNPs and phage combination showed significant biofilm reduction compared to PE-AgNPs alone and negative controls. During the growth phase, the phage-AgNP combination reduced biofilm formation by over 40% at sub-inhibitory concentrations (Fig.3a). In the detachment phase, it disrupted mature biofilms with similar efficiency (~ 40%), surpassing PE-AgNPs alone (Fig.3b). Absorbance readings confirmed substantial biomass reduction, highlighting the enhanced effectiveness of the combination therapy.

Assessment of biofilm disintegeration by phage and PE-AgNPs combination using CV and MTT assay, (a) Biomass quantification using CV assay during the growth phase after 24 h of incubation with PE-AgNPs, phage, and their combination at three different concentrations (MIC, ½ MIC, and ¼ MIC) (b) Biomass quantification during the detachment phase after 24 h of incubation and 6 h of treatment with PE-AgNPs, phage, and their combination. (c) Cell viability was analyzed using MTT assay in growth phase after 24 h of incubation with PE-AgNPs, phage, and their combination, (d) Cell viability in the detachment phase after 24 h of incubation and 24 h of treatment with PE-AgNPs, phage, and their combination. Statistical significance of the groups was determined using one-way ANOVA, and ns indicates no significance; *≤0.05, **≤0.01; ***≤0.005; ****≤ 0.0001.

The 2,3,5-triphenyl tetrazolium chloride (MTT) assay offers a more precise evaluation of cell viability in bacterial biofilms than the CV assay, as it targets explicitly viable cells by producing formazan through a reaction with their metabolic activity. This assay examines biofilm inhibition and detachment in two treatment phases: growth and detachment. After removing planktonic cells, biofilm metabolic activity is assessed by adding MTT. During the growth phase, the combination of PE-AgNPs and phage-AgNPs combination significantly inhibited biofilm formation, achieving over 60% inhibition at sub-inhibitory concentrations, outperforming PE-AgNPs alone (Fig.3c). In the detachment phase, the combination effectively disrupted mature biofilms and reduced viable cell counts by approximately 40% more than PE-AgNPs alone (Fig.3d), demonstrating superior antibiofilm activity.

The Bradford assay was instrumental in confirming the occurrence of protein leakage from bacterial cells during the treatment with PE-AgNPs and phage. Cellular protein leakage was observed after a 4-hour treatment with PE-AgNPs and phage-AgNPs combination. Notably, the higher concentration of PE-AgNPs did not increase the leakage of proteins from bacterial cells. This same trend was consistently observed in the phage-AgNPs combination as well. The augmented protein leakage was observed at sub-inhibitory concentrations of PE-AgNPs in the phage combination, as illustrated in Fig.4.

Protein leakage analysis inP. aeruginosatreated with PE-AgNPs and their combination with phage at different concentrations (MIC, ½ MIC, and ¼ MIC). The assay quantifies the amount of protein (µg/mL) released after the treatment indicating cell membrane disruption. Statistical significance of the groups was determined using one-way ANOVA, ns and indicates no significance; *≤0.05, **≤0.01; ***≤0.005; ****≤ 0.0001.

Fertilized chicken eggs were used to establish thein ovoinfection model, and PE-AgNPs with and without phage were administered to infected eggs alongside untreated controls. Results confirmed the phages’ effectiveness in managing the infection. The eggs were monitored for 24 h, with images captured every 4 h using a dissection microscope. Bacteria-infected eggs died by the 12th -16th hour, while the sample-treated eggs survived until 24 h (Fig.5a). Eggs treated with PE-AgNPs, even at higher concentrations, survived until the 30th hour. In contrast, in the combination of phage-treated and PE-AgNPs, eggs survived for more than 48 h, with no vessel or tissue damage observed from the infection, and they were plotted as a survival graph (Fig.5b).

Thein ovoinfection model demonstratesP. aeruginosainfection in the chicken eggs and evaluates the survival rate in percentage, (a) The dissection microscopy images ofP. aeruginosainfected eggs treated with PE-AgNPs and phage-PE-AgNPs at MIC and ½ MIC concentrations along with phage alone and control (untreated) groups up to 0 to 48 h, (b) The survival percentage against time for infected eggs with the treatment of PE-AgNPs and phage-PE-AgNPs at different concentrations.

The hemocompatibility assay analyzed the hemolytic activity of PE-AgNPs at MIC value. 20% of Triton X served as a negative control, inducing higher lysis (100%) of red blood cells (RBCs), while PBS was a positive control with 3.49% of lysis. PE-AgNPs exhibited a 4.48% lysis of RBCs when treated with a ~ 5.28 µg/mL concentration (Fig.6a).

Illustrates the biocompatibility and cytotoxicity evaluation of PE-AgNPs (a) Hemolytic activity of PE-AgNPs, (b) Cell viability of L929 mice fibroblast assessed by MTT assay in the presence of PE-AgNPs, (c) Live/dead staining images of L929 cells in the presence of different concentrations (A. MIC, B. ½ MIC, C. ¼ MIC, and D. control) of PE-AgNPs, (d) Quantification of cell viability using live/dead assay in percentage. Statistical significance of the groups were determined using one-way ANOVA, and ns indicates no significance; *≤0.05, **≤0.01; ***≤0.005; ****≤ 0.0001.

The MTT assay involved analyzing the cell viability of L929 mice fibroblast cells in the presence of PE-AgNPs at their MIC, ½ MIC, and ¼ MIC. After treatment, a multimode plate reader assessed the wells at 560 and 600 nm absorbance. The sub-inhibitory concentrations of PE-AgNPs in the phage-AgNPs combination demonstrated promising cell viability for more than 24 h of treatment. The results of the cytocompatibility MTT assay showed that PE-AgNPs exhibited higher cell viability at their ½ MIC and ¼ MIC levels, with values ranging from ~ 80–92%, as shown in Fig.6b.

The live/dead analysis, a microscope-based cytocompatibility assay, visually confirmed cell viability using fluorescent dyes. PE-AgNPs were tested on L929 mouse fibroblast cells at three different concentrations along with a control (no treatment). After treatment, cells were examined using an epifluorescent microscope with various filters to differentiate live and dead cells, following the manufacturer’s protocol (Fig.6c). The percentage of live cells was calculated as 86.67%, 95.53%, 98.43%, and 98.93% for MIC, ½ MIC, ¼ MIC, and control, respectively, as shown in Fig.6d.

The wound healing efficacy of PE-AgNPs was evaluated through a cell migration assay using L929 fibroblast cell lines. The study extended over a 24-hour period, wherein the wound closure effectiveness of PE-AgNPs was assessed compared to a control group devoid of any samples. By the 16th hour, scratches treated with sub-inhibitory concentrations of PE-AgNPs showed complete coverage by cells, exceeding 99% (Fig.7a). Figure7b illustrates the complete closure of wells treated with various concentrations of different compounds.

Demonstrates the effects of PE-AgNPs on cell migration using a scratch assay, (a) Scratch assay on L929 cells with the treatment of different concentrations of PE-AgNPs (MIC, ½ MIC, and ¼ MIC). (b) The graph represents the wound closure in percentage analyzed using ImageJ software, Statistical significance of the groups was determined using one-way ANOVA, and ns indicates no significance; *≤0.05, **≤0.01; ***≤0.005; ****≤ 0.0001.

Thein ovoangiogenesis chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) assay was performed as a preliminary test for biocompatibility and cutaneous wound healing, following FDA guidelines (2006)28,29. The study showed that PE-AgNPs at MIC and ½ MIC exhibited good biocompatibility, with no vessel damage or coagulation during 24–48 h of incubation. The phage-treated eggs didn’t have a significant difference from untreated eggs (Fig.8a). ImageJ and Angiotool analysis confirmed improved new vessel formation in plant extract and PE-AgNPs compared to the control. The total vessel area (TVA) (Fig.8b) and total number of junctions (TNJ) (Fig.8c) in the vessels were analyzed in the treated eggs. The presence ofBauhinia variegataplant extract led to an increase in TNJ and TVA. TNJ increased by 38% for both MIC and ½ MIC and by 51% for the plant extract. TVA increased by 25% for MIC, 28% for ½ MIC, and 44% for the plant extract.

Evaluates the effects of different treatments on CAM vasculature at 24 and 48 h post-treatment, (a) Representative images of CAM vasculature at 24 and 48 h after treatment with PE-AgNPs with concentrations of MIC and ½ MIC, plant extract, phage, and control (untreated) (b) Quantitative analysis of the TVA as a percentage at 24th and 48th hours for each treatment group, (c) Quantitative analysis of TNJ as a percentage at the 24th and 48th hours. Both TVA and TNJ were analyzed using ImageJ and angiotool. Statistical significance of the groups was determined using two-way ANOVA, and ns indicates no significance; *≤0.05, **≤0.01; ***≤0.005; ****≤ 0.0001.

The PE-AgNPs investigated in this study are a potential alternative for combating antimicrobial-resistant (AMR) pathogens. The intrinsic antimicrobial activity of metals such as silver has been recognized and utilized for centuries in humanity30. The conversion of these compounds into nano-scale particles amplifies their surface area, consequently leading to increased antimicrobial activity31. Notably, the biologically synthesized nanoparticles utilized in this study offer advantages in terms of biocompatibility compared to their chemically synthesized counterparts32,33. The use ofBauhinia variegataleaf extract in synthesizing AgNPs highlights its eco-friendly and biologically compatible nature.Bauhinia variegataflower extract-mediated AgNPs have been documented to inhibit alpha-amylase activity and scavenge free radicals34. These properties facilitate wound healing, particularly in diabetic conditions. UV-visible spectroscopy is commonly used to characterize and monitor nanoparticle stability by detecting changes in optical properties related to particle size, shape, and aggregation state, which helps to assess dispersion or agglomeration over time35. The SPR absorption peak is influenced by the dielectric medium, the size of particles, and the composition of chemicals in the AgNPs solution36. A significant peak at ~ 420 nm was observed, and this specific SPR absorption confirms the presence of Agº from PE-AgNPs synthesis37. TEM and EDX analysis demonstrated the sample’s size, shape, and elemental distribution. The size of uniformly distributed spherical-shaped PE-AgNPs was in the range of 10–50 nm (S. Figure 3). The nanoparticles were coated with organic compounds derived from the plant extract, significantly influencing the surface charge and biocompatibility of the PE-AgNPs. EDX analysis revealed that the PE-AgNPs have silver, carbon, oxygen, and rubidium. It is not biologically advantageous for medicinal plants to contain Rb. However, it is beneficial to human health38,39. As an essential trace element in the human body, rubidium supports osteoblast proliferation and differentiation. Additionally, Rb can impart multifunctional properties to biomaterials, such as enhancing osteogenesis, promoting angiogenesis, and offering substantial antibacterial effects40,41. The results obtained using PE-AgNPs showed that the zeta potential was 19.51 mV, indicating negative charge-induced repulsion that prevents aggregation and aligns with the TEM results showing uniform particle distribution. The zeta potential of PE-AgNPs measured at − 20 ± 3.2 mV suggests a lack of nanoparticle aggregation42. FTIR analysis indicated that the presence of terpenoids and flavonoids in the plant extract might be responsible for reducing PE-AgNPs, and they were adsorbed on the surface of AgNPs. The peak at 1627 cm⁻¹ indicated the presence of C = C groups, and the 1015 cm⁻¹ peak suggests carboxylic acid. Reducing sugars are also likely to be responsible for the reduction of Ag+into AgNPs, with terpenoids such as cinnamaldehyde, ethyl cinnamates, and β-caryophyllene can reduce Ag+to Ag atoms assumed to stabilize the nanoparticles and aid in the reduction process43,44.

Following the characterization of the synthesized materials, we observed the broad-spectrum antibacterial activities of the PE-AgNPs against common wound-infecting pathogensP. aeruginosaandE. faecalisusing antimicrobial spot assay. Both pathogens are often isolated from the poly-microbial biofilm in wound and urinary tract infection sites45. Due to the strain-specific nature of bacteriophages, we further characterized the antimicrobial activity of PE-AgNPs only againstP. aeruginosa(ATCC-15442) using a MIC assay. PE-AgNPs demonstrated strong bactericidal activity againstP. aeruginosawith a MIC of ~ 5.28 µg/mL. Similar MIC values have been reported in previous studies, which also detail the antibacterial mechanisms of AgNPs, including disruption of cell morphology and structural integrity46,47. This assay was conducted via a serial broth dilution method and confirmed by assessing cell viability using the resazurin assay after a 24-hour incubation period48,49. PE-AgNPs demonstrated consistent antibacterial activity againstP. aeruginosa, with no changes in MIC values throughout the study, indicating no resistance development. However, someP. aeruginosastrains can develop resistance to AgNPs through mechanisms such as efflux pumps, porin modifications, and flagellin-mediated resistance, leading to AgNPs accumulation46,50,51.

The stability of phages in the presence of PE-AgNPs is a critical consideration in combination studies. Previous research has shown no significant reduction in phage titer following incubation with PE-AgNPs for 5 to 48 h at various temperatures22,23. Longer incubation periods are needed to determine storage and shelf life under different conditions. In our study, bacteriophages were stored with PE-AgNPs for up to 30 days at room temperature without significantly altering plaque morphology and titer (S. Figure 4).

A time-killing curve assay quantifies the killing efficiency of antimicrobials against time52. Our study used PE-AgNPs and bacteriophages to plot bacterial survival rates using the absorbance of bacteria at 600 nm. Despite initial phage sensitivity, bacteria became resistant after 12 h. Phage resistance can arise from mutations, including insertions or deletions, and modifications in key phage receptors such as lipopolysaccharides (LPS) and type IV pili. The involvement of CRISPR-Cas systems in phage resistance is relatively rare, as their primary role is associated with exonuclease activity within the bacterial cells53,54. With sub-inhibitory concentrations, PE-AgNPs increased the killing efficiency of phages (at MOI 1), preventing bacterial phage resistance. The phage and PE-AgNPs synergy prevented bacterial resistance for 24–30 h, even at sub-inhibitory concentrations, with no visible resistance markers like pyomelanin, unlike in our previous phage-antibiotic study12. Complete eradication of bacterial cells devoids the likelihood of resistance development, even among persister cells that may survive initial treatment.

There is a high incidence of antibiotic resistance in bacterial biofilms, which account for two-thirds of all infections55.P. aeruginosaforms biofilms at the site of wounds due to its propensity to congregate, thereby resisting the host immune system and conventional antibiotics56,57. Persistent bacterial biofilm formation may adversely affect host tissues due to hyper-inflammatory responses that cause host cell death56. Here, we used 96 well plate-based methods for assessing PE-AgNPs and PE-AgNPs-phage combination’s anti-biofilm activity. It utilizes crystal violet to stain biofilm biomass and MTT for quantification of biofilm cell metabolism58. Phages were tested at a consistent MOI alongside three concentrations of PE-AgNPs to evaluate biofilm biomass using CV and MTT assays in growth and detachment phases. MIC levels of PE-AgNPs fully inhibited biofilm formation, while sub-inhibitory (1/2 and 1/4) concentrations allowed partial biofilm growth. Phage showed limited activity alone during the growth phase but displayed enhanced biofilm inhibition when combined with PE-AgNPs at lower concentrations. In the detachment phase, MIC PE-AgNPs were most effective in biofilm removal, and phage combinations improved efficacy due to shorter treatment times (6 h). Sub-inhibitory concentrations of AgNPs were efficient in detaching biofilm potentially in the combination. The MTT assay during the growth phase confirmed results from the CV assay, with the phage-AgNP combination at sub-inhibitory concentrations showing outstanding biofilm inhibition and bacterial population reduction. In the detachment phase, prolonged incubation revealed that even MIC levels of PE-AgNPs could not completely eradicate bacterial cells. However, phage combinations exhibited notable activity in disrupting established biofilms and reducing bacterial populations. The combination of Phage-AgNPs could be an effective anti-biofilm agent. Phages specifically target and lyse bacterial cells within biofilms, while PE-AgNPs enhance this effect through their broad-spectrum antimicrobial properties59.

The AgNPs exhibit broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity through multiple killing mechanisms. AgNPs damage the cell wall, causing morphological changes due to ROS production, and their positively charged silver ions interact with the cell wall proteins and DNA, disrupting essential processes. Additionally, AgNPs can denature ribosomes, leading to cell death by inhibiting protein synthesis60. Yet the exact mechanism of AgNPs in bactericidal activities is unclear61. To understand the killing mechanism of AgNPs and phage combination, we performed protein leakage studies upon treatment with different concentrations of PE-AgNPs combined with phage. The Bradford assay effectively measures protein leakage from bacterial cells under various antimicrobial treatments. In phage treatments following the lytic cycle, increased protein leakage was observed as phages burst from bacterial cells and cellular debris. After 4 h of treatment (at 1 MOI), the phage lytic cycle led to significant protein leakage. AgNPs were anticipated to cause similar membrane disruption and protein leakage. Interestingly, higher concentrations of PE-AgNPs caused less protein leakage than sub-inhibitory concentrations. Combining phages with PE-AgNPs followed a similar pattern to PE-AgNPs alone across different concentrations. In another study, a lower MOI (0.1) of phages caused more significant protein leakage than a higher MOI (1); however, AgNP concentration effects were not explored23. PE-AgNPs at higher concentrations exhibit greater killing efficiency but may employ mechanisms beyond membrane disruption. Protein leakage, indicative of progeny phage release, was lower in the phage-AgNP combination compared to phage-alone treatments. This reduction is likely due to the limited availability of live bacteria for phage adsorption at higher PE-AgNP concentrations. Notably, the combination of ¼ MIC PE-AgNPs with phages resulted in higher protein leakage, potentially due to these described phenomena.

The CAM assay is an adaptable animal model investigating wound healing efficiency, human bone regeneration, nanotoxicology, cancer therapy with nanomedicine, and infection models62–65. In our study, we infected fertilized eggs withP. aeruginosaand treated them with PE-AgNPs at various concentrations, both with and without phage combinations. In a previous study, we assessed infection control using ciprofloxacin and its combination in the CAM assay29. The results suggested that phages have a primary role in infection control; compared to PE-AgNPs, phages exhibited lower efficacy in inhibiting and disrupting biofilm, as observed in the crystal violet and MTT assays. This suggests that while phages play a critical role in infection control, their effectiveness in biofilm management may require enhancement through combination therapies. Bacterial infections persisted in live fertilized eggs across all treatment groups. However, eggs treated with phages or phage-AgNP combinations showed 100% survival without vessel damage, whereas PE-AgNPs alone required a dose-dependent approach. Phages demonstrated effective control without needing dose adjustments in this experiment.

Biocompatibility assays, including hemocompatibility, cytotoxicity, andin ovoCAM assays, were conducted to evaluate the toxicity of PE-AgNPs. The higher surface area to volume ratio resulted in the broad spectrum activity of AgNPs31,66, their potent killing efficiency raises concerns about their biocompatibility33. Some studies have reported that higher concentrations of AgNPs exhibit hemolytic activity in red blood cells67. Our hemocompatibility assay was conducted at the MIC (~ 5.28 µg/mL) of PE-AgNPs, and it was observed that the PE-AgNPs showed no hemolytic activity, with hemolysis levels remaining below 5%. Cell viability was evaluated using the MTT test when PE-AgNPs were present. Previous studies reported that AgNPs could be more toxic to human cells than AgNO368. In our study, focusing on infection control and wound healing, L929 mouse fibroblast cells were used as a well-established model for wound healing studies and cytotoxicity analysis in various studies69. PE-AgNPs at MIC and sub-inhibitory concentrations (½ MIC, ¼ MIC) were tested, and results indicated that the PE-AgNPs demonstrated minimal or no toxicity compared to the untreated control, likely due to the biological synthesis process. Combining PE-AgNPs with phages demonstrated maximum efficiency in controlling infections caused byP. aeruginosa. Using sub-inhibitory concentrations of PE-AgNPs minimizes toxicity, making this a promising strategy for safe and effective wound infection treatment. The live/dead assay provided valuable insights into cytotoxicity using fluorescence-based microscopy in our study. In this study, live cells are identified by intracellular esterase activity, which converts the non-fluorescent calcein AM into bright green fluorescent calcein retained within the cells70. In contrast, dead or dying cells exhibit red fluorescence as the cell-impermeant dye binds to DNA after penetrating damaged membranes71. The cell viability results from the live/dead assay were consistent with those obtained from the MTT assay, indicating that the sub-inhibitory concentrations of PE-AgNPs exhibited minimal to no toxicity toward the host cells.

The biocompatibility and wound-healing efficacy of PE-AgNPs againstP. aeruginosainfections were assessed using cell migration assays. The plant-derived organic compounds coating the PE-AgNPs mitigate this toxicity and may enhance wound healing. Scratch assays on L929 mouse fibroblast cells revealed that PE-AgNPs at sub-inhibitory concentrations were non-toxic and efficiently improved wound closure compared to untreated controls, demonstrating their dual efficacy in antimicrobial activity and wound healing.Bauhinia variegataextracts have demonstrated significant wound closure in some studies, likely due to flavonoids in the plant extract72.In ovoangiogenesis, CAM assays were done in fertilized eggs to analyze the new vessel formation during the treatment. The vessel formation was analyzed using ImgaeJ and angiotool software. This study tested the TVA and the TNJ after 24 h and 48 h treatment to analyze the wound healing efficiency73,74. The results demonstrated that PE-AgNPs don’t have toxicity towards tissues and blood vessels of eggs, which is in line with the hemolysis assay. An increase in angiogenesis was observed in PE-AgNPs and plant extract-treated eggs than in the untreated control and phage-treated eggs, which were confirmed with the ImageJ and angiotool analysis of TVA and TNJ.

This study does not address the antimicrobial mechanisms of PE-AgNPs, and it has exploited single phage in developing combination therapy, which may not be efficient in controlling polymicrobial infections.

In this study, we synthesized and characterized highly stable PE-AgNPs usingBauhinia variegataplant extract, and comprehensive analyses highlighted the role of organic and inorganic compounds in the plant extract that facilitated nanoparticle synthesis. Moreover, the green synthesized AgNPs exhibited less to no toxicity. Our study confirmed that the synergy of phage-AgNPs could be a promising alternative to control wound infection caused by MDR pathogens. The stability of phages in the presence of PE-AgNPs was not affected during the storage of phages. Phage efficiency was enhanced by the addition of PE-AgNPs, which resulted in phage resistance delay inP. aeruginosa.In combinations, PE-AgNPs at sub-inhibitory concentrations were sufficient to combat bacterial populations in the biofilm. In vitro andin ovostudies have demonstrated that the combination of PE-AgNPs-phage promotes wound healing and infection control. The green synthesized AgNPs facilitated wound healing due to the presence of organic compounds from the plantBauhinia variegata. This synergistic proof of concept combination of phage-AgNPs can be incorporated in wound healing scaffolds such as bandaids, ointment, and hydrogel for effective control of wound infections and to facilitate wound healing.

HealthyBauhinia variegataleaves were collected from the Central University of Tamil Nadu (CUTN) campus, Thiruvarur, India. AgNO3was purchased from HiMedia, India. The experiments employed a range of media and reagents sourced from various suppliers. Muller Hinton agar (MHA), Muller Hinton broth (MHB), Luria Bertani (LB) broth, and crystal violet (CV) powder were obtained from HiMedia, India. Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s media (DMEM), high glucose media (Gibco DMEM, high glucose), and LIVE/DEAD™ cell imaging kit (Invitrogen) were procured from Thermo Fisher Scientific, India. Fetal bovine serum (FBS) was acquired from HiMedia, India. Additionally, 3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) dye, trypsin, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), and bovine serum albumin were sourced from Merck, India, while Resazurin dye was obtained from TCI chemicals, India.

The plant extract was prepared from the leaves ofBauhinia variegatausing the methanol extraction method75. A 12 ml of plant extract (1 mg/mL) was taken, 400 µl of AgNO3(2mM) was added with plant extract and made up to a final volume of 20 ml by adding distilled water. The plant extract (1 mg/mL) and AgNO3(2mM) alone were kept as controls. All flasks were incubated in a shaking incubator at 60 °C for 48 h at ~ 125 rpm.

The formation of biosynthesized AgNPs was confirmed via UV-visible absorption spectroscopy using a UV3200 LABINDIA spectrophotometer. Functional groups associated with the PE-AgNPs were analyzed using Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR Bruker Alpha-2) within the spectral range of 4000–400 cm⁻¹. The morphology and size distribution of the PE-AgNPs were characterized through Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) after drying samples on a copper grid, with analysis performed using a FEI Technai Spirit TEM (Netherlands). Elemental composition was verified through Energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy. Both TEM and EDX analyses were conducted at the Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore. The surface electrical charge of the PE-AgNPs was determined using Zeta potential measurements via Dynamic Light Scattering (DLS - litesizer 500, Anton Paar). The presence of AgNPs and the proportion of organic and inorganic components in the synthesized PE-AgNPs were evaluated to confirm successful green synthesis.

Bacterial cultures were revived from glycerol stock, and overnight cultures ofP. aeruginosa(ATCC-15442) andE. faecalis(ATCC-14506) were prepared. A bacterial lawn was prepared on an MHA plate using 50 µl of each culture. PE-AgNPs was tested for antibacterial activity by spotting 3 µl of solution onto the plate, along with controls such as AgNO3and plant extract. The plate was then incubated at 37 °C for 24 h.

The methodology to determine the MIC of PE-AgNPs was adopted from Clinical Laboratory Standards (CLSI)76. A 0.5 McFarland standard ofP. aeruginosa(1.5 × 108CFU/mL) was prepared from an overnight culture. In a 96-well plate, 90 µL of MHB broth and 100 µL (169 µg) of PE-AgNPs were added to the first well, followed by double-fold serial broth dilution. Then, 10 µL of the bacterial suspension (1.5 × 106CFU/mL) was added to each well, bringing the total volume to 100 µL. After 24 h of incubation at 37 °C, 20 µL of resazurin dye (0.15 mg/mL) was added, and the plate was incubated for another 4 h. The experiment was performed in triplicate.

PseudomonasPhage M12PA was isolated from sewage samples in Thiruvarur, India, and completely characterized16. Enriched bacteriophage lysate was prepared to assess stability. PE-AgNPs were mixed with the phage lysate at MIC, while a phage lysate without PE-AgNPs served as a control. All samples were incubated for 30 days at room temperature. After incubation, the samples were serially diluted with phage buffer in a sterile 96-well plate. The diluted samples were then spotted on an LB plate using the agar overlay method to determine the phage titer via bacteriophage spot assay, followed by overnight incubation at 37°C22. The experiments were repeated in triplicate.

The experimental setup involved the utilization of sterile centrifuge tubes, each containing 1 ml of sterile LB media, test samples, bacteria, and phage.P. aeruginosacultures with a 0.5 McFarland standard (1.5 × 108CFU/ml) were prepared, from which 100 µL of bacteria and 10 µL of phages were added to each tube to achieve a MOI of 1. The choice of 1 MOI was based on the superior bactericidal effect it had previously observed in our earlier studies. A total of 9 tubes were prepared for the experiment: 3 tubes each containing three different concentrations (MIC, ½ MIC, and ¼ MIC) of PE-AgNPs, Three tubes containing three different concentrations of PE-AgNPs combined with phages, and an additional three tubes designated as controls, including bacteria alone, phages with bacteria, and blank control. All tubes were then incubated in a shaking incubator at 37 °C for 24 h, with the growth of bacteria in the presence of phage and PE-AgNPs being monitored using a multi-plate reader (Glomax, Promega) at 600 nm at two-hour intervals.

Crystal violet and MTT assays were used to evaluate biomass and cell viability inPseudomonas aeruginosa(ATCC-15442) biofilms. The assays involved two stages: growth and detachment. In the growth phase, bacteria were incubated with test samples allowed to form a mature biofilm. In the detachment phase, mature biofilms were treated with the samples. In the growth phase, 0.5 McFarland standard (1.5 × 10⁸ CFU/ml) was prepared from an overnight culture. In LB broth, 9 tubes were set up with 3 concentrations (MIC, ½ MIC, ¼ MIC) of AgNPs, both with and without phages. Controls and phages without PE-AgNPs were included. After adding 100 µL of bacterial culture and 10 µL of phages (1 MOI) to the appropriate tubes, the samples were incubated for 24 h at 37 °C in a shaker incubator at ~ 120 rpm. Crystal violet assay was performed to analyze the total biomass of the bacteria after treatment with the samples. In the growth phase, the presence of PE-AgNPs and phage was observed after 24 h of incubation. For detachment studies, cultures were allowed to grow on 96 well plates with the same conditions for growth studies. Post incubation, planktonic cells were removed and washed with PBS. Following the washing step, wells were treated with the samples of PE-AgNPs w/o phage and PE-AgNPs with phage in 3 concentrations and incubated for 6 h in a shaking incubator at 37 °C. After incubation, planktonic cells were removed and washed with sterile PBS twice. Then, 100 µl of 0.1% crystal violet was added to each well and allowed for 10–30 min at room temperature. After the staining process, crystal violet dye was removed from the wells and washed again with PBS. The plate was dried at room temperature, and then 200 µl of ethanol (100%) was added to each well [10]. Well-mixed ethanol (100%) was then carefully transferred to a sterile 96-well plate for reading at ~ 600 nm.

In the MTT assay, bacterial cell viability was observed in both growth and detachment phases in the biofilm. Similar conditions were provided for both phases as described in the CV assay. In the detachment phase, bacteria were allowed to form biofilm for 24 h and incubated with samples (MIC, ½ MIC, ¼ MIC of PE-AgNPs w/o phage and with phage) for 24 h. Following the treatment with samples, the planktonic cells were removed and washed with PBS twice. 50 µl of MTT dye (5 mg/mL) and 150 µl of PBS were added in each well and incubated in the dark for 2 h at 37 °C in a shaking incubator with ~ 120 rpm. Post incubation, 150 µl of DMSO was added to each well to dissolve the formazan crystals. The plate was incubated at room temperature for 15–20 min, and absorbance was checked using a multimode plate reader (Glomax) at ~ 600 nm. The triplicate values of the assays were depicted as percentages of cell viability.

Protein leakage fromP. aeruginosawas quantified using the Bradford assay. A fresh overnight culture was grown to an OD₆₀₀ of 0.5 (~ 1 × 10⁹ CFU/mL). Bacterial suspensions (1 mL) were treated with PE-AgNPs (at MIC, ½ MIC, and ¼ MIC) and Phage-AgNPs (1 MOI combined with MIC, ½ MIC, and ¼ MIC). Controls included untreated bacteria, phage alone, and a blank. After 4 h of incubation at 37 °C in a shaking incubator (~ 125 rpm), samples were centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min. Supernatants (100 µL) were mixed with an equal volume of Bradford reagent in a 96-well plate and incubated for 5–10 min at room temperature in the dark. Absorbance was recorded at 600 nm using a multimode plate reader (Glomax). Protein concentrations were calculated from a standard curve using bovine serum albumin (BSA) with the regression correlation. (R² = 0.985, Y = 877.68X − 85.328).

Following guidelines set by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC), the National Institutes of Health, and the Animal Scientific Procedures Act (ASPA) in the U.K., it is established that a chicken embryo, not surpassing the 14th day of its incubation period, is considered not to experience pain. Consequently, experimentation involving such chicken embryos is permissible without ethical restrictions or the necessity for prior protocol approval. The utilization of chicken embryos in our study was conducted in adherence to these regulations and did not warrant ethical approval. Fresh chicken eggs were purchased from farms in and around the CUTN and subjected to surface sterilization. These eggs underwent incubation at 37 °C for 4 days to initiate embryo development, with periodic rotation every 6 hours to prevent adherence of the embryo to the shell. Following incubation, approximately 4 mL of albumin was taken out using a 5 mL syringe through an air sac puncture, facilitating a more accessible working space within the eggs. Additionally, a rectangular window was created on the egg’s top surface, allowing the inoculation of 10 µL of 0.5 McFarland standard (1.5 × 106CFU/mL) ofP. aeruginosaculture to induce infection. 100 µL of PE-AgNPs (MIC and ½ MIC) with and without phages and phages alone at 1 MOI were introduced to the infected eggs, covered with cling film, and microscopically observed at 4-hour intervals up to 24 h. Stereomicroscope (Infinite-10X-6745 trinocular microscope) images were captured to assess the clearance of infection or biofilm formation. Control eggs withP. aeruginosainfection (untreated) and eggs without infection were also maintained. The survival of the eggs was monitored up to 48 h following treatment.

The hemocompatibility assay was conducted following the protocol established in our previous studies29,77. Blood was collected from the blood bank and placed into a 15 ml centrifuge tube containing ~ 9 mg of EDTA. The blood was then centrifuged at 1500 rpm for 5 min. The red blood cell (RBC) pellet was washed and re-suspended in PBS to make a total volume of 6 ml. The re-suspended RBCs were aliquot, and the MIC value of PE-AgNPs was added to the suspended RBCs to make a final volume of 500 µl. In addition, PBS and 20% Triton-X were added as controls in a separate 1.5 ml centrifuge tube. All tubes were vortexed after incubating for 4 h at 37 °C and then centrifuged for 5 min at 1500 rpm. After centrifugation, 100 µl of the supernatant was carefully collected and transferred to sterile 96 well plates for reading at 575 nm in a microtiter plate reader (Bio-Rad iMark).

The MTT assay was conducted to evaluate cell survival and active metabolism in the presence of PE-AgNPs. The L929 cell line was seeded in a sterile 96-well tissue culture-treated plate at a density of 10,000 cells per well. The cells were allowed to attach and proliferate in a 5% CO2incubator at 37 °C for 24 h. The cells were incubated for 24 h after reaching 70–80% confluence with MIC, ½ MIC, and ¼ MIC of PE-AgNPs. A positive control without the sample and a negative control treated with 20% Triton-X were also used. The medium was removed after incubation, and sterile DPBS was used to wash the cells. Using fresh media, 0.5% of MTT solution was prepared, and 100 µl was added to each well; then, the plate was incubated for 4 h at 37 °C in 5% CO2. Post-incubation, 100 µl of DMSO was added to each well, and the plate was incubated for 20 to 30 min at 37 °C in a 5% CO2incubator. Following incubation with DMSO, the plate was analyzed using a microtiter plate reader (Promega-Glomax) at 560–600 nm wavelength.

Live/dead staining and imaging analysis were carried out to evaluate the cytotoxicity of PE-AgNPs. The experiment follows the standard protocol for live/dead imaging (Invitrogen) under a fluorescent microscope. L929 mouse fibroblast cells were seeded in the number of ~ 30,000 cells/ml in the 12-well plate and incubated to reach 70-80% confluence. Post incubation, media was removed, and wells were treated with samples (MIC, ½ MIC, and ¼ MIC of PE-AgNPs) and incubated for another 24 h. After 24 h treatment, the stock stain was prepared per the manufacturer’s protocol, added to each well, and incubated for 15–20 min in the dark at 37 °C. The epi-fluorescent microscope was used to capture the images, employing a wavelength of 475/535 nm for live cells and 535/630 nm for dead cells. Cells with no treatment were kept as a positive control.

The efficiency of PE-AgNPs in promoting cell migration was evaluated using L929 mouse fibroblast cells obtained from NCCS, Pune. Approximately 50,000 cells/mL were seeded and grown to 90-95% confluence in a 12-well plate. After incubation, a scratch was made using a sterile tip, and the media was removed. The wells were then washed with DPBS, and different concentrations of PE-AgNPs (MIC, ½ MIC, and ¼ MIC) were mixed with media and added to the wells. The cells were incubated at 37 °C, and cell migration was monitored using an inverted microscope from when the scratch was made until completely closed. Images were captured every 4 h during the migration process and analyzed using ImageJ software.

Chorio Allantoic Membrane assay (CAM) orin ovoangiogenesis assay in fertilized chicken eggs was carried out to determine the biocompatibility and angiogenesis efficiency of PE-AgNPs. After 4 days of incubation, fertilized eggs were used to assess the development of new vessel formation. The angiogenesis efficacy of PE-AgNPs was tested at two different concentrations: MIC and ½ MIC. After adding 100 µL of PE-AgNPs (MIC, ½ MIC), plant extract, and phage in the vessels of the eggs, the window was sealed with cling film, and the eggs were incubated at 37 °C for 48 h. In the control group, no samples were added. During incubation, images were taken using a stereomicroscope at the 24th and 48th hour. Vessel and joint formation in both the treated and control groups were quantitatively analyzed utilizing ImageJ and Angiotool software.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

The authors thank the Central University of Tamil Nadu for providing essential laboratory facilities and the local farmers for supplying fertilized chicken eggs.