has
been reported
to exhibit significant antitumor effects, primarily due to its active
ingredient, Tanshinone IIA (TSA). However, its low solubility and
bioavailability pose challenges for its application. This study employed
the antisolvent precipitation method to explore the self-assembly
potential of TSA molecules for developing possible soluble nanomedicine.
It was found that the morphology of self-assembled TSA aggregates
was nanorods, and finally, numerous TSA nanorods (TSA NRs) were synthesized.
Our findings indicate that TSA can self-assemble into nanorods through
hydrophobic interactions and π-π stacking. Additionally,
a polydopamine (PDA) coating, along with polyethylene glycol (PEG)
and folic acid (FA) modifications, was applied to the TSA NRs to achieve
high drug loading capacity, high stability, and a targeted delivery
system. The resulting nanomedicine, PEG–PDA@TSA NRs, exhibits
excellent dispersion and stability, remaining stable under physiological
conditions. The antitumor efficacy of this system was evaluated using
an H22 tumor mouse model, and the results demonstrated that FA-modified
PEG–PDA@TSA NRs can significantly inhibit tumor growthin vivo. This study successfully developed a FA–PEG-PDA@TSA
NR nanodrug delivery system, effectively enhancing the pharmacological
activity of TSA and providing a novel formulation strategy for cancer
treatment.

As one of the diseases with the highest
mortality rates, cancer
has brought challenges to global medicine. Hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC), the most common primary liver cancer, remains a leading cause
of cancer-related deaths globally. In the US, it is the ninth leading
cause of cancer mortality. Despite advancements in prevention, screening,
diagnosis, and treatment, HCC incidence and mortality rates continue
to rise. Addressing HCC is critical, as
it not only impacts patient survival but also places a significant
burden on healthcare systems. Developing effective strategies to combat
HCC is therefore an urgent priority for improving public health and
societal well-being. It has been reported that approximately 60% of
anticancer agents have emerged from nature bioactivity including microorganisms
and plants. Traditional Chinese medicine
(TCM), among these sources, is used in various cancer treatments because
of its low side effects and favorable pharmacological profile.

Bunge, also
known as Danshen (DS) in TCM, refers to the dried roots of the plant
and exhibits various pharmacological effects. Diterpenoids are one group of the major bioactive components in
DS, which possesses a variety of pharmacological activities, such
as antibacterial, antioxidative, anti-inflammatory, and antineoplastic. Among all the diterpenoids, TSA is the major
constituent of the processed herb, and many studies have mainly focused
on its pharmacological activity.−Chen discovered TSA enhances cytotoxicity and pro-apoptotic effects against
HepG2 cells, mediated by the upregulation of the intracellular ROS
level, the increased cell cycle arrest at S phase, enhanced necrocytosis,
and upregulation of caspase 3/7 and P38 protein expression. Ren et
al. illustrated in their research that
TSA can induce apoptosis in HCC through the miR30b-p53-PTPN11/SHP2
signaling pathway, suggesting its potential for clinical treatment
and management of HCC.In vivoexperiment confirmed
that TSA can effectively inhibit tumor growth, no matter whether it
is injected intravenously, subcutaneously, or intraperitoneally. However, TSA’s limited solubility and
bioavailability pose significant challenges to its practical application.

Encouragingly, nanotechnology has been reported to be an effective
solution to overcome the barriers to anticancer drug delivery. These nanoparticles are formed by the active
constituents of TCM, which aggregate or self-assemble due to interactions
that enhance the solubility of the drug.−Sheng et al. discovered a novel quercetin nanorod formulation
prepared by the fluid bed coating crystallization technique. Due to
the small particle size and large surface area, quercetin has a higher
dissolution rate and higher antioxidant activity than the original
quercetin. Fan et al. reported a simple
and green approach to design a carrier-free, pure nanodrug (UA NP)
by the self-assembly of UA molecules nanosized by pure UA self-assembly,
which was without the help of a vehicle and water-soluble drugs. These
nanoparticles exhibit enhanced solubility and stability relative to
those of free UA.

Although carrier-free self-assembled nanomedicines
offer a promising
approach to enhancing the solubility of poorly soluble compounds,
their limitations in targeting capability and functional modification
pose significant challenges for overcoming physiological barriers.
This results in low bioavailability and restricts their potential
applications. The advancement of novel drug delivery systems presents
a viable solution to these issues. A nanocarrier drug delivery system,
effectively assisting to improve the solubility, bioavailability,
and targeting of drugs in the human body, is a crucial means for treating
cancer and other diseases. Fuster et
al. constructed RA-loaded silk fibroin
nanoparticles (RA-SFNs) to ameliorate the bioavailability of RA. Tang
et al. lactoferrin (Lf) comodified NPs
with borneol modification (Lf-BNPs) increased the cellular uptake
of 16HBE cellsin vitroand not only enhanced the
penetration and transport of dopamine through the nasal mucosa, but
also enhanced the drug delivery by opening the tight junctions of
the BBB. For TSA, molecule is planar and belongs to the “I”
linear structure, which is conducive to the formation of hydrophobic
interactions between molecular frameworks. Meanwhile, the formation of π–π stacking also
facilitates the self-assembly of molecules. However, as a lipid-soluble
component, TSA suffers from poor water solubility and undergoes rapid
metabolismin vivo, making it difficult to achieve
effective concentrations at the tumor site;,the lack of targeted drug delivery systems presents significant
challenges that limit their efficacy. This situation necessitates
ongoing modifications of natural self-assembled nanomedicines to enhance
both their circulation duration and targeting capabilities.

In this study, we focused on preparing and optimizing TSA nanodrugs
through the antisolvent precipitation technique first. Subsequently,
we investigated the feasibility of TSA self-assembly, specifically
discovering that TSA can coassemble to form nanorod TSA NRs, driven
by π-π stacking and the hydrophobic effect. Next, we coated
the TSA NRs with PDA to reduce the level of nanorod agglomeration
and achieve a more uniform size. We then functionalized the TSA NRs
with PEG-NH2to enhance stability and modified them with
FA to improve drug accumulation at the tumor site. Ultimately, we
prepared FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs. Physicochemical characterization
revealed that FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs exhibit enhanced solubility
and stability compared with TSA alone. Additionally, we evaluated
the antitumor potential of FA–PEG-PDA@NRs.In vitroexperiments demonstrate that FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs possess excellent
biosafety and exhibit no toxicity to tissues. In anin vivoH22 tumor mouse model, FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs displayed a significant
inhibitory effect on tumor growth. In summary, our work proposes a
self-assembly nanotechnology based on TCM, modified by the incorporation
of a variety of materials. This approach highlights the advantages
in physicochemical properties and pharmacological activity, thereby
broadening the scope of development of nanotechnology.

Tanshinone IIA (>98%) was purchased from
Shanghai Yuanye Biotechnology Co. THF (99.5%) was purchased from Anhui
Zaisheng Technology Co. Dopamine was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich,
USA. mPEG-NH2was purchased from Shanghai McLean Biochemical
Technology Co.

The TSA NRs
were prepared using the antisolvent precipitation method. First, a
TSA stock solution was prepared by dissolving 0.1 mg of TSA in 0.1
mL of THF, resulting in a concentration of 1 mg/mL. This TSA solution
was then injected into 80 mL of water under sonication. Sonication
was continued for 5 min after complete injection to produce carrier-free
TSA NRs.

To prepare stable and
homogeneous TSA NRs, we first investigated the effects of various
conditions on their formation: the types of organic phases (THF, DMSO,
and acetone), the ratios of the organic phase to the aqueous phase
(1:10, 1:25, 1:50, and 1:100), and the initial concentration of TSA
(10, 20, and 30μg/mL) on the TSA NRs. We optimized
the latest preparation process using particle size, polydispersity
index (PDI), and zeta potential as indicators.

The morphology
of TSA NRs was examined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM,
Hitachi HT-7800, Japan). Particle size distribution and PDI were determined
by using dynamic light scattering (DLS, Brookhaven BI9000AT system,
Brookhaven Instruments Corporation). Spectral properties were analyzed
with UV–visible spectroscopy (Shimadzu UV-2700, Japan), fluorescence
spectroscopy (Hitachi F-7000, Japan), and Fourier transform infrared
spectroscopy (FT-IR, Shimadzu IR Tracer 100, Japan). Crystallographic
analysis of raw TSA and lyophilized TSA NRs was performed by X-ray
diffraction (XRD, Bruker D8 QUEST, Germany) with Cu Kα radiation,
scanning from 5° to 55° (2θ) at 10°/min. Thermal
behavior was evaluated using differential scanning calorimetry (DSC,
Shimadzu DSC-60, Japan) under nitrogen purge (10 mL/min), with temperature
ramps from 25 to 500 °C at 10 °C/min using sealed aluminum
pans.

TSA analysis
was performed using a Shimadzu HPLC system (Shimadzu Corporation,
Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a Hydrosphere C18 analytical column (250
× 4.6 mm, 5 μm) maintained at 30 °C. An isocratic
mobile phase of acetonitrile/0.1% phosphoric acid aqueous solution
(76:24, v/v) was delivered at 1.0 mL/min, with 10 μL injections
and detection at 270 nm. For quantification, the TSA reference standard
was precisely weighed and dissolved in methanol by sonication to prepare
a 1 mg/mL stock solution, which was serially diluted with methanol
to standard concentrations of 5, 20, 50, 80, 120, 160, and 180 μg/mL.
After filtration through 0.22 μm membranes, a linear calibration
curve (5–180 μg/mL) was established by plotting peak
area (A) versus concentration (C, μg/mL), yielding the regression
equation:A= 74794C + 74255 (R2= 0.9996,Figure S1), confirming
excellent method linearity.

Saturation solubility
testing was performed by placing the TSA or TSA NRs in centrifuge
tubes. The tubes were weighed and then shaken at 150 rpm for 48 h
in a constant-temperature water-bath shaker at 37 ± 0.5 °C.
After the system attained equilibrium, the samples were centrifuged,
and the supernatant was analyzed by HPLC under predefined chromatographic
conditions.

AutodockTools v1.5.7 was used to perform semiflexible molecular
docking simulations of a possible TSA with the Lamarckian genetic
algorithm and calculated binding energy. In addition, the NRs solution
was supplemented with various blocking agents with different strengths
(0.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 100 mM NaCl, 100 mM urea, 100
mM NaOH, 100 mM HCl, DMSO, THF, or DMF), and the absorbance was then
measured at 270 nm and UV spectral data was recorded.

DA (0.1 mg/mL) was added
to the TSA NRs solution, suspension, and polymerized at pH 8.5. The
resulting precipitate was collected by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm
for 15 min. In order to prepare TSA NRs with high effectiveness, we
first examined the effects of different condition forces on TSA NRs:
the concentration of DA (50, 100, and 200 mg/mL) on the PDA@TSA NRs
and the coating time (2, 3, and 4 h) of DA on the TSA NRs and screened
the latest preparation process using drug loading content (DLC) and
entrapment efficiency (EE) as indicators.

PDA@TSA NRs were dispersed into methanol, followed by vortexing
and sonication to ensure complete drug release. The TSA content was
quantified by HPLC under the chromatographic conditions described
previously.

The PDA@TSA NR
aqueous dispersion was mixed with mPEG-NH2(2 mg/mL). PEG–PDA@TSA
NRs were subsequently synthesized by adjusting the solution to pH
9 using a Tris buffer solution, followed by overnight stirring and
centrifugal collection of the precipitate.

PDA@TSA NRs and PEG–PDA@TSA
NRs were submerged underwater for storage, with size and PDI being
measured over 7 consecutive days to assess the nanoparticles’
stability. Additionally, the PEG–PDA@TSA NRs were dispersed
in either PBS or DMEM, and the stability in different media was evaluated
by measuring size within 48 h.

The PDA@TSA NRs
were dispersed in water, followed by the addition of FA–PEG-NH2(1 mg/mL). FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs were then obtained by
adjusting the solution to pH 9 using a Tris buffer solution, stirring
overnight, and finally collecting the precipitate through centrifugation.

whereV0is total
release medium volume (mL),Ciis TSA
concentration at timei(μg/mL),Vtis sampling volume (mL), andmis
total drug mass (μg).

To assess the potential toxicity of
nano preparationsin vivo, healthy mice were injected
with saline and FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs (TSA, 5 mg/kg) via the tail
vein every 2 days. After 7 days, the mice were euthanized. The major
organs, namely, the heart, liver, spleen, lungs, kidneys, and brain,
were excised and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde. The tissues were then
embedded in resin, sectioned, and subjected to H&E staining for
observation.

First, we
utilized H22 cells to establish a tumor-bearing mouse model through
the injection of 100 μL of H22 cell suspension containing 107cells. Ten tumor-bearing mice were randomly assigned to two
groups (n= 5). Group 1 received an intravenous injection
of PEG–PDA@TSA NRs via the tail vein, while group 2 received
FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs. Both groups were administered a TSA-equivalent
dose of 2.5 mg/kg. At 4 h postinjection, the mice were euthanized
by cervical dislocation. The heart, liver, spleen, lungs, kidneys,
and tumor tissues were immediately harvested. The collected tissues
were perfused with normal saline to remove residual blood, blotted
dry on filter paper, weighed, and stored at −80 °C for
analysis.

A TSA stock solution (1 mg/mL) was prepared by dissolving
1 mg of TSA reference standard in methanol via sonication. Similarly,
an internal standard (IS) solution (1 mg/mL cryptotanshinone, CT)
was prepared in methanol. Both solutions were stored light-protected
at 4 °C. For analysis, 100 μL of tissue homogenate (0.5
g of tissue/1 mL of saline) was mixed with 10 μL of IS solution.
Proteins were precipitated with 300 μL of methanol. After vortexing
and centrifugation, the supernatant was lyophilized. The residue was
reconstituted in 100 μL of methanol–water (9:1, v/v).

Regarding the LC-MS/MS (6500+, American AB) quantification
conditions: chromatographic separation used an XBridge BEH C18 column
(1.7 μm, 2.1 × 100 mm; 40 °C) with a mobile phase
of 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and acetonitrile (B). The gradient
program was as follows: 5% → 95% B (0–5.0 min), 95%
B (5.0–6.0 min), 95% → 5% B (6.0–7.0 min), and
5% B (7.0–8.0 min) at 0.30 mL/min. Injection volume was 3.00
μL (autosampler: 8 °C). Mass detection employed positive
ESI-MRM with ion spray voltage 5500 V, source temperature 550 °C,
and nebulizer gas 3.0 L/min. Analyte-specific transitions and collision
energies were monitored as follows:m/z295 → 277 for TSA with a collision energy of −26.62
V andm/z296 → 254 for cryptotanshinone
(CT) with a collision energy of −35 V.

Yrepresents peak
area ratio, andXdenotes concentration in ng/mL,R2=
0.9997.

The factor 2 represents the dilution factor
due to homogenization
of 0.5 g tissue in 1 mL of saline.

After treatment, the
mice were killed and the tumor tissue was removed and preserved in
4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature for a duration of 48 h. Subsequently,
the tumor tissues underwent dehydration and were embedded in paraffin
and frozen sections were prepared, followed by H&E staining for
observation.

The tumor tissue samples were fixed, paraffin embedded, sliced, and
then made into thin slices. AfterKi-67
immunohistochemical staining, observation and counting were performed
to calculate the percentage of positive cells.

Data analysis
was conducted using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and nonparametric
Tukey’s test. APvalue less than 0.05 was
considered indicative of a significant difference. Image processing
was carried out using GraphPad Prism 9.5 and ImageJ software.

To investigate the potential of TSA, the active
ingredient ofSalvia miltiorrhiza,for self-assembly
into nanomedicines,
we initially prepared and optimized TSA nanomedicines using antisolvent
precipitation technology. TSA, being a hydrophobic drug with limited
solubility in water, was dissolved in an organic solvent and subsequently
injected slowly into an excess volume of water. We assessed the particle
size and PDI of the self-assembled nanomedicines across various solvents
(DMSO, THF, and acetone), solvent volume ratios, and drug concentrations.
The results presented inTable S1(in the
Supporting Information) indicate that utilizing THF as a solvent yields
TSA nanorods exhibiting favorable hydrodynamic diameter and low PDI,
suggesting that THF is effective for dissolving TSA. This study further
examined the impact of varying the ratio of good to poor solvents
on the size of TSA nanorods. The findings revealed that increasing
the proportion of the good solvent resulted in larger nanomedicine
sizes, while a ratio of 1:100 led to smaller particle sizes. Additionally,
it was observed that the concentration of TSA also influences the
size of the nanomedicines; higher concentrations correlate with larger
sizes and decreased stability. To achieve consistent morphology and
optimal particle size, the recommended approach is to utilize THF
as the solvent, maintain a 1:100 solvent ratio, and employ a TSA concentration
of 10 μg/mL.

TSA can self-assemble to form nanomedicine
using the antisolvent
precipitation method (FigureA). Upon irradiation with a laser pen under light-shielding
conditions, TSA NRs exhibited a significant Tyndall effect compared
to the TSA aqueous solution, with a clear visible light path (FigureB). The TEM image
inFigureC confirms
this observation, indicating the interaction among TSA molecules and
the formation of nanoscale nanorods; however, the nanorods displayed
irregular sizes and poor dispersion. The average particle size is
measured by DLS exhibiting a bimodal size distribution with peaks
at 65.76 and 249.59 nm and a PDI of 0.233 (FigureD). At the same time, quantitative size analysis
of TEM images using Nano Measurer 1.2 software revealed nanorods with
mean dimensions of 283.17 ± 10.55 nm (length) × 57.46 ±
15.12 nm (width), resulting in an average aspect ratio of 5.07.

Preparation
and properties of the TSA NRs. (A) Chemical structure
and self-assembly of TSA; (B) Tyndall effect of TSA and TSA NRs; (C)
TEM images of TSA NRs; and (D) particle size and PDI of TSA NRs.

To further investigate the formation mechanism
of the nanorods,
we conducted spectral analysis. The results from UV spectral analysis
indicate that the absorption peak of the assembled nanorods exhibits
a blue shift, specifically a 15 nm shift toward shorter wavelengths.
As illustrated inFigureA, the nanorods also display a significant hypochromic effect
compared to unassembled TSA molecules, likely due to interactions
among the TSA molecules. Furthermore, the fluorescence emission intensity
of the nanorods is markedly lower than that of free TSA, as shown
inFigureB, which
further supports the existence of energy migration within the stacked
TSA molecules. Conversely, the results
from infrared spectrum analysis revealed only slight changes, suggesting
that the structure of the TSA molecules remains stable, as depicted
inFigureC. We hypothesize
that the formation of TSA NRs primarily depends on the spatial arrangement
of the molecules. This finding provides a crucial foundation for a
more in-depth exploration of the assembly mechanism. XRD analysis
(FigureD) revealed
sharp diffraction peaks for raw TSA at 2θ = 7.13°, 9.53°,
10.1°, 11.95°, 14.4°, 17.8°, and 19.24°,
confirming its highly crystalline nature. In contrast, TSA nanorods
(NRs) exhibited broadened and attenuated peaks with burr-like profiles,
indicating reduced crystallinity and possible amorphous or small-crystalline
domain formation. To quantitatively compare crystallinity differences,
the average crystallite sizes of TSA and TSA NRs were systematically
calculated using the Debye–Scherrer equation with detailed
parameters provided in SupplementaryTable S2(in the Supporting Information). Although the difference in XRD
peaks of TSA and TSA NRs is not prominent, the discernible reduction
in crystallite size and increased full width at half maximum (FWHM)
provide conclusive evidence of modified crystallinity. InFigureE, the DSC curve
of the TSA original drug exhibits a distinct endothermic peak at approximately
208.1 °C. In contrast, the intensity of the endothermic peak
for TSA NRs is diminished and shifted to a lower temperature of 192.8
°C. This observation suggests that TSA molecules self-assemble
to form TSA NRs, leading to a reduction in the crystallinity of TSA
within the NRs. Collectively, these results confirm the successful
preparation of the TSA NRs.

Spectra characterization of the TSA NRs. (A)
UV spectra, (B) fluorescence
spectra, (C) FT-IR, (D) XRD, (E) DSC, and (F) saturated solubility
of TSA and TSA NRs.

Finally, we conducted a comparative analysis of
the saturated solubility
of TSA before and after self-assembly. The initial measurement of
TSA’s solubility in water was recorded at 0.46 μg/mL;
however, following its conversion to carrier-free nanorods, the saturated
solubility increased significantly to 40.7 μg/mL, representing
an 88-fold enhancement over the original solubility of TSA (FigureF). This study demonstrates
that the self-assembly process of TCM can significantly improve the
solubility of its active ingredients, which is essential for advancing
the development and utilization of low-solubility TCM components.

In this study, we aimed to conduct a comprehensive analysis of
the molecular mechanisms underlying the self-assembly behavior of
TSA molecules. Utilizing molecular docking technology, we accurately
determined the spatial arrangement patterns of these molecules. The
results revealed that TSA molecules exhibit a planar configuration
and belong to the I type linear structure; this characteristic facilitates
effective hydrophobic interactions between molecules, thereby promoting
the self-assembly of the molecular framework. The molecular docking results obtained from Autodock Tools 1.5.6
software indicated a favorable binding activity of TSA molecules,
with a binding energy of −3.7 kcal/mol. This finding suggests
a significant binding affinity between TSA and its molecular targets,
consistent with previous studies that indicate a good affinity when
binding energy is <−1.2 kcal/mol. Furthermore, the coplanar and orderly arrangement of the molecules
highlights the critical role of π-π conjugation forces
in the self-assembly process of TSA NRs (FigureA). These forces not only facilitate the
self-assembly of TSA molecules but also promote their aggregated growth
in coplanar or unidirectional configurations,,ultimately resulting in the formation of rod-like nanostructures.

Assembly
mechanism investigation of TSA NRs. (A) Molecular docking
of TSA molecules; (B) appearance and (C) maximum absorption intensity
of TSA NRs solutions with addition of different force blockers; (D)
UV spectra of TSA NR solutions in SDS; (E) maximum absorption intensity
(n= 3); and (F–H) UV spectra of TSA NR solutions
with different proportions of organic solvents.

According to the literature, SDS, NaCl, and urea
act as blockers
for hydrophobic, electrostatic, and hydrogen bonding interactions, respectively, while THF, DMSO, and DMF serve
as inhibitors of π-π stacking. This study systematically
investigates the behavior of nanorods in various chemical environments.
Experimental observations indicate that the appearance of the nanorods
differs significantly across different solutions. Specifically, when
TSA NRs are exposed to SDS and solvents such as THF, DMSO, and DMF,
the solution’s color deepens, suggesting structural destruction
of the nanorods. Moreover, as the concentrations of THF, DMSO, and
DMF increase, the color of the solution becomes increasingly intense.
In contrast, in other solutions, the nanorod solution exhibited a
light orange hue and remained highly transparent (FigureB). These observations provide
an experimental basis for understanding the stability and self-assembly
behavior of nanorods in various chemical environments.

By observing
the subtractive color effect produced by TSA molecules
upon the formation of nanorods, we gained insights into the dynamics
of their assembly and disassembly processes through quantitative analysis
of the absorbance values of these nanorods. As illustrated inFigureC, the introduction
of SDS into the TSA NRs solution led to a significant increase in
absorbance. Specifically, the addition of 0.5% (w/v) SDS resulted
in an enhancement of the ultraviolet–visible (UV–vis)
absorption spectrum of TSA nanorods, as shown inFigureD. This enhancement is attributed
to the disassembly process of TSA NRs, which exposes TSA chromophores
and consequently increases UV absorption. The changes in the nanorod
size distribution before and after SDS treatment further support this
conclusion (Figure S2). These findings
indicate that hydrophobic interactions play a crucial role in the
formation of nanorods.

In contrast,
the absorbance of TSA NRs did not change significantly
when exposed to NaCl and urea solutions, indicating that electrostatic
and hydrogen bonding interactions did not affect the stability of
the nanorods under these conditions. Additionally, the presence of
solvents such as THF, DMSO, and DMF significantly enhanced the UV
absorption capacity of TSA NRs, underscoring the importance of π-π
conjugation in the self-assembly process of the nanorods (FigureC). Furthermore,
we examined the effects of varying proportions of THF, DMSO, and DMF
on the UV absorbance of the TSA NRs (FigureE). The results demonstrated a progressive
increase in UV absorbance with rising organic solvent ratio, particularly
evident beyond 50% concentration. Specifically, as shown in Figure F–H, the maximum absorption peak of the UV
absorption spectrum at a concentration of 100% was enhanced compared
to that at 50%. This enhancement may be attributed to the π-π
stacking inhibitors, which prevents the formation of an effective
π-π stacking structure between the nanorods, resulting
in a reduction in the light absorption cross-section of the nanorods.

This change in absorbance is believed to be associated with the
synergistic effects of hydrophobicity and π-π stacking
interactions. At an organic solvent ratio of 25%, although the π-π
stacking forces decreased, this did not result in the disintegration
of the nanorods; DLS characterization (Figure S3) confirms that exposure to 25% DMSO, THF, or DMF did not
induce significant disintegration of the nanorods or notable alterations
in their size distribution, indicating that hydrophobic interactions
play a predominant role in the drug self-assembly process. However,
when the organic solvent ratio increases to 50 and 100%, the nanorods
disintegrate due to the complete disruption of π-π stacking
interactions. In summary, the self-assembly mechanism of TSA primarily
involves hydrophobic interactions and π-π stacking, with
hydrophobic interactions being more significant and crucial for the
formation and stability of the nanorods.

Dopamine can self-polymerize
at an alkaline pH, resulting in the
formation of PDA that can be deposited almost spontaneously on various
organic or inorganic materials. This process leads to the creation
of a surface-adhered PDA film that is stable and biocompatible within
biological systems.,Compared to other surface-functionalized
materials, PDA presents distinct advantages and significant effects
in the modification of nanoparticles, demonstrating substantial application
potential. To enhance the dispersibility
of TSA NRs and prevent drug adherence to their surfaces, a PDA coating
was applied to the surface of the nanorods.

After PDA coating,
TEM revealed that the nanorods exhibit a core–shell
structure, with TSA nanorods functioning as the core and the PDA coating
serving as the shell. In comparison to TSA, the PDA@TSA nanorod structure
is more uniform and the surface coating is smoother and more complete
(FigureA,B). To optimize
the coating conditions for PDA, a single-factor analysis was performed.Table S3(in the Supporting Information) demonstrates
that the concentration of dopamine (DA) does not significantly influence
the particle size of PDA@TSA NRs; however, it has a notable impact
on the drug encapsulation efficiency and drug loading capacity. At
a DA concentration of 0.2 mg/mL, TSA exhibited the highest encapsulation
efficiency. However, increasing the DA concentration could result
in a thicker coating, potentially hindering the release of TSA in
subsequent experiments; therefore, the 0.2 mg/mL concentration was
excluded from further consideration. In contrast, a DA concentration
of 0.05 mg/mL yielded the lowest encapsulation efficiency and yield
for the PDA@TSA NRs formulation, prompting its exclusion. After a
thorough evaluation, the final DA concentration was established at
0.1 mg/mL (FigureC). The coating time had minimal impact on particle size; however,
as the coating duration increased, drug loading gradually decreased.
At a coating duration of 2 h, drug loading reached its maximum value
of 23%; thus, 2 h was selected as the optimal coating time for subsequent
experiments (FigureD).

Characterization of polydopamine-coated Tanshinone IIA nanorods
(PDA@TSA NRs). TEM images of TSA NRs (A) before and (B) after polydopamine
coating; drug loading content (DLC) and encapsulation efficiency (EE)
effect of PDA@TSA NRs with (C) different dopamine concentrations and
(D) different coating time; (E) zeta potential and (F) size of TSA
NRs (A) before and (B) after polydopamine coating.

After coating with PDA, the zeta potential of TSA
NRs changed from
−22.6 ± 1.4 to −30.2 ± 1.9 mV, indicating
an improvement in the dispersion and stability of the final PDA@TSA
NRs (FigureE). The
bimodal hydrodynamic size distribution of TSA NRs migrated to larger
dimensions with peaks at 76.6 and 266.65 nm, while the PDI decreased
to 0.175, suggesting a more uniform distribution (FigureF).

As illustrated inFigureA, PDA@TSA NRs readily
aggregate and precipitate in PBS and
DMEM, exhibiting poor stability that results in their rapid clearance
from the body’s circulatory system duringin vivoapplications. To address this issue, we reviewed relevant literature
and identified that surface modification of PDA with PEG can enhance
its stability. Accordingly, we selected mPEG-NH2as the
binding agent for the PDA coating surface and employed a Schiff base
ligation reaction. TEM results indicated
that the morphology of the PEG–PDA@TSA NRs remained unchanged
compared to PDA@TSA NRs (FigureA,C); however, their stability in PBS and DMEM improved,
as evidenced by the absence of precipitates (FigureC). Subsequently, we evaluated the stability
of the nanoparticles under simulatedin vivoconditions,
and the particle size and PDI of the nanorods were characterized by
DLS. The results demonstrated that both PDA@TSA NRs and PEG–PDA@TSA
NRs exhibited satisfactory storage stability, with size and PDI remaining
relatively constant over a period of 7 days in the aqueous solution
(FigureB,D). Moreover,
PEG–PDA@TSA NRs maintained stability for 48 h in PBS and DMEM,
showing relatively constant size and PDI (FigureE). These findings effectively underscore
the beneficial role of PEGylation modification in enhancing the stability
of PDA@TSA NRs.

Characterization of surface-modified Tanshinone IIA nanorods
(FA–PEG-PDA@TSA
NRs). (A) TEM image, appearance in different solvents, and (B) storage
stability of PDA@TSA NRs; (C) TEM image, appearance in different solvents,
and (D) storage stability of PEG–PDA@TSA NRs; (E) storage stability
of PEG–PDA@TSA NRs in different solvents; (F) particle size;
(G) zeta potential; (H) infrared spectroscopy; (I)in vitrorelease.

For antitumor drugs, it is essential to enhance
drug accumulation
at the tumor site. Literature reports indicate that FA is utilized
as a targeting moiety in tumor-targeted delivery systems due to its
high affinity for folate receptors, which are overexpressed in various
tumors. We modified FA onto the surface
of PEG–PDA@TSA NRs to leverage the tumor-targeting properties
of FA and enhance the therapeutic effect. The particle size and zeta
potential of PDA@TSA NRs, PEG–PDA@TSA NRs, and FA–PEG-PDA@TSA
NRs were evaluated by using DLS technology. The results indicated
that following modification with mPEG-NH2and FA–PEG-NH2induced bimodal peak migration in NR hydrodynamic size, exhibiting
peaks at 118.56 and 407.37 nm compared to PDA@TSA NRs (FigureF). Additionally, as illustrated
inFigureG, the modification
also resulted in alterations to the zeta potential. These findings
confirm the successful modification of FA–PEG-NH2.FigureH presents
the FT-IR spectra of TSA, PDA@TSANRs, and FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs.
In comparison to the infrared spectrum of the TSA group, no distinct
absorption peak unique to TSA was observed at 1641 cm–1. Conversely, a broad absorption peak associated with −OH
was detected in the range 3100–3400 cm–1,
indicating the successful encapsulation of the PDA shell on the nanorods.
In the infrared spectra of PEG–PDA@TSA NRs and FA–PEG-PDA@TSA
NRs, a characteristic absorption peak at 1062 cm–1was noted, signifying the presence of C–O–C, which
demonstrates the successful attachment of PEG. Furthermore, the spectrum
of FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs exhibits a prominent CN absorption
peak that is absent in the spectrum of PEG–PDA@TSA NRs, confirming
the successful incorporation of FA.

Finally, we assessed the
release rates of FA–PEG-PDA@TSA
NRs. Compared with PDA@TSA NRs, PEG modification resulted in a slight
decrease in the release rate. After 48 h, the cumulative release amounts
for PDA@TSA NRs and FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs were 72.4 and 62.1%,
respectively (FigureI). The curve of the TSA concentration over time is shown inFigure S4. This is because PEG has a long hydrophilic
chain, which can form a hydration layer on the surface of nanoparticles
to effectively slow down the release of drugs.

Following the completion of material preparation
and modification,
a red blood cell hemolysis experiment was conducted to verify the
biological safety of FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs. The results, illustrated
inFigureA, revealed
that no hemolysis occurred when using PBS as a negative control. In
contrast, distilled water, employed as a positive control, resulted
in significant hemolysis, indicating its potential to damage cell
membranes. Notably, the hemolysis rate of FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs
at varying concentrations remained below 5%, with no statistically
significant differences observed between the groups, suggesting that
the FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs possess good blood safety.

Safety assessment
of the formulations. (A) Hemolytic assay of FA–PEG-PDA@TSA
NRs; (B) H&E staining of different tissues (scale bar = 50 μm).

Subsequently, H&E staining was performed to
conduct preliminaryin vivotoxicity studies. This
staining allowed for the
examination of the morphology of animal tissues and organs following
treatment with different nanopreparations, facilitating an evaluation
of their biological toxicity. After administration, the primary organs
of the mice were dissected and visually inspected. The findings indicated
that there were no apparent lesions in the heart, liver, spleen, lungs,
kidneys, brain, and other organs across all experimental groups. Furthermore,
histopathological examination of the aforementioned organs under a
microscope, as shown inFigureB, revealed that the tissue structure remained intact, with
no significant lesions or necrosis, and the functions of the organs
were well-preserved at the experimental dosage.

Following comprehensive
safety validation of FA–PEG-PDA@NRs,
we evaluated theirin vivobiodistribution in tumor-bearing
mice (Figure). At
4 h postintravenous administration, the TSA was detected in the heart,
liver, spleen, lungs, kidneys, and tumor tissues. Significant accumulation
was observed in the liver, spleen, lungs, and kidneys, with the highest
TSA concentration found in the liver. Following FA modification, TSA
concentrations demonstrated a marked increase across all examined
tissues. Notably, the TSA concentration detected in tumor tissue was
approximately 1.6-fold higher than that observed in mice administered
the non-FA-modified formulation. This enhancement is attributed to
folate receptor-mediated active targeting, which promotes tumor-specific
accumulation and provides a pharmacokinetic basis for the subsequent
antitumor efficacy.

In vivobiodistribution (n=
5, *p< 0.05, ***p< 0.001
compared with PEG–PDA@TSA NRs).

To evaluate the antitumor effect of the nanodelivery
systemin vivo, a tumor mouse model was established
by administering
H22 tumor cells to the right axilla. According to the dosing schedule
depicted inFigureA, various formulations (PBS, free TSA, PEG–PDA@TSA NRs, and
FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs) were injected through the tail vein every
other day. The mice were monitored for changes in tumor volume and
body weight. The results indicated that the weight of mice in each
group increased following treatment (FigureB), suggesting that the nanodrug delivery
system exhibits good safety and does not produce significant toxicity.
Furthermore, during the treatment period, the tumor volume in the
model group increased significantly; however, each drug group effectively
inhibited tumor growth compared to the model group. Notably, at the
same dose, the antitumor effect of the FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs group
was superior to that of the free TSA and PEG–PDA@TSA NR groups
(FigureC). This enhanced
efficacy is attributed to surface modification by FA, which improves
drug distribution and accumulation in tumor tissue. Following the
treatment, the mice were euthanized and the tumor tissue was excised.
The tumor tissue image is presented inFigureD, the group administered FA–PEG-PDA@TSA
NRs exhibited the smallest tumor volume, and the tumor weight results
were consistent with the tumor volume findings (FigureE). These results demonstrate that the nanodelivery
system can effectively sustain the antitumor effect of TSAin vivo, with FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs displaying the most
pronounced antitumor activity.

In vivoantitumor effect.
(A) Schematic illustration
of the experimental process; change in (B) body weight, (C) tumor
volume in each group of mice during the treatment period; (D) isolated
tumor images, (E) tumor weight, (F) H&E and immunohistochemical
staining of tumor section in each group after the end of the treatment.
(G) Percentage of Ki67 positive cells (n= 6, *p< 0.05, **p< 0.01 compared with
model group or indicated group; ###p< 0.001 vs
TSA group).

Next, H&E staining was employed to further
analyze the tumor
tissue, as illustrated by the blue-purple nuclei indicated by red
arrows inFigureF.
The tumor cells in the model group exhibited vigorous growth, high
density, and compact arrangement, accompanied by strong nuclear staining
and evident mitosis. In contrast, the distribution of tumor cells
in each treatment group appeared more scattered, with shrunken and
fragmented nuclei. Notably, the extent of cellular damage and necrosis
in the FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NRs group was the most pronounced, as
evidenced by a reduction in the blue-purple cell nuclei, indicating
that its anticancer effect is the most significant. TheKi-67 immune response further corroborated this conclusion
(FigureG), the model
group had the highestKi-67 expression
level (92.16%); conversely, the TSA group (68.23%) and the PEG–PDA@TSA
NRs group (31.93%) exhibited significantly reduced numbers ofKi-67 positive cells. Importantly, the FA–PEG-PDA@TSA
NRs group demonstrated the lowest expression level (17.76%). These
results indicate that FA–PEG-PDA@TSA NR can inhibit tumor growth
by killing tumor cells and destroying cell nuclei, further demonstrating
its excellent antitumor efficacy.

We developed a novel method employing antisolvent
precipitation
and self-assembly technology to address the high lipophilicity and
low solubility of the natural active ingredient TSA. TSA self-assembles
into nanorods, driven by π-π stacking and hydrophobic
interactions. This carrier-free nanodrug technology effectively overcomes
TSA’s low solubility, achieving an 88-fold solubility increase
in TSA NRs compared to free TSA. Subsequently, using these self-assembled
TSA NRs as a core, we successfully prepared FA–PEG-PDA@TSA
NRs. The PDA and PEG-coated nanorods demonstrated enhanced uniformity,
improved water dispersibility, and increased stability. The H22in vivotumor mouse model confirmed that modification with
FA enhanced tumor targeting and significantly inhibited tumor growth.
This study introduces a novel drug delivery system that provides a
direct approach to expanding the application of TSA. Furthermore,
this nanotechnology and drug delivery strategy holds significant potential
for clinical applications, particularly in enhancing drug solubility
and pharmacological activity at equivalent concentrations.

We acknowledge the support of Experiment Center
for Science and Technology at Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine
for technical support and Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Chinese Medicine
Processing for experimental support.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.5c03030.

Yiman Zou:
data curation, investigation, formal analysis, validation, writing
(original draft); Yu Zheng: formal analysis; Yue Liu: investigation,
validation; HaoYu Zhao: visualization; Yunyu Zhang: methodology; Qun
Zhao: methodology; Linwei Chen: supervision; Gang Li: supervision;
Rui Chen: conceptualization, supervision, funding acquisition, writing
(review and editing).

Supported by
National Natural Science Foundation (No. 82474195), Youth medical
Innovation research project of China (P24021887623), Nanjing Medical
University (TZKY20230104, 2024KF0292), and Science and Technology
Support Project of Taizhou (TS202420).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.