Organic/quantum dot light-emitting diode displays have recently been manufactured using inkjet printers, which require stable ink drops and strict control during the printing process. Combining Ansys Fluent and Ansys Mechanical simulations, this research establishes the conditions that stabilize the ink droplets. The feasibility of this approach is verified through a jetting simulation of Newtonian fluids with almost constant viscosity and a comparison of the simulation and experimental results. Then, a commercial non-Newtonian ink with a shear-rate-dependent viscosity is simulated, and the simulation and experimental results are again compared. The study then evaluates why the experimental and simulation outcomes of non-Newtonian fluids differ under the same voltage conditions. Besides finding the stable drop conditions, the performed inkjet simulations reveal the pressure changes in the inkjet nozzle.

Current organic light-emitting diode (OLED) technology based on the vacuum deposition process has enabled the commercialized production of OLED panels using fine metal masks. In this technology, low-molecular-weight organic materials can be selected and deposited as thin films with accurate thickness. However, the vacuum deposition process cannot manufacture a large-area display panel and the pump must maintain the interior of the chamber in a vacuum state, which is costly and time-intensive. Enlarging the display panel requires a corresponding increase in the size of the mask for forming the red–green–blue (RGB) pattern. When the mask reaches a certain size, its center bends under gravity and the precision of the RGB pattern decreases. Although a thick mask can prevent sagging, it introduces dead pixels. Inkjet printing technology using a solution-type material1has emerged as a promising alternative with several advantages over vacuum deposition technology. First, inkjet printing technology can realize quantum dot LEDs (QLEDs) for displays with a high color gamut. The external quantum efficiencies of QLEDs have reached 20% or higher2. However, as quantum dots exist in solution rather than as powder-type organic materials, thin QLED films are difficult to form via vacuum deposition processes and are usually formed through spin-coating-based solution processes3–5. Spin coating is an extremely simple process for transforming a solution-type material into a thin film, but RGB patterning cannot be applied on large-area substrates. Although spin-coated applications are difficult to commercialize, inkjet printing technology can perform RGB patterning of solution-type materials. Moreover, inkjet printing technology largely reduces the amount of material wasted by the mask and does not require a vacuum state, thus substantially reducing the processing cost. Finally, research on inkjet printing technology is actively ongoing because this technology can print large quantities of display panels.

Inkjet printing involves a complexity of physical concepts6such as piezoelectricity7, nozzle-shaped mechanical engineering8, surface energy9, kinetic energy of falling droplets10, kinetic-energy transfer of surface energy, impact of dropping on substrates11,12, surfactant action13, absorption on substrates, and profiles of thin films14. These phenomena almost prohibit the stable control of the solution dropped from nozzles, leading to nonuniform thin-film deposition on the pixels. Sub-pixels are spaced at intervals of several micrometers. When two or more droplets fall from the nozzle at one time, the solution may penetrate sub-pixels adjacent to the target sub-pixel, causing device defects. Thus, stable control of the solution in the nozzle is essential when developing a display using inkjet printing technology. Currently, the inkjet printing system lacks a quantified standard of input waveforms for stable ink ejection. As the drop conditions depend on the rheological properties of the various inks, the input-voltage waveforms must be correlated with the rheological properties of the material.

To overcome the limitations of conventional inkjet-printed drop simulations, this research computes the fluid dynamics in a piezoelectric structural dynamics simulation. Unlike the existing simulation approaches, which require direct meniscus measurements inside transparent nozzles, this study relies only on the physical properties of piezoelectric actuators. The accuracy of the proposed approach was confirmed through a Newtonian-fluid simulation.

The nozzle model (Fig.1) was an MJ-AT-01-50 piezo inkjet print head (MicroFab Technologies) (Fig. S1)16–19. The total length of the model, total length of the piezoelectric element, nozzle diameter, and length of the air space of the ejected droplets were 26.851 mm, 10 mm, 50 µm, and 1 mm, respectively. To reduce the analysis time, the total shape was halved for the 3D modeling, assuming a symmetric cross-section.

(a) Dimensions and (b) three-dimensional model of the piezoelectric inkjet head. The gray area represents the piezoelectric material.

The piezoelectric element comprised barium titanate (BaTiO3) with the properties listed in Table1. The properties were encoded using APDL commands and applied to the element. The elasticity of the piezoelectric element determines whether the ANEL command of Ansys APDL uses the compliance matrix () or stiffness matrix (). The elastic constant was extracted from the compliance or stiffness matrix and the density, piezoelectric constant, and permittivity along thexdirection were obtained using the DENS, PIEZ, and PERX (also PERY, PERZ) commands, respectively. The applied APDL commands of the parameters in Table1are shown in. S2, and the detailed code is given in Code S1.

The voltage to the piezoelectric element was supplied from CIRCU94, a circuit element used in piezoelectric element analyses. The CIRCU94 can supply five types of voltages with precisely modified waveforms: constant, sinusoidal, pulse, exponential, and piecewise linear24. In the present study, the piezoelectric element was supplied with a 1 kHz pulse voltage. Figure S3, Fig. S4 and Code S2 provide the details of the voltage entered by CIRCU94. Based on this model, the piezoelectric structural dynamics were calculated using Ansys Mechanical software.

whereis the shear viscosity at infinity,is the zero shear viscosity,is the time constant, andis the power law index. The parameter values of Eq. (1) are listed in Table2.

Table3lists the contact angles and surface tensions of the two types of ink. The measurement images are shown in Fig. S6.

Zero fluid backflow was assumed at the inlet boundary. The ink then behaved as a compressible fluid, forming a meniscus into which the solution was sucked into the interior by the piezoelectric element. The fluid dynamics of this model were calculated using Ansys Fluent software.

The simulation was solved using the Semi-Implicit Method for Pressure-Linked Equations (SIMPLE) algorithm. This pressure-based algorithm is widely used in incompressible flow problems and is particularly well-suited to the study objective; that is, modeling the internal flow within an inkjet nozzle and droplet formation.

By effectively coupling the pressure and velocity fields, SIMPLE ensures continuity and momentum conservation, which are essential for accurate flow simulations.

The SIMPLE algorithm offers strong numerical stability, allowing larger time steps than explicit methods. Larger time steps are advantageous for transient simulations.

As SIMPLE accommodates various boundary conditions and complex geometries, it can handle the intricate internal structure of an inkjet nozzle.

When combined with suitable under-relaxation factors and iterative solvers, the algorithm demonstrates good convergence, even in nonlinear and transient problems.

SIMPLE can handle nonlinearities in the Navier–Stokes equations, which is crucial for modeling turbulent or viscoelastic flows.

SIMPLE is widely adopted as an easy-to-use and reliable solver in both academic and industrial CFD applications.

Overall, the SIMPLE algorithm well balances the accuracy, stability, and computational efficiency of the modeling process, supporting the present analysis of detailed fluid–structure interactions.

When the piezoelectric device is supplied with a high-voltage electrical signal, it is bent by the proposed piezo inkjet structure, mimicking inflation and imposing a high negative pressure in the ink channel20. The pressure sucks the ink back into the nozzle, forming a meniscus. When the electrical signal is removed, the piezoelectric device returns to its original state and a positive pressure develops in the channel, jetting the ink outward. The analysis was iterated to 200 µs with a time step of 50 ns under different voltage signals. The calculated results were compared with the experimental results.

Figures2,3,4show the experimental results, simulation results, and input-voltage waveforms at voltages of different magnitudes. Figure S7 shows the total pressures at different locations in the nozzle at different times. The error in each result, expressed as the ratio of the simulated maximum input-voltage amplitude (Vmax) to the experimentalVmax, was approximately 5%.

(a) Experimental results for a 40-V input-voltage waveform; (b) simulation results for a 38-V input-voltage waveform; (c) experimental (red dotted line) and simulated (blue solid line) input- voltage waveforms. The images in (a) and (b) were taken at 20-μs intervals.

(a) Experimental results for a 45-V input-voltage waveform; (b) simulation results for a 42.75-V input-voltage waveform; (c) experimental (red dotted line) and simulated (blue solid line) input- voltage waveforms. The images in (a) and (b) were taken at 20-μs intervals.

(a) Experimental results for a 35-V input-voltage waveform; (b) simulation results for a 33.25-V input-voltage waveform; (c) experimental (red dotted line) and simulated (blue solid line) input- voltage waveforms. The images in (a) and (b) were taken at 20-μs intervals.

Figure2(a, b) show the experimental results withVmax= 40 V and the simulation results withVmax= 38 V, respectively. In both scenarios, the rising, dwelling, and falling times were 5 µs (Fig.2c) and the jetting remained stable. As shown in Fig. S7a, the pressure in the nozzle operated the negative pressure in the piezoelectric element region during the rising time of the input voltage. After the rising time, the piezoelectric element region was supplied with a positive pressure that advanced toward the nozzle inlet over time. The minimum and maximum internal pressures were − 140 and 130 kPa, respectively.

Figure3(a, b) show the experimental results withVmax= 45 V and the simulated results withVmax= 42.75 V, respectively. In both scenarios, the rising, dwelling, and falling times were 5 µs (Fig.3c) but theVmaxwas increased by 12.5% from that in Fig.2and the speed of the falling droplet increased accordingly. Nevertheless, both experimental and simulation results exhibited stable jetting. As confirmed in Fig. S7b, the pressure was negative during the rising time of the input voltage and positive thereafter, leading the wave to the nozzle inlet. After increasing the input voltage, the minimum and maximum internal pressures expanded to − 157 and 147 kPa, respectively. The higher drop speed of the jetted inkjet droplet in Fig.3b than in Fig.2b is attributable to the higher positive pressure advancing toward the nozzle inlet.

Figure4(a, b) show the experimental results withVmax= 35 V and the simulated results withVmax= 33.25 V, respectively. In both scenarios, the rising, dwelling, and falling times were 5 µs (Fig.4c) but theVmaxwas decreased by 12.5% from that of Fig.2.In the experimental scenario, the jetting separated from the nozzle before being sucked back into the nozzle. The same behavior was observed in the simulation. The calculated pressure was lower than that in Fig. S7a, b, with minimum and maximum internal pressures of − 122 and 114 kPa, respectively. Although the positive pressure generated in the nozzle was transmitted to the nozzle inlet, the maximum pressure was insufficient to eject the inkjet droplet from the nozzle.

The idealized boundary conditions in the simulation may not fully reflect the surface roughness, elasticity, and wetting behavior of real inkjet nozzle walls. These simplifications may alter the internal pressure dynamics, leading to underestimation of the voltage required for droplet formation.

The simulated ink properties are limited to contact angle, surface tension, and viscosity, ignoring the viscoelastic behavior and temperature-dependent properties often observed in real inks. By omitting the viscoelastic effects, this study may have miscalculated the pressure response of the ink under actuation.

Energy from the piezoelectric actuator is transmitted as pressure waves through the ink chamber and nozzle. In reality, acoustic damping leads to energy dissipation, which can affect the efficiency of pressure transmission. By not fully accounting for acoustic damping, the simulation may have underestimated the voltage of droplet formation.

Losses in the driver circuitry or transmission path can deviate the voltage applied to the inkjet head from that of the nominal waveform. Environmental factors such as temperature and humidity can further degrade the efficiency of the equipment. As these real-world inefficiencies are ignored in the simulation, the simulated effective voltage can deviate from the experimental voltage.

In summary, the simulated jetting voltages are underestimated because the simulations oversimplify the model, omit fluid–structure interactions, underestimate the damping effects, and do not account for hardware-level electrical losses.

Thus, the error in the input-voltage waveform of the inkjet simulation setup was approximately 5% relative to the experimental input-voltage waveform. Subsequently, this study attempted to find the input-voltage waveform for stable jetting of the non-Newtonian fluid. As shown in Fig.5, the non-Newtonian fluid was stably jetted atVmax= 33.25 V. The rising and falling times of the input-voltage waveform were 6 and 12 µs, respectively. Considering the 5% error in the previous Newtonian-fluid simulation, the experimental results were compensated by 5%, from 33.25 to 35 V.

The simulation and experimatal results using non-Newtonian fluid ink. (a) Experimental results for a 35-V input-voltage waveform; (b) simulation results for a 33.25-V input-voltage waveform; (c) experimental (red dotted line) and simulated (blue solid line) input-voltage waveforms. The images in (a) and (b) were taken at 20-μs intervals.

The non-Newtonian fluid exhibited a stable drop trend (Fig.5a, b) but the drop speed differed from that of the Newtonian fluid, probably because the high viscosity of the resting non-Newtonian fluid prevented sufficient transfer of the piezoelectric force to the solution. Additional error was possibly introduced by fitting the results to Eq. (1). The viscosity measurements were unstable in the ~ 0.01–1.00 range of shear rates (Fig. S5b). The shear rate was extremely low because the fluid was stationary before ejecting the inkjet droplets. At that time, the viscosity could appreciably influence the non-Newtonian-fluid simulation. Furthermore, the internal pressure wave differed from that of the Newtonian fluid. Once the negative pressure became positive, the pressure wave was not completely transmitted to the nozzle inlet. Therefore, monitoring the trend of internal pressure waves is essential for ensuring the rapid and stable jetting of droplets.

These complex behaviors arose because the simulation ignores the viscoelasticity of non-Newtonian fluids. Although the viscosity dependence of the non-Newtonian fluid was considered, a fully viscoelastic model was not implemented; for example, a Maxwell model. Besides exhibiting shear-dependent viscosity, real viscoelastic fluids possess a storage modulus and a loss modulus, which influence the propagation and reflection of the pressure wave and the droplet formation process within the ink chamber. More detailed modeling may better capture the complex response of viscoelastic fluids and reduce the discrepancy between the simulation and experimental results.

Figure6plots the drop speeds of the inkjet droplets as functions of time under the conditions of Figs.2,4,5. The experimental data start at 60 s because the ink flow cannot be known before the ink exits the nozzle (in Figs.2a,4a,5a, the ink was exposed from 60 s) In contrast, the inkjet simulation tracks the situation of the ink inside the nozzle so the ink-drop speed can be extracted at all time flows. The simulated and experimental velocity trends are similar for the Newtonian fluids but differ for the non-Newtonian fluids. Owing to external factors such as temperature, humidity, and pressure during the experimental process, the error in the viscosity measurements of the non-Newtonian fluid can exceed that in the Newtonian-fluid viscosity measurements. Proper processing conditions and viscosity measurements are expected to yield high-accuracy simulations of non-Newtonian fluids.

Speed versus time plots of falling inkjet droplets under input-voltage waveforms with different amplitudes.

The present simulation focused on three variables (contact angle, surface tension, and viscosity) representing the drop conditions. However, other variables of the inkjet equipment can non-negligibly influence the process. Ignoring the temperature, humidity, and equipment conditions in the simulation contributed to disparities between the simulated and real-world trends. Moreover, the performance of inkjet equipment heavily relies on the driver that supplies the voltage to the piezoelectric device for ink ejection. Environmental influences may have reduced the efficiency of power transmission from the piezoelectric device to the ink. Variations in variables such as temperature and humidity can adversely affect the overall functionality of the equipment, potentially deviating the result from the anticipated outcomes. Furthermore, the simulation might underestimate the voltage applied to the equipment. Limitations and simplifications inherent in the modeling process might lower the amplitude of the simulated input-voltage waveform from that of the true input-voltage waveform delivered to the piezoelectric device. This voltage discrepancy can further contribute to discrepancies between the simulated and real-world results. In summary, the exclusion of pertinent variables from the simulation, the omission of environmental factors, and the potential amplitude underestimation of the input-voltage waveform lead to incongruities between the simulated and experimental results. These limitations must be considered when interpreting and applying the findings of the present simulation to real-world trends.

In this study, the inkjet printing process driven by piezoelectric actuators was simulated in Ansys Fluent and Ansys Mechanical software. The mechanical response of the piezoelectric element was computed using Ansys APDL with the CIRCU94 circuit element, which allows flexible and precise control over the input-voltage waveform. The generated displacement and internal pressure data from Ansys Mechanical were then transferred to Fluent for simulating the ejection of Newtonian and non-Newtonian inks.

As the material used in the actual print head was unknown, the simulation assumed BaTiO₃ as a reference material for the piezoelectric actuator. Consequently, the simulation and experimental results deviated under the same voltage conditions. After reducing the amplitude of the input voltage and adjusting the voltage by ± 5%, the simulation results well aligned with the experimental data.

The input parameters of the simulation were surface tension and contact angle, which are physically related and play complementary roles in modeling the interfacial behavior and wetting dynamics, respectively, thus ensuring an accurate representation of drop formation and surface interaction.

The simulation of non-Newtonian inks considered the shear-rate dependence of viscosity but did not incorporate the storage and loss moduli. The inability to capture the full viscoelastic behavior likely contributed to deviations between the experimental and simulation results. Future incorporation of viscoelastic models such as the Maxwell model or a generalized linear viscoelastic model could enhance the prediction accuracy, particularly when simulating transient pressure propagation and droplet breakup phenomena.

The developed simulation framework can reduce the experimental trial-and-error efforts in determining optimal waveform conditions for stable droplet ejection. By integrating detailed rheological properties into the modeling, realization of a standard simulation platform that accelerates the development of inkjet-printed OLED/QLED display manufacturing is expected.

This work was supported by the Technology Innovation Program (RS-2024-00420455, RS-2025-02413058) funded By the Ministry of Trade Industry & Energy(MOTIE, Korea). And This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. RS-2023-00222166). And This work was conducted using a super inkjet patterning machine (Gosan Tech, Korea) and also an EHD (NFEC-2025-04-305408) at the center for research facilities, Gyeongsang National University.

This manuscript has been prepared without the use of generative AI technologies.