Retirement marks a significant life transition that is often accompanied by profound changes in perceived quality of life (QoL). The direction and magnitude of those changes depend on multiple factors whose combined effects remain under-researched. This study analyses the association between retirement timing and perceived changes in overall QoL and looks at how this association is mediated by changes in self-rated health, coping, satisfaction with leisure time, social relationships, and income adequacy. We use a register-supplemented cross-sectional survey conducted in 2022 among 2 212 old-age retirees who were previously employed and who retired in 2020 or 2021. Change in QoL and its domains is measured by comparing current perceptions with retrospective assessments of QoL pre-retirement. We apply the KHB method to decompose the association of retirement timing with QoL into direct and indirect parts to evaluate the role of each mediator. Before retirement, QoL was lowest for those retiring at the earliest eligibility age and highest for those who postponed retirement by at least 12 months. QoL increased most among the former and remained nearly unchanged among the latter. Most of the increase in QoL for those retiring at the earliest eligibility age was explained by improved coping and increased satisfaction with the amount of leisure time. Our results add to the multidisciplinary knowledge on retirement and suggest that retirement timing can act as a mechanism to improve QoL once employees have reached their statutory retirement age.

Retirement is a major life-course event that can have a major impact on quality of life (QoL). While multiple studies have shown that life satisfaction increases with retirement (Carr et al.2018; Gorry et al.2018; Horner2014; Okamoto et al.2022; Nguyen et al.2020), others have reported no changes (Abolhassani and Alessie2013; Kesavayuth et al.2016; Bonsang and Klein2012). We identify two gaps in the literature. First, there is a lack of studies on retirement timing that address various life domains and that take account of the country context (Fisher et al.2016; Scharn et al.2018). Such research is needed as many industrialised countries are now encouraging people to postpone retirement. Second, we identify a need for multidimensional analysis of retirement and QoL, a broad concept that depends on multiple aspects of people’s lives and measured through various indicators and models (Walker2005; Walker and Mollenkopf2007; World Health Organization [WHO]1996). It is important to study these two gaps in relation to each other because (dis)satisfaction in a certain life domain may affect retirement timing, while retirement timing may affect changes in levels of (dis)satisfaction. We need to understand how changes in life domains drive changes in overall QoL.

In this article, we compare how people retiring from employment at the earliest possible age and those postponing old-age retirement retrospectively evaluate changes in their overall QoL. We further analyse how this association is mediated by changes in the life domains of health, social relationships, leisure and incomes. We use unique survey data collected among recent retirees in Finland in 2022, supplemented with pension register data. QoL and its domains were evaluated both at the time of answering the survey and retrospectively for the time before retirement. Retirement from work was defined as the date when the respondent started to draw an old-age pension. The results provide a comprehensive picture of changes happening in different life domains and ultimately in overall QoL around the time of retirement and in this way increase our understanding of the retirement process.

The Finnish pension system provides an excellent context for studying retirement timing. Finland has a flexible old-age retirement age. The eligibility age is being incrementally raised from 63 to 65 years by 2027, and the upper age limit will also eventually shift from 68 to 70. Individuals who defer retirement beyond the lowest age limit will receive an increment to their earnings-related pension (Finnish Centre for Pensions [ETK]2024; Ritola and Väänänen2023). Currently around 40% of Finnish employees retire at the earliest opportunity, while around 20% postpone retirement by at least two years (Nivalainen et al.2023). Earlier studies have shown that the earliest statutory retirement age creates a strong social norm for retirement timing (Gruber et al2022; Lalive et al.2023), but we still know very little about the role of QoL in the decision to retire or to continue working.

Retirement timing is a decision that captures older workers’ experiences of push and pull factors related to work and QoL. Theories that stress the instrumental side of retirement timing say that the decision is driven by the perceived value of working versus retiring (Feldman and Beehr2011). This leads us to assume that retirement immediately after reaching the earliest statutory retirement age is motivated by the goal of increased well-being. At the same time, people may decide to postpone their retirement in order to maintain stability in their lives, in accordance with Atchley’s continuity theory (1999). These points lead us to assume that if people enjoy relatively high work-related well-being, they will be inclined to postpone retirement for longer, but at the same time experience no or fewer increases in QoL. Hence, we hypothesise that retirement is associated with greater positive change for those retiring at the earliest eligibility age compared to those retiring later (H1).

However, retirement timing decisions can be highly complex as they are affected by multiple individual, work-related, family and sociocultural factors (Fischer et al.2016). People may decide to retire because they want to improve their QoL through changes in one particular or multiple domains of life, for example by reducing work-induced stress and health problems or increasing their leisure time. At the same time, people may decide to postpone retirement because they are concerned about a potential loss of social networks or a drop in income. Therefore, it is possible that changes in QoL are driven not only by the timing of retirement, but also by changes in the various associated life domains.

Several studies have explored retirement and health using such measures as self-rated health, physical and psychological well-being, and health behaviours (Eibisch2015; Halleröd et al.2013; Gorry et al.2018; Henning et al.2021; Lallukka et al.2023; Okamoto et al.2022; Stenholm et al.2020; Vigezzi et al.2021). The results are conflicting, but a systematic review of longitudinal studies by van der Heide et al. (2013) showed strong evidence that retirement has a beneficial effect on mental health, while the results are mixed for perceived general health and physical health. Several studies indicate that psychosomatic and somatic symptoms and psychological distress decrease after retirement (Eibisch2015; Mosconi et al.2023; Okamoto et al.2022). Similar findings have been reported for Finnish public sector employees: people described their lives as much easier after retirement (Prakash et al.2022), while perceived health status remained unchanged among most employees and either improved or declined among a minority (Stenholm et al.2020). Poor health in any form is most likely to motivate early retirement, whereas good health encourages continued employment.

Some studies have shown that leisure time satisfaction increases after retirement (Bonsang and Klein2012), which seems to be especially related to the increased availability of free time (Nguyen et al.2020). Pinquart and Schindler (2009) distinguished different paths of leisure time satisfaction around retirement. For most people, leisure time satisfaction increased linearly until the first several months post-retirement, after which it remained at the same level. For others, there was either a sharper increase in leisure time satisfaction just before retirement and a long-term decline after the transition, or no change at all at transition. A preference for leisure time over work is a likely driver for earlier retirement, whereas postponers may stay on because of the fulfilment and sense of identity they get from work.

Regarding satisfaction with social relationships, Prakash et al. (2022) found no changes in how often public sector retirees in Finland felt lonely after retirement. Comi and colleagues (2022) also reported that after retirement, older Europeans were more satisfied with their social relationships. While the share of family members in social networks increased, the share of friends and colleagues decreased. Decisions on retirement timing may be affected by the composition of social networks and the role of work colleagues within those networks. A preference to spend time with family rather than colleagues may be a driver for earlier retirement, whereas postponers may remain in employment because of their social roles at work.

Income tends to decline at retirement and older Europeans have reported both reduced financial satisfaction (Bonsang and Klein2012) and perceived income adequacy (Palomäki2019) after retirement. Nguyen and colleagues (2020), however, observed an improvement in financial satisfaction after retirement, which they attributed to a reduction in saving or dissaving. Moreover, Calasanti et al. (2021) showed that changes in financial satisfaction mediate the relationship between retirement and life satisfaction. Low pension accruals may also be a reason for continuing at work, while large accruals may allow people to retire at the earliest opportunity.

Altogether, we expect changes in various life domains to mediate the impact of retirement timing on changes in QoL. The individual’s situation in these life domains will contribute to decisions about the timing of retirement, and the intensity of change in these domains will contribute to the level of change in overall QoL. We also expect that the mediating influence will be affected by the extent to which the life domain concerned can be affected by retirement. While physical health and social relationships are not necessarily greatly impacted by retirement, psychological well-being, leisure time and income usually are. Therefore, we conclude this section by hypothesising that the association between retirement timing and change in QoL is mediated by changes in health, psychological well-being, leisure time, social relationships and income (H2a) and that the mediating roles of psychological well-being, leisure time and income are greater than those of health and social relationships because of their more direct association with retirement timing (H2b).

Our study is based on the ‘From Work to Retirement’ survey conducted by the Finnish Centre for Pensions in 2022. Questionnaires were returned by 3 378 pensioners, with a high 68% response rate. A random sample was drawn from pension registers to form a cohort of old-age pensioners whose pension started between 2019 and 2021, who had transitioned into retirement from employment, and whose earnings for the year before retirement were at least 5000 euros. The latest possible retirement age for the cohort was 68. The survey data was supplemented with register-based information on respondents’ birth year, date of old-age retirement, gender, socioeconomic status and employment sector before retirement. The dataset includes weights, and the respondents represent the survey sample by age and gender.

The survey was focused on old-age pensioners’ experiences of the transition from paid employment to old-age retirement. The aim was to collect data on how retirement decisions were influenced by working conditions and the employer, for example. Therefore, self-employed persons as well as those receiving a partial old-age pension or a disability pension prior to old-age retirement were excluded from the initial sample selection. Under the Finnish pension system, a disability pension can be granted to persons with a reduced working capacity before they have reached eligibility for old-age pension. In recent years, around 30% of all new pensions have been granted based on disability (Finnish Centre for Pensions [ETK]2025). When retirement occurs early, issues related to (poor) health are more emergent (Oksanen and Virtanen2012) than in our study. Self-employed persons in Finland tend to follow different retirement paths than employees, often retiring later and continuing to work while drawing an old-age pension (Polvinen et al.2025).

As our aim was to capture perceived changes in QoL from pre-retirement to post-retirement, we excluded from our sample persons who retired in 2019 (n = 1018). This reduces the potential confounding effects of ageing and adaptation to retirement more than two years after the retirement transition. We also excluded 148 retirees who under specific retirement rules started to receive an old-age pension before the earliest statutory retirement age for each cohort. After these exclusions, 2212 observations remained.

The survey respondents were asked to evaluate their current situation and to retrospectively assess their situation before they retired. The latter time-point was not specified in detail, but we assume that the respondents related their pre-retirement experiences to a time close to retirement. The responses for ‘current situation’ refer to the time after retirement. These retrospective questions have some limitations. Firstly, persons may suffer from recall bias (Hipp et al.2020; Moreno-Serra et al.2022). Moreover, they may assess their past situation against their current situation. While panel survey data may be considered to provide a better measure of changes in subjective well-being between two time-points, we are particularly interested in changes as seen from the vantage-point of the current situation. After all, the assessment that a given situation was ‘good’ or ‘bad’ can sometimes only be made after some time has lapsed, once the alternatives have been experienced. The retirement transition can be seen as ‘successful’ if the pensioner feels their situation is currently better than it was before.

Our outcome variable is change in quality of life (QoL), which is based on the questions: ‘How was your overall quality of life before you retired? And currently?’ The response categories were (1) good, (2) rather good, (3) moderate, (4) rather poor, (5) poor and (6) don’t know. The sixth category is excluded from the analysis, and the scale is reversed so that higher values signal higher QoL. In the multivariate analysis, we model change in QoL as post-retirement QoL minus pre-retirement QoL. The change score values can range from -4 to 4 and the value is further centred around to its mean value. All change mediator variables are treated similarly.

Our main explanatory variable is retirement timing, which was grouped into three categories. The first category consists of those who retired in the month after reaching the earliest statutory old-age retirement age for the birth cohort; we label this group the ‘earliest eligibility’ retirees. This group is compared with two groups of postponers: those postponing retirement by 1–11 months (‘less than one-year postponers’) and those postponing retirement by 12 months or more (‘more than one-year postponers’). The weighetd distribution of retirement timing and other sample characteristics are presented in Table1. Source of data is marked with S for survey and R for register.

We consider changes in different life domains as potential mediators of the association between retirement timing and QoL. First, we explore the role of self-rated health as follows: ‘How was your health before you retired? And currently?’ We consider the psychological aspect of health based on an assessment of coping as follows: ‘How did you cope before you retired? And currently?’. Perceptions of coping were inquired using the Finnish verbjaksaa,which is difficult to translate into English. It is often used to describe people’s sense of whether they have the mental, emotional and physical energy to engage in activities or tasks after the workday, for example. The response categories were (1) poorly, (2) rather poorly, (3) moderately, (4) rather well, (5) well and (6) don’t know.

Second, we explore the roles of satisfaction with leisure time and social relationships. Satisfaction with leisure time was measured with the following questions: ‘How satisfied were you with the amount of leisure time you had before you retired? And currently?’ Satisfaction with social relationships was measured with the question: ‘How satisfied were you, overall, with your social relationships before you retired? And currently?’ The response categories were (1) not at all satisfied, (2) not very satisfied, (3) moderately satisfied, (4) rather satisfied, (5) very satisfied and (6) don’t know.

Third, we explore the role of incomes based on perceived income adequacy using the following questions: Given your household’s total income, how well was your household able to make ends meet, namely, to pay for its usual expenses before you retired? And currently?’ The response categories were: (1) with great difficulty, (2) with difficulty, (3) with some difficulty, (4) fairly easily, (5) easily and (6) very easily.

We control for respondents’ gender, relationship status, employment sector and socioeconomic status before retirement, with reference to women, those in a relationship, those employed in the private sector and upper-level employees. To account for pre-retirement differences in QoL, we control for the baseline, that is, the pre-retirement level of QoL. We allow QoL in different domains to vary before retirement because our main interest is to find out how perceived changes in these domains mediate the relationship between overall retirement timing and QoL.

Our analysis is based on descriptive statistics, using mean values and mediation analysis to determine the significance of perceived changes in different life domains for perceived changes in overall QoL. This helps us to understand what drives the retirement timing decision. Retirement can improve QoL, but at the same time, the decision to retire earlier or later is expected to be driven by satisfaction in various life domains, while the retirement transition can again potentially change this satisfaction in different directions and to different extents. Mediation analysis helps to identify which part of the change in QoL can be solely attributed to retirement timing (the direct effect), which parts are due to changes in various life domains (the indirect effects) and thereby to analyse what drives changes in QoL around the time of retirement.

The first descriptive part of our analysis presents means and 95% CIs of QoL and its domains before and after retirement. The second, multivariate part of analysis consists of a linear regression model that introduces perceived changes in each life domain as potential mediators and decomposes the total effect of retirement timing, with reference to ‘earliest eligibility’ retirement, into direct and indirect effects using the KHB method developed by Karlson, Holm and Breen (Kohler et al.2011). The KHB method helps in analysing the extent to which an explanatory variable has a direct and indirect effect on an outcome variable. When the outcome variable is close to linear, as in our case, the method compares two models: one without and one with the mediating variables. This comparison shows how much of the effect of retirement timing on changes in QoL is attributable to these mediating variables. Our model introduces all potential mediators simultaneously and disentangles the percentage contribution of each mediator to the indirect effect. The model controls for the main pre-retirement differences in job characteristics, gender and relationship status. The statistical analyses were performed with Stata18.

Figure1shows that, on average, people were relatively satisfied with their QoL before and after retirement. The average QoL score rose from 4.08 to 4.38. Before retirement, earliest eligibility retirees had the lowest perceived QoL, while more than one-year postponers had the highest perceived QoL. Earliest eligibility retirees showed the greatest improvement in perceived QoL after retirement, while improvements were lower for less than one-year and nearly nonexistent for more than one-year postponers. The difference in pre-retirement QoL was statistically significant (p. < 0.05) between earliest eligibility retirees and less than one-year postponers, and the differences between all other groups were even clearer (p. < 0.01). The difference in post-retirement QoL was statistically significant only between less than one-year and more than one-year postponers (p. < 0.05).

Table2shows that there was variation both in the direction and magnitude of changes in life domains. Positive changes were seen in satisfaction with the amount of leisure time, coping and self-rated health. The greatest change was observed for satisfaction with leisure time. More than one-year postponers were more satisfied with the amount of leisure time they had before retirement, but they showed the least increase in this respect after retirement. The same was found with regard to coping. Self-rated health increased only slightly following retirement. Earliest eligibility retirees rated their pre-retirement health the lowest, but their self-rated health improved the most. The self-rated health of more than one-year postponers showed no notable change.

Perceptions of income adequacy and satisfaction with social relationships changed for the worse. Perceptions of income adequacy are not directly comparable because of differences in the measurement scales used. However, perceived income adequacy declined clearly in all groups, and only slightly less so among more than one-year postponers. Retirement was followed by a slight decrease in satisfaction with social relationships. While no change was observed for earliest eligibility retirees, satisfaction dropped more sharply among more than one-year postponers.

We turn now to multivariate analysis in which the total effect of retirement timing and perceived changes in overall QoL are decomposed into direct and indirect effects, with all mediators simultaneously introduced into our regression model. The results reported below only include coefficients for more than one-year postponers compared with the earliest eligibility retirees as the reference category. We do not report the results for less than one-year postponers, as the coefficients for total (-0.02), direct (0.01), and indirect (-0.03) effects were statistically insignificant, suggesting that after controlling for background factors and pre-retirement QoL, there remains no difference in perceived change of QoL between earliest eligibility retirees and less than one-year postponers.

In Table3, we observe that perceived QoL increased by 0.17 units less among more than one-year postponers than among earliest eligibility retirees (as indicated by the total effect). Further, we find that a substantial part (0.12 units) of the total effect was reduced by changes in different mediators (as indicated by the total indirect effect). The direct effect remained statistically insignificant.

The percentage contribution of each mediator to the indirect effect indicates that perceived changes in coping had the greatest and satisfaction with the amount of leisure time the second greatest mediating role in explaining the association between retirement timing and change in QoL. Changes in coping explained 52 per cent and changes in satisfaction with leisure time 30 per cent of the total effect. Other potential mediators also played some, albeit minor, roles when all mediators were considered simultaneously. Changes in satisfaction with social relationships explained less than a fifth, while changes in self-rated health and perceived income adequacy made only a minor contribution to the total indirect effect.

As a robustness check, we ran the models separately for those retiring in 2020 and 2021. The results were largely similar (Appendix 1), indicating that one to two years after retirement is an appropriate time span for analysing retirement effects. Previous studies have revealed interesting gender differences in how retirement affects QoL (Calasanti et al.2021; De Preter et al.2013; Prakash et al.2022) and therefore we also performed the analysis separately for men and women (Appendix 2). These analyses showed that among women, earliest eligibility retirees differed more clearly from more than one-year postponers than they did among men. For women, there was also a statistically significant direct effect between retirement timing and change in QoL when the roles of all mediators were considered simultaneously.

Our aim was to study how retirement timing is associated with perceived changes in overall quality of life (QoL) and how this association is mediated by changes in different life domains (health, psychological well-being, leisure, social relationships and incomes) among recently retired Finnish employees. Our results show that employees who retired at the earliest eligibility age had the lowest QoL pre-retirement but showed the greatest improvement post-retirement, as we expected. Perceived QoL was the highest among employees who postponed retirement by at least one year, but they saw hardly any improvement in QoL post-retirement. Those who postponed retirement by less than one year fell in-between these two groups. Our results lend support to retirement theories that emphasise the instrumental goals of retirement timing and people’s desire for continuity in their lives (Atchley1999; Feldman and Beehr2011).

Improvements in QoL were mediated by changes in self-rated health, coping, satisfaction with the amount of leisure time and social relationships, and perceived income adequacy, as expected. However, this only applied when change in QoL was compared between earliest eligibility retirees and those postponing retirement by at least one year. The association between retirement timing and changes in QoL was most strongly mediated by changes in coping and satisfaction with leisure time. These domains improved considerably more among earliest eligibility retirees than among those postponing retirement. Self-rated health also improved to a greater degree among earliest eligibility retirees, but its mediating role between retirement timing and changes in QoL remained smaller. Previous research has shown evidence of similar changes in these domains after retirement (van der Heide et al.2013; Nguyen et al.2020; Stenholm et al.2020). Our study was able to show how changes in different life domains vary by retirement timing and to specify their mediating roles for change in overall QoL. The role of these mediators was largely consistent with our hypothesis. Altogether, our results highlight the importance of both relief from work-related stress and increased leisure time as drivers for earlier retirement and further emphasise their role in people’s aim to improve overall QoL.

Social relationships and incomes had less influential mediating roles. Satisfaction with social relationships declined more and perceived income adequacy slightly less among those postponing retirement by more than one year than among earliest eligibility retirees. As expected, satisfaction with social relationships had a weaker mediating role than coping and satisfaction with leisure time. Contrary to our expectations, income adequacy had only a minor mediating role, which is surprising in view of earlier results which suggest a close relationship between financial situation and life satisfaction in retirement transition (Calasanti et al.2021; Carr et al.2018; Nguyen et al.2020). Our finding might be explained by our focus on retirees from employment, who typically have higher income than people retiring from other labour market statuses (Rantala et al.2023). It is possible that other aspects of life carry greater weight if pension levels are adequate. Even when their income is below the poverty threshold, very few older people in Finland have considerable difficulty making ends meet (Palomäki et al. 2023).

The main strengths of our research lie in the use of pension register data as a source on retirement timing as well as in our representative sample. Its primary limitation stems from the measurement of pre-retirement QoL using retrospective questions. People often struggle to remember details of past life events, and they tend to report feelings and attitudes that reflect their current situation (Hipp et al.2020). In this sense, our analysis can be understood as an exploration of recent retirees’ accounts of their retirement experiences. Judged on this basis, many enjoyed a successful retirement in that they saw an improvement in overall QoL. This is in line with many previous findings suggesting that life satisfaction increases after retirement (Carr et al.2018; Gorry et al.2018; Nguyen et al.2020; Prakash et al.2022).

However, it is important that future studies on retirement timing also address the multidimensionality of QoL from a longitudinal perspective, as also suggested by previous studies (Mosconi2023; Scharn et al.2018; Fischer et al.2016). While our study found that retirement timing was associated with changes in QoL especially because of improvements in leisure time satisfaction and psychological aspects of health, a longer follow-up after retirement might reveal that changes in other domains are more important for QoL. Future research should also consider the experiences of people retiring via different routes as it has been shown that this has important implications for life satisfaction (Atalay and Barrett2022). For example, changes in health may matter for disability retirees and changes in income for those retiring from unemployment. In addition, as there are country differences in how life satisfaction changes after retirement (Sohier et al.2021; Henning et al.2023), there is a need for research that compares countries and considers macro-level measures of pension system characteristics.

Our results suggest that retirement timing can act as a mechanism to improve QoL once employees have reached their statutory retirement age. Retirement at the earliest eligibility age seems to be a response to lowered QoL especially for reasons that have to do with psychological well-being and lack of leisure time, at the same time as many employees decide to remain at work while enjoying a relatively high QoL. These findings highlight the benefits of a flexible old-age retirement age. Those benefits apply both to those who continue to work with a high QoL, but also to those who, for example, struggle for various reasons related to coping problems or care responsibilities. Given the current drive in many countries to prolong working lives, it is important that focus is placed on factors that help older employees to cope at work. Key measures to support these efforts could include the introduction of flexible working hours and modifying job descriptions. In connection with pension reforms, it is critical to ensure that adequate support is available both for those who want to continue at work and those who need to retire as early as possible. To this end it is also essential that QoL is closely monitored and assessed both before and after retirement and that policies are adjusted if necessary.

We thank all reviewers for their valuable comments.