Understanding and controlling the domain structures and their stability in ferroelectric thin films is crucial for advancing technologies such as energy storage, memory devices, and sensors. By optimizing domain behavior, it is possible to enhance the performance, efficiency, and reliability of ferroelectric-based systems in these applications. Here, we investigated the imprinted ferroelectric hysteresis loops and the imprinted ferroelectric domain structures of the PbTiO3(PTO) multilayer thin films, including the oxygen depletion layer. The PTO multilayer thin films were made of a structure of DPTO/PTO/Pt/glass by PTO and PbTiO3−δ(DPTO) layers by pulsed laser deposition. When the thickness of the DPTO layer was increased to 0, 5, and 7.5 nm, it was observed that the imprint effects of the ferroelectric hysteresis loops of the PTO multilayer thin films increased significantly. Through the observation of ferroelectric domain structures via Piezoresponse force microscopy, it was confirmed that the imprinted ferroelectric hysteresis loops were favored in terms of free energy in one polarization direction. This emphatically verified the presence of imprinted ferroelectric domain structures. Our study offers new insights into the correlation between the thickness of the oxygen-deficient DPTO layer and the enhancement of imprinted ferroelectric hysteresis loops and domain structures in PbTiO₃ thin films. These findings propose a novel design strategy for optimizing ferroelectric properties to advance practical applications.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-87237-8.

As ferroelectric thin films have spontaneous polarization below the Curie temperature, it is possible to observe canonical ferroelectric hysteresis loops by applying an external electric field to ferroelectric capacitors made of ferroelectric thin films1–6. Since ferroelectric hysteresis loops have remanent polarizations pointing upward or downward when no external electric field is applied, nonvolatile memory transistors can be fabricated using the remanent polarizations7–9. Ferroelectric hysteresis loops show an asymmetric structure due to the asymmetry of the electrodes of ferroelectric capacitors or oxygen deficiency; this phenomenon is called a ferroelectric imprint phenomenon10–13. When an imprint phenomenon occurs in ferroelectric capacitors, it is generally difficult to apply nonvolatile memory devices based on ferroelectric thin films10–13. Therefore, ferroelectric hysteresis loops that do not cause an imprint phenomenon are required. Unlike the application of nonvolatile memory, imprinted ferroelectric capacitors can be used as memory-shaped memory14,15. Since it is possible to implement a ferroelectric capacitor having two different strains depending on the direction of the external electric field, studies have been conducted on memory-shaped memories14,15. To systematically control the imprint phenomenon, researchers primarily focused on studies employing two electrodes with differing work functions and on controlling oxygen deficiency through heat treatment. Additionally, the imprint effect was effectively managed in multilayer thin films by utilizing various ferroelectric materials, such as PbTiO₃ (PTO) and BaTiO314. In this study, we investigated the imprint phenomenon of PTO multilayer thin films with oxygen-deficient PbTiO3−δ(DPTO) layer and ferroelectric domain structures.

PTO multilayer thin films comprising a PTO layer and an oxygen-deficient DPTO layer were deposited on Pt/glass substrates via pulsed laser deposition (PLD). The PTO multilayer thin films were deposited to have a structure of DPTO/PTO/Pt/glass, and PbTiO3and PbTiO3-δhaving a diameter of 1 inch were used for depositing the PTO and DPTO layers, respectively. To form a DPTO layer, a PbTiO3-δtarget was prepared, and a PbTiO3-δtarget was prepared by vacuum heat treatment at 500℃ for 1 h16. A KrF excimer laser with a 248 nm wavelength was used in PLD processes. After the initial vacuum of the PLD chamber became 10− 7Torr, oxygen has flowed to maintain the oxygen partial pressure at 100 mTorr. The substrate temperature was adjusted to 560℃ while controlling the oxygen partial pressure. After the multilayer thin film deposition was completed, oxygen immediately flowed to bring the oxygen partial pressure to 300 Torr, and the temperature of the substrate was slowly cooled to room temperature.

To investigate the crystallinity of the PTO multilayer thin films, θ–2θ scans and θ-rocking curves were measured by X-ray diffraction (XRD) experiments (Cu Kα1 radiation having a wavelength of 1.542 Å). Auger Electron Spectroscopy (AES) was utilized to monitor the elemental composition and chemical states of the thin films during growth, with measurements performed in situ under vacuum conditions to ensure real-time characterization. To determine the oxygen concentration profile as a function of the PTO multilayer film thickness, AES measurements were conducted using an electron energy of 3 keV. This approach enabled precise control and analysis of oxygen-deficient layers and compositional variations critical to the study. Pt top electrodes having a 100-µm diameter and 100-nm thickness were fabricated on the PTO multilayer thin films via radio frequency sputtering. Pt/DPTO/PTO/Pt capacitors were fabricated by the Pt top electrode formation process to measure ferroelectric hysteresis loops. The ferroelectric hysteresis loops of the PTO capacitors were measured using a precision LCII (Radiant Technology, USA). The surface morphology of the PTO multilayer films was observed using atomic force microscopy (AFM). The locald33hysteresis loops and ferroelectric domain structures of the PTO multilayer films were investigated using Piezoresponse force microscopy (PFM) with a scanning probe microscope (SPM) (X-100, Park Systems) equipped with a Pt-coated conducting AFM tip, which had a tip radius of 15 nm.

In this study, we fabricated PTO multilayer thin films by forming a PTO layer without oxygen deficiency on a Pt/glass substrate and then forming a DPTO layer with oxygen deficiency (Fig.1a). Pt top electrodes were formed in the DPTO/PTO/Pt/glass structure to fabricate PTO multilayer thin film-based capacitors, and the ferroelectric hysteresis loops of the capacitors were measured. In the DPTO/PTO/Pt/glass structure, an oxygen-deficient layer was formed on the surface, analogous to the oxygen-deficient layer observed when a single PTO multilayer thin film encounters heat treatment in a vacuum17. Therefore, it could be predicted that the DPTO layer having oxygen deficiency in Pt/DPTO/PTO/Pt capacitors might form imprinted ferroelectric hysteresis loops. For the PTO multilayer thin films, the total thickness of the DPTO/PTO multilayer thin films was fixed at 50 nm. Three PTO multilayer thin films (PTO1, PTO2, and PTO3 multilayer thin films) were fabricated, and the thickness of each DPTO layer was adjusted to 0, 5, and 7.5 nm for the PTO1, PTO2, and PTO3 multilayer thin films, respectively.

(a) A schematic of the formation of a PTO layer and an oxygen-deficient DPTO layer grown on a Pt/glass substrate and a capacitor structure of a Pt/DPTO/PTO/Pt structure. (b) θ–2θ scans of the PTO multilayer thin films deposited on Pt/glass substrates. (c) θ–2θ scans around the (111) XRD peaks of the PTO multilayer thin films.

To investigate the crystallinity of the PTO1, PTO2, and PTO3 multilayer thin films, θ–2θ scans of PTO multilayer thin films deposited on Pt/glass substrates were observed (Fig.1(b)). The PTO multilayer thin films showed no peaks other than (111) PTO XRD peaks, which indicated that the PTO thin films were preferentially (111) oriented. The (111) Pt XRD peaks were located at the right of the (111) PTO peaks. From previous studies, Pt bottom electrodes are also preferentially (111) oriented, whereas Pt bottom electrodes are polycrystalline18. Therefore, it could be predicted that the PTO multilayer thin films deposited on the Pt lower electrodes were in a polycrystalline state. The (111) θ–2θ scans around 19° where the PTO XRD peaks were located are shown in Fig.1(c). The PTO1 multilayer thin film had no oxygen depletion layer and showed the greatest intensity and the smallest full width at half maximum (FWHM) value. The PTO2 and PTO3 multilayer thin films tended to decrease the intensity of peaks and increase the FWHM values as the DPTO layer thickness increased, which meant that the formation of the oxygen-deficient layer deteriorated the crystallinity of the PTO multilayer thin films.

The PTO multilayer thin films were the PTO1, PTO2, and PTO3 multilayer thin films according to the thickness of the DPTO layer having oxygen deficiency (Fig.2(a)). To investigate whether the DPTO layers of the PTO multilayer thin films were well-formed, oxygen concentration profiles according to the thickness of the PTO multilayer thin films were measured via Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) (Fig.2(b)). The oxygen concentration of the PTO1 multilayer thin film showed a constant value regardless of the thickness. The oxygen concentration of the PTO2 multilayer thin film showed a value similar to that of PTO1, except after sputtering for 450 s. The sputtering time of 450 s corresponded to a thickness of 45 nm, and the PTO2 multilayer thin film did not show oxygen deficiency until 45 nm. After 45 nm, the oxygen concentration slowly decreased, and after 46 nm, the oxygen concentration was the lowest. At this time, the oxygen-deficient DPTO layer had a composition of about PbTiO2.96. Similar to the PTO2 multilayer thin film, the PTO3 multilayer thin film had a minimum oxygen concentration at 43.5 nm since the oxygen concentration decreased from 42.5 nm. We confirmed that DPTO layers having oxygen deficiency were formed by the AES results (supplementary S1).

(a) A schematic of a PTO multilayer thin film grown on a Pt bottom electrode (change in thickness of a DPTO layer). (b) Oxygen concentration profiles corresponding to the sputtering time of the PTO multilayer thin films measured via Auger electron spectroscopy.

Figure3(a) shows the schematic of the imprint effect formed when the DPTO layer was added to the PTO layer. The contrast of imprinted domains provides insight into the microstructure and physical properties of the imprinted domains and their surrounding regions in ferroelectric materials. Since PTO thin films tend to have polarization aligned in a vertical direction in a ferroelectric state, they generally tend to prefer an out-of-plane polarization direction. Typical ferroelectric capacitors of the Pt/PTO/Pt structure follow the blue free energy curve shown in Fig.3(b)19,20. The activation energy was the same when switching from a polarization of + P0to − P0and when switching from a polarization of − P0to + P0. However, the imprinted ferroelectric capacitors of the Pt/DPTO/PTO/Pt structure follow the red free energy curve. In this case, a large amount of activation energy is required when switching from a polarization of + P0to − P0. That is, the asymmetry of the external electric field polarization was formed, and the ferroelectric hysteresis loops shifted in one direction (Fig.3(c)). As the hysteresis loop moves to the right, as shown in the red hysteresis loop, changes occur in the remanent polarizations. That is, positive remanent polarization decreases, while negative remanent polarization increases. Moreover, such changes will affect PFM images during PFM measurements. When the ferroelectric film is not imprinted, the PFM signals for negative and positive polarization are equal in magnitude (Fig.3(d)). On the other hand, when the imprint phenomenon occurs, the PFM signal also becomes biased in one direction. That is, the PFM signal for positive polarization decreases and the PFM signal for negative polarization increases. Here, research was conducted focusing on the change in the PFM image due to the imprint phenomenon.

(a) A schematic of the imprint effect formed when the DPTO layer is added to the PTO layer. (b) A schematic of the change in the free energy curve corresponding to the polarization by the imprint. (c) Schematic of a ferroelectric hysteresis loop moved by the imprint effect. As the ferroelectric hysteresis loop shifts to the right, the positive remanent polarization decreases and the negative remanent polarization increases. (d) Schematic of the change in PFM signal due to the imprint effect.

Figure4(a) compares the ferroelectric hysteresis loops of the PTO1 and PTO2 capacitors. The external electric field polarization of the PTO1 capacitor showed the same size, and ferroelectric hysteresis loop was not imprinted. In the PTO2 capacitor, the magnitude of the electric field differed, and an imprinted ferroelectric hysteresis loop was observed. The PTO2 capacitor showed an imprinted ferroelectric hysteresis loop because an internal electric field was formed by the DPTO layer having oxygen deficiency between the Pt upper electrode and the PTO layer. That is, an imprint phenomenon occurred due to the formation of the DPTO layer. The DPTO layers of the PTO2 and PTO3 capacitors had thicknesses of approximately 5 and 7.5 nm, respectively. Therefore, the PTO3 capacitor represented the largest imprinted ferroelectric hysteresis loop (Fig.4(b)). With the DPTO target of this study, if the thickness of the DPTO layer was increased from 7.5 nm, the imprint phenomenon would slightly increase, and the ferroelectric properties would deteriorate. Therefore, for the DPTO target of this study, the optimal imprint thickness was approximately 7.5 nm. The summary of the data for positive remanent polarization, negative remanent polarization, and the internal electric field (imprint) is presented in Table1.

Shifted ferroelectric hysteresis loops due to the imprint effect. (a) Ferroelectric hysteresis loops of the PTO1 and PTO2 multilayer thin films. (b) Ferroelectric hysteresis loops of the PTO1 and PTO3 multilayer thin films. The positive remanent polarization of the ferroelectric hysteresis circles shifted by the imprint effect decreases and the negative remanent polarization increases.

Thickness of DPTO layer, positive and negative remanent polarizations, and internal electric fields of the PTO multilayer thin films.

To investigate how the ferroelectric domains of the imprinted PTO3 multilayer thin film were formed, comparative experiments with the non-imprinted PTO1 multilayer thin film were performed by AFM and PFM experiments (Fig.5). Figure5(a) and (b) show the AFM images of the PTO1 and PTO3 multilayer thin films. The two multilayer thin films showed triangular grains. The grains of the PTO1 multilayer thin film were slightly larger than those of the PTO3 multilayer thin film. It could be inferred that the triangular grains well-reflected the crystallinity of the PTO multilayer thin films grown in the (111) direction. The PTO3 multilayer thin film showed a disturbed surface compared with the PTO1 multilayer thin film, which seemed to be due to oxygen deficiency.

(a,b) AFM images of the (a) PTO1 and (b) PTO3 multilayer thin films. (c,d) PFM images of the (c) PTO1 and (d) PTO3 multilayer thin films. In PTO3 multilayer films, downward-facing ferroelectric domains are dominant due to the imprint effect.

To confirm the change of ferroelectric domain structure due to the imprint effect, the PFM images of domain structures in the PTO1 and PTO3 multilayer thin films are shown in Fig.5(c) and (d). In these PFM images, the amplitude and phase are combined to form a single PFM image, making it easy to distinguish the direction of polarization by darkness and brightness. In the PFM image, mosaic domain structures that are often observed in polycrystalline ferroelectric thin films are observed. In the PTO1 multilayer thin film, bright domains with upward polarization and dark domains with downward polarization are mixed in a similar ratio. In contrast, it was confirmed that the PTO3 multilayer film was not composed entirely of dark or bright domains, but only of dark domains and domains with intermediate brightness. Above all, the absence of bright domains indicates that the distribution of domains with upward polarization is small. Additionally, domains with intermediate brightness nestled between the dark domains may be upward-facing but have small polarizations. This is due to the imprint phenomenon that occurred when the internal electric field was formed in one direction by the DPTO layer.

Finally, the piezoelectricd33hysteresis loops of the PTO1 and PTO3 multilayer thin films were observed (Fig.6). The PTO1 multilayer thin film exhibits a piezoelectric coefficient of about 88.5 pm/V, which is a reduced piezoelectric coefficient due to the reduced thickness that is typical of PTO films of this thickness21,22. On the other hand, the piezoelectric coefficient of the PTO3 multilayer thin film is slightly reduced to about 80.5 pm/V by the DPTO layer having oxygen deficiency. In particular, the movement due to the imprint of the piezoelectricd33hysteresis loop of the PTO3 multilayer thin film is clearly observed. The voltage shifted by the internal electric field generated by the 7.5 nm DPTO layer is estimated to be approximately 0.55 V.

Piezoelectricd33hysteresis loops of the PTO1 and PTO3 multilayer thin films. The PTO3 multilayer thin film exhibits a right-shifted Piezoelectricd33hysteresis loop due to the imprint phenomenon.

We systematically investigated the imprinted ferroelectric hysteresis loops and ferroelectric domain structures of PTO multilayer thin films with controlled oxygen-deficient DPTO layer thickness. We confirmed that the thickness of the DPTO layer having the composition of PbTiO2.96was well-controlled by measuring the oxygen concentration profiles via AES. The PTO multilayer thin films showed ferroelectric hysteresis loops imprint by forming the DPTO layer, and we confirmed that the thickness of the DPTO layer was approximately 7.5 nm when the imprint effect was greatest. Further, PTO multilayer thin films showed mosaic ferroelectric domain structures, and we confirmed that ferroelectric domain structures having ferroelectric polarization domains in one direction were formed by the imprint effect.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.