Deletion in 22q and mutations in theneurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2)gene are frequent in sporadic meningiomas. The tumor suppressor protein merlin is encoded byNF2, and mutations may promote tumor development.NF2status is increasingly important in meningioma diagnostics and we questioned whether merlin immunohistochemistry could be used as an accessible and affordable surrogate marker for prediction ofNF2mutations. Previous studies on merlin immunoreactivity have reported diverging results. We aimed to describe the immunohistochemical expression of merlin in a large series of meningiomas and relate these findings to clinicopathological features andNF2status. Standardized immunohistochemistry was conducted on 172 meningiomas using three different merlin antibodies directed toward the N-terminal, C-terminal and phospho-merlin (ser 518). Twenty of the included cases had knownNF2status. All tumor specimens were immunoreactive for the three merlin antibodies. The immunoreactivity of phosphorylated merlin was higher in meningothelial tumors. There were no other significant associations between merlin immunoreactivity andNF2status, WHO grade, tumor subtype, tumor location or gender. These results indicate that merlin immunoreactivity does not seem to be predictive ofNF2mutation, as merlin was abundantly expressed by all included tumors and independently ofNF2status.

We hypothesized that merlin immunoreactivity could be used as a surrogate marker ofNF2mutations, providing a more accessible and affordable method for detecting these essential mutations. Accordingly, the aim of this study was to assess merlin immunoreactivity and relate these findings to clinicopathological features in a large series of human meningiomas. Three different antibodies for merlin targeting the N-terminal (AB-N), C-terminal (AB-C), and the phosphorylated protein (AB-P), were applied. Tumors with knownNF2gene status were also included and their immunoreactivity for merlin was correlated toNF2gene status and 1p deletion.

A total of 172 adult patients operated for primary intracranial WHO 2016 grade 1 or 2 meningioma were included. Among these, 162 patients were operated in the period of January 1, 1991, to December 31, 2000, at St Olavs Hospital, Trondheim University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway. These tissue specimens were prepared as tissue microarrays (TMAs), as previously described by Arnli et al.17Next-generation sequencing was performed on 20 intracranial WHO grade 2 meningiomas, comprising 10 cases from the TMA specimens and 10 additional cases, as previously reported by Meta et al.18The additional 10 patients were operated in the period of January 1st, 1991, to December 31st, 2004.

Paraffin sections of 4 µm were dried overnight, then heated to 60°C before deparaffinization and rehydration. Heat-induced epitope retrieval was conducted by PT Link (DAKO Denmark A/S). Immunodetection was performed using Dako Autostainer Plus. Primary antibodies are listed inTable 1. After incubation of primary antibodies, Dako REAL Peroxidase Blocking Solution was applied to prevent endogenous peroxidase activity. Secondary antibodies were incubated. DAB+ chromogen (Dako REAL Envision Detection System) was applied and sections underwent hematoxylin counterstain. Tissue specimens from liver and cerebellum were used as positive controls. The primary antibodies were omitted for negative controls. All TMA cores were scanned utilizing Olympus VS120S5 with a ×20 objective lens.

The immunoreactivity of each tumor was scored as: 0—negative, 1—weak, 2—moderate, or 3—strong. TMA cores with less than 50% remaining material were excluded, and each tumor needed more than one preserved TMA core to be evaluated. One collective immunoreactivity score was obtained for each patient. The scoring of immunohistochemistry was conducted by a trained medical doctor (R.M.) and supervised by an experienced neuropathologist (S.H.T.).

Mann-WhitneyUtest was used to investigate the association of merlin immunoreactivity toNF2status and 1p deletion for the 20 included cases with knownNF2status. Only TMA specimens were included in the further statistical analyses. Spearman’s rank-order correlation was used to determine correlation between the immunoreactivity of AB-N and AB-C. Mann-WhitneyUwas applied to investigate the relation of merlin immunoreactivity to the dichotomous categorical variables WHO 2016 classification (grade 1 vs grade 2) and gender (female vs male). Kruskal-Wallis test was used to investigate associations to tumor location and tumor subtype, and if significant followed by Dunn’s test with Bonferroni correction. Only tumor locations and tumor subtypes with more than one patient were included. The included tumor locations were as follows: (1) falcine, (2) convexity, (3) skull base, and (4) fossa posterior and tentorial. Included tumor subtypes were as follows: (1) meningothelial, (2) fibrous, (3) transitional, and (4) atypical.P<.05 was considered significant. IBM SPSS statistics version 29 was utilized for all statistical analyses.

This study was conducted according to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and a waiver of consent was given by the Regional Committees for Medical and Health Research Ethics (project number 4.2006.947).

Among the 162 included patients with tumor specimens prepared as TMA cores, 109 patients (67.3%) suffered from a WHO 2016 grade 1 meningioma. Median age at time of operation for these patients was 60 years, ranging from 25 years to 86 years. Most patients were female (73.3%). Transitional meningiomas (40.7%) were most frequent, followed by atypical (32.7%), meningothelial (17.3%), and fibrous (5.6%) tumors. Most tumors (49.4%) were at the convexity of the brain, while the skull base (22.2%) was the second most frequent tumor location. Patient data is shown inTable 2. The study also included 20 patients with knownNF2status, comprising 10 patients from the TMA specimens and 10 additional cases. These 20 patients had a median age of 65, ranging from 36 to 86, and a female predomination (70% females). Most of the tumors were convexity meningiomas (80%).NF2mutations were found in 55% of the tumors. The identified mutations were frameshift, nonsense, and splice site mutation, all interpreted to cause loss of NF2 protein function. 1p deletion was detected in 40% of the tumors. Patient data with associated molecular-genetic alterations are described inTable 3.

Patient characteristics for the 162 included patients with tumor specimens prepared as TMA cores.

Only included tumor subtypes with greater than 1 patient.

Patient data with associated molecular-genetic alterations for the 20 tumors with knownNF2status.

Copy number variant (CNV) with 1p deletion and/or 22q loss are described. DNA (protein) and mutation type are reported for theNF2-mutated tumors, with the remaining beingNF2wildtype tumors. Scorings of merlin immunoreactivity for all three applied antibodies (AB-N, AB-C, and AB-P) are provided.NF2mutation transcript:NM_000268.3.

Frameshift mutation due to new stronger splice site, resulting in the inclusion of 4 intronic nucletotides (−98% by MaxEntScan, NNSPLICE and SpliceSiteFinder-like).

Mutation presumed to disrupt donor splice site (−93% by MaxEntScan, NNSPLICE and SpliceSiteFinder-like).

Abbreviations: AB-C, anti-NF2/merlin ab84550; AB-N, anti-NF2/merlin LS-C164143; AB-P, anti-NF2/merlin ab2478; CNV, copy number variant; FPT, fossa posterior and tentorial.

According to Spearman’s rank-order correlation, the expression of AB-N and AB-C was positively correlated (P=.017). Most of the 162 tumors from the TMA specimens had moderate to strong cytoplasmic immunoreactivity with all three merlin antibodies. None of the tumors were regarded as negative. The 20 WHO grade 2 meningiomas with knownNF2status also had moderate to strong immunoreactivity with all three merlin antibodies. Merlin immunoreactivity and number of excluded cases are shown inTables 4and5. Representative images for each antibody are demonstrated inFigure 1.

Scoring of merlin immunoreactivity from the 162 patients with tumor specimens prepared as TMA.

Abbreviations: AB-C, anti-NF2/merlin ab84550; AB-N, anti-NF2/merlin LS-C164143; AB-P, anti-NF2/merlin ab2478; TMA, tissue microarray.

Scoring of merlin immunoreactivity for the 20 patients with knownNF2status.

Abbreviations: AB-C, anti-NF2/merlin ab84550; AB-N, anti-NF2/merlin LS-C164143; AB-P, anti-NF2/merlin ab2478.

Immunohistochemical imaging of merlin immunoreactivity from the same tumor specimen, with fibrosis as internal negative control: (A) antibody directed against the N-terminal (LS-C164143); (B) antibody directed against the C-terminal (ab84550); (C) antibody directed against phosphorylated merlin ser 518 (ab2478).

None of the applied antibodies had significant associations to WHO grade (P> 0.1), gender (P> 0.1), or tumor location (P> 0.1). The expression of merlin AB-C (P= .041) and merlin AB-P (P= .025) had significant relations to tumor subtype, yet none of the Bonferroni adjustedPvalues from Dunn’s test were significant for AB-C. However, the expression of merlin AB-P was significantly higher in meningothelial tumors compared to atypical meningiomas (adjustedP =.021).NF2status and 1p deletion were not significantly related to merlin immunoreactivity for any of the three applied antibodies (P> .2).

We have investigated the immunohistochemical expression of merlin in 172 cases of meningiomas, including 20 cases with knownNF2status, using antibodies directed against the AB-C, AB-N, and AB-P. All tumor cases were immunoreactive for the three antibodies. There were no significant associations of merlin immunoreactivity to WHO grade, gender, or tumor location. AB-C and AB-P had significant associations to tumor subtype following Kruskal-Wallis test, but only AB-P was found to be significantly higher in meningothelial tumors following the pairwise Dunn’s test and Bonferroni adjustment. Furthermore, merlin immunoreactivity had no association withNF2status or 1p deletion for any of the three applied antibodies.

NF2gene mutations are known to be more frequent in some tumor locations, including the convexities of the brain, and as more frequent in fibrous and transitional subtypes.1,18,27Also, compared to other genotypic variants,NF2-mutated meningiomas have larger tumor sizes and higher proliferation indexes.20The latest cIMPACT-NOW update 8 further warrants the relation to higher malignancy grades and recommends that tumors withNF2oncogenic variants and/or monosomy of 22q with coincidental 1p deletion be classified as WHO grade 2 tumors.3This could suggest an expected association of merlin expression to tumor subtype, WHO grade, and tumor location. Our study only found AB-P immunoreactivity to be significantly higher in meningothelial meningiomas, as could be explained byNF2mutations being less common in meningothelial meningiomas.27None of the other applied antibodies were significantly associated with tumor location or tumor subtype. One could have expected less merlin immunoreactivity in convexity meningiomas, asNF2-mutated meningiomas are more frequent in this location.1,28This was not the case, however, since merlin immunoreactivity was not linked toNF2status. According to Hanemann, there should be no correlation between merlin expression and WHO grade as mutations in merlin are assumed to be an initial gene defect and further tumor progression requires additional gene defects.29In accordance with previous studies,9,30we did not find any associations between merlin expression and gender.

Strengths of this study are the large patient population with clinical data from one neurosurgical center. The use of three polyclonal antibodies targeting different epitopes of merlin ensured high detection sensitivity. Potential limitations are the retrospective nature of the study and the inherent challenges of immunohistochemistry. The use of polyclonal antibodies could imply lower antibody specificity compared to that of monoclonal antibodies.31Reclassification of the included tumors to the WHO 2021 classification could increase the number of WHO grade 3 tumors. Still, loss ofCDKN2A/BandTERTpromotor mutations are rare mutations and not believed to have significant impact to our findings.4NF2gene analyses on all included tumors would have further clarified the relation between genetic aberrations and merlin expression. Furthermore, the present study does not include investigations of any downstream proteins that could be used as an alternative to merlin for identification ofNF2-mutations.

In conclusion, our study found an abundant expression of merlin for all applied antibodies. Due to the frequency ofNF2gene mutations in meningiomas, we expected reduced or lost merlin expression inNF2-mutated meningiomas. AB-P was significantly higher in meningothelial meningiomas; otherwise, merlin expression was not related to WHO grade, gender, tumor location, or tumor subtype. The diagnostic role of merlin immunoreactivity appears limited. Accordingly, we conclude that merlin immunoreactivity is not sufficient as a surrogate marker forNF2mutations. However, as previous studies report variation in merlin immunoreactivity, further studies are needed to clarify the impact of merlin immunoreactivity.

We would like to thank Borgny Ytterhus at the Cellular & Molecular Imaging Core Facility, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), for excellent laboratory service. We would also like to thank NTNU for funding this project.

Sofie Eline Tollefsen, 
Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway.

Rahmina Meta, 
Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway.

Ole Solheim, 
Department of Neurosurgery, St Olavs Hospital, Trondheim University Hospital, Trondheim, Norway; 
Department of Neuromedicine and Movement Science, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway.

Patricia Mjønes, 
Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway; 
Department of Pathology, St Olavs Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.

Ingfrid Vestrheim, 
Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway.

Wenche Sjursen, 
Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway; 
Department of Medical Genetics, St Olavs Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.

Sverre Helge Torp, 
Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway; 
Department of Pathology, St Olavs Hospital, Trondheim, Norway.

This study was funded by the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), funding number: 70442762.