Lipid metabolism-related inflammatory indices (LMIIs) have been recognized as potential biomarkers for the risks of atherosclerosis and major adverse cardiovascular events. This study aims to explore the associations of LMIIs, including neutrophil to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio (NHR), monocyte to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio (MHR), platelet to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio (PHR), and lymphocyte to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio (LHR), with the risk of incident peripheral artery disease (PAD) in elderly T2DM patients.

A total of 2837 participants aged ≥ 60 years with T2DM from the Jinshan Cohort (China) and 13,542 participants from the UK Biobank (UK) were included in the primary analyses. According to the type of outcome variables, logistic regression models and Cox proportional-hazards models were used to estimate the risks of incident PAD associated with LMIIs. The methods of generalized propensity score (GPS), E-value and negative control exposure (NCE) were applied to control the potential confounding. Additionally, stratified analyses were performed across various populations to examine potential heterogeneity in the effects of LMIIs on PAD risk. Mediation effects of liver and kidney function-related indicators on associations between LMIIs and incident PAD were also explored.

The results from traditional regression models suggested positive associations of incident PAD with all four LMIIs. In the Jinshan Cohort, the odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of PAD for one-unit increase in NHR (109mmol), MHR (108mmol), PHR (1011mmol) and LHR (109mmol) were 1.24 (1.11–1.39), 1.22 (1.08–1.37), 1.69 (1.32–2.15) and 1.57 (1.22–2.01), respectively. While in the UK Biobank, the corresponding hazard ratios (HRs) and 95%CI were 1.14 (1.10–1.18), 1.03 (1.01–1.04), 1.19 (1.09–1.29) and 1.11 (1.07–1.14), respectively, These associations remained robust in regression models weighted by GPS methods. The E-values for the effects of each LMII on PAD were consistently found to be significantly larger than their corresponding observed effects in both cohorts. NCE analyses revealed no statistically significant associations between any selected NCE and PAD in either cohort. On calibration using NCEs, the calibratedPvalues confirmed significant effect sizes for associations between LMIIs and incident PAD (all forP< 0.05). Additionally, subgroup analyses in the Jinshan Cohort showed different associations varied across sex, residential area, smoking status and HbA1c level, with pronounced HRs in females, urban residents, smokers and individuals with HbA1c ≥ 7%. Findings from the UK Biobank further suggested that aspirin use and HbA1c level may modify the effects of LMIIs on PAD risk (P-interaction < 0.05). Mediation analyses indicated that estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) mediated the relationships between LMIIs and PAD. The proportion of the mediating effects ranged from 10.03% to 19.95% in the Jinshan Cohort and from 10.20 to 20.80% in the UK Biobank.

Elevated levels of LMIIs, such as NHR, MHR, PHR and LHR, were associated with an increased risk of incident PAD among elderly diabetic patients. These associations exhibited notable population heterogeneity, with stronger effects observed in females and individuals with higher HbA1c level. eGFR may serve as a mediating factor in the associations between LMIIs and the occurrence of PAD. These findings provide novel evidence for immune inflammation-based risk assessment and personalized preventive strategies for PAD.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12933-025-02887-2.

Peripheral artery disease (PAD) is a chronic arterial occlusive disease caused by atherosclerosis. This condition most commonly affects the arteries of the lower limbs and can also involve the carotid arteries, upper limb arteries, abdominal aorta, extracranial carotid arteries and renal arteries, characterized by ischaemic pain, intermittent claudication, skin color changes and functional impairment [1]. Long-term PAD can further lead to serious complications such as gangrene and amputation, and is linked to an increased risk of major adverse cardiovascular events (MACEs) and death, resulting in a huge health and economic burden [2]. In 2019, there were up to 113 million people worldwide with PAD, with a prevalence of 1.52%. The prevalence of PAD increases markedly with age, especially above the age of 60 years, with a significantly higher proportion of 14.91% in the 80 to 84 age group [3].

Patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) have a considerable risk of developing PAD that is two to four times higher than that in general population [4,5]. Diabetes-induced hyperglycemia can damage vascular endothelium, increase blood viscosity and trigger oxidative stress, promoting the formation of atherosclerosis, which is closely related to the occurrence and progression of PAD [6,7]. Inflammation also plays a crucial role in this process. Inflammatory responses can induce the dysfunction in endothelial cells and increase the permeability of vessel walls, leading to the activation of platelets, the accumulation of white blood cells and lipids beneath endothelium. Dyslipidemia may activate inflammatory functions by modifying the oxidation of lipoprotein [8]. All these consequences accelerate the progression of atherosclerosis [9]. It should be noted that diabetic patients are often unaware of the early stage of PAD due to loss of pain and a decrease in the frequency of intermittent claudication, not seeking medical attention until symptoms worsen and progress to the terminal stage. Therefore, early identification of PAD-associated inflammatory factors and implementation of anti-inflammation therapeutic strategies may be efficacious in the primary prevention and management of PAD [10].

Recently, the neutrophil to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio (NHR), monocyte to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio (MHR), platelet to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio (PHR), and lymphocyte to high-density lipoprotein cholesterol ratio (LHR) have been considered as lipid metabolism-related inflammatory biomarkers for the risks of MACEs [11–17]. These composite indices, calculated as ratios of peripheral blood inflammatory cell counts to serum high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) levels, are readily measurable through routine laboratory examinations at low cost. By integrating inflammatory and lipid metabolic profiles, lipid metabolism-related inflammatory indices (LMIIs) provide a quantitative assessment of systemic pathophysiological status and demonstrate superior clinical utility over isolated indicators in monitoring disease progression. Some evidence indeed linked these indices to the risk of PAD, yet the available data is scarce and predominantly confined to cross-sectional design [18–20]. Given that inflammation is one of the important risk factors for atherosclerosis, it becomes imperative to explore whether and to what extent the aforementioned four LMIIs contribute to the development of PAD. With the ongoing trend of population aging, the burden of PAD is expected to growing significantly in the future. On the other hand, while numerous studies have examined the associations between LMIIs and MACEs, a notable methodological limitation is the absence of causal modelling [21]. Prior studies have relied traditional models and the findings may be susceptible to the influence of residual confounding.

To address these issues, we used data from the Jinshan Cohort and the UK Biobank to explore the potential associations of NHR, MHR, LHR and PHR with the risks of PAD among patients aged ≥ 60 years with T2DM. We hypothesized that higher baseline levels of these LMIIs would be associated with an increased risk of incident PAD. To test this hypothesis, Cox and logistic regression models were used to evaluate these associations. Additionally, we applied the methods of generalized propensity score (GPS), E-value and negative control exposure (NCE) to control measured and unmeasured confounding. Stratified analyses were performed to evaluate the relationships between LMIIs and PAD across various demographic groups. Furthermore, a series of exploratory analyses were undertaken to explore whether liver and kidney function-related indicators mediate the relationships between LMIIs and PAD.

The Jinshan Cohort is a population-based cohort study, derived from Zhongshan and Jinshan Proactive Prevention of Diabetic Foot Project (ZIS PROJECT) (Application ID: ChiCTR2100051856). This project is designed to conduct foot screenings for diabetic patients from 11 communities of Jinshan District in Shanghai, China, in order to early detect patients with high-risk of developing diabetic foot. During the period from March to June 2022, the project has enrolled more than 4000 diabetic patients. Since then annual follow-up has being conducted for the patients during the same months each year. Ethics approval was granted from the Ethics Committee of Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University (JIEC 2021-S24), and written informed consent was obtained from all participants at enrollment.

The UK Biobank (UKB) is a large-scale nationwide prospectively cohort study, which has recruited more than 500 thousand participants aged 40 to 69 years from 22 assessment centers (17 in England, 2 in Scotland, and 3 in Wales) in the United Kingdom (UK) between 2006 and 2010 (Application ID: 116,082). This project has collected unprecedented information on socioeconomic characteristics, lifestyles and other potentially health-related aspects through extensive baseline questionnaires, interviews and physical measurements. Details of the study design have been described previously [22]. The UK Biobank has obtained ethical approval from the North West-Haydock Research Ethics Committee (11/NW/0382) to ensure the protection of subjects and to comply with the principles set out in the Declaration of Helsinki. All participants provided written informed consent at enrollment.

In the present study, after excluding participants with type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) or PAD at baseline, those with missing data on baseline neutrophil, monocyte, platelet, lymphocyte or HDL-C, and those with missing data on outcomes, a total of 2837 participants aged ≥ 60 years with T2DM from the Jinshan Cohort and 13,542 participants from the UK Biobank were included in the primary analyses (Figure S1).

In these two cohort studies, blood samples were collected and biochemical assays were performed at baseline. In our study, data for several indicators were collected for subsequent analyses, including neutrophil, monocyte, platelet, lymphocyte, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), creatinine, total bilirubin (TBil), total protein (TP), albumin (Alb), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST).

Considering complex interactions between peripheral blood cells and HDL-C, four LMIIs were computed as composite measures of systemic inflammation, which contains neutrophil to HDL-C ratio (NHR), monocyte to HDL-C ratio (MHR), platelet to HDL-C ratio (PHR) and lymphocyte to HDL-C ratio (LHR). A higher value of each LMII indicates a greater level of inflammation.

T2DM was identified based on one or more of the following conditions: records coded by the International Classification of Diseases-Ninth Version (ICD-9) or the International Classification of Diseases-Tenth Version (ICD-10), self-reported or physician-diagnosed diabetes, experiencing anti-diabetes medication, HbA1c level ≥ 6.5%, 8-h fasting plasma glucose (FPG) level ≥ 7 mmol/L, or random plasma glucose (RPG) level ≥ 11.1 mmol/L [23].

The primary outcome of this study was the occurrence of PAD, an irreversible condition. Therefore, only first incident PAD events were considered.

In the Jinshan Cohort, PAD was defined according to ankle-brachial index (ABI) < 0.9 or ABI > 1.3, or the presence of weakened or absent arterial pulse (dorsalis pedis artery, posterior tibial artery or popliteal artery) [24]. The ABI for each limb was calculated by dividing the lower pressure value of the left or right brachial artery, with participants in a supine resting position during the measurement. Furthermore, handheld Doppler ultrasound was performed to assess arterial waveforms for PAD diagnosis. This cohort study was designed to capture new-onset incident cases of PAD during the follow-up period. Specifically, participants were initially screened for PAD using ABI, and those without PAD at baseline were followed prospectively to observe the occurrence of PAD over time. The participants were enrolled in 2022 and would being followed-up for over a decade. The date of data cut-off for this study was June 30, 2024.

In the UK Biobank, PAD was ascertained using codes from ICD-9, ICD-10, or the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys’ Classification of Surgical Operations, Fourth Version (OPCS-4) [25]. Baseline PAD was also identified through self-reported PAD, records on operations or amputations of toe or leg. Follow-up time (person years) was defined as the date from enrollment until the incident PAD, death, loss to follow-up, or end of follow-up period (October 31, 2022, for England; August 31, 2022, for Scotland; and May 31, 2022 for Wales), whichever came first. If an individual did not experience incident PAD by the end of the follow-up period, then his/her survival time was considered censored. Incident rate was calculated as the number of incident cases divided by follow-up person-years. Detailed ascertainment standards for diseases in the UK Biobank are presented in Table S1.

A series of baseline covariates were identified to adjust for their potential confounding, with the detailed information shown in Table S2-S3. In this context, physical activity frequency was defined as the number of days per week one engaged in moderate-intensity physical activity for 10 min or more. Central obesity based on waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) was defined according to the sex-specific cut-off (≥ 0.9 for male and ≥ 0.85 for female). Hypertension was identified according to the records coded by ICD-9 or ICD-10, self-reported or physician-diagnosed hypertension, experiencing anti-hypertension medication, systolic blood pressure (SBP) > 140 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure (DBP) > 90 mmHg.

Continuous variables were presented as means and standard deviations (mean ± SD), or median and inter quartile range (IQR), which were compared using the Student’s t-test or Wilcoxon rank-sum test. Categorical variables were presented as frequencies and percentages (n, %) and compared using the Chi-square test.

In the primary analyses, multivariate-adjusted logistic regression models or Cox proportional-hazards models were used to estimate the odds ratios (ORs) or hazard ratios (HRs) and their 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for incident PAD in association with four LMIIs among patients with T2DM. These models were selected after considering the types of outcome variables (binary or survival) and confirming that no strong evidence against the proportional-hazards assumption. The restricted cubic splines (RCS) were established to investigate the dose–response relationship between LMIIs and PAD.

Given that continuous variable MHR exhibits relatively low variability and may lead to an overestimation of effect sizes, while PHR shows greater variability and may result in underestimation of effect sizes, we adjusted the units of these variables accordingly: the units for the continuous variable MHR and PHR were adjusted to 108/mmol and 1011/mmol, respectively, while the units for NHR and LHR remained at 109/mmol [20].

Missing data of covariates were imputed using multiple imputation with chained equations via the MICE package in R, generating five imputed datasets. The primary analysis was conducted using the first imputed dataset. Analyses conducted on the remaining four imputed datasets yielded consistent results, thereby reinforcing the robustness of the findings. Detailed information regarding the missing data is shown in Table S2-S3.

Sensitivity analyses were performed using a series of methods aimed to address both measured and unmeasured confounders. To elaborate, the GPS method was employed to account for measured confounders, while the E-value and NCE methods were utilized to address potential unmeasured confounders.

The E-value quantifies the minimum association strength required for an unmeasured confounder should have with both the exposure and the outcome to entirely explain away the observed exposure-outcome association, after adjusting for all measured confounders [32]. A rigorous approach based on the estimated effect sizes (ORs or HRs) obtained from the primary analyses was employed to calculate E-values. By comparing the E-values to the original effect estimates, the robustness of the primary results was evaluated, and the likelihood of unmeasured confounders distorting the observed associations was also assessed.

To investigate the potential heterogeneity in the effects of LMIIs on PAD across different populations, stratified analyses were conducted across age (< 65, ≥ 65 years old), sex (male, female), residential area (urban, rural), ethnicity (white, others), smoking status (never, current or former), alcohol drinking status (never, current or former), WHR-based central obesity (no, yes), hypertension (no, yes), use of anti-diabetes medication (no, yes), use of anti-cholesterol medication (no, yes), use of aspirin (no, yes) and HbA1c level (< 7, ≥ 7%). Additionally, the multiplicative interaction terms were included in the regression models to assess effect modification by these stratified variables.

To explore the mediation effects of liver and kidney function-related indicators on associations between LMIIs and incident PAD, causal mediation analyses were performed using VanderWeele’s method [38]. The total effect was decomposed into direct effect and mediated effect. The potential mediators included estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), TBil, TP, Alb, ALP, ALT, AST (Table S2-S3). eGFR, a composite index of renal function, was calculated according to the Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration (CKD-EPI) equation (Table S4) [39]. To ensure the validity of our causal mediation analysis, several key assumptions such as no unmeasured confounders, consistency and positivity were carefully considered. A series of confounders consistent with those in the primary analyses were considered and adjusted for in the models. Furthermore, to assess the robustness of the findings, sensitivity analyses were conducted using the methods of E-value and NCE [32]. Given its complexity, the pathway (LMIIs → mediator → PAD) was decomposed into two biologically interpretable sub-pathways: sub-pathway 1 (LMIIs → mediator) and sub-pathway 2 (mediator → PAD). For each sub-pathway, the E-values were calculated to quantify the mediated effects of LMIIs on PAD via potential mediators, as well as the NCEs previously used in the primary analyses were selected to identify noncausal associations.

All analyses were conducted in R (version 4.4.1). A two-tailedP< 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Baseline characteristics and biochemical assays of participants are provided in Table1and Table S5, respectively. Overall, in the Jinshan Cohort, the mean baseline age of 2837 participants was 69.58 ± 5.56 years, of which 1578 (55.6%) were female and 2272 (80.8%) lived in rural area. During a follow-up time of 2 years, 142 (5.01%) participants experienced incident PAD. In the UK Biobank, the mean baseline age of 13,542 participants was 64.55 ± 2.87 years, of which 5036 (37.2%) were female, 12,272 (91.3%) were white. During a median follow-up of 13.16 (IQR: 12.32–14.07) years, 871 (6.43%) participants developed PAD.

The baseline characteristics in the Jinshan Cohort were basically comparable between these two groups (P> 0.001). On the contrary, in the UK Biobank, compared with those free of PAD, participants who occurred PAD were more likely to have a higher proportions of WHR-based central obesity and hypertension, as well as tended to use anti-diabetes medications, anti-cholesterol medications and aspirin (P< 0.001) (Table1). Meanwhile, the baseline levels of HbA1c, NHR, MHR, PHR and LHR were significantly higher in patients with PAD compared to those without PAD across both cohorts (P< 0.001) (Table S5).

Overall, we observed that the elevated levels of NHR, MHR, PHR and LHR increased the risks of incident PAD, both in the two independent cohorts of the Jinshan Cohort and the UK Biobank. In the RCS analyses, there seemed to be positive associations of PAD with all four LMIIs in both cohorts, with the risks of PAD significantly increasing as the levels of these indices rose (Pfor overall < 0.05) (Fig.1).

The results from traditional regression models also suggested significantly positive associations of incident PAD with each LMII, when they were included as continuous variables in the models. In the Jinshan Cohort, for each unit increase in NHR (109mmol), MHR (108mmol), PHR (1011mmol) and LHR (109mmol), the ORs for PAD were 1.24 (95%CI 1.11–1.39), 1.22 (95%CI 1.08–1.37), 1.69 (95%CI 1.32–2.15) and 1.57 (95%CI 1.22–2.01), respectively, based on the multivariable-adjusted logistic regression models. In the UK Biobank, the positive associations between PAD and LMIIs appeared to be attenuated, and the HRs per one-unit increase in NHR, MHR, PHR and LHR were 1.14 (95%CI 1.10–1.18), 1.03 (95%CI 1.01–1.04), 1.19 (95%CI 1.09–1.29) and 1.11 (95%CI 1.07–1.14) for incident PAD, respectively. Additionally, compared with those in the lowest tertile (Tertile 1), participants in the highest tertile (Tertile 3) of LMIIs had much higher risks of PAD (Table2).

The mean absolute values of the correlation coefficients between all four continuous LMIIs and covariates, as well as the maximum absolute standardized mean differences of covariates across different LMII level groups in GPS methods, were all less than 0.1 and lower than those in the unadjusted models. This indicated the GPS methods may effectively address the measured confounders. (Table S6-S13 and Figure S2-S5) [31]. Extreme weights generated by the three GPS methods for LMIIs were truncated at the 1st and 99th percentile to mitigate the influence of outliers and ensure the stability of regression coefficients. This truncation strategy effectively balanced the trade-off between retaining sample representativeness and minimizing bias from extreme weight values, resulting in a more symmetrical distribution chart with a reduction in extreme values (Figure S6-S9).

The estimated risks of PAD for one-unit increase in all four LMIIs were still robust in regression models weighted by GPS. Specially, stronger positive associations of PAD with LMIIs were found in the UK Biobank across all GPS-adjusted models, with the maximum multi-adjusted HR with NHR (HR = 1.79, 95%CI 1.50–2.13, Tertile 3 vs. Tertile 1) when using GLM scenario (Table2).

The E-values for the effects of each LMII on PAD were consistently found to be significantly larger than their corresponding observed effects in both the Jinshan Cohort and the UK Biobank (Table S14-S15). This indicates that unmeasured confounding would need to exert an extremely strong influence on both LMIIs and PAD to substantially alter our findings, thereby reinforcing the robustness of the observed associations against residual confounding. Meanwhile, the results of NCE analyses revealed no statistically significant associations between any of the selected NCE and PAD, in either the Jinshan Cohort or the UK Biobank (all forP> 0.05) (Table S16-S17). On calibration using NCEs, the calibratedPvalues for the associations between LMIIs and the risks of incident PAD were all below the significance threshold (all forP< 0.05), further indicating that the observed effect sizes were significant and the possibility of unmeasured confounding was relatively small (Fig.2).

Overall, the results of stratified analyses did not alter the primary associations between LMIIs and PAD, but revealed some significant effect modification across key subgroups (Figs.3,4). For instance, in the UK Biobank, compared to those using aspirin, associations between all four LMIIs and PAD risk were stronger in participants not using, with the corresponding HRs of 1.18 (95%CI 1.13–1.25) for NHR, 1.17 (95%CI 1.04–1.09) for MHR, 1.35 (95%CI 1.18–1.55) for PHR and 1.12 (95%CI 1.09–1.16) for LHR, respectively. Notably, significant interactions were observed for aspirin use status in the associations of PAD with NHR, MHR and PHR (allP-interaction < 0.05). HbA1c level also modified the effects of NHR and MHR on PAD (P-interaction < 0.05), with individuals having HbA1c ≥ 7% exhibiting higher HRs (HR = 1.18, 95%CI 1.13–1.23 for NHR; HR = 1.04, 95%CI 1.02–1.06 for NHR) than those having HbA1c < 7%.

In the Jinshan Cohort, the associations between all four LMIIs and PAD varied across sex, residential area, smoking status and HbA1c level. Although the interactions were not significant, the HRs were more pronounced in females compared to males, in urban residents compared to rural residents, in smokers compared to non-smokers, and in individuals with HbA1c ≥ 7% compared to with HbA1c < 7%.

We evaluated the direct and mediated effects of LMIIs on PAD, considering seven liver and kidney function-related indicators as potential mediators (Figure S10 and Table S18-19). Among these indicators, eGFR emerged as a significant mediator. In the Jinshan Cohort, eGFR mediated the relationship between each LMII and PAD, with the proportions of mediating effect ranging from 10.32% to 19.95%. While in the UK Biobank, eGFR mediated the effects of other three LMIIs in relation to PAD, except for LHR, with the proportions of mediating effect ranging from 10.20 to 20.80% (Fig.5).

Additionally, the E-values for the mediated effects of each LMII on PAD via eGFR were larger than their corresponding natural mediated effect (Table S20-S21). For instance, in the Jinshan Cohort, the E-value for the mediated effect of NHR on PAD via eGFR (NHR → eGFR → PAD) was 1.244, meaning an unmeasured confounder would need to be associated with both the mediator (eGFR) and outcome (PAD) at a relative risk of 1.244 to fully overturn the observed mediation effect.

The results of the NCE analyses are shown in Table S22-23. For sub-pathway 2 (eGFR → PAD), the results of NCE analyses in both the Jinshan Cohort and the UK Biobank revealed no statistically significant associations between any of the selected NCE and PAD (all forP> 0.05), reinforcing the pathway’s robustness against confounding. In sub-pathway 1 (NHR → eGFR), two marginally positive results emerged in the Jinshan Cohort, with wide confidence intervals. These unexpected positive results were attributed to a small sample size in specific subgroups (participants with high left foot arch, or participants with moderate-to-severe left foot varus), which introduced statistical instability rather than true confounding effects.

In this multicohort study, we evaluated the impacts of four LMIIs (NHR, MHR, PHR and LHR) on the occurrence of PAD among patients aged ≥ 60 years with T2DM, and further explored the mediation roles of liver and kidney function-related indicators in these associations.

Overall, we clarified that the elevated levels of NHR, MHR, PHR and LHR increased the risks of incident PAD, both in the two independent cohorts of the Jinshan Cohort and the UK Biobank. These positive associations were confirmed to be robust and roughly consistent even after adjusting for potential confounding by the methods of GPS, E-value and NCE. Over the past few years, studies have predominantly focused on the linkage between LMIIs and cardiovascular diseases, and have demonstrated that NHR, MHR, LHR and PHR are novel inflammatory biomarkers associated with atherosclerosis and major adverse cardiovascular outcomes (MACEs). For instance, a study showed that NHR was linked to a higher risk of death and recurrent myocardial infarction (RMI) in Chinese patients aged 65 to 85 years with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) [40]. The results from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) indicated that MHR and PHR were independently related to all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in the general population [12,14]. Data from Brazilian adults suggested that LHR was connected to traditional cardio-metabolic risk markers [13].

Substantial evidence have indicated that inflammation and immune mechanisms, as well as dyslipidemia are involved in the occurrence and progression of atherosclerosis [41]. Infiltration of inflammatory cells can be found throughout each stage of atherosclerotic diseases. Among them, neutrophils are a numerous and rapidly responsive group of cells in the human immune system, constituting the first line of defense for the immune system [42]. They can release various inflammatory mediators, such as cytokines and chemokines, which can attract more immune cells to the sites of inflammation and infection, intensifying the inflammatory response [43]. Neutrophils can also capture and kill pathogens by forming neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs). Enzymes such as myeloperoxidase (MPO) found in NETs can produce reactive oxygen species (ROS), increasing oxidative stress and leading to endothelial dysfunction [44,45]. Monocytes play a role in inflammatory responses that is similar to neutrophils, and they further differentiate into macrophages, which then phagocytose oxidized low-density lipoprotein (oxLDL) to form foam cells. The accumulation of these foam cells in the intima layer of the artery initiates the formation of fatty streaks, marking a critical and early phase in the development of atherosclerosis and an essential step in the formation of plaques [46,47]. Lymphocytes, particularly T cells, promote the inflammatory response in atherosclerosis by secreting cytokines such as γ-interferon, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), and interleukins [48]. It should be noted that helper T cells (Th1 and Th17) are likely to exacerbate inflammation and drive atherosclerotic progression, whereas regulatory T cells (Tregs) can mitigate the advancement of atherosclerosis by suppressing inflammatory responses and promoting immune tolerance [49,50]. B cells not only produce antibodies against oxLDL, but may also participate in the inflammatory process by secreting cytokines and acting as antigen-presenting cells [51]. Platelets adhere to, activate, and aggregate at the sites of damaged vascular endothelium, leading to thrombus formation. They also bind to various cells and factors, forming platelet-leukocyte aggregates, which participate in cascade inflammatory responses and promote the generation of thrombin and the formation of fibrin clots [52].

Conversely, HDL-C is involved in inhibiting inflammation and oxidation. This anti-inflammatory properties are realized by diminishing the secretion of inflammatory mediators or enhancing their breakdown, thereby aiding in the preservation of vascular endothelial integrity [53]. HDL particles contain a variety of antioxidant enzymes, such as glutathione peroxidase (GPx), platelet-activating factor-acetylhydrolase (PAF-AH), which inhibit the oxidative modification of LDL through different chemical reactions. In addition, HDL-C facilitates the reverse transport of cholesterol from the vascular wall to the liver, reducing the deposition of cholesterol in the vessel wall [54,55]. Intriguingly, HDL-C has been reported to promote the egress of macrophages from plaques through a process mediated by CCR7, the receptor for CCL19 and CCL21 [56]. HDL-C can also inhibit the abilities of activation, attachment, diffusion and migration for inflammatory cells, protecting vascular endothelium from inflammation and oxidative stress [57]. Therefore, for the complex interactions between inflammatory cells and HDL-C, the combined indices may be more reliable than individual parameters [58].

We have identified potential vulnerable subgroups who were more susceptible to the impacts of LMIIs on the development of PAD, emphasizing the necessity for targeted prevention and intervention strategies. For instance, the positive associations between LMIIs and PAD were more pronounced in females, urban residents, smokers, aspirin users, and individuals with HbA1c level ≥ 7% in the Jinshan Cohort. Sex hormones, hyperglycemia, medication and tobacco exposure are known to modulate inflammatory and metabolic pathways, serving as established risk factors for PAD [1,59]. Findings from the UK Biobank data further suggest that aspirin use and glycemic level (as indexed by HbA1c) may modify the inflammatory mechanisms through which LMIIs influence PAD risk. This indicates that medications and metabolic status could alter the biological mechanisms linking inflammatory markers to vascular injury, underscoring the importance of integrating medication use and glycemic indices into risk assessments to better characterize LMII-mediated PAD pathogenesis across diverse populations.

In addition, we found that eGFR had a evident mediation effect on the relationships between the four LMIIs and PAD across two cohorts. eGFR is an important indicator for measuring kidney function, reflecting the kidney's ability to clear waste and excess fluid from the blood. Inflammatory factors directly affect the level of GFR by causing renal tubulo-interstitial injury and promoting glomerulosclerosis. When the levels of inflammatory factors increase, kidney function may further deteriorate, thereby exacerbating the progression of arteriosclerosis [60]. Hence, regulating eGFR levels may help reduce the risk of PAD. The results from sensitivity analyses using the methods of E-value and NCE also provide additional evidence for the robustness of our findings and support the validity of the proposed mediation pathways. Nevertheless, we failed to observe the mediating role of eGFR in the relationship between LHR and PAD in the UK Biobank, this could potentially be attributed to the population composition, as more than 90% of the UK Biobank participants are of white ancestry. Such a uniform racial and genetic profile could have constrained our ability to observe the mediation effect of eGFR. To more conclusively clarify these associations, future researches should encompass a broader and more diverse population.

A comprehensive strategy is essential for the prevention and treatment of PAD in patients with T2DM. This strategy should cover a series of aspects such as life modifications, pharmacotherapy interventions, immune metabolic disease control and proper foot care. Pharmacological treatment may comprise anti-platelet medications, statins and glucose-lowering drugs, to regulate blood glucose, blood pressure and lipid profiles, while mitigating inflammation and enhancing endothelial health. Some evidence also highlighted the significance of the neutrophils as a key therapeutic target in the development of cardiovascular medications [61]. Moreover, periodic foot assessments are imperative, especially for diabetic patients, to proactively tackle foot infections and ulcers.

One of the marked strengths of this study is the utilization of two distinct cohorts, which yielded consistent findings, effectively minimizing the likelihood that the observed associations are attributable to the characteristics inherent to a single cohort. This approach enhances the reliability and generalizability of the link of inflammatory with PAD. Also, a series of methods were applied to control for potential confounding. GPS methods can model the complex relationship between continuous/multi-categorical exposure levels and covariates more flexibly, rather than being limited to simple two groups, reducing reliance on parametric assumptions compared to traditional multi-variable regression. This process achieves an effect akin to randomization, also known as “post hoc randomization” [27,28]. We also conducted several sensitivity analyses using different GPS methods to evaluate the robustness of our findings. Additionally, E-value and NCE analyses were applied to address the potential unmeasured confounding. The E-value offers a quantitative measure of the potential impact of unmeasured confounding, providing a threshold for evaluating whether unobserved factors could plausibly reverse our findings, while NCE analyses serve as an alternative method to identify the influence of unmeasured confounding. Both methods were used to complement and reinforce the robustness of the findings from the GPS-based analyses. Collectively, these analyses provide affirmative evidence supporting the assumption of no significant confounding affecting our results.

Our study also has some limitations. First, we collected LMIIs and covariates only at baseline, not accounting for possible changes during the follow-up. This single-time-point measurement may not fully capture the dynamic nature of chronic inflammation and covariates. Future studies that explore the dynamic changes of inflammatory indices over time may provide more valuable information about their mechanism on PAD. Second, our study predominantly comprises participants from China and UK, which may limit the generalizability of the findings to population in other countries or regions. Additionally, the UK Biobank cohort is subject to a healthy volunteer bias, potentially leading to either underestimation or overestimation of associations. To be noted that the methods employed to control for confounding in this study also have inherent limitations. For example, the E-value relies exclusively on the observed effects and is susceptible to the biases in the original study [32]. The NCE method relies on a strong model assumption, and it is primarily used to qualitatively determine whether bias is present, but fails to quantify the exact magnitude of these bias [62]. Subsequently, we will employ more robust statistical techniques to further enhance the reliability of our analyses [63].

In summary, this study hold a comprehensive analytical approach to enhance causal inference and emphasized the importance of inflammation in the occurrence of PAD among patients with T2DM, providing insights that elevated LMIIs levels were associated with an increased risk of PAD. Future studies should delve deeper into the regulatory mechanisms of inflammation and metabolism with the aim of developing novel preventive and therapeutic strategies for PAD. By understanding the intricate dynamics of inflammation in PAD, we can pave the way for more effective treatments and interventions, ultimately improving health outcomes and quality of lives for patients.

Elevated levels of LMIIs, such as NHR, MHR, PHR and LHR, were associated with an increased risk of incident PAD among elderly diabetic patients. These associations exhibited notable population heterogeneity, with stronger effects observed in females and individuals with higher HbA1c level. eGFR may serve as a mediating factor in the association between LMIIs and the occurrence of PAD. These findings provide novel evidence for immune inflammation-based risk assessment and personalized preventive strategies for PAD.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

The authors would like to thank the participants of the ZIS PROJECT (application ID ChiCTR2100051856) and the UK Biobank (application ID 41376) for making this work possible. Also, this study received support from the Shanghai Jinshan District Health Commission and 11 community health centers.