Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

Received 2025 Jun 20; Accepted 2025 Jun 20; Collection date 2025 Aug 20.

In celebration of Juneteenth,
the federal holiday often regarded as America’s second Independence
Day,ACS Bio& Med Chem Aupresents
a selection of Research Articles, Perspectives, Letters, and Reviews
that showcase the remarkable talent of scientists descended from the
African diaspora who continue to drive innovation in chemistry and
the life sciences. While President Joe Biden recognized Juneteenth
as a federal holiday in 2021, the history of Juneteenth dates back
to January 1, 1863, when President Abraham Lincoln issued the Emancipation
Proclamation, declaring that all persons held as enslaved people within
the Confederate states were free. While this Proclamation sparked
our nation’s commitment to freedom and initiated the critical
steps in the history of emancipation in the United States, the intended
results were severely limited, in part, by the Union army’s
limited ability to enforce the Proclamation.

On June 19th, 1866,
two months and ten days after the Confederate
army surrendered and three years after the Emancipation Proclamation,
the Union Army landed in Galveston, Texas, and pronounced that the
more than 250,000 enslaved people in Texas were free. They were among
the last to learn of their freedom. Soon after, on December 6, 1866,
the 13th Amendment officially abolished slavery throughout the United
States. Juneteenth is honored in modern times not only as a celebration
of the freedom of enslaved people from the African Diaspora but also
as a reminder that freedom in the United States was hard fought. Or,
as UC Davis historian Gregory Downs once stated, “Juneteenth
is an important moment in the history of emancipation because it reveals
the way that emancipation did not happen all at once or with the stroke
of a pen but in a brutal, decades-long fight against slave owners
who did not surrender or retreat”. It serves as a reminder
that the unity and freedoms we enjoy today were neither a “gift”
nor brought about passively. Instead, it was purchased with the blood,
sweat, and tears of our Black, White, and indigenous ancestors. In
the context of this virtual issue ofACS Bio& Med Chem Au, Juneteenth serves as a poignant reminder
that, with this freedom, Black people and others from the African
diaspora have made significant contributions to the scientific landscape
of the United States of America.

Although the Emancipation Proclamation
brought “freedom”
to Black people, African Americans were far from enjoying the inalienable
rights of Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness granted in the
U.S. Declaration of Independence. The end of slavery, especially after
Reconstruction, brought continued misery and disenfranchisement in
the form of the Black Codes, as well as poll taxes and literacy tests
to restrict Black voting. Jim Crow laws were erected to ensure that
Black people “knew their place” and to maintain a separation
between the Black and White races in almost all facets of daily life.
These laws were particularly harmful when applied to the education
of Black people; a lack of access to robust educational resources
often restricted their socioeconomic upward mobility. More importantly,
Black people who did receive robust educations, sometimes at premier
institutions in the United States, found it exceedingly difficult
to obtain employment, especially in the sciences. Renowned Black scientists
like Ernest Everett (E.E.) Just (University of Chicago), Percy Julian
(University of Vienna), and Lloyd Ferguson (University of California,
Berkeley), who received Ph.D. degrees from prestigious institutions,
were relegated to teaching positions at Historically Black Colleges
and Universities due to their inability to obtain professorships at
most White institutions or jobs in industry. These individuals, along
with many others, were exceptional. E.E. Just made fundamental contributions
to the understanding of the cell surface in biological events such
as fertilization; Percy Julian was a pioneer in the chemical synthesis
of natural products, especially steroids, and was the second Black
person to be elected to the U.S. National Academy of Sciences; while
Lloyd Ferguson was the first Black person to earn a Ph.D. in chemistry
from University of California, Berkeley, and wrote several influential
textbooks in organic chemistry, some of which were adopted at White
institutions in the south at a time when he would not be admitted
as a student. Science was not something Black people were thought
to be capable of excelling at. Instead, science was something that
was done on Black people, as in the infamous Tuskegee Syphilis study
(1932–1972), conducted by the US Public Health Service.

Black people were considered intellectually inferior, a sentiment
that persists even today, although it is now more subtle. These beliefs
were held by people such as Thomas Jefferson, who stated that Black
people were “inferior to the Whites in the endowments of body
and mind”, which was used to justify slavery. More recently,
in 2007, James Watson, who won the Nobel Prize for the structure of
DNA, argued that all our social policies in the U.S. and throughout
the world are based on the assumption that the intelligence of Black
people is equal to that of White people, whereas the testing suggests
otherwise. These beliefs, when expressed publicly by highly respected
people, have damning consequences.

As a high school student,
one of us (S.J.B.) remembers a classmate
bemoaning the arrival of Black History Month. The student stated that
he did not know why he had to celebrate Black History Month: “Black
people haven’t done anything”. This sentiment is precisely
the problem and why it remains essential to celebrate the achievements
of Black Americans. Not to do so can have devastating consequences
on how others view Black people and how Black people view themselves.
In the absence of specific examples of Black achievement in science,
the default assumption is that a White male made the achievement.
For example, few people know that Dr. Thomas Cole, as a Ph.D. student
at the University of Chicago in the laboratory of Professor Phillip
Eaton, was the first to synthesize cubane. This compound, which contains
eight carbon atoms at the vertices of a cube, attracted overwhelming
attention from the organic chemistry community. Many thought it would
be impossible to synthesize, given that each of the carbons adopted
strained 90° angles. Even fewer people know that Dr. Jane Wright,
a Black woman, was the first to use folic acid antagonists as anticancer
drugs and the first to identify methotrexate as a potent anticancer
agent. The 2024 Nobel Prize in Chemistry was awarded to David Baker,
Demis Hassabis, and John Jumper for their work in computational protein
design and structure prediction. Although they were undoubtedly deserving,
the pioneer of computational protein design is Caltech biochemist
Prof. Stephen Mayo, a Black scientist who was also deserving. Mayo,
who incidentally earned his undergraduate degree in chemistry from
The Pennsylvania State University, is credited with achieving the
first successful design of a protein from physical principles with
experimental validation (Science1997,278, 82–87.10.1126/science.278.5335.82).

The achievements above are just a few of many remarkable
contributions
to science by Black people. While it is important to acknowledge that
celebrating the achievements of Black scientists does not diminish
the contributions made by people in other racial groups, this Juneteenth
Special Issue ofACS Bio& Med Chem Au, by highlighting outstanding research from current Black scientists,
demonstrates how far Black people have come since the abolition of
slavery.

Evan Pugh Professor and Eberly Family Distinguished
Chair in Science at the Pennsylvania State University and the Richard
C. Perry Professor of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Biophysics, &
Chemical Biology at the University of Pennsylvania.

Professor. Squire J. Booker
earned a B.A. degree with
a concentration in Chemistry from Austin College (Sherman, TX) and
a Ph.D. in Biochemistry from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
where he studied under Professor JoAnne Stubbe. He performed postdoctoral
studies for one year as an NSF-NATO fellow in the laboratory of Daniel
Mansuy at Université René Descartes in Paris, France,
before moving to the Institute for Enzyme Research at the University
of WisconsinMadison to study with Professor Perry Frey under
an NIH Ruth Kirschstein postdoctoral fellowship. He started his independent
laboratory at The Pennsylvania State University in 1999 and remained
there until his move to the University of Pennsylvania in June 2025.

The Booker lab focuses on enzyme catalysis, with a particular emphasis
on enzymes that catalyze kinetically challenging reactions involving
radicals. One major class of enzymes he studies is the radical S-adenosylmethionine
(SAM) superfamily of enzymes, which use SAM as a precursor to a 5′-deoxyadenosyl
radical intermediate, responsible for initiating well over one hundred
different reaction types. His laboratory employs a range of techniques
to investigate enzyme catalysis, including structural methods such
as X-ray crystallography and cryo-electron microscopy, spectroscopic
methods like electron paramagnetic resonance and Mössbauer
spectroscopies, electrochemical methods like protein film voltammetry,
and various biochemical, microbiological, and molecular biological
methods.

In addition to his scientific endeavors, he is involved
in the
mentoring of young scientists and has served on the advisory boards
of ABRCMS and ASBMB NIH MOSAIC. He also served as chair of the Minority
Affairs Committee of ASBMB. Among other awards, Booker has received
a Presidential Early Career Award in Science and Engineering (PECASE),
an ACS Cope Scholar award, the Frank Westheimer Medal from Harvard
University, the Ruth Kirschstein and Merck Awards from ASBMB, the
Percy Julian Award from NOBCChE, and the Hans Neurath Award from the
Protein Society. He was elected a fellow of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science in 2013, a fellow of the American Society
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology in 2021, a member of the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2017, and a member of the National
Academy of Sciences in 2019. He is currently an Associate Editor ofBiochemistry ACSand the Deputy Editor ofACS Bio& Med Chem Au.

Prof. Booker’s
Article is titled “Radical Fluoromethylation
Enabled by Cobalamin-Dependent Radical SAM Enzymes” (DOI:10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.5c00062).

Harrison McCrea Dickson, MD, and Clifford
C. Baker, MD, Presidential Associate Professor, University of Pennsylvania.

Dr. Donita C. Brady earned her BS in Chemistry from Radford University
and her PhD in Pharmacology from the University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill, followed by postdoctoral research with Dr. Christopher
Counter at Duke University, where she focused on oncogenic signaling
pathways.

At the University of Pennsylvania, the Brady Lab explores
how cancer
cells adapt to fuel uncontrolled growth, with two primary research
areas: Mapping and Leveraging Metal Signaling in Cancer and Unlocking
the Chemical Space of Cancer-Associated Perturbations.

The lab
investigates how dietary metals contribute to cancer progression.
While metals are essential for DNA, RNA, and protein function, the
mechanisms by which cells regulate metal balance and respond to metal
fluctuations are not fully understood. Brady’s team studies
how metal–protein interactions shape signaling and metabolism
and how metal requirements shift as stem cells mature or activate
during tissue repaira process that, when misregulated, may
initiate cancer. These studies aim to uncover new opportunities to
therapeutically target metal-driven pathways.

Recognizing that
most patients do not benefit from genetic precision
medicine, the Brady Lab focuses on the proteomethe active
proteins driving cancer behavior. In 2019, Brady cofounded Penn Therapeutics
Mechanisms (PTM), a multidisciplinary initiative aimed at developing
tools to track dynamic changes in tumor protein activity and reveal
previously hidden cancer vulnerabilities. A key innovation, the Probe-Enabled
Activity Reporting (PEAR) platform, captures active proteins in cancer
cells to identify novel drug targets that are often missed by genetic
analyses. This proteome-centered approach has the potential to broaden
the impact of precision oncology and lead to the discovery of new
therapeutic strategies.

Prof. Brady’s Article is titled
“MAPK Pathway Inhibition
Reshapes Kinase Chemoproteomic Ligandability Reporting on Cellular
Activation States”.

The Paul A. Godley, MD, PhD, Distinguished Professor and
Chair of the Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

Before joining University
of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill in 2019, Dr. Cameron was the holder of the Eberly Family Chair
in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology at The Pennsylvania State University.
His research focuses on the enzymology and cell biology of viral genome
replication, with emphasis on viral enzymes, including viral RNA-dependent
RNA polymerases. His laboratory, in collaboration with many others,
applies a wide range of cutting-edge approaches to the study of plus-strand
RNA viruses, contributing to pandemic preparedness. Dr. Cameron’s
work has provided insights into the development of antiviral therapeutics
and the fundamental understanding of RNA virus biology. He is also
recognized for his extraordinary service to science and has received
awards acknowledging his contributions to research and mentorship.

Prof. Cameron’s Article is titled “Mechanism of Forced-Copy-Choice
RNA Recombination by Enteroviral RNA-Dependent RNA Polymerases”
(DOI:10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.5c00049).

Professor of Chemical Engineering, Paul
D. and Betty Robertson Meek Centennial Professor, and Associate Dean
for Postdoctoral Affairs, the University of Texas–Austin.

Dr. Lydia M. Contreras is a Professor (and Paul D. and
Betty Robertson Meek Centennial Professor) of Chemical Engineering
at the University of Texas–Austin and currently serves part-time
as an Associate Dean for Postdoctoral Affairs within the Graduate
School. She is also a member of the microbiology, cell molecular biology,
and biochemistry graduate programs.

Dr. Contreras obtained a
B.SE in Chemical Engineering from Princeton University in 2003, where
she graduatedCum Laude. She completed her PhD in
Chemical Engineering from Cornell University in 2008, focusing on
engineering bacterial cells for improved production of therapeutic
proteins. As a postdoctoral associate at the Wadsworth Center (New
York State Department of Health), she focused on understanding mechanisms
of infection in pathogenic bacteria. She began her career at the University
of Texas–Austin in 2011, where she leads a research team focused
on RNA biochemistry to study gene regulation mechanisms associated
with stress responses for applications in health and biotechnology.
Her research team is particularly interested in how environmental
stressors influence regulatory patterns of gene expression in living
systems.

She has received several academic, teaching and service
awards
including: an NSF CAREER, ACS BIOT Young Investigator Award, American
Institute of Chemical Engineers (AICHE) Food, Pharmaceutical and Bioengineering
Division Early Career Award, Biotechnology and Bioengineering Daniel
I.C. Wang Award, Department of Thrust Reduction Agency (DTRA) Young
Investigator, Airforce Office of Scientific Research Young Investigator,
Health and Environmental Institute (HEI) Walter E. Rosenblith New
Investigator, Norman Hackerman Advanced Research Program (NHARP) Early
Career, Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE) Young Investigator
Award, and an Innovative Early-Career Frontiers of Engineering Educator.
Most recently she has been elected to the American Society of Microbiology.

Prof. Contreras’ Article is titled “High-throughput
microfluidic technologies for rapidly screening pollutant-induced
cell health effects”.

Assistant Professor of Chemistry and of Microbiology and
Immunology, Stanford University.

Dr. Laura M. K. Dassama is an Assistant
Professor of
Chemistry at Stanford University, an Assistant Professor of Microbiology
and Immunology at Stanford School of Medicine, and an Institute Scholar
at Sarafan ChEM-H Institute. Her research interests center around
creating chemical tools for the selective modulation of difficult-to-drug
human proteins and discovering new druggable targets for infectious
disease mitigation. She received her Bachelor of Science in Biochemistry
from Temple University in 2007 and a PhD in Biochemistry, Microbiology,
and Molecular Biology from the Pennsylvania State University in 2013.
Her PhD research, performed under the mentorship of Marty Bollinger
and Carsten Krebs, focused on oxygen-utilizing metalloenzymes. As
a postdoctoral fellow with Amy Rosenzweig at Northwestern University,
she studied the biosynthesis and trafficking of bacterial secondary
metabolites. In 2017, she spent a year working as a visiting scientist
in the group of Stuart Orkin at Boston Children’s Hospital,
where she pursued a long-standing personal interest in sickle cell
disease. She began her tenure as an independent scientist at Stanford
in 2018.

Prof. Dassama’s article is titled “Engineering
Cell-Specific Protein Delivery Vehicles for Erythroid Lineage Cells”
(DOI:10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.4c00098).

Professor of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
and Biophysics, University of Maryland.

Professor
Theodore Kwaku Dayie received his doctoral
degree from Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, under the direction
of Gerhard Wagner. After a postdoctoral position with Jamie Williamson
at MIT and then at The Scripps Research Institute (La Jolla, CA),
he became a group leader at the Lerner Research Institute at the Cleveland
Clinic (OH) in 2000, starting an group focused on RNA NMR. He has
been a Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry with
a focus on biophysical chemistry at the University of Maryland, College
Park since 2008. He is interested in understanding the complex life
of the so-called dark matter of the genome, “RNAs”,
and how this dark matter influences its binding partners, such as
small effector molecules, other RNAs, DNA, and proteins. Having studied
and lived on three continents (Africa (Ghana), Europe (UK), and North
America (USA)), he understands that truly groundbreaking scientific
advances require the participation of people from various backgrounds,
cultures, and ethnicities at the bench. His group continues to develop
novel, robust, and economical chemo-enzymatic synthesis of selective
isotopically labeled (15N/2H/13C/19F) nucleotides for probing RNAs involved in disease processes,
using solution NMR to understand their structure, dynamics, and interactions.

Prof. Dayie’s Article is titled “Consolidated 3-Fold
Isotopic Lens for Probing RNAs” (DOI:10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.5c00075).

The Chair of the Department of Life and
Physical Sciences, Fisk University, and The Assistant Dean of the
School of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, Fisk University.

Professor Steven Marañón
Damo is an Assistant
Professor of Chemistry and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and
serves as the Assistant Dean of the School of Natural Sciences and
Mathematics and the Chair of the Department of Life and Physical Sciences
at Fisk University, a primarily undergraduate Historically Black University
in Nashville, TN. The Damo Lab utilizes the tools of biochemistry
and biophysical chemistry to characterize micronutrient homeostasis
at the host–pathogen interface, to further our understanding
of fundamental biological mechanisms that can be leveraged to impact
human health. A passionate teacher-scholar, Steve is dedicated to
mentoring the next generation of STEM professionals. He has supervised
the research of more than 100 undergraduate and master’s students
in his lab, the majority of whom have gone on to pursue advanced degrees.
Steve earned a BS in chemistry at New York University and his doctorate
in chemistry at the University of California, Berkeley.

Prof.
Damo’s Article is titled “The antimicrobial activity
of selenium against the perinatal pathogenStreptococcus agalactiae”.

Vice President for Research & Economic Development
and Professor of Chemistry, Georgia State University.

Just as resilience shapes our journey, every
scientific breakthrough
is forged through perseverance and opens new avenues for humanity.
- Donald Hamelberg.

Professor Donald Hamelberg’s
research focuses
on developing and applying theoretical and computational methods to
investigate allosteric mechanisms and long-time scale dynamics of
biomolecules in cellular processes. His group advances statistical
mechanics approaches to understand biomolecular function and complement
experimental techniques in structural biology. A key focus is the
development of computational tools to analyze biomolecular conformational
ensembles and uncover atomic-level mechanisms. These tools enhance
our understanding of biomolecular dynamics and support the discovery
and design of drugs and biomolecules. The Hamelberg group has made
significant contributions to theoretical biochemistry and biophysics,
including methods for enhanced sampling, free energy calculations,
and the analysis of conformational ensembles. Their molecular dynamics-based
approaches offer insights often inaccessible to experiments alone
and are instrumental in generating testable hypotheses that guide
experimental design and foster collaborative research.

Prof.
Hamelberg’s Article is titled “Uncovering the Role of
Distal Regions in PDK1 Allosteric Activation” (DOI:10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.5c00025).

Dean, College of Science, Rochester
Institute of Technology.

The central themes of Dr. André O. Hudson’s
research
are rooted in biochemistry and microbiology, specifically in the areas
of antibiotic resistance, amino acid metabolism, structural analyses
of enzymes involved in amino acid and bacterial peptidoglycan metabolism,
and the isolation, identification, and genomic characterization of
plant-associated bacteria.

Prof. Hudson’s Review is titled
“Unlocking the Potential
of Brazilian Plant Terpenes to Combat Antimicrobial Resistance”
(DOI:10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.5c00069).

Associate Professor of Chemistry
and Biochemistry, University of Texas at Arlington.

In addition to her faculty role, 
Professor Kayunta Johnson-Winters
holds the position of Director of Undergraduate Research within the
Office of the Vice President of Research and Innovation. Through her
dual roles, she plays a significant part in advancing research opportunities
and mentoring across various academic levels. Over the course of her
tenure at UT-Arlington, Dr. Johnson-Winters has mentored more than
100 individuals, including graduate students, undergraduate researchers,
high school interns, and a postdoctoral fellow, all of whom have contributed
to the dynamic and collaborative environment of her research group.
Notably, approximately 50% of her mentees have been women, and about
half have come from historically underrepresented groups demonstrating
her dedication to broadening access and opportunity in science.

Dr. Johnson-Winters’ research focuses on F420-dependent enzymes,
which are associated with the F420 cofactor, a unique flavin analog
involved in hydride transfer reactions. These reactions occur in enzymes
found primarily in methanogenic and sulfate-reducing archaea, but
interestingly, F420-dependent enzymes are also present in nonmethanogenic
organisms, including the human pathogenMycobacterium tuberculosis. Her research aims to elucidate the mechanisms of enzymes that utilize
the F420 cofactor, to develop a detailed mechanistic model for this
unique class. This work is particularly valuable because prior to
her studies, the enzymology of F420-dependent enzymes had received
limited investigation. Her contributions aid to fill a significant
gap in the biochemical knowledge and may also have broader implications
for microbiology and infectious disease. Dr. Johnson-Winters’
dedication to mentorship and scientific discovery underscores her
impact not only in the laboratory but also in shaping the next generation
of scientists.

Prof. Johnson-Winters’ Article is titled
“Kinetic
Characterization of F420-dependent sugar-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
fromCryptosporangium arvum”.

The University Professor at the University
of Connecticut, The Albert and Wilda Van Dusen Distinguished Endowed
Professor of Orthopedic Surgery, Professor of Chemical Engineering,
Professor of Materials Science and Engineering, and Professor of Biomedical
Engineering at the University of Connecticut, and Chief Executive
Officer of The Cato T. Laurencin Institute for Regenerative Engineering.

Sir Cato T. Laurencin, M.D., Ph.D., K.C.S.L., is the University
Professor at the University of Connecticut (one of only two at the
school) and the Albert and Wilda Van Dusen Distinguished Endowed Professor
of Orthopedic Surgery. He is Professor of Chemical Engineering, Professor
of Materials Science and Engineering, and Professor of Biomedical
Engineering at UConn. He serves as the Chief Executive Officer of
The Cato T. Laurencin Institute for Regenerative Engineering, an Institute
created in his honor.

Dr. Laurencin earned a B.SE in Chemical
Engineering from Princeton
University. He earned his M.D., Magna Cum Laude, from the Harvard
Medical School, and received the Robinson Award for Surgery. He earned
his Ph.D. in Biochemical Engineering/Biotechnology from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, where he was named a Hugh Hampton Young Fellow.

Dr. Laurencin is the founder and pioneer of the field of Regenerative
Engineering. He is an expert in biomaterials science, stem cell technology,
and nanotechnology, and has worked in the Convergence of these areas
of research. In receiving the Spingarn Medal from the NAACP, he was
named the world’s foremost engineer–physician–scientist.
He is the world leader in chemistry and materials science applied
toward musculoskeletal repair and regeneration.

Dr. Laurencin
is the recipient of the Priestley Medal, the American
Chemical Society’s highest honor, and the recipient of the
Von Hippel Award, the Materials Research Society’s highest
honor. He is the recipient of the Founders Award from the American
Institute of Chemical Engineers and the Percy Julian Medal from the
National Association of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers, their
highest awards. The American Association for the Advancement of Science
awarded Dr. Laurencin the Philip Hauge Abelson Prize, given ‘for
signal contributions to the advancement of science in the United States.’
In recognition of his breakthrough achievements in Regenerative Engineering
worldwide, the American Institute of Chemical Engineers created the
Cato T. Laurencin Regenerative Engineering Founder’s Award.

Dr. Laurencin is an inventor. He was named the 2023 Inventor of
the Year by the Intellectual Property Owners Education Foundation.
He received the 2024 Kathryn S. Hach Award for Entrepreneurial Success
from the American Chemical Society. He is the recipient of the National
Medal of Technology and Innovation, America’s highest honor
for technical achievement, awarded by President Barack Obama in ceremonies
at the White House.

Prof. Laurencin’s Review is titled
“Graphene Oxide
in Bone Regenerative Engineering: Current Challenges and Future Perspectives”
(DOI:10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.4c00152).

Professor of Chemistry and
Dorothy J. Wingfield Phillips Chair, Vanderbilt University.

Professor Renã A. S. Robinson, Professor of Chemistry at
Vanderbilt University and inaugural Dorothy J. Wingfield Phillips
Chair, received her B.S. in Chemistry with a concentration in Business
from the University of Louisville and Ph.D. in Analytical Chemistry
from Indiana University under the mentorship of Professor David Clemmer.
She developed proteomics methods to study aging in fruit flies and
continued working in aging as a Lyman T. Johnson Postdoctoral Fellow
with Professor D. Allan Butterfield at the University of Kentucky.
During this fellowship, she began to focus on neurodegenerative disorders
such as Alzheimer’s disease and received a UNCF/Merck Postdoctoral
Fellowship. In 2009, she accepted a position as Assistant Professor
of Chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh and in 2017 moved to
Vanderbilt University as Associate Professor of Chemistry and the
Dorothy J. Wingfield Phillips Chancellor’s Faculty Fellow.
Renã is currently a Professor of Chemistry, Principal Investigator
of RASR Laboratory, and Faculty Head of House of Murray House, and
actively supports the Vanderbilt Memory & Alzheimer’s Center,
the Vanderbilt Institute for Chemical Biology, and Vanderbilt Brain
Institute. She has an internationally recognized research program
and is a leader in the field of proteomics for her work in aging,
Alzheimer’s disease, and applications relevant to human health.
Her laboratory is especially focused on advancing proteomics and lipidomics
technologies to promote health equity in Alzheimer’s disease.
Renã serves as the Immediate Past President of NOBCChE (National
Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and
Chemical Engineers) where she was the 14th President from 2021 to
2023 and led the organization through tremendous growth in membership,
programming, funding, and overall outreach of URMs in STEM. She is
the former faculty advisor for the Nashville Student and Professional
Chapter of NOBCChE, current Co-Director for the Faculty ACCESS Program,
and Board Member-at-Large for the US Human Proteome Organization.

Prof. Robinson’s Article is titled “Bridging Health
Disparity Gaps in Alzheimer’s Disease among Marginalized Populations:
How Clinical Proteomics Can Accelerate Biomarker Discovery”.

Grace-Rupley Professor of Chemical
Biology at the University of Notre Dame and the Associate Director
at Harper Cancer Institute.

Professor Sintim’s
research interests center around cyclic
dinucleotide and cyclic oligonucleotide signaling in bacteria and
higher organisms. The Sintim group has developed various cyclic dinucleotide
probes to illuminate CDN biology, identifying small-molecule inhibitors
of CDN signaling in bacteria with potential use as novel antibacterial
agents. Additionally, the Sintim group is interested in identifying
compounds that agonize or antagonize cyclic dinucleotide signaling
in immune cells. Such compounds have the potential to be used as immunotherapies
or anti-inflammatory agents.

Prof. Sintim is also interested
in developing kinase inhibitors
that inhibit secondary mutated kinases, which play important roles
in drug resistance (i.e., cancer intrinsic pathways), and/or inhibitors
that target kinases that regulate the tumor microenvironment (i.e.,
cancer extrinsic pathways). Integrating computational and experimental
workflows, such as the use of multicomponent reactions to prepare
novel kinase inhibitor libraries, the Sintim lab has identified novel
chemotypes that inhibit disease-associated protein kinases.

Prof. Sintim’s Article is titled “5′-Phosphorothioester
Linked Cyclic Dinucleotides, Endo-S-CDNs, Displaying Impressive Antitumor
Activities In Vivo when Dosed Subcutaneously” (DOI:10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.5c00070).

Presidential Assistant Professor in the Department of Biochemistry
and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania.

Prior to joining the faculty
at the University of Pennsylvania,
Dr. Cornelius Taabazuing was a postdoctoral fellow in the Department
of Chemical Biology at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in the
lab of Dr. Daniel Bachovchin. He earned his bachelor’s and
his Ph.D. at the University of Massachusetts Amherst in the lab of
Dr. Michael Knapp. The focus of the Taabazuing lab is to understand
molecular mechanisms of cell death. The lab is especially interested
in uncovering the molecular regulation of pyroptosis, an inflammatory
type of cell death that activates the innate immune system to protect
from infections. The lab combines a variety of techniques, including
chemical biology, biochemistry, and functional genetics to interrogate
cell death mechanisms.

Prof. Taabazuing’s Article is
titled “A potent inhibitor
of caspase-8 based on the IL-18 tetrapeptide sequence reveals shared
specificities between inflammatory and apoptotic initiator caspases”.

Jacob Gershon Cohen Professor of Biochemistry and Biophysics.

Professor Blanton
S. Tolbert, is the Jacob Gershon-Cohen Professor
of Biochemistry and Biophysics at the University of Pennsylvania,
where he directs a research program investigating the molecular biology
of RNA viruses. His lab focuses on the biochemical mechanisms underlying
virus–host interactions, with particular emphasis on identifying
novel protein–RNA complexes as potential targets for therapeutic
intervention. Tolbert’s work has informed the development of
antiviral compounds with the potential to inhibit the replication
of viruses such as SARS-CoV-2 and enterovirus A71.

From 2022
to 2025, Tolbert served as the inaugural Vice President
of the Center for the Advancement of Science Leadership and Culture
at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI). In this role, he led
a comprehensive portfolio of initiatives designed to embed inclusion
into the fabric of academic science. His efforts spanned undergraduate
and graduate training, faculty development in culturally responsive
mentorship, and the creation of inclusive research environments and
strategic partnerships. He also introduced opportunities for predoctoral
scientists to meaningfully engage with their communities as part of
the basic research process, fostering a more connected and socially
aware scientific enterprise.

Prior to joining HHMI, Tolbert
was the Rudolph and Susan Rense
Professor of Chemistry at Case Western Reserve University, where he
also served as the inaugural Vice Dean for Diversity, Equity, and
Inclusive Excellence at the School of Medicine and Associate Director
for DEI at the Case Comprehensive Cancer Center. His leadership focused
on diversifying the scientific workforce and creating institutional
structures to support scholars from all backgrounds.

A longtime
advocate for inclusive excellence in STEM, Tolbert has
mentored dozens of trainees at every career stage, many of whom have
advanced to successful roles in academia, biotechnology, and healthcare.
He has led and co-developed several research experiences for undergraduates,
including the Interdisciplinary Research at the Interface of Health
Science and the Environment (IRIHSE), which supports students from
underrepresented backgrounds in pursuing biomedical and environmental
science. From 2018 to 2023, Tolbert served as acting Chair of the
NIH Office of AIDS Research Advisory Council, where he played a key
role in shaping national strategies to support and retain early stage
HIV investigators.

Dr. Tolbert received his BS in chemistry
from the University of
South Carolina and his PhD in biophysics and structural biology from
the University of Rochester. He was an HHMI postdoctoral fellow at
the University of Maryland, Baltimore County. His contributions have
been recognized with the 2016 Morton L. Mandel Award for Excellence
in Research and Service and the 2023 Diversity in Science and Excellence
Award from the International Society for Antiviral Research.

Prof. Tolbert’s Article is titled “Toward a Beautiful
Amalgam: The Necessity of Heterogeneity in RNA Science and Research
Culture”.

Our laboratory is dedicated to the discovery
and development of
new molecules of therapeutic value, obtained by advancing chemical
synthesis. Our small-molecule program is focused on carbohydrates,
terpenoids, alkaloids, and lipids that are useful tools for studying
cancer, infectious diseases, and neurological disorders. Our chemical
biology program is focused on characterizing the protective properties
of human milk, particularly the human milk oligosaccharides.

Prof. Townsend’s Letter is titled “Discovery of Iboga-Derived
Ligands for the Sigma-2 Receptor” (DOI:10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.5c00011).

Dr. Tamra C. Blue-Lahom is an NIH Postdoctoral Fellow
in the Chemistry
Departments at The Pennsylvania State University and the University
of Pennsylvania under the mentorship of Professor Squire J. Booker.
She received her bachelor’s of science in Chemistry with a
concentration in Biochemistry from Georgia State University, where
she was first introduced to research under the direction of Dr. Suzette
Reid Mooring. During this time, she became an NSF Louis Stokes Alliances
for Minority Participation (LSAMP) Fellow. She received her PhD in
Chemistry from Emory University with Dr. Katherine M. Davis.

Her current research in the Booker Lab focuses on using bioinformatic,
electrochemical, and biochemical methods to elucidate the mechanism
of novel metalloenzymes of bacterial and archaeal origin. She is a
2025 CAS Future Leader Fellow, a founding member of the graduate and
postdoctoral ASBMB Chapters at The Pennsylvania State University,
and a founding member of the NOBCChE at Emory local chapter. She is
personally driven by community centered holistic approach to science.

Views expressed
in this editorial are those of the authors and not necessarily the
views of the ACS.