Unsaturated nitriles are significant in prebiotic and
astrochemistry.
Dicyanoacetylene, in particular, is a possible precursor of uracil
and was previously detected in Titan’s atmosphere. Its null
dipole moment hindered detection through rotational spectroscopy in
interstellar clouds, and it escaped identification until recently,
when its protonated form NC4NH+was finally
detected toward the Taurus molecular cloud (TMC-1) (Agúndez
et al., Astronom. Astrophys.2023, 669, L1). Given the
low-temperature conditions of both Titan and TMC-1, a facile formation
route must be available. Low-temperature kinetics experiments and
theoretical characterization of the entrance channel demonstrated
that the CN + HC3N reaction is a compelling candidate for
NC4N formation in cold clouds. Here, we report on a combined
crossed-molecular beams (CMB) and theoretical study of the reaction
mechanism up to product formation, demonstrating that NC4N + H is the sole open channel from low to high temperatures (collision
energies). Indeed, unlike other CN reactions, the formation of the
isocyano isomer (3-isocyano-2-propynenitrile) was not seen to occur
at the high collision energy (44.8 kJ/mol) of the CMB experiment.
Preliminary calculations on the related CN + HC5N reaction
indicate that the reaction channel leading to NC6N + H
is exothermic and occurs via submerged transition states. We therefore
expect it to be fast and that the mechanism is generalizable to the
entire family of CN +cyanopolyyne reactions. Furthermore, we derive
some properties of the related reactions C2H + CNCN (isocyanogen)
and CN + HCCNC (isocyanoacetylene): the C2H + CNCN reaction
leads to the formation of HC3N + CN, and the main channel
of the CN + HCCNC reaction also leads to CN + HC3N. This
last reaction efficiently converts isocyanoacetylene and, by extension,
any isocyanopolyyne into their cyano counterparts without a net loss
of cyano radicals. Finally, we also characterized the entrance channel
of the reaction C2H + NC4N and verified that
the addition of C2H to all possible sites of NC4N is characterized by a significant entrance barrier, thus confirming
that, once formed, dicyanoacetylene terminates the growth of cyanopolyynes
via the sequence of steps involving polyynes, cyanopolyynes, and C2H/CN radicals.

Approximately 15–20%
of all species identified in the interstellar
medium (ISM) are nitriles, a family of N-bearing organic compounds
characterized by a cyano (CN) group. Unsaturated nitriles
(including vinylcyanoacetylene, cyanoacetyleneallene or aromatic cyanonaphthalene,
cyanoacenaphthylene, cyanopyrene, and cyanocoronene) rank among the
most complex individual interstellar organic molecules identified
to date.−The detection of these complex nitriles was accomplished toward
a cold molecular cloud, the Taurus Molecular Cloud (TMC-1), which
seems to be particularly rich in nitriles. Furthermore, nitriles have
been detected on Titan−as well as in star-forming regions (high-mass and
low-mass),−protoplanetary disks,−circumstellar envelopes (CSE)
of asymptotic giant branch (AGB) stars−in photodissociation regions (PDR),,and cometary
comae.−Their presence in exoplanets has also been speculated. Given their significant prebiotic potential
and the conjectured role they may have played in the chemistry that
led to the emergence of life,,nitriles have garnered
considerable attention, prompting extensive investigation into their
formation pathways and astrochemical/photochemical models (see, for
instance, refs., , −).

More recently, given
the increased sensitivity of radio telescopes,
the first detection of interstellar dinitriles (molecules containing
two cyano groups) has become accessible. The first dinitriles identified
were maleonitrile (Z-but-2-enedinitrile or cis-1,2-dicyanoethylene)
and malononitrile (propanedinitrile or dicyanomethane), both identified
toward TMC-1. Prior to this, isocyanogen
(CNCN) and protonated cyanogen had been detected,,while attempts to detect larger saturated dinitriles,and dicyanobenzene failed. Furthermore,
and of relevance to the present work, the detection of dicyanoacetylene
(2-butynedinitrile; NCCCCN,
henceforth indicated by NC4N) in its protonated form NC4NH+(an otherwise nonobservable apolar dinitrile)
finally confirmed its presence, which,
together with that of larger dicyanopolyynes, had been postulated
long ago.,NC4N is considered a precursor
of uracil via its hydrolysis to acetylenedicarboxylic acid and subsequent
reaction with urea. Furthermore, in a
recent study, a new α-cytidine derivative was successfully synthesized
from the reaction of ribose aminooxazoline and dicyanoacetylene. Therefore, it is particularly interesting to
understand the formation routes of dicyanoacetylene in space and its
possible connection with the emergence of life on Earth.

A rate coefficient of 10–11cm3·s–1was adopted by Yung in
his upgraded photochemical
model of the atmosphere of Titan, following the indications of experimental
measurements by Halpern et al., who later published their work reporting
a value of (1.7 ± 0.08) × 10–11cm3s–1at room temperature. A barrier of 1.5 kcal mol–1(6.3 kJ mol–1) was suggested upon comparison with the rate coefficients
of other CN reactions with unsaturated hydrocarbons. This room-temperature
data were used by Faure et al. to estimate,
using a semiempirical model coupled to the capture theory, thek(T) value in the temperature range from
10 to 295 K. Finally, recent kinetic measurements by using the CRESU
technique derived thek(T) below
room temperature, reaching a value as low as 22 K. The reaction rate coefficient was seen to increase with
decreasing temperature, which is incompatible with the significant
entrance barrier inferred by Halpern et al. However, the rate coefficients at low temperatures are smaller than
those predicted by Faure et al. In addition
to the experimental values, Cheikh Sid Ely et al. also characterized the entrance channel of the potential
energy surface (PES) ofreaction(1)and were able to reproduce the trend of the experimental
rate coefficient as a function of temperature by employing a two-transition-state
(2TS) model. A similar trend was also
obtained by Valença Ferreira de Aragão et al., who used a semiempirical analysis of the long-range
interactions based on an improved Lennard–Jones potential.
Both theoretical studies focused only on the entrance channel, and
the full PES up to the products was not derived. In addition, both
the kinetic experiments by Cheikh Sid Ely et al. and Halpern et al. followed
only the decay rate of the reactants and, therefore, could not provide
information on the reaction products.

The crossed-molecular beam (CMB)
apparatus, equipped with universal quadrupole mass spectrometric (QMS)
detection and time-of-flight (TOF) analysis, used in the present study,
has been described in detail elsewhere.,Therefore,
only a concise description is provided here. Two collimated, continuous
supersonic beams of the reactants are crossed at 90° in a large
scattering chamber maintained at 10–5Pa to ensure
single-collision conditions. Reactants and products were detected
by a triply differentially pumped ultrahigh-vacuum detection system,
maintained at a pressure of less than 10–9Pa during
operation and equipped with an electron impact ionizer, a quadrupole
mass filter, and a Daly detector. The
entire detector unit can be rotated in the collision plane around
an axis that passes through the collision center.

The product
angular distribution, N­(Θ), that is, the intensity of the products
as a function of the laboratory (LAB) scattering angle Θ, was
obtained by taking at least five scans per angle, with a counting
time of 100 s and by modulating the cyanoacetylene beam with a tuning
fork chopper at a frequency of 160 Hz for background subtraction.
Velocity distributions of the reactants were determined by measuring
in-axis single-shot time-of-flight (TOF) spectra. Product TOF distributions,
N­(Θ,t), were obtained at selected LAB angles by using the TOF
pseudorandom chopping technique, with the pseudorandom wheel (containing
four identical sequences of 127 open/closed elements) spinning in
front of the entrance of the detector at 328.1 Hz (corresponding to
a dwell time of 6 μs/channel).

The beam of CN radicals
was generated by the high-pressure radio
frequency (RF) discharge beam source successfully used in our laboratory
over a number of years to generate intense supersonic beams of atoms
and radicals.−More specifically, the CN beam was generated by expanding a gas
mixture with the composition CO2(0.8%)/N2(2.5%)/He
at 90 hPa (quartz nozzle diameter was 0.45 μm, and RF power
300 W); the CN beam had a peak velocity of 2184 m/s and a speed ratio
of 5.5. Typically, in CMB experiments utilizing supersonic beams,
the internal energy content of the reactants is minimal due to the
extensive cooling of internal degrees of freedom during expansion.
Nevertheless, in this case, the beam of CN radicals is formed chemically
in situ by the transient species produced in the discharge plasma
starting from CO2/N2/He and the radicals maintain
a large internal energy content. By using a laser-induced fluorescence
(LIF) characterization, we verified that
the cooling of the internal excitation is incomplete and that the
CN radicals are ro-vibrationally excited. More specifically, the CN
vibrational distribution is consistent with a vibrational temperature
of 6500 K, while the rotational distribution is bimodal, with two
peaks aroundN= 6 andN= 39–44.

Cyanoacetylene (HC3N) was synthesized
by following the
two-stage procedure described by Miller and Lemmon (see also Liang et al.).,The HC3N white crystals were stored in a glass vial immersed in a
261 K constant-temperature bath to prevent polymerization and maintain
a stable equilibrium vapor pressure. The HC3N beam was
produced by expanding the vapor (pressure around 64 hPa) through a
0.1 mm stainless steel nozzle. The internal energy content of the
HC3N molecule is expected to be small because the internal
degrees of freedom are cooled during the supersonic expansion. The
HC3N beam had a peak velocity of 657 m/s and a speed ratio
of 3.5.

Under these experimental conditions, the average collision
energy
(Ec) was 44.8 kJ/mol. The center-of-mass
(CM) position angle, ΘCM, was 30.6°.

The
scattering measurements were carried out in the LAB system
of coordinates, while for the physical interpretation of the scattering
process, it is necessary to transform the data (angular, N­(Θ),
and time-of-flight N­(Θ, t) distributions) to a coordinate frame
of reference that moves with the center-of-mass (CM) of the colliding
system. The relation between the LAB and CM product flux is given
by ILAB(Θ,v) =
ICM(θ,u) ×v2/u2, where Θ
andvare the LAB scattering angle and velocity,
respectively, while θ anduare the corresponding
CM quantities (see the velocity vector, or “Newton,”
diagram inFigure). Since the mass spectrometric detector measures the number density
of products, N­(Θ), rather than the flux, the actual relation
between the LAB density and the CM flux is given by NLAB(Θ,v) = ICM(θ,u) ×v/u2. The final outcome of a reactive scattering
experiment is therefore the so-called differential cross-section ICM(θ,u), which is commonly
factorized into the product of the velocity (or translational energy)
distribution, P­(u) (or P­(E’T)), and the angular distribution, T­(θ). Because of the
finite resolution of experimental conditions, i.e., finite angular
and velocity spread of the reactant beams and angular resolution of
the detector, the LAB-CM transformation is not single-valued, and
analysis of the laboratory data is carried out by the usual forward
convolution procedure in which trial CM angular, T­(θ), and translational
energy, P­(E’T), distributions are
assumed, averaged, and transformed to the LAB for comparison with
the experimental data until the best fit of the LAB distributions
is achieved. The best-fit CM T­(θ)
and P­(E’T) functions contain all
of the information about the reaction dynamics.

Laboratory angular distribution
of the NC4N product
atm/z= 76 from the reaction CN
(X2Σ+) + HC3N at Ec= 44.8 kJ/mol using a 70 eV electron energy at an
emission current of 2 mA and the corresponding velocity vector (Newton)
diagram. The dots represent the experimental data (an average of at
least 5 scans) and their standard deviation. The solid black line
in the upper figure represents the calculated distribution using the
best-fit CM angular and translational energy functions fromFigure. ΘCMdefines the CM position angle. The circle in the Newton diagram
delimits the maximum center-of-mass speed and therefore, the angular
range within which the NC4N product can be scattered (see
text). The analogous circle for CNC3N could not be drawn
because it is too small.

The potential energy surface of
the doublet CN–HC3N system was investigated by searching
for and optimizing the relevant stationary points and product channels.
Calculations were performed adopting an unrestricted formalism using
the Gaussian 09 code. Following a well-established
computational scheme, the geometries of minima and saddle points were
optimized using a less expensive method compared to the one employed
to get more accurate energy values.,,−Preliminary benchmark calculations
to test the theoretical methods were presented in ref. .

Geometry optimization
calculations were performed using density functional theory (DFT),
with the Becke-3-parameter exchange and Lee–Yang–Parr
correlation (B3LYP),in conjunction with the correlation-consistent
valence polarized basis set aug-cc-pVTZ. In some cases, the structures were optimized with the hybrid meta
exchange-correlation functional M06–2X in conjunction with 6–311+G­(d,p).,Vibrational frequency analysis was used to determine the nature
of stationary points: a minimum in the absence of imaginary frequencies
or a saddle point if one frequency and only one frequency is imaginary.
Furthermore, intrinsic reaction coordinate (IRC) calculations,have been performed for each saddle point geometry to confirm that
it corresponds to a true transition state between two minima. After
optimization, the energies of the stationary points were computed
with coupled-cluster CCSD­(T)−and aug-cc-pVTZ basis set to
achieve more accurate energetics. All energies presented in this paper
are the CCSD­(T) energies corrected with zero-point energies from frequency
calculations. The T1 diagnostic values for all species included in
the minimum energy path, for both the C-side and N-side addition,
support the adequacy of single-reference methods such as CCSD­(T) (seeTable S1).

TheE(DF-MP2/CBS) extrapolation was performed
using Martin’s two-parameter scheme.

Reactive scattering signals were recorded atm/z= 76, corresponding to the parent ion of products
with the gross formula C4N2. Since the parent
peak is largely dominant in the electron ionization of dicyanoacetylene and there was no gain in the signal-to-noise ratio
when using the soft ionization approach,,all the measurements were performed atm/z= 76 using an energy of 70 eV for the ionizing electrons.
The product laboratory angular distribution detected atm/z= 76, together with the relevant velocity vector
(“Newton”) diagram, is reported inFigure. The error bars (representing
± 1 standard deviation) are also shown when they exceed the size
of the dots, indicating the intensity averaged over the different
scans. In the Newton diagram ofFigure, the Newton circle relative to NC4N scattered
by the H coproduct is drawn on the assumption that all the available
energy is converted into product translational energy for the reaction
of CN in its ground rovibrational level (v = 0,N= 0). The Newton circles relative to the reactions involving the
excited vibrational levels are very similar and are not shown for
the sake of simplicity. The Newton circles delimit the LAB angular
range within which NC4N can be scattered. Since in our
previous experiments on the CN + C2H2and CN
+ C2H4reaction, we had experimental evidence
of the formation of the isocyano products (with a small yield), we
also considered the possibility that CNC3N could be formed
in an H-displacement mechanism. The quite different enthalpy change
of the two channels (seesection) implies a very different extension of the Newton
circles, with the angular distribution of CNC3N confined
between Θ = 27° and 33°. No apparent features can
be associated with a contribution of this kind.

The TOF spectra
measured at selected angles are reported inFigure.

Time-of-flight (TOF) distributions of NC4N (m/z= 76) product detected
at selected
LAB scattering angles using a 70 eV electron energy. Counting times:
170 min at 22°, 120 min at 30°, and 180 min at 38°,
respectively. The empty circles indicate the experimental data, while
the solid black lines represent the distributions obtained with the
best-fit functions shown inFigure.

The angular distribution extends for 30° and
has a bell-shaped
curve around the peak, which is located at the center-of-mass angle.
The TOF distributions were recorded at ΘCMand in
the forward (Θ = 22°) and backward (Θ = 38°)
directions. Also, in the case of TOF spectra, no features are visible
that could be associated with the channel leading to CNC3N + H. If it were present, the TOF distribution recorded at (Θ
= 30°) would show a distinct component not present in the other
two TOF spectra.

The solid lines inFiguresand  represent the
curves calculated
with the best-fit functions reported inFigure. The best-fit CM
angular distribution (top panel ofFigureis isotropic, with equal intensity from
0° to 180°. A slightly polarized T­(θ) (with T(90°)
= 0.7) or sideways T­(θ) (with T(90°) = 1.3) still affords
an acceptable fit of the experimental distributions (see the shaded
areas inFigure).
The T­(θ) shape is consistent with the formation of a bound intermediate
with a lifetime longer than its rotational period.

Best-fit CM product angular
distribution (top) and translational
energy distribution (bottom) for the NC4N + H channel.
In the bottom panel, the black arrow indicates the total available
energy for NC4N + H when considering the reaction of CN
in its ground rovibrational level. The red arrow, instead, indicates
the total available energy for the CNC3N + H isomeric channel.
The shaded areas indicate the error bars for the best-fit CM functions.

Regarding the best-fit product translational distribution,
P­(E’T), shown inFigure(bottom panel), we observe that the peak
is centered around
19 kJ/mol, while the tail extends to approximately 110 kJ/mol. The
peak position suggests the presence of a small exit barrier. We recall
that in this kind of experiment, the fit of both angular and TOF distributions
is very sensitive to the rise and the peak position, while it is less
sensitive to the tail of the P­(E’T) (in this case,
from E’T= 55 kJ/mol). Nonetheless, it is quite
clear that the extra amount of energy carried by the CN vibrational
excitation (which is quite sizable, being ΔV1–0= 24.4 kJ/mol, ΔV2–0= 48.6 kJ/mol, ΔV3–0= 72.4 kJ/mol) is not necessary to fit the experimental distributions
(the indicated black arrow inFigurerefers to the total available energy for the reaction
channel leading to NC4N + H and involving CN in v = 0).
The average product translational energy, defined as<E′T>=ΣP(E′T)×E′T/ΣP(E′T), is about 37 kJ/mol. We recall that the
total available energy (ETot) is the sum of the collision
energy, internal energy of the reactants (Eint), and the
reaction exothermicity (−ΔH0◦). We considered here the value ofΔH0◦that we calculated at the highest level
of theory, that is, −64.4 kJ/mol. When considering ETotfor the reaction involving CN­(v = 0) and leading to the products
NC4N + H, the average fraction of total available energy
released into translation is 0.33, a typical value considering the
energy profile of the PES as far as the pathway leading to NC4N + H is concerned.

The structures (interatomic distances, bond angles, and dihedral
angles) of the reactants, possible products, and stationary points
of the PES are shown inFigures–. Most geometric configurations have been optimized at the B3LYP/aug-cc-pVTZ
level, with the exception of the van der Waals complex (vdW) in the
entrance channel and the transition state (TS) that connects vdW with
the addition intermediate INT1, which have been computed at M062X/6–311+G (d,p).Figuresand  depict the
two portions of the PES that originate when the CN radical interacts
with cyanoacetylene on the C-side and the N-side, respectively. All
reported energy values are at the CCSD (T)/aug-cc-pVTZ level and include
ZPE. We have characterized the lowest energy paths (in red inFiguresand ) for the two portions of the PES, also at the higher CBS
level, to provide a better evaluation of the energy values as they
are critical to interpreting the outcome of the CMB experiments.

Geometries
of reactants and products were optimized at the B3LYP/aug-cc-pVTZ
level. Bond lengths (in Å) are displayed in black, and bond angles
(in degrees) are in blue. Carbon atoms are represented in gray, hydrogen
atoms in white, and nitrogen atoms in blue.

Geometries of saddle points optimized at the B3LYP/aug-cc-pVTZ
level. TS vdW-INT1 was optimized at the M062X/6–311+G­(d,p)
level. The units of distance and angle and the color scheme are the
same as inFigure.

Portion of the potential energy surface with products
resulting
from the addition of the C-side of the cyano radical. Energies (kJ/mol)
in black were computed at the CCSD­(T)//B3LYP/aug-cc-pVTZ level. Energies
(in kJ/mol) are in green at the CCSD­(T)//M062X/6–311+G­(d,p)
level. Shown in red is the most favorable pathway, with the energy
values calculated also at the CBS level.

Potential energy surface with products resulting from
the addition
of the N-side of the cyano radical. Energies (kJ/mol) were computed
at the CCSD­(T)//B3LYP/aug-cc-pVTZ level. Shown in red is the most
favorable pathway, with the energy values calculated also at the CBS
level.

Geometries of intermediates optimized at the B3LYP/aug-cc-pVTZ
level. The vdW geometry was optimized at the M062X/6–311+G (d,p) level. The units of distance and angle and
the color scheme are the same as inFigure.

The interaction of the cyano radical with cyanoacetylene,
from
both the C-side and N-side, can occur via: (a) the attack on the π-system
of the C–C triple bond; (b) the attack on the π-system
of the C–N triple bond; and (c) H-abstraction. In the case
of the interaction from the C-side, addition to the lone pair of N
of the HC3N cyano group is also possible.

A concise
description of the reaction mechanism for all of the
reaction channels is provided below.

Addition of the cyano radical
on the C-side can occur in four different
ways:(1)The interaction with the C–C triple
bond can lead to the CN addition on the unsubstituted acetylenic carbon,
resulting in the formation of INT1-t that easily isomerizes to thecisisomer INT1-c; both isomers can undergo H-loss by overcoming
a barrier (TS INT1t-P1A and TS INT1c-P1A, respectively), located at
ca. 21 kJ/mol above the energy of the NC4N + H products.
This is the only exothermic reaction channel of the entire PES. The
entrance channel is characterized by the formation of a van der Waals
adduct (vdW) that must overcome a small barrier (TS vdW-INT1) to rearrange
into INT1-t. This portion of the PES is crucial for determining the
reaction rate coefficient. The energy values obtained in our calculations
are in line with those of previous theoretical evaluations, falling
within the uncertainty of the employed methods. Since the entrance
channel has already been the subject of dedicated calculations,,we did not devote additional effort to this part of the PES, considering
that our CMB experiments were conducted at anEcvalue that is quite high. All the factors
that control thek(T) values have
already been discussed at length in refs.,. The dissociation
of INT1-t into CN + CCHCN (P1B) was also considered; however, the
enthalpy change is so high (ΔHP1B,0◦=+299.4kJ/molrelative to the reactants) that we can
consider it as not accessible under most conditions of interest. The
addition on the C–C triple bond can also lead to INT2 if the
entering CN group attaches to the carbon already bound to a cyano
group in the HC3N coreactant. INT2 can only dissociate
into H + CC­(CN)2(P2) in a very endothermic channel(ΔHP2,0◦=+165.5)which is, therefore, not open under most
conditions of interest.(2)The CN radical can also
add to the C atom of the HC3N cyano group, leading to the
INT3 intermediate. In this case, a significant entrance barrier (TS
R-INT3) of 21.2 kJ/mol is present. The breaking of the H–C
bond of INT3 leads to the formation of a cyclic CC­(N)­CCN isomer in
a very endothermic channel(ΔHP3A,0◦=+350.6kJ/mol), while the C–C σ bond fission
leads to NCCN + HCC (P3B), another endothermic channel withΔHP3B,0◦=+54.5kJ/mol. An exit barrier associated with TS INT3-P3B
(located 74.2 kJ/mol above the energy of the reactants) must be overcome.(3)The last addition mechanism is the one in which the
CN radical adds to the N atom of HC3N, leading, in a barrierless
process, to the formation of INT4. However, INT4 can only dissociate
to CCCNCN + H (P4A) and CNCN + HCC (P4B) products in two endothermic
channels (ΔHP4A,0◦=+205.2kJ/molandΔHP4B,0◦=+155.8kJ/mol.

The H-abstraction channel leading
to HCN + C3N (P9)
is endothermic by 48.2 kJ/mol.

Unlike many other CN reactions
with unsaturated hydrocarbons,,,the attacks of CN on the N-side
are characterized by an entrance barrier for all possible addition
sites. More specifically,(4)the addition to the
triple C–C bond occurs with an entrance barrier of 27.9 kJ/mol
and leads to INT5 in itscisandtransform (more stable than the reactants by ca. 137 kJ/mol); INT5 can dissociate into CNCCCN + H (P5A) through
TS INT5-P5A (located at +64.9 kJ/mol at the CBS level of calculations),
an endothermic channel withΔHP5A,0◦=+42.6kJ/mol. INT5 can also undergo isomerization to
INT8 (by overcoming a barrier located at +73.2 kJ/mol with respect
to the energy asymptote of the reactants) that, in turn, can dissociate
into CNCCCN + H (P5A) or CN + HCCNC (P6B) in a very endothermic channel(ΔHP6B,0◦=+109.7kJ/mol). Alternatively, the addition of the C–C
triple bond can also lead to INT6, in which the new CN group is attached
to the carbon already bound to a cyano group. In this case, the entrance
barrier is even higher (+ 50.4, TS R-INT6), while INT6 can dissociate
into CC­(CN)­(NC) + H (P6A) products(ΔHP6A,0◦=+272.7kJ/mol)or the already cited CN + HCCNC (P6B) products.(5)Furthermore, the CN addition on the N-side can involve
the C atom of the CN group of cyanoacetylene, but the entrance barrier
is very high (+ 69.4 kJ/mol, TS R-INT7), and the addition intermediate
INT7 can only dissociate into very high-energy fragments, namely the
channel CNCN + HCC (P4B) and cyclic-CC­(N)­CNC + H (P7)(ΔHP7,0◦=+434.2kJ/mol).

In the case of CN approaching from
the N-side, the H-abstraction
leads to products (C3N + HNC) in a very endothermic channel
(+107.9 kJ/mol) and through a barrier of 144.7 kJ/mol.

The present
results are in line with the previous calculations
by Petrie and Osamura who used the CCSD­(T)/aug-cc-pVXZ//B3-LYP/6–311G**
(X) D,T) levels of theory to derive the PES for the C3N
+ HNC reaction, which has some common points with the PES investigated
here. For instance, from their PES, an enthalpy change of −58.6
kJ/mol can be inferred for the CN + HC3N → NC4N + H reaction, in good agreement with our value of −64.4
kJ/mol at the CBS level. The energy content of INT1-t (int63 in their scheme ofFigureis −231.1 kJ/mol, which can be compared with our CBS
value of −232.8 kJ/mol. The equivalent of our TS INT1t-P1A
falls at −39.5 kJ/mol. Their geometries are also very similar.

To summarize, the evaluation of the energetic profile of the global
PES reveals that only one exothermic channel is open, namely, the
one that leads to dicyanoacetylene via an H-displacement mechanism.
All of the other channels are endothermic, and some of them are also
characterized by high energy barriers.

The CMB data clearly suggest
that an H-displacement channel leading
to the formation of molecular products with a C4N2gross formula is open. The experimental determination of the product
energy release is fully consistent with the formation of dicyanoacetylene.
The absence of any structure in both the LAB distributions and the
best-fit CM functions indicates that no high-energy additional channels
are open. Considering the energetics of the other possible H-displacement
channels, as they result from the present electronic structure calculations,
only the channel leading to 3-isocyano-2-propynenitrile (P5A) is barely
accessible (byca. 2 kJ/mol) under our experimental
conditions (without considering the entrance barrier). Were this channel
were to occur, features in the LAB distributions would be clearly
visible due to the strong enhancement provided by the CM→LAB
Jacobian to products with low CM speeds (seeFigure S1). In similar cases,,−contributions accounting for 5% of the total yield were clearly
identified and separated during the data analysis. On the contrary,
here a single-contribution fit with a backward-forward symmetric T­(θ)
and a smooth bell-shaped P­(E’T) nicely reproduces
all the experimental observables.

The experimental results are
perfectly in line with the main characteristics
of the PES minimum energy path. The formation of stable intermediates
(cis/transINT1) with a deep potential
aligns well with the backward-forward symmetric CM angular distribution,
which implies the formation of a long-lived complex. The barrier on
the exit channels fromcis/transINT1 has a height of 21 kJ/mol, perfectly consistent with the position
of the peak of the best-fit P­(E’T) at 19 kJ/mol.

Concerning the possible role of the internal excitation of CN on
the scattering properties, as in previous studies from our laboratory,,,as well as kinetics experiments,on similar systems, the vibrational excitation of CN was not seen
to promote the reaction and was not converted into product translational
energy but was retained as vibrational excitation of the molecular
products.

The rotational excitation of CN could affect the reaction
as it
was previously observed for the related CN + C2H4reaction. In that case, it was speculated
that CN rotational excitation enhances the yield of the CH2CHNC channel over that of the favored CH2CHCN one. However,
unlike that case, the formation of 3-isocyano-2-propynenitrile (P5A)
is strongly unfavored due to the large endothermicity and high barrier
in the exit channel (TS INT5-P5A).

The results obtained in this
study can be compared with the data
reported in the literature for similar systems and, in particular,
with the reaction CN + C2H2since cyanoacetylene
can be regarded as a functionalized acetylene with a nitrile group
in place of one of the two hydrogen atoms.,Such a comparison is particularly appropriate when carried out with
the work by Casavecchia et al. and Leonori
et al., given the fact that the CN +
C2H2reaction was investigated using the same
CMB apparatus, CN beam, and at a very similar collision energy of
Ec= 48.1 kJ/mol. For the PES comparison,
we can refer to the work by Huang et al. Starting from the experiments, the CM angular distributions are
clearly different: in the case of CN + C2H2,
the best-fit T­(θ) shows some forward bias, indicating the shortening
of the intermediate lifetime, while the T­(θ) of the present
determination is fully backward-forward symmetric. This is well explained
by considering the reduced exothermicity of the channel leading to
NC4N + H with respect to the analogous channel leading
to HC3N(ΔH0◦=−94kJ/mol)and the much higher exit barrier (21 kJ/mol
with respect to the products, compared with +7 kJ/mol for CN + C2H2for the most favorable channel). In addition,
the presence of an additional CN group in the molecular skeleton of
the reactant results in an increased number of degrees of freedom
among which to distribute the large amount of energy liberated by
the formation of the bound intermediates (ca. 230–240 kJ/mol
in both cases).

Also, the shape of the
best-fit P­(E’T) is quite
different: in the case of the CN + C2H2, the
peak is flat from E’T= 20–60 kJ/mol. This
characteristic suggests that two mechanisms actually contribute to
the reactive signal. The second contribution was, indeed, associated
with the formation of isocyanoacetylene + H, a channel that is accessible
under the conditions of the experiment by Leonori et al.

The similarities and differences in the
PES of CN + C2H2vs CN + HC3N do
not only affect the reaction
dynamics, but have a direct impact on the reaction kinetics as well.
As already noted by Halpern et al., at
room temperature, the CN + HC3N reaction is significantly
slower than the CN + C2H2reaction. We now know
that this is not caused by the presence of an entrance barrier, but
rather associated with the effect of a vdW complex in the entrance
channel and the submerged transition state vdW-INT1.,Furthermore, we note that the addition of CN to the triple C–C
bond on the N-side is barrierless in the case of the CN + C2H2reaction. The HCCHNC intermediate easily
isomerizes to the HCCHCN intermediate, which then
dissociates into HC3N + H. In the title reaction, instead,
the N-side addition reactive flux is lost in a repulsive channel.

When comparing the present results with the related CN + C2H3CN reaction, which was also investigated in our
laboratory using the same experimental and theoretical approaches, some similarities can be noted. Also in this
case, there was no evidence that the vibrational excitation of the
CN radicals is converted into product translational energy, and the
isocyano products are not formed (their formation channels are endothermic
and characterized by high exit barriers). However, a small yield of
1,1-dicyanoethylene was observed in an exothermic channel characterized
by submerged transition states. This is in contrast to the current
system, where the equivalent path (INT2 → TS INT2-P2 →
CC­(CN)2+ H) is strongly endothermic.

A final comparison
should be made with the CN + HCN reaction since
cyanopolyynes are often compared to hydrogen cyanide. The CN + HCN
reaction has been studied using experimental and theoretical methods.,,,Experimental studies of chemical kinetics consistently indicate
the presence of a significant activation energy.,The presence of a barrier in the entrance channel was confirmed
by theoretical calculations,,,even when considering the favored attack, i.e., the addition of
the CN radical to the carbon atom of HCN. Therefore, the situation is very different from that of the reaction
under consideration. The reason for this is the greater strength of
the C–N triple bond compared to the C–C triple bond,
which is due to the electronegativity of nitrogen and its smaller
size, enhancing orbital overlap. These effects can be easily appreciated
by observing the structure of cyanoacetylene (seeFigure), in which the CC
bond distance is 1.201 Å (1.2 Å is the typical value for
acetylenic compounds), while the CN distance is 1.155 Å
(1.15–1.16 Å are the typical values for nitriles). This
is reflected in their differing reactivity in bimolecular reactions:
while it is known that CN, or other radicals, readily add to triple
C–C bonds (e.g., CN + C2H2, CH3CCH),,,the cyano
group present in nitriles is rarely involved in reactions that cause
its breaking and is preserved in the products, even in the case of
reactions with very reactive species like atomic nitrogen in the2D electronically excited state (e.g., N­(2D) + CH3CN, N­(2D) + C2H3CN, and N­(2D) + HC3N).,,,The characteristics of the cyano
group in nitriles are so unique that cyano is considered a pseudohalogen.

Our work presents experimental evidence that NC4N is
the sole molecular product formed in the only open H-displacement
channel. 3-Isocyano-2-propynenitrile is not formed with a measurable
yield within the sensitivity of our technique, even though the total
energy available to the reactants, when considering the collision
energy and the internal energy of the CN radical, is sufficient to
overcome the exit barrier and to compensate for the positive enthalpy
change associated with that channel. The other possible reaction channels
are even more endothermic and are not seen to occur under the conditions
in our experiments. It is not straightforward to convert the collision
energy of CMB experiments into temperature. Based on previous work,
it can be inferred that the collision energy of this experiment corresponds
to a temperature between 300 and 1000 K.,Obviously, at the low temperatures of relevance to the atmosphere
of Titan or cold interstellar regions, NC4N + H is the
only possible set of products.

After the determination of the
rate coefficient at low temperature,
the title reaction has been considered in the photochemical models
of the atmosphere of Titan as a possible formation route of dicyanoacetylene,
together with other, less-characterized reactions (e.g., N + HC4N or C3N + HCN).,However, photochemical
models still underpredict the amount of NC4N and the related
species C2N2,,pointing to
the fact that the chemistry of these two species has not yet been
well understood.

On the contrary, the CN + HC3N reaction
is not mentioned
as a possible formation route of NC4N in TMC-1 by Agúndez
et al. Agúndez et al. were only referring to the reactions proposed
by Petrie and Osamura and Petrie et al. for C2N2and NC4N.

However, considering the large fractional
abundance of both CN
and HC3N in TMC-1 (both in the order of 10–8) and the large rate coefficient measured
at low T, the title reaction is clearly an important formation route
of dicyanoacetylene that should be considered in astrochemical models.
In the recent upgraded version of the UMIST Database for Astrochemistry,
the CN + HC3N reaction has been included in both the TMC-1
and IRC+10216 models using the fit expression of the CRESU data and assuming that NC4N + H is the
sole reaction channel. The resulting simulated fractional abundance
of NC4N+calculated at 1.6 × 105years for the O-rich model or at 1.0 × 106years
for the C-rich model is in good agreement with the value derived by
Agúndez et al.

To verify whether our results for the
title reaction can be extended
to other reactions in the CN + H–(CC−)nCN series, we performed calculations for the CN +
HC5N reaction for the minimum energy pathway only at the
CCSD (T)//B3LYP/aug-cc-pVTZ and CBS levels of theory (determining
the full PES, as presented inFiguresand F require dedicated work
and a separate publication). Again, we did not find an entrance barrier
above the energy of the reactants; the reactants correlate with a
covalent intermediate (INT9 inFigure), and its dissociation into the NC6N +
H products proceeds with a barrier that remains well below the energy
of the reactants. Therefore, this reaction will be characterized by
a rate coefficient in the gas kinetics limit (in the 10–10cm3s–1range) even at the very low
temperatures of interest in the ISM or the atmosphere of Titan.

Minimum energy
path in the potential energy surface for the CN
+ HC5N reaction. Energies are computed in kJ/mol at the
CCSD­(T)//B3LYP/aug-cc-pVTZ (black) and CBS (red) levels.

The formation of NC(CC)nCN (including dicyanoacetylene withn= 1)
stops further growth in theeqs– chain since dicyanopolyynes
are unlikely to be reactive toward further attack by CN or C2H, as suggested by Cheikh Sid Ely et al., who mentioned the low rate coefficient for the reaction CN + NC4N at room temperature (5.4 × 10–13cm3s–1) and
their preliminary calculations (unpublished to the best of our knowledge)
on the entrance barrier of CN + NC4N and C2H
+ NC4N. Since this aspect is crucial to understanding the
growth and destruction routes of cyanopolyynes, we have also carried
out calculations for the entrance channel of the last reaction. As
visible inFigure, all of the possible addition sites of C2H to NC4N are indeed characterized by a significant entrance barrier
that would make this reaction impossible in the low T regions of the
interstellar medium. However, this does not necessarily mean that
an environment with abundant CN radicals will impede the growth of
cyanopolyynes by converting them into dicyanopolyynes: a recent astrochemical
model revealed that HC5N is formed essentially by the reactions
N + C6H, C2H + HC3N, C3N + C2H2, and C4H + HCN in cold
clouds and C3N + C2H2in shocked
regions. In the same work, the CRESU
rate coefficients for the reactions C2H + HC3N and C3N + C2H2were provided (for
temperatures as low as 24 K), as well as the potential energy surface
with a kinetic analysis for three other possible formation routes
of HC5N (N + C6H, C4H + HCN, and
C4H + HNC). Therefore, the importance ofreaction(8)in the formation of larger
cyanopolyynes seems to be reduced, at least in the case of HC5N, but larger cyanopolyynes could be formed in similar ways.

Entrance
channels of the potential energy surface for C2H + NC4N. Energies (in kJ/mol) are in green at the CCSD­(T)/aug-cc-pVTZ//M062X/6-311+G­(d,p)
level and in red at the CBS level.

From the global PES that we have derived in this
work, we can also
infer some properties of other reactions that have not been investigated
previously (to the best of our knowledge). For instance, the reaction
C2H + C2N2is characterized by a
significant entrance barrier (+ 19.7 kJ/mol), and, therefore, it cannot
occur either in the interstellar medium or in the atmosphere of Titan.
On the contrary, the C2H + CNCN reaction is barrierless
and easily produces HC3N + CN. It can therefore be considered
either a destruction route of isocyanogen or an alternative formation
route of HC3N (provided that isocyanogen is available).

where the energy values are those calculated at the CCSD­(T)//B3LYP/aug-cc-pVTZ
level of theory and assuming the energy content of CN + HCCNC as the
zero of the energy scale. Since TS R-INT6 is lower in energy than
TS INT8-P5A, the formation of cyanoacetylene + CN is favored. In other
words, the reaction of CN with isocyanoacetylene is an efficient way
to convert it to cyanoacetylene with a null consumption of CN radicals.
This can be generalized for all reactions of the type CN + isocyanopolyynes,
a new class of reactions that could help better understand the relationship
between the abundance of cyanopolyynes and isocyanopolyynes. For instance,
in TMC-1 [HC3N]/[HCCNC] is 77.0 ± 8.0, while in IRC+10216,
it is 392 ± 22. Considering the
next member of the series, [HC5N]/[HC4NC] is
600 ± 70 in TMC-1 and ≥ 2000 in IRC+10216. The origin of the large difference between
the TMC-1 and IRC+10216 values is not yet known nor is the variation
along the series.

We recommend testing the conversion of isocyanopolyynes
into their
cyano counterparts through reactions with CN in astrochemical models.
In CN-rich environments, we expect that the cyanopolyynes are converted
into dicyanopolyynes, but at the same time, isocyanopolyynes are mostly
converted into cyanopolyynes. The role of these two contrasting trends
can only be assessed in astrochemical models. A recent model proposed
by Xue et al. for TMC-1 overproduces
both HCCNC and HC4NC. In that model, an important destruction
route for both cyanopolyynes and isocyanopolyynes is the reaction
with atomic carbon, which is considered to occur with the same efficiency
in both cases (see also Loison et al. and Li et al.). Since the CN radicals
can be as abundant as C atoms, the reactions of cyanopolyynes and
isocyanopolyynes are expected to be important destruction routes but
with a very different outcome. For instance, the increased fractional
abundance of CN radicals in the CSEs of AGB stars (such as IRC+10216)
of at least 1 order of magnitude wrt TMC-1 could explain why isocyanopolyynes are almost absent, even though
their formation routes are the same as those considered for TMC-1.

In this work, we present
an experimental and theoretical study
of the reaction between the cyano radical and cyanoacetylene. Based
on experimental evidence and electronic structure calculations of
the relevant potential energy surface, the reaction involving cyanoacetylene
and the cyano radical leads to only one exothermic channel associated
with the formation of dicyanoacetylene. Furthermore, we derive some
properties of the related reactions C2H + CNCN (isocyanogen)
and CN + HCCNC (isocyanoacetylene): the C2H + CNCN reaction
leads to the formation of CN + HC3N, and the main channel
of the CN + HCCNC reaction also leads to CN + HC3N. This
last reaction efficiently converts isocyanoacetylene and, by extension,
any isocyanopolyyne into their cyano counterparts without a net loss
of cyano radicals. The effects of this new family of reactions should
be tested in astrochemical models.

Finally, we also characterized
the CN + HC5N reaction
(confirming that it easily evolves toward NC6N + H) and
the entrance channel of the reaction C2H + NC4N. The addition of C2H to all possible sites of NC4N is characterized by a significant entrance barrier, thus
confirming that, once formed, dicyanoacetylene terminates the growth
of cyanopolyynes.

This project has received funding
from the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under
the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 811312 for the
project “Astro-Chemical Origins” (ACO). Support from
the Italian Space Agency (Bando ASI Prot. n. DC-DSR-UVS-2022-231,
Grant No. 2023-10-U.0 MIGLIORA) is also acknowledged. MR and NFL acknowledge
financial support under the National Recovery and Resilience Plan
(NRRP), Mission 4, Component 2, Investment 1.1, Call for Tender No.
104 published on 2.2.2022 by the Italian Ministry of University and
Research (MUR), funded by the European Union – NextGenerationEU
– Project Title 2022JC2Y93 ChemicalOrigins: linking the fossil
composition of the Solar System with the chemistry of protoplanetary
disks – CUP J53D23001600006 – Grant Assignment Decree
No. 962 adopted on 30.06.2023 by the Italian Ministry of University
and Research (MUR). EVFA and NFL thank the Herla Project (http://
hscw.herla.unipg.it) – Università degli Studi di Perugia
for allocated computing time. The authors thank the Dipartimento di
Ingegneria Civile e Ambientale of the University of Perugia for allocating
computing time within the project “Dipartimenti di Eccellenza
2018–2022, F. Ferlin for the synthesis of cyanoacetylene, and
P. Recio and D. Marchione for assistance in running CMB experiments.
NB acknowledges additional support by the International Space Science
Institute (ISSI) in Bern, through ISSI International Team project
#615 “Advancing Titan’s Atmospheric Chemistry Knowledge”.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsearthspacechem.5c00154.

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.

Published
as part ofACS Earth and Space Chemistryspecial issue“Eric Herbst Festschrift”.