Heart failure (HF)
is a complex condition. Among altered
signal
transduction pathways associated with HF pathogenesis, the stress-activated
p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (Mapk) pathway has attracted
attention for its role in HF progression and cardiac hypertrophy.
However, the mechanisms by which p38-Mapk influences HF remain unclear.
Addressing knowledge gaps may provide insight into why p38 inhibition
has yielded inconsistent outcomes in clinical trials. Here, we investigate
the effects of p38-Mapk inhibition via SB203580 on cardiac remodeling
in a guinea pig model of HF and sudden cardiac death. Using an HF
model with ascending aortic constriction and daily isoproterenol (ACi)
administration, we assessed three groups: sham-operated controls,
untreated ACi, and ACi treated with SB203580 (ACiSB). Cardiac function
was evaluated by M-mode echocardiography. Proteome and phosphoproteome
profiles were analyzed using multiplexed Tandem Mass Tag labeling
and LC–MS/MS. Our findings demonstrate that SB203580 treatment
protects against cardiac dysfunction in HF. Proteomic data indicate
that SB203580 exerts broad protection of the cardiac phosphoproteome,
inhibiting maladaptive p38-dependent phosphorylation, extending to
Pka and Ampk networks, ultimately protecting the phosphorylation status
of critical myofibrillar and Ca2+-handling proteins. Though
SB203580 had a limited impact on widespread protein changes in HF,
its biosignature revealed preserved mitochondrial energetics and reduced
oxidative and inflammatory stress.

Heart
failure (HF) is a complex condition
that brings substantial
risks to health and life. With over 64 million individuals worldwide
affected by HF, it has emerged as a pressing concern, and reducing
its impact has thus become a principal goal. The pathophysiology of HF is characterized by a multifaceted interplay
of cellular mechanisms, including altered cyclic AMP, cyclic GMP,
and Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent signaling; Ca2+handling impairment; and mitochondrial oxidative stress. Stress-activated
kinases of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (Mapk) family have
also garnered significant attention.,Triggered by
osmotic, mechanical, or oxidative stress, Mapk signaling cascades
have been implicated as regulators of both cardiac hypertrophy and
HF progression.,Mapks are a group of highly conserved
serine/threonine protein kinases that transmit signals through a multilevel
kinase cascade. Four primary subgroups of the Mapk signaling pathway
have been recognized: Erk, c-Jnk, p38/Mapk, and Erk5.,These kinases regulate key physiological and pathological processes,
including apoptosis and inflammation, as well as proliferation, growth,
and differentiation of cardiac resident cells such as cardiomyocytes,
fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and macrophages.

There are four P38 Mapks (α, β, γ,
and δ)
encoded by genes Mapk14, Mapk11, Mapk12, and Mapk13, respectively.
They are activated in response to cellular stressors including oxidative
stress, DNA damage, and cytokine receptor stimulation. Activation leads to phosphorylation of downstream targets
including Mapk Apk2/3, Msk1 Hsp27, and several important cardiac transcription
factors (e.g., Atf2, Myc, Stat1, Mef2, Nfat, Creb1, and Pgc1α).,p38 Mapk has been shown to contribute to the growth response of
cultured cardiomyocytes to hypertrophic agonists. Of the four p38s, p38α and β have received
the greatest scrutiny for their role in HF pathogenesis. Evidence
garnered from mouse knockout and overexpression models would indicate
that maladaptive p38α activation via phosphorylation by dual-specificity
kinases, MKK3 or MKK6, contributes to cardiomyocyte cell death and
contractile dysfunction in settings of both chronic pressure overload,and ischemia, though it may also play
an adaptive role in response to acute changes in afterload. P38β
expression in the heart is comparatively low, although it may have distinct functional roles, for example, in
the estrogen-dependent modulation of mitochondrial reactive oxygen
species.

Clinical evaluation of p38
inhibition for several conditions (recovery
from myocardial infarction (MI), COPD, or depression) has been pursued,
thus far, with limited success. Losmapimod, a novel inhibitor of p38
Mapk, was well tolerated upon oral administration and demonstrated
efficacy in improving the prognosis of MI patients in a phase II clinical
trial. However, a larger phase III trial
(LATITUDE-TIMI 60) showed that, while losmapimod effectively reduced
the inflammatory response post-MI compared to placebo, it did not
mitigate the risk of major ischemic cardiovascular events. Similarly, despite early positive results, a
different p38 Mapk inhibitor was recently terminated because it was
not expected to meet the primary end point in a global phase 3 trial
(REALM-DCM) in patients with symptomatic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM)
due to a mutation of the gene encoding the lamin A/C protein (LMNA). These findings indicate that although p38 Mapk
inhibition holds promise in improving cardiac function in the context
of HF, further investigation of p38 Mapks cellular targets and effects
is warranted to ascertain the best strategy to optimize interventions
that could improve cardiovascular outcomes.

Here, we examine
the outcome of p38 Mapk inhibition with SB203580
(SB) on cardiac HF remodeling in a guinea pig model of HF and sudden
cardiac death. Our objective is to understand
how inhibiting p38 Mapk affects the progression of HF, focusing on
proteome remodeling and alterations in protein phosphorylation associated
with HF. We find that p38 Mapk inhibition protects against cardiac
decompensation by impacting select classes of HF-associated protein
changes while exerting broader protection of the cardiac phosphoproteome.

Hartley guinea pigs (∼300 g; HillTop
Lab Animals) were housed in the animal facility at Johns Hopkins University.
This study conforms to the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory
Animals published by the National Institutes of Health (NIH Publication
No. 85-23, revised 1996) and was approved by the Johns Hopkins Animal
Care and Use Committee. Male animals were anesthetized with 4% isoflurane
in a closed box for 4 min and then intubated. Animals were ventilated
with oxygen and 2% isoflurane. Ascending aortic constriction (AC)
was produced by tying a suture around the ascending aorta using an
18-gauge needle as a spacer, which was then removed. Sham operation
was performed following the same procedure without the ligation. Daily
bolus of Isoproterenol (ISO) was administered via a programmable iPRECIO
pump (SMP-200, Data Science International, St. Paul MN) that was implanted
in the peritoneal cavity. The pump was programmed for 1 h daily delivery
of Isoproterenol for a dose of 1 mg/kg/day. For the treatment of SB203580,
an osmotic pump (Alzet Osmotic pump, model 2004, Cupertino, CA) was
implanted in the abdominal cavity. SB203580 was delivered continuously
at 0.5 mg/kg/day of DA. A vehicle-filled osmotic pump was implanted
for control in the ACi group. The following treatment groups were
studied: 1. Sham-operated, serving as controls; 2. ACi (AC + isoproterenol
treatment until end point); and 3. ACi-SB (AC + isoproterenol treatment
+ SB203580 treatment). All personnel involved in data collection and
analysis were blinded to the treatment and nontreatment groups. Both
groups received similar incisions and thus could not be distinguished
based on these interventions. Each animal was assigned a unique computer-generated
numeric ID.

Transthoracic echocardiography
was
performed on conscious nonanesthetized guinea pigs by using a Vevo
2100 high-resolution in vivo imaging system with a 24 MHz transducer
(VisualSonics, Toronto, ON, Canada) and analyzed with the Advanced
Cardiovascular Package software (VisualSonics).

For heart weight, lung
weight, and FS % analysis between groups, one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) followed by Tukey’s post hoc analysis was used.

Ventricles were
harvested. Tissues were rinsed in cold PBS, rapidly heat-stabilized
(Stabilizor, Denator, Inc.), snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored
in a −80 freezer. To extract protein, stabilized tissues were
homogenized with RIPA buffer in the presence of 2% SDS, solubilized,
and boiled in 1× LDS sample buffer for SDS-PAGE. The protein
mixture was separated on a 4–12% NuPAGE gel (1 mm, Invitrogen).
Samples were run at room temperature for 35 min at 200 V. Proteins
were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes with iBlot (Invitrogen,
Inc.) using program 3 for 7 min. Membranes were stained with a Ponceau
S solution (Sigma-Aldrich) to evaluate the transfer efficiency. Membranes
were blocked for 1 h using Odyssey blocking buffer (Li-Cor Biosciences)
and incubated with primary antibody overnight at 4 °C. Antibody
binding was visualized with an infrared imaging system using IRDye
secondary antibodies, and quantification of band intensity was performed
using the Odyssey Application Software 3.0 (seeTable).

Densitometric analysis of p38 and phosphorylated p38
(p-p38) signals
in three distinct groups was conducted using ImageJ software, with
data derived from digitized .tif image files. These signals were subsequently
normalized to the total protein levels detected via Ponceau S staining.
Statistical analysis was performed using one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA), followed by Tukey’s post hoc test, to evaluate the
comparison of p-p38/p38 ratios across the different groups.

The experiment compared 3 experimental groups: (1) Sham-operated
controls, (2) ACi failing hearts (at 4 weeks), and (3) ACi animals
treated concomitantly with SB203580 (0.5 mg/kg/day).

Hearts
were harvested and washed with ice cold phosphate-buffered saline.
The left ventricle free wall was isolated and immediately subjected
to heat denaturation to abolish all enzyme activity using the Denator
Stabilizor System (Denator) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Denatured samples were then stored at −80 °C
until the next step. The left ventricle of each guinea pig heart was
homogenized with a hand-held Polytron tissue disrupter in filtered
and deionized, Tris-buffered 9 M urea (5 mL), pH 7.5. Samples were
allowed to solubilize for 30 min at room temperature. Soluble homogenates
were subjected to methanol/chloroform/water extraction and protein
precipitation by the method of Wessel and Flugge. Samples were dried under nitrogen gas to remove residual
chloroform before resolubilizing for 30 min in 9 M urea. Aggregates
were disrupted by brief bursts of sonication (<30 s total). Peptides
were diluted 6-fold into 60 mM HEPES and 0.6 mM DTT, pH 7.5 such that
the final reaction buffer contained 50 mM HEPES, 1.5 M urea, 0.5 mM
DTT, pH 7.5. All samples were diluted further with reaction buffer
to a common final protein concentration of 1 mg/mL. Samples (1 mg)
were subjected to proteolytic digestion with proteomics grade Trypsin
(1 μg/100 μg protein; Promega) at room temperature, overnight.
The following morning, samples were supplemented with Trypsin (1 μg/100
μg protein; Promega). At that time, DTT was added to samples
at a concentration of 5 mM, and the digest was allowed to proceed
for 1 h prior to peptide alkylation by addition of iodoacetamide to
a final concentration of 15 mM. Alkylation was allowed to proceed
1 h at room temperature in the dark. Peptides were subsequently acidified
by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration 0.5%
(v/v) and purified by solid-phase extraction using Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges
(Waters) on a vacuum manifold. Purified peptides were eluted with
60% (v/v) acetonitrile in aqueous 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. Peptides
were evaporated to dryness on an Eppendorf Vacufuge. Peptide samples
were resolubilized in triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8.5 and
labeled with TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

Following TMT
labeling of individual samples, peptides were pooled and subjected
to high-pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography (bRP-HPLC), as detailed by Foster et al. Briefly, samples were fractionated at 250 μL/min
on a Waters BEH C18 column with a gradient running from 10 mM TEAB
to 90% Acetonitrile and 10 mM TEAB over 105 min. The fractions were
concatenated into 24 fractions, from which 20% of each was taken for
the expression proteome determination. The remaining 80% was combined
into 11 fractions, and TiO2enrichment (Top Tip Titanium
Dioxide, MTIO0010.1 g; Glygen Corporation, Columbia, MD, USA, with
a particle size of 10 μm) was performed to assess the phosphoproteome.

Following concatenation, samples were analyzed using a nanoAquity
nanoLC system (Waters) interfaced with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid
Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were injected
onto a 2 cm trap column at 5 μL/min for 6 min before being eluted
onto a 75 μm × 15 cm in-house packed column (Michrom Magic
C18AQ, 5 μm, 100 Å) operating at 300 nL/min. Each sample
was run on a 90 min gradient. Data were acquired using a 3 s cycle
between MS1 scans in FT–FT acquisition mode. The survey full-scan
MS (400–1600 Th) was performed at a resolution 120,000 with
an automatic gain control target ion intensity of 4 × 105, while MS2 scans were performed at a resolution of 50,000
with a target value of 1.25 × 105. Mass tolerances
were ±10 ppm for MS1. Maximum injection times were set to “Auto”
for MS1 and 86 ms for MS2. A 0.7 Da isolation window was
used, and HCD fragmentation was performed with a normalized collision
energy of 36. Internal calibration was set to Easy-IC. Spectra whose
charge was unassigned or +1 were not tabulated. Dynamic exclusion
was set to a repeat count of 1 with a 15 s exclusion time.

The .Raw files for both the
enriched and unenriched (12 + 24 respectively) were searched against
a guinea pig database of predicted protein sequences (NCBI RefSeq,
taxonomy: , date: 01/20/2021,
FASTA format, 37727 sequences) using Mascot Version: 2.8.0 (Matrix
Science) interfaced through Proteome Discoverer 2.4.0.305 (Thermo).
Peaks were filtered at a signal-to-noise ratio of 3, deisotoped, and
searched with a parent ion mass tolerance of 5 ppm and an MS2 mass
tolerance of 0.02 Da. Trypsin was specified as the enzyme, and 1 missed
cleavage was allowed. N-terminal labeling with TMTpro reagent and
carbamidomethyl was specified as a fixed modification, and dynamic
modifications included deamidated NQ, oxidized M, phosphorylation
on STY, and TMTpro on lysine. All searches were conducted with the
reversed database search mode engaged. Percolator software was used
for peptide FDR (q-value) calculations. Mascot output
files (.dat) tabulated were in Proteome Discoverer. Only high confidence
peptides (q< 0.01) were used for protein identification.

Analysis
was confined to uniquely and unambiguously assigned spectra (1% peptide
FDR). Missingness of ion intensities for a single spectrum across
reporter channels was low (<2% of unique spectra with intensities
missing from one or more channels), indicative of efficient TMT labeling
and fragmentation.

Reporter ion intensities were integrated over 20
ppm using the most
confident centroid method and corrected for purity in Proteome Discoverer
2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectral TMT signals were quantified
using the median sweep algorithm originally described by Herbrich
et al. essentially as implemented recently
by Foster et al. with a minor modification.
TMT reporter ion intensities were (1) logarithmically transformed
(base 2), (2) median-centered within each channel prior to (3) median-centering
each individual spectrum across channels, and (4) determining protein
abundance by taking the median value of the logarithmically transformed
median-centered intensities for all spectra belonging to that protein
in a given channel (median summarization). For phosphopeptide analysis,
all spectra (phosphorylated and unphosphorylated) median-centered,
as above, and median-summarized at the peptide level. Unphosphorylated
peptides were filtered from the final table.

Following the median
sweep, differential protein abundance between experimental groups
was assessed using a Bayesian statistical framework, specifically,
linear modeling of microarrays (LIMMA)
with multigroup comparison. Pairwise contrast was also performed.
The resulting moderatedp-values were used to assess
the positive false discovery rate (q-value) method
of Storey,The code used for the median sweep procedure
and statistical analysis can be found athttps://github.com/Frostman300/p38-upload.P-Values derived from pairwise-comparisons were
utilized to determine specific differences between the groups, as
demonstrated in the boxplots presented in the figures.

An Excel macro
was written to find human peptides homologous to the detected guinea
pig peptides using the command line version of Protein–protein
BLAST (2.15.0+). In brief, for each guinea pig peptide detected, blastp
was used to compare the full-length sequence of the corresponding
guinea pig protein with a fasta format database of all refseq proteins downloaded from the
NCBI protein database. Blastp was then used to align the guinea pig
peptide with the corresponding highest scoring human protein target.
The best homologous peptide match was then output to the spreadsheet.
The macro code is available athttps://github.com/Frostman300/p38-upload.

For Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Qiagen IPA) of the proteome, uploaded
data fields included the gene name and log2­(ACi/ACiSB) value. Data
were compared to the Ingenuity Knowledge Base reference set, which
included genes only. The search space was limited to consideration
of database relationships derived from primary tissues; data arising
from cancer cell lines was excluded from analysis. Both direct (transcriptional)
and indirect (signaling) relationships were probed. Highlighted pathways
were among those with Benjamin–Hochberg-correctedp-values of <0.05. Pathways are colored according to theirz-score. The z-score integrates, not only gene over-representation,
but the degree of concordance between supplied data (direction of
change, magnitude, andp-value) and a database of
curated relationships compiled from scientific literature and publicly
available data sets. IPA provides an inference about whether upstream
gene regulatory and signaling pathways may be activated or inhibited.
Higher scores, whether positive or negative, reflect the strength
of the inference.

Functional protein association/interaction
networks were constructed by loading the gene identifiers of up- and
downregulated proteins into stringApp 2.0.3 embedded in Cytoscape 3.10.2. The default
association/interaction threshold (STRING score >0.4) was used
to
map relationships between proteins. Network modularity was assessed
with the Markov clustering function in the clusterMaker2 app (v.2.3.4) using the STRING score (>0.6) for edge weighting.
The granularity parameter (inflation value) was set empirically. Modules
were rearranged for clarity and named consistent with STRING’s
multipathway enrichment terms (e.g., Gene Ontology, Reactome, KEGG,
among others). Singletons that were ontologically consistent with
a module were grouped with it. The phosphorylation association network
was further annotated using Omics Visualizer 1.3.1. embedded in Cytoscape.

We employed a guinea
pig model of HF that combines ascending AC
with administration of the β-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol
once a day (1 mg/kg/day) via an implanted programmable pump. This
model has been validated previously.,P38 Mapk,
as demonstrated inFigureA,B, is activated by phosphorylation at Thr180/Tyr182 in guinea
pig HF, and treatment with SB prevented its activation. The following
treatment groups were studied: (1) Sham-operated, serving as Controls;
(2) ACi (AC + isoproterenol); and (3) ACi-SB (ACi + SB treatment via
implanted osmotic pump; 0.5 mg/kg/day).

p38 inhibition attenuates
HF progression in guinea pigs. (A) The
p38 is activated by phosphorylation at Thr180/Tyr182 in guinea pig
HF. Treatment with SB203580 prevents activation. (B) Ensemble analysis
of p38 activation normalized for p38 expression. SB attenuates the
decline in fractional shortening (C) and prevents cardiac hypertrophy
(D) and pulmonary edema (E). F. Experimental designCreated
in BioRender. Sedighi, S. (2025)https://BioRender.com/vt73yx4. To illustrate peptide-level detection
of post-translational modifications, Myl2 was chosen as a representative
example. Mass spectra corresponding to its phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated
peptides are displayed.

An appreciable decline
in FS was noted in the ACi
group compared
to its respective Control group (ACi: 30.5 ± 2.9%,n= 8; Control: 44.9 ± 1.2%,n= 7,p< 0.0001), further confirming the validity of our HF
model. SB treatment effectively abrogated 61% of the decline in FS
seen in the ACi-4w group (i.e., 39.3 ± 5.6%,n= 8 vs 30.5 ± 2.9%,n= 8;p-value = 0.0005) (FigureC). ACi-induced hypertrophy was also blunted by SB treatment.
Specifically, heart weight/tibia length was decreased from 0.7 ±
0.06 g/mm (n= 8) in the ACi group to 0.6 ±
0.05 g/mm (n= 8) in the ACiSB group (p-value <0.001) (FigureD). Additionally, lung weight/tibia length decreased significantly,
from 1.5 ± 0.4 g/mm (n= 8) to 0.8 ± 0.2
g/mm (n= 8) with SB treatment, indicating a reduction
in pulmonary edema (p-value = 0.0003;FigureE).

Consistent with our prior work, the ACi protocol
elicits substantial proteome remodeling after 4 weeks. Fully, 2480
of 5016 quantified proteins (i.e., 49%) were differentially expressed
in the ACi group (p< 0.05 ACi vs Control by LIMMA
with post hoc pairwise contrast). We defined expression as SB-responsive
if protein abundance differed significantly between the ACiSB and
ACi groups (p< 0.05). We found 292 proteins differed
between the groups, irrespective of whether they changed significantly
between ACi and Control. Thus, 227 (of 2480) proteins whose expression
differed from control in the ACi group (i.e., 9%) were deemed SB-responsive.
These results are summarized in the Venn diagram ofFigureA. Complete tabulated protein
levels and their statistical analyses are provided inTable S1.FigureB depicts a PCA biplot of the statistically SB-responsive
subset proteins, showing that, even within that subset, the variance
of the ACiSB group was distinct from Control, lying between Control
and ACi groups. This trend is illustrated more explicitly in the heatmap
depicted inFigureC, where the protein levels of the SB-responsive group lie between
those of the Control and ACi groups. Thus, while select proteins were
more SB-responsive than others, on aggregate, SB treatment only partially
offset ACi-induced differential protein expression. The volcano plot
inFigureD highlights
some of the proteins whose abundance was most impacted by the SB treatment.
Additionally, specific examples of proteins that differ between ACi
and Control group are presented inFigure S1.

p38 inhibition mitigates protein changes associated with HF. (A)
Venn diagram illustrates that fully 2480 of the 5016 quantified proteins
change abundance in HF, but only about 1/10 of these proteins are
impacted by SB treatment. SB also modulated the expression of 65 proteins
that were not otherwise changing in HF. (B) The PCA biplot of proteins
changing significantly between ACi and ACiSB. (C) Hierarchical clustering
of proteins that differed between ACi and ACiSB. (D) Volcano plot
highlighting specific examples of proteins responsive to SB treatment.
(E) Functional association network of proteins in D Blue nodes indicates
proteins that were downregulated in ACi relative to ACiSB, while yellow
nodes indicate proteins that were upregulated in relative to ACiSB.
(F) Pathway analysis of proteins from (D). Highlighted pathways were
among those with Benjamin–Hochberg-correctedp-values of <0.05. Ochre indicates pathways inferred to be augmented
by SB and blue indicates pathways inferred to be attenuated. G. Inferred
activation or inhibition of transcription factor activity based on
observed protein changes. The color scheme is the same as for (F).

For further insights, we subjected 292 proteins
to both network-
and pathway-based annotation enrichment analyses. The significantly
changing proteins inFigureD were queried using the STRINGdb functional annotation network.
Modules of interest were revealed by Markov clustering inFigureE. As inFigureD, blue nodes represent
proteins downregulated in ACi that were SB-responsive, while yellow
nodes indicate responsive upregulated proteins. The 33 modules depicted
encompass 214 of the 292 SB-responsive proteins and summarize the
major features of the data set. Among downregulated, yet SB-responsive
proteins, several modules correspond to mitochondrial processes or
pathways, including oxidative phosphorylation, mitochondrial translation,
mitochondrial iron–sulfur cluster biogenesis, mitochondrial
protein import, and nicotinamide metabolism. Proteins of the respiratory
complexes were particularly SB-responsive (see alsoFigure).

Expression of many proteins
involved in mitochondrial bioenergetics
are changing significantly and are responsive to SB: Global significance
(p< 0.05) established viaF-test,
withp-values derived from LIMMA contrast matrices
for intergroup comparisons.P-Values <0.05 are
indicated by faceted brackets.

Among the upregulated
proteins, major nodes implicate extracellular
and acute phase response proteins, ER and endosomal proteins, and
proteins of the cytoskeleton. Acute phase response proteins were among
the most SB-responsive (also seeFigure).

Expression
of many acute phase proteins are significantly increased
with ACi: Out of those that are changing Hp, Serpina1, Iqgap2, and
Vwf are SB-responsive. Global significance (p<
0.05) established via F-test, withp-values derived
from LIMMA contrast matrices for intergroup comparisons.P-Values <0.05 are indicated by faceted brackets.

Complementary Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis (FigureF)
is consistent with network-based annotation,
implicating both oxidative phosphorylation and acute phase response
signaling, whose dysregulation in the ACi group was ameliorated by
treatment with SB. Finally, Ingenuity upstream regulator analysis
(URA) provides a set of candidate transcription factors whose activity
might explain the changes in observed protein levels arising from
SB treatment (FigureG). URA strongly implicates Tead1, whose activity could explain the
coordinate expression of 20 respiratory complex proteins, particularly
from complex I (seeFigure S2). Prior work
has shown that Tead1 deletion decreases phospholamban phosphorylation,
Serca2a expression, and mitochondrial gene expression, resulting in
cardiomyopathy in mice. Here, the inferred
involvement of Tead1 is consistent with reports that stress-induced
activation of p38 Mapk results in its interaction with, and phosphorylation
of, Tead1 in the cytoplasm, inhibiting its nuclear function as a transcription
factor in the Yap/Taz pathway. The Tead1
transcriptional program partially overlaps with the Rb1 and Pgc1α
programs. Together Tead1, Rb1, and Pgc1α regulation likely account
for most of the mitochondrial protein downregulation in ACi that responds
to SB (Figure S2).

With respect to
the mechanisms of chromatin remodeling, Kdm5a,
a lysine-specific demethylase involved in the regulation of gene expression,
is inferred to be strongly inhibited by SB treatment (p= 1.3 × 10–11,z-score =
−4.1). Kdm5a has previously been identified as a key regulator
of cardiac fibrosis and is upregulated in fibroblasts from patients
with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) via the angiotensin II and PI3K/AKT
signaling pathways.

Mapk cascade proteins including Mapk14
(p38a), Mapk9 (Jnk2), and Mapk1 (Erk2), along with their upstream
activators, Map2k1, Map2k2, Map2k3, and Map4k5 (Khs1), exhibited alterations
in their abundances in ACi but showed no significant responsiveness
to SB treatment (FigureA–I). An exception to the trend, Map3k17 (Taok2), which is
an upstream kinase in the p38 Mapk cascade, did not change in ACi
but was decreased with SB treatment. Notably, while the abundance
of Mapk14 (p38α) and Map4k5 (Khs1) did not undergo significant
changes, their phosphorylation was markedly altered, as depicted inFigureand discussed hereinafter.
Several Mapk cascade proteinsincluding Map2k4, Map2k7, Map3k4,
and Map4k4remained unchanged in ACi and were unresponsive
to SB treatment (Figure S3). With respect
to known p38 Mapk substrates, the expression of most remained unchanged
in ACi. Among the substrates of p38, only Gys1, Mef2d, and Spag9 and
Lsp1 exhibit altered abundances in ACi, and furthermore, only Lsp1
was responsive to SB treatment (Figure S4).

Several Mapk cascade proteins are differentially expressed in HF
but largely unresponsive to SB: Global significance (p< 0.05) established viaF-test, withp-values derived from LIMMA contrast matrices for intergroup
comparisons.P-Values <0.05 are indicated by faceted
brackets.

Phosphorylation of p38a
and several upstream kinases are responsive
to SB: global significance (p< 0.05) established
viaF-test, withp-values derived
from LIMMA contrast matrices for intergroup comparisons.P-Values <0.05 are marked with brackets.

Downregulation of mitochondrial proteins is a consistent
biosignature of HF and correlates with mitochondrial dysfunction.
The mitochondrial network modules highlighted inFigureE are consistent with prior
studies.FigureA–P specifically shows that several
subunits of respiratory complexes I (Ndufa8, Ndufaf7, Ndufb1, Ndufc1,
Ndufs1, and Ndufv1) and IV (Cox6b1, Cox7C, Cox11, and Cox19) were
downregulated in the ACi group.Figurealso shows that their decline is substantively withdrawn
in the ACiSB group. Atp5f1d, a subunit of ATP synthase, and Uqcrb,
from complex III, are likewise SB responsive. The Pdks, or pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinases, are key regulators of pyruvate metabolism to
acetyl-CoA via phosphorylation of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex.
In HF, Pdk1 levels typically decline while Pdk4 levels rise. This
observation holds in the ACi model. SB treatment had a mild, though
significant, impact on Pdk1, although there was no significant effect
on Pdk4. Taken together, this suggests that SB treatment might offset
impaired mitochondrial function in HF. However, not all mitochondrial
proteins were affected; a few examples of unchanged proteins are provided
inFigure S5.

Like mitochondrial dysfunction, inflammation and
activation of
the acute phase response is a hallmark of human HF and recapitulated
here in the guinea pig ACi Model. Several proteins associated with
innate immunity were significantly upregulated in ACi (Figure), and all these trended toward mitigation of the response
in the ACiSB group. However, owing to high variation in the response
for this class of proteins, only 4 of these showed statistically significant
inhibition by SB treatment; specifically, Hp, Serpina1, lqgap2, and
Vwf (Figure).

Our
study identified 4310 unique high confidence phosphopeptides (1% FDR),
encompassing 3844 unique phosphorylation sites. 3482 phosphopeptides
(80%) could be linked to a quantified protein. Of the 5016 proteins
quantified, phosphorylation sites were detected for 1129 (22%) of
them. Phosphoproteome analysis of the failing heart is complicated
by the fact that nearly half of all quantified proteins in our expression
proteome are differentially expressed between ACi and Control groups.
AsFigureA illustrates,
the observed change in phosphorylation levels strongly correlates
with changes in the levels of underlying protein between the Control
and ACi groups (Pearsonr= 0.72). More explicitly,
the R2value of 0.52 indicates that half of the variance
in measured phosphorylation can be attributed to changes in underlying
protein abundance. To discriminate between changes in bona fide phosphosite
occupancy from changes arising from differential phosphoprotein abundance,
phosphopeptides were normalized to the underlying protein abundance
for each TMT channel. Briefly, the TiO2-enriched peptide
relative abundances were compiled by row-wise median-centering of
the logged peptide-spectral match intensities across all TMT channels
and then median-centering the PSM intensities within each TMT channel
before median-summarizing them to yield a regularized matrix of relative
peptide abundances. Relative protein abundance levels from the non-TiO2-enriched data set were compiled using the same “median
sweep” algorithm. Just as one might normalize nonlogged phosphopeptide
abundances to the underlying protein levels by dividing the phosphopeptide
abundances by the protein abundances, on log-transformed data, the
logged protein abundance is simply subtracted from the logged phosphopeptide
abundance for each TMT channel, i.e., the logged protein abundance
matrix is subtracted from the logged phosphopeptide matrix. This step
accounts for variations in total protein expression and provides a
relative measure of phosphorylation levels for each biological replicate.
Following normalization, changes in phosphopeptide abundance showed
only a mild residual inverse dependence on changes in protein abundance
(R2= 0.07;Figures S6andS7).

p38 inhibition substantially
attenuates changes in phosphorylation
associated with HF. (A) Scatterplot reveals the correlation between
phosphosite changes in HF relative to changes in underlying protein
abundance. Just over 50% of the variance in phosphorylation can be
explained by changes in relative protein levels. (B) Venn analysis
reveals that of the 1613 unique phosphosites changing between control
and ACi; 32% were impacted by SB treatment. A further 231 phosphosites
differed between ACiSB and ACi, despite no significant change in ACi
relative to controls. (C) PCA biplot analysis of the 525 unique phosphopsites
indicates the character of the SB-significant phosphoproteome is closer
to that of control hearts than failing hearts. (D) Hierarchical cluster
highlights that about the largest impact of SB on the phosphoproteome
was by inhibiting phosphorylation that otherwise increases in failing
hearts. (E) Depicts thez-scored phosphosite signals,
superimposed on a functional annotation network. Functional modules
are revealed through network Markov clustering using the String score
for edge-weighting. A legend of network node attributes is provided
(bottom right).

Statistical analysis was conducted
on all phosphopeptides. 1613 changed significantly between Control
and ACi groups, of which 525 (33%) were significantly impacted by
SB treatment. A further 231 phosphopeptides differed between ACiSB
and ACi, irrespective of whether they changed in ACi relative to Controls
(FigureB). PCA biplot
analysis of the SB-responsive phosphosites is illustrated inFigureC (p< 0.05, ACi vs ACiSB). This is illustrated explicitly in the
hierarchically clustered heat map inFigureD, where three major SB-dependent trends
can be distinguished. First, there is a set of sites that become hyperphosphorylated
in ACi that are largely prevented by SB treatment. Second, there are
phosphorylated sites that become hypophosphorylated in ACi but which
SB-preserves at Control levels, perhaps through indirect impact on
intermediary phosphatases. Third, SB inhibits phosphorylation of a
unique set of phosphorylation sites that are phosphorylated in both
Control and ACi conditions.

To extract greater insight into
processes impacted by SB, the quantitative information from the heatmap
inFigureD was superimposed
onto a Markov-clustered STRINGdb functional annotation network to
visualize changes in relative phosphosite occupancy in the context
of ontologically enriched modules (FigureE). As depicted in the legend (6E, bottom
right), the center of the node denotes Control levels of phosphorylation,
the outer ring represents phosphorylation levels in ACi, and the middle
ring denotes phosphorylation in the ACiSB group.

Among phosphoproteins,
cytostructural proteins constitute a major
proportion. Large modules include the myofibrils, cell junction, actin
cytoskeleton, and microtubules. Additional modules consist of cytoskeletal
regulatory proteins, such as the Rho GTPases and Rho GTPase effectors.
A second broad category of phosphoproteins encompasses membrane-associated
or membrane-trafficking ontologies including Golgi vesicle transport,
dynein/dynactin complexes, kinesins, and nuclear envelope proteins.
Channels and transporters are encompassed by calcium signaling and
transmembrane transport modules. Finally, a third major category represented
inFigureE are proteins
involved in phosphorylation-mediated signal transduction. Notable
modules include Protein kinase A (Pka) signaling, Amp Kinase (Ampk)
signaling, Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling, assorted
kinases and phosphatases, and SH3 domains/binding.

Mapk family signaling is characterized
by extensive crosstalk and feedback regulation by both direct phosphorylation
and through indirect phosphorylation/dephosphorylation through intermediary
kinases and phosphatases as well as indirect effects on the gene regulation
of intermediary phosphatases. Accordingly, one might expect SB to
affect the phospho-status of upstream regulators of p38 Mapk, Erks,
and Jnks, as well as their known substrates, p38 Mapk substrates.FigureIndicates that Mapk14 (p38α) showed a significant decrease
in phosphorylation upon SB treatment, as shown earlier by Western
blot (FigureA). Map2k4­(Mek4),
Map3k7­(Tak1), Map4k5­(Khs1), and Map4k6­(Mink1) displayed increased
phosphorylation in the ACi group, which, for Map2k4, was significantly
attenuated by SB treatment. Conversely, Map3k2 (Mekk2) showed a significant
decrease in phosphorylation in the ACi group. Additional Mapk cascade
proteins that did not exhibit significant changes across groups are
presented inFigure S8.

With respect to known protein substrates of p38
Mapk, the phosphorylation
levels of Spag9 (Ser 584) and Nelfe (Ser S115) increased with HF and
exhibited significant responsiveness to SB treatment. Additionally,
Hspb6 (Ser 16; Hsp20) stood out as being SB sensitive. This site increased
by ∼2.5-fold in the ACi group compared to Controls, which was
mitigated by SB treatment (Figure S9).Figure S10further illustrates the phosphorylation
of kinases responsive to ACi and SB treatment.

Phosphorylation status of several ion transport proteins,
including Atp1a2, Cacna1c, Cacnb2, Kcnh2, Kcnq1, Trpm7, Piezo1, and
Clcc1, were also altered in the context HF; Only Trpm7, Piezo1, and
Clcc1 were responsive to SB treatment (FigureA–E).

Phosphorylation of select proteins of
the ion transport is sensitive
to SB: Global significance (p< 0.05) established
viaF-test, withp-values derived
from LIMMA contrast matrices for intergroup comparisons.p-Values <0.05 are marked with brackets. Only a subset of results
are shown in the figure.

In
this study, we showed that inhibition
of p38 Mapk with SB203580
offered considerable efficacy in protecting against experimental HF,
offsetting the bulk of the decline in fractional shortening as well
as alleviating both pulmonary edema and cardiac hypertrophy. Our proteomic
studies indicate that this protection is characterized by a substantial
impact on the observable phosphoproteome. The scope of the impact
on the proteome was modest by comparison, although the impacted processes,
most notably mitochondrial function and inflammation, are key determinants
of cardiac function. Taken together, notwithstanding the broad protein
expression changes in HF, the data are consistent with a contributing
role for p38 Mapk-driven phosphoproteome modifications in cardiac
decompensation. The significance of targeting p38 Mapk in HF is further
supported by findings in HFpEF models, where treatment with Doramapimod
reduced cardiac and pulmonary hypertrophy and lowered pathological
markers such as GAL-3, LDHA, and BNP. Additionally, Erk1/2-targeted therapies, including herbal compounds
(e.g., oxymatrine, scutellarin, and salidroside) and nonpharmacologic
approaches like Follistatin and MicroRNA-26b agomir, have been reported
to suppress p38 activity as part of broader antifibrotic effects. Unlike these multitargeted strategies, our use
of SB203580 enables direct interrogation of p38’s specific
role in myocardial remodeling and supports its utility as a focused
therapeutic target in HF. These collective insights suggest that p38
inhibition may complement or enhance broader therapeutic strategies
aimed at attenuating myocardial fibrosis and dysfunction in HF. We
discuss the impact of SB203580 on the proteome and phosphoproteome
in turn.

Though scarcely 10% of differentially expressed
proteins in HF were deemed SB-responsive, many were associated with
mitochondrial pathways. The protein-level data suggest that SB treatment
maintains mitochondrial functional integrity by preserving the stoichiometry
of respiratory oxidative phosphorylation (oxphos) complexes. Not only
does SB prevent the decline in the levels of over 30 complex subunits
but it also offsets declines in the mitochondrial protein translation
machinery that makes the mitochondrially encoded subunits and normalizes
the expression of proteins involved in iron–sulfur biogenesis
and complex assembly. SB further impacts the levels of the MICOS complex
members responsible for cristae formation, thereby maximizing bioenergetic
efficiency. By maintaining respiratory chain integrity, SB may serve
to optimize ATP production, while minimizing mitochondrial ROS generation,
a principal driver of HF pathogenesis. We further note that key antioxidant defense proteins, including
thioredoxin reductase 2 (TrxnRd2) and ferredoxin reductase, were also
SB-responsive. Finally, SB may help to preserve proper mitochondrial
substrate utilization by ameliorating HF-induced changes in fatty
acid oxidation enzymes and perhaps forestalling the switch in pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase activity. Recent research suggests Pdk4 inhibition
as a promising strategy for HFrEF therapy. Targeting Pdk4 could offer
a novel adjunctive therapy for HF, especially for patients resistant
to conventional treatments.

Potential
mechanisms for preserving mitochondrial integrity and fatty acid oxidation
are suggested by the URA analysis, which implicated the lysine demethylase
Kdm5a and the transcription factors Tead1, Pgc1α, and Rb1. The
network diagram inFigure S2shows that
these four transcriptional regulators could reasonably account for
the coordinate expression of mitochondrial and metabolic proteins.
Tead1 plays a vital role as a central transcriptional hub, autonomously
regulating a broad network of genes associated with mitochondrial
function and biogenesis. Ablating Tead1
in mice causes cardiomyopathy. Perhaps,
its best documented role is as one of the end-effector transcription
factors of the HIPPO-Yap/Taz pathway, where it is activated by the
nuclear translocation of dephosphorylated Yap/Taz. However, p38 has also been shown to downregulate Tead1
activity directly, independently of Yap/Taz. Specifically, p38 phosphorylates
Tead1 and prevents its shuttling from the cytoplasm to the nucleus.,Applied here, p38 hyperactivation would then be expected to inhibit
the Tead1 bioenergetic program, leading to mitochondrial dysfunction.
SB-treatment, by inhibiting Tead1 phosphorylation, could ensure there
is no brake on nuclear shuttling and thus preserve Tead1-mediated
transcription.

The P38 Mapk pathway regulates inflammatory cytokine
expression,
immune cell functions, and cardiac healing. Acute inflammation is crucial for cardiac protection, but unresolved
inflammation can lead to HF. In our study,
SB treatment reduced acute phase proteins and inflammation in HF,
likely contributing to improved cardiac function. Because the acute
phase proteins identified are typically the ones secreted into the
circulation by the liver in response to inflammatory cytokines, part
of the SB beneficial effect in HF is likely to be linked to the inhibition
of systemic inflammation.

We
identified over 800 phosphopeptides that were responsive to SB treatment.
Notwithstanding the specificity of the inhibitor, the set of SB-responsive
phosphosites extends to peptides that do not conform to the canonical
Mapk family consensus site characterized by a proline residue immediately
C-terminally adjacent to the phosphosite (S/T-Pro). Presumably, the
4 week administration of SB influenced the phosphostatus of both direct
substrates, as well as indirect targets, by influencing the expression
and/or activity of other kinases and phosphatases. This was keenly
apparent inFigureE, where several modules within the SB-responsive phospho-network
were associated with phosphorylation pathway signaling by other kinases
and phosphatases (e.g., VEGF, Pka, and Ampk substrates).

The
impact of SB treatment on Pka signaling is noteworthy, given that
HF is characterized by a loss of β-adrenergic responsiveness,
manifested as a reduction in cardiac contractile power and slowed
ventricular relaxation. A hallmark of
the Pka signaling deficit is the progressive dephosphorylation of
the thin filament regulatory protein, cardiac Troponin I (cTnI) at
serines 23 and 24 (database numbering).,Dephosphorylation
aberrantly increases the Ca2+sensitivity of myofibril
contraction and slows myofibril relaxation rate. Here, we show that SB treatment indirectly preserves the
cTnI Ser23 phosphorylation. cTnI is also phosphorylated at Ser150
(Ser151 herein) by Ampk, which has been shown to blunt Pka phosphorylation
at Ser 23/24. We also demonstrate that
Ser151 phosphorylation is elevated in HF but is blunted by the SB
treatment. Thus, an unexpected or emergent consequence of chronic
SB treatment in HF is that it preserves β-adrenergic signaling
to thin filaments. Besides cTnI, SB treatment impacts phosphorylation
of over 25 myofibrillar proteins such as titin on nearly 100 unique
phosphopeptides, the majority of which have not been characterized.
In addition to contractile proteins, the myofibrillar substrates include
Z-disk proteins and structural links to the costameres. We therefore
speculate that SB treatment could also modulate the mechanotransduction
from the sarcolemma to the myofibrils and the nucleus.

How p38
inhibition preserves β-adrenergic signaling homeostasis
is unclear, although we observed substantially altered phosphorylation
among the A-kinase anchoring proteins or Akaps, including Akap1, Akap5,
Akap6, Akap9, and Akap13 that localize Pka and/or PKC signaling to
discrete nanodomains. The AKAPs are particularly notable, as several
have documented roles in Ca2+handling, serving as docking
points for Pka, which in turn phosphorylate and modulate the activity
of ion channels. Examples include the role of Akap5 in the regulation
of Ca2+-influx through the T-tubular voltage-gated Ca2+channel (Cav1.2) and the role of Akap6 in the regulation
of sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+release through Ryr2. Coincidentally,
we note that SB normalizes phosphorylation of the Cav1.2 regulatory
subunit (Cacna1b), as well as two mechanosensitive sarcolemmal divalent
cation channels, TrpM7 and Piezo1. SB likewise preserved the phosphorylation
state of Ryr2 and phospholamban.

Apart from Pka signaling, we
also note that SB treatment impacted
Ampk signaling and Ca2+-Calmodulin-activated kinase (CamkII)
phosphorylation. Specifically, SB abrogated the ACi-induced hyperphosphorylation
of the Ampka1 catalytic subunit (Prkaa1) at Ser351 (guinea pig numbering;
equivalent to Ser496 in the mouse) within its AMP sensor domain. SB
similarly prevents Ampk beta subunit2 (Prkab2) hyperphosphosphorylation
at Ser108, within its glycogen-binding domain, which would be predicted
to impair glycogen binding. Hyperactivation of the Ca2+-Calmodulin-activated kinases, particularly Camk2D, is well documented
in HF. The activation process is mediated,
in part, through autophosphorylation at multiple sites, some of which
are better characterized than the others. Here, we show that phosphorylation
at Thr337, which has previously been shown to increase kinase activity,
is blunted by SB treatment.

Our previous research highlighted the significance
of targeting mitochondria as a therapeutic approach for HF. Employing
mitochondrially targeted antioxidant MitoTEMPO normalized cellular
ROS levels. Additionally, administering MitoTEMPO to HF animals in
vivo prevented and reversed HF, mitigated the risk of sudden cardiac
death by reducing repolarization dispersion and ventricular arrhythmias,
attenuated the chronic HF-induced remodeling of proteome expression,
and prevented specific alterations in the phosphoproteome. Furthermore, the Mapk kinase pathway emerged
as a pathway sensitive to mitochondrial ROS (mROS), known to be activated
by it and exhibit altered signaling in HF models. Notably, the activation
of Mapk was evident in the subset of proteins displaying changes in
the expression proteome of failing hearts, a phenomenon moderated
by MitoTEMPO treatment.

Even though
MitoTEMPO’s effect on protein remodeling in HF was significantly
greater than that of SB and had a wider influence, comparing the effects
of MitoTEMPO and SB on the HF proteome highlights the diverse remodeling
pathways triggered by mitochondrial ROS, including the activation
of p38 Mapk. It is noteworthy that p38, downstream of mitochondrial
ROS, plays a role in oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondrial processes,
suggesting that its inhibition could yield beneficial effects.

We have captured a snapshot
of how SB treatments impact the HF phosphoproteome in HF pathogenesis.
Therefore, it is a challenge to discern how many of the SB-responsive
phosphopeptides are bona fide p38 Mapk substrates. While the presence
of a proline at P+1 is a defining feature of the p38 Mapk consensus
sequence, assigning substrates is complicated by the fact that the
consensus sites of other “proline-directed” kinases
(Mapks, Cdks) are highly similar. Moreover,
though a subset of proline-containing SB-responsive sites represent
p38 substrates, the experimental design (i.e., chronic SB treatment)
makes it difficult to parse the direct p38-mediated impact of SB on
substrate phosphorylation. Only a time-course of SB-mediated p38 inhibition
in cardiac cell types could help address the issue. Finally, we are
using whole heart lysates, which do not distinguish between effects
on different cell types, such as fibroblasts, whose activation state
is known to be modulated by p38 Mapk. This would require additional cell-type-specific studies.

In conclusion, chronic SB treatment elicits
substantial protection
against HF by exerting the effects on the phosphoproteome that percolate
beyond direct inhibition of p38 to influence the broader web of cardiac
kinase signaling from Pka to Ampk and CamkII, ultimately ameliorating
the phospho-status of key myofibrillar and Ca2+-handling
substrates. The impact of SB on the underlying HF proteome, while
not expansive, is consistent with preserved energetics as well as
reduced levels of oxidative and inflammatory stress. Further research
and clinical investigation are warranted to unravel the full potential
of targeting p38 Mapk as a part of therapeutic strategies aimed at
improving outcomes in HF management.

The MS proteomics
raw data (.raw), complete search results (.msf), and spectra (.mzidentML)
have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (http://www.proteomexchange.org/;) via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD058012 and10.6019/PXD058012. The R code
used for data analysis along with macros used for finding homologous
human peptides can be found athttps://github.com/Frostman300/p38-upload.

The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.5c03687.

This project
was supported by the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI)
of the NIH, grants R01HL134821 (DBF and BO’R), and R01HL164478
(DBF), U.S. Army Medical Research Acquisition Activity USAMRAA HT94252410277
(DBF), as well as American Heart Association grants AHA965158 (BO’R)
and Transformational Project Award 18TPA34170575 (DBF).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.