In multiple sclerosis (MS), neurodegeneration results from the interplay between disease-specific pathology and normal aging. Conventional MRI captures morphologic changes in neurodegeneration, while quantitative MRI (qMRI) provides biophysical measures of microstructural alterations. Combining these modalities may reveal how aging and pathology interact and contribute to disability progression in people with MS.

We analyzed cross-sectional and longitudinal morphometry data from 1,353 patients with MS and 3,462 healthy controls (HCs). In addition, cross-sectional qMRI data, available for 378 HCs and 169 patients with MS, were analyzed separately. Morphometric measures and quantitative metrics were used to estimate brain-predicted age differences (brain-PADs) with machine learning. We assessed the added value of quantitative metrics over a model based exclusively on morphometric measures in brain age prediction. We also investigated the associations of brain-PADs derived from conventional and qMRI-based predictive models with clinical disability, serum inflammatory biomarkers of neuroaxonal and astrocytic injury, and lesion burden.

Models combining morphometry and qMRI data achieved the best performance (mean absolute error: 5.73), outperforming those based on qMRI (6.62) or morphometry alone (8.00). Cross-sectional and longitudinal morphometry-based brain-PAD correlated with clinical disability, serum neurofilament light chain, and serum glial fibrillary acidic protein levels (allp< 0.01), with significant longitudinal interactions with time (allp< 0.05). Cross-sectional qMRI-based brain-PAD correlated with white matter lesion count (p= 0.042,R2= 0.028) and paramagnetic rim lesion volume (p= 0.028,R2= 0.020).

Integrating qMRI improves brain age predictions. Brain-PAD serves as an imaging biomarker to quantify MS-associated aging and track disability and neuroinflammation progression.

Quantitative MRI (qMRI) enables the quantification of tissue properties in the CNS, capturing changes not detectable on cMRI.9For example, quantitative T1reflects water content, tissue density, and the dynamic exchange between water pools and macromolecules, which is sensitive to various microstructural changes, including age-associated myelin content.10T2* measures transverse magnetization decay, influenced by iron deposition, myelin content, and the orientation of fibers within WM,11where WM bundles can be reconstructed using diffusion tensor imaging-based tractography techniques.9Quantitative Susceptibility Mapping (QSM) assesses tissue magnetic susceptibility, distinguishing between paramagnetic iron and diamagnetic myelin providing additional insights into microstructural changes associated with aging.12To date, these qMRI techniques have been widely applied in studying MS pathology, for example, in investigating myelin loss and abnormal iron deposition within lesions,9enabling the study of microstructural changes over time and how these drive disease progressions, even at the early stages of MS.

In this study, we aimed to advance MRI-based brain age prediction in MS by (1) comparing the performance of models using different MRI modalities; (2) calculating cMRI-driven brain-PAD at macrostructural levels, linked to the neurodegeneration process, and further examining the associations with serum markers of neuroinflammation, as well as clinical severity assessments; and (3) innovatively calculating qMRI-driven brain-PAD to quantify microstructural pathology and exploring its association with clinical severity and lesion burden.

This study used cMRI and qMRI data from healthy controls (HCs) and pwMS (Figure 1).

Panel (A): For predictive model training, 2 healthy combined datasets were included: a larger dataset with morphometric data and a smaller dataset with both morphometric and qMRI data. (B): The morphometry-based predictive model was trained on the larger combined cohort, while the qMRI-based predictive model (Mq), supplementary morphometry-based predictive model (Mm), and a combined modalities predictive model (Mm-q) were trained on the smaller dataset. (C): In the brain-PAD analysis, the morphometry-based brain-PAD was calculated for each patient in the SMSC cross-sectional cohort and at each follow-up for longitudinal analysis. The qMRI-based brain-PAD (Mq-based), supplementary morphometry-based brain-PADs (Mm-based), and combined-based brain-PADs were calculated for each patient in the INsIDER cohort to assess the intercorrelation between them and their association with clinical data. INsIDER, ABRIM, and SMSC: Names of Cohorts. qMRI = Quantitative MRI; Brain-PAD = Brain-Predicted Age Difference; EDSS = Expanded Disability Status Scale; sNfL = serum Neurofilament Light Chain; sGFAP = serum Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein.

Morphometric analysis was conducted by selecting a set of public and nonpublic datasets of HCs [N = 3,462; median (interquartile range [IQR]) age: 48 (27–66) years; range: 8–95 years],13-25with 2 cohorts containing qMRI data (N = 378; median (IQR) age: 49 (32–63) years; range: 18–79 years, INsIDER and advanced BRain imaging on ageing and memory [ABRIM] Cohorts).13,25Detailed information is presented in eTable 1.

We included 2 MS cohorts: a larger cohort with morphometric data and a smaller cohort containing both morphometric and qMRI data (Figure 1).

For the morphometric analysis, pwMS were included from the Swiss MS Cohort (SMSC).26A total of 1,353 pwMS were included in the cross-sectional analysis (median [IQR] age: 46.8 [36.8–56.8] years; range: 18.3–82.2 years), of which 536 patients with 1,976 available MRI scans and clinical follow-ups were further included in the longitudinal analysis (median (IQR) age: 3.1 (1.9–4.6) years; range: 0.4–7.0 years). Four additional pwMS from INsIDER and 6 pwMS from SMSC were not included due to imaging incompatibility with the processing pipeline.

Inclusion criteria for participants are detailed in eMethod 1.

For pwMS, we collected information including disease duration (time since first symptom) and phenotype. Current and previous disease-modifying therapies (DMTs) were categorized into oral, platform, and monoclonal antibodies and a nontreatment group.

Clinical disability was evaluated using the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS) score by certified raters every 6 or 12 months. Relapses were recorded at each visit (defined according to McDonald's criteria27), with time since onset grouped into 90 days (cross-sectional analysis only), 60 days, and 30 days.

The included data from the INsIDER cohort lack information on DMTs, relapses, and serum biomarkers and are limited to cross-sectional data compared with SMSC data. Detailed clinical characteristics are presented inTable 1.

Abbreviations: CL = cortical lesion; EDSS = Expanded Disability Status Scale; GFAP = serum glial fibrillary acidic protein; NfL = serum neurofilament light chain; PMS = progressive multiple sclerosis; PRL = paramagnetic rim lesion; qMRI = quantitative MRI; RRMS = relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis; WML = white matter lesion.

The morphometry-based and qMRI-based predictive models refer to clinical association analyses based on brain-PAD calculated from the SMSC and INsIDER cohorts, respectively. The INsIDER cohort includes only cross-sectional data with disease phenotype and EDSS scores and exclusive lesion volume and count information but lacks DMTs and serum biomarkers compared with the SMSC cohort. Disease duration was defined as the time since the first reported symptom. Relapse was defined following the McDonald criteria. In the correlation analysis, patients lacking the required variable information were excluded, and the final number of subjects included in the analysis was recorded in the table.

For HCs, imaging protocols included 3T, three-dimensional (3D) T1-weighted images (detailed in eTable 2). For pwMS, MRI scans were performed at each center using protocols optimized for a homogeneous signal-to-noise ratio.26These protocols consistently included 3T, 3D, and 1-mm isotropic magnetization-prepared rapid gradient-echo (MPRAGE) sequences (Detailed in eTable 3) and 3D fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images.

The advanced qMRI protocols included MP2RAGE,30multiecho gradient recalled echo (ME-GRE), and multishell diffusion sequences. Images were acquired using a 3T MRI system Magnetom Prisma (Siemens Healthineer). An additional 3D echo planar imaging acquisition was included. Acquisition parameters are presented in eTable 4.

T1-weighted images were processed using FreeSurfer (version 6.0) for the cross-sectional morphometric analysis34(for pwMS, lesion-filling by the FMRIB Software Library35was conducted earlier). Morphometric measurements were subsequently extracted, including volumetric, thickness, and surface area based on the Human Connectome Project multimodal parcellation (HCP-MMP 1.0) altas36and automated segmentation pipeline, with the former dividing the human cerebral cortex into 180 regions per hemisphere. A FreeSurfer longitudinal pipeline was implemented to obtain reliable morphometric estimates tracking the follow-up time points. Morphometric measures from MP2RAGE were converted to MPRAGE-like measurements using linear transformations derived from the ABRIM cohort and harmonized following a previous study,10,37with details in eMethod 2.

R1(1/T1) maps were generated from MP2RAGE data, while R2* (1/T2*) and QSM were reconstructed from ME-GRE data. Quantitative metrics for cortical regions and WM bundles were calculated following a previous study10with details in eMethod 3.

Machine learning models were developed to predict brain age using morphometric and/or qMRI features from the HC datasets. eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) was selected for its flexibility in combining different features, high predictive accuracy, and proven effectiveness in similar studies.38Moreover, XGBoost has demonstrated competitive or superior performance compared with other machine learning algorithms in brain age prediction.7,39The grid search algorithm was used for each model to optimize hyperparameters40and select the best-performing configuration based on the root mean square error (RMSE), including parameters such as the max depth, estimator number, and the learning rate. Early stopping was implemented to prevent overfitting, where the training process halted once the model's performance on the validation set stopped improving. Model performance was evaluated by RMSE and mean absolute error (MAE). The top features in each model are assessed using permutation importance, which quantifies each feature's contribution as the increase in the prediction error (RMSE) when that feature values are randomly shuffled.

The combined HC dataset14-17,19-24was split into 2 subsets stratified on the sites: 90% (N = 3,115) for training and validation (internal testing) of the morphometry-based predictive model and 10% reserved as an external test set (N = 347). In the first subset, five-fold cross-validation was performed, where data were further split into 80% for training and 20% for validation (internal testing), iterating across the 5 folds. The external test was then applied to assess the model's generalizability with unseen data. The final prediction performance was evaluated based on the average MAE and RMSE from the five-fold cross-validation.

Another dataset13,25containing both morphometric and qMRI metrics was used for this analysis. The best-performing model was selected based on the five-fold cross-validation performance, using the 20% validation portion (internal test set) within each fold. An additional feature selection was conducted to mitigate the potential confounding effect due to the significant difference in the feature number so that the best-trained performance is compared in the following analysis; only the features ranked within the 1% of the permutation importance were empirically selected for subsequently training the best models.

In this step, we trained a qMRI-based predictive model using only qMRI data, a supplementary morphometry-based predictive model (Mm) using only MP2RAGE-based morphometry data, and a combined modalities predictive model (Mm-q) using MP2RAGE-based morphometry and qMRI data, both from the same dataset (Figure 1). This approach enables a comprehensive comparison with the qMRI-based predictive model (also referred to as Mqin contrast).

The brain-PAD was calculated by subtracting the chronologic age from the corrected predicted brain age and included morphometry-based brain-PAD (derived from the SMSC cohort), qMRI-based brain-PAD, supplementary morphometry-based brain-PAD, and combined-based brain-PAD (all derived from the INSIDER cohort;Figure 1).

MRI-derived morphometric features were first normalized by intracranial volume using FreeSurfer and harmonized across cohorts using neuroCombat.42Linear mixed-effects models were fitted to identify age-dependent variables that differentiate HCs and pwMS for model training.

Brain-PAD was compared across phenotypes (progressive MS [PMS], relapsing-remitting MS [RRMS]) and HCs using a linear model. Cross-sectional correlations between brain-PAD and clinical biomarkers (EDSS, sNfL, sGFAP) were assessed using multivariable linear regression (MLR). To model repeated measures across multiple time points, subject-specific random intercepts were added in MLR and longitudinal models further included interaction terms with time to capture temporal dynamics. Multicollinearity was assessed using the Variance Inflation Factor (VIF), and variables showing a VIF ≥5 were excluded to avoid significant collinearity.

Additional MLR models assessed the association between lesion burden (WML, CL, PRL volumes and counts) and qMRI-based brain-PAD. Spearman correlation tested the relationship between qMRI-based and morphometry-based brain-PADs, and pairedttests assessed differences between them.

The effect size was calculated using Cohenf2. Subjects missing available data for specific variables of interest were excluded. All analyses were conducted in R (v4.2.3), with a significance threshold of 0.05. A detailed description of the statistical analyses and models is provided in eMethod 4.

All public data were collected with informed consent and ethics approval from the original providers; no additional approval was required for reuse. The nonpublic cohorts included ABRIM (CMO Arnhem-Nijmegen, 2014/288), INsIDER (EKNZ), Variability in Language Learning (CMO Arnhem-Nijmegen, 2019/5975), and SMSC (local ethics committees at participating Swiss centers), all of which received appropriate ethics approval. All participants were provided written informed consent.

Access to public datasets was obtained through formal application. Data from unpublished cohorts supporting this study's findings may be made available on reasonable request.

We trained a morphometry-based predicted model on 351 morphometric features using 90% of the combined dataset consisting of 3,115 HCs (median age [IQR]: 48 [27–66], range: 8–95). The model achieved an MAE of 6.69 and RMSE of 8.60 (Figure 2, A and C). The optimal parameters for the final prediction based on grid search included a max depth of 2, the number of estimators set to 1,412, and a learning rate of 0.05. The model performance on the external test set remained consistent, achieving an MAE of 6.36 and an RMSE of 8.21. Among the morphometric features, the volume of the third ventricle exhibited the highest importance in prediction, with a permutation importance of 58.99.

(A) shows corrected brain-PAD (colored points) and uncorrected brain-PAD (gray points) across healthy controls for the morphometry-based predictive model. The table above the plot presents the average root mean square error (RMSE) and mean absolute error (MAE) from five-fold cross-validation. Colored points represent different cohorts, and the red dashed lines indicate the 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th percentiles of the corrected brain-PAD distribution. Following the format of (A),(B) presents corrected and uncorrected brain-PAD for participants using the qMRI-based predictive model. (C and D) show the relationship between chronologic age and predicted age in the morphometry-based and qMRI-based predictive models, respectively. The black dashed line represents the relationship before bias correction, while the red dashed line represents the relationship after correction. Colored points indicate corrected predicted ages by cohort, with the distribution and corresponding color for each cohort shown in the bar charts above panels (A and B). RMSE = Root Mean Square Error; MAE = Mean Absolute Error; brain-PAD = Brain-Predicted Age Difference; and qMRI = Quantitative MRI.

Complete selected feature lists are presented in eTables 5–8, and the permutation importance rankings are presented in eTable 9.

Owing to the relatively small sample size compared with a large number of features, an additional feature selection step was performed using permutation importance, and only the top 1% of the most relevant features (selected: Mm[n = 110], Mq[n = 369], Mm-q[n = 479], additional selected: Mm[n = 39], Mq[n = 71], Mm-q[n = 110]) were selected. The qMRI-based predictive model (Mq) achieved an MAE of 6.62 and an RMSE of 8.50 for brain age prediction based on the five-fold cross-validation (Figure 2, B and D), with R1values in the left corticospinal tract showing the highest permutation importance of 10.40% among the features. By comparison, Mm-qachieved the best performance (MAE: 5.73, RMSE: 7.40), outperforming the Mm(MAE: 8.00, RMSE: 9.99).

For the morphometry-based predicted model, the mean brain-PAD was 0.02 years (±7.53) (Figure 3, A and B) for HCs from the external dataset, 10.50 years (±8.76) for the PMS group, and 9.50 years (±9.57) for the RRMS group (Figure 3C). Both PMS and RRMS groups showed higher brain-PAD compared with HC group (p <0.001 for both comparisons). The PMS group had a higher brain-PAD compared with the RRMS group (p <0.001). Longitudinally, brain-PAD varied by 2.72 (±1.79) years within subjects, with an average range of 5.55 years.

(A and D) Scatterplots showing chronologic age vs predicted brain age for patients (red) and controls (blue) from morphometry-based (A) and qMRI-based (D) predictive models. Regression lines indicate group trends, with patients exhibiting higher predicted brain ages. (B and E) Histograms of the predicted age difference for patients (red) and controls (blue) using morphometry-based (B) and qMRI-based (E) predictive models. (C) Split violin plots displaying chronologic (blue) and predicted (red) ages in healthy controls and patients' phenotype groups, with medians indicated by bold lines. (F) Scatterplot with linear fit and marginal histograms illustrating the correlation between qMRI-based brain-PAD and supplementary morphometry-based brain-PAD. Spearman correlation (ρ) andpvalue are shown. MAE = Mean Absolute Error; RMSE = Root Mean Squared Error; Brain-PAD = Brain-predicted age difference.

For the qMRI-based predictive model, the mean brain-PAD for pwMS was 10.63 years (±7.88) (Figure 3E), with 8.67 years (±8.61) for the PMS group and 12.24 years (±6.87) for the RRMS group. Considering the chronologic age mismatch between the 2 groups and the quadratic changes in myelin and iron levels with age, the linear regression model accounting for age, sex, and disease duration was conducted, showing no significant difference in brain-PADs between the RRMS and PMS groups. Internal cross-validation showed an average brain-PAD of 0.00 years (±6.70) for HCs.

There was a weakly positive correlation between the brain-PAD estimated with the supplementary morphometry-based (Mm) and the qMRI-based predictive models (ρ = 0.204;p =0.008) (Figure 3F). A pairedttest revealed a significant difference between the brain-PADs derived from the 2 models (t= 6.85,p< 0.001); additional results are presented in eFigure 1.

Brain-PAD showed an association with EDSS (β= 0.008,p <0.001) (R2= 0.439) in the MLR model (Cohenf2= 0.04) (Figure 4A).

(A–C) For the morphometry-based predictive model, partial residual plots show the relationship between brain-PAD and EDSS (log-transfer), sNfL (Z score), and sGFAP (Z score) (blue). Linear (dashed black) and locally estimated scatterplot smoothing (blue) fits are displayed, with marginal histograms illustrating the brain-PAD distribution. Separate fits for RRMS (dot-dash, blue) and PMS (dot-dash, red) phenotypes are displayed in (C), showing their significant difference. (D–F) showing the results for the qMRI-based predictive model on patients in red. (D) A linear regression fitting shows the relationships between brain-PAD and log-transformed EDSS in progressive MS (PMS) patients. (E) presents a linear regression model between brain-PAD and log-transformed PRLs accounting for WMLs and CLs volumes and disease duration. (F) presents a linear regression model between brain-PAD and WMLs count accounting for CLs and PRLs counts and disease duration. Significant correlations are annotated with adjustedR2andpvalues corresponding to the predictor variable on the top right corner in each plot. EDSS = Expanded Disability Status Scale; PRL = Persistent Rim Lesion; WML = White Matter Lesion; PMS = Progressive Multiple Sclerosis; sNfL = Serum Neurofilament Light Chain; sGFAP = Serum Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein.

Brain-PAD was associated with sNfL Z scores, with higher brain-PADs associated with higher sNfL levels (β= 0.017,p <0.001) in the MLR model (Cohenf2= 0.02) (Figure 4B).

The MLR model showed that brain-PAD was associated with sGFAP Z scores, with higher brain-PAD associated with higher sGFAP levels (β= 0.024,p <0.001) (Cohenf2= 0.04). The phenotype was also relevant, with PMS as the reference group (β= −0.310,p =0.011). Further interaction between brain-PAD and phenotype showed a lower association observed in the RRMS group compared with the PMS group (β= −0.028,p =0.022) (Figure 4C).

Based on qMRI data, there was no association between brain-PAD and EDSS. Only in the subgroup analysis of patients with PMS did the brain-PAD show an association with EDSS (β= 0.012,p =0.010) (Figure 4D).

A significant association was observed between brain-PAD and total PRL volume (β= 2.020,p =0.028) (Figure 4E), indicating that an increase in total PRL volume contributes to increases in brain-PAD. In addition, the number of WMLs was significantly associated with brain-PAD (β= 0.042,p =0.042) (Figure 4F), showing that a higher number of WMLs is also associated with increased brain-PAD. The number and volume of CLs were not significantly associated with brain-PAD.

Correlation analyses based on the supplementary morphometry and combined model brain-PAD values are presented in eTable 10.

With repeated EDSS assessments and morphometry-based brain-PAD across multiple time points per subject, the MLR model revealed a significant association between brain-PAD and EDSS (β= 0.007,p <0.001) (Figure 5A). The model had a MarginalR2of 0.028 and a ConditionalR2of 0.832.

Partial residual plots illustrate the relationships between morphometry-based brain-PAD and (A) EDSS (log-transformed), (B) sNfL (Z score), and (C) sGFAP (Z score), accounting for multiple time points in each subject through random effects. Linear (dashed black) and locally estimated scatterplot smoothing (dashed red) fits are displayed, with marginal histograms depicting the brain-PAD distribution. Significant correlations are annotated withpvalues and conditionalR2values. (D–F) present a longitudinal analysis that illustrates the interaction effects of brain-PAD and time on (D) EDSS, (E) sNfL, and (F) sGFAP. These figures depict the predicted clinical outcomes over time for the different brain-PAD percentiles (25th, 50th, and 75th), with each panel including annotations that indicate the significance of the interaction effects and the conditionalR2values. EDSS = Expanded Disability Status Scale; PMS = Progressive Multiple Sclerosis; sGFAP = Serum Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein; sNfL = Serum Neurofilament Light Chain. brain-PAD = brain-predicted age difference.

The same MLR model adding recent relapses as covariates revealed that sNfL Z scores were significantly associated with increasing brain-PADs (β= 0.011,p =0.006) (Figure 5B). The model had a MarginalR2of 0.036 and a ConditionalR2of 0.609.

The MLR model showed that sGFAP Z scores were significantly associated with increasing brain-PADs (β= 0.017,p <0.001) (Figure 5C). The model had a MarginalR2of 0.038 and a ConditionalR2of 0.800.

The results showed a significant positive association between brain-PAD and the change of EDSS over time (interaction term brain-PAD*time:β= 0.001,p =0.034) (Figure 5D). For sNFL, the interaction of brain-PAD with time was significant and negative (β= −0.002,p =0.044) (Figure 5E), indicating that the positive association observed cross-sectionally between higher brain-PAD scores and higher sNFL levels weakens over time. A similar negative interaction was observed for sGFAP (β= −0.002,p =0.030) (Figure 5F).

Clinical correlation analysis results are presented in eFigure 2, with Cohenf2and standardized regression coefficient reported in eTable 11. The longitudinal analysis of brain-PAD and disease duration is also presented in eFigure 3.

As the first study to introduce a predictive approach for brain age integrating both cMRI-based and qMRI-based models in pwMS, our results showed that qMRI metrics boost brain age prediction compared with morphometric measurements in standalone models. The qMRI-based brain-PAD was related to disability severity only in the PMS. This is probably because the qMRI-based brain-PAD is sensitive to regional microstructural changes that might be functionally compensated, and hence not necessarily lead to an increased disability measured with EDSS. In addition, a high qMRI-based brain-PAD was associated with increased WML count and PRL volume, providing additional evidence that lesion accumulation and chronic activity contribute to MS-associated neurodegenerations.

In both cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses, we found consistent positive correlations between the morphometry-based brain-PAD and EDSS. Our results align with previous findings linking morphometry-driven brain-PAD increased with disease severity5and clinical worsening in pwMS.6Most importantly, we provided new knowledge about the associations between the morphometry-based brain-PAD and fluid biomarkers of neuroaxonal damage (sNfL) and astrocyte activation (sGFAP) in pwMS.

The morphometry-based brain-PADs increased with sGFAP levels only in the PMS group (Figure 4C). This suggests that sGFAP may be more sensitive to neurodegenerative changes in PMS compared with RRMS, potentially reflecting the more advanced astrocytic activation pathways characteristic of progressive disease stages.29Moreover, in longitudinal analysis, a negative interaction of the morphometry-brain PAD with time suggested that the initial neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative burden (indicated by increased sNfL/sGFAP) stabilizes at older ages, even when functional decline (measured by EDSS) accumulates. This likely reflects sNfL and sGFAP's sensitivity to early fluctuations driven by acute inflammatory responses in pwMS.28Altogether, we confirmed and expanded the value of morphometry-based brain-PAD as a correlate of disability accumulation, early-stage inflammation, and astrocytic activation in pwMS.

XGBoost, the algorithm used in this study, is widely validated and consistently shows higher accuracy and robustness compared with other methods.39The RMSE and MAE values at the best-performing folds were lower than those in previous studies with the same algorithm (RMSE (MAE): 8.16 (6.34) vs 8.95 (6.74),458.80 (6.99),46and 9.03–10.76 (6.93–9.02)),47despite an extensive age range (8–95 years) that typically increases RMSE.41Furthermore, we implemented rigorous modeling procedures to improve accuracy and objectivity, including grid search for parameter tuning,40early stopping based on RMSE, five-fold cross-validation, and external validation. These steps mitigated limitations in similar studies, where such procedures were rarely reported and conducted.

This study achieved a balanced performance across different age groups, addressing the issue seen in prior research where age distribution focused on younger (20–30 years) or older (60+ years) populations.8Feature selection prioritized age-dependent features different between patients and controls. This enhanced the model's ability to distinguish normal aging from MS-associated degeneration. In addition, reducing the number of features improved the training of the model, preventing overfitting and reducing computational complexity. Thus, the model exhibited consistent stability, with the third ventricle volume consistently emerging as the feature with the highest predictive importance across multiple models (Mm, Mm-q, and morphometry-based predicted model). Notably, the Mmand Mm-qwere based on MP2RAGE images, while the morphometry-based predicted model was based on conventional T1w images, and the models driven by these different protocols maintained synchronization in their predictive performance. This provides additional evidence to previous research reporting the dominant role of third ventricle size in aging. In fact, the enlargement of the third ventricle serves as a key marker of central atrophy in pwMS and MS-associated aging,48and it is related to cognitive decline49and physical disability over time.50Furthermore, we conducted a multiple time point analysis to confirm the cross-sectional results, accounting for the individual variability. Multiple clinical covariates also adjusted our models at each follow-up instead of a single baseline assessment.

Building on previous research,5,7,8,51this study attempted to address some limitations of current literature: (1) We conducted a semimanual lesion correction and filling process to mitigate the potential impact of lesion tissues; (2) our models were trained on regional neuroanatomical information, providing strong interpretability of single feature's contribution in prediction; (3) we integrated lesion burden and serum biomarkers analysis, rather than relying solely on clinical severity assessments; and (4) our paradigm included both cMRI and qMRI metrics, quantified microstructural information through multiparametric qMRI analysis across brain structures. Our age-predictive model based on qMRI metrics marks a notable step forward by directly comparing it with a cMRI-driven model in the context of MS-associated aging.

Despite the strengths of our work, some limitations must be acknowledged. Considering the potential nonlinear age dependencies of qMRI metrics,10it is necessary to enlarge the qMRI dataset and perform age-stratified analyses accounting for specific maturation peaks of tissue properties. For instance, the observation of higher qMRI-based brain-PAD in RRMS compared with PMS before adjusting for age addresses the importance of controlling for objective interpretation and conclusions. Future work may also require comparing multiple atlases to evaluate the contribution of qMRI features. In addition, although we used a practical method for harmonizing MP2RAGE-based and MPRAGE-based morphometric measurements, and evaluated it based on statistical distributions across the sample, some residual bias might remain. We also applied harmonization techniques to minimize scanner-related effects, used statistical methods to adjust for location-based variance, and conducted rigorous external validation; variations in data sources and scanner types across multiple sites may still have introduced variability,10which is common in multicenter MRI studies. Although our predictive models specifically target MS-associated aging, future investigations could benefit from incorporating disease-specific models, such as those targeted at predicting disease duration,51to potentially offer complementary insights into MS-specific pathologies. In addition, while qMRI data improved the model's prediction, the atlas-based brain region segmentation sometimes splits areas with concentrated quantitative values (e.g., myelin-rich areas). This structure-based segmentation approach can dilute the original spatial characteristics, reducing the accuracy of regional qMRI measurements. Therefore, although qMRI boosted model performance in brain age prediction, the permutation importance ranking in Mm-qrevealed that morphometric features still dominated the top positions. This also suggested that morphometric measurements, which reflect the progression of brain atrophy, can effectively capture MS-associated age effects. In addition, we acknowledge that the limited number of participants with primary progressive MS restricted our ability to explore subtype differences within the PMS group. Finally, our model cannot fully account for the complex physiologic processes underlying brain aging, a challenge common to all brain age prediction models. However, continued advancements in imaging techniques and modeling approaches hold promise for improving the accuracy and depth of these predictions in the future.

In conclusion, integrating qMRI and cMRI within a brain age prediction framework provides deeper insights into MS-related damage. The cMRI-derived brain-PAD proved effective in capturing macrostructural alterations associated with disability severity, neuroinflammation, and neurodegeneration. Despite the limited size of our dataset, the qMRI-based brain-PAD showed additional sensitivity in identifying MS subtype–specific patterns of disease severity and in quantifying changes related to focal lesion burden, particularly in relation to PRLs, which are recognized biomarkers of more aggressive disease.

The authors extend their gratitude to all the clinical participants of this study for their involvement and contributions and thank the researchers who provided the following publicly available datasets: CamCAN (mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk/datasets/camcan); IXI dataset (brain-development.org/ixi-dataset); OASIS (sites.wustl.edu/oasisbrains); AgeRisk (doi:10.18112/openneuro.ds004711.v1.0.0);  CalgaryCampinas (sites.google.com/view/calgary-campinas-dataset/home); LA5C (doi:10.18112/openneuro.ds000030.v1.0.0); NIMH (doi:10.18112/openneuro.ds004215.v2.0.1); OASIS-3/OASIS-4 (sites.wustl.edu/oasisbrains/); PAINGEN (doi:10.18112/openneuro.ds004746.v1.0.1);  AOMIC-PIOP1 (doi:10.18112/openneuro.ds002785.v2.0.0); AOMIC-PIOP2 (openneuro.org/datasets/ds002790).