Despite progress made in improving family planning (FP) services in Jordan, significant barriers remain. This study aimed to assess the availability of FP services in primary care settings and explore women’s knowledge and attitudes toward FP to support the development of more person-centred FP services and interventions.

The Service Availability and Readiness Assessment (SARA) was conducted in 2022 in six governorates to assess FP service availability in Jordan. Also, a cross-sectional study was conducted among women who attended primary health centres (PHCs) for postpartum care or immunisation of newborns to assess their knowledge, attitude and past experience of using FP, and family support.

SARA results showed limited healthcare capacity for FP services with inadequate FP training mainly in PHCs and village centres, and a lack of reproductive health training in most centres. Among 972 women, 6% had never heard of FP, and only 47.1% received FP counselling before their last delivery. About 76% considered contraceptives expensive, despite being free for Jordanians and refugees. Only 22.7% discussed contraceptive use with their husbands. The proportion of women who visited PHC for antenatal care ≤8 times was 56.8% among Syrian women and 46.3% among Jordanian women, while it was 68.7% among women living in Mafraq governorate and 36.8% in Irbid governorate.

Barriers to FP services include limited availability in rural areas, insufficient knowledge and negative attitudes, with evidence of disparities in antenatal care access across demographics and regions. Awareness programmes and enhanced staff capacity are recommended to improve FP service access and utilisation.

This study reveals gaps in the provision of family planning methods at primary health centres and village centres (which offer fewer services compared with comprehensive primary health centres), as well as gaps in the capacity to provide family planning services across all three types of centres. It also highlights inadequate adolescent-focused services and variations in training and supply readiness across health centre types. Additionally, the study documents persistently low awareness of several contraceptive methods among women, widespread misconceptions about cost and safety, limited counselling coverage and limited support from husbands.

These findings highlight the need for targeted provider training, person-centred interventions and policy reforms to improve family planning services, especially in rural and underserved areas of Jordan.

Despite all programmatic efforts in Jordan to increase the demand and use of family planning services, some major factors need to be explored.14 27This study aimed to assess the availability of family planning services in primary care settings and explore women’s knowledge and attitudes toward family planning to support the development of more person-centred family planning services and interventions.

To assess the availability of family planning services in primary care, data related to family planning were analysed using the Service Availability and Readiness Assessment (SARA) tool, which was developed by the WHO. SARA was conducted in six governorates in Jordan. In order to assess women’s knowledge, attitudes and past experience of using family planning and family support, a cross-sectional study was conducted in two governorates in the north of Jordan, namely Irbid and Mafraq governorates. The selection of the two governorates was based on criteria related to the presence of Syrian refugees in host communities and adequate representation of women belonging to the lower two income quintiles.

Facility selection followed a purposive sampling strategy to ensure geographic and service-level representation across four governorates. Within each governorate, the process involved selecting one comprehensive centre (CHC) located in the main city, two primary health centres (PHCs) under the catchment area of the selected CHC, and two village health clinics (VHCs) within the catchment area of the two selected PHCs. In total, 40 facilities were selected and assessed. The selection aimed to reflect the actual structure of service delivery across urban and rural settings. Inclusion was based on facility type, geographic location and service role; exclusion criteria involved facilities outside the defined service catchment areas or those not functioning during the study period. In Jordan, primary healthcare services are delivered through a network of CHC, PHC or VHC, with CHCs offering the widest range of services, including preventive, curative, diagnostic and some specialised care. The PHCs provide a more limited range of outpatient and preventive services and are usually situated in smaller towns. VHCs represent the most basic level of service delivery and are typically found in rural communities, offering only essential primary care services.28The SARA tool was used to assess and monitor the service availability and readiness, including family planning services, of the selected health centres. The standard SARA manual was followed to prepare and conduct the data collection. Data were collected over 3 months in 2022, adding one more week for tool testing and training of data collectors. A team of 12 data collectors with experience in assessments and who are familiar with the health system was recruited and trained on the use of the assessment tool. (The form used is provided inonline supplemental file 1).

As for the primary data collection, the study was conducted among women who attended PHCs for postpartum care or immunisation of newborns during the first month after birth. A list of health centres in the selected districts was obtained from the Directorate of Primary Health Care at the Ministry of Health. Three centres were selected using a simple random sampling method from each governorate. The study included all consecutive women who visited the maternal and childhood units in the selected centres during the period March to June 2022. Women were enrolled consecutively in the study if they met the inclusion criteria: postpartum married women of reproductive age, residing in the selected two governorates, visiting the comprehensive health centres for their child’s (4 weeks of age or younger) routine immunisation services or postnatal care, and agreeing to give consent to participate in the study.

The questionnaire was developed based on the review of previous studies’ research and structured into different sections (the form used is provided inonline supplemental file 2). The final version of the questionnaire was reviewed and commented on by a group of researchers, clinicians and laypeople to ensure face and construct validity. To test the instrument and the procedure, a pilot study was conducted on 30 women in each group. Based on feedback from the women, the questionnaire was rephrased and modified. The questionnaire included closed-ended questions with predefined responses on the mother’s identifying information, socioeconomic status and clinical characteristics, newborn’s information (including gender, birth weight and gestational age), awareness/knowledge of modern family planning methods, attitude towards contraceptives, past experience of contraceptive use and husband’s support. After obtaining ethical and administrative approvals, two midwives from each selected health centre were trained on the study procedures and filled out the questionnaire. Midwives verified the inclusion criteria, explained the study to participants, obtained written consent and filled out the baseline questionnaire before counselling using a paper form.

For the SARA, the outcomes focused on the availability and readiness of family planning services across different levels of health facilities. These outcomes included whether family planning services were offered at each facility, the presence of trained staff and service delivery guidelines, the availability of contraceptive commodities and the readiness of infrastructure and basic equipment required to deliver such services. For the survey among postpartum women, outcomes were designed to capture individual-level knowledge, attitudes and experiences related to family planning. Additional outcomes included past experience with contraceptive use and the perceived level of husband’s support for family planning decisions.

The paper responses were initially input into Excel sheets. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS IBM (V.29). Data were described as frequencies and percentages for categorical variables.

Patients and/or the public were not directly involved in the design, conduct, reporting or dissemination plans of this research.

A total of 40 facilities (6 CHCs, 11 PHCs and 23 VHCs) were assessed in Jordan. Nine facilities (22.5%) were located in urban areas, and 31 (77.5 %) were located in rural areas. Four CHCs (66.7%) had four full-time general practitioners (GPs), one CHC had three GPs and one CHC had two GPs. In addition, two CHCs had part-time GPs. All centres had one to three midwifery professionals.Table 1shows the availability of family planning services in healthcare centres. All of the CHCs and PHCs, and nine (39.1%) VHCs provide family planning services. Combined oestrogen-progesterone OC pills and progestin-only contraceptive pills, and condoms are offered in all CHCs and PHCs, and eight (88.9%) of the nine VHCs that provide these services. Injectable contraceptives are offered to a lesser extent than pills. Intrauterine contraceptive devices (IUCDs), emergency pills and implants are offered to an even lesser extent. None of the CHCs, PHCs and VHCs provide family planning services for unmarried adolescents.

Table 2shows the capacity of providing family planning services. All CHCs and PHCs, and seven of the nine VHCs that provide family planning services, have national family planning guidelines. Almost all centres have family planning checklists and/or job aids. The staff of all CHCs, the staff of half of PHCs (n=6, 54.5%), and the staff of two VHCs only received family planning training in the last 2 years. Training in adolescent sexual and reproductive health was received in the last 2 years in one CHC and one PHC only. All of the CHCs, seven of the PHCs (70%) and 7 of the VHCs (77.8%) stock contraceptive commodities at the service site.

Only nine VHCs provide family planning services, and this number is the denominator of the listed indicators.

Our primary data were collected from 972 women, 854 (87.9%) Jordanians and 118 (12.1%) Syrians. Almost 60.1% of them were aged between 21 and 30 years, 62.2% had a high school education or less and 90.2% were housewives. Almost one-fifth (19.7%) had anaemia. The majority (94.0%) attended the PHC for newborns’ immunisation, 91.4% delivered full term and 90.9% gave birth to a baby with normal weight. During the first month of birth, 63.7% of them breastfed the baby exclusively. Almost 12.3% of women did not attend the PHC for antenatal care, and 47.5% had ≤8 antenatal visits. The proportion of women who visited PHC for antenatal care ≤8 times was 56.8% among Syrian women and 46.3% among Jordanian women. As for governorates, the proportion of women who visited PHC for antenatal care ≤8 times was 68.7% among women living in Mafraq governorate and 36.8% among women living in Irbid governorate.

Of all women, 6% never heard about family planning. Syrian women, those living in Mafraq governorate, compared with women living in Irbid governorate, women with low education level, women with low income and women 20 years old or younger, were less aware of family planning. The majority of women (>85%) know oral pills and IUCDs. However, the majority are not fully aware of other modern family planning methods (table 3). The most commonly reported source of information on family planning was healthcare workers, cited by 57.6% of women. This was followed by relatives (51.7%) and the internet (37.2%). Television was also a notable source (26.7%), while fewer women reported learning about family planning from friends (13.8%), radio (11.5%) or newspapers/magazines (11.4%). Only 5.8% of women identified their spouse as a source of information. Almost 70.2% of women were aware of the family planning methods that are available at the clinic for postpartum mothers. Only 47.1% of women had received any counselling about family planning services before delivery of the last child, and 45.4% of women had received any counselling about family planning services in the hospital after delivery at discharge.

The majority (83.2%) of women were not using contraceptives at the time of conception, and 6.8% were using contraceptives irregularly. About 76% of postpartum women thought that contraceptives are expensive, although contraceptives are provided free for Jordanians as well as refugees. One-fifth (20%) of postpartum women thought that contraceptive use leads to infertility, 20% believe that contraceptives are not effective in avoiding pregnancy, and 25% reported that contraceptives are not safe.

A total of 485 (49.9%) of postpartum women had ever used any contraception. The most commonly reported reason for using contraception was spacing (90.2%). For women who never used contraception, the main reason was the desire to have a child (74.7%), followed by fear of side effects (11.3%). About 3.5% of them reported that they did not use contraceptives because their husband or mother-in-law objected to the use.

Only 22.7% of women had discussed the use of contraceptives with their husbands. The majority (88.3%) of women had received their husband’s support in issues related to family planning services. The majority (83.5%) of women reported that their husband approves of the use of family planning methods soon after delivery. Almost 7.6% of women reported that their husband is the one who makes the final decision about using family planning.

Family planning is a vital component of women’s health services, contributing to improved health outcomes and broader societal benefits. This manuscript presents findings from two complementary data sources to offer insights into the current availability and use of family planning services in selected areas of Jordan. The SARA, conducted across 40 health facilities in six governorates, showed that family planning services are consistently available in CHCs and PHCs, but much less so in VHCs.

One of the key findings was the limited capacity of PHCs and VHCs to deliver comprehensive family planning services, primarily due to inadequate training of healthcare providers. Sexual and reproductive health training was lacking across most facility types. This aligns with findings from Jordan’s National Strategy for Reproductive and Sexual Health (2020–2030), which highlights weak integration of sexual and reproductive health into primary care services.29Strengthening workforce capacity is essential for achieving service integration and improving access to quality care.

One of the limitations of the study is that not all of Jordan’s governorates were included in the study, which may limit its generalisability to other regions in Jordan. Additionally, the use of a cross-sectional design restricts the ability to draw causal inferences. Also, reliance on self-reported measures may introduce social desirability bias; however, we mitigated this by validating responses through visual inspections of some items, such as the availability of contraceptives. Additionally, having midwives collect the data may have introduced social desirability bias. Future studies will need to be conducted on a larger scale to increase the representativeness of the results.

Barriers to accessing family planning services include the limited availability of family planning services in village health centres in rural areas, along with insufficient knowledge and negative attitudes among women. Also, there are evident disparities in access and utilisation of antenatal care services among various demographic groups and regions. Thus, there is a need to implement programmes to raise family planning and antenatal care awareness among women, families and communities of all nationalities across Jordan. It is also important to build the capacity of the staff in all centres to offer family planning services and ensure the availability of updated guidelines and job aids in health facilities.