This paper develops an enhanced pseudo dynamic method for conducting seismic stability analysis of slopes. The enhancement is justified by the development of uniform sampling approach and the incorporation of both different and correlated initial phases through a uniform random field. The advanced methodology, named by modified pseudo dynamic Bishop method (MPDBM) is verified against the existing research results and extended to homogeneous soil slope with different scales emphasizing the effect of scale of fluctuation on the minimum factor of safety (FSmin). The numerical results demonstrate that the identical assumption on initial phases in the traditional pseudo dynamic method underestimates the FSminas compared to the current method considering the spatial variability of initial phases for the cases where the slope soil is subjected to its natural frequency. This underestimation grows significant as the slope scale enlarges.

Slope failures caused by earthquakes have led to huge economic losses and casualties, and hence seismic slope stability analysis has triggered the worldwide attention [1–7]. Among the methods for seismic slope stability evaluation, the Factor of Safety (FS)-based one still remains fair popularity owing to its simplicity and easiness in decision making on slope stability. The FS-based methodology can be further classified into three categories: (1) pseudo static method(PSM), in which seismic forces are dealt with by constant forces acting on the centriod of sliding mass [8–10]; (2) pseuso dynamic method (PDM) where part of the dynamic characteristics of seismic forces are taken into account [11–14]; and (3) dynamic time history method, in which the full dynamic characteristics of seismic forces are properly considered. To put it in detail, the PSM, by adding an equivalent static force loaded at the center of sliding mass to the conventional limit equilibrium method, results in a pseudo static Factor of Safety(FS), based on which the seismic stability of slopes can be evaluated in a simplified manner. The PSM finds overwhelming popularity within the geotechnical practitioners, although it only focuses on the amplitude of the seismic force. The dynamic time history method, integrates the complicated soil dynamic constitutive model and the seismic acceleration records to obtain the distributions of stress, strain, and water pressure within the sliding mass, based on which the comprehensive assessment on seismic stability of slopes can be achieved in a systematic but inefficient manner as compared to PSM. As a proper balance between PSM and dynamic time history method, the PDM, mimics the seismic force using a sinusoidal wave stemming from the slope base with a specific initial phase [15,16] to properly address the dynamic characteristic of earthquake.

The PDM was originated by Steedman and Zeng and was validated against the seismic active thrust on a rigid retaining wall [15]. Unlike the constant or linearly varied seismic forces acting on the vertical components of sliding mass in pseudo static method, the concept of initial phase was introduced in PDM to address the variation of seismic forces acting on the vertical components of sliding mass. The seismic acceleration is regarded as a sinusoidal wave projecting from the slope base with a specific initial phase and the seismic acceleration acting on each of vertical components of the sliding mass can be directly determined with the propagation velocity of the sinusoidal wave in the original PDM [17]. The original concept of PDM was integrated with limit equilibrium method and limit analysis to evaluate the seismic slope stability [18–23]. For example, Pan et al. [18] calculated the reliability of slopes using limit analysis coupled with PDM highlighting the influence of slope geometry and seismic parameters on the probability of failure. Hazari et al. [24] combined the Swedish circle method with PDM to examine the slope stability and compared the results from the proposed method with those by the finite element method. Zhou and Qin [11] used the upper bound limit analysis method coupled with PDM to solve the FS of slopes emphasizing on the linear amplification on the amplitude of seismic acceleration.Their outputs have demonstrated that the PDM leads to larger FS than PSM does indicating that the PSM tends to underestimate the FS of the slope and thus to make conservative decision on slope stability. It was also noted in [11] that the increase in FS form the PDM fades out as the shear wave velocity increases, which was also confirmed by [23]. Despite the popularity of original PDM, it suffers from the incompatible stress boundary condition at the slope crest. To properly address this issue, Bellezza [16] developed a modified pseudo dynamic method(MPDM) by regarding the slope soil as a more realistic visco-elastic material(e.g., Kelvin-Voigt material represented by a purely elastic spring and a purely viscous dashpot connected in parallel). Since the origination of MPDM, it has been applied into seismic-related geotechnical problems. For example, Chanda et al [25] proposed a method for calculating slope stability based on MPDM using the horizontal slice method. Zhong and Yang [19] introduced a method for analyzing the stability of rock slopes using the MPDM within the framework of limit analysis.Zhou and Qin [26] analyzed the impact of soft bands on the seismic stability of slopes using finite element limit analysis combined with MPDM. Li et al. [27] used the upper bound theorem of limit analysis to analyze the stability of slopes reinforced with piles under the MPDM, finding that the FS of slope decreases significantly when the normalized frequency of the shear wave coincides with the natural frequency of the soil, which agrees well with that presented in [16].

The literature review on the PDM and the MPDM has found that the FS from the PDM and MPDM is dependent on the initial phase and the most dangerous initial phase must be determined to obtain the minimum FS (denoted herein by FSmin), based on which the slope stability is evaluated by PDM and MPDM in the previous studies. However, it must be noted that the initial phase at different locations of slope base is assumed to be identical in the existing studies. This assumption may be applicable to small scale slopes. However, for large scale slopes, the initial phase at the slope base may be intuitively different but correlated within one seismic motion regarding the influencing factors as epicentral distance, epicenter depth, and the propagation velocity of the seismic wave. In addition, the seismic slope stability was investigated considering the different arrival times of seismic waves at various locations [28–30], which justified the necessity of incorporating the different but correlated initial phase in seismic slope stability using PDM or MPDM. Therefore, how to evaluate the seismic slope stability considering both the difference and correlation in initial phase using MPDM remains an open question.

This paper begins with the combination of MPDM with simplified Bishop Method, followed by the simulation of initial phases using random field theory. Then, the proposed methodology, named modified pseudo dynamic Bishop method(MPDBM) is described in detail and is validated against the previous research outputs. Then, The proposed methodology is elucidated through homogeneous soil slopes with different scales to investigate the effect of damping ratio, scale of fluctuation, and slope scale on the seismic slope stability. Finally, discussions and conclusions are drawn based on the findings.

wherekhis the horizontal seismic coefficient at the slope base; Four variables, denoted by Csz,Ssz,Cs,Ss are defined to facilitate the expression ofEq. (1). They are dependent on theω,D,Vs, andYi.

The traditional simplified Bishop method [31] can be extended to a pseudo dynamic Bishop method for slope stability, where the contribution of horizontal seismic force is quantified using the MPDM as described in Eq.(9). Refer toFig 2, where the sliding soil is divided intomslices.Giis the weight of slicei,ERiis the horizontal inter-slice force between sliceiand slicei+ 1,ELiis the horizontal interslice force between sliceiand slicei-1,NiandTiare respectively the normal and shear force at the base of slicei,Fhi(t) is the distributed horizontal seismic force. Thanks to the horizontal direction for theFhi(t), the force equilibrium equation in vertical direction in traditional simplified Bishop method can still be available.

where FS(t) is the Factor of Safety at initial phaset;φiandciis the internal friction angle and cohesion at the base of slicei.

Obviously, the calculation of FS using the PDBM depends on initial phaset, as indicated by Eq.(10). Previous studies [13,23] have to alter the initial phasetand to find the FSminof PDM or MPDM for seismic slope stability. However, the initial phasets at different locations(e.g.,t1,t2, andtmas shown inFig 3) on the slope base are assumed to be identical(e.g.,t1=t2= …,tm=t). This identical assumption is applicable to the small scale slope where the slope width is negligible as compared to the epicentral distance. As will be discussed in case studies, the initial phase at different locations on the slope base may be varied for medium and large scale slopes. As compared toFig 3,Fig 4shows the seismic force distribution of a slope in the case of different initial phases. The arrows below the slope base in different colors indicate the different initial phases of the seismic wave that reaches the base. The comparison between the seismic force distribution of the sliding mass illustrates the difference between identical assumption (used in PDM and MPDM) and different initial phase assumption(will be considered in this study) justifies the necessity of incorporating variations in initial phase in seismic slope stability using PDM and MPDM.

In this section, the influences of epicentral horizontal distance(denoted byEh), the epicentral depth(denoted byEd), and the propagation velocity of seismic wave within the slope base(denoted byVp) are demonstrated and discussed in detail for the further understanding of the importance of both different and correlated initial phases.

Fig 5illustrates the influence ofEhon the initial phase for the given combinations ofEdandVp. As depicted inFig 5, variations in theEhfor a specific location of the slope base accordingly result in the disparity in its initial phase. Consider sliceifor example, its projection point in the slope base isS.The respectiveEhof pointSisEh1,Eh2, andEh3inFig 5. Given the sameVp, the initial phase ofSvaries accordingly. In addition, the initial phases at adjacent pointsS1andS2correlate to that at pointS. This correlation weakens as the distance between pointSand the focus point, see pointQ, for example increases. It is intuitively derived fromFig 5that the correlation in initial phase at pointSandQis sorted in descending order as the distance betweenSand epicenter increases.

Apart fromEh,Edwhich ranges from several hundred meters to tens of kilometers exhibits significant influence on the initial phase [32].Fig 6demonstrates the variation trend of initial phase at pointSand the correlation trend of initial phases between pointSand its adjacent pointsS1andS2, andQas well under the influence ofEd. Refer toFig 6, for the sameEhof pointS, theEdisEd1,Ed2,Ed3, respectively. Given the sameVp, the initial phase ofSvaries accordingly. It is noticed fromFig 7that for the sameEhandEdof pointS, the respectiveVpisVp1,Vp2,Vp3inFig 7. Given the sameEhandEd, the initial phase ofSvaries accordingly. It can be concluded fromFigs 5–7that the initial phase of pointSis different but highly correlated with those of adjacent pointsS1andS2, and the correlations diminish as the relative distance between two points increases. The variation and correlation trends of initial phases coincide with those concepts of random field theory, where the soil properties at two different locations are different but correlated and the correlation decreases as the relative distance between two locations increases [33]. To properly simulate both different and correlated initial phases, the random field theory will be briefly reviewed in the next section.

The random field theory was originated by Vanmarcke [33] to simulate the spatial variability of soil properties in geotechnical engineering. Since the initiation of random field theory, it has been widely used to investigate the influence of spatial variability of soil properties on the performance of geotechnical structures, e.g., slope, foundation, and embankments [33–45]. The fundamentals of the random field theory are the autocorrelation function and the scale of fluctuation. Since the precise determination of the autocorrelation function is nontrivial, the previous studies [46–52] can be referred to for preliminary studies. As for the determination of the scale of fluctuation for the initial phase, in situ or laboratory model tests can be referred to, where the accelerations of at different locations on the slope base are to be measured.The determination of the autocorrelation function and scale of fluctuation is not given in this study and the influence of scale of fluctuation of the initial phase on seismic slope stability is focused on. Consider the stationary random field of initial phase for example, the exponential autocorrelation function is assumed for simplicity and the scale of fluctuation, denoted byλ, is selected to reflect the integrated influence ofEd,Eh,andVpon the correlation of initial phases. The initial phase, denoted byP, is modeled by one dimensional random field spatially varying along the horizontal direction. The value ofPat the same width is assumed to be fully correlated. The spatial variability with width is simulated by a homogeneous uniform random field with an exponentially decaying correlation structure.

whereλis the scale of fluctuation. when|wi−wj|/λ≥1,Φ−1(P(wi)Iu−Il)andΦ−1(P(wj)Iu−Il)are effectively uncorrected [34]. In contrast, when|wi−wj|/λ<<1,Φ−1(P(wi)Iu−Il)andΦ−1(P(wj)Iu−Il)are highly correlated. In this example, the value ofλvaries from 4 m to infinity for consideration of different spatial correlations.

Consider, for example, covariance matrix decomposition method is adopted to generate the horizontal uniform random field ofP, denoted byR(P).

whereθ=[θ1,θ2,...,θn]T=a standard Gaussian vector withnindependent components;L= an-by-nlower-triangular matrix determined from Cholesky decomposition of the correlation matrixη=LLT.

The proposed methodology, which combines PDBM with correlated initial phaseR(P) to assess the seismic stability of soil slopes, is called MPDBM.Fig 9depicts the flowchart of the proposed methodology. It is seen fromFig 9that MPDMB consists of four parts. That is, Part 1:Search the critical sliding surface; Part 2: Determine the seismic parameters; Part 3: Generation ofR(P); Part 4: Evaluate the seismic slope stability using MPDBM.

In Part 1, the slope model is established in Geostudio and the critical sliding surface with minimum FS is searched, based on which the seismic slope stability is evaluated. Part 2 involves the selection of seismic parameters such as the angular frequency of seismic waveω, the shear wave velocity in the slope soilsVs, the damping ratioDand scale of fluctuation in the random field ofR(P). Part 3 is the generation ofR(P), based on which a series of seismic FS can be calculated using the MPDBM. In Part 4, the minimum seismic FS is selected from the series of FS determined in Part 3 to evaluate the seismic stability of slopes.

Before the proposed MPDBM can be extended to case studies, it should be validated against the results from the previous research [16]. The maximum active thrust acting on the rigid retaining wall and the corresponding distribution of horizontal seismic acceleration were investigated using the MPDM in [16]. Since the distribution of horizontal seismic acceleration is dependent only onω,Vs,H, andD, the slope stability problem is adopted to investigate the distribution of horizontal seismic acceleration leading to minimum FS, which are comparable with the results from [16].

The 100 realizations ofR(P) are generated following the descriptions in Section 3 under a set of scale of fluctuations(λ = 50, 500 and +∞m). Refer to Section 3, the slope base is 50m wide and it is discretized into 50 1-m-wide sub-bases. Each of 100 realizations ofR(P) is regarded as the input for the initial phases of 50 sub-bases. The corresponding FS is calculated using Eq.(10). As a result, 100 FSs are obtained and the minimum one is found to be 0.701,0.689 and 0.683 underλ= 50, 500 and +∞m, respectively. The realization ofR(P) leading to the minimum FS is plotted versus the normalized depth.Fig 11summarizes the distributions of horizontal seismic accelerations (ah) underλ= 50, 500, and +∞m, respectively and the results form the Bellezza (2014) as well. As shown inFig 11, the distribution ofahobtained atλ=+∞m (i.e., the initial phases are fully correlated as in MPDM) agrees well with that from [16]. The consistent comparison demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed MPDBM. That is, the proposed MPDBM degenerates into MPDM when the spatial variability is not considered (λ=+∞m). Asλdecreases,i.e., the spatial variability of initial phases turns to be significant, the distribution of horizontal seismic acceleration differs from that without considering spatial variability of initial phases.

The proposed methodology is illustrated through the homogeneous soil slope shown inFig 10. The critical sliding surface depicted in red line inFig 10is based on to evaluate the seismic stability of the slope. How the variation of critical sliding surface influences the seismic stability will be discussed in Section 6.5. For seismic parameters, thekh= 0.1 andD= 0.2 are specified.

Following the previous research outputs of MPDM [16,27], The normalized frequency is reckoned as a crucial factor. Bellezza [16] has pointed out thatNf= 0.5π, where the slope soil is subjected to its natural frequency, leads to maximum seismic forces and minimum FS. Hence, atNf= 0.5π, the variations of FS(t) with initial phasetis demonstrated and an equivalent uniform sampling approach, which is easily implemented into MPDBM, is described and validated. Considerω= 2π (i.e.,T= 1s), the initial phasetin Eq.(10) is assumed to be a set of values ranging between 0 andTwith equal increment ∆T. Equation (10) is used to calculate the FS(t) underNf =0.5π, 1.5π, and 2.0π, respectively.

The respective variations of FS(t) withtunderNf =0.5π, 1.5π, and 2.0π are plotted inFig 12. For the case ofNf =0.5π, the FS(t) decreases from 0.91 to a minimum of 0.71 astvaries from 0 to 0.19, and it increases to to a maximum of 2.18 astranges from 0.19 to.0.69, and finally it decreases to the original value of 0.91(t= 0) astincreases from 0.69 to 1.0. This variation trend indicates that the FS(t) is a periodical function with a period ofT= 1s. The minimum FS value 0.71 is adopted for assessing the slope stability. Similar variation trends have been noticed for the cases ofNf =1.5π, and 1.5π. It is clearly noticed that the respective minimum FS values of FS(t) are 0.71, 1.02 and 1.03 witht= 0.19s, 0.29s and 0.46s underNf =0.5π, 1.5π, and 2.0π. It is demonstrated that the minimum FS value and the corresponding initial phasetare dependent onNf.The determination of minimum FS value is of importance. An mathematical method, where the derivative of active thrust to initial phasetis adopted, is presented in [16]. However, in this study, refer to Eq.(10), the derivative of FS to initial phasetis not easily dealt with as compared to that in [16]. Therefore, a set of tentative initial phasetmust be tried and compared to find the minimum FS value as does inFig 12. To facilitate the implementation of MPDBM, an alternative approach, named uniform sampling approach, is proposed in this study to find the minimum FS value and the corresponding initial phaset. The initial phasetis assumed to be a uniformly distributed random variable within the range between 0 andT. A finite number of random samples are generated within the range between 0 andT, considerNurandom samples for example, each ofNusamples is substituted into Eq.(10) and a FS can be obtained. Finally, a total ofNuFS values are available. The minimum one among theNuFS values is the minimum FS value.Fig 13demonstrates the variation of FSminwith differentNuvalues at differentλunderNf =0.5π.

Considerλ= 4m as an example, the respective FSminis 1.05, 1.07, 0.84, 0.87, 0.86, 0.80, 0.86, 0.81, 0.85, 0.84, 0.82, 0.85, 0.79, 0.79, 0.79 and 0.79 forNu= 3, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 80, 100, 150, 200, 300, 500, 1000, 2000 and 5000. It is noticed that onceNuis greater than 500, the FSminremains unchanged at 0.79. Asλincreases, e.g.,λ= 20m,the respective FSminis 1.01, 0.89, 0.81, 0.77, 0.87, 0.75, 0.79, 0.75, 0.76, 0.74, 0.74, 0.74, 0.74, 0.74, 0.74 and 0.74 forNu= 3, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 80, 100, 150, 200, 300, 500, 1000, 2000 and 5000. WhenNuis greater than 200, the FSminremains unchanged at 0.74. For the rest ofλcases, similar variation trends have been noticed. However, it is worthy to note that a largerλrelates to a smaller minimumNubeyond which the FSminobtained by uniform sampling approach is not varied. It implies that as the spatial variability of initial phases grows significant, more samples are required in uniform sampling approach, and vice versa. When it comes to an extreme case, i.e.,λ=∞m, the minimumNuis 35 and the final unfluctuated FSminis 0.71, which coincides with that found in the traditional method shown inFig 12. This identical comparison justifies the effectiveness of the uniform sampling approach. As a result, the uniform sampling approach is adopted in MPDBM.

The proposed methodology is used to calculate the minimum FS value for a variety ofλvalues in order to investigate the effect ofλon seismic slope stability. A set ofλvalues, e.g., 4, 20, 50, 500, 1000,and +∞ are assumed. Starting with an initial value of 0.1π,Nfis increased by equal step of π/200 until it reaches 2π, leading to a total of 400 individualNfvalues. For each combination ofλandNf,following the description in Section 3.2, the-50-m-wide slope base is divided inton =50 1-m-wide sub-bases, Equation(11) is used to establish the correlation matrixL, and finallyNusamples (i.e.,Nurealizations ofR(P)) are generated in accordance with Eq.(12). It is noted thatI1= 0 andIu= Tin this study. Thereafter, the proposed uniform sampling approach is used to calculate the minimum FS value. The full combinations of sixλvalues and 400Nfvalues yield 2,400 minimum FS values.

The results are summarized inFig 14. Forλ= ∞ m, the respective FSminis 0.91, 0.71, 1.04, 1.02, and 1.03 underNf= 0.1π, 0.5π, 1.0π, 1.5π, and 2.0π. Two local minima are observed. One is found atNf= 0.5π and the other is at 1.5π, which is consistent with the observations from MPDM in [16,27]. The minimum FSminis 0.71 atNf= 0.5π. Quite similar variation trends of FSminwithNfare noticed for the cases ofλ= 4, 20, 50, 500, and 1000 m. However, the respective minimum FSminare 0.79, 0.75, 0.74, 0.72 and 0.72 atNf= 103π/200, 99π/200, 19π/40 and 99π/200 forλ= 4, 20, 50, 500 and 1000m. It is worth noting that the respective minimum FSminis in the vicinity of 0.5π. To explore the relationship betweenλand the minimum FSminin detail,Fig 15depicts the FSminfor differentλvalues atNf= π/10, π/2, π, 3π/2, 2π. For example, atNf =π/2, the respective FSminis 0.79, 0.74, 0.72, 0.71, 0.71forλ= 4, 20, 50, 500, 1000 and ∞ m. It is observed that asλincreases from 4m to 500m, the FSmindecreases dramatically from 0.79 to 0.71, and it varies slightly around 0.71 asλis greater than 500m. The difference between 0.79(λ= 4m) and 0.71(λ=+∞m) can be up to 11%, which significantly underestimates the seismic slope stability and tends to result in a conservative slope design if spatial variability of initial phase is not considered.

It is worth noting that the variation trend of FSminwith respect toλis likely to differs from that atNf= 0.5π. For example, as illustrated inFig 15, atNf =3π/2, the respective FSminis 1.02, 0.99, 0.99, 0.99, 1.00 and 1.02 forλ= 4, 20, 50, 500, 1000 and ∞ m. It is seen that the FSmindrops firstly and then it increases to a value close to the initial value. The minimum FSminis observed atλ= 20m, which is clearly different from that observed atNf= 0.5π(the minimum FSminis atλ= +∞m). The results from the MPDBM without considering spatial variability of initial phases can be either conservative or unconservative depending on theNfvalue.

Dis assumed to be constant at 0.2 in the previous sections 6.2 and 6.3. To investigate the effect ofDon the seismic slope stability,D= 0.1 is specified and the FSminat each combination of threeλ(4, 50, and +∞m) and 400Nfvalues is calculated. The results fromD= 0.2 are compared with those fromD= 0.1.Fig 16compares the variation trend of the FSminwith respect toNfforD= 0.1 and 0.2 atλ= +∞ m. It is observed fromFig 16that the variation trend of FSminatD= 0.1 agrees fairly well with that atD= 0.2. It is interesting to note that the FSmincalculated atD= 0.1 is lower than that atD= 0.2 asNfranges between 0.1 and 0.685π. The most significant difference is found atNf= 0.5π (theNfleading to the first local minimum), where the difference in FSminreaches 0.19 = 0.72-0.53.AsNfvaries from 0.685π to 1.31π, the FSmincalculated atD= 0.1 is slightly greater than that atD= 0.2 with a maximum difference of 0.02 in FSminatNf= 1.145π. WhenNfincreases from 1.145π to 2.0π, the FSmincalculated atD= 0.1 is lower than that atD= 0.2 with a maximum difference of 0.05 = 1.02-0.97 in FSminatNf= 1.5π. The comparisons atλ= 50 m andλ= 4m are shown inFig 17andFig 18, respectively. Very similar variation trends have been noticed atλ= 4 and 50 m. It is concluded from the comparisons that a smallerDtends to yield a lower FSminespecially atNfvalues corresponding to the natural frequency of slope soil. It must be noted that a smallerDalso leads to a slightly greater FSminwhenNfranges between 0.5π and 1.5π in this study.

Two slopes with different scales are considered in this section. The first one is shown inFig 19. It is a medium scale homogeneous slope with slope height=212m and slope angle = 22.08°.The cohesionc, internal friction angleφ, soil unit weight and damping ratio of soil are 18 kPa, 20°, 18kN/m3and 0.2,respectively. The other one, a large scale slope, has a slope height = 800m and slope angle = 14.53°,which is shown inFig 20. The cohesionc, internal friction angleφ, soil unit weight and damping ratio of soil are 20 kPa, 16°, 19kN/m3and 0.2,respectively. Similarly, the Bishop method is used to calculate the FS for a given slip circular surface.The respective minimum FS without seismic forces is determined to be 1.10 and 1.21 and the corresponding critical sliding surfaces are plotted in red line inFigs 19and20for the medium and large scale slope.

Similar to the treatment in Section 6.2, 2400 combinations ofλandNfare considered. The variation trends of FSminwithNfandλare shown inFigs 21–24for two slopes with different scales. It can be noticed that the variation trends found inFigs 21and23agree with those demonstrated inFig 14.Fig 22plots the variation of FSminwithλunderNf= 0.5πfor the medium scale slope. It is seen thatthe FSmindrops from 0.91 to 0.60 asλvalues increase from 4 to +∞m for medium scale slope. The difference between 0.91(λ= 4m) and 0.60(λ=+∞m) reaches 50%, which is significantly higher than 14% as compared to small scale slope. This comparison indicates a more pronounced effect ofλon medium scale slope.

Fig 24plots the variation of FSminwithλunderNf= 0.5π for the large scale slope. In the case of large scale slope, the FSmindrops from 1.08 to 0.65 asλvalues increase from 4 to +∞m. The discrepancy between 1.08(λ= 4m) and 0.65(λ=+∞m) arrives at 67%, which is significantly higher than 11% (small scale slope) and slightly higher than 50%(medium scale slope). The effect of ofλon seismic slope stability grows significant as the slope scale increases. As a result, the proposed MPDBM is recommended for seismic stability analysis of slopes with medium and large scale slopes.

In the previous sections, the critical sliding surface without seismic forces is focused. To see how the varied critical sliding surfaces influence the seismic stability, the critical sliding surface with pseudo static forces (ah= 0.1g), defined as pseudo static critical sliding surface is incorporated into the analysis. The locations of the two mentioned critical sliding surfaces are compared inFig 25. The FSmins for the pseudo static critical sliding surface at each combination of twoλ(4 and +∞m) and 400Nfvalues are calculated.

The results from critical sliding surface without seismic forces are compared with those from pseudo static critical sliding surface.Fig 26compares the variation trends of the FSminwith respect toNfatλ= +∞ m between critical sliding surface without seismic forces and pseudo static critical sliding surface. It is observed fromFig 26that the variation trend of FSminfor pseudo static critical surface closely aligns with that for critical surface without seismic force. However, it is noted fromFig 27that significant discrepancy in FSminhas been observed for each ofNfs atλ= 4 m. Specifically,whenNf= 0.5π, the FSminfrom critical sliding surface without seismic forces is 1.088, whereas it decreases to 0.968 if the pseudo static critical sliding surface is used. Therefore, it must be noted that the critical sliding surface should be carefully selected. Based on the current comparisons, it is found that the choice of critical sliding surface tends to significantly influence the seismic stability atλ= 4 m.

The proposed MPDBM emphasizes two issues in the use of pseudo dynamic method for assessing seismic slope stability. The first one is how to find the initial phase leading to the minimum FS for a given sliding surface. The other one is how to consider both the difference and the correlation in the initial phases. To address the first issue, a uniform sampling approach is originated and validated as an alternative to the traditional method, where a finite number of individual initial phases are tried. The advantage of the uniform sampling approach beyond the traditional method lies in its time efficiency, especially for low frequency seismic waves. It is interesting to note that the first issue has scarcely been dealt with. One exception is the research from [16], where a mathematical approach is adopted to directly determine the initial phase. Compared to the mathematical approach, the uniform sampling approach exhibits broader applicability because it does not require mandatory derivatives of geotechnical performance indicators (e.g., FS, displacement) with respect to the initial phase.

The second issue stems from the uncertainties and randomness in seismic motions. The seismic uncertainty is fairly complicated and only epicentral horizontal distance, epicentral depth, and the propagation velocity of the seismic wave in the slope base is briefly discussed to illustrate the existence of second issue. The initial phase behaves somewhat like the spatial variability of soil properties owing to the fact that both the difference and the correlation in the initial phase must be properly dealt with. Therefore, uniform random field of initial phase is adopted herein to simulate the spatial variability in the horizontal direction along the slope base. It is worth noting that the initial phase is assumed to be uniformly distributed for preliminary analysis. Besides, the uniform sampling approach and the uniform random field of initial phase coincide in the uniform essence of the initial phase.

For simplicity, the circular sliding surface and the simplified Bishop method are adopted to evaluate the seismic slope stability for simplicity and for the homogeneous soil slopes. However, the uniform sampling approach and the uniform random field can be easily combined with existing methods for assessing slope stability including but not limited to limit equilibrium methods, limit analysis, and strength reduction method. As a result, the proposed methodology is versatile although only homogeneous soil slopes are discussed in this study.

The proposed MPDBM is implemented within a commercial software package, SLOPE/W, and effects of the scale of fluctuation, damping ratio, and the slope scale on the seismic FS are investigated, providing a basis for further analysis of key findings.

The proposed MPDBM is able to delineate the difference in seismic FS attributed to the spatial variability of initial phase and serve as an effective and alternative tool for conducting seismic slope stability using pseudo dynamic method.

The traditional method ignoring the spatial variability of initial phase underestimates the FS for the cases where the slope soil is subjected to its natural frequency as compared to the proposed MPDBM with scale of fluctuation = 4m(i.e., the spatial variability of initial phase is significant). The underestimation turns to be profound for large scale slopes.

For the cases, where the frequency of the seismic wave deviates from the natural frequency of slope soil, the consideration of the spatial variability of initial phase may yield smaller FS than the traditional method ignoring the spatial variability of initial phase.