Gallbladder cancer (GBC) is characterised by a desmoplastic microenvironment rich in collagen fibres and extracellular matrix, contributing to increased matrix stiffness. SEMAs are overexpressed in various cancers but their expression and role in the crosstalk between activated gallbladder fibroblasts (GFs) and GBC cells within a stiff microenvironment remain unclear. Herein, we aimed to elucidate the expression patterns and tumour-promoting effects of SEMAs in activated GFs under the matrix stiffness microenvironment.

Masson staining assessed collagen deposition in GBC stroma. GFs were isolated from gallbladder tissues and cultured on silicon or polyacrylamide hydrogels. SEMA expression in GFs under different stiffness conditions was determined via RNA-seq and RT-qPCR. Transwell assays, tumorsphere-formation and Western blot assays were used to investigate the effects of GFs-derived SEMA7A on GBC epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer stem-like traits. Subcutaneous tumour models were established by co-injecting GFs and GBC cells to assess SEMA7A’s role in vivo. Co-immunoprecipitation, WB, Elisa and mutation assays were employed to elucidate the mechanism of SEMA7A involvement in GFs-GBC cell crosstalk.

This study revealed a high-stiffness microenvironment in GBC, inducing GFs activation and SEMA7A paracrine through YAP/TAZ signalling. GFs-secreted SEMA7A under matrix stiffness microenvironment promoted GBC EMT and cancer stem-like traits. Mechanistically, GFs-secreted SEMA7A bound to its receptor integrin β1 instead of plexinC1 on GBC cells to induce the phosphorylation of p300 at S1834 and maintain the malignant phenotypes of GBC cells. Moreover, the SEMA7A/integrin β1 axis-induced p300 phosphorylation at S1834 was mediated by Akt activation (p-Akt at S473) in GBC cells.

Our findings demonstrate a complex stiffness/SEMA7A/integrin β1/AKT/p300 cascade mediating reciprocal interactions between GFs and GBC cells, offering a potential therapeutic target for patients with GBC.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13062-025-00683-2.

Gallbladder cancer (GBC) stands as the most prevalent malignancy of the biliary tract, characterised by its dismal prognosis, particularly in advanced stages due to its aggressive phenotype and a dearth of effective therapeutic strategies [1]. Despite notable advancements in treatments such as surgery, chemotherapy and immunotherapy, patients with advanced-staged GBC continue to lack efficacious treatments to impede malignant progression [1]. Hence, there is an urgent need to unveil novel molecular mechanisms underlying the malignant progression of GBC and to identify promising therapeutic targets for combating this malignancy.

Gallbladder carcinoma (GBC) exhibits a characteristic desmoplastic stroma marked by a collagen-rich extracellular matrix enriched with matricellular proteins (thrombospondins, periostin, tenascin C) and predominantly populated by cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), with sparse tumor-associated immune cell infiltration [1–3]. CAFs stand as principal instigators of the desmoplastic reaction in GBC and are pivotal contributors to its malignant progression [4]. Under normal conditions, fibroblasts remain relatively ‘quiescent’; however, they can undergo trans-differentiate into CAFs, characterised by the heightened synthesis of biologically active molecules (e.g., fibronectins, collagens and matrix metalloproteinase) in response to various stimuli within the tumour microenvironment [5]. The deposition of abundant collagen fibres and other extracellular matrix constituents around cancer nests significantly amplifies the matrix stiffness of GBC [3]. Augmented matrix stiffness is not solely a consequence of the desmoplastic reaction, but it is increasingly recognised as a key driver in tumour malignant progression [6]. Matrix stiffness has emerged as a prominent hallmark of the tumour microenvironment, drawing intensive investigations into its role in cancer biology [7]. Matrix stiffness modulates malignant phenotypes of cancer cells by directly regulating proliferation, invasion, metastasis, cancer stemness and therapeutic resistance [8,9]. While activated-fibroblasts/CAFs prominently contribute to the desmoplasia of GBC, it remains unknown whether stiffness can reciprocally modulate the biology of activated-fibroblasts/CAFs and their tumour-promoting effects. This study therefore focused on whether and how tumour stiffness influenced the activation of GFs aiming to identify a novel mechanosignaling pathway and GF-cancer crosstalk for the malignant progression of GBC.

Semaphorins (SEMAs) constitute a family of over 20 signalling molecules known for their pivotal roles in the development and maintenance of various organs and tissues, modulating cell morphology, cell motility and axonal guidance during neuronal development [10]. The SEMA family comprises eight classes (SEMAl-SEMA7 and V-viral), with each class encompassing several SEMA molecules [10]. While more than 20 SEMA family members with diverse structures have been identified, characterised by either secreted transmembrane or cell surface attached forms, they share a conserved extracellular amino-terminal SEMA domain [11,12]. A growing body of evidence underscores the critical roles of SEMAs in cancer biology, directly influencing tumour growth, invasion, tumorigenesis, metastasis and therapeutic resistance [10]. However, these studies predominantly focus on investigating SEMA effects in tumour cells, leaving the expression patterns of SEMAs in CAFs under a stiff microenvironment and their tumour-promoting effects on GBC cells unclear, necessitating further exploration.

In this study, we aimed to elucidate the expression patterns and tumour-promoting effects of SEMAs in activated gallbladder fibroblasts (GFs) under the matrix stiffness microenvironment. By seeding GFs on gel with varying stiffness to induce its activation and subsequently screening SEMA expression, we observed that matrix stiffness effectively induced GF activation and trans-differentiation into CAFs, with semaphorin 7 A (SEMA7A) exhibiting the most robust increase in expression among activated GFs induced by matrix stiffness. Furthermore, matrix stiffness-induced GFs activation and SEMA7A paracrine signalling promoted epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and cancer stem cell-like traits of GBC cells by modulating p300 acetyltransferase. Thus, SEMA7A emerges as a potential novel target for disrupting the deleterious crosstalk between CAFs and GBC cells under a stiff microenvironment. Targeting SEMA7A in the stroma may offer an effective strategy for treating GBC.

Recombinant human SEMA7A (rh-SEMA7A) protein was procured from Cedarlane (#CLPRO2506-2). An integrin β1 neutralising antibody was sourced from Millipore (Darmstadt, Germany). SEMA7A shRNA and PlxnC1 shRNA (#sc-44026) were obtained from Xi’an GeneCarer Biotech Co.Ltd or Santa Cruz Biotechnology respectively. The Non-Targeting shRNA control sequence used in this study: NT shRNA: CAACAAGATGAAGAGCACCAA. The SEMA7A shRNA sequences used in this study: shRNA1:CGCCTTCAACATCATGGAGAT; shRNA2:CCAGGCTTACGATGACAAGAT; shRNA3:GACGCCATTGTTCCACTCTAA. The YAP shRNA sequences used in this study: shYAP#1: GGAATTGAGAACAATGACGAC; shYAP#2: GGATACAGGTGATACTATCAA. LY294002 and C646 were acquired from Selleckchem (Houston, TX, USA). P300 shRNA#1 lentiviral constructs,NM_001429.1-2773s1c1, were sourced from the MISSION shRNA Library (Sigma-Aldrich), P300 shRNA#2 (#sc-29431) was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Scrambled siRNA (si-Control: sense 5′-UUCUCCGAACGUGUCACGUTT-3′; antisense 5′-ACGUGACACGUUCGGAGAATT-3′). The siRNAs for targeting YAP or TAZ used in this study: YAP, sense, 5’-GACAUCUUCUGGUCAGAGA-3’, and YAP, anti-sense, 5’-UCUCUGACCAGAAGAUGUC-3’; TAZ, sense, 5’-ACGUUGACUUAGGAACUUU-3’, and TAZ, antisense, 5’-AAAGUUCCUAAGUCAACGU-3’ were purchased from Shanghai GenePharma Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). The details for construction of the secreted form of HA-SEMA7A plasmid and the generation of HA-SEMA7A RGE mutant were consisted with previous studies respectively [13,14]. The methods for generation of synthetic RGD peptide and control peptide were the same as previous study [15]. Detailed information regarding the antibodies used in the study is provided in TableS1. All reagents were stored following the manufacturer’s instructions.

A total of 86 GBC tissues and adjacent nontumor tissues, along with corresponding clinical data from patients were obtained from the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University. All specimens were histopathologically verified, and patients had not received any chemotherapy before surgery. Written informed consent was obtained from all patients for the use of GBC samples. GFs were isolated from human gallbladder tissues of patients diagnosed with gallbladder stones and cultured in F12/DMEM as previously described [4,16,17]. Isolated GFs were cultured on soft or stiff silicon or polyacrylamide gels within five passages for further experiments. The GBC cell lines, GBC-SD and NOZ were purchased and cultured as reported previously [4].

Silicon gels with incremental stiffness of 0.5 kPa or 16 kPa were obtained from Advanced BioMatrix CytoSoft, as previously described [18]. The preparation of polyacrylamide hydrogels with increasing stiffness ranging from 0.4 kilopascal (kPa) to 25.6 kPa was consistent with previous studies [7]. For matrix stiffness experiments, GFs were cultured on silicon gels or polyacrylamide hydrogels with different stiffness and then collected for subsequent analyses or functional assays.

Primary human GFs were cultured on silicon gels of 0.5 kPa or 16 kPa and starved with serum-free medium for 24 h. RNA from primary human GFs was extracted using the Trizol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA) method. RNA quality control, library construction, sequencing, and data processing were performed by Shanghai Personal Biotechnology Cp. Ltd. All raw RNA sequencing data were uploaded to the NCBI SRA database (accession No: PRJNA1182410), and the further bioinformatics analysis was conducted as we previously reported [7,19].

We downloaded the datasetGSE76633[20] containing 9 pairs of gallbladder cancer tissues and normal gallbladder tissues using the “GEOquery” R package. The probes of the genes were transformed to gene symbols for the following analysis. Differentially expressed genes were found between tumor and paired non-tumor tissues by using the “limma” R package. Correlation analysis between SEMA7A and collagen-related genes was finished relying on the “corrplot” function.

The single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data OEP00001237 was downloaded from the National Omics Data Encyclopedia (https://www.biosino.org/node/project/detail/OEP00001237) database. We integrated data from 13 patients for the following analysis. The raw gene expression matrix was converted to a seurat object using the “Seurat” R package. Cells with less than 300 detected genes and genes expressed in less than 5 cells were discarded for infiltration and quality control. Following normalizing and scaling the data, principal component analysis (PCA) and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) were performed for dimension reduction. After that, we conducted the cell clustering and annotation according to the workflow [21]. Finally, we identified 16 cell types.

The protocols for lentivirus production were consistent with previous reports [19]. Virus-containing medium from HEK293T cells (Invitrogen) was collected 48 and 72 h after transfection. CAFs or GBC cells were infected by incubation with the lentivirus-containing medium and were subsequently treated with puromycin to select knockdown cells. The method for generating the p300 mutation at S1834 was consistent with previous studies [7,22]. S to A mutation was validated by sequencing [7,22].

The siRNAs were transiently transfected into GFs by using lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, CA, USA). The GFs were transfected with siRNAs at different concentrations following the manufacturers’ instructions for 48 h prior to further experiments.

A GF-GBC coculture model was established to evaluate interactions between activated GFs and GBC cells. Briefly, conditioned medium (CM) from GF cells seeded on soft or stiff silicon gel was collected, filtered and stored at -80 °C for further use. To assess activated GFs-induced EMT and cancer stemness, serum-starved GBC cells were treated with CM from GFs cells cultured on 0.5 or 16 kPa silicon gel, and then the GBCs were collected for function assays.

After culturing on 0.5 kPa or 16 kPa silicon gel or polyacrylamide gel with gradually increased stiffness, GFs were serum-starved (1% serum in fresh medium) for an additional 48 h, after which CM was collected and centrifuged (1500 rpm for 5 min). The secretion of SEMA7A into CM was detected using a human SEMA7A ELISA kit (#RD-SEMA7A-Hu, Reddot Biotech) following the manufacturer’s instructions.

Cell migration and invasion assays were performed following established protocols [4,23,24]. Briefly, CM collected from activated GFs and recombinant human SEMA7A was used to treat GBC-SD and NOZ cells for invasion assays, while GFs seeded on 0.5 kPa or 16 kPa gel was collected for migration assay. After completing the designated treatment, the invasion assay was conducted using Transwell chambers (BD Biosciences, Franklin Lakes, NJ). In brief, 1 × 105GBC-SD and NOZ cells were added to the upper chamber with a Matrigel-coated membrane. After 24 h of incubation at 37 °C, cells invaded to the lower surface of the membrane were fixed and dyed with crystal violet. The results were analysed by counting the dyed cells using optical microscopy (×100 magnification) in five randomly selected fields.

GBC cells were treated with CM from GFs cultured on different stiffness subtracted and seeded at a density of 5000 cells per well into six-well ultralow attachment plates (Corning, Corning, NY, USA). Cells were cultured for two weeks in serum-free DMEM/F12 medium (Gibco) containing 1% B27 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), 20 ng/mL human FGF and 20 ng/mL EGF at 37℃ with 5% CO2for tumorsphere-formation. The detailed protocol for tumorsphere-formation assay was consistent with previous studies [25,26]. Tumour sphere number and diameter were counted and measured using a microscope (Nikon Instruments Inc.) at a magnification of 200×.

We used TRIzol Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA) to extract total RNA of GFs and GBC cells, and quantitated the RNA concentration by absorbance at 260 nm. For mRNA detection, RNA samples (1 µg) were reverse transcribed using PrimeScript RT Master Mix, and quantitative realtime PCR was performed with SYBR-Green PCR Master Mix (Takara Bio, Dalian, China) using gene-specific primers. GAPDH was used as an endogenous control, and data were analysed using the 2−ΔΔCtmethod. Specific primer sequences are provided in TableS2.

Total protein from GFs and GBC cells was extracted using RIPA lysis buffer (Beyotime, Guangzhou, China), and protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay kit (Pierce, Rockford, USA).

The lysates were separated by SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and blotted onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes. Then, the membranes were blocked with 10% nonfat milk and probed using primary antibodies at 4 °C overnight and the corresponding secondary antibodies at room temperature for 1 h. Finally, ECL reagent (Millipore, Merck Co., Ltd., Darmstadt, Germany) was used for signal detection. For the IP assay, the antibody or IgG (2 µg) was incubated with protein A/G magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) for 15 min at room temperature and then incubated with equal amounts of cell lysates (1000 µg) at 4 °C overnight, and the immunoprecipitates were subjected to Western blotting.

After finishing the designated treatment, GBC cells were collected for ChIP assay, ChIP assay was performed utilizing an EZ-Magna-ChIP HiSens kit (Millipore, #17-10461) as previously reported [7]. In brief, GBC cells fixed with 1% formaldehyde and scraped from the dish were subjected to nuclear lysis to release cross-linked protein/DNAs. The nuclear extract was then subjected to sonication and immunoprecipitation with anti-P300 antibody (#ab275378), anti-H3K27ac antibody (#ab4729) or control rabbit IgG (Santa Cruz Technology, #sc-2027). Precipitated DNA fragments containing the promotor of Snail and ZEB1 were quantitated by qPCR with the pairs of primers. The primers for ChIP-qPCR were displayed in TableS2.

Procedures for HE, Masson and IHC staining were conducted as previously described [4,27,28]. The percentages of positive stromal cells were categorized as follows: 0 = < 10%, 1 = 10–25%, 2 = 25–50%, 3 = 50–75%, and 4 = > 75%. The staining intensity was scored as follows: 0 = no staining, 1 = light brown, 2 = brown, and 3 = dark brown. The final IHC score was determined by multiplying the staining intensity and the percentage of specifically positive staining tumor cells.

Animal experiments were conducted following approved protocols by the Ethics Committee of Xi’an Jiaotong University. To evaluate stiffness-induced paracrine SEMA7A from GFs in promoting GBC tumorigenesis in vivo, sh-NT or sh-SEMA7A lentiviruses were transfected into GFs. Single-cell suspensions of 5 × 105of GBC-SD cells alone or together with GFs (sh-NT or sh-SEMA7A) were mixed at a ratio of 1:1 in 100 mL of PBS, following subcutaneous injection into the left flanks of 4-week-old male BALB/c nude mice (acquired from and housed in the Animal Center at Medical College, Xi’an Jiaotong University). Tumour growth was monitored by calculating the tumour volume according to the following formula: V (tumour volume) = s (shorter diameter)2/2 × L (longer diameter). Three weeks later, mice were sacrificed and the tumour specimens were weighed and used for IHC staining.

TheGSE276931dataset (including 7 tumor and 5 adjacent tissue samples) and theGSE139682dataset (comprising 10 tumor and 10 adjacent tissue samples) were retrieved from the GEO database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/). In theGSE139682cohort, we quantified the correlation between SEMA7A and the P300 gene. InGSE276931cohort, R package “GSVA” was used to calculate the AKT signaling pathway score for each sample and further calculate the correlation with SEMA7A expression levels.

Furthermore, we categorizedGSE276931samples into high and low SEMA7A expression groups based on the median value. GSEA was utilized to highlight significant differences between the two expression groups and identify correlations between gene expression and biological pathways. The calculations were repeated 1000 times.

Data are presented as means ± SD of three independent experiments. Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS 20.0. Student’s t-test was used for comparisons between two groups, and one-way ANOVA followed by LSD post hoc test was used for differences among multiple groups. Kaplan-Meier analysis evaluated survival differences among groups. AP< 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Many previous studies have confirmed that the deposition of a large number of collagens and other extracellular matrix components around the cancer cells is correlated with the increase of tumor tissue stiffness [29,30], thus we conducted HE and Masson staining to visualize tissue structure and collagen deposition, respectively. The results revealed a substantial deposition of collagen fibres surrounding cancer cells compared to adjacent nontumor tissues, indicating a high-stiffness microenvironment in GBC (Fig.1A). Immunofluorescence staining also confirmed the presence of α-SMA+CAFs surrounding GBC cells (Fig.1B). Next, we investigated whether matrix stiffness reciprocally influenced the activation of GFs. Isolating GFs from gallbladder tissue, we cultured them on silicon hydrogels of variable but precisely defined stiffness. Primary human GFs cultured on 0.5 kPa or 16 kPa displayed significantly different morphology (Fig.1C-D), consistent with the result of human HSCs seeded on different stiffness hydrogels [27]. GFs seeded on 0.5 kPa exhibited limited spreading and low α-SMA expression, as evidenced by IF staining (Fig.1C-D). Conversely, GFs seeded on 16 kPa were well spread and expressed elevated α-SMA levels, indicative of activated myofibroblasts (Fig.1C-D). Western blot and RT-qPCR analyses confirmed that matrix stiffness induced GF activation into myofibroblasts, evidenced by increased a-SMA, type I collagen, fibronectin and CTGF expression, which confirmed by culturing GFs cells on Silicon or polyacrylamide hydrogels with incremental stiffness (Fig.1E-F and Fig.S1A-C ). Additionally, GFs cultured on 16 kPa silicon hydrogel demonstrated heightened migratory capability (Fig.1G).

Since matrix stiffness can effectively induce primary human GFs activation into CAFs, we tried to find the potential upregulated genes during the process of stiffness-mediated GFs trans-differentiation into CAFs. To this end, we analyzed our RNA-seq data (NCBI SRA database, NO: PRJNA1182410) with primary human GFs cultured on 0.5 kPa and 16 kPa silicon gel, the results presented that the SEMA7A expression on 16 kPa stiffness was increased 3.21-fold in comparison to 0.5 kPa soft gel (Fig.2A). Consistently, our RNA-seq data also showed that high stiffness significantly increased the expression of GFs activation markers, such as ACTA2 (α-SMA), CCN2 (CTGF) and Col4A1 (Fig.2A). SEMAs have been established to play critical roles in cancer biology, with a direct link to tumour growth, invasion, tumorigenesis, metastasis and therapeutic resistance [10] Furthermore, class 3 semaphorins have also been established to be highly expressed in rheumatoid arthritis fibroblast-like synoviocytes, modulating their invasive capacity [31]. To further elucidate SEMA expression in GFs under different stiffness conditions, we utilised RT-qPCR to screen a panel of SEMAs in GFs cultured on soft or stiff hydrogels, revealing SEMA7A mRNA as the predominantly expressed SEMA (Fig.S2A). As was shown in FigureS2B, SEMA7A expression was also higher in GBC tissues than in normal gallbladder tissues ofGSE76633. The scRNA-seq data (OEP00001237) was downloaded from the National Omics Data Encyclopedia (https://www.biosino.org/node/project/detail/OEP00001237) database. We integrated data from 13 patients for the following analyses (Fig.2B). We identified 16 cell types including Mast cells, Myofibroblast cells, M2 and M1 macrophage, Monocyte-like cells, Plasma B cells, Follicular B cells, Epithelial cells, Endothelial_VWF cells, Endothelial_DCN cells, DC, CD8 + T cells, CD4 + T cells, Treg cells, cancer associated fibroblasts_MFAP5 and cancer associated fibroblasts_ACTA2(Fig.2C and Fig.S2C). The Fibroblasts subgroup was selected for further cell clustering and was separated into 2 scattered groups (Fig.S2D). As shown in Fig.2D, the collagen-related genes ACTA2, MFAP5 and COL1A1 were highly expressed in the CAFs. Moreover, SEMA7A was also abundant in the ACTA2(+), MFAP5(+) or COL1A1 (+) CAFs. To further investigate the role of SEMA7A in fibroblast activation, we performed the correlation analysis between SEMA7A and fibrillar collagen expression. We found that SEMA7A was positively correlated with fibrillar collagens including COL1A1, COL1A2, COL4A1, COL4A2, COL8A1, ACTA2, PDGFRA, TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 (Fig.S2E). In addition, our results proved that SEMA7A also had a direct correlation with COL1A1 and ACTA2 (Fig.S2F). IF and IHC analyses confirmed elevated SEMA7A expression in the reactive stroma of GBC tissues (Fig.2E and Fig.S2G). Further analysis revealed increased expression and secretion of SEMA7A in the CM of GFs cultured on stiffer silicon or polyacrylamide hydrogels compared to softer ones (Fig.2F-H and Fig.S1A-D). Kaplan-Meier analysis of patients with GBC demonstrated that high SEMA7A expression in GBC stroma correlated with poor prognosis, indicating shorter overall survival (Fig.S2H). Furthermore, as shown in TableS3, high SEMA7A expression in GBC stroma was significantly associated with large tumour sizes (P= 0.006) and lymph node metastasis (P= 0.001). These findings collectively suggest that SEMA7A is a matrix stiffness-modulated mechanosensitive gene, and its high expression in GBC stroma signifies poor prognosis.

Recent studies have verified that YAP/TAZ signalling is activated in response to mechanical stress, playing a role in maintaining myofibroblasts or CAF phenotype [32]. Consistently, our data displayed that 16 kPa stiffness prominently promoted YAP nuclear accumulation in GFs as compared to 0.5 kPa (Fig.S3A-B). The UAMP chart shows that SEMA7A and YAP1 are co-expressed to a certain extent in CAFs at the single-cell level, suggesting a potential interaction between YAP1 and SEMA7A (Fig.3A). We also performed a single-gene GSEA analysis based on SEMA7A expression levels. The results showed that the “Cordenonsi yap conserved signature” was significantly up-regulated when SEMA7A expression levels were high (Fig.3B). To examine whether stiffness-induced activation of GFs and secretion of SEMA7A rely on YAP/TEADs signalling, we utilised YAP shRNA or verteporfin, a YAP inhibitor, to assess the involvement of YAP-mediated mechanotransduction in GFs activation and SEMA7A secretion. GFs transduced with lentiviruses encoding either non-targeting shRNA (NT shRNA) or YAP shRNA were cultured on either 0.5 kPa or 16 kPa hydrogel, and mRNA and protein were collected for RT-qPCR and western blot analysis, respectively. Herein, depletion of YAP was found to suppress stiffness-mediated activation of GFs and expression of SEMA7A (Fig.3C-F and Fig.S3C-G). Furthermore, ELISA revealed that the knockdown of YAP abrogated stiffness-induced SEMA7A secretion in the CM of GFs cultured on soft or stiff gels (Fig.3G and Fig.S3H). Consistently, pharmacological inhibition of YAP signalling by verteporfin also impaired stiffness-induced GF activation and SEMA7A secretion (Fig.S4A-E). Further analysis through bioinformatics identified the binding elements of YAP/TEAD1 in the promoter region of SEMA7A, suggesting potential transcriptional regulation by the YAP/TEAD1 complex (Fig. S4F). Subsequent ChIP assays confirmed increased enrichment of SEMA7A-promoter DNA in TEAD1 antibody-immunoprecipitated chromatin of GFs cultured under high stiffness conditions (Fig.3H). TAZ is highly homologous to YAP [33]. We found that knockdown of YAP slightly increased the expression of TAZ (Fig.S5A-B). To validate YAP/TAZ signalling playing crucial role on matrix stiffness-mediated GFs activation and SEMA7A secretion, we simultaneously knocked down YAP and TAZ by transfection combined YAP/TAZ siRNAs into GFs cultured on different stiffness gels. siYAP/TAZ transfection significantly decreased both YAP and TAZ expression compared with nontargeting siRNA controls (Fig.S5F-G). Furthermore, concurrently targeting YAP and TAZ by siRNAs significantly mitigate the matrix stiffness induced GFs activation and SEMA7A secretion (Fig.S5C-G). These findings collectively suggest that matrix stiffness activates SEMA7A transcription through a mechanism dependent on YAP1/TAZ signalling.

Given the evidence implicating myofibroblasts in promoting invasive potential and cancer stem-like features in response to stiffness, we postulated that stiffness-driven paracrine SEMA7A from GFs would enhance these properties. To test this hypothesis, we depleted SEM7A in GFs cultured on different stiffness gels and collected their CM to establish an indirect coculture system. To directly evaluate whether stiffness-driven SEMA7A impacted the malignant phenotypes of GBC cells, NOZ and GBC-SD cells were utilised for further experiments. SEMA7A knockdown in GFs was achieved using SEMA7A shRNA lentiviruses, and the depletion efficiency was confirmed by western blot analysis. As shown in Figure S6A, SEMA7A protein levels were lower in SEMA7A shRNA cells compared to NT shRNA cells. Therefore, we selected SEMA7A shRNA#2 and shRNA#3 for subsequent experiments. Compared to CM from GFs seeded on soft hydrogels, CMs from GFs cultured on stiffness gels (CMGFs−16kPa) significantly increased the invasion and tumorsphere-formation capacities of GBC cells. Conversely, GBC cells incubated with CM from SEMA7A-knockdown GFs on 16 kPa (CMGFs−shSEMA7A−16kPa) gels showed reduced invasion and tumorsphere-formation capacities (Fig.4A-B and Fig.S6B-C). Furthermore, CMGFs−16kPaincubation induced the expression of EMT and cancer stemness markers in GBC cells, as evidenced by the downregulation of E-cadherin and upregulation of vimentin, EPCAM, CD44 and ALDH1A1 (Fig.4C and Fig.S6D-E). These effects of CMGFs−16kPawere partly attenuated by SEMA7A knockdown (Fig.4C and Fig.S6D-E). Furthermore, the administration of rh-SEMA7A into CMGFs−shSEMA7A−16kPaeffectively rescued the effects of SEMA7A depletion in GFs-induced the reduced EMT and cancer stem-like traits of GBC cells, as revealed by invasion, tumorsphere-formation and western blot assays (Fig.4A-C, Fig. Fig.S6B-E). CSCs are characterised by stem cell-like traits, including self-renewal, tumorigenicity, invasion and metastasis [4,24,34]. To determine whether activated GFs could promote in vivo tumorigenesis, we subcutaneously injected GBC-SD cells with or without GFs into nude mice at a 1:1 ratio. Co-injection of GBC-SD cells and GFs into nude mice produced tumours with higher weights and volumes than those implanted with GBC-SD cells alone (Fig.5A-C). Conversely, the co-injection of SEMA7A-depleted GFs with GBC-SD cells hindered the tumorigenesis-promoting effect of activated GFs (Fig.5A-C). IHC staining and semiquantitative analysis of subcutaneous tumours revealed higher expression levels of Ki-67, α-SMA and the makers of EMT and cancer stemness in tumours from mice co-injected with GFs/GBC-SD compared to tumours from mice injected with GBC-SD cells alone (Fig.5D-E). Conversely, the depletion of SEMA7A in GFs partly inhibited the expression of Ki-67, α-SMA and the markers of EMT and cancer stemness in tumours from mice co-injected with SEMA7A-silenced GFs/GBC-SD (Fig.5D-E). Overall, these results provide in vivo support to our in vitro findings, demonstrating that matrix stiffness-driven paracrine SEMA7A from activated GFs effectively promotes EMT and stem-like characteristics in GBC cells.

Integrin β1 and PlexinC1 have been identified as potential receptors for SEMA7A signalling [14,35]. To further elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying SEMA7A signalling mediated by integrin β1 or PlexinC1 receptors in GFs, we utilised a specific integrin β1-neutralising antibody, PlxnC1-specific shRNA and anti-plexin C1 monoclonal antibody in subsequent experiments. In GBC-SD and NOZ cells, treatment with the integrin β1-neutralising antibody attenuated the invasive abilities induced by rh-SEMA7A (Fig.6A) and reduced the tumorsphere-forming capacities (Fig.6B). Furthermore, integrin β1-neutralising antibody also mitigated rh-SEMA7 -induced EMT and cancer stemness, as evidenced by western blot analysis (Fig.6C and Fig. S7A). Although anti-PlexinC1 monoclonal antibody or depletion of PlexinC1 receptor can effectively mitigate the phosphorylation level of PAK, the canonical downstream signalling of SEMA7A/PlexinC1 axis as previously reported [14], targeting PlexinC1 cannot effectively abrogate the rh-SEMA7A induced invasion, EMT and cancer stemness of GBC cells (Fig. S7B-F and Fig. S8A-F ).

Previous studies also verified that soluble SEMA7A directly interacts with Integrin β1 in cis via its RGD motif [13,15], and soluble SEMA7A presenting its native integrin-binding RGD-motif can stimulate formation of focal adhesion complexes and activation of FAK signaling through β1 integrin [15]. Additionally, SEMA7A primes integrin β1 instead of its canonical receptor PlexinC1 engagement instructing fibroblast mechanotransduction under matrix stiffness microenvironment [13]. To further demonstrate that matrix stiffness mediated activation of gallbladder fibroblasts and paracrine SEMA7A acts through integrin β1 rather than PlexinC1 receptor, we construct HA-tagged soluble SEMA7A plasmids, packed into lentivirus and infected into GBC-SD and NOZ cells to conduct Co-IP assay. Our Co-IP results confirmed that HA-SEMA7A binds to integrin β1 receptor significantly increased under high matrix stiffness microenvironment (16 kPa) (Fig. S9A-B). However, when the integrin-binding motif (RGD) was replaced by RGE, the Co-IP assay showed that the binding of HA-SEMA7A to integrin β1 was significantly abrogated (Fig. S9C-D). Thus, we concluded that soluble SEMA7A, secreted by activated gallbladder fibroblasts under matrix stiffness microenvironment, directly interacts with integrin β1 receptor on GBC cells via its RGD motif. Additionally, we used RGD peptide combined with rh-SEMA7A to intervene GBC cells. RGD peptide can significantly block the rh-SEMA7A induced EMT and cancer stemness of GBC cells (Fig. S10A-E). These functional phenotype alterations induced by rh-SEMA7A were predominately abrogated by targeting the integrin β1 receptor instead of PlxnC1, indicating a β1-dependent effect.

The SEMA7A/integrin β1 axis is known to activate several downstream signalling molecules, such as PI3K/Akt, mTOR, ERK, p38 and JNK [36–38]. To disclose the potential downstream signalling pathway-mediated effects of SEMA7A/integrin β1 axis, we first performed a single-gene GSEA analysis based on SEMA7A expression and found that the AKT signalling pathway was significantly activated when SEMA7A expression was up-regulated. Our bioinformatics analysis also found a positive correlation between SEMA7A with AKT or P300 signaling (Fig.7A-B). Then, we performed western blot to investigate which of these downstream signalling molecules of the SEMA7A/integrin β1 axis are activated in conjunction with p300 activation. As displayed in Fig.7C, we observed the simultaneous phosphorylation of p300 at S1834 and Akt at S473. To further elucidate this finding, GBC-SD cells were treated with rh-SEMA7A for 0–120 min, and the levels of p-p300 (S1834) and p-Akt (S473) were evaluated. The results showed that p-p300 activation kinetics were consistent with those of Akt, both showing time-dependent phosphorylation in response to rh-SEMA7A (Fig.7D). Next, we investigated whether Akt physically interacted with p300. Co-IP assays confirmed a direct interaction between Akt and p300, independent of rh-SEMA7A treatment (Fig.7E and Fig. S11A), which is consistent with previous studies that Akt phosphorylation of p300 at Ser-1834 is essential for its histone acetyltransferase and transcriptional activity [22]. Furthermore, we examined the role of Akt signalling in SEMA7A-mediated p300 activation, promoting EMT and cancer stemness in GBC cells (Fig.8F and Fig. S11B-E). Treatment with rh-SEMA7A elevated Akt phosphorylation (S473), which was inhibited by pretreatment with integrin β1-neutralising antibody or the PI3K inhibitor LY294002. To evaluate the involvement of Akt activation in the paracrine SEMA7A/integrin β1 axis-induced phosphorylation of p300 at S1834, we further measured the changes in p-p300 (S1834) levels in response to rh-SEMA7A after pretreating NOZ and GBC-SD cells with the PI3K inhibitor LY294002. The inhibition of PI3K suppressed the SEMA7A/integrin β1 axis-induced increase in p-p300 (S1834) levels in GBC cells (Fig.8F and Fig. S11B). Consistently, the inhibition of PI3K partially reversed the SEMA7A-induced promotion of EMT and cancer stemness in GBC cells (Fig. S11C-E).

P300 phosphorylation at S1834 has been shown to significantly activate p300 co-transcriptional activity [7]. Moreover, p300 signalling plays a vital role in EMT and cancer stemness [39,40]. To further investigate the downstream effectors of the paracrine SEMA7A/integrin β1 axis and explore the potential role of p300 in SEMA7A-induced malignant phenotypes in GBC, we examined p-p300 (S1834) levels after treatment with rh-SEMA7A or integrin β1 blockage. As displayed in Fig.8A and Fig. S12A, treatment with rh-SEMA7A significantly increased the expression level of p-p300 (S1834) in GBC and NOZ cells, while pretreatment with an integrin β1-neutralising antibody inhibited this expression. Additionally, we also cultured GBC cells on 0.5 kPa and 16 kPa silicon gel, and collected cell lysates for western blot to detect the expression level of p-p300 and t-p300 (Fig. S12B). To elucidate whether p300 is the downstream effector of the paracrine SEMA7A/integrin β1 axis, GBC cells were transfected with two different p300 shRNAs or treated with C646 (a p300 inhibitor) and then incubated with rh-SEMA7A for 24 h. rh-SEMA7A treatment promoted the invasion, EMT and cancer stem-like features of GBC cells, while these effects were mitigated by targeting p300 (Fig.8B-D, Fig. S12C-G and Fig. S13A-C). Furthermore, we investigated whether p-p300(S1834) was the downstream effector of the paracrine SEMA7A/integrin β1 axis by generating a p300S1834A mutant, which replaced serine 1834 with alanine [7]. The reintroduction of wild-type p300 instead of p300S1834A into p300-depleted GBC cells dramatically reversed the repression of invasion, EMT and cancer stemness induced by targeting p300 in GBC cells (Fig.8E and Fig. S14A-D). After rh-SEMA7A stimulation of GBC cells, H3K27ac significantly increased, while H3K27ac decreased after mutation of P300S1834 site (Fig. S15A-B). ChIP assay also found that rh-SEM7A stimulation of GBC cells can significantly increase P300 or H3K27ac-mediated the transcription of EMT regulator such as Snail and ZEB1 (Fig. S15C-F), which plays important role on EMT-induced cancer stem cell like properties [41]. In summary, these findings suggest that SEMA7A enhances invasion, EMT and cancer stem-like features in GBC cells by inducing the phosphorylation of p300 at S1834.

GBC is designated an orphan disease and presents unique challenges due to its distinct molecular profile compared to cholangiocarcinoma [1,42], often characterised by a desmoplastic microenvironment enriched with collagen-rich ECMs. This microenvironment contributes to increased matrix stiffness, largely orchestrated by CAFs, which play pivotal roles in GBC progression [4]. GBC cells recruit fibroblasts and induce their activation into CAFs to build a favourable stromal microenvironment to promote tumorigenesis, proliferation, invasion, metastasis, EMT and cancer stemness as well as increase the stiffness of GBC [4,16]. Notably, an elevated matrix stiffness is now considered a hallmark of the tumour microenvironment (TME). This feature is also recognised as a key mediator in not only fostering malignant transformation but also modulating cancer aggression [6]. However, the role of GBC stroma on the biology of the activated GFs remains poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that matrix stiffness further activates GFs into CAFs through YAP/TAZ signalling. Similarly, matrix stiffness induces YAP/TAZ nuclear translocation and TEAD1-dependent transcription of activation markers of GFs, such as α-SMA, CTGF, FN1 and Col1A1, to enhance GF activation [32]. Notably, YAP/TAZ function is crucial for the transformation of fibroblasts into CAFs, which in turn, promote matrix stiffness and malignant phenotype [32,43].

Matrix stiffness not only activates fibroblasts but also enhances the transcription and paracrine release of various tumour-promoting factors, such as CXCL12, IL6, IL11, PDGF-A, PDGA-B and VEGFA, to facilitate tumour metastasis [7]. However, paracrine pro-tumorigenic cytokines after matrix stiffness-induced GF activation remain unclear. SEMAs play prominent roles in developing and maintaining organs and tissues, such as modulating cell morphology, cell motility and axonal guidance during neuronal development [10]. Furthermore, an emerging body of evidence has verified that SEMAs play critical roles in cancer biology, directly correlating with tumour growth, invasion, tumorigenesis, metastasis and therapeutic resistance [10]. However, these studies mainly focus on investigating the effects of SEMAs in tumour cells, and the expression pattern of SEMAs in CAFs under stiffness microenvironment and their tumour-promoting effects on GBC cells remain inadequately understood. Thus, in this study, we focused on SEMA7A expression and secretion in activated GFs under stiff conditions. Moreover, RT-qPCR identified SEMA7A mRNA as the predominantly upregulated SEMA in activated GF. Further mechanistic explorations revealed that matrix stiffness-induced transcription and secretion of SEMA7A in GFs was highly dependent on YAP/TAZ signalling. Thus, these findings reveal that SEMA7A is a novel force-dependent expressed and secreted soluble factor in activated GFs.

SEMA7A’s involvement in post-injury inflammation and tissue fibrosis is established, yet its role in directing stromal cell phenotypes, particularly fibroblasts, remains elusive. Notably, SEMA7A can modulate integrin signallingviacis-coupling with active integrin α5β1 on the cell plasma membrane, facilitating rapid integrin adhesion strengthening to FN1 and normal downstream mechanotransduction, ultimately enhancing fibroblast adhesion, cytoskeletal alteration and migration [13]. Moreover, SEMA7A can exist in both membrane-bound and soluble forms, with distinct roles in diseases and tumours [44]. Both secreted and membrane-bound SEMA7A play vital roles in modulating multiple immunoinflammatory diseases and tumours [10,44]. Previous studies have already demonstrated that soluble SEMA7A, presenting its native integrin-binding RGD motif, activates downstream signalling, such as FAK, MAPK and ERK [15]. However, whether soluble SEMA7A possesses different functions from membrane-bound SEMA7A and activates different signalling pathways warrants further exploration. Herein, plexin C1 (PLXNC1) and integrin β1 were identified as the two main functional receptors of SEMA7A [14,35,45]. After interacting with SEMA7A, both types of receptors undergo an immediate conformational alteration to activate corresponding intracellular signals [45]. In this study, we observed that soluble SEMA7A secreted by activated GFs under stiff conditions promote GBC invasion, EMT and cancer stemnessviaintegrin β1 rather than PLXNC1, suggesting receptor-specific tumour-promoting functions of SEMA7A in different cancer cells.

Furthermore, matrix stiffness-induced GF activation and subsequent SEMA7A secretion, promoting EMT and cancer stem cell-like traits of GBC cells by activating the integrin β1/AKT/p300 signalling cascades. Previous studies have verified that p300 induces histone H3 lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac) at target gene promoters, enhancers and super-enhancers, thereby activating gene transcription [46]. Additionally, p300 is overexpressed in cancer cells and drug-resistant cancer cells, activating oncogene transcription and inducing cancer cell proliferation, survival, metastasis, tumorigenesis, immune evasion and drug resistance [46]. In conjunction with BRD4 and BRG1, p300 also induces H3K27ac and pluripotency gene transcription, such as OCT4 and NANOG, which drive cancer stemness [23,47]. Moreover, the dysregulation of p300 is regarded as a pivotal regulator of EMT and cancer stem-like traits [39,40]. Whole-exome and ultradeep sequencing of GBC revealed genes with non-silent mutations, such as ERBB signalling components (EGFR, ERBB2, ERBB3 and ERBB4 and their downstream genes) [48]. Interestingly, ERBB mutation directly activates Akt, which is the canonical upstream component of p300 signalling [7]. Moreover, this study confirmed that CAF-derived SEMA7A interacted with the transmembrane receptor integrin β1 on GBC cells, which induced Akt (p-Akt at S473)-mediated p300 activation (p-p300 at S1834) to promote EMT and cancer stem-like traits in GBC (Fig.9). These findings underscore the significance of paracrine interactions between GBC cells and CAFs within the stiff tumour microenvironment.

In conclusion, our study elucidates the significant impact of matrix stiffness on GFs, driving their activation and trans-differentiation into CAFs, and upregulating the expression of SEMA7A. Importantly, we demonstrate that matrix stiffness-induced GF activation and SEMA7A secretion promote EMT and cancer stem cell-like properties in GBC cells through the modulation of p300 acetyltransferase activity. This highlights SEMA7A as a potential therapeutic target to disrupt the detrimental crosstalk between CAFs and GBC cells with the stiff tumour microenvironment, offering a promising strategy for combating GBC progression. Targeting SEMA7A could hold significant therapeutic potential in the battle against GBC.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.