Nanocomposites based on nanolignin (NL) and polypyrrole (PPy) are preparedvia in situoxidation polymerization. The chemical structure of the obtained nanocomposites was studied using FTIR and XRD and their morphology was studied by SEM. Broadband dielectric spectroscopy (BDS) was used to study the electrical and dielectric properties of the nanocomposites. The results showed that the dc-conductivity decreases remarkably as the NL concentration increases. It decreases significantly from 2.88 × 10−5to 1.82 × 10−8S cm−1as the NL concentration increases tenfold in the 5% composite form. However, an interfacial polarization that originated from the accumulation of charge carriers at PPy–NL interface became clearer as NL concentration increased. Moreover, NL exhibits weak electrical conductivity due to its semiconducting nature, resulting in a band gap of 1.25 eV in the near-infrared (IR) region. Pure NL yields low efficiencies when used as an electrolyte in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). However, incorporating the conducting polymer PPy significantly improves the performance of NL-based electrolytes. Increasing the NL ratio to 50% optimized the DSSC efficiency, leading to enhanced performance. Overall, the study demonstrates that the integration of PPy with NL significantly promotes the electrical and dielectric properties of the nanocomposites, improving their performance in energy conversion applications.

A novel class of NL-PPy nanocomposites is synthesizedviaanin situoxidative polymerization method. The electrical properties of the material and its performance as a redox-active electrolyte in dye-sensitized solar cells were studied.

The BDS is established in terms of the large body of literature on the dielectric feature of the dipolar materials and moderately conducting electrolyte systems. BDS studies the relationship between both complex parameters (permittivityε*(ω), and conductivity andσ*(ω)), on one hand,viaphenomenological and molecular theories, the empirical relaxation functions and time-dependent molecular properties on the other hand give information on the rotational and translational motions of molecules and charges in molecular-liquids and solids.

This manuscript reports on the development of a novel class of nanolignin–polypyrrole nanocomposites, synthesizedviaanin situoxidative polymerization method. The core novelty resides in the utilization of nanolignin as both a structural scaffold and a dopant-like component, which significantly influences the morphology and electrical properties of the resulting nanocomposite. We systematically investigate the electrical conductivity of these materials and, for the first time, demonstrate their successful application as a redox-active electrolyte in dye-sensitized solar cells. To achieve our goal, composites of polypyrrole (PPy) and NL in varying ratios were prepared using thein situpolymerization method. The chemical structures of the obtained materials were analyzed using various techniques, and their morphology was examinedviaSEM. The electrical properties of the nanocomposites were further investigated using BDS. DSSCs were fabricated by incorporating PPy/NL composites in different ratios as the electrolyte. This study aims to evaluate how the inclusion of NL influences the overall efficiency of the DSSCs.

Soda lignin extracted from Bagasse was prepared in the labs of paper and cellulose department – National Research Centre – Egypt. The monomer, pyrrole (98%) is a product of Alfa Asser. Potassium persulphate (PPS), potassium bromide (KBr), tetrahydrofurane (99.9%), propylene carbonate (PC), ethylene carbonate (EC) anhydrous 99%, and 1-methyl-3-propylimidazolium iodide (IMII) are obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Indium tin oxide (ITO) conductive glass is purchased from KINTEC.HK, China. Titanium dioxide (TiO2) P25 is a product of Degussa, Germany. N3 or Ru-535, and platisol solution (transparent platinum catalyst paint), were purchased from Solaronix, Switzerland. Triton® X-100 for gas chromatography is obtained from Merck. Polyethylene oxide 20 000 (PEO 20 000), acetylacetone 99.3% were purchased from Fluka. Polycarbonate sheet is obtained from General Electric, USA. Acetonitrile (AN) and iodine (I2) pearls are from PA-ACS, PANREAC Quimica SA. Potassium iodide (KI) extra pure are products of SD Fine-Chem Ltd, Mumbai. Barium sulphate (BaSO4), acetone, isopropanol extra pure AR and ethyl alcohol are products of Adwic. All chemicals are used without further treatment.

10.0 g of the oxidant PPS is dissolved in 100 mL cold distilled water then pyrrole monomer (2.23 g, 0.03 mol) is added drop by drop. A black precipitate is formed immediately and the reaction was left under stirring for 24 hours. The formed polymer is separated by filtration, washed and dried in a vacuum oven at 70 °C.

2 g of lignin is dissolved in 200 mL of THF and stirred with a magnetic stirrer till complete dissolution. 160 mL of Millipore water, as non-solvent, is added in a rate of 4 mL min−1. Finally, THF is removed by rotary evaporator and a colloid of NL particles is obtained.

Preparation of the nanocomposite was performed as follows: 10.0 g of the oxidant PPS is dissolved in 40 mL cold distilled water then different amounts NL colloid namely (5, 10, 20 and 50 mL) were added to obtain nanocomposites of different concentrations. The overall volume of the polymerization solution was kept 100 mL. Amount of monomer is added and the reaction proceeded for 24 hours. The formed nanocomposite is separated by filtration, washed several times and finally dried.

The fabrication of the DSSCs was discussed in detail in our previous publication.37Briefly, TiO2photo- and Pt counter electrodes were sandwiched against each other with the electrolyte in between as illustrated inFig. 1.

A 0.5 × 0.5 cm2active area of ITO conductive glass was defined using 35 μm-thick tape to enable uniform deposition of the TiO2filmviathe doctor blade technique, using 1–2 drops of prepared paste. The paste was prepared by grinding 6 g of TiO2anatase (particle size < 25 nm) with 33 wt% PEO (Mw20 000), 14 mL of deionized water, and 0.2 mL of acetylacetone for 30 minutes. Subsequently, 2 drops of Triton X-100 were added, followed by an additional 15 minutes of grinding. After deposition, the film was air-dried, the masking tape removed, and the substrate sintered in air at 450 °C for 30 minutes, then cooled to room temperature. The TiO2films were subsequently immersed in a 5 × 10−5mol L−1N3 (Ru-535) dye solution in isopropanol after cooling to 80–60 °C and were sensitized overnight.

Two to three drops of platisol solution (transparent platinum catalyst paint) were evenly spread onto a clean ITO substrate using a glass rod. The solvent was allowed to evaporate at room temperature over a few minutes. The coated substrates were then fired in air at 450 °C for 15–30 minutes, resulting in the formation of small clusters of catalytically active platinum.

The electrolyte was prepared by dissolving 0.01 g of PPy/NL composite was dissolved in AN in a sealed glass vial with continuous stirring at 70 °C for 1 h. In another vial, 0.5 M KI and 0.5 M I2were dissolved in a (9 : 1 vol) PC/EG mix. The iodine mixture is then transferred to the polymer vial and 0.5 M IMII was added and stirred for 1 h before raising the temperature to 90 °C for 24 h. Liquid electrolyte: 0.5 M KI and 0.5 M I2were dissolved in a (9 : 1 vol) EG/AN mix.

A 50 μm polycarbonate spacer sheet was cut to match the cell borders and used to separate the two electrodes, effectively preventing short-circuiting. After electrolyte injection, the cell was sealed by clamping two opposite sides with paper clips to minimize electrolyte leakage.

FTIR spectroscopy was used to investigate the chemical structure of the prepared. An instrument from Bruker VERTEX 80 ATR-FTIR (Germany) combined with Platinum Diamond ATR, comprising a diamond disk, was used. The instrument has internal reflector measure spectra in the range of 400–4000 cm−1with a resolution of 4 cm−1and a refractive index of 2.4. The structure of prepared samples was further studied using powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) technique and a diffractometer from Empyrean Panalytical Instruments in the Netherlands, with CuK as an X-ray source of radiation. Scanning electron microscope (SEM), TESCAN VEGA3 was utilized to study sample morphology. UV spectrometer (Shimadzu, Germany) equipped with an internal diffuse reflectance accessory (DRA) is used to study optical properties. The powder samples were dispersed in a non-absorbing medium (BaSO4), so that scattering is minimized.

The performance of the DSSCs was investigated using a 300 W ABA SCIENCETECH solar simulator (Canada) equipped with a xenon lamp and theI–Vdata was recorded and analyzed using a 20 W-2401 SOURCEMETER Keithley. Photo-intensity was fixed to 1 sun or 100 mW cm−2and the equipment was calibrated using a verified reference silicon cell.

The dielectric characteristics of the samples are examined using a Novocontrol high-resolution alpha analyzer in the frequency range of 10−1to 107Hz. This method uses pure nitrogen as the heating agent and is accompanied by a Novocontrol-Quatro temperature controller system. Even at low volume fractions, dielectric spectroscopy is an effective technique for identifying and examining the dynamics of polar segments that relax near nanoparticles. With a measurement uncertainty of less than ±0.5%, the measurements were made at various temperatures between 25 and 150 °C isothermally and temperature is controlled by the Quatro-Novocontrol cryo system and repeated three times. Two stainless steel plate electrodes, the upper one with a 20 mm diameter, and the lower one with a 40 mm diameter, were positioned in parallel geometry between the pristine PES and PES/NL film samples. The complex dielectric functionε*(υ) =ε′(υ) − iε′′(υ), the dissipation factor:(where,ε′ is the real part andε′′ is the imaginary part or dielectric loss,,υis the frequency) were obtained.

Chemical structures of PPy/NL composites compared to pure PPy were investigated by FTIR (Fig. 2) using KBr pellets.45The spectrum of PPy depicted inFig. 2ashows a band at 3445 cm−1related to NH stretching vibration. The band at 1637 cm−1can be attributed to CCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019O bond that appears in PPy prepared by PPS as oxidizing agent due to over-oxidation.46The band at 1042 cm−1is corresponding toCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019C–H in-plane deformation vibration.47Bands corresponding to the vibration of the pyrrole ring and CCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019C appeared at 1454 and 1550 cm−1; respectively. However,Fig. 2breveals FTIR spectra of different concentrations of PPy/NL hybrids. The spectra depict a broad band at 3200–3400 cm−1is related to N–H and OH stretching vibration bands. Bands at 2911 and 2852 cm−1are corresponding to aliphatic C–H. The weak band at 2103 cm−1is due to C–H stretching vibration,48while CCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019O band can be observed at 1654 cm−1. TheCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019C–H in-plane vibration band is shifted to 1054 cm−1. Nevertheless, the shift in band positions in the prepared composites compared to PPy confirms the electrostatic interaction between PPy and nanolignin as shown inScheme 1.

XRD diffraction patterns of PPy/NL composites compared to PPy (inset) are presented inFig. 3. The XRD pattern of PPy showed one peak can be observed at 2θ= 20° related to the (002) plane and consistent with polymer chain diffraction confirming the amorphous structure of the polymer.49Moreover, XRD investigations for PP/NL composites revealed 2 peaks, the main one shifted to 2θ= 24.12° and a small bump at 2θ= 42°. These findings suggest the formation of chain ordering in the obtained composite most likely due to the hydrogen bonds between PPy and NL functionalities as previously mentioned.

The morphology of PPy, PPy/NL5, and PPy/NL50 was investigated by scanning electron microscope, and the images are presented inFig. 3. Images of PPy [Fig. 4a and b] revealed that the particles have spherical morphology similar to that observed before for PPy prepared by oxidation polymerization method.50The particle size ranged from 103–189 nm (Fig. 4b). It should be pointed out that many factors affect particle size of the polymer such as temperature, and solvent concentration of the oxidant.51,52The addition of 5% NL to the polymerization solution yielded polymer particles of irregular structure. The particle size increased remarkably with lowest particle diameter of 182 nm and reached 364 nm (Fig. 4d). It can be claimed that NL the addition of 5% of NL promoted larger particle size by acting as solid-state nuclei that adsorbed the formed oligomers and hence facilitated the evolution of the nanocomposite particles. Further increase in the concentration of NL in the polymerization medium led to the formation of nanocomposite of granular porous structure as depicted inFig. 4e. The particle size shown inFig. 4franged from 89 to 128 nm. The reason for this decline in the particle size might be attributed to the presence of a large amount of NL in the reaction medium that hindered the propagation step.

The real part of complex conductivity,σ′, was measured for the investigated PPy/NL composites and presented as a function of frequency ranging from 0.1 Hz to 10 MHz inFig. 5in comparison with that of the PPy.

It became a well-known feature in such conducting and semiconducting polymer composites that the frequency behavior of the ac-conductivity at lower and intermediate frequencies shows some case of frequency independence or what is usually called plateau-like behavior that directly yields the dc-conductivity.53–55The determined dc-conductivity,σdc, of the pure PPy was illustrated against temperatures varied between −40 and 100 °C inFig. 6. The figure shows thatσdcincreases linearly from 1.85 × 10−3S cm−1at −40 °C to 5.87 × 10−3at 100 °Ci.e.increased only about three times with increasing temperature from −40 to 100 °C. This indicates the slight effect of temperature on the enhancement of the conductivity of PPY. On the other hand, the dc-conductivity of the different concentrations of PPy/NL hybrids as presented inFig. 7shows the high effect of NL in reducing the conductivity of PPy.Fig. 5revealed that the addition of 5% NL decreased dc-conductivity from 3.53 × 10−3of PPy pure to 2.88 × 10−5i.e.about two orders of magnitude lower. However, increasing NL content to 50% reduces the dc-conductivity to be 1.82 × 10−8i.e.by about 6 decades.

The ac-conductivity (defined as the real part of the complex conductivity),σ′, is characterized by the low frequency and intermediate frequenciesviaa plateau that directly yields the dc-conductivity,σdc(Fig. 5). The plateau followed by some characteristic frequency,νc, at which dispersion sets in and turns into a power law at higher frequencies.Fig. 8shows the permittivity,ε′ as presented against frequency for the investigated hybrids. At the characteristic frequency (fc), the permittivity turns from the high frequency limit to the static value,εs. Their dispersion step is a direct measure for the dipole moment and hence the polarity of the investigated system. Further decrease of frequency shows a mostly linear increase of the permittivity indicating the contribution of the conductivity. The other side ofFig. 8shows the electric loss modulusM′′ presentation. It shows the contribution of the interfacial polarization or what is usually called Maxwell–Wagner–Sillars (MWS) polarization relaxation that became very clear as the ratio of NL increased.55–58This is the origin of the dispersion step of the relaxation dynamic shown in the permittivity representation.

The band gap energies of all powder samples were measured using a UV-vis spectrophotometer equipped with a DRA attachment. The band gaps were calculated using the Kubelka–Munk (KM) remission function, which converts the reflectance data to pseudo-absorption, commonly used approach for estimating band gaps in semiconducting materials.59,60The band gap values were determined by extrapolating a least squares linear regression of the initial significant absorption onset until it intersects with the baseline. The pure NL sample exhibits a clear absorption edge with a band gap of 1.25 eV, falling within the near-infrared region (Fig. 9), consistent with its characteristic brown color. In contrast, the KM plots of all NL/PPy composites show a broad, flat absorption response with no distinct onset, indicating a significant quenching of the band gap. This suggests a loss of semiconducting behavior, likely due to electrostatic interactions between NL and PPy, which alter the electronic structure and density of states in the composites.

The PPY electrolyte and its composite with NL at varying concentrations were utilized to fabricate DSSCs (0.5 × 0.5 cm2) and tested under simulated sunlight at an incident power of 100 mW cm−2. The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics were recorded, and the fill factor (FF) and efficiencies (η) were calculated usingeqn (1)–(3)and are presented inTable 1. The NL electrolyte exhibited significantly higherVocandIsccompared with the liquid electrolyte, resulting in higher power output (Pm) and efficiency (0.224%). However, the FF is lower, suggesting that while NL can generate more power, it may not be as efficient at converting this power into usable electricity. This improvement inVocis likely due to NL's insulating character and abundant surface functional groups, which may suppress charge recombination at the TiO2/dye/electrolyte interface and help maintain a higher quasi-Fermi level in the TiO2conduction band. However, upon increasing the PPy into in the PPy/NL composites (PPy/NL10 to PPy/NL50), a gradual decline inVocwas observed.Vocvalues decreased from 497 mV (PPy/NL50) to 364 mV (PPy/NL10), indicating that increasing PPy content leads to higher ionic conductivity but also promotes recombination losses and/or modifies the redox potential of the electrolyte.

Despite the decrease inVoc, the overall device efficiency improved with increasing PPy content. The PPy/NL50 composite achieved the best performance among the composites, with an efficiency of ∼1.0%, compared to just 0.2% for pure NL. This enhancement is attributed to improved charge transport and ionic mobility offered by PPy. The FF values (∼60–65%) observed in these composites further confirm stable cell assembly and favorable electrode–electrolyte compatibility. The pure PPy electrolyte (Fig. 10) exhibited the highest efficiency of approximately 1.4%, with aVocof 505 mV and a high FF of ∼75%, owing to its high ionic conductivity and effective redox mediation. In contrast, the low performance of the liquid electrolyte sample, which also showed a lowVocandJsc, suggests that some of the low-current results may also stem from contact resistance or measurement artifacts in the test setup. These factors are being further investigated to refine future measurements. Overall, these results confirm that the electrolyte composition—specifically the PPy/NL ratio—has a direct impact onVocand overall device performance, and that an optimal balance between conductivity and recombination suppression is critical for maximizing DSSC efficiency.

In this work nanocomposite based on a biopolymer (NL) and a conducive polymer (PPy) were prepared in different ratiosvia in situoxidation polymerization. The formed nanocomposite was characterized using FTIR and XRD. Morphology investigations by SEM revealed that the particles have a spherical shape and their size is reduced significantly by increasing the amount of NL in the nanocomposite. The materials showed reduced electrical conductivity with an increasing amount of NL. Nevertheless, investigation of the electrical and dielectric properties of the nanocomposite revealed that an interfacial polarization has occurred originating from the accumulation of charge carriers at the PPy–NL interface. Moreover, NL demonstrated a band gap of 1.25 eV in the near-infrared (IR) region. When used as an electrolyte in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), the conducting polymer polypyrrole (PPy) significantly improved the performance of NL-based electrolytes. The PPy/NL50 composite showed a notable enhancement in cell efficiency, reaching approximately 1%, compared to only 0.2% for pure NL. This improvement emphasizes the potential of PPy to enhance the performance of NL as an electrolyte in DSSCs. Further optimization of device parameters such as electrolyte thickness, composition, and cell architecture will be essential to fully evaluate and improve the effectiveness of the NL–PPy composite strategy.