Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

Received 2025 Jun 26; Accepted 2025 Jun 26; Issue date 2025 Sep.

This is an open access article under the terms of thehttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for commercial purposes.

In this issue of theJEADV, two papers address a previously unmet need—providing evidence for the use of dupilumab in the treatment of atopic dermatitis (AD) during pregnancy.

Atopic dermatitis affects individuals of all ages and sexes and persists into adulthood in approximately 5–10% of cases. These cases often require active treatment in women of childbearing potential and during pregnancy.1However, women with moderate to severe AD—or with other conditions requiring systemic treatment—have frequently been left in a therapeutic limbo. Due to limited safety data, physicians often advise stopping systemic treatment before and during pregnancy to avoid any risk to the fetus.

In the first paper, Preuss et al.4utilize the US‐based collaborative network TriNetX, which provides real‐time access to up to 110 million electronic health records.4From this vast dataset, they identified 293 women who had been exposed to dupilumab during pregnancy. Remarkably, the study found no increased risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes. In fact, the data suggested a reduced risk of preterm labour among dupilumab‐exposed women.

The second paper, by S. Gregoriou et al.5presents a systematic review of published case reports involving dupilumab use during pregnancy.5The authors identified 14 publications, encompassing 61 pregnancies and 2 cases of breastfeeding. While 28 of the women discontinued dupilumab upon learning they were pregnant, fetal exposure had already occurred during some of the most critical periods of gestation. Even so, the study reported no adverse pregnancy outcomes among the cases reviewed.

Together, these two studies offer reassuring evidence for dermatologists managing moderate to severe AD in pregnant patients. The findings suggest that dupilumab does not increase the risk of adverse pregnancy outcomes and may even offer some benefits. Based on the data presented in this issue of theJEADV, it may be reasonable to consider continuing dupilumab in selected patients with moderate to severe, uncontrolled AD—especially when associated with comorbidities such as asthma—who become pregnant.

Christian Vestergaard has served on advisory boards/received honoraria/received grants from Pfizer, Novartis, LEO Pharma, Abbvie, Sanofi, MSD and Pierre Fabre; Mette Deleuran has served on advisory boards/received honoraria/received grants from Pfizer, Novartis, LEO Pharma, Abbvie, Sanofi, MSD, Almirall, Pierre Fabre, Kymab, Numab, Eli Lily, Regeneron, Union Therapeutics and Incyte. Mette Deleuran has received research support, travel support, honoraria for lecturing and/or consulting/advisory board agreements from AbbVie, Eli Lilly, LEO Pharma, Incyte, La Roche Posay, NUMAB Therapeutics AG, Pierre Fabre, Pfizer, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Sanofi Genzyme, Union Therapeutics, Mustela, Almirall and Kymab.

Linked articles:S. L. Preuß et al.J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol2025;39:1576‐1587.https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.20670; and S. Gregoriou et al.J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol2025;39:e750–e755.https://doi.org/10.1111/jdv.20570.