With the increase of urban development in big cities, the requirement for deep excavations to build the tall building foundations of has increased significantly. Depending on the dimension and location, these excavations can have an important effect on underground tunnels, especially subway tunnels. In order to get a better realization of the behavior of an existing tunnel due to a vicinity deep excavation, this research that consists of three main parts, propose new intelligent models for predicting the excavation-tunnel displacements using machine learning. For the purpose four equations present to predict displacements of the excavation-tunnel complex. In the first step, a three-dimensional (3D) finite-element (FE) model validate against case stories. In the second step, a number of three-hundred and sixty 3D simulations of an existing tunnel located directly beneath an excavation under different parameters such as excavation geometry and tunnel positions beneath the excavation were carried out. Finally in the third part, based on the simulation results two models developed for predict and validate the,,andvalues. Based on 3D FE results, the displacements mechanisms of the excavation-tunnel complex were presented. It was observed that theratio variation have a more effect on thevalues than. Additionally, thevalues occurs approximately in the middle. The results demonstrate that when the tunnel located at very close beneath the excavation area, tunnel tends to move vertically towards the excavation area. Asvalue increases, the vertical displacement values of the tunnel decrease. The proposed models validated against FE results the results show that the models has an acceptable performance in estimating the of excavation and tunnel displacements.

Deep or semi-deep excavation in soil media create deformations in the soil. Soil deformations include the retaining structure horizontal displacement and the ground settlement. It can be predict that due to the reduction of the amount of soil surcharge on the tunnel, an excavation in the areas close to the tunnel will cause significant displacements in the tunnel face. If the displacements are more than the allowable limit, it will cause problems in the stability of the tunnels, which must be evaluated by geotechnical engineers. Numerical simulation and modeling is one of the methods that can be used to control the excavation-tunneling complex behavior.

In the previous studies, the tunnel deformations have been investigated by authors using numerical simulation10–16. Kasper and Meschke10used MARC FE software to model of interaction the tunnel excavation that capable to simulate whole the stages of excavation. Wang et al.11used FE to study on the behavior of the tunnel surface settlement in cohesiveness soil in long-term condition. They reported that the creep behavior of cohesiveness soil has a serious role in the long-term behavior of ground settlement. Hajjar et al.12studied on the effect of round length, surcharge depth and cohesion in drained conditions and proposed a correlation theory. By using 2D and 3D FE simulations, Kavvadas et al.13have investigated on the longitudinal deflections during tunnel construction in soil media. Jallow et al.14conducted 3D FE parametric study to evaluate the settlement behavior of shield tunnel in long-term condition. They concluded that 80% of the overall settlement values related to creep behavior, whereas, consolidation behavior is 5% of the overall settlement. Mu et al.15by performing 3D FE analyses have studied on the influences of some parameters on the tunnel deformations and the ground settlement.

Today, the use of application of machine learning techniques to predict the excavation-tunneling response has become very widespread among engineers and researchers17–19. Guo et al.17presents a method to predict the tunnel displacement and internal forces due to adjacent excavation. The proposed method combines additional stresses from excavation unloading and dewatering effects. They showed that excavation depth significantly influences tunnel responses when exceeding the tunnel’s cover depth. Zhao et al.18developed a Bayesian-optimized XGBoost (BO-XGBoost) model. They included that proposed model outperformed other models in displacement prediction and generalization, with construction factors being the most influential and its interpretability offers practical insights for geotechnical decision-making.

A summary of recent studies that focused on the excavation-tunneling problem is present in Table1.

Summary of recent research outcomes performed on the excavation-tunneling complex.

It should be pointed that the behavior of excavation-tunneling complex should be consider in 3D condition. Considering the running time of 3D numerical analyses and for plane strain conditions, in practice, often-2D numerical modeling is more popular than 3D modeling. A brief overview to the studies carried out in Table1shows that, although several researchers have evaluated the tunnel behavior beneath an excavation by numerical modeling, but to accurately examine the simultaneous performance of the excavation-tunneling complex, the number of 3D models are really limit. Beside, a lack of practical equations that can predict the values of excavation-tunnel displacements is exist in the technical literature. Considering such these conditions, the present study has carried out with achieving the following aims.

For this purpose, 360 3D FE models were analyzed and the results used to extract intelligent models for evaluation the excavation-tunnel response.

Before conducting FE analyses, the Texas A&M case study excavation was modeled in 3D condition, then the results validated against the measurements data and Briaud and Lim26results. Some parts of the Texas A&M case study excavation that used in modeling of in this study were supported by two-level tie-back wall (soldier beam and the ground anchors). The excavation depth was 7.5 m and the ground anchors withwere located at 1.8 and 4.8 m below the wall. Also, the wood lagging with dimensions of 2.4 × 0.3 × 0.075 m (length × height × thickness) used to stabilize the soil between soldier beams. More details are provided in the literature and readers are referred to Weatherby et al.27, Briaud and Lim26and Abraham28.

By using PLAXIS 3D, v.2020 software29, 3D numerical analyses of this study were performed to evaluate the excavation-tunnel response. The software work according to finite-element method (FEM) and can simulate most of the geotechnical and structural elements especially SSI effects. The hardening soil (HS) model, a constitutive model in PLAXIS, effectively predicts the excavation-tunnel deformations. Hence, in this study, we adopted the HS model. Moreover, this constitutive model has been used in the previous studies on excavation issues30–32. The triple stiffness modulus coefficients related to the reference stress in the HS model are determined from Eqs. (1), (2), (3).

In HS model, in order to determine the stiffness modulus usually Eq. (4) is used.

Based on Abraham28, the soil media in the 3D simulation was divided into four layers. The input parameters of the soil layers for the HS model are tabled in Table2. In 3D numerical simulation, plate element was used to simulate soldier beam and wood lagging element. Also, beam, a node-to-node anchor and embedded beam elements were used to model wales, unbonded length and bonded length of ground anchors, respectively. Based on Abraham28, eighteen stages of construction were used to model the two-level tie-back wall at the Texas A&M case study excavation.

Input parameters of the soil layers for the HS model used in numerical simulation.

In Fig.1, a comparison between the profiles of wall deflection at final step of excavation obtained from the 3D numerical simulation, measurements and Briaud and Lim26study is shown. As it is seen, the value of deflection occurred at the wall crest is 38.60, 36.88 and 34.80 mm from the measured data, this study and Briaud and Lim26study, respectively. In addition, the different between results of this study and Briaud and Lim26study was equal to 5.9%. The calculated wall deflection of this study and Briaud and Lim26results are greater than the measurements for the most parts of the wall. One important contributing factor to the deviations between the results is the uncertainty associated with determining certain soil parameters and their depth-varying heterogeneity. As illustrated in Table2, the soil parameters utilized in the numerical simulation were taken directly from Abraham28study. Other nuances include the measurement errors, construction stages, facing element modeling, site investigation issues, etc. It should be mentioned that the maximum value of wall deflection obtained from 3D numerical simulation of this study are lower than the values 0.2−0.5%that recommended in FHWA-SA-99-01533.

Comparison between the results obtained from the 3D numerical simulation, measurements, and Briaud and Lim26study.

The results ofwithfor the Texas A&M excavation (obtained from the measured data, Briaud and Lim26and the current studies) and other case histories shows in Fig.2. For comparison, the actual data obtained from Singapore, China34,35and Taiwan36,37and are also included. As seen in Fig.2, the values ofobtained from the current study are consistent with Briaud and Lim26study and the measured data. In addition, the results show the values ofare in a range of 0.5%.

The relationship between theandfor the Texas A&M excavation and comparison with some case histories in the world34–37.

From Figs.1and2, it can concluded that the 3D FE model adopted in the current study can reflect the soil and structural elements deformation very well. Therefore, use of the 3D FE simulations for studying on behavior of the other structures such as the excavation-tunnel is justified.

After validating the 3D FE model, a parametric numerical study has been carried out on the factors affecting the excavation- tunnel response. In the current study, we examined on the effects of excavation geometry (including excavation length and depth) and the tunnel’s position relative to the bottom of the retaining wall. To evaluate the excavation- tunnel response, a total of 360 3D FE simulations were conducted by PLAXIS 3D.

Figure3depicts the schematic 2D and 3D view of the excavation-tunneling complex. As seen, the existing circular tunnel has been located directly beneath the excavation area and in perpendicular to the longitudinal direction of the excavation. Such a combination is seen more in the densely populated areas of big cities of the world.is the horizontal distance of the excavation center from the tunnel center anddenotes the vertical distance of the retaining wall bottom from the tunnel center. When, the tunnel is located exactly below the excavation center with certain value of. In the next section, the details of 3D FE geometry model dimensions and the model parameters presents.

Schematic of the excavation-tunneling complex: (a) 2D view and (b) 3D view.

The use of FE and discrete-element (DE) methods in geotechnical engineering was reported in the past studies7–9,38–41. In this study, we used PLAXIS 3D software to model the excavation-tunneling complex. For simplicity in 3D running time, only one layer with parameters illustrated in Table2(second layer) consider in the simulation. As seen, the soil behaviour was assumed HS model. The underground water surface have been considered to be at level of -4 m from ground surface. Due to the easy in implementation of the ground anchors in sandy soil, soil anchoring system with diaphragm wall used as a retaining structure in the simulations.and. The retaining structure systems used for stability of excavation wall presents in Fig.4. It should be pointed that, to keep the same safety of factor against basal failure, the ratio ofhave been kept constant. As shown in Fig.4, four, five and six rows of four strands ground anchors are used to stabilize the excavation wall withand, respectively. The unbonded length of ground anchors designed to continue behind the failure wedge. According to the recommendation FHWA-SA-99-01533, the bonded length of ground anchors was considered 8 m. The horizontal distance of the ground anchors was 3 m, which were prestressed with a force of 60 tons. Such this system has been used previously for stabilizing the excavation wall in some case studies42,43.

The retaining structure systems used for stability of excavation wall at: (a), (b), and (c).

The tunnel analyzed in the current study is circular shape with a diameter of 10 m. In numerical simulations, plate element was used to simulate diaphragm wall and tunnel. Interface element was used to consider the interaction between diaphragm wall and tunnel to the surrounding soil elements. Previous researchers have shown that linear-elastic model for structural elements have a reasonable result for excavation or tunnel problem7,14,24,30,31,44–46. Therefore, in the current study we used linear-elastic model to simulate the structural elements including diaphragm wall, tunnel and ground anchors for the excavation-tunnel problem. The input parameters of the structural elements used in the 3D FE analysis lists in Table3. It should be noted that the diameter of diaphragm wall were 1 m and other parameters were considered according to the Chheng and Likitlersuang31study. In addition, the structural parameters of the tunnel chosen based on Huang et al.30and Tabaroei et al.9studies. For determining of the of ground anchors parameters a borehole with diameter of 0.146 m were used and the type of strand used for stabilizing the excavation were four strand 0.6 inch.

Input parameters of the structural elements used in the 3D FE analysis.

Figure5shows one of the 3D FE model of the excavation-tunnel problem. The dimension of the model is 320 × 260 × 95 m (length × width × depth) and consist of 108,865 10-node triangular elements and 175,823 nodes. In other models, the dimensions of the numerical model were selected in such a way that have a minimum effect on the numerical results. For this purpose, the lateral dimensions extended beyond the values offrom excavation walls andfrom tunnel centerline as suggested by Khoiri and Ou47and Shivaei et al.48, respectively. The height of the model was continued until the value ofbelow the tunnel invert as recommended by Shivaei et al.48. The boundary conditions in base of the model fixed but were supported by rollers in the vertical surface. The details of the structural elements (including diaphragm wall, ground anchors and tunnel) illustrates in Fig.5b. The stage construction simulation for the excavation-tunnel problem presents in Table4. The steps including simulate additional stress caused tunneling, an excavation to a certain depth, active and pre-stress the ground anchors. By excavation in the soil during each steps, the underground water surface was progressively lowered.

(a) 3D FE model of the excavation-tunnel problem and (b) details of the structural elements.

The stage construction simulation for the excavation-tunnel problem.

To assessment the excavation-tunnel response under different parameter, 360 3D FE simulations were conducted, as showed in Fig.6. In all of the FE simulations, the existing tunnel was located at different positions beneath the excavation area (see Fig.3). In order to study the effect of excavation geometry on the excavation-tunnel response, the value ofwas constant 20 m butvalue was varied from 20, 40, 60 and 80 m. It should be noted these values approximate similar to the values that considered in previous studies49,50. To get a better understanding of the tunnel position on the problem behavior, wide range ofandvalues have been adopted in this study (see theandvalues illustrates in Fig.6).

Chart of parameters considered in the numerical analysis program of the excavation-tunnel problem.

In Fig.7, the effects of different values of the tunnel positions and excavation geometry includingandratio behavior are shown. Due to the similarity of excavation behavior to these variations and also large number of 3D FE models, only the results related toandand different values ofandatandpresents. As it is seen, the Fig.7a–c are composed of two parts, the left and right parts are the wall deflection profiles and the surface settlement profiles, respectively. The results reveal that the profiles of wall deflection and the surface settlement are in concave type. At a certain value of, the minimum value of the wall deflection and the surface settlement related to theratio. At ratio of, the displacement at top of the wall is nearly zero. By increasing theratio fromto, an initial deformation is created at the edge of the wall which increased byvalue. Also the Fig.7a–c clearly show that theandvalues increasing withvalue.

Wall deflection and the surface settlement profiles caused by excavation at: (a), (b)and (c).

The results indicated that when theratio increased up to, the maximum values of the wall deflection and settlement increase significantly. Compared with, the changes in theratio have a more significant influence on thevalues. The results portray that thevalues occurs approximately in the middle. In diaphragm walls with ground anchors, the top anchors prevent large deflections near the crest and shifting the peak displacements to the downward of the wall. In addition, the lower part of the wall is restrained by passive resistance from the soil or toe embedment, therefore, the movement near the base reducing. Finally, the middle section has intermediate stiffness, allowing the most deformations under soil pressure.value occurs at a distance between 15 and 18 m from the wall. By increasing the distance from the wall up to 30 ~ 40 m, the variations in the surface settlement are equal to zero. It can be concluded that the dimensions considered in the numerical simulations are correct.

Tunnel deformations at different locations and varying values ofanddepict in Figs.8,9and10. Due to the symmetry in this problem, only the results of the half of the models are presented. Figures8,9and10belong toand, respectively. In these Figures,and,andandand(for the introductionandparameters please see Fig.3). In addition, the orange dashed lines show the variations of tunnel displacements in both directions. As illustrated in the Figs.8,9and10, the results emphasize that the soil deformations at the excavation bottom caused to create a displacement in all of the tunnel locations toward to the excavation area. As can be seen, the tunnel positioned atandtends to move vertically towards the excavation area. By increasing in thevalue, the shape of the tunnel displacements also changes (compare the tunnel located atandto the tunnel located atandin Figs.8a,9a and10a).

Tunnel deformations at different locations caused by excavation activity: (a),and (b),(the tunnel deformation sketches have been magnified 200 fold).

Tunnel deformations at different locations caused by excavation activity: (a),and (b),(the tunnel deformation sketches have been magnified 200 fold).

Tunnel deformations at different locations caused by excavation activity: (a),and (b),(the tunnel deformation sketches have been magnified 200 fold).

Regardless of thevalue, at a certain value of, the values of the vertical displacement of the tunnel decrease asvalue increases (increase the distance from the excavation are) and this decreasing trend increases with the increase ofvalue. At a constant value ofand with an increase invalue, due to the upheaval displacement of the tunnel, thevalue increases, but forand outside of the excavation area, the horizontal displacement of the tunnel decreases. At a given value of, the horizontal and vertical displacement values of the tunnel decrease significantly as the value ofincreases. Asincreases, the displacements of the tunnel also increase. As the yellow dashed lines show in Figs.8,9and10, in a constant value ofand with increasing invalue, the slope variation of these lines decrease.

Artificial neural networks (ANNs) were chosen as the core algorithm for developing the intelligent prediction model due to their exceptional capacity for modeling complex, nonlinear relationships through biologically inspired computation. In addition, nonlinear activation functions used in excavation-tunnel response of this study, allow the modeling of diverse system behaviors, while distributed representations provide inherent noise tolerance-crucial for real-world datasets with inherent variability. The architectural framework addressed in this context entails the creation of a neural network model with seven neurons in the hidden layer. This framework, illustrated in Fig.11, has been iterated four times, with each iteration designating one of the displacement parameters as the target parameter. Subsequently, two neural network models were developed to estimate theandvalues while two additional models were crafted to ascertain the values of theand.

In the training phase for each of the four neural network models in this study, 70% of the all dataset was employed. To evaluate accuracy and test the models, the remaining 30% of the data was utilized. Following the determination of the final models, they were employed as the foundational models to establish the mathematical framework and formulate the equations for estimating displacement values. These aspects are presented and elucidated in the subsequent sections.

In the earlier section, the proposed ANN demonstrated satisfactory error rates. However, the complexity of the ANN structure makes it challenging to ascertain the target accurately. To address this issue, this section focuses on deriving an equation from the previously obtained ANN. The methodology begins by assigning a fixed value to each input variable, termed the reference value. This constant can be the mean or another statistical parameter. Notably, the chosen value for each variable should be non-zero, as the technique involves subtracting values from the reference numbers. In the current study, we determined the average value for the each four input variable parameters based on the designated database (360 datasets) for this purpose. Subsequently, a sensitivity analysis was conducted for each input variable parameter. This involved altering one input variable (e.g., 100 times) while maintaining fixed reference values for the other variables. By performing this analysis, the sensitivity of the output to each input could be gauged.

The intricacies of calculating the target from the complex ANN structure prompted the extraction of an equation from the network. The methodology involved selecting reference values for input variables, emphasizing the need for non-zero values due to the subtraction-based technique. To extend these principles to the surface settlement scenario, a parallel approach is adopted. The reference values, derived from statistical parameters such as the median or mean, are applied to the input variables in the sensitivity analysis. The subsequent analysis reveals the sensitivity of the output to variations in each input variable. Drawing inspiration from the chart variable identified in the horizontal context, an equivalent chart variable is pinpointed for the horizontal displacement of the retaining wall and the surface settlement determination. The selection process hinges on assessing the maximum relative importance, computed from the values of weight of the trained neural network. The method introduced by Milne51, aids in calculating the relative importance of each input variable on the output for thevalues (see FiguresA1andA2in the Supplemental Materials part of the paper).

With the crucial chart variable identified, a new database is established to exert to the ANN for determining thevalues. Similar to thevalues scenario, the database creation involves systematically varying the values of input variables. FiguresA3andA4in the Supplemental Materials part of the paper shows input variables. The resulting variation graphs, representing the relationship between input changes and thevalues, are critical for further analysis.

To avoid redundancy, the methodologies employed for thevalues determination are referenced here without delving into repetitive details. The principles of sensitivity analysis, identification of the chart variable, and database creation remain consistent. FiguresA5andA6in the Supplemental Materials illustrated the average graphs forandvalues, respectively.

Based on Fig. A1, conducting statistical regression allows the derivation of Eq. (5), which depicts the relationship between variableand the target parameter (in this instance,). Using graphs shows in Fig. A5 and regression analysis on their outcomes, Eqs. (6), (7), (8) can be established. Ultimately, thevalue can be determined using Eq. (9).

Upon establishing the relationship between the chart parameter (Eq. (5)) and the average curves (Eqs. (6), (7), (8)), thevalue could be calculated with simplicity using Eq. (9).

Likewise, one can derive relationships for determining thevalue by employing Eqs. (10), (11), (12), (13) and (14).

Building upon the insights gained in the preceding section, which focused on the determination of displacements cussed by an excavation, this section delves into the intricacies of ascertaining tunnel displacements includingandvalues. The groundwork laid in section "Computational framework for determination of displacement values caused by an excavation" involving the application of ANN and sensitivity analyses serves as a valuable foundation for addressing the vertical aspect. Results of these sensitivity analyses for the tunnel problem illustrated in Figs. A7 and A8 of the Supplemental Materials part.

The objective of the sensitivity analysis is to identify a primary variable, termed the chart variable, significantly influencing the network formulation. The selection of this variable holds substantial importance as it directly contributes to the final equation. The approach is based on determining the maximum relative importance that is determined according to the values of weight of the trained neural network. Milne’s method51was employed to predict the relative importance of each input variable on the output, withX1identified as the most crucial parameter, possessing the highest value of relative importance (28.565%). Following this, a new database was created for applying to the ANN, determining the output value for each input vector. The database comprised 50 datasets for each network implementation, allowing for a comprehensive representation of variable changes. The creation process involved incrementing the values of each variable in 50 steps, generating 10 sets of 50 databases for each variable. The variation graphs, representing the relationship between input changes and output, were constructed for each input (see Figs. A9 and A10 in the Supplemental Materials).

To utilize the obtained change graphs, the average of these graphs was determined, and subsequently, the best-fitted curve for each variable was identified through regression analysis as presented in Figs. A11 and A12 of the Supplemental Materials. The relationships for each mean curve were expressed in Eqs. (16), (17) and (18) for thevalue problem.

Upon establishing the relationship between the chart parameter (Eq. (15)) and the average curves (Eqs. (16), (17) and (18)), thevalue could be calculated with simplicity using Eq. (19).

Utilizing a comparable methodology, one can derive relationships pertaining to the determination of thevalue. These relationships are discernible in Eqs. (20), (21), (22) and (24).

A comprehensive comparison of two models, namely the ANN and a Formula-based approach, in predicting thevalues provides in Table5. The evaluation metrics encompass Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) for both training and test datasets, as well as their cumulative values. Focusing on theandvalues details, the MAE and RMSE metrics are presented for the training data, test data, and the overall dataset. The ANN model emerges as the superior performer, showcasing lower MAE and RMSE values across all three datasets, indicating its effectiveness in accurately predicting theandvalues. In contrast, the Formula-based model, while delivering reasonable predictions, exhibits higher error metrics, suggesting a less precise fit to the data (see Fig.12).

Regression for the computational framework to predict thevalues.

It is essential to consider the practical implications of the models. Despite the higher error metrics, the Formula-based technique may be more practical and applicable due to its user-friendly and straightforward nature. This aspect should be taken into account when deciding between the ANN and Formula models for predicting thevalue scenarios. The accompanying Fig.12provides visual insights into the predictive performance of both models.

Examining Table6, which centers on thevalues, a consistent trend is observed. The ANN model consistently outperforms the Formula model across metrics such as MAE and RMSE in both training and test datasets, as well as the combined dataset. The lower MAE and RMSE values for the ANN model indicate its proficiency in capturing thepatterns. Conversely, the Formula-based model displays higher errors, as illustrated in Fig.13, indicating potential limitations in accurately predicting thevalues. While the ANN model excels in precision, it is crucial to consider practicality and applicability. Despite its higher error metrics, the Formula-based technique may be more practical and applicable due to its user-friendly and straightforward nature. This consideration becomes significant when deciding between the ANN and Formula models for predicting the surface settlement scenarios. Figure13displays a visual representation of the predictive performance, aiding in a comprehensive evaluation of both models.

Regression for the computational framework to predict thevalues.

While the ANN model demonstrates superior predictive accuracy in both theandvalues, it’s essential to consider practical applicability. The Formula-based model, despite exhibiting higher error metrics, might be more advantageous in certain scenarios due to its user-friendly nature and simplicity. The Formula model offers a more straightforward approach that is easier to understand and implement, making it potentially more practical for users who prioritize simplicity and ease of application over the absolute precision of predictions. The choice between the ANN and Formula models should therefore be guided by a balance between predictive performance and the practical considerations of usability and simplicity in real-world applications.

A thorough assessment of the performance of two models, the ANN and a Formula-based model, in predicting thevalues presents in Table7. The evaluation metrics encompass MAE and RMSE for both training and test datasets, as well as their cumulative values. The ANN model consistently outperforms the Formula-based model across all scenarios, demonstrating lower MAE and RMSE values. While this highlights the ANN model’s adeptness in fitting the training data and its capacity to generalize to new, unseen data, it’s crucial to consider practical applicability. The Formula-based model, despite yielding higher error metrics, may be deemed more practical and applicable due to its user-friendly nature and simplicity. This aspect should be carefully weighed when deciding between the ANN and Formula models for predicting thevalue scenarios. For a detailed visual representation, regression plots for the horizontal model can be referenced in Fig.14.

Regression for the computational framework to predict thevalues.

Transitioning to Table8, the examination now focuses on thevalues. Consistent with the observations in thevalues, the ANN model showcases superior performance across all metrics compared to the Formula-based model. The ANN model’s commendably low MAE and RMSE values on the training data underscore its robust fit. However, a slight uptick in errors on the test data suggests challenges in generalization. Despite this, the ANN model maintains competitive accuracy levels when considering the entire dataset. In contrast, the Formula-based model consistently reveals higher errors, accentuating the overall superiority of the ANN model in predicting bothandvalues.

It’s important to note that while the ANN model excels in precision, the practical applicability of the models should be carefully considered. The Formula-based technique, despite yielding higher errors, may be deemed more practical and applicable due to its user-friendly nature and simplicity. This aspect should be taken into account when deciding between the ANN and Formula models for predicting vertical displacements in tunnel scenarios. Refer to Fig.15for detailed regression plots illustrating thevalues.

Regression for the computational framework to predict thevalues.

While the results from both tables highlight the robust predictive performance of the ANN model, it’s essential to consider practicality and user-friendliness in real-world applications. Despite the ANN model’s superior accuracy, the Formula-based model may offer advantages in terms of simplicity and ease of implementation. The Formula model’s user-friendly structure and framework make it a potentially more practical choice for scenarios where interpretability and straightforward application are critical. Engineers and practitioners often value models that are not only accurate but also accessible and easy to integrate into existing systems. Therefore, the Formula-based model’s user-friendly nature could make it an effective solution in certain practical contexts, balancing performance with ease of use for more straightforward implementation in engineering and construction applications.

Compared with, the changes in theratio have a more significant influence on thevalues. When theratio increased up to, the maximum values for the wall deflection and settlement increase significantly. In addition, thevalues occurs approximately in the middle. By increasing the distance from the wall up to 30 ~ 40 m, the variations in the surface settlement are equal to zero.

When the tunnel located at very close beneath the excavation, tunnel tends to move vertically towards the excavation area. Regardless of thevalue, at a given value of, the values of the vertical displacement of the tunnel decrease asvalue increases and this decreasing trend increases with the increase ofvalue. At a constant value ofand with an increase invalue, due to the upheaval displacement of the tunnel, thevalue increases. At a constant value of, the values of horizontal and vertical displacement of the tunnel decrease significantly as the value ofincreases.

The ANN proposed model maintains competitive accuracy levels when considering the entire dataset. In contrast, the equation-based model consistently reveals higher errors, accentuating the overall superiority of the ANN model in predicting the,,andvalues. It’s important to note that while the ANN model excels in precision, the practical applicability of the models should be carefully considered. The equation-based technique, despite yielding higher errors, may be deemed more practical and applicable due to its user-friendly nature and simplicity. This aspect should be taken into account when deciding between the ANN and equation models for predicting the excavation and tunnel displacements.