Aging is a progressive decline in physiological & immunological functions, leading to an increased risk of chronic diseases. Taurine is a semi-essential amino acid, reduces inflammation by apoptosis, and oxidative stress by lowering inflammatory factors and decreases oxidative stress. The aim of this pilot study is to evaluate the saliva and serum levels of taurine and interrelated proteins in patients with periodontitis in different age groups.

The study included systemically healthy young (25–44 years old) and old (≥ 65 years old) periodontally healthy and stage III grade B periodontitis patients. Periodontal parameters and salivary flow rates were recorded. Serum and saliva samples were collected to measure the taurine, sirtuin 1(SIRT1), and TNF-α using ELISA kits.

Taurine levels in saliva and serum were significantly elevated in the young periodontally healthy group compared to other groups (p< 0.05). SIRT1 levels in serum were also higher in the young healthy group (p< 0.05), while no significant difference was found in saliva. TNF-α positively correlates with the local inflammatory burden of periodontal disease (bleeding on probing and clinical attachment loss). TNF-α was found the most accurate biomarker (AUC = 0.711).

According to data of this pilot study, young individuals have higher levels of taurine compared to older individuals, and that this variation may be suggested as more strongly associated with age than with periodontal condition.

NCT06635369– 10/10/2024—Retrospectively registered.

Periodontal tissue is exposed to oral microbiota and stimuli from respiration and mastication, maintaining a balance through immune surveillance to prevent severe inflammation. Colonization by specific pathogens disrupts this balance, increasing pathogenicity and triggering inflammatory responses marked by cytokine production and immune cell infiltration [1]. Studies have proved that Interleukin 6 (IL-6) and Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) upregulate the receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa-Β ligand (RANKL) in osteoclasts leading to osteoclasts differentiation and bone resorption in periodontitis [2–4].

Aging is a gradual decline in physiological, biochemical, and immunological functions, resulting in lower survival rates and higher susceptibility to chronic illnesses and disabilities [5]. It involves complex changes, including metabolic dysfunction, reduced stem cell regeneration, increased chronic inflammation, reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation, and telomere erosion [6]. The presence of continuous chronic inflammation leads to increase levels of reactive oxygen species which induce intracellular oxidative stress, then this oxidative stress activates different pro-inflammatory pathways which contributes to the pathogenesis of many age-related diseases like diabetes, cancer, cardiovascular diseases and neurodegenerative diseases [7–12].

Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) is a nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD +) dependent protein deacetylase and plays a role in deacetylation of a variety of substrates being involved in a wide range of physiological functions including cellular senescence, apoptosis, oxidative stress and inflammation [13–15]. It was also speculated that SIRT1 could be directly related to aging and aging-related diseases as it can play a role in regulating pathways like NF-κB, FOXOs, and p53 [16–18]. Similarly, it was shown the SIRT1 levels in serum are affected by periodontal status as SIRT1 levels was shown to be in a decrease in periodontitis patients and its levels in serum increases after periodontal treatment [19].

Taurine is a semi-essential amino acid found in mammalian cells. It plays roles in central nervous system development, retinal calcium regulation, osmoregulation, and membrane stabilization [20]. In vitro and in vivo studies show that taurine supplements reduce inflammation, apoptosis, and oxidative stress by lowering inflammatory factors like TNF-α and IL-6, which in turn decreases oxidative stress and pro-inflammatory responses [21,22]. Studies on taurine and periodontitis show that taurine supplements lower oxidative stress markers in serum and gingival tissues and significantly improve periodontal indices in patients [23,24]. These data suggested that the use of taurine in patients with periodontitis could have a protective role against oxidative stress. Recent studies have found that taurine levels decline with age in mice, monkeys, and humans. These limited studies claimed that taurine reduces cellular senescence, protects against telomerase deficiency, suppresses mitochondrial dysfunction, decreases DNA damage, and decreases inflammaging [25,26].

Although limited studies suggest that taurine may influence the aging process by reducing oxidative stress and may also exert anti-inflammatory effects in periodontitis, its combined role in both aging and periodontitis remains unclear. Accordingly, to our knowledge, there is no study evaluating the salivary and serum levels of taurine in periodontitis patients with respect to age. Thus, the hypothesis of this study is that taurine may be a common effectual biochemical related to aging and periodontitis by offering insights into its role in oxidative stress-related inflammation. Therefore, the aim of this pilot study is to evaluate the saliva and serum levels of taurine and interrelated proteins in patients with periodontitis in different age groups.

The study protocol was approved by the Ethical Committee of Istanbul Medipol University (approval date: 21/12/2023; number: 1078). The Declaration of Helsinki was followed when conducting this cross-sectional study. All participants provided written informed consent.

387 patients who were received at Istanbul Medipol University, Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Periodontology were eligible for this cross-sectional study. The inclusion criteria of the study were (1) young group ages between 18 and 25 years old while old group ages between 45 and 64 [27] (2) no use of antibiotics, anti-inflammatory drugs, immunosuppressants, beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers, or anticoagulants within the last 6 months; (3) absence of diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, or other systemic conditions such as cardiovascular, renal, hepatic, and neurodegenerative disorders; (4) not being pregnant or lactating; (6) being nonsmoker; (7) not having nonsurgical periodontal treatment in the past 6 months or surgical treatment in the past 12 months; (8) not having fewer than 20 natural teeth, excluding third molars; and (9)no use of orthodontic appliances. Of the 387 patients, 91 were excluded for drug use, 83 for systemic diseases, 74 for smoking, 23 for recent periodontal therapy, 35 for refusal to participate, and 15 for not passing the periodontal exam (Fig.1).

A comprehensive periodontal evaluation was conducted, which included radiographic imaging (orthopantomography) and clinical assessment. Clinical periodontal measurements, including pocket depth (PD), plaque index (PI), bleeding on probing (BOP) and clinical attachment loss (CAL) were recorded. The periodontal disease and health status were diagnosed based on the 2017 AAP/EFP classification of periodontal and peri-implant diseases [28]. The periodontal index measurements and classifications were carried out following the methods used in our previous study [29] (Fig.1).

Unstimulated saliva samples were collected according to a modification method of Balci et al. [30]. Patients were instructed to sit in a comfortable position, rinse with distilled water, and subsequently spit into a sterile plastic tube for 10 min. Then, the salivary flow rate (SFR) was calculated for each patient separately. SFR (in μl min−1) was determined by dividing the volume of saliva by the collection time basically [31].

Venous puncture was performed conventionally, and the samples were collected by qualified staff (C.O.) and centrifuged at 4000 g for 10 min to separate the serum [32]. The samples were stored at − 80 °C until transferred to the laboratory for analyses.

Salivary and serum levels of taurine, SIRT1, and TNF-α were measured with ELISA kits (Sunred Biological Technologies, catalog Nos: 201–12-9013, 201–12-2558, 201–12-0083, China) per manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were analyzed in duplicate, and averages were used for calculations.

Statistical analysis was conducted using SPSS version 22.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA), with data normality assessed through Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Shapiro–Wilk tests. Descriptive statistics were complemented by the Kruskal–Wallis test for group comparisons and Dunn's test for post-hoc analysis. Mann–Whitney U test was used for comparisons between two groups, and Chi-Square test for qualitative data. Spearman's rho correlation analyzed relationships between parameters. ROC analyses assessed salivary biomarkers'effectiveness for periodontitis prediction, calculating the area under the curve (AUC) with a 95% confidence interval. Significance was set at p < 0.05.

A total of 66 systemically healthy and non-smoker included participants were categorized into four groups: Young-aged with healthy periodontium (Young-H group;n= 18; 10 females and 8 males; a mean age of 28,67 ± 4,39 years), young aged with Stage III, Grade B periodontitis (Young-P group;n= 19; 13 females and 6 males; a mean age of 32 ± 6,16 years), old-aged with healthy periodontium (Old-H group;n= 12; 8 females and 4 males; a mean age of 68,58 ± 3,48 years), and old-aged with Stage III, Grade B periodontitis (Old-P group;n= 17; 8 females and 9 males; a mean age of 67,71 ± 1,86 years). Table1represents the demographic and clinical data (Table1). The age of both old groups, Old-H and Old-P, was higher than the younger groups, and this difference was statistically significant(p<0.001).While the proportion of males and females varied between groups, the distribution was not statistically significant (p=0.556). The salivary flow rate of the Young-H group was statistically significantly higher than both old-aged a group (Old-H;p:0.024, and Old-P; p:0.006).The difference in SFR among the other groups were not statistically significant(p>0.05).

PI, PD, and BOP measurements were found to be elevated in the periodontitis groups (Young + Old) than the healthy periodontium groups (p< 0.001). This finding was statistically significant (Table1). CAL of the cases in young and old periodontitis were significantly higher than those in Young-H (p< 0.001). Moreover, Old-P group’s CAL levels were significantly higher than Old-H group (p:0.004,p< 0.05). (Table1). Periodontal pockets were measured at a total of 3449 sites in 36 periodontitis patients participating in the study. 596 of the 3449 sites had a pocket depth of more than 4 mm (17.28%). In addition, the mean of PD measured more than 4 mm was 5,03 ± 0.7 (PD more than 4 mm for Young-P= 5,29 ± 0,66; Old-P = 4,73 ± 0,63; Table1).

The saliva concentrations of taurine were higher in the young healthy periodontium group than in the Old-H (p=0.025) and both periodontitis groups (young and old; respectively;p=0.044, p:0.012). This difference was statistically significant (Fig.2). For serum taurine levels, the Young-H and P groups showed statistically significant elevated levels compared to Old-H and Old-P groups (p<0.05). No statistically significant difference in serum taurine levels was found among the other groups (p>0.05).

When SIRT1 levels were evaluated in saliva and serum, there was a statistically significant difference between the groups in terms of serum SIRT1 levels (p=:0.001; p<0.05) (Fig.2). Serum SIRT1 levels of old healthy periodontium and periodontitis groups were significantly lower than young healthy periodontium group (respectively;p=0.002, p:0.001; p<0.05), whereas there were no significant differences in saliva samples among groups (p>0.05) (Fig.2).

There were no significant differences in either salivary or serum TNF-α levels among the groups included (p> 0.05) (Fig.2).

The results of ROC analyses are shown in Table2and Fig.3. None of the biochemicals showed statistically significant diagnostic accuracy in differentiation from periodontitis except for TNF- α in young group in differentiation of periodontitis from periodontally healthy controls. The cut-off point for TNF-α was > 181, the sensitivity was 78.95% and specificity was 61.1% (AUC = 0.711;p=0.029) (Fig.3).

Salivary taurine concentrations were negatively and significantly correlated with BOP (r=−0.291) and PI (r=−0.436) (p< 0.05; Table3). In contrast, the positive correlation was found between saliva TNF-α with BOP and CAL (respectively,r=0.293, r=0.288;p< 0.05). There was a positive, low degree level and statistically significant correlation between salivary SIRT1 level and PD (r=:0.273; p<0.05) (Table3). Serum levels of taurine, and SIRT1 were negatively and significantly correlated to all the clinical periodontal parameters and age mostly at the low degree (p<0.05) whereas there were no statistically significant correlations between serum TNF-α with the parameters (Table3).

Aging is recently characterized by the presence of a continuous low-grade inflammation it is important to understand the effect of antioxidant and ani-inflammatory molecules in the presence of this low-grade chronic inflammation caused by aging alongside the presence of an inflammatory disease like periodontitis [33]. In this study, the levels of taurine and SIRT1, which have recently been noted for their antioxidant and anti-inflammatory effects, are measured in patients with varying periodontal statuses across different age groups to establish a clearer understanding of how their levels are affected by periodontitis and whether this effect changes with age.

TNF-α, which is a pro-inflammatory cytokine, was investigated to measure the levels of inflammation in different groups. The results of this study have showed that taurine levels of saliva and serum were significantly higher in young, periodontally healthy group compared to other groups and similarly SIRT1 levels were significantly higher in the serum of young, periodontally healthy group. The salivary and serum levels of TNF-α had also shown to increase with the periodontal disease via clinical indices correlation while taurine and SIRT1 levels in serum were inversely proportional not only with the periodontal index but also with age. In the insight of these results, TNF-α seems to be a reliable marker for periodontitis both locally (saliva) and systemically (serum) regardless to age. According to the ROC analysis of our study, AUC of 0.711 falls within the acceptable range (0.7–0.8),suggesting that TNF-α has fair discriminative ability.The statistically significant p-value (0.029) confirms that this discrimination is not due to chance.Taken together, these values support TNF-α as a reasonably accurate and clinically relevant biomarker,especially in periodontitis, where TNF-α is biologically known to play a key role in disease pathogenesis. While not perfect, its performance indicates it can be a useful tool in early detection or risk stratification, possibly in combination with other biomarkers to improve overall diagnostic performance.

The main strength of this study is that there is no study previously conducted measuring the levels of these molecules in patients with different periodontal statuses in different age groups. The literature is rich with studies that mainly focused on the different levels of these molecules between periodontally healthy and periodontitis patients in a similar age group and with other studies that compared the levels of these molecules and their differences between patients of different age groups regardless of their periodontal status [16,17,23,25,26]. But in this study, the salivary and serum levels of taurine, SIRT1 and TNF-α are being measured in patients with different periodontal statuses and in different age groups which would give an insight of the overlapping ani-inflammatory role of taurine and SIRT1 in the presence of inflammaging and periodontitis. This study has certain limitations, primarily the low number of older, periodontally healthy individuals. This was due to the stringent inclusion criteria, as it is rare in our community to find individuals over 65 years of age who are non-smokers, free of systemic diseases, and not taking daily medications. Additionally, the lack of sample size analysis can be considered a limitation of this study. Since, there was no similar study to the method before, the number of study groups was determined conventionally. The results of this pilot study can be a data source for power analysis for future studies. Gingival crevicular fluid (GCF) is an inflammatory exudate from periodontal tissues, containing serum, tissue breakdown products, and antibodies against plaque bacteria. Not measuring the levels of these molecules in GCF is another possible limitation and this was due to the nature of the selected molecules being sensitive and due to the available analysis methods and resources.

Studies have reported that there is a difference in the quantity and the quality of saliva between different age groups and between healthy periodontal patient and patients with periodontitis [34]. A 2016 study comparing salivary flow rates (SFR) in adults aged 20–55 and those over 70 found a 38.5% reduction in resting SFR and a 38.0% reduction in stimulated SFR in the older group [35]. In 2015, the result of the meta-analysis study was that the SFR was noticeably lower in older adults than in younger adults [36]. According to the same studies, the reason behind this reduction is that aging causes structural changes in the salivary glands like reduction in acinar volume, loss of secretory tissue and an increase of adiposity causing hyposalivation. Many studies have also compared the SFR in periodontally healthy individuals and periodontitis patients, all these studies concluded that the SRF in periodontitis patients are lower compared to periodontally healthy patients. According to these studies the reason behind this difference could be due to the increased in pro-inflammatory cytokine levels in periodontitis patients causing glandular damage resulting hyposalivation [37–39]. The result in our research supports these data as reporting that the SFR was the lowest in the aging periodontitis group and highest in young, periodontally healthy group (Table1). Recent literature suggests that variations in salivary flow—whether due to stimulation, individual physiology, or external factors—can lead to misleading biomarker readings if not properly accounted for. Increased flow rates may dilute certain molecules, while reduced flow rates may result in higher concentrations, potentially skewing the interpretation of results [40,41]. For inflammatory markers, some—such as IL-1β—are influenced by flow rate, whereas others—such as IL-6 and IL-10—appear relatively unaffected [42]. Although the impact of salivary flow on TNF-α, SIRT1, or taurine levels has not been specifically investigated, accurate measurement and standardization of salivary flow—ideally through normalization (e.g., picograms of analyte per minute of saliva)—are essential for meaningful comparisons. In our study, the use of a standardized collection method, specifically morning unstimulated passive drool, likely helped to minimize variability associated with flow rate differences [43].

The results of the present study highlight a significant relationship between TNF-α, SIRT1, and taurine in the context of aging and periodontitis.Our data indicated a positive correlation between salivary TNF-α, CAL and BOP. This data suggests that TNF-α could be a reliable and useful biomarker for assessing the local inflammatory response in periodontitis patients supporting a previously conducted study that showed a direct relationship between salivary TNF-α levels and periodontitis [44].

On the other hand, our data also showed that there is a negative correlation between the levels of taurine & SIRT1 in serum and all the measured periodontal indices which suggests that the systemic levels of both taurine and SIRT1 could be affected by the patient’s periodontal status. This supports previous studies that showed a decrease in taurine and SIRT1 levels in periodontitis patients [19,45]. At the same time, Taurine & SIRT1 levels in serum also showed to have a negative correlation with age, which supports the previously conducted studies that suggested the presence of a decline in taurine & SIRT1 levels with age [25,26].

Taurine, a non-protein amino acid, is present in various animal tissues, including the brain, heart, and skeletal muscles. In humans, it is mainly synthesized in the liver via the “cysteine sulfinic pathway.” This process begins with cysteine dioxygenase, which oxidizes cysteine into cysteine sulfinic acid. Cysteine sulfinic acid decarboxylase then decarboxylates this compound to form hypo taurine, which is subsequently oxidized by hypo taurine dioxygenase to produce taurine [46,47]. Our data shows that the levels of taurine in saliva and serum in young individuals are significantly higher compared to older individuals regardless of the periodontal process. This suggest that even though taurine showed a negative correlation with periodontitis, its levels have been more affected by age than the periodontal status of the patient suggesting a direct relationship between taurine levels and aging. A study conducted in 2023 reported that concentrations of circulating taurine decline with aging in mice, monkeys, and humans, and at the same time, taurine supplementation increased the healthy lifespan in worms and mice, and health span in monkeys. The same study also proved that taurine reduces cellular senescence, protects against telomerase deficiency, suppresses mitochondrial dysfunction, decreases DNA damage, and decreases inflammaging [25].

Adding our study results to these studies establishes an inevitable idea that taurine levels have an anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory effect and that its levels are significantly affected by age regardless of any other systemic or local factors.

SIRT1 levels in saliva and serum had specified to be a potential biomarker for aging [48,49]. A study has been conducted evaluating the relationship between serum SIRT1 levels and aging in different age groups with respect to gender [49]. The results have showed that SIRT1 levels decreases with age regardless of gender. This study even suggests that not only SIRT1 levels could be a protentional biomarker for age but that it can also be potentially used to estimate biological age of an individual. In the insight of these studies, even though our results have supported that SIRT1 in serum decreases with age and that it could be a very valuable potential biomarker for aging, but our results didn’t show that there is a statistical difference in salivary SIRT1 between the different age groups. This could be due to the difference in saliva and serum as serum is a sterile fluid while saliva has a complex and mixed components making the detection of a very sensitive molecule like SIRT1 challenging especially in the aging population as the volume of the collected unstimulated saliva is very limited.

The overall results of this study have played an important role in separating and understanding the effect of an inflammatory disease like periodontitis on the local and systemic levels of TNF-α, SIRT1 & taurine in the presence of a chronic persistent inflammation like in the case of aging. The main importance of this study is that not only inflammatory cytokines are being measured but at the same time the levels of anti-inflammatory molecules are measured, which gives a clearer idea on how the immunological balance is tipping in periodontitis and aging. It was shown that while TNF-α levels in saliva is a very potential biomarker for periodontitis not being significantly affected by age, taurine and SIRT1 levels in serum have shown to be significantly affected by age more that their levels being affected by the periodontal status. Thus, TNF-α could be suggested as a local biomarker for a patient’s periodontal status regardless of age while taurine and SIRT1 could be a very reliable systemic biomarker for aging.

According to data of our cross-sectional study, young individuals have higher levels of taurine compared to older individuals, and that this variation may be suggested as more strongly associated with age than with periodontal condition. Additionally, there is a correlation between taurine levels and age, regardless of periodontal status.

Clinical implications of the findings in this study include a demonstration that TNF-α positively correlates with the local inflammatory burden associated with periodontal disease (bleeding on probing and clinical attachment loss).

H.S contributed in designing the study, gathering samples, documenting clinical data, and drafting the manuscript with contributions from other authors. O.Y assisted with the study design, sample collection, and result interpretation. C.O also contributed to the study design and result interpretation. N.B was involved in study design, conducted statistical analysis, helped interpret results, and co-authored the manuscript with input from others. B.D aided in recording and analyzing clinical data, while H.T documented clinical data and collaborated on the manuscript. All authors reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript.

This research received no specific grant or funding.