Chronic subdural hematoma (CSDH) typically affects the elderly and is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. However, data on its presentation and outcomes in individuals living with HIV are limited. The purpose of the study was to describe the clinical profile and management outcomes of CSDH in HIV-infected patients.

A retrospective review was conducted between January 2006 and December 2022. Patients were stratified into two groups based on CD4 count ≥ and < 200 cells/µL. Variables analyzed included demographics, clinical characteristics, anti-retroviral therapy (ART) status, radiological findings, surgical management and outcomes.

Forty-eight patients were included, with a median age of 38 years. The majority (52.1%) had a CD4 count ≥ 200 cells/µL. Males comprised 50% of the cohort, with a higher proportion of males in the CD4 count ≥ 200 group (p= 0.029). The median admission Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 14. Common clinical presentations included headaches (47.9%) and hemiparesis (43.8%). ART coverage was 58.3%, and bilateral CSDH was diagnosed in 25%. Most patients (72.9%) received two burr holes. Postoperative complications included recurrence (16.7%), septicemia (10.4%), and subdural empyema (2.1%). Mortality rate was 14.6%. Factors significantly associated with mortality included low GCS, INR > 1.2 and septicemia.

CSDH in HIV-infected individuals presents at a younger age than in the general population. While most patients had CD4 count of ≥ 200 cells/µL, CD4 level was not a predictor of surgical outcome. Mortality was associated with low GCS, increased INR, and septicemia.

Chronic subdural hematoma (CSDH) is an encapsulated collection of liquefied blood and inflammatory by-products within the subdural space for a duration longer than three weeks [1–5]. It is commonly diagnosed in the elderly, who account for up to 69% of cases, and has a rising incidence due to the increasing elderly population [2,6,7]. The pathophysiology of CSDH involves a complex interplay of inflammation, disorganized fibrinolysis, angiogenesis, and coagulation imbalance [1].

The Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) has represented an ongoing public health challenge in South Africa (SA) and continues to redefine the clinicopathological profile of common diseases. With a prevalence of 20.4% among the 15-to-49-year-old age group and an overall prevalence of 14%, SA has the largest number (approximately 7.92 million) of people living with HIV (PLWHIV) globally [8–10]. Besides the increased burden of infectious disease, the emergence of HIV resulted in epidemiological shifts with illnesses such as malignancy presenting at a younger age and with a more aggressive clinical course [11–13].

Pathological interactions between HIV and central nervous system (CNS) pathologies have been reported in the literature [14,15]. Still, to our knowledge, there is no study reporting on the clinical profile and postoperative outcomes of CSDH in PLWHIV, apart from a few case reports of patients with concurrent thrombocytopaenia [16,17].

The purpose of the study was to describe the demographics, clinical characteristics, radiological features, surgical management, and outcomes of spontaneous CSDH in PLWHIV infection.

We conducted a retrospective review in the Department of Neurosurgery at Inkosi Albert Luthuli Central Hospital (IALCH), Durban, SA, examining the medical records of consecutive HIV-infected patients treated for CSDH between January 2006 and December 2022, excluding those with evidence of trauma and those with incomplete medical records. Data were extracted from the hospital information database system (Meditech®, SA), and the radiological reports were reviewed from the picture archiving and communication system (PACS). Criteria for symptomatic CSDH included CT brain scan-confirmed hypodense, iso-dense, or mixed density subdural collection, symptoms referable to increased intracranial pressure or mass effect, and operative note description of the typical “crank oil” fluid, excluding empyema, hygroma, or effusion.

We stratified patients into two groups based on CD4 count less than (<) 200 cells µ/L and those with CD4 count equal to and above (≥) 200 cells/µL. The World Health Organization (WHO) defines advanced HIV disease (AHD) as a CD4 cell count of < 200cells/µL [18]. Data collected included demographics, admission Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), clinical characteristics, radiological findings, laboratory results, viral load, number of burr holes, and postoperative outcomes. The viral load levels were categorized as follows: undetectable (< 50 copies/mL), suppressed (≤ 1000 copies/mL), and unsuppressed (> 1000 copies/mL).

We defined the postoperative recurrence of CSDH as symptomatic recurrent ipsilateral hematoma within a six-month window post-initial surgery following a period of documented clinical improvement. The Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS) was used to determine functional outcome at 6 months. The five categories of the GOS are as follows: 1 = death, 2 = persistent vegetative state, 3 = severe disability, 4 = moderate disability, and 5 = good recovery [19]. The GOS was categorised as favourable (GOS 4–5) and unfavourable (GOS 1–3). The study was granted ethical approval by the Biomedical Research Ethics Committee of the University of KwaZulu-Natal.

We used STATA®v18 (Stata Corp LLC, College Station, TX, USA) for analysis. Descriptive statistics summarized the demographic, clinical characteristics, radiological findings, laboratory results, number of burr holes and postoperative outcomes. Variables were reported as median and interquartile range (IQR). Chi-square tests identified categorical factors associated with mortality. T-tests or Mann-Whitney tests compared numeric risk factors. Kaplan-Meier graphs compared time to complications and death between CD4 groups. Statistical significance was set atp< 0.05.

A total of 1618 patients diagnosed with CSDH were treated during the study period. A flow chart showing included and excluded cases is presented in Fig.1. A total of 48 cases (3%) met the inclusion criteria.

The median age was 38 years, IQR (Q1-Q3) = 33 to 46.3, and there was an equal sex distribution. Twenty-five patients (52.1%) had a CD4 count ≥ 200 cells/µL, while the rest (n= 23; 47.9%) had a CD4 count < 200 cells/µL. Males were significantly more likely to present with a CD4 count ≥ 200 cells/µL (p= 0.029). The summary of the demographic and clinical characteristics is presented in Table1. Headaches (47.9%) and hemiparesis (43.8%) were the most common clinical presentations. Twenty-eight (58.3%) patients were on antiretroviral therapy (ART).

The CT brain scan findings are presented in Table2. The majority of patients (75%) were diagnosed with unilateral CSDH.

Figure2shows CT brain scans of patients with unilateral and bilateral CSDH.

Univariate analysis did not show statistically significant radiological differences between the CD4 groups. The summary of key laboratory results is presented in Table3. The median viral load was 372.5 copies/mL, IQR (Q1-Q3) = 50–23211.8. The viral load categories in the CD4 ≥ 200 group were: undetectable (n= 14; 56%), suppressed (n= 4; 16%), and unsuppressed (n= 7; 28%). The viral load categories in the CD4 < 200 group were: undetectable (n= 4; 17.4%), suppressed (n= 4; 17.4%), and unsuppressed (n= 15; 65.2%). All patients with undetectable viral loads were receiving ART.

The summary of surgical procedures and post-surgery complications is presented in Table4. None of the included patients were managed conservatively. The majority of patients (72.9%) underwent two burr holes. Single burr holes were frequently performed in patients with CD4 < 200 cells/µL, and this was statistically significant (p= 0.045). A drain was left in situ post-drainage of CSDH in 77.1% of cases. The surgical complications included CSDH recurrence (16.7%), septicemia (10.4%) and subdural empyema (2.1%). Univariate analysis showed no statistically significant difference in complications between the CD4 groups (Table4).

The Kaplan-Meier graph in Fig.3compares time to post-surgery complications between the CD4 groups. There was a trend towards early complications in patients with CD4 < 200 cells/µL, however, this was not statistically significant.

The majority of patients (83.3%) had a favourable outcome at 6 months, and the overall mortality rate was 14.6%. The rest of the outcomes are presented in Table5. There was no statistically significant difference in outcomes between the CD4 groups.

Univariate analysis of factors associated with mortality is presented in Table6. Factors associated with mortality included a low GCS (p= 0.004), INR level > 1.2 (p= 0.010), and septicemia (p= 0.001).

The Kaplan-Meier graph in Fig.4compares time to death between the CD4 groups. There was a trend towards early death in patients with CD 4 count < 200 cells/µL; however, this was not statistically significant.

To our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the clinical characteristics and management outcomes of CSDH in HIV-infected individuals. Evidence has demonstrated a strong link between HIV/AIDS and spontaneous intracranial hemorrhage [15,20]. The cause for this association remains unknown, although reports have linked the HIV protein Nef to endothelial and blood-brain barrier dysfunction [21,22]. HIV infection has been identified as a critical link between inflammation, immune activation, and endothelial dysfunction through its gp120, p17, Tat, and Nef proteins in the context of cardiovascular disease [23–25]. There are also reports of increased incidence of vascular disease due to dysregulated or aberrant angiogenesis in HIV-infected people [26]. These involve the p17 protein, which has been found to mimic IL-8 chemokine activity by binding to the IL-8 receptor CXCR1, which increases the formation of matrix metalloproteinases, which helps degrade extracellular matrix components to allow for endothelial migration [25]. They also support the release of proangiogenic factors like VEGF [25]. The outer membrane of CSDH over-expresses Ang-2 mRNA and is thought likely to represent one of the stimuli for forming the fragile new vessels in CSDH [27]. Ang-2 may be increased due to HIV-related inflammation in association with increased biomarkers of endothelial activation and vascular adhesion [28]. ART initiation has been reported to reduce plasma levels of Ang-2 and decrease endothelial activation [29].

The study cohort was predominantly middle-aged with a median age of 38 years, which is lower than the global averages of CSDH, which often exceed 70 years in high-income countries [3,5,7,30]. This younger age profile is likely influenced by the epidemiological impact of HIV in SA and mirrors the patterns observed in HIV-related malignancies and stroke [12,13,20,31]. Interestingly, males and females were equally affected in our study, with HIV prevalence reported to be almost twice as high amongst women when compared to men [20].

Our study found that headaches (47.9%) and hemiparesis (43.8%) were the most common presenting symptoms, consistent with existing literature on CSDH, further compounding the neurological complications of HIV infection [32].

A significant observation is the gender disparity in CD4 counts, with males more likely to have CD4 counts ≥ 200 cells/µL. This could reflect differences in healthcare access, ART adherence, or biological differences in immune response between sexes. Such findings are important for tailoring healthcare strategies and ensuring equitable access to treatment and monitoring.

While the CD4 count < 200 cell/µL has been reported to result in increased postoperative surgical complications in other series [33], our analysis did not find statistically significant differences in surgical complications or recurrence rates between the CD4 groups. The absence of significant differences in complication rates between the two CD4 groups may also suggest that once CSDH is diagnosed and surgically managed, the immediate postoperative outcomes may not be heavily dependent on immune status. The outcomes are determined by prompt surgical treatment; however, the underlying immunosuppression likely still plays a role in overall recovery and long-term health. Shanthamurthy et al. in their study, found that perioperative outcomes in HIV-infected patients undergoing surgical procedures were not influenced by parameters such as CD 4 cell count, duration of HIV infection and ART regimen [34]. Other studies have reported similar findings [35,36].

The overall mortality rate in the cohort was 14.6%, with a favourable outcome in 83.3% of patients. Significant predictors of mortality included a lower GCS score, INR > 1.2, and septicemia. The findings of this study have several important implications for clinical practice, which include the importance of early and prompt management of coagulopathies and infections to improve survival outcomes. Secondly, they highlight the need for prompt surgical treatment of CSDH, which should not be delayed by the CD4 count status. Thirdly, thorough preoperative evaluations, including detailed immunological assessments, are an important part of the holistic management of patients diagnosed with CSDH.

A South African study with a mean patient age of 43.6 years, ranging from 3 months to 98 years, reported a mortality rate of 7%, while 90.6% of patients achieved a favourable outcome [37]. In contrast, a multicentre study from the United Kingdom (UK) involving patients with a median age of 77 years reported a lower mortality rate of 2%, with a favourable outcome reported in 78% of cases and an unfavourable outcome in the remaining 22% [38]. The UK study identified several predictors of poor outcome, including failure to insert a drain intraoperatively, advanced age, postoperative bed rest, and the use of a single burr hole. Reported causes of mortality included pneumonia, sepsis, and stroke [38].

In our study, all patients who were on ART were noted to have undetectable HIV viral load, further highlighting the importance of ART in achieving effective disease control. In SA, all HIV-infected individuals are started on ART regardless of CD4 count [39]. As ART access continues to improve, surgical outcomes in PLWHIV may continue to parallel those of the non-infected population, provided that modifiable risk factors are proactively addressed.

Our study’s limitations include its retrospective nature, which is subject to bias. This was a single-institution study; therefore, the results cannot be generalized to other regions. Furthermore, the evolving ART initiation guidelines, which have progressively lowered the CD4 count thresholds from 200 to immediate initiation upon HIV diagnosis, likely influenced ART uptake, CD4 count distribution, and patient age demographics over time. These temporal variations could impact study outcomes and should be considered when interpreting the findings. We did not include HIV-uninfected patients for comparison. Future research should account for these changes to better understand their effects on CSDH development and patient outcomes.

CSDH in HIV-infected individuals presents at a younger age than in the general population. The majority had a CD4 count ≥ 200 cells/µL. However, CD4 count did not influence surgical outcomes. Patients presented with a high complication rate, and factors associated with mortality included low admission GCS, INR > 1.2, and septicemia. This study provides essential baseline data for future prospective research and suggests that standardized neurosurgical protocols can yield favorable outcomes even in immunocompromised populations.

K.X.: conception and design of the study, acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation of data, drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content and final approval of the version to be submitted. N.S.: analysis and interpretation of data, drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content and final approval of the version to be submitted.B.E.: analysis and interpretation of data, drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content and final approval of the version to be submitted.