Subacromial pain syndrome (SAPS) is the most common shoulder pain condition in primary care. Despite the importance of shared decision‐making (SDM) being increasingly recognised, its application in SAPS care remains poorly understood. The primary aim of this study was to explore the influence of a decision aid on patient and observer perceptions of SDM, and secondarily to explore correlations between these ratings in the primary care management of patients with SAPS.

We conducted a multi‐methods study including observations of consenting patients with SAPS in their clinical consultations with clinicians from four Danish primary care practices using OPTION‐12. We gathered patients' perceptions of SDM 2 weeks after the consultation using the CollaboRATE questionnaire and Shared Decision‐Making Questionnaire (SDM‐Q‐9). We observed consultations with and without the introduction of a decision aid tailored to support the management of patients.

Thirty‐four consultations were observed (16 with and 18 without the decision aid). Without the aid, the mean (SD) OPTION‐12 score was 10.5 (3.3), while the median (IQR) CollaboRATE and mean (SD) SDM‐Q‐9 scores were 5 (1.3) and 22.2 (7.5), respectively. With the aid, scores significantly increased: OPTION‐12 to 22.7 (6.87, range 5–32), CollaboRATE to 6.5 (1.4), and SDM‐Q‐9 to 30.6 (8.4). Patients' and observers' OPTION‐12 and SDM‐Q‐9 scores correlated significantly across both phases, but no significant correlation was found between CollaboRATE, OPTION‐12, and SDM‐Q‐9 scores in either phase.

A decision aid significantly improved observer‐ and patient‐rated SDM in primary care consultations for patients with SAPS. Observer‐rated SDM scores more than doubled with the decision aid, and patients reported higher levels of SDM.

Our recent needs assessment study highlighted that care‐seeking patients with SAPS often require more knowledge and information to participate in SDM (Bengtsen et al.2025). In this regard, decision aids are often considered as a sensible solution to accommodate such decisional needs (Stacey et al.2024). Decision aids are clinical tools, often combining text and visuals, designed to present unbiased information on the pros and cons of different treatment options (Bulletin2013). Recent evidence suggests that decision aids have the potential to reduce decisional conflict, particularly feelings of being uninformed or uncertain about personal values (Stacey et al.2024). However, limited knowledge exists in the practical use of decision aids in managing musculoskeletal pain and their impact on SDM.

We have developed a new decision aid which was initially evaluated in care‐seeking patients with SAPS (Lyng et al.2025). Although the study showed promising results in reducing decisional conflicts and regrets among patients, there remains limited knowledge about how SDM is currently utilised in clinical practice and whether decision aids can influence practitioner behaviour. Therefore, the primary aim of this study was to explore the influence of a decision aid on patients' and observers' perceptions of SDM in the primary care management of patients with SAPS. Secondarily, we sought to explore correlations between patients' and observers' ratings of SDM, providing insights into the congruency of perceptions on SDM practices in primary care.

We conducted a two‐phased multi‐methods study in primary care with patients with SAPS. The observations were conducted as a part of patients' first consultation with general practitioners and physiotherapists. To explore changes in SDM, the observations were conducted in two distinct phases. Phase 1, referred to as the baseline observations, involved the observations of consultations without a decision aid (i.e., usual care). In Phase 2, the intervention phase, observations were made during consultations where the decision aid was applied (Figure1).

Study process. Observing patient involvement in decision‐making (OPTION)‐12. Shared Decision‐Making Questionnaire (SDM‐Q9).

Written and oral informed consent was obtained from all participants before the observations. The findings are presented in an anonymous manner and compliant with ethical standards to safeguard participant confidentiality. The study was conducted in accordance with the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki and was considered exempt from full ethical review by the North Denmark Region Committee on Health Research Ethics (reference number: 2023‐000206).

S.C.B. is a physiotherapist with a master's degree in musculoskeletal physiotherapy, 7 years of clinical experience managing patients with SAPS and experience undertaking qualitative research (Bengtsen et al.2025; Lyng et al.2025). K.D.L. is a physiotherapist and PhD candidate with experience in musculoskeletal pain research (20+ peer‐reviewed articles) including qualitative research; however, only with little knowledge on ethnographic studies (description of the remaining author group can be seen in Appendix1).

We previously developed a decision aid containing information about invasive and non‐invasive treatment options commonly used for patients with SAPS (Lyng et al.2025). Further details on the development process, as well as alpha and beta testing, are thoroughly described elsewhere (Lyng et al.2025). Prior to Phase 2, All healthcare practitioners received a brief introduction to the decision aid involving information on its development (e.g., steps of development, end‐user involvement, rationale for its development), the content (e.g., cards regarding how to use the decision aid, and option cards) and contact person (S.C.B. or K.D.L.). See example of decision aid for care‐seeking patient with SAPS in Figure2.

Example of decision aid for care‐seeking patients with SAPS.

Observations were conducted at two private physiotherapy clinics and two general practices in the North Denmark Region. Significantly differing in their daily practices, the physiotherapy clinics allocate 45–60 min per patient for the first consultation. In contrast, at the general practices, patient appointments are typically between 10 and 15 min. Patients at the physiotherapy clinics are typically referred by general practitioners, hospital specialists or healthcare insurers although they can also self‐refer to physiotherapy. General practitioners serve as the primary point of contact for patients experiencing non‐traumatic shoulder pain, with financial coverage from the public healthcare system in Denmark (17). Unlike visits to general practitioners, patients in Denmark may have direct access to physiotherapists but typically incur out‐of‐pocket costs for physiotherapy services, including treatment or additional tests, unless these are covered by public health insurance or specific exemptions.

The target population for this study was care‐seeking patients living with SAPS and healthcare practitioners involved in the management of these patients (e.g., general practitioners, physiotherapists). Healthcare practitioners were included if they possessed an authorised health licence allowing them to manage patients with SAPS. Additionally, they had to have a minimum of 2 years of experience in addressing pain‐related issues and manage at least five cases of SAPS annually (on average). Healthcare practitioners were invited to participate through local professional networks and emails. None of the healthcare practitioners were blinded to the study aim. Patients were eligible if they were 18 years of age or above and were suspected of having SAPS based on self‐described symptoms or referral from general practitioners or healthcare insurers. Patients were included if they; were willing to participate and have their consultation observed, and if they could read and understand Danish. Healthcare practitioners were also required to provide consent prior to the observation of each consultation. The exclusion criteria encompassed traumatic onset of shoulder complaints or cases where SAPS could be definitively ruled out through clinical assessment of the patient's healthcare practitioner. Furthermore, patients were excluded in the presence of symptoms indicating potential serious pathology (e.g., infection, malignancy, neurological conditions), and known severe psychiatric or psychological disorder.

The observations of patient‐health care professional consultations at physiotherapy clinics and general practices in both phases of the study were conducted, in‐person, by members of the research team (S.C.B. and K.D.L.) (Eldh et al.2020). We collected data on gender, age, and educational level. To explore the influence of the decision aid on patient perceptions of SDM in the primary care management of patients with SAPS, we used the Observing Patient Involvement in Decision‐making (OPTION‐12) instrument (Elwyn et al.2003). OPTION‐12 is a validated tool designed to measure the extent and quality of SDM (Elwyn et al.2003). The tool comprises 12 items (Elwyn et al.2003,2005). Each item is rated on a 5‐point scale from 0 to 4, with 4 indicating the highest level of competence and communication behaviour in SDM. Consequently, the ratings for a consultation can range from 0 to 48 points. Both researchers thoroughly familiarised themselves with the OPTION manual beforehand to ensure a consistent understanding of the scoring criteria. Subsequently, they jointly observed consultations with five patients, collaboratively scoring each consultation to ensure congruency and reliability in their assessments. Although a Danish version of the OPTION‐12 instrument was not available at the time of testing, both researchers were sufficiently proficient in English, allowing them to use the OPTION‐12 instrument and manual in English comfortably. OPTION‐12 has since been translated and culturally adapted to Danish (Knudsen et al.2024). To address the second aim of the study, we used SDM‐Q‐9 and CollaboRATE tools to measure patients' perceived degree of SDM (Elwyn et al.2013; Kriston et al.2010). Patients were asked to fill out the questionnaires 2‐weeks after the consultation through a secure survey link using the web‐application, REDCap. A Danish version of both SDM‐Q‐9 and CollaboRATE tools was used, but only the SDM‐Q‐9 was culturally validated (Hulbæk et al.2018). The SDM‐Q‐9 consists of nine items, rated on a Likert scale from 0 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). CollaboRATE involves three questions, each item is scored from 0 (no effort was made) to 9 (every effort was made).

We used descriptive statistics to determine means and standard deviations of demographics and outcomes for normally distributed data, and median and interquartile range (IQR) for non‐normally distributed data. Normality of the data was assessed using visual inspection of Q‐Q plots. Observer‐rated SDM (OPTION‐12) and patient‐reported SDM (CollaboRATE and SDM‐Q9) scores were compared between phases using appropriate statistical tests (independentt‐tests or Mann‐WhitneyUtests) dependent on the normality of the data. Correlations between OPTION‐12, CollaboRATE, and SDM‐Q9 were assessed using correlation analysis (Pearson's or Spearman's correlation dependent on normality). Correlation strength was computed using an online Fisher'sr‐to‐ztest calculator (http://vassarstats.net/rdiff.html). SPSS 25 for Windows (IBM Corp., Armonk, New York) was used for all analyses, with statistical significance set top< 0.05 (two‐sided).

Sixteen local practices (eight physiotherapy practices, six general practices, two chiropractor practices) were invited, and four practices agreed to participate. From these, nine healthcare practitioners and 34 patients agreed to participate. Among the healthcare practitioners, seven were physiotherapists across two physiotherapy clinics, one was a physiotherapist in a general practice, and one was a general practitioner. Seven healthcare practitioners participated in Phase 1, and six healthcare practitioners participated in Phase 2 (of which four also participated in Phase 1). Two patients declined to participate because of a lack of interest in participating, and four patients were excluded because of an ineligible diagnosis. In the first phase, 18 baseline observations were conducted at two physiotherapy clinics and one general practice. These encompassed 14 consultations conducted by six different physiotherapists and four consultations by one general practitioner. In the second phase, when the decision aid was included in the consultations, 16 observations were made. Of these, 13 were conducted in physiotherapy consultations, while three were carried out in general practitioner consultations. Demographics of patient participants across the two phases are reported in Table1.

Visual inspection of Q‐Q‐plots indicated that data from the OPTION‐12 total score did not violate the assumption of normality; thus, parametric analyses were conducted. In Phase 1, the mean (SD, range) total OPTION‐12 score for all 18 consultations was 10.5 (3.3, 3–19) out of 48. In Phase 2, a mean score of 22.7 (6.7, 5–32) was achieved. An independent samplet‐test was conducted to compare differences in the OPTION‐12 scores between the two phases. Assumption of equal variances between the two phases and outcomes was tested using Levene's test, and the results showed no significant differences in variance (OPTION‐12,F= 2.967,p= 0.095). Results indicated a statistically significant difference between the two phases in OPTION‐12 scores,t(32) = 6.8,p≤ 0.001. The mean difference between the phases in OPTION‐12 scores was 12.2 (95% CI [8.6, 15.8]), indicating significantly higher SDM scores in consultations in Phase 2. See Table2for mean scores and change‐scores between the two phases.

Change scores of OPTION‐12, SDM‐Q‐9, and CollaboRATE across phases.

Non‐normally distributed, thus statistics is reported using median, IQR, and Mann‐Whitney U statistics.

Normality testing using the Q‐Q‐plots test indicated that data from the SDM‐Q‐9 total score did not violate the assumption of normality, while data from the CollaboRATE total score deviated from normality. Given these findings, an independent samplest‐test was conducted to compare SDM‐Q‐9 scores between the two phases, whereas a Mann–WhitneyUtest was applied to compare CollaboRATE scores. In Phase 1, the mean total SDM‐Q‐9 score for all 18 consultations was 22.2 (7.5, 1–37) out of 45. The median score across items for CollaboRATE was 5 (IQR = 1.3) out of 10. In Phase 2, the mean total SDM‐Q‐9 score for all 16 consultations was 30.6 (8.4, 5–40). The median CollaboRATE score was 6.5 (IQR = 1.4). The results from Levene's test showed no significant differences in variance for SDM‐Q‐9 scores (F= 0.063,p= 0.803). The independent samplest‐test indicated a statistically significant difference between the two phases in SDM‐Q‐9 scores;t(32) = 3.0,p= 0.004, with a mean difference of 8.4 points (95% CI: [2.8, 14.1]). Results from the Mann–WhitneyU‐test showed a significant difference between the two phases,U= 30.0, Exactp≤ 0.001. Together, these findings suggest that the decision aid increased SDM, as reflected by both the SDM‐Q‐9 and CollaboRATE measures. See Table2for mean scores and differences between the two phases.

A significant positive correlation was found between OPTION‐12 and SDM‐Q‐9 scores in the first phase (r= 0.865,p≤ 0.001), which remained significant in the second phase (r= 0.887,p≤ 0. 001). The Fisher'sr‐to‐ztest revealed a statistically significant change in correlation strength between OPTION‐12 and SDM‐Q‐9 between the two phases (Z= 3.23,p= 0.001). This finding suggests that the relationship between these two measures of SDM was improved in Phase 2. A Spearman correlation revealed a non‐significant correlation between CollaboRATE and OPTION‐12 scores in phase one (ρ= 0.340,p= 0.168). This correlation remained non‐significant in phase two (ρ= 0.218,p= 0.417). Similarly, the correlation analysis showed a non‐significant relationship between CollaboRATE and SDM‐Q‐9 scores in phase one (ρ= 0.314,p= 0.204). The correlation was also non‐significant in phase two (ρ= 0.110,p= 0.686). See Table3for the correlation between OPTION‐12, SDM‐Q‐9 and CollaboRATE across phases.

Correlation between OPTION‐12, SDM‐Q‐9, and CollaboRATE across phases.

This study explored the influence of a decision aid on patients' and observers' perceptions of SDM in the primary care management of patients with SAPS. We also explored correlations between scores on SDM from consultations without (Phase 1) and consultations with the use of our decision aid (Phase 2). The study highlighted higher SDM scores in Phase 2, where the decision aid was used as a tool for the consultations which were present from both observer’ and patient’ ratings. A significant positive correlation was found between OPTION‐12 and SDM‐Q‐9 scores, with the strength of this relationship increasing in Phase 2. This suggests greater alignment between observed healthcare practitioner behaviours and patients' perceptions of SDM in Phase 2. No significant correlations were found between CollaboRATE scores and either OPTION‐12 or SDM‐Q‐9 scores across phases. This surprising finding may indicate that CollaboRATE captures different aspects of SDM that are less directly tied to those measured by OPTION‐12 and SDM‐Q‐9. This discrepancy highlights the complexity of assessing SDM and the potential need for multimodal measurement approaches.

The available evidence on how decision aids impact observed shared decision‐making behaviours in pain conditions is limited (Bowen et al.2019; Stacey et al.2024; Wieringa et al.2019). Consistent with our findings, Bowen et al. reported that decision aids improve patients' understanding of treatment options for chronic musculoskeletal pain (Bowen et al.2019). However, their review highlighted that while decision aids enhance knowledge, their impact on broader decision‐making processes and patient satisfaction is variable. This may suggest that additional factors, such as healthcare practitioner communication, may influence their overall effectiveness. Our study suggests that SDM can be influenced by a decision aid; however, more research is needed. Our decision aid was partly adapted from a recent online randomised controlled trial, which found that a decision aid targeting people with SAPS on a waitlist considering shoulder surgery had no effect on treatment intention, attitudes, informed choice and decisional conflict (Zadro et al.2022). The lack of effect was mainly attributed to the timing and delivery‐method of the decision aid (Zadro et al.2022). Our adapted version, which was delivered in the earlier decisional stages and by a healthcare practitioner in primary care, showed more promising results in terms of influence on decisional conflicts (Lyng et al.2025). These findings shed light on the possible importance of understanding the contextual‐ and patient‐specific characteristics that may influence the effectiveness of decision aids and SDM perceptions. Our findings suggest that SDM‐Q‐9 scores were higher in consultations using a decision aid. However, the magnitude of improvement in SDM‐Q‐9 scores observed in our study exceeds what has been reported in most studies, where little‐to‐no differences have been reported between randomised controlled trials were interventional groups had received training in SDM compared to no training (Doherr et al.2017). This discrepancy could be attributed to differences in the study design, patient characteristics (e.g., level of decision‐preparedness), or the complexity of decisions addressed. Furthermore, our results might be partly explained by the fact that our decision aid was developed for both patients and healthcare practitioners. The evidence for the effectiveness of multi‐faceted interventions is however inconclusive, and further evidence is needed to understand the impact of such strategies (Légaré et al.2018; Squires et al.2014). Our study also showed significant improvements in CollaboRATE scores after the introduction of a decision aid; however, the scores were not correlated with SDM‐Q‐9 or OPTION‐12. Unlike the OPTION‐12 and SDM‐Q‐9, which focus on specific clinician behaviours and structured decision‐making processes, CollaboRATE reflects patients' subjective experience of involvement. These distinct differences may explain the lack of correlation and further underscore that CollaboRATE likely assesses a unique dimension of SDM, offering a complementary perspective when evaluating SDM behaviours. Similar to our study, Ubbink et al. conducted a secondary analysis combining data from five studies (n= 422 patients) across various outpatient and inpatient departments, comparing CollaboRATE and SDM‐Q‐9 scores (Ubbink et al.2022). They found a moderate correlation between the two measures across diverse patient groups, including those from congenital vascular malformations, anaesthesiology, cardiology, nephrology, radiotherapy, psychiatry, internal medicine, and haematologic oncology, spanning four different university medical centres or hospitals in the Netherlands (Ubbink et al.2022). The study also found a clear ceiling effect across both measures, but the effect was much stronger for the CollaboRATE tool (Ubbink et al.2022). Together with our findings, these results highlight the need for future studies to investigate which measures work for whom, when and why, and the importance of including both subjective and objective measures of SDM.

We co‐developed a decision aid with key stakeholders to support SAPS patients in primary care (Bengtsen et al.2025; Lyng et al.2025). While our findings suggest a positive impact on SDM, a randomised controlled trial is needed to compare its use with usual care in a larger and more diverse population. The discrepancy between CollaboRATE and other SDM measures highlights a key research gap. Additionally, the long‐term effects of decision aids in musculoskeletal care remain unclear. Their effectiveness depends on clinician SDM competency, yet many lack formal training (Dobler et al.2019; Tousignant‐Laflamme et al.2017). In our study, minimal training may have influenced the results. Future research should assess the impact of structured SDM training and whether additional strategies are needed to sustain improvements. Finally, studies should examine how SDM evolves over time and its effects on clinical outcomes such as pain, function and quality of life.

The use of observational compared to patient‐reported methods assessing SDM as it occurs in clinical practice increases the applicability and relevance of our findings to clinical practice in primary care. Furthermore, the study is strengthened by the use of multiple validated tools to assess SDM. This multi‐modal approach strengthens the robustness of the findings, as it captures complementary perspectives on SDM, offering valuable, although explorative insights into how decision aids impact both observers' and patients' ratings of SDM. There are several limitations to our study. The main limitations of the study are a small sample size and lack of randomisation, which should raise caution regarding the conclusion of this study. Secondly, observations were conducted by two observers who were not blinded to the hypothesis, and furthermore, did not audio or video record the observations. Furthermore, both observers had limited experience with the method. These limitations hamper both the consistency of the measurements (inter‐ and intra‐reliability), and might also impose observer bias, which may over‐inflate OPTION‐12 scores (Mahtani et al.2018). Our study primarily recruited physiotherapists, and recruitment of healthcare practitioners was primarily based on the authors' personal networks. The lack of other healthcare practitioners will influence the generalisability of our findings, and the recruitment through personal networks might impose selection bias where most participants already had an interest in SDM. This study lacked data collection of healthcare practitioners' perceptions of SDM due to practicality‐issues in clinical practices. These data would have provided valuable additional insights. Lastly, in our study, we collected data on patients' perception of SDM 2 weeks after a consultation. This was done to minimise the burden on patients but might impose recall bias (Althubaiti2016).

Our study suggests that a decision aid can enhance both patient and observer ratings of SDM in primary care for SAPS. The positive correlation between these ratings indicates alignment between observed SDM and patient experience. However, the CollaboRATE measure did not follow this pattern, suggesting that it captures different aspects of SDM. Future research should validate these findings in larger trials and further explore differences between SDM measures.