The Fischer–Tropsch
process can be considered as an alternative
route to convert fossil fuels such as crude oil, coal, and methane
for the production of more environmentally friendly liquid fuels and
chemicals. As recoverable sources of carbon, Fischer–Tropsch
synthesis (FTS) converts a mixture of CO and H2to a range
of hydrocarbons, which is free of sulfur and nitrogen and low in aromatics.
The surface-sensitive investigation of the temperature and pressure
effects on the FT synthesis performance over mesoporous carbon-supported
iron catalysts was examined byin situX-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy analyses. Raman and Mössbauer spectroscopy measurements
illustrated the structural properties of mesoporous Fe-based oxides.
Under FTS reaction conditions of 20 and 30 atm, and temperatures of
240, 255, and 270 °C with a CO-to- H2ratio of 1,
the solids were active with 38–45% of CO conversion and a rate
of 1 × 10–5molCO·g–1·s–1. The product distribution gave C1–C4, C5–C9,
and C10+products with the structure of the
solid marginally affected by the type of product obtained. Thein situsurface XPS analyses were conducted at ∼240–270
°C and 10 atm with a CO-to-H2ratio of 1 for 1 h.
The α-Fe2O3phase was reduced to Fe3O4resulting in well-dispersed magnetite nanoparticles
with further reduction to metallic iron on the mesoporous carbon support.
Such α-Fe phase demonstrated accessibility of the syngas resulting
in the activity of the solids. The chemical evolution of the Fe 2p, O 1s, C 1s, and K 2score levels during the FTS with increasing the temperature
up to 255 °C suggested that the surface carburization formed
χ-Fe5C2and θ-Fe3C iron
carbide phases along with Fe3O4and, tentatively,
the metallic iron phase. The mesoporous carbon-supported iron catalysts
having χ-Fe5C2carbide determined the
activity and stability during the FTS synthesis.

In this regard, FTS is a large-scale route industrially used
to
produce a range of synthetic liquid fuels and fine chemicals besides
oxygenated compounds and waxes.−The water gas shift reaction (WGS) ineqconstitutes a reversible parallel-consecutive
reaction for converting CO to CO2and water that can be
controlled, when adjusting the initial H2/CO ratios.

Therefore, improvement of the Fe-based catalysts for the FTS
process
turns out to be mandatory. Despite the considerable progress in the
achievements of α,γ-Fe2O3-based
catalysts and their similar-shaped structure reduction to obtain Fe3O4and its further reduction to metallic iron,
the carburization to form active iron carbide phases continues to
be extensively studied in FTS reaction.,,To shed light on the nature of the iron carbide formation,
the carburization occurs during FTS reaction steps on a complex mixture
of iron carbides possessing a variety of carbon contents, i.e., Hägg
carbide χ-Fe5C2, Fe7C3, cementite θ-Fe3C, ε-Fe2C, and
ε′-Fe2.2C.,This has attracted
a great deal of research interest due to these iron carbides'
potentially
debatable activity and selectivities to liquid fuels and olefins.

Moreover, the
interaction of the Fe oxides with the gas reactants
and products involved in the FTS reaction can dramatically affect
their chemical composition and consequently their catalytic properties. For this reason, studies on the catalysts under
working conditions usingin situand operando spectroscopy
techniques are innovative approaches to understanding the reactivity
and the role of the active phase in FTS.−Given the fact
of successful synthesis of Fe-based catalysts supported on polystyrene
mesoporous carbons, the surface properties of these materials are
of great interest toward the production of valuable liquid fuels and
chemical feedstocks via FTS.

The novelty of this work
consists of understanding the transformation
of the Fe oxide catalyst structures and the effects of the experimental
FTS reaction conditions on the chemical evolution of the formed carbide
phases. Thus, structure–activity relationships of the two distinct
formulations are examined by Raman and Mössbauer spectroscopy
measurements combined toin situXPS analyses.

The mesoporous
carbon-supported iron oxides were prepared by a wetness impregnation
method. A detailed description of the catalyst preparation has been
presented in our previous reports.,Briefly, the
carrier consisting of a polystyrene-based spherical mesoporous carbon
was purchased from Blucher GmbH Erkrath Germany as a fine powder and
used without further modifications. Typically, a ferric nitrate in
aqueous solution was impregnated onto 2.0 g of polymeric carbon support
(C) in a rotary evaporator at 60 °C. The powdered solid consisting
of 10 wt % Fe was dried in an oven at 60 °C and subsequently
heated under flowing nitrogen at 500 °C for 2 h. The catalyst
was designed as FC1. Another solid was prepared by using a similar
procedure with the resultant catalyst calcined at 700 °C under
the abovementioned conditions. The sample was denoted as FC2.

A summary of the
fresh sample characterizations by X-ray diffraction (XRD), nitrogen
physisorption isotherms, scanning electron microscopy coupled to energy-dispersive
spectroscopy (SEM-EDS), and thermo-programmed reduction (TPR) are
given in in our previous work.

The
chemical compositions and valences of elements in the spent solids
were characterized by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The
analyses were carried out in a Physical Electronics VersaProbe II
Scanning XPS photoelectron under an ultrahigh vacuum. A monochromatic
X-ray Al Kα beam source was used. The binding energies were
calibrated with respect to that of the C 1speak
at 284.8 eV for adventitious carbon. The spectra were analyzed using
XPS software, and the high-resolution spectra were deconvoluted based
on the Gaussian–Lorentzian curves using Origin 8.5 software.

Raman spectroscopy measurements were obtained to examine the vibrational
properties of the spent samples. The Raman spectra were collected
in a Jobin Yvon from a HoribaT64000spectrometer. The Raman system
was operated using an exciting radiation of 514 nm with a He–Ne
laser. The spectrometer was coupled to a nitrogen-cooled charge-coupled-device
detector. The scattering bands were calibrated with a reference peak
at 520 cm–1from a silicon wafer. A laser power
below 15 mW for the sample was used to prevent sample degradation.
Raman spectra were recorded using a 50× microscope objective
lens. The spectra were collected with five data acquisitions per 10
s in the range 100–1600 cm–1with a spectral
resolution of 4 cm–1and a wavenumber precision
of 1 cm– 1. The Raman spectra were acquired
at several locations on each sample to verify the homogeneity of the
surface atoms in the solids.

Mössbauer spectra were collected
on a WissEl spectrometer
with transmission geometry. Samples were obtained at room temperature
using a57Co-in-Rh matrix source at 50 mCi. The calibrations
were performed against a 6 μm-thick α-Fe foil. Spectra
were fitted by using a least-squares nonlinear computer fitting program
with constraints. Peaks were extracted by fitting the spectrum with
Lorentzian functions possessing equal widths for each spectrum component.
The baseline was fitted to a second-order polynomial, and the velocity
nonlinearity was fitted to a third-order polynomial.

Fischer–Tropsch
synthesis was conducted using a semibatch
high-pressure autoclave reactor from Parr Instruments model 4571.
About 2 g of the solids were suspended in 200 mL of squalene under
constant stirring of 800 rpm. Prior to the catalytic runs, the catalyst
was activatedin situat 240 °C and 20 atm of
pressure for 6 h. The catalytic runs were performed, feeding H2and CO with a molar ratio of 1 in a temperature range of
240–270 °C and pressure of 20 or 30 atm.,The catalytic runs were performed in triplicate. The products were
analyzed in a gas chromatograph (Model Thermos Ultra), equipped with
thermal conductivity (TCD) and flame ionization (FID) detectors. The
calculated carbon mass balances were higher than 95%.

In situsurface XPS analyses
were carried out at 10 atm in the temperature range of 240–270
°C, using a CO-to-H2ratio of 1. Indeed, these experiments
were conducted to simulate the catalytic environment to understand
the evolution of the catalyst surface and its structure and correlate
with the FTS. XPS analyses were performed with a high-temperature–high-pressure
cell (SPECS HPC 20) with an infrared sample heating instrument. The
apparatus allows a fast postreaction solid transfer from the reaction
chamber to the spectrometer chamber to ensure the UHV conditions in
the absence of laboratory air. A non-monochromatic Al Kα source
of 1486.6 eV was used for spectral acquisition in a hemispherical
analyzer (SPECS PHOIBOS 100) with 20 mA and 12 kV, which worked at
fixed transmission and 50 eV pass energy with an energy step of 0.1
eV. Binding energies were calibrated with the reference of Al 2pat 74.0 eV. Such a methodology of calibration was applied
due to the surface charging that may occur under photoemission conditions.
Therefore, the effect was constant during spectral analyses and lower
than 5 eV to avoid peak shape distortions. Before the analyses, samples
were evacuated under a vacuum of 10–7mbar at room
temperature. Then, the solids were pretreated using a gaseous flow
mixture of 50% hydrogen and argon for 2h at 1 atm. Subsequently, the
samples were cooled to room temperature and transferred to the spectrometer
chamber for XPS analysis. Afterward, the experimental setup consisted
of placing the samples in the spectrometer chamber and subsequently
to the high-pressure cell operating under ultrahigh vacuum in the
high temperature–pressure cell at 700 °C at 10 atm. Then,
the gases hydrogen and carbon monoxide in a ratio of 1 were introduced
in the system where the temperature was varied from 250 and 270 °C
in a similar fashion as the FTS reaction.

Finally, samples were
cooled to room temperature in a reaction gas atmosphere. After transferring
back to the spectrometer chamber for analysis, the samples were analyzed
without exposure to laboratory air.

XPS analyses were
carried out to evaluate the chemical state and the superficial composition
of the fresh FC1 and FC2.Figuresa and a illustrate the survey
and high-resolution spectra of selected core levels. The XPS survey
spectrum of FC1 (Figurea) corresponds to the states of the Fe 2p, O 2p, and C 1score levels, besides the Fe
LMM emission Auger lines. Some contaminants, represented by the lines
of K 2sand Cl 2p, arise from the
mesoporous polystyrene carbon carrier that appears also in the XPS
survey spectra.

Photoelectron spectra of the FC1 sample: (a) survey spectrum,
(b)
Fe 2p, (c) C 1s, and (d) O 1score levels.

Photoelectron spectra
of the FC2 sample: (a) survey spectrum, (b)
Fe 2p, (c) C 1s, and (d) O 1score levels.

The typical XPS spectrum
of the Fe 2pcore levels
for FC1 (Figureb)
appears as a high-intensity deconvoluted peak at 710.2–712.8
eV and a small one at 724.5–726.4 eV, which can be assigned
to the Fe 2p3/2and Fe
2p1/2contributions,
respectively. These two spectral lines are associated with the difference
inj–jspin–orbit coupling and the
degeneracy of states that make the intensity of the Fe 2p3/2peak higher than the Fe 2p1/2counterpart.−Likely, the dominant chemical
state of iron in the sample is found to be Fe3+as in the
case of the α-Fe2O3phase, which is previously
observed by the solid characterizations. The appearance of the charge transfer satellite peaks at 718.1 and
732.2 eV is likely ascribable to the ejection of the core 2pphotoelectron. This is in reasonable agreement with the
electron transition from an Fe 3dorbital to the
empty Fe 4sorbital in Fe3+species from
Fe2O3.−Also, at 55.3 eV, the presence
of Fe3+species as the majority specie is confirmed (Table). It is worth noticing
that the presence of either Fe3+or Fe2+species
as γ-Fe2O3is detected through the binding
energy values, in similar peaks and satellite position ranges as those
of literature reports.,Consistently, the existence of
Fe2+is confirmed through the Fe 3ppeaks
in the survey spectra of all samples with binding energy close to
53.5 eV (Table),
and in good agreement with the findings.,The origin of the Fe2+entities is the partial reduction
of Fe3+species by the CO released from the carbon matrix
itself during the calcination.

The carbon-to-iron and Fe2+/Fe3+atomic ratios are taken from XPS spectra. The numbers
in parentheses are the percentage of the areas corresponding to each
peak.

This observation is
consistent with different iron species existing
in the Fe2+state as a result of the decrease in the coordination
of Fe3+ions at the surface.,−Accordingly, the Fe3+/Fe2+ratios illustrate
that the iron surface species existed in more than one oxidation state
(Table), showing
the abundance of surface Fe3+species for all samples.

Noticeably, the two samples depict distinctive features concerning
only the Fe 2pcore levels (Figureb). Overall surface features of FC2 have
very similar lines for C 1s and O 1s core levels (Figurec,d). Compared with the binding
energies of the FC1 and FC2 samples, that of deconvoluted Fe 2pin the FC2 shifts to lower values than the others (Table). At present, it
is difficult to distinguish between these possible contributions,
that is to say, whether either the carbon carrier plays a strong interaction
with both hematite and maghemite phases, forming other different phases,
or the carrier promotes a role in reducing Fe3+to Fe2+species.

Furthermore, Raman and Mössbauer measurements
will give
insights into elucidating the influence of the metal species on the
stabilization of iron oxide mixed phases.

In all cases, the
data can readily be explained considering that
the Fe species are in major concentrations on the external surface
of the former solids, i.e., C/Fe atomic ratio of 0.72–0.93
(Table).

When
considering the α-Fe2O3, γ-Fe2O3, and Fe3O4iron oxide
phases, the limited resolution in the XPS spectra does not allow distinguishing
between the aforesaid phases in the samples. This is further confirmed
by Mössbauer and Raman measurements.

XPS spectra of O
1score levels for FC1 (Figurec) depict three fitted
curves associated with different oxygen atoms coordinated to the iron
species. The binding energy of the first component has a maximum at
529.5 ± 0.3 eV arising from the O2–lattice
oxygen in Fe2O3, and that for the other is in
the range of 530.1–531.8 eV, belonging most likely to OH–chemisorbed oxygen species or defect-oxide species
on the solid surface.,This peak is attributable to
oxygen vacancies as in the case of Fe-based oxides.−The third peak
at 533.1 ± 0.3 eV matches well with the reported results for
the presence of adsorbed water.,Moreover, the relative
abundance of these kinds of oxygen species suggests that the solids
contain fewer hydroxyl-like and defect-oxide species than the lattice
oxygen ions. It is generally accepted that the mixed metal oxides
have characteristic surface lattice O2–species,
as a result of the intensive dehydroxylation of the oxide surfaces
and desorption of oxygen-containing species formed during the high
temperature of calcination such as at 700 °C. In addition, FC1
has an O530/O531ratio of 2.1 while only a marginal
effect of the aforesaid ratio is observed for FC2. Such an effect
can be read as the local electron density distributions in the close
vicinity of iron surface atoms that differ significantly with the
FC2 sample, contributing the majority with oxygen defects. Moreover,
the surface lattice O2–species are bonded to the
neighboring metal atoms; it is possible to ascertain that the samples
possess vacant defects in similar positions of those of the lattice
oxygen, according to the XPS results.

The C 1score-level spectra of all samples (Figuresd and d) are split
into three components at 284.7, 285.7, and 288.3
eV. The first peak at 284.7–284.9 eV is attributed to adventitious
carbon as a major component, whereas the peak positioned at 285.7–286.7
eV is mostly due to the C–OH/C–O–C bonds.,The peak at 288.3 eV is associated with CO bonds forming
carbonyl and carboxyl species. It is
clear that the origin of all these carbon species is believed to be
from their chemisorption on the Fe sites preferentially during the
synthesis or calcination. In addition, the K 2p,
K 2sand Cl 2pcore levels arise
from the impurities of the mesoporous carbon support. The surface
C/Fe atomic ratios are close to the bulk. In addition, iron carbides
are not detected by XPS of the fresh solids.

Mössbauer
spectroscopy provides identification of all iron species of the solids
and their particles. As carburization of iron oxides hardly occurs
on larger Fe particles, Mössbauer spectroscopy could predict
the particle size to give insights on the carbide phase formation
duringin situXPS analyses.

Mössbauer
spectra of the catalysts taken at 23 °C for
(a) FC1 and (b) FC2.

The symbols S1
and S2 represent
sextets 1 and 2, respectively.

Both γ-Fe2O3or Fe3O4phases crystallize in a cubic symmetry belonging to theFd3̅mspace group of a spinel-type
structure, as vastly documented.,,In such a structure, Fe cations located either octahedral
(16d) or tetrahedral (8a) sites of the cubic spinel. Particularly,
the inverse spinel structure adopted by magnetite and maghemite has
octahedral sites occupied by a fraction or the totality of Fe2+cations while the Fe3+ions occupy octahedral
and tetrahedral sites. All of these above
observations manifest that magnetite and maghemite have a strong Zeeman
splitting at ambient temperature owing to their ferromagnetic order. Taking into account that the Mössbauer
features of Fe2+cations are hardly distinguishable in
maghemite, the hyperfine parameters are difficult to resolve.

The first sextet is associated with the Fe3+ions on
octahedral sites, and quadrupole splitting of −0.03 mm·s–1correlates well with the hematite phase. The second sextuplet possessing a high isomeric
shift of ca. 0.37 mm·s–1seems to be from Fe2+ions in tetrahedral sites. In that case, the second sextuplet
may be attributed to the large oxidized maghemite particles. The S1
and S2 sextets represent 70% of the relative area, which is attributed
to be from bigger particles, in line with the findings of refs,. A slight broad central doublet with isomer
shifts of 0.28 mms–1in the spectrum of FC2 can
be due to the small particles exhibiting a fast superparamagnetic
relaxation, as found elsewhere. These
results assign the super exchange interactions between magnetic ions
of the sites, confirming the presence of either hematite or maghemite
in the sample. Moreover, the Mössbauer spectrum of FC2 depicts
a main intense sextet and a broader centered doublet (Figureb). The doublet possessing
30% of the relative area suggests a rapid magnetic relaxation of Fe2+ions most probably from maghemite and magnetite contributions.
Moreover, the existence of the α-Fe2O3and γ-Fe2O3phases observed by Mössbauer
spectroscopy is confirmed by the X-ray diffraction results.

Raman spectroscopy
is a sensitive tool to metal–oxygen bond vibrations and lattice
defects. Therefore, it constitutes a powerful tool to analyze the
metal–oxygen interactions in oxides. In addition, the active
phonon modes of the iron oxide main phases such as α-Fe2O3, γ-Fe2O3, and Fe3O4can be clearly certified using Raman measurements.,,The Raman spectra of the samples
are shown inFigure.

Raman spectra of the catalysts obtained at distinct points of the
samples: (a) FC2 and (b) FC1.

The Raman modes observed at low frequencies for FC2 appear
at 228
(A1g), 247 (Eg), 293 (Eg), 410 (Eg), 498 (A1g), and 613 (Eg) cm–1owing to the transverse optical (TO) contributions.,Assignment of the obtained phonon lines is in accordance with the
literature reports as a signature for α-Fe2O3besides γ-Fe2O3in FC2 spectra.
It is important to note that a shoulder at around 661 cm–1(highlighted in the pink square) can be due to the forbidden Eumode arising from the longitudinal optical (LO) contributions.,Moreover, the origin of the intense band at 1310 cm–1(highlighted in the pink square), the so-called 2LO longitudinal
optical phonon, is associated with two-magnon scattering caused by
the interaction of two magnons created on close antiparallel spin
sites.−There is a band at 1050 cm–1rather
broad than the other, whose position suggests that it is related to
oxygen vacancy defects. It seems that these oxygen vacancies are present
in the three points investigated of FC2 (Figurea).

Of importance, Raman spectra exhibit
similar features in terms
of position, when varying the points on the solid surface of the FC1
sample (Figureb).
It resulted in the observed homogeneity of the surface of both solids.
Nevertheless, the band at 1310 cm–1for FC2 (Figureb, highlighted in
pink square) shows a remarkable bordering in two points probably due
to the poor scattering response. Consistent with XPS analyses, the
surface of the samples is rich in Fe3+species arising
from hematite.

No significant differences of the Raman spectrum
of FC1 (Figureb)
are observed in
terms of position and intensities, when varying the laser surface
point, indicating the homogeneity of both surfaces. Mössbauer
and Raman measurements evidenced that α-Fe2O3with a rhombohedral structure is present in both solids.

Catalytic
performances of the solids in FTS synthesis are shown inFigure. From a first comparison
among distinct temperatures (Figurea,b), there is a nonlinear temperature effect on the
FTS performance on different catalysts. The solids are actives with
conversion varying from 32 to 51% and a productivity of 1 × 10–5molCO·g–1·s–1, depending on the pressure and temperature conditions
applied. Moreover, CO conversion does not increase proportionally
with increasing temperature from 240 to 270 °C over all solids.

Catalytic
evaluation in FTS synthesis: CO conversion in function
of the temperature at (a) 20 bar and (b) 30 bar. Product distribution
of (b) FC1 and (c) FC2 catalysts as a function of the temperature
at 20 atm and CO-to-H2ratio of 1 after 6 h of FTS reaction.
Product distribution of (d) FC1 and (e) FC2 catalysts in function
of the temperature at 30 atm after 6 h of FTS reaction.

Particularly, CO conversions for FC1 are found in the range
of
47–51% (Figurea) upon increasing the temperature from 240 to 270 °C at 20
atm. As revealed by the Raman, Mössbauer, and XPS results,
FC1 has mainly the α-Fe2O3phase alone.
When the latter rhombohedral phase is reduced, it is fully transformed
into well-dispersed Fe3O4nanoparticles on the
mesoporous carbon support, as further demonstrated byin situXPS analyses. Such spinel phase is accessible to CO2and
H2and responsible for the catalytic performance in FTS
reaction.

Furthermore, similar trends
are observed for FC2 with CO conversions
reaching about 32.5–40.7% for temperature increments between
240 and 270 °C. Furthermore, the octahedral Fe2+and
Fe3+ions located in the defective Fe3O4play an important role during high-temperature WGS and FTS
reactions.−Accordingly, hydrogen involvement during CO dissociation
promotes a redox reaction on the defective Fe3O4sites possessing surface oxygen vacancies, with the latter being
filled by CO to form surface carbonate intermediates. Concomitantly,
water dissociation seems to be required on such oxidation of Fe2+to Fe3+to release hydrogen, whereas the oxidized
Fe sites seem to be subsequently reduced by CO producing CO2to complete the cycle.,Such defect sites observed
in FC1 by XPS may be expected to improve the CO conversions to a certain
extent. Despite α-Fe2O3, the predominant
phase with a minor amount of maghemite phase, FC2, is completely converted
into magnetite during activation for FTS.

There are proposed
reasons for the well-documented distinct reaction
regimes for the FTS reaction governing diffusional steps at high temperatures.
This indeed favors the occurrence of CO hydrogenation by WGS reaction
(eq), as found elsewhere. Based on the fact that the Fe3+and
Fe2+ions are present in the magnetite phase, the performance
of FC1 and FC2 could be explained considering that the magnetite is
the active phase for the WGS reaction. Therefore, it could be deduced
that the catalytic activity of both solids toward FTS reaction, i.e.,
the extent of the reaction temperature increments effects on the CO
conversions, is not greatly remarkable due to WGS reaction occurrence.
Another possible reason is that the carbide formation such as FexC, in turn, may affect the FTS performance,
despite the fact that the water formation arising from WGS results
in the oxidation of the carbides concomitantly reoxidizing Fe2+and Fe3+sites from magnetite. This can enhance
the WGS reaction, as confirmed byin situXPS analyses.

Figureb illustrates
the influence of the syngas pressure increment to 30 atm. It is expected
that FTS performance would be enhanced up to a partial pressure of
about 11 atm. Opposite trends are observed
when the syngas pressure is increased for 30 atm while other process
conditions are kept constant. FC2 is evaluated with only a slightly
higher CO conversion of ca. 8% at 270 °C at 30 atm, while temperature
as low as 255 °C favors CO conversions. The level of CO conversions
rises almost linearly with syngas pressure of 30 atm over FC1, despite
a lower reaction temperature of 240 °C.

Figurec–f
shows the product distribution of the solids as a function of the
temperature. The C1–C4constituents are
gaseous hydrocarbons, e.g., methane and C2–C4, while C5–C8represents the
gasoline fraction and C10+compounds represent very long
hydrocarbon chain fractions from kerosene with some of them from hydrocracking
the latter into the diesel fraction. Moreover,
the Anderson–Schulz–Flory distribution of the products
with respect to carbon number can be determined by the chain-growth
probability, which is considered independent of chain length.,The distribution of the product analysis for FC1 (Figurec) illustrates the formation
of ca. 40% C1–C4products as a consequence
of the hydrogenation side reactions to obtain either methane or carbon
dioxide, short-chain products, and light olefins at 20 atm at 240
°C. At the same conditions, product distribution toward long-chain
carbons such as C10+within 35% is observed
whereas C5–C8production is marginally
affected below to 255 °C. In contrast, there appears to be a
preference over FC1 for C5–C8and C10+products compared to the C1–C4ones at 270 °C. Accordingly, the CO conversion increment at
high temperatures gives a decrement of light olefins at the expense
of heavier product formation.,This result can be
explained considering that in the case of C5+fractions, the water formation may result in the inhibition of hydrogenation
reactions by competitive adsorption, which decrease the C1–C4fraction with further olefin readsorption and
growth at low space velocity. As the
same active sites are present in both catalysts during activation,
no differences between them can be observed.

When the product
distribution is analyzed at 30 atm, distinct behaviors
are observed. At 240 °C, FC1 shows the highest C5–C8and C10+production (Figured), as observed under 20 atm, while the opposite
is true for FC2 achieving the lowest one (Figuree). Again, both have a similar magnetite
active phase after the solids are fully reduced, but a significant
type of active carbide phase often formed during CO carbidization
is thought to be the main reason for decoration of Fe particles with
such species possibly affecting the product distribution over FC2
(Figuree,f). This
is confirmed byin situXPS analyses. Apparently,
the carbidization does not depend on the catalyst type but its extension
depends on the exposition on surface and particle sizes. The Mössbauer
spectroscopy suggests that the particle sizes of FC2 are smaller than
those of FC1 and, thus, CO carbidization is favored over FC2, as later
confirmed byin situXPS analyses.

By increasing
the temperature from 240 to 270 °C, FC1 depicts
achievable 30–34% of all fractions (Figured), whereas the C5+fraction around
41% was still detected predominantly at high temperatures over FC2
(Figuref). For this
reason, both pressure and temperature do seem to affect the FTS performance
with the distribution of the product dependence of the carbide formation
appreciably.

Furthermore,in situXPS investigations
used a
pressure of 10 atm at ∼240–270 °C, with a CO-to-H2ratio of 1 during 1 h showing the evolution of the Fe 2p, O 1s, and C 1score
level spectra.

Figuredepicts
the
XPS spectra of fresh, reduced, and recorded under relevant FTS reaction
conditions for FC1. One has to mention that the original spectrum
for the Fe 2pcore level (Figurea, left panel in the bottom) exhibits spin–orbit
doublets corresponding to the Fe 2p3/2and Fe 2p1/2contributions. As previously
observed, the binding energies of 710.2 and 724.5 eV for the Fe 2p3/2core level assign the presence of Fe3+from the α-Fe2O3phase while
the Fe3+and Fe2+species arising from γ-Fe2O3are also shown. Moreover, the presence of shoulders
as satellite peaks at binding energies of 732.3 and 718.2 eV for Fe2p1/2and Fe2p3/2contributions
in the original FC1 confirms these assumptions.

Evolution of (a) Fe 2p, (b) Fe 3p, (b) O 1s, (d) C 1s, and (e) K
2s core levels as a function of the binding energies for FC1. The
spectra were recorded for the original sample (e.g., blue oval), reduced
at 255 °C (e.g., pink inverted triangle), upon using a reaction
mixture of CO and H2with a ratio of 1 at 240 °C and
10 atm for 1 h (e.g., red triangle), using a CO-to-H2ratio
of 1 at 255 °C and 10 atm for 1 h (e.g., brown rectangle) and
using a CO-to-H2ratio of 1 at 270 °C and 10 atm for
1 h (e.g., green diamond).

Figureb in the
right panel at the bottom displays the Fe 3p peaks for the original
spectrum with the binding energy of 55.3 eV with a minor peak at 53.5
eV, suggesting the presence of the Fe2+and Fe2+contributions. A similar shape appears from the analysis of the
Fe 2p3/2and Fe 2p1/2doublets acquired for thein situreduced
Fe 2pcore at 255 °C for 1 h (Figurea, left panel in the bottom).
In other words, a broadening of the Fe 2ppeak and
shifts toward lower binding energies is indicative of magnetite formation,
as found elsewhere. This cannot exclude
the reduction of Fe3+species in the α-Fe2O3and γ-Fe2O3to Fe3O4phase and its further reduction to metallic iron as
the binding energy of Fe 2p3/2shifts to
708 eV while Fe 2p1/2moves to 718 eV,
in agreement with the findings of refs,. This is consistent with the previous TPR
results that exhibit the Fe3O4reduction to
FeO with its proceeding toward reduction to metallic iron, as shown
in our previous work.

Accordingly,
the Fe 3ppeak following exposure
to hydrogen (Figureb, right panel at the bottom) indicates a change in the peak position,
full width at half-maximum besides an asymmetric increment of the
low binding energy peak at 53.0 eV along with a displacement of the
55 eV peak for higher binding energy, denoting the Fe2+conversion to metallic iron.

Throughin situXPS analyses at a pressure of
10 atm using a reaction mixture of CO-to-H2ratio of 1
and a temperature of 240 °C, the phase evolution behavior of
FC1 is illustrated. That is to say, deconvolution of the Fe 2pregion reveals that the shape of Fe 2p3/2and Fe 2p1/2contributions
hardly changed, despite the disappearance of the satellite near 719
eV, during the reaction under the given conditions. However, the deviations
in peak positions and full width at half-maximum besides a more asymmetric
Fe 2p3/2low binding energy peak accompanied
by its downward shift provide compelling evidence for the formation
of the iron carbides, which is consistent with the findings of refs−. This comes as a result of the surface–structure
relationship showing that the Fe3+and Fe2+ions
in the Fe3O4phase are reduced to metallic iron
along with iron carbides during the FTS reaction. As the carburization
ability of metallic iron is higher than that of Fe3O4, the surface iron phases are
concomitantly converted into iron carbides, i.e., Hägg carbide
and cementite in addition to Fe3O4, both reaching
a balance during FTS reaction along with the formation of hydrocarbon
species on the solid surface. The experimental FTS reaction confirms
these assumptions.

Importantly, the Fe 3pregion
(Figureb) has the
intensity of the
peaks positioned at 55 and 53 eV affected with the Fe entity present
in the low binding energy peak as preferable for the structural change
to form a mixture of iron partially reduced phases and their carbide
analogues. In addition, it is not easy to ascertain the Fe components
of the XPS spectra due to the uncertainties associated with the shape
of the inelastic background of the Fe 2pregion as
well as the close proximity of the binding energies for the iron oxide
phases.

As the temperature goes
up to 255 °C, the spectrum, recorded
for the Fe 2pregion at 710–724 eV, displays
an obvious change as the intensity of the peaks gets higher followed
by a shift toward low binding energies for Fe 2p3/2whereas the Fe 2p1/2peak does not change so
much. It could be indicative of the surface staying with the same
species during the reaction and the surface carburization forming
various iron carbide phases, mainly Hägg carbide (χ-Fe5C2), ε-Fe2C, and Fe3O4, and tentatively metallic iron phase, as latter shown.
The Fe 3p peak clearly shows the presence of quite symmetric peaks
with the one at 53 eV prevailing, in terms of intensity, revealing
a greater formation of two iron carbides species. At 270 °C,
the Fe 2pregion exhibits the presence of four species
between Fe 2p3/2and Fe 2p1/2lines (Figurea, left panel in the top) while gradually moving to
higher binding energies as the reaction temperature increases. For
the Fe 3pregion (Figureb), a clear formation of three species at
270 °C is accompanied by their shift at lower binding energies
and the intensity of the middle peak becoming higher than others.
Such a feature is consistent with the favorable Fe3O4spinel structure transformation into χ-Fe5C2and ε-Fe2C along with Fe3O4and metallic iron, when the temperature is increased
up to 255 °C.

Figurec displays
the corresponding O 1score-level spectra for FC1.
There are contributions of the O2–lattice oxygen
and defect-oxide species at 529.5 eV holding the dominant peak and
530.1–532.0 eV coming from the C–O/CO/O–H
entities, which is attributed to be from the mesoporous carbon support
(Figurec, left panel,
in the bottom). No clear differences are observed in the shape of
the distorted O 1sof reduced FC1, although a development
of the intensity of the signal at 530.1–532.0 eV is observed.
It should be argued that the observed trends displayed inFigurefor the reduced
samples are a result of all the α-Fe2O3and γ-Fe2O3transformations into a mixture
of Fe3O4and its partial reduction to metallic
iron, as illustrated by the Fe 2pand 3psignals for the reduced FC1.

After syngas exposition at 240
°C, a very broad contribution
of the peak at 531–532.0 eV appears at the expense of the slight
shift of that at 529.5 eV toward low binding energies. Again, the
iron carbide formation due to the adsorbed CO can be suggested along
with the Fe3O4and metallic iron particles.
It is important to underline that due to OH adsorbed on the surface,
the O 1sregion could be a proof of favorable byproduct
formation ofin situFTS reaction, as found elsewhere. At 255 °C, the significant width of the
O 1sregion signal at least twice as broad at 240
°C is explained by the coexistence of cementite θ-Fe3C and Hägg χ-Fe5C2carbide
species. These entities appear even though the lattice oxygen from
the oxides or α-Fe phase is dominant. This is consistent with
the result of thein situXRD, EXAFS, and XAS available
in the literature.,It is worthy to note here that
the temperature increment to 270 °C changes the O 1s core-level
features with a detectable broadening of the peaks, suggesting that
the fraction of iron carbide increased significantly covering the
solid surface and any other Fe compound still present. Comparison
of the reaction product distribution for FC1 reveals C5–C8and C10+heavy hydrocarbon products
instead of light olefins, e.g., C1–C4ones, whereas CO conversion varies over a wide range, i.e., 47–55%
at 270 °C due to the concomitant CO hydrogenation by WGS and
FTS reactions at high temperatures.

The C 1score levels of fresh FC1 (Figured, middle panel in the bottom)
displays binding energies of 284.8, 285.7, and 288.4 eV, which is
attributed to the adventitious carbon as the dominant component; C–OH/C–O–C,
and CO bonds form carbonyl and carboxyl species, respectively.
At higher binding energies beyond 290 eV, a complex set of asymmetric
peak and Π–Π* transition peaks is clearly visible,
as found elsewhere. All of these contributions
arise from the mesoporous carbon support. Accordingly, the O1sspectrum of the original FC1 (Figurec) shows the presence of C–O, lattice
oxygen in oxides, and carboxylates at 529, 530, and 531 eV, respectively.
In the C 1score level of thein situhydrogen reduced FC1, features similar to those of the original
sample are observable.

When exposure of the syngas mixture at
240 °C is performed,
the C 1sspectrum exhibits an increment in terms
of intensity for the peak at 283.5 eV likely due to the adsorbed CO
and C/CH chemisorbed on the surface, which results in the carbidic
C–Fe bonds as iron carbides on the solid surface. Based on
mechanistic considerations on Fe carbide surfaces during FTS,−the carbide surface forms a carbon vacant surface where CO dissociation
and hydrogenation of the carbidic entity to CH3monomers
to HCO recover the carbon species through a dynamic behavior, in a
similar way as the Mars–van Krevelen mechanism.,In addition, the sp2-hybridized graphitic carbon is located
in the C 1sregion near 284.5 whereas the high binding
energy at 285.5 eV assigns sp3-hybridized carbon such as
amorphous carbon, both carbon species arising from the dissociation
CO molecules.,Upon increasing the temperature
to 255 °C, the intensity of the peak at 283 eV gradually rises
with the iron carbide predominance followed by a decrement in the
area of graphitic and amorphous carbon at 285 eV, whereas a simultaneous
drop in intensity of the asymmetric peak and Π–Π*
transition peaks is observed. At high temperatures, the C 1score level remains unchanged with a huge decrement of
the peak intensities for graphitic and amorphous carbon, apart from
a notable formation of iron carbide peaks. This result demonstrates
that the iron carbide formation may possibly be thermodynamically
favored over FC1, even though at FTS reaction, temperatures below
255 °C contribute to the surface carbon species owing to the
limited diffusion of carbon from the surface into the Fe active phases.

The K 2s core levels are visible inFiguree (right panel) at 376 eV arising as impurities
of the mesoporous carbon support, which remains unchanged during all
the conditions evaluated. It is speculated that the addition of K
in unprompted Fe catalysts for FTS suppresses the formation of light
compounds such as CH4and CO2owing to the Fe–C
bond strengthening provided by the increment in the electron density
on Fe while weakening Fe–H and C–O bonds affecting the
CHxgroups on the solid surface to obtain
olefins and longer-chain hydrocarbon molecules. This can explain the product formation over FC1 compared
to FC2 counterparts.

Another point worth mentioning is that
the iron carbide (FexCy) structure
consisted of carbon atoms located in available interstitial sites
in a distorted hexagonal (hcp) lattice of zerovalent Fe atoms. Moreover, the crystal structure of the iron
carbides is analyzed by the site occupation of the carbon atoms into
trigonal prismatic carbides and octahedral carbides. For instance,
the deformed hcp Fe sublattice is found in θ-Fe3C
(Pnma), χ-Fe5C2(C2/c), and o-Fe7C3(Pnma), whereas the triangular prism interstitial
sites are Fe7C5(I2), Fe4C3(Cmcm), Fe5C4(C2/m), Fe6C5(Imm2), and Fe7C6(P63/m).,According
to the findings, the octahedral carbides can be transformed into trigonal
prismatic ones, depending on the temperature with martensitic shearing
reaching up to 250 °C while that of χ-Fe5C2above 250 °C and subsequently that of θ-Fe3C beyond 350 °C. Based on
these findings, the θ-Fe3C, χ-Fe5C2, and Fe7C3carbides are formed
under the range of temperature and pressure experimentally applied
in this work.

In an attempt to demonstrate whether the temperature
of calcination
plays an indispensable role in the FTS catalytic performance, thein situXPS analyses of FC2 calcined at 700 °C is obtained
(Figure). As FC2
is calcined at a higher temperature than FC1, it may provide on the
surface of mesoporous carbon more functionalized groups that would
result in a stronger interaction between the iron precursor and the
carbon support with the consequent higher iron species dispersion,
and thus, an improvement in the catalytic properties of FC2 is expected.

Evolution
of (a) Fe 2p, (b) Fe 3p, (b) O 1s, (d) C 1s, and (e) K
2s core levels as a function of the binding energies for FC2. The
spectra were recorded for the original sample (e.g. blue oval),, reduced
at 255 °C (e.g.pink inverted triangle) upon using a reaction
mixture of CO and H2with a ratio of 1 at 240 °C and
10 atm for 1 h (e.g., red triangle), using a CO-to-H2ratio
of 1 at 255 °C and 10 atm for 1 h (e.g., brown rectangle) and
using a CO-to-H2ratio of 1 at 270 °C and 10 atm for
1 h (e.g., green diamond).

Despite the differences in the calcination temperatures, FC1 and
FC2 hold similar Fe 2pcore-level spectra (Figurea andFigurea panels, at the bottom). Concurrently,
the Fe 3pcore level for original and reduced FC2
(Figureb, middle
panel, in the bottom) only has the peaks located at 55 eV with the
absence of that at 53 eV, previously shown in the FC1 sample (Figureb right panel, in
the bottom). This indicates that the Fe3+species prevails
in FC2 even after reduction. Particularly noticeable is the Fe 2pcore-level shape of FC2 after syngas exposure at 240 °C,
which is dominated by the well-developed Fe 2p3/2and 2p1/2peaks (Figureb, left panel). In addition,
shifts in the peak positions followed by asymmetry of the Fe 2p3/2core-level peaks suggest the iron carbide
formation. Accordingly, the Fe 3ppeak slightly shifted
to lower energy (Figureb, right panel), and the clear appearance of the peak at 53 eV assigns
the formation of iron carbides. These results indicate that Fe3O4is undergoing reduction on the proximal α-Fe
sites in the carburization occurrence. Similar features are also observed
for the Fe 2pspectrum at 255 °C regardless
of the iron carbide formation. This underscores the idea that Fe 2p3/2shifts to the low binding energy region
and increases the Fe 2p1/2peak intensity
yielding iron carbide phases such as Hägg carbide χ-Fe5C2, ε-Fe2C, and Fe3O4. At temperatures above 255 °C (Figurea, left panel on the top),
the Fe 2p3/2and Fe 2p1/2core levels indicate the same species as those of FC1 at
270 °C. The Fe 3pXPS spectrum (Figureb, right panel) gives further
evidence of the iron carbides from the appearance of two high-intensity
deconvoluted peaks at temperatures above 255 °C under exposure
to the syngas. The findings state that ε-Fe2C is
formed under carburization of the metallic iron at temperatures below
270 °C, but the instability of the latter phase provides the
χ-Fe5C2and θ-Fe3C formation. Thus, the obtained Fe 2pand
Fe 3presults also confirmed the formation of such
types of carbides as well as the iron oxide phases at high temperatures
during FTS reaction.

Figurec (left
panel) depicts the XPS spectra of the O 1s core level for FC2. Both
original and reduced samples exhibit two major peaks at 529 and 531–532
eV (Figurec left
panel, in the bottom), which corresponds to the O2–anions in the lattice of α-Fe2O3, γ-Fe2O3, or Fe3O4oxides and the
C–O/CO/O–H species from the support, as observed
in FC1. Binding energy positions of the corresponding two peaks are
shifted roughly toward lower-energy regions along with a higher intensity
of the peak located at 531–532.0 eV upon using syngas at the
temperature range 240–270 °C (Figurec left panel at the top), ensuring the iron
carbide formation besides the water probably from the WGS reaction.
This coincides with the observed O 1score-level
features of FC1.

The core-level C 1sspectrum
for FC2 is shown
in the middle panel ofFigured. Both original and reduced spectra (Figured middle panel, in the bottom) reveal a deconvoluted
doublet located at 284.5 and 288.4 eV, accounting for the C–OH/C–O–C
and CO bonds forming carbonyl and carboxyl species. At temperatures
between 240 and 270 °C (Figured middle panel, in the top), there is evidence that
all of the peaks have the same shape with the high binding energy
peak positioned at 283 eV while an enhanced intensity is perceptible
similarly to FC1. Such shifts are attributed to a considerable intensification
in C bonded to the iron on the surface of FC2 assigning the carbide
formation.

Additionally, the K 2s core levels at different FC2
conditions
(Figuree right panel,
in the top) are featureless since K is not present in the support.

Considering the fact that the active sites of FC1 and FC2 are identified
as the same, the composition of these samples differs only in terms
of calcination temperature and the lack of K in the support formulation
of the latter sample. Roughly, FC1 and FC2 have similar CO conversions
owing to the Fe particle dispersion on the mesoporous carbon support.
As a structure-sensitive reaction, the catalytic performance in the
FTS reaction is associated with the nature of the active phase and
its dispersion. Furthermore,in situXPS analyses
suggest that the product distribution of FC2 for long-chain hydrocarbon
molecules and heavy olefins is a result of the stable χ-Fe5C2and θ-Fe3C phases, which indeed
suppressed coking covering the aforesaid iron carbide phases under
the FTS conditions.

The
surface sensitivity of mesoporous carbon-supported iron catalysts
was investigated byin situXPS analyses. Two Fe-based
catalysts calcined at distinct conditions of temperature,i.e., 500 and 700 °C, exhibited quite different structural
properties as proved by Raman and Mössbauer measurements. When
reduced by hydrogen, both solids hold the same Fe3O4active sites, roughly exhibiting similar CO conversion owing
to the Fe particle dispersion and K presence on the mesoporous carbon
support. The structure-sensitive FTS reaction activity was associated
with the nature of the active phase and its dispersion. The surface–structure
relationship investigated byin situXPS analyses
indicated that the α-Fe2O3reduction to
Fe3O4is well dispersed on the mesoporous carbon
support and its further reduction to metallic iron. The Fe 2p, O 1s, C 2p, and K2s
core level evolution upon temperature increment up 255 °C revealed
the surface carburization forming χ-Fe5C2and θ-Fe3C iron carbide phases, along with Fe3O4metallic iron phases. The product distribution
displayed preferential long-chain hydrocarbon and heavy olefin formation
as a consequence of the stable χ-Fe5C2and θ-Fe3C phases, which may suppress coking of
the aforesaid iron carbide phases under the FTS conditions in study.

J.P.S.N. acknowledges support from the FUNCAP pHD
scholarship program.

The authors have
permission to share data under request.

J.P.S.N.,
G.S.P., O.G.P, and A.C.M. performed the experiments; A.C.O., F.A.N.F.,
J.J.-J., and E.R.-C. analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript, funding
acquisition, and conceptualization; J.PH. and F.A.N.F. designed and
performed the experiments and analyzed the data, as well. All authors
have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

The Article
Processing
Charge for the publication of this research was funded by the Coordenacao
de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES), Brazil (ROR
identifier: 00x0ma614). O.G.P, J.J.J. and E.R.C. acknowledged project
PID2021-126235OB-C32 funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and
FEDER funds.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.