Frontotemporal dementia is a group of neurodegenerative disorders mainly characterized by behavioural and language impairments. While the precise pathophysiology remains elusive, emerging evidence points to an important role of dopamine dysfunction, particularly within the caudate nucleus. Moreover, a theoretical model proposes that frontotemporal dementia manifestations result from a deficit in goal-directed behaviour, which may be related to altered dopamine control of the frontostriatal circuitry. However, no study has investigated the gradient of striatal dopamine transporter levels in frontotemporal dementia using neuroimaging and their correlation with clinical features. This study used123I-Ioflupane Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography imaging to measure striatal dopamine transporter levels and their distribution patterns in frontotemporal dementia, compared to Parkinson’s disease and healthy controls. Additionally, we explored the correlation between dopamine transporter uptake and two key domains affected in frontotemporal dementia: social cognition and language abilities. We hypothesized that frontotemporal dementia would show a predominant dopaminergic deficit in the caudate, and that this would correlate with the severity of clinical core features. The study comprised 139 participants, including 34 sporadic and genetic frontotemporal dementia, 68 Parkinson’s disease individuals, and 37 age- and sex-matched healthy controls. Among the frontotemporal dementia group, 22 cases had clinically probable behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia, and 12 had primary progressive aphasia. Social cognition was assessed with the abbreviated version of the Social and Emotional Assessment, which includes a Theory of Mind test and a Facial Emotion Recognition Task. Language skills were evaluated with the Screening for Aphasia in NeuroDegeneration battery. We found that dopamine transporter levels were reduced in frontotemporal dementia compared to healthy controls (P< 0.001) and that frontotemporal dementia showed a higher putamen-to-caudate ratio than Parkinson’s disease (P< 0.001), particularly notable in patients with identified disease-causing mutation. We also found that dopamine transporter levels were correlated with parkinsonian motor features and general cognition in frontotemporal dementia. Notably, both social cognition—especially facial emotion recognition—and language abilities exhibited associations with dopamine transporter levels in both the putamen and the caudate. These findings suggest that the pattern of dopamine transporter uptake could serve as a valuable biomarker for frontotemporal dementia, shedding light on the role of the dopaminergic system and the striatum in some fundamental clinical aspects. This opens new avenues for further investigating the underlying mechanisms and potential therapeutic targets of the dopaminergic projections in frontotemporal dementia.

Ursoet al. report that striatal dopamine transporter levels are reduced in frontotemporal dementia, with both the putamen and caudate similarly affected. These reductions correlate with core clinical features of frontotemporal dementia, including social cognition and language, suggesting that dopaminergic imaging may aid in the diagnosis and disease characterization.

Despite these previous findings, no study has yet systematically evaluated the patterns of nigrostriatal degeneration in FTD and their correlation with cardinal clinical features. Therefore, in this study we use123I-Ioflupane SPECT, a widely available dopamine transporter imaging modality, to (i) assess dopamine transporter levels in the striatum of patients with FTD, compared with PD and healthy controls, (ii) assess the putamen-to-caudate ratio, reflecting the distribution pattern of striatal dopaminergic loss in FTD, compared with PD and healthy controls, and (iii) explore whether dopamine transporter levels in the striatum are associated with cardinal clinical manifestations of FTD, namely social cognition and language. We hypothesize that dopaminergic deficit in FTD is predominantly in the caudate, and dopaminergic striatal degeneration correlates with the principal FTD clinical features.

The local Medical Ethics Committee approved the protocol for using the clinical data for research purposes (Protocol No: 6, 25 July 2017).

Thirty-eight patients with a clinical diagnosis of behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) or primary progressive aphasia (PPA), whose amyloid status data were available, diagnosed between January 2021 and September 2023, were prospectively recruited at the Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases and the Aging Brain of the University of Bari Aldo Moro at Pia Fondazione ‘Card. G. Panico’. All patients underwent an extensive assessment, including medical examination, neuropsychological tests, language assessment, and imaging (3T MRI or CT scan) and a lumbar puncture for CSF biomarkers analysis, as part of the diagnostic procedure. All patients were diagnosed by a multidisciplinary team according to clinical diagnostic criteria for probable bvFTD4or PPA.5Four patients who had a positive Alzheimer’s disease CSF profile and/or a positive amyloid-PET scan were excluded. In addition, all participants with clinical features suggestive of progressive supranuclear palsy, such as early postural instability, unexplained falls, or vertical gaze palsy, were excluded. The final sample comprised 22 subjects with bvFTD and 12 subjects with PPA (eight non-fluent/agrammatic variant, three semantic variant and one mixed variant33) and were included in the analysis. Seven of the FTD subjects had an identified disease-causing mutation (fourC9orf72, threeGRN). All of these cases had a bvFTD clinical syndrome except for one that was a PPA. All FTD individuals underwent dopamine transporter imaging to measure dopamine transporter binding using123I-Ioflupane SPECT imaging as part of this study. To compare DAT binding, age and sex-matched Parkinson’ disease (n= 68) patients diagnosed between January 2021 and September 2023 were included in this study. PD diagnosis was made according to the latest Movement Disorders Society diagnostic criteria for clinically established PD.34All patients underwent dopamine transporter imaging to measure dopamine transporter binding using123I-Ioflupane SPECT imaging. We excluded patients with normal DAT binding34and any clinically significant neurological disorders. Additionally, 37 age- and sex-matched healthy controls (HC) were added as a reference for dopamine transporter binding. Data used for HC were obtained from the Parkinson’s Progression Markers Initiative database (www.ppmi-info.org/data) in September 2023. HC were eligible if they had no significant neurological or psychiatric disorders, Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) scores above 26, and no first-degree relatives with PD, and if they showed normal DAT binding. None of the patients or control subjects received dopaminergic medication or medication known to affect dopaminergic function,21including alpha methyldopa, methylphenidate, amphetamine derivatives, or modafinil. No participant had a significant burden of cerebrovascular disease or visual loss. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of ASL Lecce (verbale n. 6, 25 July 2017), and all participants gave informed consent in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.

Disease duration for each patient was calculated from the time of symptom onset to the date of enrolment in the study. Symptom onset was defined as the point when the patient or informant first noticed significant cognitive or behavioural changes for bvFTD, language problems for PPA, and motor problems for PD. Parkinsonian motor features were systematically assessed using the motor part (Part III) of the MDS Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS)35by a trained neurologist experienced in movement disorders (D.U). The severity of functional impairment in patients was evaluated using the Clinical Dementia Rating scale (CDR).36Patients with a CDR global score greater than 2, indicative of more than moderate dementia severity, were excluded from the study as their cognitive and functional impairment might have interfered with the accuracy of assessments. Cognitive function was assessed using the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE)37and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA).38All assessments, including social cognition and language assessments described below, were conducted by trained neuropsychologists and clinicians who were blinded to the patients’ dopamine transporter imaging results. The assessments were performed within a close timeframe to minimize variability due to disease progression or other factors.

Seventeen patients diagnosed with bvFTD and four individuals with PPA underwent the abbreviated version of the Social and Emotional Assessment (Mini-SEA),39which were validated in a previous study, to be able to accurately discriminate bvFTD from controls or patients with Alzheimer’s disease (AD).40This comprehensive evaluation comprises a Theory of Mind (ToM) test known as the Faux-Pas Test and a Facial Emotion Recognition Task. For the assessment of Theory of Mind (ToM), we utilized a concise version consisting of ten stories adapted from the Faux-Pas Test41to gauge individuals’ ability to comprehend social situations. The Faux-Pas Recognition Test contains ten previously published narratives, with five describing a ‘faux-pas’ scenario (characterized by inadvertently saying something inappropriate) and five without such instances. Each ‘faux-pas’ story is rated out of 6, while stories without ‘faux-pas’ are scored out of 2. The cumulative score on the Faux-Pas Test, with a maximum of 40, is determined by adding the subscores from ‘faux-pas’ stories (five stories × 6 points = 30) and the subscores from stories without ‘faux-pas’ (five stories × 2 points = 10). Control question scores are not included in the total Faux-Pas Test score. Additionally, participants completed the Facial Emotion Recognition Task, which involved identifying the emotion expressed in 35 facial images from Ekman’s collection.42The images, shown five times each during the test, represented seven emotions: fear, sadness, disgust, surprise, anger, happiness, and neutrality. A general recognition percentage was computed based on the number of correct responses.

The Screening for Aphasia in NeuroDegeneration (SAND)43battery was used to evaluate the language skills of all patients with PPA and 17 individuals with bvFTD. The SAND is a screening tool that can identify the main linguistic features needed for the diagnosis and classification of PPA. It consists of nine tests: naming pictures, understanding sentences, comprehending single words, repeating words and non-words, repeating sentences, reading, writing, making semantic associations and describing pictures. For more information on the test structure, instructions and scoring methods, please refer to theSupplemental Materials.

Descriptive statistics were computed by using median (IQR) or frequencies, as appropriate. We tested the normality of all continuous data using the Shapiro–Wilk test. We compared categorical variables between groups (Frontotemporal Dementia, Parkinson’s Disease, or Healthy controls) using chi-square tests, and continuous variables using Kruskal–Wallis tests, as the data were not normally distributed. We performedpost hoccomparisons with the Mann–Whitney U-test, adjusting for multiple comparisons with the Bonferroni correction. We compared categorical and continuous variables between subgroups (behavioural variant Frontotemporal Dementia and Primary progressive aphasia) using chi-square and Mann–Whitney tests, respectively. We reported the inferential statistics as test statistic, andP-value for the chi-square, Kruskal–Wallis tests and Mann–Whitney tests. The primary outcome was defined as the group comparison of the putamen-to-caudate ratio. This outcome was prioritized based on findings from an interim analysis, conducted midway through the study. To evaluate the diagnostic performance of striatal SBR measures, we conducted receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analyses comparing FTD against PD and HC. We computed the area under the curve (AUC) for the striatum, putamen, and caudate to quantify the discriminatory accuracy of these measures. For the exploratory correlation analysis between regional specific binding ratios of123I-Ioflupane SPECT and clinical measures, we used partial Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient, controlling for age and sex. We reported the correlation coefficients as Spearman’s rho andP-value. Additional analyses evaluating the representativeness of the control group included in the present study are provided in theSupplementary Materials. The statistical analyses were performed using R studio 23.03.1 (http://www.rstudio.com/) with R 4.3.0. We set the significance level at a correctedP-value of <0.05.

The participant groups did not exhibit significant differences in age (H= 4.7, P= 0.096,Table 1) or sex distribution (χ2= 0.1,P= 0.93), indicating a well-matched sample across groups. However, the duration of disease was notably longer in individuals with Parkinson's disease (PD) compared to those with Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD) (U= 4.9,P= 0.026). Expectedly, FTD participants displayed higher scores in the CDR Global score (U= 76.3,P< 0.001) and lower scores in the MMSE (U= 11.2,P< 0.001) compared to other groups. Furthermore, the MoCA scores were lower in FTD compared to HC (U= 39.1,P< 0.001). Evaluating parkinsonian features using the MDS-UPDRS revealed significant differences among groups (H= 141.4,P< 0.001). On average, PD patients exhibited a mean MDS-UPDRS score of 30.59 (SD, 12.65), indicating a higher burden of motor features compared to HC and FTD. Individuals with FTD showed an average MDS-UPDRS score of 13.97 (SD, 13.92), indicating a higher burden of motor features than HC.

Mean (standard deviation) scores are shown unless otherwise indicated. CDR, Clinical Dementia Rating Scale; MMSE, Mini-Mental State Examination; MoCA, Montreal Cognitive Assessment; MDS-UPDRS, Movement Disorders Society Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale. Specific Binding Ratios refers to 123I-Ioflupane SPECT specific bindings in the striatum, putamen and caudate. BoldedP-values indicate statistically significant group differences.

Dopamine transporter binding in the whole striatum, putamen and the caudate separately showed significant differences between groups (striatumH= 73.6, putamenH= 82.1, caudateH= 58.2;P< 0.001,Table 1,Fig. 1).Post hoctests (Mann–Whitney U-tests corrected for multiple comparisons with Bonferroni adjustment) revealed that there were significant differences between all groups for each variable. Specifically, FTD and PD had lower dopamine transporter binding than HC in the striatum, the putamen, and the caudate (allP< 0.001). PD had lower dopamine transporter binding than FTD in the striatum, the putamen (bothP< 0.001), and the caudate (P= 0.040). In differentiating FTD from HC, dopamine transporter binding measures showed good overall diagnostic accuracy, with AUCs of 0.886 for the putamen, 0.858 for the striatum, and 0.854 for the caudate. In contrast, the ability to distinguish FTD from PD was lower, with AUCs of 0.796 for the putamen, 0.761 for the striatum, and 0.662 for the caudate (Supplementary Fig. 1).

Dopamine transporter binding in FTD, PD and controls.Box and whisker plots displaying the distribution of specific binding ratios of123I-Ioflupane among the Parkinson’s Disease (PD, n = 68), Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD,n= 34), and Healthy Controls (HC,n= 37) groups. The box represents the interquartile range (IQR; 25–75th percentile) with the median value (horizontal line) inside. The whiskers extend from the box to the minimum and maximum values that are not outliers, and the outliers are shown as dots. Outliers are defined as values outside the range [Q1–1.5 * IQR, Q3 + 1.5 * IQR], where Q1 is the 25th percentile and Q3 is the 75th percentile. Statistical analysis was conducted using the Kruskal–Wallis test for group comparison (striatum: H = 73.6; putamen: H = 82.1; caudate: H = 58.2; allP< 0.001), followed by Mann–Whitney U-tests with Bonferroni correction for post hoc pairwise comparisons. *P-value < 0.05, ***P-value < 0.001.

The putamen-to-caudate ratio was significantly different among groups (H= 62.5;P< 0.001,Table 2,Fig. 2).Post hocanalysis revealed that FTD had a higher putamen-to-caudate ratio than PD (P< 0.001), and that PD had a lower putamen-to-caudate ratio than HC (P< 0.001). This indicates that FTD have higher levels of dopamine transporter binding in the putamen relative to the caudate nucleus, when compared with PD. The striatal asymmetry index was significantly different among groups (H= 41.0;P< 0.001).Post hocanalysis showed that FTD and PD (bothP< 0.001) had a higher asymmetry index than HC and that PD (bothP< 0.001) had a higher asymmetry index than FTD (P< 0.001).

Mean (standard deviation) scores are shown unless otherwise indicated; The putamen-to-caudate ratio provides an index of the posterior-to-anterior dopaminergic loss gradient. Lower values of the putamen-to-caudate ratio indicate lower levels of DaT binding in the putamen relative to the caudate nucleus, while higher values indicate lower levels of DaT binding in the caudate relative to the putamen nucleus. Higher value of the asymmetry index indicates a greater difference in DaT binding between the two sides of the striatum. BoldedP-values indicate statistically significant group differences.

Gradient of dopamine transporter binding in FTD.Exemplary axial views showing predefined striatal volumes of interest, comparing tracer uptake in a patient with Frontotemporal Dementia (FTD), a patient with Parkinson’s disease (PD), and a healthy control (HC) subject (A). The reference VOIs are set to the bilateral occipital lobes. While the patient with PD exhibits a more significantly reduced signal posteriorly, the patient with FTD displays a more heterogeneous signal reduction, distributed both anteriorly and posteriorly. Box and whisker plots displaying the distribution of putamen-to-caudate ratio among the Parkinson’s disease (PD,n= 68), frontotemporal dementia (FTD,n= 34), and healthy controls (HC,n= 37) groups (B). The box represents the interquartile range (IQR; 25–75th percentile) with the median value (horizontal line) inside. The whiskers extend from the box to the minimum and maximum values that are not outliers, and the outliers are shown as dots. The putamen-to-caudate ratio provides an index of the posterior-to-anterior dopaminergic loss gradient; lower values of the putamen-to-caudate ratio indicate lower levels of DaT binding in the putamen relative to the caudate nucleus, while higher values indicate lower levels of DaT binding in the caudate relative to the putamen. Statistical analysis was performed using the Kruskal–Wallis test (H= 62.5,P< 0.001) followed by Mann–Whitney U-tests with Bonferroni correction. ***P-value < 0.001.

In the FTD group, Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient, controlling for age and sex, revealed a negative association between dopamine transporter binding in the striatum (rs= −0.366,P= 0.043,Fig. 3) and the putamen (rs= −0.416,P= 0.02), and Parkinsonian features as measured by MDS-UPDRS. Similarly, dopamine transporter binding in the putamen (rs= 0.390,P= 0.037) was positively correlated with general cognition as measured by MMSE. There was no evidence of a significant correlation between striatal dopamine transporter binding and age (rs= −0.291,P= 0.095), disease duration (rs= −0.132,P= 0.463) or functional impairment evaluated using the CDR global score (rs= −0.271,P= 0.18).

Associations between specific binding ratios (SBR) of123I-Ioflupane in the striatum, putamen and caudate, and clinical measures.Scatterplots showing the Spearman partial correlations (rs) after controlling for age and sex. The linear fit (solid line) is shown. Data points are colour-coded by FTD subtype: bvFTD and PPA. *P< 0.05; **P< 0.01.

Among patients with FTD, social cognition measured by Mini-SEA correlated with dopamine transporter binding in the striatum (rs= 0.472,P= 0.004,Table 3,Fig. 4) and the putamen (rs= 0.634,P= 0.004) using Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient, controlling for age and sex. Regarding the subtests of Mini-SEA, only dopamine transporter binding in the putamen (rs= 0.269,P= 0.049) was positively associated to the Faux-Pas test, while dopamine transporter binding in the striatum (rs= 0.664,P= 0.001), putamen (rs= 0.700,P< 0.001), and caudate (rs= 0.570,P= 0.009) was associated with Facial Emotion Recognition.

rsis the Spearman partial correlations after controlling for age and sex. mini-SEA, mini-Social Cognition & Emotional Assessment. mini-SEA comprise the sum of the facial emotion recognition and the short Faux-Pas test scores.

Associations between specific binding ratios (SBR) of123I-Ioflupane in the striatum, putamen and caudate, and social cognition measures.Scatterplots showing the Spearman partial correlations (rs) after controlling for age and sex. The linear fit (solid line) is shown. Data points are colour-coded by FTD subtype: bvFTD and PPA. *P< 0.05; **P< 0.01; ***P< 0.001.

A specific analysis on the different seven emotions of the Facial Emotion Recognition Task showed that the emotions that were most correlated with the measures of dopamine transporter binding weresurprise(striatum,rs= 0.664,P= 0.001; putamen,rs= 0.673,P= 0.001; caudaters= 0.552,P= 0.012,Supplementary Table 1),disgust(striatum,rs= 0.590,P= 0.019; putamen,rs= 0.518,P= 0.019; caudaters= 0.475,P= 0.034), andfear(striatum,rs= 0.536,P= 0.015; putamen,rs= 0.463,P= 0.010; caudaters= 0.478,P= 0.033).

We investigated the relationship between language abilities measured by SAND and dopamine transporter binding in the striatum, the putamen, and the caudate using Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient, controlling for age and sex, within the FTD group. (Table 4). We found that the measures of dopamine transporter binding were strongly correlated with several language tasks, such as Picture Naming (striatum,rs= 0.427,P= 0.026; putamen,rs= 0.534,P= 0.004; caudaters= 0.337,P= 0.086), single-word comprehension (striatum,rs= 0.487,P= 0.010; putamen,rs= 0.531,P= 0.004; caudaters=0.473,P= 0.013), sentence repetition (striatum,rs= 0.409,P= 0.034; putamen,rs=0.430,P= 0.049), semantic associations (striatum,rs= 0.517,P= 0.007; putamen,rs=0.527,P= 0.006; caudaters=0.406,P= 0.030)¸ and picture description (striatum,rs= 0.569,P= 0.002; putamen,rs=0.660,P< 0.001; caudaters= 0.468,P= 0.012).

rsis the Spearman partial correlations after controlling for age and sex. SAND, Screening for Aphasia in NeuroDegeneration.

No significant differences were found when comparing demographic and clinical characteristics between individuals with bvFTD (N= 22) and those with PPA (N= 12,Supplementary Table 2). Regarding Dopamine transporter binding using123I-Ioflupane SPECT, no significant differences were found in the striatum, putamen, and caudate binding. However, the bvFTD exhibited a higher putamen-to-caudate ratio compared to patients with PPA (U= 5.15,P= 0.023).

Individuals with genetic FTD were younger than those with PD (P= 0.018) and HC (P= 0.049,Supplementary Table 3). Both FTD and PD had lower dopamine transporter binding than HC in the striatum, the putamen, and the caudate (P< 0.05). However, there were no differences in striatal binding between FTD and PD (Supplementary Fig. 2). The striatal asymmetry index was significantly different among groups (H= 41.5;P< 0.001). Post hoc analysis showed that FTD (P= 0.008) and PD (P< 0.001) had a higher asymmetry index than HC. When comparing genetic (N= 7) and sporadic (N= 27) FTD, individuals with genetic FTD were younger than those with sporadic FTD (P= 0.011). Dopamine transporter binding was comparable between the two groups. However, the putamen-to-caudate ratio was higher in individuals with genetic FTD (P= 0.031). Finally, to assess the potential influence of genetic cases, we conducted a sensitivity analysis excluding the seven individuals with genetically confirmed FTD. The results remained consistent, with all group differences between sporadic FTD and healthy controls remaining highly significant (P< 0.001) across all striatal regions.

In this study, we demonstrated that dopamine transporter (DAT) levels are significantly reduced in FTD compared to controls, with a symmetrical loss observed in both the putamen and the caudate, particularly in patients with genetically confirmed disease. Additionally, our analysis highlighted significant associations between DAT levels and core clinical features of FTD, including general cognition, social cognition (particularly facial emotion recognition) and language abilities.

We have demonstrated that123I-Ioflupane SPECT, a widely available dopamine transporter imaging modality, can detect lower dopamine transporter levels in patients with FTD compared to age- and sex-matched controls, although higher than in patients with PD. These results are in line with reports from smaller sample sizes that support the impairment of the dopaminergic system in FTD.17,18Rinneet al.using PET and[11C]CFT showed a reduction of tracer binding in the caudate nucleus and putamen of 12 patients with FTD. Similarly, Sedaghatet al.demonstrated that the uptake of123I-Ioflupane in the right and left striatum of seven patients with FTD was reduced to 62% and 68%, respectively, compared to controls. Moreover, consistent with our study, the motor UPDRS score of the patients with FTD showed a negative correlation to the uptake of the radiotracer, suggesting that parkinsonian symptoms are associated with striatal dopaminergic denervation, especially of the putamen. Another study on the diagnostic accuracy of123I-Ioflupane SPECT for the differentiation of FTD from dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)21showed that the uptake of striatal DAT is reduced in some cases of FTD and that123I-Ioflupane SPECT is less useful in differentiating FTD from DLB than it is in differentiating AD from DLB. Similarly, in our study, in which the mean MDS-UPDRS score was about 14, in the study by Morganet al. the overall frequency of parkinsonian features was surprisingly high in FTD and reached similar levels to that observed in DLB. Although parkinsonian motor features were originally included as a supportive feature in theNearyclinical criteria,53they were subsequently excluded from later revisions,4even though numerous studies have reported high prevalence in FTD.17,18,20Additional support for the dysregulation of the basal ganglia in FTD is derived from structural imaging22-25,27,54-56and the pathological modifications identified in the striatum and substantia nigra in postmortem studies.26,57-59In a neuropathological study involving individuals with transactive response DNA-binding protein-43 kDa (TDP-43)-related frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD-TDP), phosphorylated TDP-43 accumulation was found in the neurons of striatal efferent pathways, their corresponding tracts, or axon terminals located in the substantia nigra pars reticulata (SNr) and globus pallidus (GP).26This suggests that striatal efferent projections are often involved in TDP-43-related FTD and may influence its clinical manifestations.

A large coordinate-based meta-analysis of structural and functional brain studies on bvFTD revealed consistent alterations in the striatum, especially in functional studies of bvFTD patients versus healthy controls.22This suggested a key involvement of the salience network and subcortical regions in the pathophysiology of bvFTD. Another recent study investigated the long-term anatomical progression of the three FTD variants using MRI staging schemes and described the sequential divergence of volumetric trajectories between normal aging and FTD.27They reported that striatal atrophy precedes focal cortical atrophy with a ‘radiological’ prodromal phase lasting 8–10 years. This implies that striatal atrophy could potentially serve as a biomarker for identifying preclinical or prodromal FTD variants. Whether or not dopamine transporter imaging can also serve as an early marker for preclinical/prodromal FTD variants remains to be investigated.

Our data indicate that the levels of dopamine transporter in the striatum are related to general cognition, as assessed by MMSE, and to social cognition, especially theory of mind and facial recognition tasks. These findings are consistent with previous MRI studies that suggested a link between behavioural impairment and striatal atrophy in FTD.23,24,63-65Voxel-based morphometry analyses showed that anhedonia was linked to reduced volume in a wide frontostriatal network, comprising orbitofrontal and medial prefrontal, paracingulate and insular cortices, as well as the putamen.63Moreover, a study found that cortical thickness in caudal, lateral and superior frontal regions and caudate nucleus volume were inversely correlated with apathy severity scores of the Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire (NPI).64Likewise, another study using manual Region of Interest tracing for volume quantification found that putamen volume also correlated significantly with NPI score.23Additionally, another study revealed that behavioural symptoms and severity of bvFTD were associated with abnormalities in striatal size and shape.24Furthermore, recent structural imaging studies have also provided evidence that social cognition in FTD may be related to striatal atrophy. Voxel-based morphometry was employed to identify patterns of grey matter loss associated with task performance of social norm compliance in 22 patients with bvFTD.66In the prosocial condition, patients’ performance indicated a diminished expression of prosocial behaviour, related to reduced grey matter in the anterior insula, lateral orbitofrontal cortex, anterior cingulate and dorsal striatum. This suggests that the striatum may have a unique role in computing social reward and influencing action-output oriented to seek rewarding social interactions.66A large cohort study of familial FTD patients carrying mutations inC9orf72,GRN, orMAPTgenes from the GENFI multicentre cohort revealed that social cognition impairment, assessed by Facial Emotion Recognition and Faux-Pas Recognition tests, was mainly related to a network of left-hemisphere regions, especially the striatum, orbitofrontal cortex, and insula.67Likewise, empathy, evaluated by informant-based Interpersonal Reactivity Index scores, decreased from asymptomatic to very mild symptomatic stages in both genetic and sporadic bvFTD, regardless of the pathogenic variant, and was associated with subcortical atrophy in the left caudate.68Another noteworthy study from the GENFI initiative employed cross-modal correlation of MRI-based measures with nuclear imaging–derived estimates of various neurotransmitter systems, indirectly assessing neurotransmitter deficits in monogenic FTD.69The study found that social cognition scores, loss of empathy, and poor response to emotional cues correlated with the strength of grey matter volume colocalization of dopamine and serotonin pathways. By demonstrating the association between dopamine transporter levels in the striatum and social cognition, we bolster the emerging framework that considers symptoms of FTD as stemming from impaired goal-directed social behaviour,15which may depend on dopaminergic dysfunction in the striatum.

Dopaminergic therapies have been investigated in FTD, although available evidence remains limited and primarily focused on symptomatic management.73Dopaminergic stimulants such as methylphenidate74and dextroamphetamine75have shown some promise in alleviating behavioural disturbances, particularly apathy and impulsivity, in small randomized trials of patients with bvFTD. However, dopamine replacement therapies have generally shown minimal benefit for parkinsonian features in FTD, with only isolated case reports suggesting clinical improvement.76In the context of PPA, a small crossover trial of the D2 agonist bromocriptine (22.5 mg/day) in six patients with the non-fluent variant reported limited benefit, including modest improvement in utterance length.72,77Notably, an ongoing Phase IIa randomized controlled trial (NCT04937452) is currently evaluating the non-ergot dopamine agonist rotigotine (4–6 mg/24 h, transdermal) in 75 patients with bvFTD over a 24-week period. This trial aims to assess the drug’s impact on behavioural symptoms and frontal lobe metabolism as measured by FDG-PET, and may provide valuable insight into the therapeutic modulation of dopaminergic tone in FTD.

One limitation of our study is that we used public data from an international dataset for the striatal binding ratios of healthy controls. However, the data from this dataset (PPMI) have been widely validated78,79and the striatal binding ratios of healthy controls are consistent with those of reference studies18,19and with those of the European multicentre database of healthy controls for123I-Ioflupane SPECT.45Another limitation is the focus on the dopamine transporter levels in the putamen and caudate, which may not capture the whole spectrum of dopaminergic dysfunction in FTD. Future studies could explore extra-striatal dopamine transporter uptake using123I-Ioflupane SPECT80and other imaging and tracer modalities. Another limitation is that structural brain changes in FTD, such as caudate atrophy or frontal horn widening, may partially contribute to the observed reduction in dopamine transporter binding. Future studies should incorporate partial volume correction techniques to more accurately assess dopaminergic function in the context of neurodegeneration. We also acknowledge that the use of the original CDR, rather than the FTLD-modified version, may have reduced sensitivity to detect functional impairment in domains typically affected in FTD, and might have contributed to the lack of clear associations between SBR and CDR scores observed in this study.

A major strength of our study is the inclusion of patients with genetically confirmed FTD, which increases the reliability and specificity of our findings. We found that the degree of dopaminergic denervation was even more pronounced in patients with genetic FTD than in those with sporadic FTD. Another strength is the comparison of striatal dopaminergic distribution patterns across FTD, PD, and healthy controls, which highlights that the pattern of dopaminergic dysfunction in FTD, characterized by a more uniform involvement of the putamen and caudate, differs from the posterior-to-anterior gradient typically observed in synucleinopathies. This suggests that dopamine transporter imaging could be useful to differentiate between these neurodegenerative disorders. Moreover, the fact that the clinical and dopaminergic imaging characteristics were similar between bvFTD and PPA patients makes our study more significant, showing that dopamine transporter imaging is a marker of the FTD spectrum and correlates with the core features of language and social cognition dysfunction. This supports the notion that FTD is a heterogeneous syndrome with a common underlying pathology.

In conclusion, we demonstrated that dopamine transporter levels are lower in FTD than in healthy subjects, and that striatal dopaminergic loss in FTD shows a more uniform distribution across the putamen and caudate, differing from the posterior-to-anterior gradient typically observed in Parkinson’s disease. We also revealed that dopamine transporter levels are associated with parkinsonian symptoms and cognitive performance in FTD. Moreover, we found that social cognition and language impairment correlated with dopamine transporter levels in both the putamen and the caudate. These results indicate that the pattern of dopamine transporter levels could be a useful biomarker of FTD and pave the way for further studies on the role of the dopaminergic system and the striatum in the cardinal clinical features of FTD.

The authors are grateful to the research participants involved in the research studies. Data pertaining to healthy controls used in the preparation of this article were obtained from the Parkinson’s Progression Markers Initiative (PPMI) database (www.ppmi-info.org/data). For up-to-date information on the study, visitwww.ppmi-info.org.

Daniele Urso, 
Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases and the Aging Brain, Department of Clinical Research in Neurology, University of Bari ‘Aldo Moro’, 73039 Tricase, Lecce, Italy.

Antonio Anastasia, 
Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases and the Aging Brain, Department of Clinical Research in Neurology, University of Bari ‘Aldo Moro’, 73039 Tricase, Lecce, Italy; 
Department of Nuclear Medicine, Pia Fondazione di Culto e Religione ‘Card.G.Panico’, 73039 Tricase, Italy.

Valentina Gnoni, 
Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases and the Aging Brain, Department of Clinical Research in Neurology, University of Bari ‘Aldo Moro’, 73039 Tricase, Lecce, Italy.

Alessia Giugno, 
Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases and the Aging Brain, Department of Clinical Research in Neurology, University of Bari ‘Aldo Moro’, 73039 Tricase, Lecce, Italy.

Davide Vilella, 
Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases and the Aging Brain, Department of Clinical Research in Neurology, University of Bari ‘Aldo Moro’, 73039 Tricase, Lecce, Italy.

Alessandra Vitulli, 
Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases and the Aging Brain, Department of Clinical Research in Neurology, University of Bari ‘Aldo Moro’, 73039 Tricase, Lecce, Italy.

Chiara Zecca, 
Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases and the Aging Brain, Department of Clinical Research in Neurology, University of Bari ‘Aldo Moro’, 73039 Tricase, Lecce, Italy.

José A Pineda-Pardo, 
HM CINAC (Centro Integral de Neurociencias Abarca Campal), Hospital Universitario HM Puerta del Sur, HM Hospitales, 28938 Madrid, Spain; 
CIBERNED, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Guglielmo Foffani, 
HM CINAC (Centro Integral de Neurociencias Abarca Campal), Hospital Universitario HM Puerta del Sur, HM Hospitales, 28938 Madrid, Spain; 
CIBERNED, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

José A Obeso, 
HM CINAC (Centro Integral de Neurociencias Abarca Campal), Hospital Universitario HM Puerta del Sur, HM Hospitales, 28938 Madrid, Spain; 
CIBERNED, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Giancarlo Logroscino, 
Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases and the Aging Brain, Department of Clinical Research in Neurology, University of Bari ‘Aldo Moro’, 73039 Tricase, Lecce, Italy; 
Department of Translational Biomedicine and Neurosciences (DiBraiN), University of Bari Aldo Moro, 70124 Bari, Italy.

Supplementary material is available atBrain Communicationsonline.

This work has been supported by the funding of Regione Puglia and Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche for Tecnopolo per la Medicina di Precisione. D.G.R. n. 2117 of 21.11.2018 (grant number: B84I18000540002).