Violent forms of discipline (VFD) used in homes and schools to correct children’s behaviour have significant long-term consequences, leading to their prohibition in most countries. This study focused on understanding school children’s perspectives on VFD. A community-based cross-sectional study surveyed 16 to 19-year-olds using random sampling. Out of 1130 participants, 60.7% reported experiencing violent punishment at least once during a school term. Physical punishment was most common (64.5%), followed by psychological methods (27.1%). Interestingly, 85% of students were aware of their rights under the child’s charter, and all knew emergency contact numbers. An overwhelming 86.3% preferred alternative disciplinary methods, believing VFD negatively impacts their future development. Participants with better knowledge supported legal measures against VFD (P< .05). The differences in prevalence when compared to other studies indicate that cultural background might influence acceptance of such practices. These findings underscore the importance of promoting non-violent disciplinary strategies to safeguard children’s well-being and development.

Boys are beaten with more force when compared to girls as it is felt boys are stronger and more aggressive.5Hence, the knowledge and perception of various forms of punishment may vary between boys and girls.

We conducted this study among school children to see the knowledge, perception, and actions the students would take towards VFD. The objective of this study was to identify the prevalence of VFD, factors that influence VFD, their knowledge, its long-term effect on their well-being, and their perception of VFD.

Stratified proportionate random sampling was done, and 10 schools in the district of Jaffna were selected using a recently updated list of secondary schools in the district of Jaffna with a probability proportionate to the student population size. The selected 10 schools had all the streams representing Maths, science, arts, commerce, and information technology. Each stream had a minimum of 2 classrooms to a maximum of 5 classrooms. One class in each stream was selected randomly. A total of 20 students were randomly selected from 1 class as a cluster. A total of 58 clusters were chosen to achieve the sample size. This study is limited to 16 to 18-year-old adolescents and cannot be generalised as younger age groups were not considered.

An anonymous pre-tested and standardised self-administered questionnaire was used. The questionnaire was developed specifically for this study using the existing Parent-Child Conflict Tactics Scales.23The validity was assessed by a field test which was conducted with 10 experts in the field of child abuse to measure the content validity. The questionnaire was modified as per the expert’s suggestions, and the modified version was used as the study tool. Part A considered the demographic details, Part B assessed the knowledge component of the participants and Part C checked the perception of VFD. The students were asked to report on the previous school term that is, period between 2 holidays. To assess the knowledge, questions regarding types of corporal punishments, the reason for the punishment, and the legal implications were checked. A set of 17 items that had correct and incorrect responses were used, and each correct response was awarded +1. A score ≥12 was considered good knowledge. This score was determined by the questions that the students must know by the expert panel over several discussions. and the internal consistency was satisfactory with a Cronbach alpha of .72, Part C checked the perception of the participants on violent forms of discipline, The perception was checked with 22 items which recorded the response on the Likert scale, and the responses were recorded as “strongly agree” or “agree,” or “Neutral” or “disagree,” or “strongly disagree.” Depending on whether it was a proper perception or not, scores from 1 to 5 were allocated to each item. Reverse scoring was awarded for the negative responses. A score of “0” was given for “don’t know”/ “can’t say.” The internal consistency was satisfactory with aCronbach alpha of .75.Part D of the questionnaire checked the preferred method of discipline and the outcome of violent forms of discipline in those who received it. Trained investigators went to the schools to administer the questionnaire. A pilot study was conducted in a group of 20 students in a different district, and the tool was further validated. The tool used to collect data was specifically designed and not a standard tool, but validated for this study; hence there may be a reporting bias among the participants.

Data was analysed by using Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) version 22.0. Responses were expressed as percentages and Chi-square test for significance of difference among proportions was calculated. Cronbach alpha was used to assess the reliability of the scores. The data was described using frequencies and percentages. One-way ANOVA was used to compare the means of the scores for perception and knowledge.Pvalue of <.05 was considered as statistically significant.

Ethical approval was obtained from the Faculty of Medicine, University of Jaffna Sri Lanka Ethics Review Committee (J/ERC/16/72/NDR/0143), and permission was obtained from the Provincial ministry of education, zonal directors, and school principals.

Ethical principles were followed throughout the research. The information was provided both verbally and in writing, and consent was obtained. Participants were assured that they could discontinue the study at any time that suited them. Informed consent was obtained from the parents by giving the consent form on a previous visit, and consent was obtained from the students. Personal information remained confidential, and assurances of non-publicity were obtained.

A total population of 1130 was recruited to the study, with a response rate of 97.4%. The majority were boys (53.5%) and the mean age was 17.58 ± 0.5 years (Table 1). Nearly 60.7% (687) had experienced at least 1 episode of punishment either at home or school during a school term. Physical type alone was experienced by 64.5% (n = 443) followed by psychological alone was seen in 27.1% (n = 186) and both forms in 8.4% (n = 58).Table 2describes the number of incidences, the reason for VFD, and the type of VFD the child received. There was no significant relationship between age, sex, stream of study, family type, and number of siblings to the incidences of VFD (Pvalue > .05).

Violent Forms of Discipline Experienced by the Students (n = 687).

Academic related: making mistakes, not reading/writing, not doing home work, low marks.

Discipline related: coming late, absent, fighting with others, damage to property, being noisy.

Behaviour related: stealing, not getting permission to go out, telling lies.

The common form of physical VFD was standing outside class for a long time which was experienced by 91.2% (n = 404). The common form of psychological VFD was shouting, yelling, and using inappropriate language (99.4%). The non-violent forms of discipline were received by 258 (22.8%) and the common form was explaining by 70.9%. The various forms of physical, psychological, and non-violent methods are described inTable 3.

The mean score for the knowledge component was 11.43 ± 3.1 in girls and 10.9 ± 3.5 in boys which had a significant difference. When considering the individual knowledge factors nearly 85% of the students knew the child’s right charter and nearly all the children knew the emergency contact number to dial if harm occurred to them. A significant difference is seen in the knowledge components between girls and boys.Table 4describes the components of knowledge.

A total of 38.2% (n = 432) of the participants agree while 27.1% (n = 306) disagree that VFD promotes future perpetrators to commit child abuse. Nearly 70.4% (n = 796) of the participants disagreed with the statement “violent forms of discipline are psychologically beneficial,” and 45.9% (n = 519) agreed that VFD is associated with an increase in delinquent and antisocial behaviours in childhood. It was noted that students marked either strongly agree or agree in 60.7% (n = 686) to “violent forms of discipline disgraces you,” 57.9%(n = 654) to “violent forms of discipline cause too much pain and has a detrimental effect,” 45.6% (n = 515 ) to “increases the antisocial and illegal behaviour,” 56.7% (n = 641) to aggressive behaviour and 38.3% (n = 50) to increases conflicts in the family and leads to gender-based violence (Table 5).

A majority (86.3%, N = 976) preferred an alternative way of discipline and felt corporal punishment had a detrimental effect on their future development (89.5%, N = 1012). 31.8% (n = 359) said it was a method used to discipline students and reluctantly accepted it. Nearly 79.6% (n = 900) answered yes to “Will you take legal actions against violent forms of discipline” and 50.5% (n = 571) supported complete prohibition of corporal punishment.

Participants with good knowledge favoured legal action, supported the complete prohibition of VFD, and felt it had a detrimental effect on their future. (Table 6) The favoured method of discipline reported by the students was getting extra homework (58%; n = 655), after school class (38%, n = 429), cleaning the school and playgrounds (23%, n = 260), removal of privileges (29%, n = 328) and when the teacher/parent explained and gave advice (47%), n = 531). The outcome of the children who experienced VFD 12% (n = 82) of the children received medical treatment following an injury, 60.4% (n = 415) said it did not change or affect them, 18.6% (n = 128) said it changed their behaviour, and 9.0% (n = 62) said it affected them psychologically as they felt sad and rejected.

Analysis of Perceived Actions and the Knowledge Scores.

Teachers and parents use various tactics to discipline and correct behaviour in children. Despite having legal implications against corporal punishment, schools in the northern part still use it to discipline children. The violence experienced by the children leads to long-term psychological problems and may lead to criminal behaviour in adult life.7,24In this study, physical and psychological punishments have been predominant compared to non-violent discipline. Nearly 65% have reported having the experience of violent forms of discipline in our study which is also similar to a study from India (2015) which showed 65% and a study from Sri Lanka (2017) stated nearly 80% have experienced it.9,25A possible explanation is provided for the general reduction, attributed to a fear of mitigation, along with a consideration of methodological differences, particularly in the age groups analysed in both studies.

The most frequent VFD is the physical form seen in 64.5% of the population. The downward trend from 80% mentioned in the previous Sri Lankan Study (DeSilva H, 2017) is promising as the Sustainable developmental goal is to end violence against children by 2030.15The psychological form of violence was experienced in 27.1% when compared to the previous study (DeSilva H, 2017) it was seen in 72.5%.

Psychological aggression towards the children was noted in 27.1% and calling by names was the commonest (20.8%). When compared to other studies this seems to be low and it may be that the student’s perception of psychological trauma may be different in different study populations and countries.22Acceptance of children being yelled at or called out names like “lazy” is accepted as normal in this cultural context. This may also contribute to the low incidence of psychological aggression.

VFD is known to cause negative effects like physical injuries, poor academic performances, school dropouts, low self-esteem, and fear of school and teachers.26In our study, the short-term harm of physical injury was seen in 7.3%. Despite these effects, VFD is still advocated by children as our study also revealed that 31.8% (n = 359) accepted VFD despite being aware of its detrimental effects.

A study done in Malatya on violent parenting behaviour showed psychological punishment was the most common method, while nonviolent discipline was less used. Discipline practices were significantly associated with the mother’s education, family income, child’s gender, and age. This may also reflect on our study conducted in schools and practices accepted as normal by the teachers.29We propose to do further studies in the community to assess the community’s understanding of violent forms of discipline.

The use of corporal punishment is widespread with physical harm being common. The knowledge regarding prevention of VFD was satisfactory but a change in perception is needed among the school students attending secondary schools in the Northern Province.