This study fabricated and applied spray-dried microcapsules of polyphenol-rich crude extract from rambutan (Nephelium lappaceumL.) peel. The influence of encapsulant composition based on maltodextrin, rice starch, and polysaccharide gums on microcapsule physicochemical properties, encapsulation efficiency, and antioxidant activity were investigated. Applying rambutan peel polyphenol microcapsules as a functional ingredient in ice cream was also studied. An encapsulant system containing maltodextrin (49.85 wt%) and rice starch (49.85 wt%) in the presence of tamarind polysaccharide (0.3 wt%) was optimal for the fabrication of polyphenol microcapsules with favorable physicochemical characteristics, high encapsulation efficiency (∼85−87%), and high antioxidant activities (159.2 and 1793.2 mmol Trolox/g for DPPH and ABTS, respectively). Ice cream products added with 1 wt% rambutan peel polyphenol microcapsules enhanced the melting rate and antioxidant activity compared with the standard formula. Microcapsules of polyphenol-rich extract from rambutan peel showed promise as a dual functional ingredient, stabilizer and antioxidant, in ice cream which could also be used in other food and beverage products.

Polyphenols are naturally occurring phytochemicals in plants, mainly classified as flavonoids and phenolic acids. Polyphenol extraction from agriculture and food by-products or wastes is a viable solution to minimize environmental pollution and respond to consumer demand for clean-label food with natural ingredients1. Rambutan (Nephelium lappaceumL.) peel as waste material from canned products is a promising source of polyphenols. Previously we extracted a polyphenol-rich fraction from dried rambutan peel using an accelerated solvent extraction (ASE) process and aqueous ethanol as a green solvent. The main phenolic compounds were geraniin, ellagic acid, shikimic acid, and corilagin. Rambutan peel polyphenols showed promise as a natural antioxidant by retarding linoleic acid oxidation in a lipid model2.

Polyphenols extracted from various plant parts show several promising biological properties. Antioxidant and antimicrobial activities are significant biological functions for polyphenols extracted from rambutan peel3–5. The polyphenols from rambutan peel have been reported for use as functional ingredients in both non-foods and foods applications including functional additives in bioactive films4natural coloring agents and texture improvers of ground meat5and alternative antioxidants to stabilize vegetable oils6. However, limitations of using polyphenols in foods and beverages include poor solubility, interactions with the food components, instability during processing and storage, and loss of bioaccessibility and bioavailability after digestion1. Encapsulation technology has been applied to improve stability and maintain the functional properties of polyphenol-rich extracts.

Encapsulation involves trapping solids, liquids, or gaseous core materials in sealed microcapsules. The loaded active core can be released in the target area at a controlled rate under specific conditions. This process provides protection, with improved stability of the polyphenol-rich extracts7. From the literature, rambutan peel polyphenols have been encapsulated using various techniques including spray drying8, thin layer drying9, foam mat drying10, and hydrogel11. Thin layer drying is a time-consuming dehydration process and requires additional grinding which may destroy the structure of microcapsules. Polyphenol deterioration often occurs during foam mat drying due to increased liquid-gas contact surface, resulting in the oxidation of compounds10. In hydrogel systems, rapid release of polyphenols can arise from large porous hydrogels and during hydrogel swelling12. Spray drying has several advantages for using as an encapsulation process for rambutan peel polyphenols including short processing time inside the drying chamber for heat-sensitive compounds. Spray drying also has low production costs and provides large-scale continuous production with good stable finished products13.

Factors affecting the efficiency and quality of encapsulated compounds obtained from the spray drying process include the type and composition of the encapsulants, loading of active cores, feed solid content, and spray drying conditions13. The suitable selection of encapsulant type and composition is a pioneer decision for the successful encapsulation of polyphenols. Proteins and carbohydrates are major types of encapsulant for spray drying encapsulation of polyphenols used alone or in combination13–16.

Proteins are good encapsulating agents because their emulsifying properties create a stable feed emulsion for hydrophobic core materials. However, proteins produce porous microcapsules that allow the diffusion of oxygen and volatile compounds through the matrix, consequently reducing the stability of active materials16. Carbohydrate encapsulants typically used for spray drying are starches, modified starches, maltodextrin, and polysaccharide gums17. Gum Arabic has also been utilized for encapsulation because it can act as an emulsifier, but the high product cost limits its usage14,15. Starches and maltodextrin can act as an oxygen barrier in the microcapsule matrix, but they have no interfacial properties. However, this may not impact polyphenol encapsulation which are most naturally hydrophilic compounds14,16. Therefore, this study investigated the influence of maltodextrin and rice starch used alone and in combination as key encapsulants for polyphenol-rich rambutan peel extract encapsulation using a spray drying process. Xanthan and tamarind polysaccharide gums were also evaluated as co-encapsulants. Xanthan gum is a highly water-soluble polysaccharide, possesses high viscosity, is stable in either alkaline or acidic conditions, and is commonly used as a stabilizer and thickening agent in food products. It has also been used as a co-encapsulant to enhance efficiency and provide sufficient protection for encapsulation18. Tamarind polysaccharide, a nonionic polymer derived from tamarind seed kernel, has been used as a stabilizing agent and encapsulant in the food and pharmaceutical industries19. However, no previous study has assessed the effect of these polysaccharides on encapsulation with maltodextrin and rice starch. The application of selected microcapsules in ice cream products was also studied. We hypothesized that encapsulated rambutan peel polyphenols could be used as a dual functional ingredient with potentially act as stabilizer and antioxidant to improve the melting behavior and enhance the antioxidant activity of ice cream products, respectively.

Rambutan (Nephelium lappaceumL.) peels were collected from Malee Group Public Company Limited (Nakhon Pathom, Thailand). The rambutan peels were washed and sliced into small pieces and dried in a hot air oven (Binder Model D-78532, Tuttlingen, Germany) at 70 °C for 8–10 h until the moisture content of the sample reached 5%. The dried rambutan peel was ground to a coarse powder (approximately 0.1 × 0.1 cm) and kept in a freezer (−18 °C) until use. Rice starch and maltodextrin (DE 10–12) were purchased from Cho Heng Rice Vermicelli Factory Company Limited (Nakhon Pathom, Thailand) and Gen Commerce Company Limited (Bangkok, Thailand), respectively. Xanthan gum was purchased from Krungthepchemi Co., Ltd. (Bangkok, Thailand). Tamarind kernel polysaccharide (TKP) was prepared using tamarind seed powder from Freshy Thai Company Limited (Chachoengsao, Thailand) with the method modified from Mali et al.20and Manimaran et al.21. Briefly, 20 g of tamarind seed powder and 200 mL of distilled water was well stirred. After that 800 mL of hot 0.2% citric acid solution was added, and boiled for 20 min, and then let stand for 24 h. The supernatant solution was then separated from the slurry by centrifugation for 20 min at 5000 rpm. Consequently, adding the supernatant to 95% ethanol (1:1 vol/vol), collecting the precipitate with a stainless-steel screen, and drying it for 4 h at 50 °C.

Absolute ethanol and gallic acid were obtained from RCI Labscan Ltd. (Bangkok, Thailand) and Merck KGaA (Darmstadt, Germany), respectively. 6-Hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchroman-2-carboxylic acid (Trolox), 2,2′-azino-bis (3-ethylbenzothi azoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS), 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH), and Folin–Ciocalteu reagents were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Monoglyceride (E471) was purchased from Nutrifood Creation Part., Ltd. (Pathum Thani, Thailand). Deionized distilled water was used for all sample preparations.

Polyphenol‑rich crude extract from rambutan peel was extracted using the maceration method with concentration and volume of solvent, and extraction temperature following our previous study2. Dried rambutan peel (150 g) was mixed with 1.5 L of aqueous ethanol solution (54 vol%), extracted at 60 °C in a water bath (Memmert Schutzart DIN 40050-IP 20, Schwabach, Germany), and stirred with an overhead stirrer at 350 rpm (IKA RW 20 digital, Staufen im Breisgau, Germany) for 4 h. The mixture was centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 10 min, then filtrated and evaporated to obtain 50°Brix using a rotary evaporator (Buchi Rotavapor R-220 PRO, Flawil, Switzerland). The concentrated rambutan peel extract was stored at −18 °C.

Each feed dispersion (200 g) containing 30 g of concentrated polyphenols‑rich extract (9 g) and encapsulants (21 g) at a 3:7 weight ratio (Table1) was prepared following the steps shown in Supplementary Fig.S1. The polyphenol‑rich extract (9 g of 50°Brix) was dissolved in 70 g of distilled water. After stirring at 600 rpm (Stuart heat-stir UC152D, Stuart, Staffordshire, UK) for 1 h, the polyphenol aqueous solution was stored overnight at ∼4 °C before blending with the encapsulant solutions.

Weight (g) of each component in feed dispersion (200 g) prepared for fabrication of polyphenol microcapsules.

1MDmicrocapsules fabricated using maltodextrin alone as encapsulant material,RSmicrocapsules fabricated using rice starch alone as encapsulant material,MRmicrocapsules fabricated using maltodextrin and rice starch combination (1:1 weight ratio) as encapsulant materials,MR-XANmicrocapsules fabricated using maltodextrin and rice starch combination in the presence of xanthan gum as encapsulant materials,MR-TKPmicrocapsules fabricated using maltodextrin and rice starch combination in the presence of tamarind kernel polysaccharide as encapsulant materials.

The main encapsulant material solutions of maltodextrin (MD), rice starch (RS), and their combination (1:1 weight ratio, MR) were prepared. When using only maltodextrin as an encapsulant, 21 g of maltodextrin powder was dissolved in 100 g of distilled water under constant stirring at 600 rpm until a clear solution was obtained (∼15 min). This solution was then kept overnight at ∼4 °C before blending with the polyphenol extract solution.

When using rice starch alone as an encapsulant, 21 g of rice starch powder was mixed with 100 g of distilled water and stirred at 600 rpm until completely dispersed (∼15 min). This dispersion was then blended with the extract solution. For the maltodextrin and rice starch combination (1:1 weight ratio, MR), 10.5 g of MD was dissolved in 50 g of distilled water under constant stirring at 600 rpm until a clear solution was obtained (∼15 min). This solution was kept overnight at ∼4 °C before mixing with the RS dispersion prepared as described above, using 10.5 g RS and 50 g of distilled water. This encapsulant mixture was then blended with a polyphenol extract solution.

All feed dispersions including polyphenol core compounds and encapsulant materials were magnetic stirred at 600 rpm for 15 min and then homogenized using a high-speed homogenizer (Ultraturrax-IKA T25, Staufen, Germany) at 10,000 rpm for 5 min before spray drying. The final weights of concentrated polyphenol-rich crude extract and encapsulants in feed dispersion were 4.5 and 10.5 wt%, respectively.

In this experiment, a maltodextrin and rice starch combination (1:1 weight ratio, MR) was used as the main encapsulant materials. A commercial xanthan gum (XAN) and tamarind kernel polysaccharide (TKP) were used as co-encapsulants at 0.3 wt% of total encapsulant materials.

For feed dispersions preparation (Supplementary Fig.S2), the polyphenol‑rich crude extract from rambutan peel (9 g of 50°Brix) and maltodextrin (∼10.47 g) solutions were prepared separately by dissolving in distilled water (70 and 50 g, respectively) using the same procedure described previously. Rice starch (∼10.47 g) and co-encapsulant (∼0.06 g) were blended before dispersed in distilled water (50 g) under stirring at 600 rpm for ∼15 min. This dispersion was then mixed with maltodextrin and polyphenol extract solutions. The feed dispersion (200 g) was magnetically stirred at 600 rpm for ∼15 min and then homogenized using a high-speed homogenizer (Ultra turrax-IKA T25, Staufen, Germany) at 10,000 rpm for ∼5 min before spray drying. All feed dispersions contained 15 wt% of concentrated polyphenol‑rich crude extract and encapsulants at a 3:7 weight ratio (Table1). The final weight concentrations of polyphenol extract, maltodextrin, rice starch and co-encapsulants in feed dispersion were 4.5, 5.235, 5.235 and 0.03 wt%, respectively.

Spray drying was performed using a Buchi mini spray dryer B -290 (Postfach, Switzerland) following Boyano-Orozco et al.8with some modifications. A two-fluid nozzle atomizer (0.7 mm diameter) was used with an inlet temperature of 160 °C; maximum outlet temperature of ∼90 °C; atomization air flow rate of 601 L/h; liquid feed pump rate of ∼4 mL/min; and main drying air flow rate of ∼38 m3/h. The polyphenol‑rich crude extract microcapsule powder was collected and packed in a hermetically sealed aluminum foil bag and stored at ∼4 °C until analysis.

The moisture content of the microcapsules was determined according to the AOAC method number 935.2925. The water activity (aw) was measured using a Novasina Lab Master-aw (Lachen, Switzerland) at 25 °C.

Bulk and tapped densities were measured following the method of Sablania et al.27with some modifications. Briefly, 1 g of microcapsule powder was placed in a 10 mL graduated cylinder and the sample volume was recorded. The bulk density was calculated by dividing the mass of the powder by the volume in the cylinder (g/mL). The tapped density was evaluated by tapping the powder in the same graduated cylinder 20 times and calculating the density using mass and tapped volume.

WAI and WSI were determined following Anderson28and Ahmed et al.29with some modifications. The microcapsule powder (∼1 g) and distilled water (15 mL) were subjected to vortex mixing and the mixture was incubated at 30 °C for 30 min in a water bath (Memmert Schutzart DIN 40,050-IP 20, Schwabach, Germany) while stirring every 5 min using a vortex stirrer (Vortex Genie 2, Scientific Industries, Bohemia, NY, USA). The mixture was centrifuged for 10 min at 3,500 rpm and the collected supernatant was dried at 105 °C to constant weight. The water solubility index was calculated as the proportion of dry solid in the supernatant to the amount in the initial sample. WAI was calculated as the weight of sediment remaining after centrifugation per unit weight of the dry sample.

The encapsulation efficiency was determined by measuring the amounts of total and surface polyphenols (phenolic and anthocyanin compounds) in the microcapsule powder following the method modified from Robert et al.30. The total polyphenols were extracted by mixing 0.2 g of the microcapsule powder with 2 mL of methanol: acetic acid: water (50:8:42 vol%) mixed solvent. The mixture was vortexed for 1 min and sonicated for 20 min using an ultrasonic instrument (GT SONIC, Guangdong, China), and then centrifuged (Sorvall Legend X1R Centrifuge, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) at 7000 rpm for 10 min before filtering through a 0.45 μm filter. The extracted solution was used to determine the total phenolic content (TPC)31and total anthocyanin content (TAC)32.

To determine the TPC, the extracted solution was diluted with deionized water at a concentration of 5 mL/L and then 0.2 mL of the diluted solution was mixed with Folin-Ciocalteu reagent (0.2 mL) before 2.6 mL of deionized water was added. After leaving the mixture to react for 6 min at room temperature, 7% sodium carbonate solution (2 mL) was added, and the solution was kept in the dark for 90 min31. The absorbance of the reaction solution was measured at 750 nm using a spectrophotometer (Genesys 10 S UV-VIS, Thermo Scientific, Madison, WI, USA). The gallic acid solution was used to construct a standard curve, with the results expressed as milligrams of gallic acid equivalent per gram of microcapsule powder.

whereAis the difference in absorbance (A510–A700) between pH 1.0 and 4.5,Mwis the molecular weight of cyanidin-3-glucoside (449.2 g/mol),DFis the dilution factor,εis the molar absorptivity coefficient (26,900 mol/L cm),Lis the cuvette optical pathlength (1 cm) andmis the weight of the sample (g).

The extracted solution from the microcapsules was used to determine the antioxidant activity by the method described in the previous section. The ABTS radical scavenging activity was measured following He et al.33with some modifications. A stock solution of ABTS reagent was prepared by dissolving 10 mg ABTS in 2.45 mM potassium persulfate solution (2.6 mL) and then kept in dark at room temperature for 16 h. The working solution of ABTS reagent was then prepared to determine the absorbance at 734 nm as 0.700 ± 0.02. This ABTS working solution (3 mL) was then mixed with 1 mL of sample or standard solutions and kept in the dark for 5 min. The absorbance of the solutions was measured at 734 nm using spectrophotometer (Genesys 10 S UV-VIS, Thermo Scientific, Madison, WI, USA).

The DPPH radical-scavenging capacity assay was performed following Monthakantirat et al.34with some modifications. The DPPH solution was prepared by dissolving 7.9 mg 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl with 50 mL ethanol and 50 mL deionized water and stirring for 30 min. The filtrate extracted from the encapsulated powder (3 mL) was added to 3 mL DPPH solution, then mixed and kept for 30 min in the dark. The activity was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 515 nm with spectrophotometer (Genesys 10 S UV-VIS, Thermo Scientific, Madison, WI, USA).

The antioxidant activity determined by the ABTS and DPPH assays was expressed as Trolox equivalent antioxidant capacity (TEAC) using the calibration curve plotted against different concentrations of Trolox solution.

The FTIR transmission spectra of freeze-dried rambutan peel crude extract, maltodextrin, rice starch, xanthan gum, tamarind polysaccharide and microcapsules were performed using an FTIR spectrophotometer (Tensor 27, Bruker, Germany) according to the method of Karrar et al.35with some modifications. The sample powder (∼0.1 g) was blended with solid KBr (∼0.4 g) and then pressed into pellets. All the prepared samples were scanned 64 times at a wavenumber range of 4000–400 cm− 1with a resolution of 4 cm− 1. The freeze-dried extract powders were used for FTIR analysis to obtain the characteristic peaks, which denoted the markers for monitoring the core compounds in the microcapsules. The extract powders were prepared by freezing the peel extract at −80 °C for 24 h using an ultra-low temperature freezer (Model 906GP, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Jiangsu, China). After freezing, the frozen extract samples were dried in a freeze dryer (Freeze Dryer 8, Labconco, USA) at − 50 °C under a pressure of 0.4 Pa for 48 h.

The surface morphology of the freeze-dried rambutan peel extract, spray-dried encapsulant materials, and polyphenol microcapsules was observed using a scanning electron microscope (FEI Quanta 450 FEG, Czech Republic). Freeze-dried extract powders, non-encapsulated extract, were used as a reference sample. The rambutan peel extract without encapsulating agents was freeze-dried according to the method described in the previous section. Also, the encapsulant materials composed of maltodextrin and rice starch combination (1:1 weight ratio), and 0.3 wt% tamarind polysaccharide without loading of the extract and the MR-TKP polyphenol microcapsules were prepared using the spray drying process described previously.

The microcapsule powders of rambutan peel polyphenols were produced according to the procedure described in the previous sections. The feed dispersion containing concentrated polyphenol extract and encapsulants with a total weight of 15% at a 3:7 ratio was used. A combination of maltodextrin and rice starch (1 :1 weight ratio, MR) in the presence of 0.3 wt% tamarind polysaccharide was selected as the encapsulant system.

Ice cream products were prepared following Yazdi et al.36with some modifications. The compositions of all samples including the control ice cream (CON), ice cream with freeze dried extract (FDE), ice cream with microcapsules (MCS), and ice cream with spray-dried encapsulant materials (SDM) are presented in the Supplementary TableS1. The dried ingredients (sugar, emulsifier, and skim milk powder) were blended with the freeze-dried extract or spray-dried encapsulant materials or microcapsule powders. These blends were added to hot liquid milk (∼50 °C) and whipping cream was added and mixed well with a high-speed blender (Philips Promix Hand Blender, Koninklijke Philips N·V., Netherlands). The liquid mixture was stirred and heated to a pasteurized temperature of ∼80 °C using a water bath and held for 10 min. The mixture was then homogenized using a high-speed blender (Philips Promix Hand Blender, Koninklijke Philips N·V., Netherlands) for 3 min. The temperature of the ice cream mix was then lowered to ∼10 °C and aged at ∼4 °C for 22–24 h. After aging, the cooled ice cream mix was passed through an ice cream maker (Cuisinart®ICE − 100, Stamford, CT, USA) with a paddle spinning speed of 25 rpm for 20 min and then placed in plastic cups (4 ounce) with lids, before storing at −18 °C for 24 h to allow hardening.

A rheometer (Physica MCR 301, Anton Paar Ltd, Graz, Austria) equipped with coaxial cylinders (CC27) was used to assess the viscosity of the mixes after a 24 h aging period. Viscosity measurements were taken across a shear rate range of 1–150 s−1, with results reported as apparent viscosity (mPa s) at a shear rate of 120 s−1.

The hardness of the ice cream samples was assessed using a texture analyzer (Stable Micro System, TA-XT2i, UK) equipped with a cylindrical probe 2.5 cm in diameter, following the method described by Lim et al.38with slight modifications. The probe penetrated for 10 mm at a velocity of 2 mm/s.

The melting rate was determined following Gabbi et al.39with some modifications. Briefly, 10 g of hardened ice cream was placed on a stainless-steel sieve (1 × 1 mm) above a beaker. The weight of the melted sample at ∼30 °C was recorded at 5 min intervals for 60 min and calculated as a percentage of the melting rate.

The melted ice cream ∼25 g was dissolved in 50% methanol (25 mL) and held for 16 h at 4–6 °C to extract the polyphenol compounds40. The mixed solution was filtered through a Whatman No. 4 paper and the filtrate was diluted with deionized water at a concentration of 50 mL/L. The diluted extract was then used to determine the TPC following the method of Wolfe et al.31as previously described. For determination of antioxidant activity by ABTS assay, the undiluted extract after filtration was used for analysis by following the method of He et al.33that described in the previous section.

All experiments were performed at least twice with results reported as the mean and standard deviation. The collected data were subjected to one way analysis of variance (ANOVA) using IBM SPSS Statistics (Thaisoftup Co., Ltd., Bangkok, Thailand). Significant differences in mean values were established by Duncan’s Multiple Range Test with aP-value of less than 0.05.

The final weights of concentrated polyphenol-rich crude extract and encapsulants in feed dispersion were 4.5 and 10.5 wt%, respectively. The rambutan peel extract was extracted by the maceration method at atmospheric pressure, utilizing similar conditions as reported in our previous study2with 4 h of extraction time. The spray drying process was utilized to preserve the rambutan peel polyphenol-rich extract. The encapsulant materials studied in this experiment were maltodextrin (MD), rice starch (RS), and their combination (1:1 weight ratio, MR). The feed contained core polyphenol extracts and encapsulant materials at a weight ratio of 3:7, with a total weight of 15 wt%. The process yields, powder recovery, microcapsule characteristics, encapsulation efficiency, and antioxidant activity were reported.

Factors revealing the effectiveness of spray drying encapsulation are process yields and powder recovery. In this experiment, the process yields ranged from 10.2 to 10.6%, and the powder recovery ranged from 79.6 to 83.3% (Fig.1a), with no significant differences between the samples. This result implied that the composition of the encapsulants did not affect the drying performance of feed dispersions.

Process yield and powder recovery (a), total phenolic content (TPC,b), total anthocyanin content (TAC,c), and antioxidant activities (d) of rambutan peel extract microcapsules fabricated with different encapsulant materials.MDmaltodextrin,RSrice starch,MRmaltodextrin and rice starch combination (1:1 weight ratio). The different letters (a,b,c) indicate significant differences between samples for each property (P≤ 0.05).nsdenotes a non-significant difference.

There were no significant differences in the total phenolic content (TPC) and total anthocyanin content (TAC) among the samples, with results ranging from ∼57 to 58 mg GAE/g and ∼50 to 61 mg cyanidin-3-O-glucoside/g, respectively (Fig.1b and c). This is probably due to the same loading amount of extract being used in all samples.

The percentage of active polyphenols entrapped in microcapsules is defined as the encapsulation efficiency (%EE). Using rice starch as an encapsulant (RS) gave the lowest encapsulation efficiency for phenolic and anthocyanin (∼32% and ∼48%, respectively), while microcapsules encapsulated with maltodextrin alone (MD) showed the highest encapsulation efficiency of ∼85 to 87%, higher than microcapsules produced using a combination of maltodextrin and rice starch (MR) (P≤ 0.05) with encapsulation efficiency of 75 to 81% (Fig.1b and c).

The lower encapsulation efficiency of microcapsules producing from rice starch was due to the spherical aggregate formation, giving the particles morphology that resembling popcorn with irregular surfaces and gaps. This porous structure had limited retention of active compounds in the internal particles by extraction41. By contrast, the spray-dried powder utilizing maltodextrin as an encapsulant had non-porous walls in the cross-sectional structures resulting in high protection of entrapped active compounds42. However, the %EE of microcapsules from all encapsulant systems were in the range that were previously observed of 27 to 95% for polyphenol encapsulation17.

The ABTS and DPPH radical scavenging assays were used to evaluate the antioxidant activity of rambutan peel extract microcapsule powder. Results showed that the ABTS values ranged from 1807 to 1883 mmol Trolox/g, while the DPPH values varied from 141 to 145 mmol Trolox/g (Fig.1d). There were no significant differences in the ABTS and DPPH antioxidant activities because the samples did not have significant amounts of TPC and TAC (Fig.1b and c). A strong correlation was previously reported between polyphenol content and antioxidant activity. The antioxidant role of the rambutan peel extract resulted from the presence of TPC and TAC2.

The encapsulation behavior and intermolecular interactions between the core compound and encapsulant materials were studied using FTIR analysis. The FTIR spectra of rice starch, maltodextrin, freeze-dried rambutan peel extract, and microcapsules from various encapsulant materials are shown in Fig.2. Rice starch and maltodextrin spectra (Fig.2a) showed a broad band at wavenumbers of 3386 and 3415 cm− 1, respectively due to the hydroxyl groups (O–H) and the hydrogen-bonded OH stretch17,43. The transmittance peaks at 2928 to 2931 were assigned to C–H stretching related to the methane hydrogen atoms. The apparent peaks observed at 1643, and 1648 cm− 1were assigned to C = O stretching and attributed to the presence of tightly bound water in the carbohydrates44. The peaks observed at 1155 to 1157, 1081 to 1083, and 1021 to 1022 cm− 1were assigned to C–O stretching and C–O–H bending vibrations, indicating the presence of glycosidic linkages. Peaks at 929 to 577 cm− 1corresponded to the pyranose ring17,45. For the freeze-dried rambutan peel extract (Fig.2a), the broad band at 3395 cm− 1corresponded to the O–H functional group stretching. The FTIR spectra of the rambutan peel extract corresponded to the main functional groups found in polyphenolic compounds including carboxylic (1708 cm− 1), C–O stretching (1617 cm− 1), and aromatic rings (1518 and 1446 cm− 1)17,46. The spectra obtained from the rambutan peel extract encapsulated with maltodextrin (MD), rice starch (RS), and their combination (MR) are shown in Fig.2b. The shifts, decreases, or absences in the characteristic peaks of both the core compounds and the encapsulants were observed. The unique band at 1708 cm− 1observed in the free extract was also presented in the encapsulated samples. However, this shifted toward lower wavenumbers (1702 to 1705 cm− 1) and exhibited a decrease in intensity. Similarly, a decrease in intensity at 1617 cm− 1with a shift toward higher wavenumbers being 1631 to 1634 cm− 1was observed. These results indicate the occurrence of molecular interactions between polyphenol compounds in the extract and encapsulating materials. Polyphenols found in the rambutan peel extract were classified as ellagitannins, e.g., geraniin, ellagic acid, and corilagin2,11. These active compounds had many carboxyl and hydroxyl groups, which could promote the formation of multiple hydrogen bonds with the functional groups of polysaccharide-based encapsulating materials used in this work17,47. The peaks seen at 1518 and 1446 cm− 1in the freeze-dried rambutan peel extract (Fig.2a) related to the presence of the phenolic aromatic ring but were absent in the encapsulated samples. These results were concurrent with the work of Nascimento et al.47who reported the disappearance of the characteristic peaks of the flavonoids and phenolic compounds of the extract in the microcapsules. These are probably due to the unique peaks of polyphenol-rich extract being completely covered by the ones of the encapsulating materials, indicating that the extract was embedded within the encapsulants matrix of microcapsules48.

FTIR spectra of rambutan peel extract and encapsulant materials (a), and microcapsules fabricated with different encapsulant materials (b).MDmaltodextrin,RSrice starch,MRmaltodextrin and rice starch combination (1:1 weight ratio).

Appearance and color are used to indicate quality and sensory attractiveness. The final product of the encapsulation process is a fine, light brown powder. Among the samples, the extract powder that used maltodextrin as an encapsulant (MD) had a lighter color tone than the other samples which had a whiteness index of 71.83 ± 0.40 (Table2). The spray drying technique produced brighter product samples using maltodextrin as an encapsulant. The addition of maltodextrin caused dilution with more solid content in the feed solution and lightened the color of the spray drying powder. Using rice starch to encapsulate rambutan extract (RS) resulted in the lowest whiteness value (66.80 ± 0.46) while microcapsules coated with a maltodextrin and rice starch combination had an intermediate whiteness value. The lowest whiteness index found for RS microcapsules due to lower entrapped polyphenols with high surface polyphenols49.

Characteristics of rambutan peel extract microcapsule powders obtained by spray drying using different encapsulant materials.

1MDmaltodextrin,RSrice starch,MRmaltodextrin and rice starch combination (1:1 weight ratio).a−cValues with different superscript letters in the same row indicate significant differences (P≤ 0.05).

The important quality attributes of powder food ingredients are moisture content and water activity (aw). These are related to drying effectiveness, powder flowability, and storage stability. To maintain the quality and safety of powdered foods and ingredients, the moisture content should not be more than 7%17and aw should be less than 0.650. Results in Table2showed that moisture content and aw of the microcapsule powders ranged from 4.03 to 4.83% and 0.14 to 0.19, respectively. Microcapsules made using rice starch as the encapsulant material had the highest moisture content because of the water- retaining properties of the spherical aggregates of rice starch molecules51. The aw of these samples was lowest (0.137 ± 0.012) because of the high-water binding capacity of starch molecules, making the water strongly attracted to the polar regions on the molecular surface and resulting in the low aw of these samples. When using maltodextrin, a crust developed during the drying process, leading to rapid dehydration and resulting in a thicker covering layer. This process resulted in a hollow structure, which is beneficial for encapsulating core material. The formation of a surface crust hindered further water evaporation, resulting in residual water remaining within the particles52. The water contained within the particles may not be tightly bound, resulting in a higher aw value compared to the other samples. The low moisture content and water activity of encapsulated rambutan peel extract in this study indicated an efficient spray drying process.

Flowability is another important characteristic of dry food ingredients and promotes easier handing, processing, and storage. This property was evaluated using the Carr’s index (CI) and Hausner ratio (HR). Higher CI and HR values than 25 and 1.34, respectively indicate poor flowability26. Rambutan peel extract microcapsules with only rice starch (RS) had a CI of ∼12% and HR of 1.14 (Table2). These samples had good flow characteristics as a result of lower water activity levels, which prevented the particles from sticking together and reducing flow resistance53. The sample encapsulated with maltodextrin alone (MD) and a combination of maltodextrin and rice starch (MR) had CI and HR values of ∼20 and ∼18% and 1.25 and 1.22, respectively indicating that the powdered microcapsules were fair-flowing26.

Ideal powder behavior had the desired properties of complete and quick wetting, sinking, and uniform dispersion or dissolving without lump formation54. The water absorption index (WAI) is a measure of the ability of the powder to bind water while the water solubility index (WSI) indicates the powder’s capacity to dissolve in water. Samples employing rice starch as the encapsulant material (RS) exhibited the highest WAI (∼2.24 g/g) (Table2). This result was attributed to the enhanced water absorption capacity of pregelatinized rice starch55. The microcapsules encapsulated with maltodextrin alone (MD) exhibited the highest WSI of ∼90%. This result was due to the excellent solubility properties of maltodextrin17,56. Microcapsules encapsulated utilizing a combination of maltodextrin and rice starch exhibited WAI values of ∼1.44 g/g and WSI of ∼49% which were intermediate between microcapsules employing only rice starch and maltodextrin. The presence of maltodextrin in the encapsulant mixture contributed to its excellent solubility, while water absorption was derived from rice starch. Similarly, George et al.57combined maltodextrin and gum Arabic as an encapsulant. This exhibited a WSI value between the values of the samples encapsulated with maltodextrin and gum Arabic alone.

The rapid and complete reconstitution are important quality indicators influencing the applications and customer acceptance of instant powdered foods, beverages and drinks56. Rambutan peel extract microcapsules using maltodextrin alone as the encapsulant (MD) had high WSI value which are recommended to apply as functional ingredient in these products. By contrast, materials and ingredients exhibiting high WAI are used as stabilizers, thickening agents, or texture improvers. This study aims to apply the fabricated microcapsules in ice cream products with a dual role as a functional ingredient and stabilizer. Therefore, the polyphenol microcapsules from rambutan peel encapsulated using a combination of maltodextrin and rice starch (1:1 weight ratio, MR) was chosen. Because it had moderate WSI and high WAI that is an important property of stabilizer used in ice cream to control meltdown and restrict the growth of ice crystals during storage58. However, MR microcapsules had a lower %EE than the MD microcapsules (Fig.1b and c). The effect of xanthan gum and tamarind kernel polysaccharide was therefore studied as a co-encapsulant to increase the content of entrapped core polyphenols.

This experiment prepared feed dispersions containing core polyphenol extracts and encapsulant materials at a weight ratio of 3:7 with a total weight of 15%. The final weights of concentrated polyphenol-rich crude extract and encapsulants in the feed dispersions were 4.5 and 10.5 wt%, respectively. Encapsulant compositions studied in this experiment were a combination of maltodextrin and rice starch (MR, ∼10.47 wt%), and ∼0.03 wt% of co-encapsulant. The process yield, powder recovery, encapsulation efficiency, antioxidant activity and microcapsule characteristics were evaluated.

The process yields and powder recovery of the encapsulated powder in the absence and presence of polysaccharide gums as co-encapsulant ranged from 9.7 to 10.5% and 76 to 82%, respectively (Fig.3a). The process yields and powder recovery obtained using spray drying for microcapsules containing xanthan gum (MR-XAN) exhibited the lowest value (P≤ 0.05). This was attributed to the higher viscosity of the feed dispersion containing xanthan gum (MR-XAN) than that of the MR-TKP and MR dispersions. This alteration in viscosity led to increased adhesion during the drying process, resulting in a decrease in the quantity of microcapsule powder59. The process yields and powder recovery of the MR-TKP microcapsules (∼10.2 and ∼79.8, respectively) were not significantly different compared to the MR powder (P> 0.05).

Process yield and powder recovery (a), total phenolic content (TPC,b), total anthocyanin content (TAC,c), and antioxidant activities (d) of rambutan peel extract microcapsule powders obtained by spray drying using maltodextrin and rice starch combination (1:1 weight ratio,MR) as main encapsulant materials with different co-encapsulants.MR-XANxanthan gum as co-encapsulant, MR-TKPtamarind kernel polysaccharide as co-encapsulant. The different letters (a,b) indicate significant differences between samples for each property (P≤ 0.05).nsdenotes a non-significant difference.

No significant differences were found for the total phenolic compounds (TPC, Fig.3b) and total anthocyanin contents (TAC, Fig.3c) among all the microcapsule powders (P> 0.05), with values ranging from 58 to 59 mg GAE/g, and 57 to 65 mg cyanidin-3-O-glucoside/g, respectively. The encapsulated powders containing the co-encapsulant polysaccharides, MR-XAN and MR-TKP, had a higher percentage of encapsulation efficiency compared to the MR microcapsules without additional co-encapsulant polysaccharide (P≤ 0.05). MR-TKP microcapsules exhibited the highest encapsulation efficiency for phenolic and anthocyanin contents.

These results were related to the high concentration of xyloglucan in TKP. A galloyl moiety structure of xyloglucan could form a gel-like material when it interacts with phenolic compounds leading to the development of film-forming properties and enhanced efficiency in storing active substances60. Similarly, xanthan gum addition sample demonstrated better encapsulation results compared to the MR sample due to its film-forming capacities. Ravichandran et al.59found that coating betanin with maltodextrin combined with xanthan gum provided greater stability and increased betalain content compared to maltodextrin coating alone.

The antioxidant activity of the microcapsule powders measured by ABTS (Fig.3d) exhibited no significant differences (P> 0.05), ranging from 1793 to 1883 mmol Trolox/g. By contrast, the DPPH values of the co-encapsulant-added samples, MR-XAN and MR-TKP (∼157 and ∼159 mmol Trolox/g, respectively), were significantly (P≤ 0.05) greater than microcapsules prepared using only main encapsulant materials, MR (∼145 mmol Trolox/g). The utilization of polysaccharide gums during the encapsulation process resulted in enhanced antioxidant efficacy of the microcapsule samples due to the inherent antioxidant activity presented by polysaccharides. One possible antioxidant mechanism of polysaccharides might be the hydrogen donor from hydroxyl groups of monosaccharide residues in their molecules to scavenge the radical. Monosaccharide compositions and pyranose conuration of the polysaccharides have a great impact on their antioxidant activities61. Therefore, the presence of glucose, mannose and glucuronic acid in xanthan gum, and the existence of glucose, xylose, galactose and uronic acid in tamarind polysaccharides suggested that they possessed antioxidant characteristics61,62.

Xanthan gum and tamarind polysaccharide showed characteristic peaks that were different from maltodextrin and starch described previously (Fig.2). The FTIR spectrum of xanthan gum (Fig.4a) exhibited carbonyl stretching of the ester group at a wavenumber of 1730 cm− 1. The two peaks at 1618 and 1415 cm− 1were attributed to the asymmetric and symmetric stretching vibrations of the carboxylate ion, respectively. The peak at 1059 cm− 1was associated with stretching of the C–O bond17,44. The FTIR spectrum of tamarind kernel polysaccharide is shown on Fig.4a. The C = O stretching of the carboxylic group was detected at 1647 and 1429 cm− 1. The C–O stretching and C–C stretching (1040 to 1043 cm− 1), as well as ring vibration (943 cm− 1) were also observed45. The spectral peaks of all microcapsule powders were similar (Fig.4b). This suggests no observed interaction between main- and co-encapsulants used in this work. Consistency results were previously reported by He et al.18that indicated there was no interaction between the OSA-modified starch and xanthan gum during spray drying. However, the shifts, decreases, and absences of the characteristic peaks were observed when compared to either the freeze-dried extract or the encapsulants. These results suggested the formation of molecular interactions between polyphenol compounds in the extract and encapsulating materials. These were also indicated that the extract was embedded within the encapsulant matrix of microcapsules, which are described in the previous section2,11,47,48.

FTIR spectra of main and co-encapsulant materials (a), rambutan peel extract and microcapsules fabricated with different encapsulant materials (b).MRmicrocapsule using maltodextrin and rice starch combination (1:1 weight ratio) without co-encapsulant,MR-XANmicrocapsule using xanthan gum as co-encapsulant, MR-TKPmicrocapsule using tamarind kernel polysaccharide as co-encapsulant.

The microcapsule powders exhibited no significant differences in visual color and whiteness index (Table3), attributed to the small amount of polysaccharide, which did not influence the overall color of the encapsulated powder samples. Microcapsules containing xanthan gum (MR-XAN) and tamarind polysaccharide (MR-TKP) had moisture contents of ∼3.91 and ∼3.54, respectively and lower than the MR sample (P≤ 0.05). This demonstrates that the feed compositions influenced the moisture content of spray-dried microcapsules. However, the moisture content and aw of all the microcapsules were within the recommended values of less than 7% and 0.6 for moisture content and aw, respectively17,50.

Characteristics of rambutan peel extract microcapsule powders obtained by spray drying using maltodextrin and rice starch combination (1:1 weight ratio,MR) as main encapsulant materials without and with different co-encapsulants.

1MRmaltodextrin and rice starch combination (1:1 weight ratio) without co-encapsulant,MR-XANxanthan gum as co-encapsulant, MR-TKPtamarind kernel polysaccharide as co-encapsulant.a−bValues with different superscript letters in the same row indicate significant differences (P≤  0.05).

The flowability of microcapsules was assessed using Carr’s index (CI) and the Hausner ratio (HR). Results indicated that the CI and HR were lower in microcapsules containing polysaccharides as a co-encapsulant (Table3), associated with improving the flowability of fabricated microcapsules from fair flowing for MR powder (CI and HR of ∼17.9 and ∼1.22, respectively) to good flowing for MR-XAN and MR-TKP samples (CI and HR of ∼11.2 and ∼1.13, respectively)26.

A significant reduction in WAI without affecting WSI (∼48 to 51%) was observed in the spray-dried microcapsules containing xanthan gum (MR-XAN, WAI ∼1.33) compared with the other samples (WAI ∼1.44 to 1.46, Table3). The decrease in water absorption was due to the binding or covering of rice starch molecules by xanthan gum molecules at the surface which inhibited swelling and gelatinization. Liu and Xu63studied the properties of binary gels made from starch and gum. Their results revealed that the swelling rate of starch granules was not inhibited by tamarind gum. The hygroscopic nature of tamarind gum results in competitive water adsorption between starch and gum, which slows pasting and increases viscosity resulting in an increase of WAI.

Our results suggested that using polysaccharides as co-encapsulants improved encapsulation efficiency, antioxidant activity, and flowability of rambutan peel polyphenol microcapsules. Using tamarind kernel polysaccharide (TKP) as a co-encapsulant in the rambutan peel extract encapsulation process demonstrated remarkable effectiveness. A combination of maltodextrin and rice starch as the main encapsulant materials, along with polysaccharide from tamarind kernel as a co-encapsulating component was optimal in the formulation design of spray-dried microcapsule powders. This sample was selected to observe the surface morphology using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) compared with the freeze-dried rambutan peel extract and spray-dried encapsulant materials (Fig.5). The SEM images revealed that the freeze-dried rambutan peel extracts had an amorphous, irregular shape and exhibited various sizes (Fig.5a and b). The spray-dried encapsulant materials exhibited surface irregularities of wrinkles or dimples, as seen in Fig.5c and d. While the rambutan peel polyphenols-loaded microcapsules (MR-TKP) represented an uneven shape with less visible wrinkles and no fractures, fissures, or pores (Fig.5e and f). This is advantageous because it indicates that the particles have reduced permeability to gases, resulting in enhanced protection and preservation of the active compounds64.

SEM images of the freeze-dried rambutan peel extract (a and b, 250× and 500×, respectively), spray-dried encapsulant materials composed of maltodextrin and rice starch combination (1:1 weight ratio) with 0.3 wt% tamarind polysaccharide (c and d, 2500× and 5000×, respectively), and polyphenol extract-loaded MR-TKP microcapsules (e and f, 2500× and 5000×, respectively).

This study investigated the influence of incorporating rambutan peel extract microcapsules on the properties of an ice cream product. The microcapsules were prepared using a combination of maltodextrin and rice starch (1:1 weight ratio) as the main encapsulant materials in the presence of tamarind polysaccharide (0.3 wt%) as the co-encapsulant. The weight ratio of core extract to encapsulant materials was 3:7. These microcapsules were selected as polyphenols enrichment ingredients for ice cream fortification because they had the highest encapsulation efficiency (85–87%) and antioxidant activities, both ABTS and DPPH (∼1793 and ∼159 mmol Trolox/g, respectively). Importantly, they had the highest WAI (∼1.46 g/g), considering great potential to be used as stabilizers or texture improvers58. Thus, these rambutan polyphenol microcapsules are suitable for application in ice cream products with a dual role for structure stabilization and antioxidant activity enhancement.

The fabricated microcapsules (MCS) were added to ice cream and compared with freeze-dried extract (FDE) and spray-dried encapsulant materials (SDM). A control sample of ice cream (CON) with no additional materials was also prepared. The viscosity of the ice cream mix, as well as the physical properties (color, overrun, hardness and melting properties) and antioxidant activities (total phenolic content and ABTS assay) of the ice cream samples were investigated. The MCS and SDM were used in the ice cream formulation at 1 wt%, and the FDE was utilized in an equivalent quantity of ∼0.18 wt% extract mass content in MCS.

Viscosity is an important physical property of ice cream that affects its sensory quality, particularly in texture evaluation. The viscosity of liquid mix influences the melting characteristics of harden ice cream. An inverse relationship was observed between ice cream mix viscosity and dripping rate, with a decrease in viscosity leading to an enhanced drip-through rate65. Figure6a shows the viscosity of the ice cream mixes. The sample with SDM exhibited the highest viscosity (∼20 mPa s,P≤ 0.05), followed by MCS (∼18 mPa s). The lowest viscosity was found in the CON and FDE samples at 10 to 11 mPa s (P> 0.05). The higher viscosity of the ice cream mixes prepared with SDM and MCS was related to the water-adsorbing properties and gel network formation of maltodextrin and rice starch66.

Viscosity of ice cream mixes (a), overrun (b), hardness (c), and melting rate (d) of various ice cream products.CONcontrol ice cream produced using standard formular;FDEice cream enriched with freeze-dried peel extract;MCSice cream enriched with polyphenol microcapsules;SDMice cream contained spray-dried encapsulant materials. The different letters (a,b,c) indicate significant differences between samples for each property (P≤ 0.05).

Overrun is a characteristic that impacts the quality of ice cream and refers to the increase in volume of the ice cream compared to the initial liquid mix, caused by the presence of air. The incorporation of air in ice cream products enhances productivity and profitability, as well as generating a more desirable texture and satisfying customer expectations. High air incorporation results in fluffy ice cream, whereas lack of air produces a dense product. The overrun percentage of premium ice cream ranges from 50 to 90%. An overrun below 50% defines a super-premium ice cream, which must have a minimum milk fat percentage of 10%67. The CON had an overrun value of 55.63%, whereas FDE, MCS, and SDM had significantly lower overrun values ( ∼41 to 46%) (Fig.6b). The reduction of overrun in SDM and MCS was related to the viscosity of the ice cream mixes (Fig.6a) which had less air penetration during batch freezing, resulting in a lower overrun relative to the control. Similar results presenting an inverse relationship between viscosity and overrun were also found for ice cream containing microencapsulated pistachio peel extract36cornelian cherry peel40and okra polysaccharide68. The FDE provided a lower overrun compared to CON, despite the similar viscosity. The addition of FDE increases the amounts of phenolic acids, which in turn affects the whipping properties. Phenolic compounds reduce foaming capability by inducing protein aggregation, thereby hindering their distribution and absorption at the air -water interface. Similarly, ice cream added with pomegranate peel powder exhibited lower overrun compared to the control sample69.

The hardness of ice cream was determined by measuring its resistance to deformation against an external force. Hardness is important because it influences the spoonability of products. Factors such as ice cream components, freezing point, overrun, total solid, and the type of stabilizers used influence the hardness of ice cream58. Figure6c shows that the hardness of ice cream samples prepared with FDE, MCS and SDM were not significantly different (P> 0.05), with values of 101.3 to 104.1 N. However, they were significantly higher than the CON sample (95.2 N,P≤ 0.05). A previous study revealed that the rheological properties of the mix significantly influenced the hardness of the ice cream. An increased apparent viscosity of the ice cream mixes led to harder ice cream37. The CON ice cream exhibited the lowest viscosity and the least hardness. The FDE had comparable viscosity to CON while revealing greater hardness. The interaction between polyphenol and milk protein may alter the textural properties of ice cream70.

The meltdown property of ice cream is a key and influential physical aspect that affects product quality. High-quality ice cream products exhibit a lower rate of melting. Several factors influence the meltdown including the ice cream composition, additives, the amount of air incorporated, the presence of ice crystals, and the presence of fat globules37. In this study, the melting behavior of ice cream was reported as the melting rate. The results showed that ice cream samples prepared with SDM and MCS exhibited the lowest melting rate (2.66 to 2.67 wt%/min), which were significantly different from the FDE and CON samples (Fig.6d). The lower melting rate of these samples than the CON sample indicated the improved melting behavior of MCS. Wu et al.71reported an inverse relationship between liquid mix viscosity and melting rate. A higher viscosity of the serum phase resulted in an extended duration traversing the ice cream surface and penetrating through the screen.

The color of food is an important factor in consumer acceptance and can also serve as an indicator of any food defects. The appearance and color indices of ice cream samples are presented in Fig.7a and b, respectively. The CON and SDM exhibited off-white or ivory color, with YI of 26.6 to 27.2, while the FDE and MCS ice creams exhibited a light-yellow color, with YI values of 36.3 and 37.9, respectively. Considering the ΔE values, the SDM-added ice cream had a value of ∼1.1, indicating a small difference in total color compared to the CON sample. Gengatharan et al.72reported that a ΔE of less than 1.5 indicates a slight color difference between samples, while an ΔE of over 3 indicates an evident color difference between samples. The FDE and MCS ice creams exhibited a difference in total color (13.9 and 15.6, respectively) compared with the CON sample but there were no significant differences between the samples (P> 0.05).

Visual appearance (a), yellowness index (YI) and ΔE (b), total phenolic content (TPC,c), and ABTS scavenging activity (d) of various ice cream products.CONcontrol ice cream produced using standard formular;FDEice cream enriched with freeze-dried peel extract;MCSice cream enriched with polyphenol microcapsules;SDMice cream contained spray-dried encapsulant materials. The different letters (a,b,c) indicate significant differences between samples for each property (P≤ 0.05).

Figure7c and d presents the total phenolic content (TPC) and ABTS scavenging activity of the ice cream samples. The MCS ice cream exhibited the greatest total phenolic content (7.44 mg GAE/100 g) and ABTS value (∼1236 µmol Trolox/g). These values were significantly higher than ice cream samples prepared with SDM (1.99 mg GAE/100 g, and 82.5 µmol Trolox/g for TPC and ABTS, respectively). The antioxidant activity found in the MCS ice cream sample resulted from the polyphenol compounds in the rambutan peel extract and not the encapsulant materials. The TPC and ABTS activity of ice cream prepared with MCS were also significantly higher than the product applying FDE with TPC and ABTS of 3.44 mg GAE/100 g and 722.47 µmol Trolox/g, respectively. This finding showed that the encapsulation process is useful for preserving polyphenol compounds throughout the ice cream production process. Many previous studies also reported similar results. Çam et al.73noted that the addition of microencapsulated pomegranate peel phenolics resulted in an increase in the TPC of ice cream, with over 75% of the participants accepting ice cream enriched with phenolics. Moreover, Ghandehari et al.36found that the addition of microencapsulated black carrot anthocyanins significantly enhanced the TPC of ice cream products. The quantity of polyphenols in ice cream products directly impacts their antioxidant properties. Ice cream added with polyphenols exhibited significant antioxidant activity that was directly proportional to the polyphenol content36,73. Identically, the polyphenols fortified ice cream using microcapsule powders of rambutan peel extract (MCS) had 410 and 1483% higher TPC and antioxidant activity, respectively, than the control ice cream sample (CON).

Rambutan peel extract was encapsulated using the spray drying technique. Different encapsulant systems provided rambutan peel extract microcapsules with unique characteristics. Using the combination of maltodextrin and rice starch in the presence of tamarind polysaccharide as encapsulant materials improved the antioxidant activities of encapsulated rambutan peel polyphenols. The addition of rambutan peel extract microcapsules to the ice cream products improved their meltdown and antioxidant activity compared with the control sample and samples with unencapsulated freeze-dried extract powder. Products containing rambutan peel polyphenol microcapsules caused an increase in brown color intensity which is more suitable for tea, coffee or chocolate flavored ice creams than milk-based products. Fabrication of polyphenol-rich liquid extract from rambutan peel in microcapsule powders form showed potential as functional ingredients in foods, beverages and drinks. Further bioavailability and bioaccessibility assays, and sensory evaluation of products enriched with polyphenol microcapsules are needed before commercialization.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

This research was funded by the Kasetsart University Research and Development Institute (KURDI) under the project of Development of Advance Researcher Competence System for Competitiveness in Agriculture and Food, grant number FF(KU)51.67. Funds for this research were also provided by the National Science and Technology Development Agency (NSTDA), Thailand. The authors thank Malee Group Public Company Ltd. (Nakhon Pathom, Thailand) for kindly providing the rambutan peel sample.