Organic agriculture, while widely advocated for its reduced environmental impact through the elimination of synthetic agrochemicals1, faces a critical translational challenge: consumer acceptance. Despite documented nutritional enhancements and, paradoxically, reports of superior sensory profiles in raw organic fruits and vegetables produces2–4, as well as increased consumer attraction to organic labeled products5, the sensory impact of integrating organic vegetable ingredients into common processed foods as functional ingredients remains largely unexplored.

Here, we address this question through a rigorous sensory panel analysis of processed meats cured with synthetic, conventional, or organic ingredients. The primary objective is to isolate the impact of the curing source on consumer sensory perception and purchase intent. A further aim is to identify potential sensory barriers to the wider adoption of organic processed meats, providing crucial insights for commercial innovation and policy development aimed at reconciling sustainability goals with consumer expectations.

To characterize the curing ingredients, we quantitatively analyzed the volatile and non-volatile phytochemical compounds in the organic and conventional plant-source powders using gas chromatography and ultrahigh-pressure liquid chromatography, respectively. As previously reported, organic plant-sourced curing ingredients exhibited significantly higher levels of volatile and aromatic plant compounds compared to conventional ingredients9. Furthermore, non-volatile phytochemicals were also significantly more abundant in organic ingredients (Supplementary Figs.1,2and Supplementary Table1). Synthetic ingredients traditionally used in industry, most notably sodium nitrites, which remain the most widely used curing agent in the meat industry, predictably lack detectable plant-associated compounds.

Complemented by chemical analysis, A large-scale consumer sensory panel, comprising 478 participants recruited from the University of Wisconsin and UW Health mass email communication to 246,143 individuals, was conducted. The demographic distribution of participants was as follows: 24.9% aged 18 to 24, 27.4% aged 25 to 34, 19.2% aged 35 to 44, 13.1% aged 45 to 54, and 16.8% aged 55 or above.

Despite visually distinct plant pigmentation across incorporated ingredient sources, Consumer preference on frankfurter color (Supplementary Fig.3), non-meat aftertaste, and purchase intent did not differ significantly (Fig.1). However, some significant sensory differences were observed in deli-turkey and boneless ham (Fig.1). Notably, organic-cured products elicited significantly higher non-meat aftertaste perception compared to conventional counterparts (deli-turkey:p< 0.001; boneless ham:p= 0.020). This increased non-meat aftertaste correlated with significantly reduced liking and purchase intent for organic-cured deli-turkey (liking:p< 0.017; purchase intent:p= 0.048), and a similar trend was observed for organic-cured boneless ham (liking:p= 0.118; purchase intent:p= 0.123). Principal component and correlation analyses further confirmed a robust negative association between non-meat aftertaste and purchase intent (Supplementary Fig.4).

Unlike letters within a dependent variable denote a difference, withp-values provided in the figure panels.

Analysis of consumption frequency (Fig.2a) revealed that consumers consumed twice per month exhibited significant perceptual differences (p< 0.05) in non-meat aftertaste for organic-cured boneless ham. Specifically, disparities were observed between products cured with organic source ingredients and the remaining products. For deli-turkey, perception differences were observed between organic and the rest of products for consumers with once a month consumption frequency, and between organic ingredient cured products and the deodorized ingredient cured products for consumers with a higher consumption frequency. Age-stratified analysis unveiled distinct non-meat aftertaste perception patterns across different age cohorts (Fig.2c, d). Specifically, age groups 25 to 34 and 35 to 44 reported significantly elevated non-meat aftertaste perception in organic boneless ham compared to products cured with conventional vegetables and chemically synthesized curing agents. Conversely, age groups 18 to 24, 35 to 44, and 45 to 54 reported significantly higher non-meat aftertaste intensity in organic deli-turkey compared to products incorporating deodorized plant source ingredients. Notably, the 45 to 54 age group reported significantly lower liking for organic products compared with products cured with conventional and deodorized vegetables. All other age groups did not report any significant differences among these products. Multilinear regression demonstrated a strong model fit for both boneless ham (R² = 0.732) and deli-turkey (R² = 0.714), indicating a significant association between age, non-meat aftertaste perception, and purchase intent (deli-turkey:p= 0.0022; boneless ham:p= 0.033) (Supplementary Fig.5). These age and consumption frequency dependent differences were not identified in frankfurters.