Do mono‐ and bilingual children differ in the way they learn novel words in ambiguous settings? Listeners may resolve referential ambiguity by assuming that novel words refer to unknown, rather than known, objects–a response known as themutual exclusivity effect. Past research suggested that mono‐ and bilinguals differ with regard to this disambiguation strategy, perhaps because, across languages, bilinguals’ experience contradicts one‐to‐one mappings of label and referent. Another line of research suggested a bilingual advantage in resolving referential ambiguity, based on bilinguals’ advanced pragmatic skills. Here, we examine both these claims in a preregistered study with comparable samples of mono‐ and bilingual 3‐year‐olds (n= 74) and adults (n= 86). We tested referent disambiguation and retention in two tasks: In the Mutual‐Exclusivity task, a speaker used a novel label in the presence of a known and an unknown object. In the Pragmatic task, she used another novel label in the presence of two unknown objects and participants could infer from the pragmatic context that the speaker referred to the object that was new in their discourse. Mono‐ and bilinguals were equally successful in inferring the correct label‐referent links in both tasks and retained them after a delay. These findings indicate that children with different language backgrounds can develop the same strategies and pragmatic skills to learn novel words. Children can use their lexical knowledge and socio‐cognitive skills to infer the meanings of novel words, irrespective of whether they are acquiring one or more languages.

We tested if mono‐ and bilingual preschoolers (and adults) differ in the strategies and pragmatic skills used to disambiguate and learn novel words.

Both language groups successfully disambiguated and retained words in both a mutual exclusivity task and a task that required interpreting the pragmatic context.

Mono‐ and bilingual participants did not differ in their performance in either task or in either age group.

These findings contribute to ongoing theoretical debates about whether (and, if so, why) mono‐ and bilinguals might differ in their word‐learning strategies.

Children often need to find the referents of novel words in the light of referential ambiguity, that is, when several potential referents are present. Children, at least monolinguals, have been demonstrated to resolve this ambiguity by showing the mutual exclusivity (ME) effect: They assume that the novel label refers to a novel/label‐unknown, rather than to a familiar/label‐known, object (Lewis et al.2020; Markman and Wachtel1988). But why might children's language background, that is, growing up in a mono‐ versus bilingual environment, affect how they respond (e.g., Byers‐Heinlein and Werker2009)? Why might bilingual children be less likely to show the ME effect? Two different types of explanations have been put forward.

The second type of explanation is that the ME strategy may be available to both mono‐ and bilingual children in principle, but bilinguals may not always show the ME effect for various reasons. For example, bilinguals have smaller productive vocabularies in each of their languages compared to their monolingual peers (e.g., Bialystok et al.2010). If bilinguals’ knowledge of the familiar distractor labels is more fragile, this may result in a weaker ME effect (Grassmann et al.2015; Lewis et al.2020). This may be especially relevant in the case of young infants (Byers‐Heinlein and Werker2009, Lewis et al.2020). In addition, bilinguals may be less comfortable with the test language than monolinguals, which may influence how they respond in such tests. Thus, while the first type of explanations proposed competence differences between mono‐ and bilingual children (with regard to their word learning strategies), the second type of explanations proposed performance differences due to effects of the test language.

However, irrespective ofhowpotential differences in ME performance between monolingual and bilingual children may be explained, the more fundamental question that needs examining iswhetherthe reported difference is a robust effect. Do mono‐ and bilingual children really differ in their ME performance? A closer look at the empirical findings reveals a mixed pattern: While some studies find that bilinguals are less likely to show the ME effect than monolinguals (Byers‐Heinlein and Werker2009; Houston‐Price et al.2010; Repnik et al.2021), other studies could not replicate this difference (Byers‐Heinlein et al.2014; I. Frank and Poulin‐Dubois2002; Kalashnikova et al.2015, Kalashnikova et al.2018; Rocha‐Hidalgo et al.2021; Rochanavibhata et al.2022; Weatherhead et al.2021). A meta‐analysis, including 12 studies with multilingual participants, suggested that the magnitude of the ME effect is influenced by the participants’ language background as well as their age: The effect sizes tended to be larger for monolingual and older children (Lewis et al.2020). This analysis, however, did not include more recent research (published after 2017)—much of which did not find a difference in ME performance between mono‐ and bilingual children (e.g., Kalashnikova et al.2018; Rocha‐Hidalgo et al.2021; Rochanavibhata et al.2022; Weatherhead et al.2021).

Some of these recent studies have suggested a new twist on how word learning in ME contexts may differ between mono‐ and bilinguals: They distinguished between the use of ME to identify the intended object in the moment of interaction and the long‐term retention of this label‐object link (Kalashnikova et al.2018; Repnik et al.2021; Rocha‐Hidalgo et al.2021; Weatherhead et al.2021). This distinction is based on theoretical (e.g., McMurray et al.2012) and empirical work (e.g., Horst and Samuelson2008), suggesting that referent disambiguation and retention should not be conflated and that in order to evaluate children's word learning, their retention of the identified label‐object link needs to be assessed after a 5‐min delay (to ensure that word learning was based on a retrieval from long‐term memory, see Horst and Samuelson2008).

Thus, in addition to children's immediate disambiguation responses, these studies comparing the performance of mono‐ and bilingual children also assessed their retention of the novel label‐referent link after a delay. And while in these studies bilinguals showed the ME effect in their immediate referent disambiguation just as their monolingual peers did, bilingual 2‐year‐olds did not select the targets above chance in subsequent retention trials (Kalashnikova et al.2018; Repnik et al.2021; Rocha‐Hidalgo et al.2021; but see Weatherhead et al.2021). Specifically, in a study by Kalashnikova et al. (2018), at 18 months of age both mono‐ and bilingual children showed retention of the novel labels they encountered in a ME context. However, at 24 months mono‐ and bilingual children differed significantly in their word‐learning performance: Whereas at 24‐month‐old monolingual children retained the novel labels, their 24‐month‐old bilingual peers did not. This led to the proposal that, with increasing experience with language use, the ME strategy develops into a reliable word‐learning strategy for monolingual but not for bilingual children (Kalashnikova et al.2018;cf. Rocha‐Hidalgo et al.2021). The idea here is that, based on their experience with many‐to‐one mappings across languages, bilingual toddlers begin to learn that ME is not a reliable word‐learningstrategy for them and will stop applying it.

To evaluate this proposal regarding this difference in word learning strategies, research with young preschoolers may be especially informative. If it is indeed the case that bilinguals’ experience leads them to discard ME as a basis for word learning from their second birthday onwards, then a difference between mono‐ and bilingual children in their use of the ME strategy should become more pronounced and easily demonstratable in young preschoolers. In other words, bilingual 3‐year‐olds should not show word learning in an ME context. In contrast, if bilinguals use and retain ME as a word learning strategy, but may sometimes show more fragile performance, especially during their first 2 years of life (e.g., due to uncertainty about the familiar distractor label), then difficulties should not persist in preschool years (especially if distractor objects are used whose labels are highly familiar by this age to both mono‐ and bilingual peers). Thus, in this latter case, both mono‐ and bilingual 3‐year‐olds should demonstrate competence in word‐learning based on the ME strategy.

The mixed pattern of findings regarding the effect of language background may reflect methodological issues. One potential issue concerns small and unbalanced sample sizes. Small sample sizes generally come with problems of statistical power. This becomes particularly problematic if the sample sizes are unbalanced (i.e., more mono‐ than bilinguals are tested) or if the reported difference in performance is established by testing each group's performance against chance, with no direct comparison of mono‐ and bilingual samples. Furthermore, since bilinguals, in contrast to monolinguals, are often not tested in their first language, they may feel less comfortable in the test language, causing differences in their responses that are independent of the capacities of interest.

In sum, past research suggested mono‐ and bilinguals differ in how they disambiguate novel word meanings in the ME task and retain these mappings subsequently. However, mixed findings and methodological concerns highlight the need for preregistered research that tests balanced samples of mono‐ and bilingual preschoolers, based on a priori power analyses, to assess the robustness of the suggested effects. Given the suggestion that differences between language groups in novel word retention develop from 2 years onward (see Kalashnikova et al.2018), the assessment of young preschoolers is especially relevant.

A second, more or less independent, line of research has suggested that bilinguals have advantages in other word learning areas. Specifically, bilinguals may outperform their monolingual peers in their pragmatic and social‐communicative skills (e.g., Fan et al.2015; Yow and Markman2015). Again, there are different explanations for the potential differences between mono‐ and bilinguals.

First, bilinguals’ language experience may lead to advanced communicative and socio‐cognitive abilities. These advantages may be a consequence of the communicative challenges they are facing in their daily lives—such as communicative failures, misunderstandings, and adapting to an environment using different languages (Fan et al.2015; Liberman et al.2017; Wermelinger et al.2017)—and may even be a way of dealing with an initially smaller vocabulary in each of their languages (Siegal et al.2009). Bilinguals’ continuous demands to flexibly adjust their linguistic interactions to their conversation partner, may train their communicative skills, as well as their perspective taking (Schroeder2018) and executive function in general (Ware et al.2020).

Second, the bilingual pragmatic advantages may also be a consequence of a systematic selection bias. Bilingual populations do not only differ from monolinguals in terms of their language background. Bilingual families often immigrated from another country (and cultural background) and may potentially be more open‐minded and socially sensitive, which may in turn lead to social‐cognitive advantages that are not specifically due to their language experience (see, e.g., Gampe et al.2020for an example in which not bilingualism per se, but the cultural background of child and caregiver shapes communicative interactions).

The empirical basis for the proposed bilingual pragmatic advantages is, again, mixed (van Wonderen et al.2023). Bilingual advantages are mainly found in younger children, and may depend on the specific task or ability in question (see Antoniou et al.2020). They may be especially pronounced in tasks that tap more basic pragmatic and social‐communicative skills, such as perspective taking (Fan et al.2015; Liberman et al.2017) and Theory of Mind in general (Schroeder2018), understanding referential intent (Yow et al.2017; Yow and Markman2015), or repairing communication failures (Wermelinger et al.2017). Differences may be less robust, however, in more complex pragmatic abilities, such as irony, sarcasm, metaphors or implicatures (Antoniou et al.2020; Syrett et al.2017; but see Siegal et al.2009). Overall, past research on bilingual pragmatic advantages is relatively sparse and it remains open if the proposed advantages are replicable and to which specific pragmatic abilities they apply.

Past research has suggested that mono‐ and bilingual children may differ in the strategies and pragmatic abilities underlying their word learning. However, there is uncertainty regarding the robustness, as well as the explanations for these potential differences. In the current project, we focus on the two contexts in which differences have been suggested: differences between mono‐ and bilinguals with regard to (i) the use of ME to disambiguate and learn novel word‐object links and (ii) the use of social‐pragmatic information for word learning.

Combining both lines of research, we tested thesameparticipants in both contexts to assess in a common design whether mono‐ and bilingual children differ in the strategies and pragmatic abilities they use for referent disambiguation and word learning, or whether potential differences may vanish when the tested samples of mono‐ and bilinguals are sufficiently comparable. Testing the same participants in both their use of ME and their use of socio‐pragmatic information for word‐learning is also relevant with regard to theoretical debates on the cognitive bases of the ME response—specifically the debate between lexical constraint accounts and pragmatic accounts. As described above, the lexical constraint accounts propose that the ME response is based on the assumption that each object has only one basic‐level label (Markman and Wachtel1988). Hence, children's ME response may be independent from their pragmatic abilities. In contrast, pragmatic accounts assume the ME response itself is based on pragmatic processes (Clark2015; Diesendruck and Markson2001). In this case, one wouldnotassume participants to show a divergent pattern of performance on the ME task and on tasks assessing their pragmatic abilities. Instead, a population of children with advanced pragmatic skills should not face any difficulties with the ME task (as long as the testing conditions are adequate to assess their word learning strategies).

In the current study, we thus tested comparable samples of mono‐ and bilingual 3‐year‐olds and adults (as a validation group) with the same first language (German) and similar living surroundings, in comfortable test contexts (in their homes, with one parent being fluent in the test language). We assessed their disambiguation and retention performance in two conditions (within‐subjects): In the ME condition, a novel label was used in the presence of one novel and one familiar object. In the pragmatic condition, we presented two novel objects and the referent of the novel word could be pragmatically inferred based on common ground information (discourse novelty; see, e.g., Bleijlevens et al.2023; Bohn et al.2022).

With our design, we aimed to address how robust and persistent mono‐ and bilingual differences are in preschoolers, and how specific they are to the proposed areas. We predicted the following: First, if differences between language groups are robust and specific to the ME context because bilinguals learn that ME is not a reliable word learning strategy for them (Kalashnikova et al.2018), then we expected bilingual 3‐year‐olds to be less likely to show the ME effect and subsequent retention than their monolingual peers. Second, if bilingual advantages are robust and extend to children's use of common ground information, bilingual children should outperform monolinguals in the pragmatic condition—potentially regarding both, referent disambiguation and retention. However, if differences between mono‐ and bilingual children are due to other factors, such as the test language and sampling biases, rather than the application of different word learning strategies, we would not expect any differences between both groups in our study with highly comparable mono‐ and bilingual samples.

We preregistered the experimental design, procedure, sample sizes, and statistical analyses on OSF (https://osf.io/9epuw/). The complete study materials, data, analysis scripts, and details regarding the sample size calculation, the counterbalancing/randomization plan, and results are accessible on OSF as well. This project has been approved by the ethics committee of the Institute for Psychology, University of Göttingen (project number 317b).

The final sample for the main analyses included 74 typically developing 3‐year‐old children (36–47 months,M= 41.0, SD = 3.6; 31 females, 42 males, 1 without gender indication): 37 monolingual and 37 bilingual children. Eight additional children participated but were not included in the main analyses because they did not meet the bilingualism criteria (for details see AppendixD).

In addition, 10 children participated, but were excluded based on our pre‐registered exclusion criteria: technical issues (1), at least one mistake on familiarization trials (3) and uncooperative behavior (5) or because they did not provide any data in test trials (1).

The final samples of mono‐ and bilingual children were highly comparable. All children, both mono‐ and bilinguals, (a) had German as their first language (or as one of their first languages, in cases when parents stated that their child's input was more or less balanced across languages), (b) were recruited from the same data bases and living in similar surroundings in German university cities, and (c) had at least one parent who was fluent in German and present during the test session.

In a short, structured interview, we asked parents to indicate (a) the first language of their child, (b) whether they would describe their child as being raised bilingual, (c) the additional languages (beyond German) of their child, and (d) the estimated percentage of time their child is exposed to each language in their daily life.

Children were included in the bilingual group if they were exposed to at least one additional language regularly by one of their parents, constituting at least 20% of their language input. Additional languages included English, Spanish, Russian, Chinese, Danish, French, Polish, Turkish, Japanese, Dutch, Italian, Arabic, Romanian, Portuguese, Czech, and Bulgarian. The included bilingual children were exposed to an additional language on average for 42.9% of the time (SD = 13.6, range = 20%–70%).3Children included in the monolingual group were raised by German‐speaking parents and had no regular contact with any other languages.

Families were recruited from databases of German‐speaking children whose parents previously had expressed interest in child development studies. The participating children lived in German university cities and their surroundings. Further demographic data were not collected due to the local data protection rules (see Singh et al.2024).

We determined the sample size of 74 children a priori via data simulation. The goal was to obtain 0.8 power to detect the assumed effect size for the comparison of mono‐ and bilinguals’ retention performance in the ME condition. The estimations for some of the parameters needed relied on data from another study (Bleijlevens et al.2023). For details seehttps://osf.io/6f527.

The final sample included 86 adults with German as their first language (19–72 years,M= 36.2, SD = 12.7 years; 36 females, 50 males; 77 White, 4 Asian, 3 Mixed, 1 Black, 1 Other): 43 monolinguals and 43 bilinguals. We determined this sample size a priori via data simulation. We aimed to obtain 0.8 power to detect the assumed effect size for the comparison of mono‐ and bilingual adults’ retention performance in the Pragmatic condition. The estimations for some parameters relied on data from another study (Bleijlevens et al.2023). For details seehttps://osf.io/vx7b2. Adults were recruited via an online platform (www.prolific.com) and compensated for their participation at the recommended rate (£9/h).

Bilingual adults indicated on Prolific that their first language was German, that they were raised with two or more languages and are fluent in their native language (German) as well as at least one other language. Additional languages for bilinguals included Slovakian, English, Polish, French, Italian, Turkish, Bengali, Spanish, Vietnamese, Lebanese, Czech, Arabic, Danish, Dutch, Japanese, Russian, Swedish, and Urdu. See AppendixAfor further information regarding adults’ language backgrounds, including the age of acquisition, and the percentage of current average exposure, usage and proficiency in each language.

Monolinguals indicated that their first language was German and that they were raised with their native language only. The monolingual adults included in the final sample also indicated that their country of birth was Germany, that they were still living in this country, and that they were exposed to the German language at least 90% of the time. Additional languages for these monolinguals were English, French, Spanish, Persian, and Latin.4For further information on the recruitment of monolingual adults and on why the inclusion criteria used in the final sample of monolingual adults differ from the pre‐registered ones see AppendixD, which also reports the analyses of the adult samples based on the pre‐registered inclusion criteria.

We used a 2 (condition: ME vs. pragmatic) × 2 (monolingual vs. bilingual) factorial design with conditions being tested within‐subjects. Children were tested in one test trial per condition and adults in two.

For auditory stimuli, we recorded three female German native speakers, one for each animal speaker in the experimental phases. Two non‐words (“ergi” and “sude”), that matched German phonology, served as novel labels in the referent disambiguation trials and six German known words served as labels in practice (“apple,” “house,” “flower,” and “bus”) and familiar‐label trials (“ball,” and “shoe”). The familiar distractor for the ME task was a car (and for adults additionally a flower). Based on the Wordbank (M. C. Frank et al.2017), each of these words (those used as labels in practice and familiar‐label trials, as well as the word car) is, on average, produced by 94%–100% of 2.5‐year‐old German‐speaking children and expected to be well known to all of our 3‐year‐olds.

For visual stimuli, we used unknown object images from the NOUN database (Horst and Hout2016), images provided by Bohn et al.2022; see also Bleijlevens et al.2023) and open source material. Videos were created via Powerpoint.

The study was conducted online (due to the Covid‐19 pandemic). The child version was a synchronous online study (using BigBlueButton video conferencing), the adult version was an asynchronous online study presented via Labvanced (Finger et al.2017). Participants watched short, animated videos which asked them to point to different objects. We video‐recorded children's, but not adults’, testing sessions. After providing informed consent, each participant was presented with 10 (children) or 12 (adults) trials in four experimental phases: Practice (children: 4 trials, adults: 2 trials), Familiar‐label test (2 trials), Referent disambiguation (children: 2 trials, adults: 4 trials) and Retention (children 2 trials, adults: 4 trials; Figure1). We created 16 experimental versions for counterbalancing/randomization of the factors in the tasks (for details see the descriptions of each task type below).

Experimental procedure: example trials for each phase in both conditions. The wording of the test question was constant across conditions, as were the main elements involved in the overall scene (e.g., bear leaving in response to a phone ringing, bear turning toward each table before asking the test question etc.).

On each trial, an animal speaker, located at center stage and looking straight ahead, asked for one of the presented objects. Adult participants directly clicked on the objects on the screen. Children selected objects by pointing at them. A letter then appeared underneath each of the objects on the screen and parents were instructed to indicate their children's choice by reading aloud the letter displayed under the chosen object. Parents and the experimenter were not permitted to help or interfere in children's choices in any way (except in Practice trials). When children did not respond, the experimenter encouraged the participant by asking “Just choose what you think is right.” After the main experiment, children participated in a German receptive vocabulary test and adults were asked to describe the selection strategies.

Frog introduced herself. Then, on each trial, two known objects appeared on top of the screen and descended until they rested each on one of the two empty tables in front of frog. Frog asked the participant to point at a specific object by asking “Oh, there is a [known label]! Look at the [known label]. Can you show me the [known label]?” The experimenter interacted with the child until she picked the correct object and choices were followed by positive feedback from frog.

Practice trials were presented in fixed order (children: apple‐house‐flower‐bus; adults: bus‐house), and target locations (children: left‐right‐right‐left; adults: left‐right). Target locations were, thus, fully counterbalanced for each participant.

Mouse introduced herself. In each of the two familiar‐label trials, two known objects fell down on the two empty tables in front of her, followed by mouse's request to show one of them to her. In contrast to the practice trials, participants did not receive any feedback. Subjects who made at least one mistake in familiar‐label trials were excluded from analyses.

The object pairings (ball & duck, shoe & banana) and targets (ball, shoe) were fixed. The order of trials and target locations were randomized, either across experimental versions (for children) or in‐the‐moment by the experimental platform (for adults). Within participants, target locations were fully counterbalanced, with one target being presented on the left table and one on the right.

Bear introduced herself. The following procedure within each trial depended on the condition. Children were presented with one trial per condition in counterbalanced order, adults with two.

A phone started ringing and bear left the scene, disappearing inside the hill. Then, two objects, one familiar and one unfamiliar object, appeared on top of the screen and descended until they rested on the tables. Bear reappeared and turned toward each table in turn. Then, bear looked straight ahead and said excitedly “Oh cool! There is a [novel label] on the table! How nice, a [novel label] on the table! Can you show me the [novel label]?”.

In the child study, across experimental versions, we counterbalanced the order of conditions, labels, and gaze directions (first to target/distractor side), and we randomized target locations (left/right) and the assignment of unknown objects to a role in the experiment (target or distractor in the Pragmatic task, or distractor in the ME task). In the adult study, which included 4 instead of 2 referent disambiguation trials, all of these variables were randomized across versions. We fully counterbalanced target locations within participants, and gaze directions within participants and conditions.

A children's non‐verbal video cartoon was played, serving as a time delay of 5 min prior to retention trials (see, e.g., Horst and Samuelson2008).

Participants were presented with one retention trial per newly learned label (i.e., two retention trials for children and four for adults). In each trial, bear was standing behind four tables when four objects fell down onto them. Without changing her frontal gaze direction, bear said “Oh, there is a [novel label]! Look at the [novel label]! Can you show me the [novel label]?”.

The four presented objects were identical in both conditions. In the child version, we presented all four objects they had encountered in the two referent disambiguation trials: both target objects and both distractor objects from the “ergi” and “sude” disambiguation trials. Across the experimental versions for children, we counterbalanced the label order (ergi/sude first), the correspondence of label order relative to the label order in referent disambiguation trials (same/different), and object locations, such that across these versions, each object was presented equally often at each position and changed its position between trials. In the adult version, we extended this approach to the four presented trials. For details see AppendixB.

Following the main experiment, children participated in a German receptive vocabulary test for 3‐ to 8‐year‐olds (Bohn et al.2023), including 20 trials.5On each trial, four different pictures were presented on screen and a voice asked the child to point at one of them. Note that only part of our sample (20 monolinguals, 19 bilinguals) provided data on this test, because we only started implementing the test later in the data collection process and because some children failed to concentrate after the main study.

At the end of the experiment, we asked adults to describe how they decided on the object they selected in each condition (one question per condition). The question was accompanied by a screenshot of the participant's first referent disambiguation trial in that condition (in counterbalanced order). We asked, for example, “Please think back to the first game with bear: Could you shortly describe, how you decided which object ‘ergi’ is referring to in the situation on the picture?” and participants answered in an open text field.

We measured object choices for adults via their mouse clicks, and for children via their pointing gestures, confirmed by parents’ reading out of the corresponding letter. For referent disambiguation trials, we codedcorrect choices, for example, selecting the novel object (1) instead of the known/pre‐exposed one (0).

For retention trials, we codedconsistent choices, that is, whether (1) or not (0) participants selected the same object they had previously selected in the corresponding disambiguation trial amongst four different objects (the target and distractor object from the previous corresponding disambiguation trial, and the target and distractor object from a previous disambiguation trial in the other condition).

We measured adults’ response times in referent disambiguation and retention trials. Response times started with the first label onset and ended with their mouse click on one object.

A blinded coder assigned adults’ descriptions of their selection strategies to one of five pre‐registered categories: “speaker intent,” “nameability,” “familiarity,” “perceptual features,” and “explicit guessing” (Table1). Reliability coding by a second blinded coder for all trials revealed 82% agreement. Cases of disagreement (31 out of 172) were discussed with a third coder until a joint decision was reached. The majority of disagreements were due to either assignments to closely related categories (i.e., disagreement between nameability and familiarity (n= 6) or between perceptual features and explicit guessing (n= 4)), or due to one coder, but not the other, refraining from assigning any category (n= 15).

Categories of adults’ specific reasoning strategies.

Note: As preregistered, we distinguished the categories “nameability” and “familiarity.” However, we realized that many given answers were in line with both categories (e.g., “It can't be the car”), because they do not differentiate if the distractor was excluded based on its name or familiarity. In these cases, we decided to code “nameability” whenever the object's name was mentioned, leading to a high number of “nameability” and a relatively low number of “familiarity” codings.

For data analysis, we used R (version 4.2.1; version 2023.6.0.421). AppendixClists all functions and packages used. The data set, R scripts, analysis results and assumption tests are accessible on OSF (https://osf.io/9epuw). If not stated otherwise, we followed our preregistered analysis plan and the model assumptions were met.

Before interpreting model parameters, we tested for the overall effect of our fixed effects for each model with more than one predictor by using Likelihood Ratio Tests comparing the fit of the full model to that of a null model, lacking the predictors of interest. This way, we avoided “cryptic multiple testing” (Forstmeier and Schielzeth2011).

As preregistered, we removed non‐significant interactions from full models in a stepwise fashion, starting with non‐significant higher‐order (3‐way) interactions (e.g., language background × condition × age group), and followed by non‐significant lower‐order (2‐way) interactions (e.g., language background × condition).

To test whether participants’ performance in referent disambiguation trials differed between language backgrounds or conditions, we fitted a GLMM with binomial error distribution. We predicted participants’ correct object choices by language background (monolingual/bilingual), condition (ME/Pragmatic), age group (children/adults), and all of their possible interactions. Additionally, we added the speaker's gaze order (first to target/distractor) as a control variable and random intercepts for participants. This analysis differed from the preregistered one in that we replaced the predictor continuous age (in years) by age group. The new model eased the interpretation and description of the results, but revealed the same pattern of results as the preregistered one (see AppendixD: FigureD1and TableD1).

To test for effects of language background and condition on adults’ processing speed, we fitted a LMM. We predicted adults’ log‐transformed response times by language background, condition and their interaction. We added age (z‐transformed)6and the speaker's gaze order as control variables, and random intercepts for participants.

To test adults’ differential use of strategies across conditions, we fitted a multinomial mixed effects model. We predicted adults’ strategies by language background, condition, and their interaction, and added random intercepts for participants.

To test whether participants’ retention performance was affected by language group and/or conditions, we fitted a GLMM with binomial error distribution. We predicted participants’ consistent object choices by language group, condition, age group, and all of their possible interactions. We added random intercepts for participants. As above, we decided to ease the interpretation and communication of the results by replacing the preregistered predictor continuous age (in years) by age group. This model revealed the same pattern of results as the preregistered one (see AppendixD: FigureD2and TableD2).

First, we tested whether mono‐ and bilinguals differed in their L1 (German) vocabulary size. We fitted a GLMM with binomial error distribution, predicted their correct choices in the vocabulary test (on a trial basis) by language background, and added random intercepts for participants.

The binomial GLMM on participants’ correct object choices in disambiguation trials (correct choice ∼ language background * condition * age group + gaze order + (1|participant)) revealed that both children and adults selected the target object significantly above chance level in both conditions (Figure2: the bootstrapped confidence intervals do not include chance level).

Correct object choices in referent disambiguation trials. Transparent dots represent the proportions of correct object choices per participant, based on those trials in which any choice was made (children:nmonolingual= 74,nbilingual= 72; adults:nmonolingual= 172,nbilingual= 172) and circled dots the aggregated proportions per group and condition. Horizontal lines indicate the predicted probabilities; and vertical lines the 95% confidence intervals, both obtained by the GLMM and calculated via bootstrapping with 1000 boots.

As preregistered, in a stepwise fashion, we first removed the non‐significant 3‐way interaction (language background × condition × age group:b= 1.54, SE = 1.29,p= 0.232), and then the non‐significant 2‐way interactions (language background × condition:b= −0.09, SE = 0.60,p= 0.878; language background x age group:b= −0.94, SE = 0.64,p= 0.141). See Table2for the results of the full model. The final reduced model included all main effects and only the significant interaction of condition and age group (b= −1.91, SE = 0.62,p= 0.002).

Model predicting correct choices in referent disambiguation trials by language background, condition, age group, their interactions, and gaze order.

Note: GLMM with binomial error distribution on participants’ correct choices in referent disambiguation trials with language background (monolingual/bilingual), condition (ME/Pragmatic), age group (children/adults) and all of their interactions as predictors, gaze order (first to target/distractor) as control variable and random intercepts for participants (SD = 0.54).Nobservations= 490.Ngroups= 160. Confidence intervals were obtained via bootstrapping with 1000 boots.

Overall, language background did not affect the performance in disambiguation trials (b= −0.24, SE = 0.28,p= 0.396). Children's performance did not differ between conditions (b= −0.03, SE = 0.49,p= 0.950), but adults performed significantly better in the ME than in the Pragmatic condition (b= −1.94, SE = 0.38,p< 0.001). In fact, adults performed significantly better than children in the ME condition (b= 0.97, SE = 0.49,p= 0.048), but significantly worse than children in the Pragmatic condition (b= −0.95, SE = 0.40,p= 0.019). The speaker's gaze order (i.e., which object the bear looked to first before requesting the target) did not affect performance (b= −0.28, SE = 0.27,p= 0.287). The reduced model described the data significantly better than the corresponding null model (χ2(4) = 36.00,p< 0.001) and did not differ significantly from the full model including all interactions (χ2(3) = 3.99,p= 0.262).

The LMM on adults’ response times (log.RT ∼ language background * condition + z‐age + gaze order + (1|participant)) did not reveal a significant interaction between language background and condition (b= 0.02, SE = 0.08,p= 0.782). Therefore, we interpreted the reduced model lacking this interaction. There was no significant effect of language background on adults’ response times (b= 0.08, SE = 0.10,p= 0.415). However, in line with their object selections, adults responded significantly faster in the ME (M= 7.3 s, SD = 3.7 s) than the Pragmatic condition (M= 8.5 c, SD = 4.1 s;b= 0.21, SE = 0.04,p< 0.001). There were no significant effects of adults’ age (b= 0.09, SE = 0.05,p= 0.085) nor the speaker's gaze order (b= −0.01, SE = 0.04,p= 0.827) on their response times. The reduced model described the data significantly better than the corresponding null model (χ2(2) = 24.97,p< 0.001) and did not differ significantly from the full model including the interaction (χ2(1) = 0.08,p= 0.782).

The multinomial GLMM on adults’ selection strategies (strategy ∼ language background * condition + (1|participant)) revealed that mono‐ and bilinguals did not differ in the described strategies they used to disambiguate words in our tasks (Figure3: confidence intervals of one language group include fitted values of the other). In the ME condition, both mono‐ and bilingual adults described strategies in line with the nameability category significantly more often than any other category. In the Pragmatic condition, strategies based on the speaker's intentions were the most prevalent of the five categories (described in 38% of the Pragmatic trials) for both mono‐ and bilinguals (Table3). These “speaker intent” strategies were significantly more frequent than strategies based on the objects’ nameability, familiarity, or perceptual features. However, the number of adults who decided on an object by guessing and/or based on its perceptual features was still unexpectedly high.

Adults’ reasoning strategies for referent disambiguation. Dots show the proportions of actual selection strategies for those trials in which adults indicated a strategy matching any of the five preregistered categories (monolinguals:nME= 40,nPragmatic= 37; bilinguals:nME= 38,nPragmatic= 37; 20 of the 172 trials included answers that did not match one of our categories). Horizontal lines indicate the predicted probability of this strategy by the multinomial mixed model and vertical lines their 95% confidence intervals.

Adults’ reasoning strategies for referent disambiguation.

Note: Percentage of coded strategies per language group and condition for those responses that were codable (n= 152 out of 172).

The GLMM on participants’ consistent object choices in retention trials (consistent choice ∼ language group * condition * age group + (1|participant)) revealed that children and adults, both mono‐ and bilinguals, made consistent choices in retention trials above chance (i.e., 25%, due to the selection amongst four objects) in both conditions, as confirmed by the bootstrapped confidence intervals (Figure4: confidence intervals do not include the chance level of 0.25).

Consistent object choices in retention trials. Transparent dots represent the proportions of consistent object choices per participant, based on those trials in which any choice was made (children:nmonolingual= 73,nbilingual= 70; adults:nmonolingual= 172,nbilingual= 172) and circled dots the aggregated proportions per group and condition. Horizontal lines indicate the predicted probabilities; and vertical lines the 95% confidence intervals, both obtained by the GLMM and calculated via bootstrapping with 1000 boots.

The full model did not reveal a significant 3‐way interaction of condition × language background × age group (b= −0.43, SE = 0.95,p= 0.651). As preregistered, we first removed this interaction from the model, followed by the nonsignificant 2‐way‐interactions (condition × language background:b= −0.08, SE = 0.47,p= 0.870; condition × age group:b= 0.02, SE = 0.47,p= 0.961). See Table4for the results of the full model. The resulting reduced model included all main effects and only the significant interaction of language background × age group (b= 1.05, SE = 0.53,p= 0.048).

Model predicting consistent choices in retention trials by language background, condition, age group, and their interactions.

Note: GLMM with binomial error distribution on participants’ consistent choices in retention trials with language background (monolingual/bilingual), condition, age group (children/adults) and all of their interactions as predictors, and random intercepts for participants (SD = 0.70).Nobservations= 487.Ngroups= 160. Confidence intervals were obtained via bootstrapping with 1000 boots.

The model revealed that, although adults had to remember four word‐object‐links and children only two, adults’ performance in retention trials was significantly better than children's, and as suggested by the interaction, this effect was even stronger for bilinguals (b= 2.24, SE = 0.41,p= < 0.001) than for monolinguals (b= 1.19, SE = 0.37,p= 0.001). However, there were no significant effects of language background, neither for children (b= −0.48, SE = 0.40,p= 0.227) nor for adults (b= 0.57, SE = 0.35,p= 0.104), and no effect of condition (b= −0.20, SE = 0.23,p= 0.389). The reduced model described the data significantly better than the corresponding null model (χ2(4) = 44.8,p< 0.001) and did not differ significantly from the full model including all interactions (χ2(3) = 0.24,p= 0.972).

The GLMM on children's correct choices in the vocabulary test (correct choice ∼ language background + (1| participant)) revealed that the bilingual children had a significantly lower vocabulary size in their first language German (M= 7.1, SD = 2.8) than the monolinguals (M= 11.0, SD = 2.3;b= −0.81, SE = 0.18,p< 0.001).

In the current study, we tested whether mono‐ and bilinguals differ in the strategies and socio‐pragmatic skills underlying their word learning. We found that mono‐ and bilingual children (and adults) were equally successful at disambiguating and retaining novel word meanings in a ME task as well as a pragmatic task that required taking common ground into account. In contrast to prior suggestions, in our comparable samples of children with different language backgrounds, mono‐ and bilinguals did not differ in the strategies and pragmatic abilities they relied on to learn the meanings of novel words.

Past research suggested differences in how mono‐ and bilinguals use ME to disambiguate novel word meanings and subsequently retain these labels (Kalashnikova et al.2018). Here, we tested mono‐ and bilingual 3‐year‐olds’ (and adults’) disambiguation and retention of novel words in the ME task. Both groups were successful at inferring that the novel label referred to the novel object and retained the labels after a short delay—without any differences between language groups. Furthermore, both groups of children performed just as successfully in the ME task as in the pragmatic task (a task that did not include any known labels or objects and in which the correct referent could be inferred pragmatically).

For adults, exploratory analyses suggested that the proportion of exposure to (and usage of) the test language predicted their success in the ME disambiguation task. This finding highlights how measuring bilingualism in a rather continuous manner can potentially provide more fine‐grained insights into the effects of language experience on cognitive tasks. However, note that these findings were revealed in a large set of exploratory analyses (in which all other effects of interest did not reach significance), and not mirrored in the analyses based on participants’ self‐reported affiliation to the mono‐ or bilingual group. Thus, future research should investigate more systematically whether measures of bilingualism that are not based on arbitrary cut‐offs, may robustly affect adults’ (or children's) word learning (see, e.g., Rocha‐Hidalgo and Barr2023for the impact of cut‐offs between mono‐ and bilinguals on the reported differences in the literature, and Gullifer and Titone2020, for using language entropy as a measure capturing the social diversity of bilingual language background and use).

The lack of performance differences between the mono‐ and bilingual groups contradicts the idea that bilinguals’ language experience, particularly their experience with cross‐language synonyms (i.e., many‐to‐one mappings) results in the development of different word learning strategies: It has been proposed that bilingual children may learn around their second birthday that ME as a word learning strategy is not reliable for them (Kalashnikova et al.2018). However, in that case, we would have expected (a) that the differences between mono‐ and bilinguals’ performance in the ME task are especially pronounced in preschoolers and (b) that bilinguals perform worse in the ME than the pragmatic disambiguation task, since the impact of bilinguals’ language experience should have been specific to tasks involving word‐known distractors. In contrast, neither children's language background nor the experimental conditions affected their disambiguation and retention performance: Mono‐ and bilinguals performed equally well in disambiguating and learning novel word meanings, both in the ME task and the pragmatic task.

The results are in line with the idea that mono‐ and bilingual children have the same word learning strategies available, but this may have been masked by various other factors in previous studies. First, bilinguals’ vocabulary in the test language may have led to a weaker ME effect in bilingual infants, while the 3‐year‐olds tested here already had sufficient vocabulary in the test language to use ME to a similar extent as their monolingual peers. Second, bilingual children may not always feel comfortable in the test language, causing general performance differences that are not due to their bilingualism per se. To avoid this confound, (a) we tested comparable samples of mono‐ and bilinguals who had the same first language (German), (b) children had at least one parent who was fluent in that language and also present during the test session, and (c) children were tested at home in their familiar environment. Third, methodological issues may have influenced the pattern of results in the literature, including small and unbalanced samples whose performance was not always directly compared, but separately tested against a chance value. This potential overestimation of differences was prohibited here by testing a balanced and bigger sample and running a preregistered analysis that included a direct test of the effect of bilingualism.

Importantly, the fact that we did not find bilingual children to perform any different from monolinguals in our study was probably not because bilinguals tested here were “not bilingual enough”: The bilingual sample received at least 20% input in their additional language(s) which was provided daily by one of their parents. Additionally, just like in previous studies, we found bilinguals to have a smaller vocabulary in their first (and test) language. Nevertheless, there were no differences between mono‐ and bilingual's disambiguation and retention performance.

In sum, our study does not reveal any differences between mono‐ and bilinguals in using ME for word disambiguation and learning. Our comparable samples of mono‐ and bilingual 3‐year‐olds inferred and retained novel word‐object mappings in a ME task to the same extent. Their language background ultimately did not influence the strategies available to learn novel word meanings.

Another line of past research suggested advantages of bilingual children in social‐pragmatic and communicative skills that may be beneficial for understanding referential intent (e.g., Siegal et al.2009; Wermelinger et al.2017; Yow and Markman2015). Here, we tested participants in a pragmatic condition in which the correct referent could be inferred pragmatically by considering common ground (specifically, discourse novelty): Since one object was already given in the common ground, the speaker's later excitement while using a novel label indicated that this label rather referred to the novel object. The data revealed that mono‐ and bilinguals (both children and adults) were similarly successful at making this pragmatic inference and retaining the new word‐object mapping after a delay.

While there was no difference in performance between mono‐ and bilinguals, we observed an unexpected difference between the two age groups: While children performed very well in our pragmatic disambiguation task, a subgroup of the tested adults showed difficulties in interpreting the pragmatic context. Their reduced performance in the pragmatic disambiguation task, as well as their strategy descriptions, indicated that these adults did not consider the common ground information, but instead guessed and/or selected an object based on its perceptual features. In contrast to the children, adults participated in an asynchronous study with no video‐record. Thus, some adult participants included in the final sample may have been inattentive, thereby missing crucial elements of the pragmatic context (i.e., that the bear had already looked and commented on one of the objects)—especially as during these elements participants were just meant to watch and not required to respond. Note that in previous work, adults had shown much better performance in almost identical tasks (Bleijlevens et al.2023; Bohn et al.2022) except that here the crucial elements were presented twice8thereby reducing the chance that participants might miss them due to inattention.

There are different explanations for the current pattern of results. First, bilinguals may not actually possess any pragmatic advantages (see also Antoniou et al.2020; van Wonderen et al.2023). Contrary to some proposals in the literature, communicative challenges of bilinguals may not lead to improved pragmatic skills compared to monolinguals. If true, positive findings from other studies may present sampling and performance issues.

Second, bilinguals may possess pragmatic advantages that we failed to detect in our task due to ceiling effects (given that monolinguals already showed a quite high performance in our pragmatic disambiguation task). Future research should investigate the performance of mono‐ and bilingual children in a more demanding pragmatic word‐learning task that induces more variation in children's performance.

Third, bilingual pragmatic advantages may exist, but be more specific either to certain circumstances or to other areas of pragmatic skills. For example, the enhancement of pragmatic skills may only manifest in populations who are confronted with communicative challenges to a stronger extent. Given that in our sample, one parent was fluent in each of the child's languages, respectively, children may not have faced too challenging experiences that would result in the need to focus on different social cues to understand their communication partner. Alternatively, it is possible that the challenging communicative experiences of bilingual children train, for example, their ability to take their interlocutor's perspective or affect their weighing of social cues in ambiguous contexts (Fan et al.2015; Liberman et al.2017; Yow et al.2017; Yow and Markman2015). However, they may show no effect on the fundamental skills that are underlying every child's word learning (regardless of language background), such as the ability to consider common ground information during discourse (see e.g., Bleijlevens et al.2023; Liebal et al.2009; Matthews et al.2006).

To conclude, children (and adults too) need socio‐pragmatic understanding in many areas of their lives, including the area of language acquisition. Irrespective of their language background, they can use these general pragmatic skills to understand the behavior and communication of others and to learn the words of our language(s). Our study revealed no advantage for bilingual children and adults in using common ground to identify the referents of novel words and retaining them. This seems plausible given that interpreting the pragmatic context is so crucial for children's social lives, regardless of whether they learn one or many languages. More research is needed to determine if bilingual pragmatic advantages do not exist at all or apply to specific pragmatic areas, for example, those in which understanding the referential intent requires correct weighing of different cues.

Since bilingualism and experiential effects in general were mostly not explicated in the initial formulations of each theoretical proposal (see e.g., Markman et al.2003), our data cannot provide clear evidence for or against certain theoretical approaches. However, some researchers made specific predictions about the role of linguistic experience that are not in line with our findings. One version of the lexical constraint accounts claims that children's development of the ME constraint is based on their experience with one‐to‐one mappings. According to this idea, bilingual children should not acquire the ME principle because they learn more than one word per concept (e.g., Byers‐Heinlein and Werker2009; Houston‐Price et al.2010), at least across languages. Similarly, associative network accounts could predict a poorer ME performance for cases in which concepts have more than one label, because the associative network is shaped by language experience and the structure of bilinguals’ lexicon is not sufficient to use ME (McMurray et al.2012).

The illustrated predictions by both lexical and associative accounts are not in line with our findings. However, our data may be compatible with a specific version of these accounts in which bilinguals separate their languages and ME is only applied within a language. This is in line with studies showing that mono‐ and bilinguals use ME only within and not across languages (Au and Glusman1990) and studies showing a weakened ME effect when the novel target word is presented in isolation versus embedded in a carrier phrase that provides additional information regarding the word's language affiliation (Rochanavibhata et al.2022). This discussion ultimately leads to the question of how and when bilingual children separate their languages (see, e.g., Byers‐Heinlein2014).

Finally, the pragmatic word learning accounts would predict to observe a ME effect whenever children can assume that the speaker knows the conventional word for the known (distractor) object and would use it if she wanted to refer to it (Clark2015; Diesendruck2005). Socio‐pragmatic accounts would therefore not predict any differences between mono‐ and bilingual children in our design in which the speaker was monolingual and thus knowledgeable regarding the distractor labels. The pragmatic account is thus the only one which is unconditionally supported by our data.

The current study investigated whether mono‐ and bilingual children's language experiences lead to differences regarding the strategies and pragmatic skills underlying their word learning. In contrast to prior suggestions, monolingual children were not more likely than their bilingual peers to disambiguate or retain novel words in a ME task. Bilingual children's language experience did not prevent them from developing or maintaining the ME strategy to learn novel words. Additionally, they were not more successful than monolinguals in using pragmatic common ground information to disambiguate and retain novel word‐object mappings. Bilinguals’ language experience and potential communicative challenges did not result in advanced pragmatic abilities that underly their word learning.

Our findings suggest that comparable samples of mono‐ and bilingual children seem to develop the same strategies and pragmatic abilities to disambiguate and learn the meanings of novel words: They can make use of their lexical knowledge and socio‐cognitive understanding to infer the meanings of novel words in their language—regardless of whether they learn only one or several languages.