The genusScaphoideusis one of the most diverse groups in Deltocephalinae with significant pest species, including the American grapevine leafhopperScaphoideus titanusBall, the vector of Flavescence dorée phytoplasma in European grapevines. Despite the diversity and the agricultural importance of these species, limited information regarding the phylogenetic relationships ofScaphoideusspecies is available. Furthermore, althoughS. titanusis one of the most important pest of grapevine in Europe, details on its intraspecific genetic variation are limited to only a few studies based on single mitochondrial markers. By sequencing the complete mitochondrial genomes ofS. incisusOsborn,S. melanotusOsborn,S. minorOsborn,S. nigrisignusLi, andS. titanus, we examined the phylogenetic relationships among these species. We specifically investigated the genetic differences betweenS. titanuspopulations from North America and Europe to reveal new insights on the invasion history of this species in Europe. Based on our dataset, two distinct genetic clades ofS. titanuswith more than 10% pairwise genetic distance were identified in the native range: one comprising Midwestern USA and Quebec, Canada and a second one with individuals from Ontario, Canada. Morphological analysis of the aedeagus showed differences between the two clades, suggesting that they should be considered as different species. Invasive European populations share high mitochondrial similarity with those from Ontario, supporting the hypothesis that the invasion originated from this region. Our data reveal new insights into the invasion history of this important pest species and highlight the need for a taxonomic revision of theS. titanusspecies complex.

In this study we investigated the evolutionary relationships of Scapohoideus species and specifically investigated the genetic differences betweenScaphoideus titanuspopulations from North America and Europe to reveal new insights on the invasion history of this species in Europe. Sequencing the mitochondrial genomes of several Scaphoideus species, two genetically distinct groups ofS. titanusin North America, which also differ in morphology and may represent separate species. European populations closely match those from Ontario, Canada, suggesting this region as the invasion source. These findings improve our understanding ofS. titanusinvasion history and indicate a need for taxonomic revision in the species complex.

The genusScaphoideusUhler is one of the largest within the Deltocephalinae subfamily (Hemiptera: Membracoidea) with more than 200 species described in North America, South East Asia, Africa, and Europe (Chen and Dai2015; Kamitani and Hayashi2013; Viraktamath and Mohan2004). Despite the high number of species, to date, phylogenetic reconstructions have been insufficiently discussed on the basis of morphological and molecular characters (Barnett1977; Du et al.2017; Hamilton1983). Barnett (1977) proposed a phylogeny of Nearctic species based on morphological characters, but molecular assessments included only fourScaphoideusspecies from China for which the complete mitochondrial genomes are available (Du et al.2017). A few additional studies focused only on the mitochondrial genescox1andcox2that have limited phylogenetic resolution (Papura et al.2012; Gonella et al.2024).

Among the knownScaphoideus, two species play a crucial role as vectors transmitting phytoplasmas. In North America,Scaphoideus luteolusVan Duzee is the vector of ‘CandidatusPhytoplasma ulmi’, which causes elm yellows disease, leading to phloem necrosis in elm trees (Lee et al.2004). In Europe, the Nearctic leafhopperScaphoideus titanusis the primary vector of the Palearctic 'CandidatusPhytoplasma vitis' which is causing Flavescence dorée, one of the most important grapevine diseases in Europe (Chuche and Thiéry2014). The temperate North American species ofScaphoideuswere revised taxonomically by Barnett (1977), whose concept ofS. titanusincludes five junior synonyms and is distributed in Eastern and Central North America (Barnett1977; Dmitriev et al.2022). Hamilton (1983) considered it a species complex and interpreted the species differently than Barnett (1977) removingS. diutiusDeLong & Mohr andS. aduncusDeLong and Knull, adding the synonymcyprius. Initial characterization of the mitochondrial genecox1suggested thatS. titanusas defined by Barnett constitutes multiple genetically distinct lineages (Gonella et al.2024).

The native distribution ofS. titanus(sensuBarnett) spans most of the regions of deciduous forest in the USA and Southern Canada (Beanland et al.2006; Olivier et al.2009; Gonella et al.2024), especially east of the Rocky Mountains (Barnett1977). AlthoughS. titanuswas most likely introduced into Europe during the importation of American vines into France around the 1850s, or during the Phylloxera crisis around 1872 (Gale2002), the first official record dates to 1958 in Southern France (Bonfils and Schvester1960). Subsequently,S. titanuswas found in many European countries, including Italy (Belli et al.2010; Vidano1964), Switzerland (Clerc et al.1997), Portugal (Sousa et al.2011), Eastern European countries (Mirutenko et al.2018) and European island territories such as Madeira Island in Portugal (Aguin‐Pombo et al.2020). However, the geographic source of its introduction and the exact time of its initial arrival remain unclear. Low genetic variation ofS. titanusin Europe is consistent with the single introduction hypothesis (Bertin et al.2007; Papura et al.2012).

In this study, we aimed to infer potential invasion routes ofS. titanusfrom North America to Europe by comparing individuals from the native and invasive ranges using morphological and molecular approaches. The presence of two distinct clades among North American specimens led us to further describe the genetic variability between species from the native and invasive ranges. For this purpose, we extended our phylogenetic analyses to other relatedScaphoideusspecies from North America (S. incisus,S. melanotus,S. minor), one from Asia (S. nigrisignus) as well as four previously published species (Du et al.2017). Our findings offer new insights not only into the invasion history ofS. titanus, one of the most significant pest species in Europe, but also into additional related species from the native range.

FiveScaphoideusspecies were analyzed in this study:S. incisus,S. melanotus,S. minor,S. nigrisignus, andS. titanus. Samples were collected between 2004 and 2023 in China, Canada, USA, and six European countries (Table1). Identification at the species level was accomplished by examining specimens with a stereomicroscope (Leica S9i) and using the dichotomous key of Barnett (1977) and Wen et al. (2017).

List of complete mitochondrial genomes assembled in this study together with information about the sampling localities and mitochondrial genome length.

For the morphological analysis ofS. titanus, 24 male specimens (four from France, three from Serbia 1, two from Italy 2, two from IL, USA, and 13 from QC, Canada) were dissected. The male genitalia were examined with a focus on variations in size, length, and shape of the major structures to assess the consistency of these morphological features across specimens from the native and invasive range. After taxonomic identification, all specimens were stored directly in absolute ethanol at −20°C prior to DNA extraction.

A total of 19 individuals were analyzed in this study. DNA from five individuals from the Ontario Peninsula, ON, Canada was obtained from a previously published study (Papura et al.2012). Additionally, DNA from 14 individuals from the fiveScaphoideusspecies (one individual fromS. incisus,S. melanotus,S. minor, S. nigrisignusand ten individuals fromS. titanus; Table1) was extracted using the DNeasy blood & tissue extraction kit according to the manufacturer's instructions (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). DNA quality and quantity were measured using the DS‐11 FX+ (Denovix Inc., Wilmington, DE, USA) fluorometer and the Qubit 1× dsDNA high sensitivity (HS) kit (Invitrogen, Waltham, DE, USA). Paired‐end 2 × 150 bp Illumina Novaseq sequencing was performed at Macrogen Europe (Amsterdam, The Netherlands).

Raw reads were mapped against the mitochondrial genome ofS. maai(KY817243) using BWA V0.7.17‐r1188 (Li and Durbin2009) to select only reads belonging to the mitochondrial genome. Mapped reads were assembled using SPAdes v3.15.4 with default parameters (Bankevich et al.2012). The assembly produced a single contig representing the complete circular mitochondrial genome for each specimen, except forS. minor, for which the mitochondrial genome was split into two contigs. To close the gap observed between the two contigs ofS. minor, we designed new primers: SMgapF 5′—CTCAGACCTTCATGTTTTAA—3′ and SMgapR 5′—GCCTAGGGTTAGTTTCATAT—3′. PCR was performed in a total volume of 25 μL containing 2 μL of DNA, 1.75 μL of each primer (10 μM), 12.5 μL of 2X DreamTaq Master Mix (ThermoFisher) and 7 μL of sterile water under the following thermal conditions: 3 min at 95°C for initial denaturation; 35 cycles of 30 s at 95°C, 30 s at 48°C, 1 min at 72°C, and 10 min at 72°C. PCR products were sent for Sanger sequencing at Eurofins Genomics (Ebersberg, Germany). Annotation of the mitochondrial genomes was performed in MITOS2 v2.1.3 (Bernt et al.2013) and then manually curated. The newly assembled mitogenomes were deposited in the NCBI under accession numbersPV613503–PV613521.

The non‐synonymous (Ka) and synonymous (Ks) substitution rates of each protein coding gene (PCG) together with the Ka/Ks ratio were calculated in DnaSP v6.12.03 (Rozas et al.2017) using the 19 genomes assembled in this study and the ones published by Du et al. (2017). The Ka/Ks dataset was tested for normality of variance using the Shapiro–Wilk test in R v4.3.1 using the packages FSA and ggsignif. The Kruskal–Wallis rank‐sum test was conducted to analyze the differences of Ka/Ks ratios across the PCGs inScaphoideus, and a multiple comparison test was conducted using Bonferroni correction to compare the gene evolutionary rates.

The phylogenetic analyses were performed using the 19 newly assembled mitochondrial genomes (Table1) along withS. maai(KY817243),S. maculatus(NC_060770),S. nigrivalveus(KY817244) andS. varius(KY817245). Two Deltocephalinae species,Roxasellana stellata(NC_050257) andDrabescoides nuchalis(NC_028154) served as outgroups. Alignments of the nucleotide sequences of the 13 PCGs were generated with the MAFFT online server with Auto option algorithm (Katoh et al.2019). The final alignments were concatenated with FASconCAT‐G (Kück and Longo2014). Maximum likelihood estimation (ML) was performed in IQTREE v2.3.6 (Minh et al.2020). IQTREE was run on the concatenated matrix with the MFP + MERGE option using ModelFinder (Kalyaanamoorthy et al.2017) applying an Edge‐unlinked partition model. Node support was assessed using 1000 ultrafast bootstrap replicates (Hoang et al.2018). Additionally, Bayesian inference (BI) analysis was performed using MrBayes v3.2 (Ronquist et al.2012). The analysis was conducted with two independent runs, each consisting of four Markov chains, run for 50 million generations with sampling every 5000 generations. The GTR + I + G substitution model was applied, as determined by ModelFinder. A burn‐in of 25% of the sampled trees was applied before summarizing the posterior distribution. Convergence was assessed by ensuring the average standard deviation of split frequencies fell below 0.01. A stop rule and checkpointing were enabled to monitor convergence and ensure data recovery in case of interruption. Posterior probabilities were calculated from the majority‐rule consensus tree. Trees were visualized using FigTree (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/). Finally, a haplotype network was constructed using the concatenated alignment of the 13 PCGs of allS. titanusindividuals with the Templeton, Crandall & Sing (TCS) algorithm as implemented in PopArt (http://popart.otago.ac.nz).

The size of the 19 complete mitochondrial genomes of the fiveScaphoideusspecies ranged from 14,890 bp inS. minorto 16,171 bp inS. titanusfrom France and Serbia 1 (Table1). The newly assembled circular mitochondrial genomes contained a complete set of 13 PCGs, two rRNAs, and 22 tRNAs. Gene order was conserved across all mitogenomes, withatp6,atp8,cytB,cox1,cox2,cox3,nad3, andnad6 located on the J‐strand, andnad1,nad4,nad4l, andnad5 on the N‐strand.

The average overall ratio of non‐synonymous and synonymous substitutions (Ka/Ks) was positive for all the 13 PCGs analyzed inScaphoideusspecies. The analysis of synonymous (Ks) and non‐synonymous (Ka) substitution rates in the 13 PCGs revealed thatnad4has the lowest Ka/Ks value, whilenad2has the highest (FigureS1). The results indicate thatatp8,cox1, cox2, nad1, and nad2are under positive selection (Ka/Ks > 1), whereasatp6,cytB, cox3, nad3, nad4, nad4l,nad5, andnad6are under purifying selection (Ka/Ks < 1).

We dissected and compared the male genitalia ofS. titanusto assess morphological congruency across populations from the native (IL, USA; ON and QC, Canada) and invasive (France, Italy, Serbia) range (Figure1). The number, size, and position of setae on the pygofer exhibited noticeable variation among the specimens studied; though this variation was observed not only between but also within populations and was not deemed taxonomically significant. As the long setae can easily fall off from the pygofer, we counted the setal bases, which proved to be more consistent across populations.

Phylogenetic tree based on the concatenated nucleotide sequences of the 13 mitochondrial protein‐coding genes (PCGs) fromScaphoideusspecies. Numbers on branches indicate node support values from Maximum Likelihood (ML) and Bayesian Inference (BI) analyses, shown as ML bootstrap/BI posterior probability. Terminal labels marked with an asterisk (*) indicate newly assembled mitochondrial genomes generated in this study. Morphological detail of the two aedeagus variants inS. titanus, shown in lateral and dorsal views in the inset figures. Arrows indicate the observed differences in the apical part of the aedeagus. Outgroups were removed to improve visualization.

The internal genital structures, including the aedeagus, connective, and styles, were generally consistent between European and North American populations. The length and shape of the process of the connective displayed no variation among the observed specimens. However, a noticeable variation was observed in individuals from IL, USA, and QC, Canada, where the apical part of the aedeagus was shorter and had a less prominent “shield” when compared to the European specimens and individuals from ON, Canada (Figure1). No other morphological divergence was observed between the males from IL, USA, and QC, Canada, and individuals from other populations ofS. titanus.

The phylogenetic analyses demonstrated strong bootstrap support for the majority of nodes within the genusScaphoideus. However, the clade comprisingS. variusandS. maculatusexhibited moderate support values, with a ML bootstrap value of 78 and a BI posterior probability of 1.0.S. nigrisignuswas identified as a sister species toS. nigrivalveus, withS. maaiplaced as their sister group. Within the New World clade,S. minorandS. melanotusformed a strongly supported sister group to the clade containingS. incisusandS. titanus.

All individuals morphologically identified asS. titanuswere divided into two strongly supported clades. The first clade included specimens from QC, Canada, and IL, USA, which grouped withS. incisus(ML = 100; BI = 1.0). The second clade comprisedS. titanusfrom ON, Canada, and from Europe, which also formed subclades (ML ≥ 98; BI = 1.0, except for one internal node within the ON group). Sample Serbia 2 was placed as sister to the remaining European lineage, with strong support (ML = 100; BI = 0.84). The phylogenetic structure withinS. titanuscorresponds with the two observed aedeagus morphotypes, suggesting congruence between molecular and morphological variation (Figure1).

To visualize the relationships between the different haplotypes, a network was constructed using only samples that were morphologically identified asS. titanus. The haplotype network analysis of the 15 mitochondrial genomes ofS. titanusrevealed 12 different haplotypes. Consistent with the phylogenetic reconstruction, two haplotype groups were identified, separated by 1178 substitutions (Figure2). The first group contained the samples from IL, USA, and QC, Canada, which were separated by 98 mutations. In the second, all remaining populations from ON, Canada, and Europe were included. The five samples from ON Canada, were directly connected to the samples IL, USA, and QC, Canada, differing from each other by one to five mutations. The sample from Serbia 2 was separated from ON, Canada, samples by 27 plus 30 mutations, and from the rest of Europe by 30 plus 30 fixed mutations. These results suggest a possible second source population for these samples, possibly from Southern Canada or North Eastern United States. Additionally, all samples from France, Portugal, Italy, Romania, Czech Republic, and Serbia 1 were genetically homogeneous.

Haplotype (TCS) network for 13 mitochondrial protein coding genes inScaphoideus titanusshowing the relationship between populations from the native and invasive range. Numbers of single nucleotide polymorphisms are reported in brackets near the representing nodes.

To estimate the phylogenetic relationships between Palearctic and NearcticScaphoideusspecies, we inferred the genetic and evolutionary relationships among nineScaphoideusspecies, with a particular focus onS. titanusto examine its invasion history in Europe. We compared the morphology and the mitochondrial genome data fromS. titanusof 11 localities from the native range in North America and the invasive range in Europe. Our findings reveal new insights into the evolutionary history of the genusScaphoideusand shed new light on the invasion history ofS. titanusin Europe.

The mitochondrial genomes ofScaphoideuswere consistent in structure and organization with most other reported insect and Cicadellidae mitochondrial genomes (Du et al.2017). Genome length, gene order, and codon usage were highly conserved. However, length variation amongS. titanusfrom different localities may be explained by differences in the control region. This non‐coding part of the mitochondrial genome helps regulate DNA replication and gene expression and in hemipterans usually contains short A and T stretches (Li and Liang2018). The Ka/Ks ratio quantifies selection pressure on a gene, where Ka/Ks = 1 indicates neutral selection, Ka/Ks < 1 indicates purifying selection, and Ka/Ks > 1 indicates positive selection (Hurst2002). Our Ka/Ks analysis showed that nine out of 13 PCGs are under positive selection, while three are under purifying selection. Interestingly, high rates in Ka/Ks are rare in Deltocephalinae species (Wang et al.2015) but common in Sternorrhyncha, likely due to mitochondrial rearrangements (Liu et al.2020; Hou et al.2023). The genescox1andcox2are largely evolving under positive selection with ratios greater than 1 (FigureS1). Even if they are currently both widely used as mitochondrial markers, alternative genes, such asnad2andatp8, may provide additional resolution.

Our results show the clade comprising all included New WorldScaphoideusderived within a paraphyletic grade comprising the two clades of included East Asian species, suggesting that the genus originated in the Old World and subsequently colonized North America. Newly sequencedS. nigrisignusfrom China was placed as sister toS. nigrivalveus, which shares common phenotypical features such as the absence of pale longitudinal stripes in dorsal view and the crown with a complete transverse band (Wen et al.2017). Within the New World clade,S. minorandS. melanotusgrouped together as sister clade to the remainingScaphoideusfrom the Nearctic region, differing from traditional taxonomy, which clusteredS. melanotusandS. titanusas closely related taxa (Barnett1977).

Our phylogenetic analysis revealed two distinct clades ofS. titanus, one including individuals from the Midwestern USA and QC, Canada and another from ON, Canada and Europe. These two clades also exhibit morphological differences in the aedeagus. The concept ofS. titanusadopted by Barnett (1977) was broad, encompassing several previously described species that were treated as synonyms. Prior to our study, analysis of the mitochondrial genecox1ofS. titanusspecimens also recovered two separate clades (Gonella et al.2024). However, no morphological differences were assessed, nor was genetic differentiation examined until the present study.

Scaphoideus titanusas described in Barnett (1977) exhibited considerable variation, with overlap in many morphological characteristics with the nearest species asS. cypriusandS. nigrellus. Differences in the paraphyses length, size, and shape allowed morphological identification in males. The aedeagus was described as highly variable but generally pear‐shaped, with structural differences best observed in the posterior view. Barnett (1977) recognized four distinct morphotypes of the aedeagus withinS. titanus, a level of variation not observed in any of the other 20Scaphoideusspecies treated in the same revision. In our study, we found differences in the apical part of the aedeagus between three populations of North America, which are also reflected by molecular analyses. In the native range,S. titanusis more diverse than in the invasive range, where it is described as polyphagous, infesting multiple plants (Barnett1977). This study supports those observations, noting, for example, thatS. titanusspecimens from QC, Canada, were captured in strawberry fields not surrounded byVitis vinifera(Plante et al.2024). In contrast, in Europe, this species is described to be monophagous, feeding almost exclusively onV. viniferaand occasionally in other species ofVitis(Chuche and Thiéry2014).

The two morphotypes observed in this study are consistent with two of the four morphological variants illustrated by Barnett (1977). Few individuals from IL, USA and QC, Canada were included in our morphological and molecular analysis. Therefore, further investigations with a larger number of specimens will be needed to determine whether individuals from IL, USA and QC, Canada included in our study represent different species. However, analyses of the complete mitochondrial genomes have proven to be a powerful approach for phylogenetics and population genomics (Shao and Barker2007; Molligan et al.2024). Our results indicate it is possible thatS. titanuscomprises multiple allopatric species occurring in different areas and/or co‐occurring in the same areas. Therefore, hybridization including mitochondrial introgression may take place, and a single locus approach may be insufficient to detect hybridization. Based on the available data, the most likely scenario for the origin of European populations ofS. titanusis a single introduction from founding populations from Ontario or the Northeastern USA. However, secondary introductions may have occurred, as suggested by genetically divergent individuals from Serbia 2, potentially originating from a different source population, possibly still from this range. Future studies are needed to investigate the wholeS. titanusspecies complex described by Barnett (1977) and the geographic distribution of these species in North America to understand the diversity and evolution ofS. titanusin the native range.

Here we sequenced the complete mitochondrial genomes ofS. incisus,S. melanotus,S. minor,S. nigrisignus, andS. titanusfor the first time and analyzed these data in combination with previously sequenced mitochondrial genomes from otherScaphoideusspecies, with emphasis on the invasion history and morphology ofS. titanusacross North America and Europe. Our study reveals striking genetic and morphological differences between populations ofS. titanus, suggesting that these clades may represent distinct species. While additional taxonomic work is needed to test this hypothesis, particularly using larger morphological datasets and genomic tools, our results highlight the need to revisit the species boundaries of one of the most important viticulture pests in its native range. Especially, the fact that these cryptic species might possess the potential to become new invasive pests and should be considered in monitoring programs.