Clinicians can mitigate the impact of invalidating or traumatic clinical experiences by actively working to ensure that the clinical interface is a space that is safe, inclusive, and responsive. In Aotearoa, New Zealand (NZ) the cumulative and ongoing effects of colonisation drive significant health inequities experienced by the Indigenous Māori population. Systemic health inequities extend across the perinatal period for Māori mothers and birthing parents with mental health outcomes being particularly poor. Previous invalidating or traumatic experiences at the clinical interface may impact a person’s ability to trust or feel safe with clinicians.

The aim of this paper is to explore Māori mothers’ and birthing parents’ experiences of clinical interactions during the perinatal period to guide clinicians in providing high-quality, culturally safe perinatal mental health care.

This qualitative study was guided and informed by Kaupapa Māori methodology. Semi-structured interviews were undertaken with 19 Māori mothers and birthing parents.

Participants described the challenges they experienced at the clinical interface and also offered insights around positive interactions they encountered with clinicians. Three themes predominated the analysis of Māori mothers and birthing parents:whakawhanaungatanga(relationships, building connections);kaitiakitanga(guardianship and protection); andmana(prestige, dignity).

Themes from the clinical experiences of Māori mothers and birthing parents when seeking perinatal healthcare outline important dimensions of positive clinical encounters. During the perinatal period these dimensions were promoted through continuity of care and the inclusion and centring ofwhānau(family, wider support network).

Quality clinical care occurs within a system, and structural components of the health system can influence practice and impact provision of care. It is systemic changes that will facilitate clinicians’ contribution to equitable outcomes for Māori, through the creation of services that support clinicians to prioritise working with whānau, engage in culturally safe practice, and address the barriers that prevent Māori from accessing evidence-based healthcare. Whakawhanaungatanga, kaitiakitanga and mana are essential to enhancing clinician-patient/whānau interactions in perinatal mental health care. To facilitate these relational values and practices, healthcare organisations must adapt health system structures to support whānau-centred practices. Recommendations from participants within this study provide important directions to guide clinical practice.

Clinicial interactions have the potential to be validating and empowering experiences for recipients of healthcare. Clinicians can advocate, support, and offer clinically and culturally safe care, grounded in evidence-based best practice [16]. Despite this potential, a power imbalance inevitably occurs when clinicians are situated as experts ‘who know what’s best’ [12]. Within this power imbalance, interactions at the clinical interface can become unsafe and disempowering experiences for recipients of care. Power imbalances are magnified when the clinician is from the dominant culture and the recipient of care is from a minoritised population [43].

Māori are the Indigenous peoples of Aotearoa, New Zealand (NZ) and their rights as Indigenous peoples are protected within Te Tiriti o Waitangi, the foundational document of Aotearoa, NZ, signed by representatives of the British Crown and Māori in 1840 [24] and internationally by the declaration on the rights of Indigenous peoples [58]. Despite health equity for Māori being mandated in Aotearoa, NZ, through Te Tiriti o Waitangi, Māori continue to face inequitable access to services, resources and best practice healthcare [29,30]. Currently, Māori experience significant health disparities, resulting from the cumulative and ongoing effects of colonisation [45]. Poverty, land loss, language loss, racism, discrimination, and unfair and unequal access to the social determinants of health are shared experiences of colonised peoples globally [15]. Social marginalisation occurs as a consequence of these issues [27]. It is also well established that Māori experiences of personally-mediated racism (where a person’s conscious or subconscious racial bias influences their interactions and perceptions of other people), and institutional racism contribute to health inequities [45,52]. Health disparities are therefore exacerbated when clinical interactions echo peoples’ experiences of marginalisation.

The therapeutic relationship between a clinician and recipient of care is particularly susceptible to the impact of deliberate or inadvertent prejudice [8]. Previous invalidating or traumatic experiences at the clinical interface may impact a person’s ability to trust or feel safe with clinicians [13]. Clinicians can mitigate the impact of these experiences by actively working to ensure that the clinical interface is a space that is safe, inclusive, and responsive [8]. Clinicians can achieve this through effective communication, respectful interactions, being aware of the nuances of power differences, and facilitating culturally safe interactions at the clinical interface [8]. The concept of ‘person-centred care’ [47] encourages clinicians’ responsiveness and respect of the priorities of the person needing care and promotes a partnership approach to clinical decision-making [12]. The concept of cultural safety was introduced by Dr. Irihapeti Ramsden [44] to support best healthcare practice for Māori. Cultural safety advances the ‘person-centred’ approach through supporting healthcare professionals to consider interpersonal power dynamics within the clinical setting [8,44]. Quality clinical care occurs within a system, and it is worth noting that structural components of the health system do influence practice and can impact on provision of care [18]. These structural components include policy, workforce, professional education, funding allocation, leadership, organisational structure and priorities [29,62].

In Aotearoa, NZ, health inequities across the perinatal period for Māori are significant with mental health outcomes being particularly poor. In colonised countries including Aotearoa, NZ, the structural factors within health systems created by settler- colonial regimes continue to privilege non-Indigenous parents, creating inequity in health and mental health outcomes for Indigenous birthing populations [6,37,48]. Globally, approximately 20% of the birthing population will experience mental illness in the perinatal period. Indigenous mothers/birthing parents experience disproportionate levels of mental illness in the perinatal period relative to settler and ethnic-majority mothers/birthing parents [37]. Non-Indigenous birthing parents are more likely to be screened, assessed, and treated for perinatal mental illness, perpetuating patterns of inequity for Indigenous parents already impacted by structural racism and discrimination [31]. These patterns of inequity are echoed in the Aotearoa, NZ context, with Māori mothers and birthing parents being significantly impacted by racism and discrimination within healthcare settings [2,56]. Furthermore, stressful life events have also been found to mirror patterns of inequity that favour non-Māori, directly and adversely impacting the perinatal health and well-being of around 60% of Māori birthing parents and their infants [38]. The extent of perinatal mental health inequity is further emphasised by a recent New Zealand report highlighting that suicide accounts for over 40% of direct maternal mortality events, with Māori being affected three times the rate of their NZ European counterparts [42].

Racism and discrimination have been shown to contribute to mental health illness within birthing populations and the experience of personally-mediated racism negatively impacts the wellbeing of the infant [56]. Māori mothers who experienced racism had children with significantly shorter telomere length (an indicator of cellular aging) than children of Māori mothers who did not report racism. Conversely, children of Māori mothers and birthing parents who had positive feelings about their culture had significantly longer telomeres [56]. Rising rates of birth trauma and perinatal mental health illness have led to several calls for action including addressing the broader needs of the birthing population and their families, increasing access to resources and more engaged, culturally appropriate care in the first 1,000 days, and increased support and interventions if risk factors and/or signs of mental health distress are present. Other recommended actions include a commitment to setting standards, regulation, service provision arrangements, and personal responsibility in relation to cultural safety, adherence to cultural safety frameworks, alongside the collection of complete and robust data to allow the monitoring of equitable outcomes [42],PMMRC 2024; [60]. These recommendations all require an examination of the delivery of care offered to the Māori birthing population. The aim of this paper is to explore Māori mothers’and birthing parents’experiences of clinical interactions during the perinatal period to guide clinicians in providing high-quality, culturally safe perinatal mental health care and improve the perinatal clinical interface for Māori.

Kaupapa Māori methodology informed and guided this research with Māori participants [49]. Kaupapa Māori centres Māori realities and respects the dignity and authority of research participants, prioritising their concerns and needs. Aligning research practices to meet the needs and aspirations of Māori participants is fundamental to this methodology and is achieved through genuine collaboration and partnership with participants in research [49]. Mana wāhine is a Māori feminist theory [40] and is founded on the belief that all Māori women possess innate strength and self-determination. It creates a space where wāhine Māori can actively shape and share their own experiences on their own terms. This approach directly challenges the historical trend, beginning with colonisation, in which Māori narratives were defined and retold by non-Māori—often through a white, male perspective resulting in the marginalisation or silencing of Māori women’s voices [30].

Mana wāhine supports the exploration of the diverse experiences and intersectionality of being a Māori woman in different contexts [19]. As a research framework, Mana Wāhine theory ensures Māori perspectives are central and given priority, rather than being sidelined or compared unfavourably to non-Māori viewpoints. It encourages research that is sensitive to the diverse and often traumatic impacts of colonisation on participants and helps to avoid reinforcing harmful stereotypes or deficit-based views. This safeguards participants’ wellbeing during the research process. The combined use of Kaupapa Māori and Mana Wāhine theories allows Māori women to express their experiences and insights within a research environment that acknowledges and respects their unique realities [30].

Ethics was obtained through the Human and Disability Ethics Committee (HDEC) of NZ. (Ethics EXP ID: 13,768). Māori consultation was completed through the University of Otago. The CONSolIDated critERtia for strengthening the reporting of health research involving Indigenous Peoples (CONSIDER statement) also guided our research study [21,30].

Participants were recruited from two community based perinatal mental health services. Both services were based in an urban setting, one was a Kaupapa Māori perinatal mental health service and the other was a non-Kaupapa Māori service. Clinicians from each service provided information leaflets and participants contacted the researcher directly via email or phone. To be eligible to participate, participants needed to be Māori and have accessed a community perinatal mental health service within the previous 12 months. Consent was gained prior to the interviews and participants were invited to bringwhānau(family or support people). Further information around recruitment can be found in the published methodology paper [30].

Semi-structured interviews were conducted and interviews lasted between one to two hours. Participants were able to be interviewed in their choice of at home, in a clinic room at one of the recruitment sites, or at a room at the research department. Two participants opted to be interviewed in the clinic room and the rest opted to have the interviews conducted within their homes. Questions were structured around participant’s experiences at the clinical interface during the perinatal period involving a variety of clinicians such as midwives, obstetricians, and GPs. For the purposes of this paper clinicans have not been differentiated as the focus is on general experiences within all clinical encounters. In line with Kaupapa Māori methodology, akoha(gift) was offered to all participants, andkai(food) was shared at the interview. In acknowledgement of the sensitive nature of the interview,karakia(traditional blessing, prayer) was offered prior to the interview and at completion. Interviews were recorded and transcribed, anonymised and allocated a pseudonym, then stored securely on the University drive. Transcripts were sent to participants for any corrections or amendments prior to analysis.

Nvivo version 20.7 software [26] was utilised to view and code the transcripts. Two cycles of coding were completed. The first cycle comprised of two phases. Phase one used a structural coding method to order and organise the data, the second phase used descriptive coding to explore the nuances and details of the data [46]. For the first phase, structural codes were developed from two Aotearoa, NZ health and maternity strategic frameworks: Te Pae Tata: Interim New Zealand Health Plan 2022 [55], and Kahu Taurima, an approach to maternity and early years healthcare [54]. These documents were integrated to provide a framework for the initial structural coding of participant transcripts, as they provide a benchmark for best practice in Aotearoa, NZ within the perinatal period. The integrated framework was then used to organise the data from the transcripts into structural codes. Phase two used descriptive coding to then further organise participant’s commentary into topics within each structural code. The second coding cycle involved pattern coding whereby the relationships between structural and descriptive codes were grouped in categories that were exploring and critiquing the same phenomenon, and then categories were clustered together to form themes. Further detail on analysis is outlined in the methodology paper [30]. See Table1for sample of coding patterns.

The initial analysis was conducted by the lead researcher (CM), and then peer reviewed by the research team. One interview was excluded from analysis as the interviewee did not meet inclusion criteria. In-depth discussions were undertaken to reach a consensus agreement on the criteria for inclusion within specific codes, categories and then themes. This process provided an opportunity to ensure participants’ voices were central to the analysis and that the principles of Kaupapa Māori methodologies were enacted.

CM is a Māori midwife and undertaking her PhD in the perinatal mental health field, SP, CMc, and TH are Māori health researchers with extensive experience in Kaupapa Māori methodologies and Māori health. SP, CMc, and TH co-authored this paper in their capacity as PhD supervisors. Researcher positioning has been expanded upon in another paper [30].

Nineteen participant interviews were included in the analysis. Interviews were conducted over a period of two months. All participants had accessed a community perinatal mental health service during the postnatal period. Table2outlines further demographic information.

Participants described the challenges they experienced at the clinical interface and also offered insights around positive interactions they encountered with clinicians. Three themes predominated the analysis of Māori mothers and birthing parents in these perinatal clinical encounters:whakawhanaungatanga(relationships, building connections);kaitiakitanga(guardianship and protection); andmana(prestige, dignity).

Results from qualitative analysis will be presented first by defining each theme, then by describing the nuances of each related sub-theme. Direct quotes will be used as examples to illustrate the data analysis for each sub-theme. Te reo Māori (the Māori language) is a language rich in depth and nuance, with words and concepts that often describe complex interactions and whose meanings may vary depending on context. For the purposes of this paper, when specific terms in te reo Māori are used to define themes, their meanings are presented in ways that best reflect the interpretations derived from the analysis process. An overview of the themes is presented in Table3.

The first theme ofwhakawhanaungatangaencompassed Māori participants’ perspectives of developing relationships at the clinical interface, highlighting the process to be fundamental to having positive perinatal experiences. Three distinct yet connected sub-themes were evident within this theme, and detailed howwhakawhanaungatangawas enacted or omitted. Sub-themes included:manaakitanga(caring for);tūhono(connection); andkotahitanga(shared vision).

Participants emphasised that expressions ofmanaakitangaestablished successful relationships with clinician’s early on.Manaakitangawas noted when participants referred to clinicians taking the time to acknowledge and introduce themselves to their wholewhānau.Sharingkai(food) and the offer of cups of tea was also seen by participants as an important component of clinician’swhakawhanaungatanga.In addition, participants reported valuing home visits because it was then possible for mothers/birthing parent’s and their whānau to reciprocatemanaakitanga. Ultimately, findings reflected thatmanaakitanga,as an action ofwhakawhanaungatangamade the clinicial relationship feel less clinical and more relaxed, which was captured by this quote.

Longer appointment times were also preferred to facilitatetūhono. When interactions did not feel rushed and there was time to build connection, disclosing symptoms of mental health distress felt easier. Being known by the clinician and having theirwhānaucontext understood, enabled clinicians to recognise when to step in and provide support and when to respect the capability of awhānauand step back. Clinicians sharing stories and parts of their lives disrupted the power imbalance and enhancedtūhono.

Participants recognised and respected clinicans’ needing to adapt priorities in different contexts such as hospitals, prisons, groups, or at awhānauhome. However, working through those adaptations together with the clinician led to a shared understanding of boundaries and expectations. The shared decision making led to a sense ofkotahitangawithin the perinatal clinical interface that left participants feeling respected and their autonomy recognised. Participants found that Māori practitioners aligned with and better undertood their priorities and vision as Māori parents, which facilitatedwhakawhanaungatangaby empowering collaborativekotahitangabetween perinatal services andwhānau.

Theme two captured Māori participant’s experiences ofkaitiakitanga: the protective and supportive actions of clinicians during the perinatal period.Kaitiakitangawas experienced directly at the clinical interface or indirectly, with Māori mothers/birthing parents describing the impact of protective or supportive actions that they understood were taking place in the background. Three sub-themes described actions ofkaitiakitanga:haumaru(creating safety);tūwhana(advocacy); andwhakatere(navigation).

Consent, protocols, or agreements around confidentiality were highlighted as actions that created a sense of well-being and safety. At the other end of the spectrum, misunderstandings, a lack of informed consent and dismissive interactions led to feelings of trauma and betrayal, destroying any sense of safety. Harmful and abusive actions of clinicans at the clinical interface were evident within the analysis, erodinghaumaru, contributing to birth trauma for Māori whānau, and causing ongoing mental distress.

Participants considered that advocacy was a key action ofkaitiakitangarequired in clinical settings. Some participants felt able to advocate for themselves whereas others lacked the confidence in the clinical setting. Participants recounted experiences of clinicians failing to recognise when advocacy ortūwhanawas required, and the harms that arose whentūwhanawas not employed as an essential component of clinicalkaitiakitanga.

Participants wanted clinicians to recognise and consider the wholewhānauwhen advocating, to include everyone’s voice in discussions and decision making. Advocacy failed when Māori participants did not feel safe to share their needs in case of unwanted or punitive consequences, such as referral to the child protection agency. However, when participants’ trusted clinicans they felt able to share information without a fear of judgement that then allowed the clinician to enactkaitiakitanga. A relationship founded onkaitiakitanga, where racial bias towards Māoriwhānauwas absent, provided opportunities for clinicians to advocate and support in ways that enhanced wellbeing.

Participants considered thatkaitiakitangarequired clinicians to be responsive to their needs and to help them navigate and access services. Fundamental to successful navigation was the clinician understanding and knowing the circumstances ofwhānauand their unique needs. Where navigation failed or was withheld, it was generally when a practitioner was not equipped with the skills or knowledge to be able to recognise the needs of Māoriwhānauand offer support effectively. Participants reported their mental distress being compounded when clinicians did not offer or even discuss available options for further services or support.

Participants shared that the clinician was often their only source of support during the vulnerable perinatal period and were subsequently able to make a significant difference to their experience through the process ofwhakatere. A key identified action ofwhakaterewas clinicians employingkaitiakitangathrough gaining consent to engage other agencies, coordinating supports that were an appropriate match for whānau.

The third and final theme ofmanaembodied the participant’s discussions around the importance of Māoriwhānauhaving their dignity nurtured and protected during perinatal clinical encounters. Descriptions of the role ofmanawithin clinical interactions included how the participants felt when being treated and recognised as worthy and capable parents, and having their identity as Māori acknowledged. Upholding the dignity ormanaof the wholewhānauwas viewed as an essential component of ensuring perinatal wellbeing during clinical interactions. Three sub-themes encapsulated howmanawas upheld at the perinatal clinical interface:whakaute(showing respect);pono(being honest) andwhakamana(empowerment).

Respectful interactions were outlined by participants as having their Māori identity acknowledged, or when clinicians in perinatal settings supported customary practices. Disrespectful interactions were devoid ofwhakaute, and ranged from blatant rudeness through to not feeling prioritised within the clinical setting. Omissions ofwhakauteoften occured during stressful moments when participants recognised that staff were busy. Participants perceived those moments as their needs becoming reduced to a task on a list of actions a clinician had to complete, rather than being respected as a person orwhānauwith valid needs and concerns. The impact of an absence ofwhakauteoften compounded the isolation they felt during the perinatal period.

Participants felt respected when their experiences of distress were validated by clinicians and options of support were offered. Kind and compassionate approaches to care were experienced as respectful,manaenhancing and reflective ofwhakaute, especially when clinicians gave participants their full attention and were not distracted during clinical interactions. Being reassured that support was available whenever it was needed and the creation of safety plans were further expressions ofwhakauteundertaken by clinicians, and experienced by participants as their situation being taken seriously. Again, clinicians’ inclusion ofwhānauduring these discussions was a demonstration ofwhakautethat enhancedmanawithin the clinical setting, and contributed to respectful clinical interactions.

Participants identified the role ofponoin relationship tomana, by sharing experiences of clinicians who were honest, trustworthy and reliable, and the impact on perinatal care. Transparent, and honest communication was noted to be a highly important component of clinicalpono. A lack of honest communication often led to clinicians making harmful assumptions, or withholding protective knowledge and education, or support. The absence ofponoleft participants feeling that they had not been centred or even considered in clinical decision making processes. Poor communication eroded trust, and contributed to clinicians being perceived as unreliable and uncaring, adding further distress and anxiety for Māoriwhānau.

When participants had previous experiences that were discriminatory or disrespectful, honest and open communication or expressions ofponobecame even more important. One participant shared that her mental distress included symptoms of significant anxiety and that her past experiences of healthcare for anxiety had not been positive.Manaand trust were enhanced through the clinician behaving in ways that werepono, achieved through a series of positive interactions, with the clinican acting upon promises made and providing reliable, non-judgemental advice. Beingponoalso encompassed clinicians sharing knowledge, taking the time to discuss options, and providing education which enhanced themanaof the clinical encounter and built trust. Participants recognised that comprehensive mental health care and follow up seemed challenging to resource in the perinatal period, and it was noticable when a clinician appeared to be going out of their way to help. These experiences ofponoclinicial encounters supported the willingness of Māori participants to open up about their mental health. Access to aponoclinician during the perinatal period was deemed to assist participants to overcome the anxiety of feeling inadequate during a vulnerable time, and enabled them to ask for support.

By contrast, experiences of empowerment orwhakamanaby clinicians happened within seemingly simple actions such as making participants a cup of tea and highlighting how they were doing ‘a good job’ in their new parenting roles. Offering to hold the baby, noting baby’s growth and development and being present to share in the joy of parenthood were other simple actions that were reassuring and made a difference towhakamanaparticipants’ confidence. Participants also valued being given opportunities at the clinical interface to have positive interactions and experiences, rather than focusing only on the challenges they faced. The sharing of happier interactions supported and facilitated deeper discussions around distress during the challenging perinatal period.

The results of this study provide rich insights about the experiences of Māori mothers and birthing parents when seeking healthcare and interacting with clinicians during the perinatal period. The perspectives shared by participants detail how perinatal clinicians can promote positive interactions at the clinical interface. Three themes highlighted how building relationships (whakawhanaungatanga), working in a manner that ensured protection through guardianship(kaitiakitanga) and recognising the dignity and prestige (mana) of Māoriwhānauwas facilitated through culturally safe and effective perinatal clinical practice. When the aspects of whakawhanaungatanga, kaitiakitanga, and mana were omitted from care the mental wellbeing of Māori mothers and birthing parents was negatively impacted, compounding any existing mental distress. These important dimensions of clinical encounters during the perinatal period were promoted through continuity of care and the inclusion and centring of whānau.

Participants in this study highlighted how whakawhanaungatanga, with its emphasis on nurturing respectful and meaningful relationships, can mitigate fragmented care and is a culturally safe approach to clinical care. The protective and supportive actions of kaitiakitanga as described in this study created a sense of safety, alongside supporting the wider whānau to be engaged with clinical care. The concept of mana (and of upholding mana) was seen to ensure clinical interactions were respectful and empowering.

These findings reiterate the existing evidence supporting continuity of care [11,14,32,59]. However, the experiences of Māori participants within this study revealed fragmented care and disruptions to continuity of care. Fragmented care is known to lead to disengagement [6,11] and international literature highlights its negative impact on minoritised populations receiving perinatal mental health support [61].Whānau-centred care also aligns with the wider literature, [7,16] and this is consistent with Māori health and maternity experts arguing the need to move beyond person-centred care, to whānau-centred care [6,17,28,36]. However clinicians are often underresourced with staff shortages and limited structural or organisational levers in place to support the provision of either continuity of care or whānau centred care [10,33,53]. This leads to whānau often feeling unwelcome in clinical environments [13], and Māori mothers/birthing parents experiencing fragmented care, raising questions around whether established evidence and policy recommendations are being prioritised in perinatal services.

As highlighted by the participants in this study, positive clinical interactions occur when clinicians utilise existing cultural safety frameworks to guide their practice with Māori whānau, [35,41,44] leading to responsive, anti-racist perinatal healthcare, and mitigating the potential for further marginalisation and inequities [14,20]. However, as evidenced in this study, structural components within perinatal services often inhibit, rather than support, clinicians to practice these crucial aspects of cultural safety when working with Māori whānau. The results from this study are consistent with other findings about the experiences of Māori of services within other areas of the health system ([4,9,15,22,39,45]). This is further consistent with the Waitangi Tribunal’s WAI 2575 Hauora Report (in 2019) that found that Māori had not been afforded Te Tiriti o Waitangi-consistent control of decision-making about health service design and delivery and that the health system had consequently caused significant and persistent health disparities between Māori and all other New Zealanders [5].

Strengths of this study include the Kaupapa Māori methodology, which centred the perspectives and expertise of Māori participants in a previously under researched area. The findings add to the current body of knowledge and understanding of perinatal mental health for Māori mothers and birthing parents. Limitations of the study include that the study was based on the perspectives of Māori in one urban area and may not be reflective of the experiences of Māori whānau across Aotearoa, NZ. Whilst the size of the sample was small, this does not limit the utility of the nuanced findings to inform service-level changes given the qualitative research design. While participants were not recruited in-person by the lead researcher (CM), which may in some cases have been a limitation preventing participation this was mitigated by the close relationships the lead researcher has within the perinatal and Kaupapa Māori perinatal mental health sector. As such, recruiting clinicians were able to provide participants with a personalised introduction to the lead researcher, along with information about the study itself. In addition, the lead researcher worked to further alleviate apprehension about participation by the Kaupapa Māori interview process detailed within the methodology.

Responding to the aspirations of Māori whānau for perinatal services will require the health system to address structural components that act as barriers to clinically and culturally excellent perinatal mental health care. Examples include providing increased flexibility in service provision to allow for longer appointment times, with incentives for home visiting; [50] improving the clinical environment for whānau [25], and ensuring inclusion of whānau in decision making, information sharing and education [25]. Addressing workforce shortages [57] ensuring continuity of care, and equipping clinicians with robust knowledge around perinatal mental health [34] and available supports is crucial. Professional development, reflective practice and supervision around cultural safety [8,25,64] are all useful tools and opportunities for clinicians to interrogate cultural safety within their practice but need to be prioritised by a system that resources and supports culturally safe practice [8]. Similarly, ample research and frameworks exist [1,5,17,23,39,51,63] to guide health systems and services in creating the conditions wherewhānaucentred care can be the norm, inequities be addressed, and clinicians be adequately resourced and supported to meet their responsibilities to practice culturally safe and clinically excellent care. The recruitment, retention, training and education of a culturally safe and clinically excellent perinatal workforce needs this resourcing. Integrating cultural safety within workforce Professional Development Recognition Programmes (PDRP) or Quality Leadership Programmes (QLP) for health practitioners would further strengthen workforce cultural competency within perinatal mental health services [29]. Again, this requires a commitment from the health system to prioritise equity and the provision of evidence based perinatal mental health services [3].

Inherent structural and organisational constraints exist within the health system that inhibit clinicians from practicing in ways that ensure continuity of care, whānau centred care and culturally safe care. Recent research exploring health care for Māori [16,39] offers recommendations highlighting that health system adaptations are required to support clinicians to provide both clinically and culturally excellent healthcare. It is systemic changes that will facilitate clinicians’ contribution to equitable outcomes for Māori, through the creation of services that support clinicians to prioritise working with whānau, engage in culturally safe practice, and address the barriers that prevent Māori from accessing evidence-based healthcare [8,16,39]. Whakawhanaungatanga, kaitiakitanga and mana are essential to enhancing clinician-patient/whānau interactions in perinatal mental health care. To facilitate these relational values and practices, healthcare organisations must adapt health system structures to support whānau-centred practices. Crucially, the perinatal health system in Aotearoa needs to address structural and organisational barriers [8,60] and provide the space and support for clinicians to develop and demonstrate clinical and cultural excellence in their perinatal practice.

The authors would like to acknowledge the participants of this study, without whom this work would not have been possible. E mihi ana ki a koutou.

CM: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization. CMC: Supervision. TH: Supervision. SP: Supervision. All authors reviewed the manuscript.

Cara Meredith is the recipient of a Health Research Council of New Zealand Māori Clinical Research Training Fellowship Grant no: 22/501.