The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-15916-7.

In this study a quantitative research approach involving questionnaires was utilized. The questionnaires were disseminated online to a large panel of Dutch citizens curated by the IPSOS research agency. Panel members were invited via email and supplied with all requisite information accompanied by a formal request for informed consent. Inclusion was limited to those panel members who provided consent for their responses to be utilised in subsequent research. The data collected for this study was gathered during the period of September to December 2021. The questionnaires that were distributed to the panel members contained various items related to sample characteristics followed by multiple measurement instruments on expected utility, projected utility and health behaviour.

Sample characteristics were examined employing descriptive statistics. Categorical variables were conveyed as percentages, whereas continuous variables were presented as means. Questionnaire characteristics were assessed through measures of construct reliability, construct validity, convergent validity and discriminant validity. Construct reliability was appraised using Cronbach’s alpha (α), rho_a and rho_c coefficients, which are considered satisfactory when their values exceed the 0.70 threshold27. Construct validity was determined by executing a factor analysis in which the instruments’ factorial structure was verified and refined by excluding redundant and cross-loading items27. Convergent validity was assessed by computing the average variance extracted (AVE) coefficient, which is regarded as adequate when its value surpasses the 0.50 threshold27. Discriminant validity was evaluated through the heterotrait-monotrait (HTMT) ratio, which was considered acceptable when it remained below the 0.90 threshold27. Model characteristics were investigated through the construction of regression models and were delineated using effect sizes, significance levels and explained variance27. Effect sizes of associations between model variables were examined via standardised Beta coefficients (β), which were interpreted as small when below 0.30, moderate when between 0.30 and 0.50 and substantial when exceeding the 0.50 threshold27. Significance levels of these associations was assessed using p-values, which are considered significant when falling below the 0.05 threshold27. Explained variance was reported through R-squared (R²) coefficients, which can be deemed small when below 0.30, moderate when between 0.30 and 0.50 and substantial when surpassing the 0.50 threshold27. Sample characteristics were derived by utilising the IBM SPSS Statistics software package Version 27, whereas questionnaire and model characteristics were extracted employing the SmartPLS software package Version 4.027,28.

The final sample for this study consisted of 2,550 panel members. The final sample was found to closely mirror the Dutch general population across key demographic and socio-economic indicators including ‘age’, ‘gender’, ‘health status’, ‘residential region’, ‘education level’ and ‘annual income’29–35. Nevertheless, the final sample also reflected a population with a comparatively higher degree of urbanisation than that of the Dutch general population29–35. An overview of the sample characteristics is presented in Table1.

The instruments assessing projected utility (α = 0.88; rho_a = 0.89; rho_c = 0.92) and health behaviour (α = 0.72; rho_a = 0.79; rho_c = 0.82) could be considered reliable as all reported reliability coefficients exceeded the minimal threshold of 0.70. The projected utility instrument demonstrated adequate construct validity with all items loading onto a single factor, while the health behaviour instrument likewise exhibited sufficient construct validity following the removal of two items (i.e., ‘smoking’ and ‘alcohol use’). The instruments for projected utility (AVE = 0.74) and health behaviour (AVE = 0.54) further evidenced satisfactory convergent validity as the average variance extracted surpassed the minimal threshold of 0.50. Discriminant validity was confirmed among the instruments for expected utility and projected utility (HTMT = 0.63), expected utility and health behaviour (HTMT = 0.53) and projected utility and health behaviour (HTMT = 0.73) with all heterotrait-monotrait ratios falling below the maximum acceptable value of 0.90. Given that the expected utility instrument comprises individual utility values and is not multidimensional, reliability and convergent validity could not be assessed. Nevertheless, in light of the aforementioned metrics, the measurement instruments employed in this study could be regarded as both valid and reliable.

Three regression models were developed to investigate whether the use of projected utility or a combination of projected and expected utility improves the prediction of health behaviour in health economics compared to the traditional use of expected utility alone. For clarity and ease of understanding, only the general regression models are presented as segmenting by available control variables (e.g., age, gender, health status) yielded minimal additional insights apart from a few minor deviations.

The initial regression model explores the effect and explained variance of expected utility regarding health behaviour (Fig.1). This first regression model shows that expected utility (β = 0.50,p<.01) has a significant and relatively strong direct effect on health behaviour indicating reasonable predictive power. This regression model further suggests that expected utility accounts for only limited variance in health behaviour (R² = 0.25).

The subsequent regression model examines the effect and explained variance of projected utility regarding health behaviour (Fig.2). This second regression model shows that projected utility (β = 0.62,p<.01) also has a significant and even stronger direct effect on health behaviour than expected utility giving it considerable predictive power. This regression model further suggests that projected utility explains more variance in health behaviour (R2= 0.38) than expected utility.

The last regression model examines the combined effect and explained variance of expected utility and projected utility regarding health behaviour (Fig.3). This third regression model shows that the combined direct effect of expected utility (β = 0.20,p<.01) and projected utility (β = 0.50,p<.01) is significant and stronger than each type of utility separately providing this combination with even more predictive power. This regression model also shows that expected utility and projected utility combined explain more variance in health behaviour (R2= 0.41) than each type of utility separately.

Expected utility, projected utility and health behaviour.

This study examines whether the deployment of projected utility or a combination of projected utility and expected utility in health economics enhances the prediction of health behaviour as compared to the conventional deployment of expected utility. The results suggest that projected utility has a larger significant direct effect on and explains more variance in health behaviour than expected utility. The results subsequently indicate that expected utility and projected utility combined have a larger significant direct effect on and explain more variance in health behaviour than each type of utility separately.

Although not many have combined both expected utility and projected utility in order to determine health behaviour, this study shows that such a combined approach has enhanced predictive power regarding health behaviour relative to each type of utility separately. However, it should be remarked that the explained variance in health behaviour only increases marginally between the unilateral deployment of projected utility and the combination of expected utility and projected utility. One might suggest that this small increase in explained variance could be due to the artificial inflation of the R2statistic as it does not correct for the number of variables in the regression model36. One might also suggest that such a small increase in explained variance does not justify the efforts and transactional costs resulting from the complex measurement and deployment of both expected utility and projected utility37,38. One might even suggest that the use of expected utility and projected utility combined is not theoretically sound as they are both a representation of the same concept albeit conceptualized and measured in different ways. Due to these methodological, practical and theoretical drawbacks health economists, policy makers and other public health practitioners should carefully ponder whether using both types of utility combined provides sufficient added value.

For this study several strengths and limitations can be identified. The first important strength of this study is that it constitutes one of the first attempts at conceptualizing, operationalizing and measuring projected utility. The second important strength of this study is the considerable sample size that has been established in order to generate relatively valid and reliable results. The third important strength of this study pertains to the valid and reliable measurement instruments used in order to produce accurate and veracious findings. The first limitation of this study relates to the potential bias towards relatively highly urbanized respondents within the used sample and the subsequent findings. The second limitation of this study is concerned with the limited generalizability of the findings due to the exclusively Dutch population and context of this research.

The results of this study have multiple implications for health economic practice and research. The results of this study imply that the current operationalization and measurement of expected utility in the context of health economics might not be the most accurate or precise. This observation further implies that alternative operationalizations and measures for expected utility (e.g., projected utility) might warrant more investigation and deserve more consideration in the field of health economics. Moreover, the results of this study especially suggest that projected utility may constitute such a viable alternative operationalization and measurement of expected utility.

The findings of this study prompt multiple directions for future research that may be worth pursuing. A first important direction for future research relates to repeating this research in disease-specific populations in order to understand its applicability in different patient groups. The second important direction for future research is concerned with repeating this study in different countries and regions in order to enhance interpretability and generalizability of the results. The third important direction for future research relates to explicating the process and associated transactional costs of measuring projected utility separately or in combination with expected utility.

Given the findings of this study, it has become evident that the expected utility conventionally deployed in health economics is not necessarily the most accurate predictor of health behaviour. In contrast, its less conventional counterpart, also known as projected utility, seems to be a considerable improvement with regard to the prediction of health behaviour. Additionally, the use of both concepts combined in order to predict health behaviour might be even more accurate. However, the combined use of both concepts may have some substantial methodological, practical and theoretical drawbacks that need to be considered. Nevertheless, health economists, policy makers and other public health practitioners are well advised to at least consider the separate or combined deployment of projected utility in health economics.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

We wish to thank the IPSOS research agency for their cooperation and contribution to this study.