Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

Received 2025 Jun 6; Accepted 2025 Jun 6; Collection date 2025 Aug 20.

In their editorial
recently
published inACS Physical Chemistry Au, Solomon et
al. (DOI:10.1021/acsphyschemau.5c00019) discussed the significant challenges facing new researchers, presented
by the ever-expanding gap between textbook level knowledge and understanding
gained from undergraduate studies and the ways in which this is applied
in state-of-the-art research. To help bridge this gap, we are pleased
to announce the launch of a new manuscript type across the ACS Au
community journal portfolio, Tutorials. These publications provide
a free-to-read resource for researchers, students, and instructors
in advanced undergraduate or graduate courses to learn more about
new or unfamiliar research topics and methods.

Although we have
always considered work of this type in our journals,
introducing Tutorials as a bespoke manuscript type creates designated
journal space, provides guidance for prospective authors, and makes
them more easily accessible for readers. We have had the privilege
of publishing excellent examples across the portfolio in recent years
(Table), and we are
delighted that they have been so well received.

In due course, a dedicated webpage will be created
to capture all
of the Tutorial content published across the ACS Au community journals
in a single location, as an index of free-to-read content covering
the broad range of the journals’ scopes.

If you are interested
in submitting a Tutorial, please submit a
short proposal toau-eic@journals.acs.org.

We
hope this new manuscript type resonates with both our readers
and authors and provides useful educational resources that can be
accessed immediately by anyone, anywhere in the world. We look forward
to serving these journals’ communities by continuing to publish
these important educational resources.

Views expressed in
this editorial are those of the authors and not necessarily the views
of the ACS.

This Editorial is jointly
published inACS Bio & Med Chem Au, ACS Engineering Au,
ACS Environmental
Au, ACS Materials Au, ACS Organic & Inorganic Au, ACS Nanoscience
Au, ACS Measurement Science Au, ACS Physical Chemistry Au, and ACS
Polymers Au.