Squalene, a natural triterpene with antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and immunostimulatory properties, holds promise for cancer therapy. Here, we examined a previously developed, diethylene glycol derivative of squalene (SQ-diEG) and investigated its in vivo anti-carcinogenic effects in bladder cancer. C57BL/6 mice were treated with 0.025% N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl) nitrosamine (BBN) to induce bladder cancer, with SQ-diEG or PBS (control) administered orally from Week 0. SQ-diEG significantly reduced bladder cancer incidence to 3.7% after 8 weeks, compared to 21.4% in controls (p = 0.025). Transcriptomic analysis indicated that SQ-diEG may exert anti-carcinogenic effects by reducing ROS-mediated DNA damage, enhancing the immune microenvironment, and modulating cholesterol biosynthesis via SQLE downregulation. In vitro, SQ-diEG inhibited proliferation and induced apoptosis in bladder cancer cell lines. This study is the first to demonstrate that SQ-diEG significantly reduces bladder cancer in a BBN mouse model, highlighting potential for therapeutic development. Further research is needed to elucidate the mechanisms and long-term efficacy of SQ-diEG.

Squalene is a natural triterpene abundant in olives, rice bran, fish livers, human skin, and subcutaneous fat. In vivo, squalene is a precursor for sterol/steroid synthesis via squalene epoxidase (SQLE) in the mevalonic acid pathway and is reported to exhibit antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and immunostimulatory effects, plus protect the skin and cardiovascular system by preventing atherosclerosis1. In oncology, squalene exerts antitumor effects by modulating oncogene expression, reducing oxidative stress, altering cell membrane structure and function, and affecting cell signaling pathways2,3. Due to these properties, squalene is being investigated as a potential new cancer therapeutic agent4; however, its hydrophobic nature limits effectiveness due to poor tissue permeability. To overcome this, ethylene glycol (EG) moieties may be added to squalene, rendering it amphiphilic and enhancing both tissue permeability and bioactivity5. Indeed, we previously reported that the incorporation of a mono-EG derivative into squalene (SQ-monoEG) effected a 100-fold increase anti-inflammatory effects compared to native squalene in endotoxin-stimulated murine macrophages6. Additionally, SQ-monoEG demonstrated improved metabolic functions in adipocytes differentiated from diabetic adipose-derived stem cells7. Encouraged by these results, we further explored the bioactivities of squalene derivatives by introducing the open-chain polyether ligands SQ-diEG, SQ-triEG, and SQ-tetraEG5. Comparative transcriptomic analyses in preadipocytes revealed that these EG derivatives, compared to unmodified squalene, enhanced glucose homeostasis, fat metabolism, and anti-inflammatory effects8. Interestingly, the EG derivatives of squalene self-assembled into distinct vesicle structures in pure water, with the morphology and size of the vesicles varying according to the length of the EG moiety. Specifically, SQ-diEG uniquely formed two types of vesicles: rod-oval-shaped vesicles (2.9 μm in length and 0.50 μm in diameter) and spherical vesicles (0.44 μm in diameter), distinguishing it from other EG derivatives8. In a recent study, we demonstrated that SQ-diEG exhibited potent anti-metastatic effects in vitro on highly proliferative and aggressive melanoma cells, primarily through the activation of the apoptosis pathway9, highlighting its potential for anticancer activities.

Chronic exposure to amine and aromatic amine derivatives, such as nitrosamines and benzidines, is a known risk factor for bladder cancer, as DNA alkylation and oxidative stress contribute to development and progression10,11. Given that bladder cancer is strongly influenced by inflammation and oxidative stress, and that squalene derivatives (including SQ-diEG) exhibit anti-inflammatory properties, we considered bladder cancer a biologically relevant model to evaluate the antitumor effects of SQ-diEG. Squalene, as a key driver of bladder cancer carcinogenesis, acts through squalene monooxygenase (SQLE)-mediated generation of squalene-derived sterols and steroids as well as regulating proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) in transformed cells12. Thus, inhibition of SQLE through modifications to squalene could be protective against bladder cancer pathologies, especially if antioxidant or other anti-cancer properties are retained. In this study, we demonstrate for the first time that SQ-diEG may inhibit carcinogenesis in the murine N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl) nitrosamine (BBN) bladder cancer model through SQLE downregulation13. We also report novel in vivo data that indicates SQ-diEG-mediated suppression of bladder cancer cell proliferation and induction of apoptosis.

Squalene was purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., Ltd. Under the catalysis of squalene monooxygenase, squalene was reacted as previously described with NADPH and molecular oxygen to form 2,3-epoxysqualene. Subsequently, SQ-diEG was then synthesized by the addition of diethylene glycol to 2,3-epoxysqualene as previously reported5,6.

Female C57BL/6 (BL6) mice (6–8 weeks old) were purchased from Charles River Laboratories Japan (Yokohama, Japan). Female 8-week-old, wild-type (WT) BL6 female mice were given drinking water with 0.025% N-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl) nitrosamine (BBN) (Tokyo Kasei Kogyo), starting at Week 0, and euthanized at Weeks 4, 8, 12, and 16. SQ-diEG was administered orally at a dose of 0.2 mg/kg (4 µg/body) daily from Week 0 until euthanasia and bladder extraction. For histological examination, the bladder was fixed in 10% buffered formalin and analyzed using hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. Cancer was diagnosed when at least two areas were identified in which atypical cells proliferated in the bladder mucosa, causing the cell layer to thicken and become irregular. All animal experiments were approved by the University of Tsukuba Animal Experiment Committee and were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. All methods are reported in accordance with the ARRIVE guidelines. Mice were euthanized by cervical dislocation under isoflurane anesthesia.

Microarray analyses were carried out on bladder samples of SQ-diEG-treated and control mice at 8 and 16 weeks utilizing the GeneChip® Whole Transcript (WT) PLUS microarray reagents and kits (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommended protocols. A Clariom S cartridge array (Mouse; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was employed for the microarray hybridization. A GeneChip™ Fluidics Station (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was then used to hybridize the cartridge array. Finally, the resulting hybridized arrays were subjected to scanning using a GeneChip Scanner (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

Following acquisition of raw image data from the scanning process, subsequent analyses were conducted utilizing Transcriptome Analysis Console (TAC) software, version 4.0.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The raw data were normalized to ensure robustness using the signal space transformation robust multi-chip analysis (SST–RMA) algorithm. Gene-level analysis was then performed employing the Limma Bioconductor package included with TAC 4.0.2. A one-way ANOVA was applied to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), followed by an empirical Bayes correction. A detected above background (DABG) cutoff of 0.05 was set to refine the analysis further to eliminate non-significant signals. Additionally, the positive vs. negative area under the curve (AUC) value was conservatively set at greater than 0.7 to focus on genes with strong discriminatory potential. The final selection of DEGs was based on stringent filter criteria, requiring a p-value of less than 0.05 (calculated using one-way between-subject ANOVA) and a fold change (FC) greater than 2 (in linear space).

Gene ontology (GO) analyses were performed using the web-based tool Metascape (v3.5.20230101,http://metascape.org)14. Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA, Qiagen) was used to analyze canonical pathways. The identification of gene set clusters was carried out using the NCATS BioPlanet 2019 library. For each term, we calculated term frequency–inverse document frequency (TF–IDF) values and applied the Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) dimensionality reduction technique to these values. The resulting two-dimensional UMAP coordinates were used to plot the terms. The Genetic Perturbation Similarity Analysis database (GPSAdb) (https://www.gpsadb.com/) was employed to compare the gene set under investigation with a vast array of perturbation RNA-seq datasets15. Bladder neoplasm-associated gene sets were identified from the DisGeNET database16and an overrepresentation analysis was conducted using the downregulated DEGs.

For in vitro experiments, T24 cells were purchased from the Cell Resource Center for Biomedical Research Institute of Development (Miyagi, Japan) while 253 J cells were kind gifts from Northwestern University (Chicago, USA). Cell lines were cultured in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium, supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), and kept at 37 °C with a 5% humidified CO2atmosphere.

Total RNA from cultured cells and excised whole bladders was isolated using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) or a NucleoSpin RNA kit (TaKaRa). The reverse transcription reaction was performed by using High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kits (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Semi-quantitative, real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was performed using SYBER Green PCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and QuantStudio 5 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The relative gene expression levels were quantified using the 2‑ΔΔCq method. Each sample was independently measured three times. All primer sequences are listed in Supplementary Table1.

Cell viability on addition of SQ-diEG to cultured cells in vitro was determined by WST-8 assay. Briefly, each cell line (1 × 103cells in 100 μl of culture medium) was seeded into each well of a 96-well plate and pre-cultured overnight. Then, 10 μl of PBS or SQ-diEG in PBS (equivalent to final concentrations of 5 or 10 μg/ml) was added to the culture medium and cell viability was colorimetrically determined 72 h later using a CCK-8 kit (Dojindo Molecular Technologies, Mashiki, Japan). All experiments were repeated more than twice and are presented as mean values with standard deviations.

Apoptosis was assessed using a Caspase‑Glo® 3/7 Assay System (Promega Corporation G8090), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. In brief, cell lines (1 × 104cells with 90 μl of medium) were seeded into each well of a 96-well plate and cultured overnight. Then, 10 μl of PBS or SQ-diEG in PBS (equivalent to final concentrations of 5 or 10 μg/ml) was added to the medium and 100 μl of assay reagent was added to each well after another 24 h. Cells were further incubated at room temperature for 1 h before the luminescence signal was measured with a microplate reader (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Varioskan LUX). All experiments were repeated more than twice and are presented as mean values with standard deviations.

Data are presented as means with standard deviations. The relationships between groups were compared using Student’s t test for continuous and ordinal variables and the Chi-square test for categorical variables. Probability values < 0.05 were considered significant. GraphPad Prism8 (GraphPad Software) was used for all statistical analyses.

To explore the anti-carcinogenic effects of SQ-diEG in the context of orthotopic bladder cancer, we employed a bladder cancer model induced by BBN. Mice exposed to BBN were orally administered SQ-diEG (diethylene glycol squalene, 0.2 mg/kg) or PBS (vehicle control) daily from Week 0 to Week 16 (Fig.1A). Bladder cancers consistently developed in control-treated, BBN-administered mice starting at 8 weeks, with incidence rates of 21.4, 50, and 66.6% at 8, 12, and 16 weeks, respectively (Fig.1B). In contrast, the incidence of bladder cancers in mice treated with SQ-diEG at 8 weeks was significantly lower (3.7%, 1 out of 23) compared to the control group (p = 0.025). At 12 and 16 weeks, mice treated with SQ-diEG showed a trend toward reduced bladder cancer incidence compared to the control group (Fig.1C). These results suggest that oral administration of SQ-diEG may delay bladder carcinogenesis and potentially suppress its progression.

Anti-tumor effect of SQ-diEG in a bladder cancer model. (A) Wild-type C57BL/6 mice treated with 0.025% BBN were orally administered SQ-diEG daily from Week 0 to Week 16 before sacrifice and bladder extraction at Week 16. (B) Representative image of the bladder stained with hematoxylin at 200 × magnification. (C) Percentage of bladder cancer in SQ-diEG treated and control groups. *p < 0.05 (chi-square test).

To investigate the mechanisms underlying the anti-carcinogenic effects of SQ-diEG, we next performed transcriptomic analyses using bladder samples from our BBN-induced bladder cancer mouse model at 8 and 16 weeks. The Clariom S Assay (mouse) identified 22,207 probe sets in total. At 8 weeks, 3237 genes showed significant differential expression between SQ-diEG-treated and control mice, with 1544 genes upregulated and 1693 downregulated. At 16 weeks, 1214 genes exhibited differential expression, including 616 upregulated and 598 downregulated (Fig.2A). Specifically, at 8 weeks, 846 upregulated and 767 downregulated genes had a fold change (FC) greater than 2 while, at 16 weeks, 286 upregulated and 229 downregulated genes met this criterion. Volcano plots for both time points illustrate the significant differences in gene expression between treated and control mice (Fig.2B,C).

Whole transcriptomic analysis using micro array in SQ-diEG-treated mice model. (A) Bar graphs showing the distribution of fold changes of the DEGs. The orange bars represent the numbers of upregulated DEGs. Volcano plots displaying differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between SQ-diEG-treated and nontreated BBN-induced mice (B) 8 weeks and (C) 16 weeks. The vertical axis (y-axis) corresponds to − log10 p value and the horizontal axis (x-axis) displays linear fold change. The orange dots represent the upregulated genes; the green dots represent the downregulated genes. The top 20 DEGs with the largest fold changes are shown. (D) 8-week SQ-diEG-treated and (E) 16-week SQ-diEG-treated timepoints. Clusters were computed using the Leiden algorithm and the points were plotted on the first two UMAP dimensions. The larger and black-outlined points represent significantly enriched terms. The greater the enrichment significance of a term, the larger and darker the corresponding point is. The countPlots from the GPSAdb web tool showing predicted top activated and inhibited Hallmark gene sets at (F) 8-week SQ-diEG-treated and (G) 16-week SQ-diEG-treated timepoints. Red bars represent activated and blue bars represent inhibited gene sets. The X-axis represents the net enrichment score (NES) and the Y-axis is ordered based on the NES score.

Next, we conducted an untargeted transcriptomic analysis to explore the broader bioactivities induced by SQ-diEG treatment. Using UMAP dimensionality reduction, we identified significantly enriched and functionally related pathways in the SQ-diEG treated group compared to controls. By mapping the Bioplanet 2019 gene set library terms onto the first two UMAP dimensions, we highlighted key clusters of pathway terms enriched by the upregulated and downregulated DEGs (Fig.2D,E). At 8 weeks, dominant clusters (specifically clusters 1, 5, 6, and 7) were primarily associated with cell adhesion, immune response, and cell migration. Additionally, pathways related to MAPK, EGFR1, PPAR signaling, insulin signaling, fatty acid metabolism, and cell cycle regulation were enriched during this period (Fig.2D). At 16 weeks, immune response remained the predominant function, with additional enrichment in pathways related to the complement and coagulation cascades and transendothelial migration processes (Fig.2E).

Subsequently, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) based on gene FC rankings revealed that SQ-diEG treatment activated gene sets associated with inflammatory responses, particularly adaptive immunity, and apoptosis while inhibiting gene sets related to cell proliferation, metabolic processes (including glycolysis, fatty acid metabolism, and cholesterol homeostasis), reactive oxygen species (ROS) pathways, and DNA repair (Fig.2F,G). These findings suggest that SQ-diEG treatment may exert anti-carcinogenic effects by reducing ROS-mediated DNA damage, enhancing the tumor immune microenvironment, and modulating metabolic processes.

Next, we identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) specific to bladder neoplasms to assess the potential anti-carcinogenic effects of SQ-diEG. Gene set similarity analysis with the DisGeNET database revealed 68 downregulated DEGs associated with ‘bladder neoplasm’ (total gene set size of 1217) at 8 weeks and 29 downregulated DEGs at 16 weeks, with the specific gene list detailed in Supplementary Table2. The heatmap in Fig.3A illustrates the average signal intensity of DEGs linked to bladder neoplasms in both SQ-diEG treated and nontreated conditions at the 8- and 16-week time points. Notably, we observed decreased expression ofFgfr3at both 8-week (FC = − 1.85, p = 0.04) and 16-week (FC = − 3.05, p = 0.0015) timepoints in the SQ-diEG-treated group compared to the nontreated group. In cancer contexts, aberrantFgfr3signaling triggers diverse pathways. As shown in the wheel graph (Fig.3B),Fgfr3was significantly involved in enriched biological processes related to cell proliferation, the MAPK cascade, and positive regulation of phospholipase activity. Another crucial oncogene,Hras, also exhibited downregulation at both 8-week (FC = − 2.97, p = 0.002) and 16-week (FC = − 2.05, p = 0.008) timepoints.Hrasis involved in similar biological processes asFgfr3and additionally in miRNA metabolic processes. Other notable bladder neoplasm-specific downregulated DEGs included early growth response 1 (Egr1), Jun proto-oncogene (Jun), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (Pparg), hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (Hif1a), and P21 (RAC1) activated kinase 1 (Pak1). While most of these genes showed a consistent downregulation pattern at both 8 and 16 weeks, some genes, such as glycoprotein (transmembrane) nmb (Gpnmb), SRY (sex-determining region Y)-box 9 (Sox9), junction plakoglobin (Jup), heat shock protein 1 (Hspb1), and Erb-B2 receptor tyrosine kinase 2 (Erbb2), displayed significantly lower signal intensities at 16 weeks (Fig.3C). These findings suggest that SQ-diEG treatment in the BBN mouse model leads to significant downregulation of key bladder neoplasm-associated genes, includingFgfr3andHras, indicating its potential to inhibit bladder cancer progression by targeting specific molecular pathways.

Whole-transcriptome analysis targeted to bladder neoplasm-specific genes. (A) Heatmap showing the average signal intensity of ‘bladder neoplasm’-specific downregulated DEGs identified from the DisGeNET database. (B) Wheel graph showing important genes that showed similar expression patterns in both 8-week and 16-week conditions and the enriched functions. (C) Wheel graph showing important genes that showed pronounced downregulation in the 16-week conditions and the enriched functions.

Squalene, a key intermediate in cholesterol biosynthesis, is metabolized by SQLE and plays a crucial role in regulating cholesterol metabolism in vivo1. SQ-diEG treatment may exert anti-carcinogenic effects by modulating cholesterol homeostasis (Fig.2F,G) as cholesterol biosynthesis is not only critical in tumorigenesis, progression, and therapy resistance, but is also associated with bladder cancer invasiveness. To further explore these effects, we analyzed biological functions and canonical pathways using IPA based on the 1613 significantly expressed genes in the BBN mouse model at the 8-week timepoint. This analysis revealed significant downregulation of cholesterol biosynthesis functions in the SQ-diEG treated group, with multiple cholesterol metabolism pathways ranked among the most suppressed (Fig.4A). Specifically, analysis of genes involved in cholesterol metabolism showed that SQ-diEG treatment significantly suppressed several candidate genes (Fig.4B), particularly those downstream of squalene, includingSqle,Cyp51a1,Msmo1,Nsdhl, andSc5d. Among these,Sqlewas the most suppressed. Subsequent qRT-PCR using RNA extracted from the bladders of BBN mouse models further confirmed the significant suppression of Sqle, Cyp51a1, Msmo1, Nsdhl, and Sc5d. (Fig.4C).

SQ-diEG inhibits cholesterol metabolism and exerts anti-carcinogenic effects in the BBN mouse model. (A) The representative top 10 downregulated biological functions in SQ-diEG-treated mice compared to those in control mice were analyzed by using IPA. (B) Extraction of the gene symbols that comprise the cholesterol biosynthesis pathway and the fold changes for each. (C) mRNA expression levels ofSqlein the bladders of SQ-diEG-treated and untreated mice were analyzed by qPCR.**p < 0.01(student’s t test).

These results suggest that the inhibition of cholesterol metabolism by SQ-diEG may contribute to its anti-carcinogenic effects, with SQLE suppression potentially playing a key role in this mechanism.

Transcriptomic analyses in the BBN mouse model showed that SQ-diEG treatment inhibited cell proliferation while inducing apoptosis in bladder cancer, with SQLE suppression as a potential contributing factor. To explore these findings further, we examined the direct effects of SQ-diEG on bladder cancer cells in vitro. We treated human bladder cancer cell lines T24 and 253 J with SQ-diEG and assessed their proliferative capacity using the WST-8 assay. Both 5 and 10 µg/ml of SQ-diEG significantly inhibited cell proliferation in a dose-dependent fashion in the T24 and 253 J cell lines (Fig.5A). We then investigated whether SQ-diEG treatment induced apoptosis in T24 cells. The activity of caspases 3 and 7 was significantly elevated in SQ-diEG-treated T24 cells (Fig.5B). Additionally, qPCR analysis revealed that the transcription levels of apoptosis-related genes (BAD, BAK, BAX, PUMA) were significantly increased in SQ-diEG-treated T24 cells (Fig.5C). Variations in SQLE expression due to SQ-diEG treatment were assessed using qPCR, which showed reduced SQLE expression in both cell lines (Fig.5D). These results indicate that SQ-diEG treatment inhibits cell proliferation and induces apoptosis in bladder cancer, suggestive of potential anti-carcinogenic properties.

SQ-diEG modulates proliferation and apoptosis in bladder cancer cell lines by affecting SQLE expression. (A) CCK-8 assays were performed to examine cell proliferative potential in T24 and 253 J cell lines supplemented with SQ-diEG. (B) Analysis of cell apoptosis by Caspase-3 and Caspase-7 assay in SQ-diEG-treated cells from T24 cell lines. (C)The mRNA expression of proapoptotic genes was analyzed by qPCR. (D) mRNA expression of SQLE in T24 and 253 J cells supplemented with SQ-diEG was analyzed by qPCR. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001 (one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s post-hoc test).

Squalene has demonstrated in vitro antitumor effects and, as a natural compound, is expected to have fewer adverse effects compared to synthetic drugs1. Fortunately, its limited solubility and bioavailability (that present challenges for clinical applications) can be overcome by adding amphiphilic EG moieties, as observed in our previous studies5–8. In this study, we demonstrate for the first time that oral administration of SQ-diEG, which overcomes squalene hydrophobicity issues, induces a significant anti-carcinogenic effect in a BBN mouse model. Additionally, SQ-diEG significantly inhibited cell proliferation and induced apoptosis in bladder cancer cells in vitro. These effects can be attributed to SQ-EG’s enhanced ability to overcome hydrophobicity and improve pharmacokinetics, which may lead to more effective therapeutic outcomes.

Untargeted and targeted transcriptomic analyses revealed the involvement of multiple signaling pathways underlying the anti-carcinogenic effects of SQ-diEG. In the BBN mouse model, pathway analysis of the SQ-diEG-treated group indicated downregulation of oncogenic pathways, including those related to MAPK, EGFR1, and cell cycle regulation. Additionally, SQ-diEG treatment suppressed gene sets involved in glycolysis, fatty acid metabolism, cholesterol biosynthesis, and DNA repair, while promoting the activation of pathways associated with adaptive immune responses and apoptosis. These findings suggest a multifactorial mechanism involving both tumor suppression and immune modulation. The expression of several key bladder neoplasm-associated genes was significantly reduced, with Fgfr3 and Hras, which are involved in MAPK and Ras signaling pathways, showing particularly notable downregulation. Their suppression highlights potential mechanisms by which SQ-diEG exerts its anti-carcinogenic effects. Together, these results provide a molecular basis for the anticancer potential of SQ-diEG and open new avenues for its therapeutic application. Future studies should focus on validating these findings in clinical settings and elucidating the detailed mechanisms through which SQ-diEG regulates these pathways.

Carcinogen exposure and chronic inflammation are well-known risk factors for bladder cancer. The BBN mouse model reflects these factors by metabolizing BBN in the liver, leading to DNA damage and oxidative stress in the bladder, which promotes carcinogenesis13. Squalene has been reported to reduce oxidative stress by decreasing intracellular reactive oxygen species and protecting genomic DNA from damage3,17. In our study, SQ-diEG treatment inhibited gene sets related to reactive oxygen species and DNA repair, suggesting that SQ-diEG reduces oxidative stress as one mechanism of its total anti-carcinogenic effect. Furthermore, SQ-diEG treatment in the BBN mouse model activated gene sets related to the immune response, particularly those involved in adaptive immunity. Although squalene’s impact on the tumor microenvironment is not well-documented, its role in promoting Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonism and enhancing immune responses as a vaccine adjuvant suggests that SQ-diEG may also modulate the tumor microenvironment18,19.

Cholesterol biosynthesis is critical in tumorigenesis, progression, and therapy resistance, making it a promising target for cancer treatment. Squalene, a key intermediate in cholesterol biosynthesis, is metabolized by SQLE, which, like HMG-CoA reductase (HMGCR), is a rate-controlling enzyme in this pathway. Modification of squalene with functional groups may thus decrease affinity with SQLE and reduce the downstream availability of cholesterol products that are implicated in cancer metastasis while maintaining anti-inflammatory activity. There may also be a feedback inhibition mechanism at work and this possibility remains open for future exploration. Experimentally, our transcriptomic analysis revealed significant downregulation of cholesterol biosynthesis pathways in BBN mice treated with SQ-diEG, possibly contributing to the observed anti-carcinogenic effects. While the precise mechanism by which SQ-diEG regulates cholesterol metabolism remains unclear, previous reports suggest that squalene can suppress carcinogenesis by inhibiting HMGCR20,21. In our study, SQ-diEG treatment also inhibited HMGCR in BBN mice, implying that SQ-diEG might act through a similar mechanism. Moreover, SQLE was identified as a key gene among strongly repressed, cholesterol metabolism-related genes after SQ-diEG treatment both in vivo and in vitro. SQLE overexpression has been linked to tumor progression, while its downregulation and inhibition in vitro reduce cell proliferation, decrease migration, and promote apoptosis22,23. A report by Yang et al. revealed that squalene expression (and, by extension, higher SQLE downstream production) was a driver for lung cancer metastasis by enhancement of lipid raft formation via cholesterol synthesis and synergistic action with osteopontin24. Zou et al. reported that overexpression of SQLE in bladder cancer promote cell proliferation, migration, and invasion growth through P53 regulation of the PTEN/AKT/GSK3β signaling pathway25. These results are congruent with our transcriptomic analysis, which revealed that SQ-diEG treatment and SQLE downregulation activates the p53 pathway (inducing apoptosis in our BBN mouse model), while also inhibiting cell proliferation and promoting apoptosis in vitro. Our results and previous reports thus collectively indicate that the anti-carcinogenic effects of SQ-diEG may strongly involve SQLE suppression. In addition to potential upstream effects by functional squalene modification, we alternatively speculate that SQ-diEG could also induce feedback effect by initially raising cholesterol levels, leading to reduced overall SQLE activity. To clarify this hypothesis, it is necessary to evaluate the temporal changes in cholesterol metabolism following SQ-diEG administration, as well as the conversion rates of SQLE with modified versus wild-type squalene.

Our study is the first to demonstrate that oral administration of SQ-diEG induces a significant anti-carcinogenic effect in a BBN mouse model. The ability of SQ-diEG to modulate oxidative stress, enhance immune responses, and regulate cholesterol biosynthesis pathways suggests its potential as a safe, effective, and easily administrable therapeutic option for bladder cancer. Future studies are needed to further elucidate the precise mechanisms of SQ-EG action and long-term efficacy and safety.