It is important to study the temporal and spatial change characteristics and the decreasing trend in cultivated land in China in the past decades, analyze the core influencing factors of the cultivated land decrease, and understand the regularity and trend in the cultivated land change. This study has important guiding significance for ensuring food security in China and optimizing and adjusting the pattern of land spatial development and utilization. Based on the data of China’s urban cultivated land change from 1990 to 2022, this study analyzes the pattern of cultivated land protection and destruction in China from the perspective of the total cultivated land change, the increase and decrease evolution characteristics, and future trends and determines the main driving factors of cultivated land destruction in the process of urbanization. The results show the following: (1) The goal of the dynamic balance policy of cultivated land in China from 1990 to 2022 has been basically achieved, but regional differences still exist, which show a spatial pattern of planar contraction and belt growth. There is a new feature of a “southwest, northwest, and northeast” increase, while there is a “central” decrease. (2) Cultivated land has gradually shown a trend of growth rather than contraction, the cultivated land contraction shows a trend of crossing the “Hu–Huanyong Line” and moving westward, and the center of gravity of the cultivated land contraction has shifted to the periphery of the Chengdu–Chongqing area. The cultivated land growth shows a trend of moving southeast across the “Hu–Huanyong Line”, and developed provinces such as Guangdong, Fujian, and Zhejiang have gradually become the new centers of cultivated land growth. This coincides with the strict implementation of basic cultivated land protection policies in developed areas of China in recent years. (3) Factors such as the urban population size, economic level, agricultural scale, industrial structure, and other types of land scale have different degrees of impact on the destruction and restoration of cultivated land.

Cultivated land is the foundation of grain production, and cultivated land is the cornerstone of ensuring national food security. Cultivated land protection is particularly important for a large country such as China, with a population of 1.3 billion1,2. With the acceleration of urbanization and industrialization in China, much of the cultivated land has become urban construction and ecological lands3. The contradiction between the limited cultivated land resources and the spread of construction and ecological lands has become increasingly prominent4,5. According to statistics, China’s cultivated land resources are decreasing. From 1957 to 1996, China’s cultivated land area decreased by more than 4000 square kilometers annually. From 1996 to 2008, the annual net decrease exceeded 6,666.67 square kilometers. Between 2009 and 2022, the average annual net decrease exceeded 7,333.33 square kilometers. The decreasing trend of cultivated land is also reflected in the per capita cultivated land area6. According to the results of China’s first national land survey, the per capita arable land area in China was 0.00106 square kilometers7. The second survey results showed 0.00101 square kilometers, and the third survey results showed 0.00091 square kilometers. China’s arable land area is 1.918 billion mu. If the current trend of cultivated land reduction continues, China’s cultivated land area will break through the red line of 1.8 billion mu in 10 years8,9. With the rapid development of China’s economy and urbanization, the competition between the demand for production, living, and ecological land is rising rapidly. Protecting cultivated land, restoring ecology, and developing production have conflicted in the new era10. Therefore, the characteristics and trends in cultivated land use in China are constantly changing. It is an urgent scientific problem to study the spatiotemporal changes in cultivated land in China in the past few decades and the future reduction trend.

China’s per capita cultivated land area continues to decrease, the overall quality of the cultivated land is poor, the reserve cultivated land resources are insufficient, and the severe situation of cultivated land utilization makes the spatial change and utilization trend in cultivated land a concern for everyone11,12. Scholars have carried out rich explorations of the spatial and temporal change patterns of cultivated land13, the development and utilization mode, the driving mechanism of cultivated land change, and the effects of cultivated land change and cultivated land protection14,15. The research content has shifted from shallow to deep, and the research focus has gradually shifted to cultivated land protection and food security issues16. The research perspectives mainly focus on cultivated land protection, social and economic development, and sustainable development17. From the perspectives of the cultivated land area change law, the cultivated land supply and demand law, cultivated land circulation, cultivated land resource reserves and reclamation, and cultivated land change and food security, the research has expanded18–20. The research methods are also increasingly diversifying. These mainly include remote sensing, global position systems (GPSs), and geographic information systems (GISs)21,22. Some scholars use quantitative evaluation and mathematical models to study the driving factors of cultivated land change23. The Markov model, CA model, BP neural network model, CLUE-S model, and system dynamics model have also been used to simulate and predict the change in cultivated land use24,25. In the quantitative analysis of driving factors, linear regression and principal component analysis were mainly used in the early stage, and logistic regression, grey correlation degree, and STIRPAT have been successively combined for deeper study26. With the progress in science and technology, many scholars have started to use artificial intelligence and big data to explore the changes in cultivated land use27. A large number of studies have deeply explored the formation of scientific, reasonable, and sustainable cultivated land utilization modes from the aspects of increasing income and increasing the yield of cultivated land, enabled by science and technology, labor–capital–technology intensive transformation of cultivated land utilization, the optimization of the land fallow rotation system, etc.28,29,, which is of great significance for alleviating the rising contradiction between humans and land and achieving a balance between economic development, cultivated land protection, and ecological civilization construction30,31.

Generally speaking, previous studies have extensively explored the change in cultivated land use and formed a rich theoretical basis for the status quo, problems, and regulation and management strategies of cultivated land use32. The main studies can be divided into two categories according to the subjects, years, and scale. One category explores the characteristics and driving forces of cultivated land change from the national, provincial, and prefecture or city level for long-time series analysis33. Because cultivated land change is mainly influenced by national policies and government actions over a long period34, most of these studies mainly consider the policy background within the research period. The other is the quantitative analysis of the driving factors of cultivated land change in specific regions, including research on cultivated land change in southeast coastal areas and cities such as Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei, the Yangtze River Delta, and the Pearl River Delta35. These areas have had rapid economic development and a rapid change in cultivated land, with obvious characteristics, which can more easily show the characteristics, trends, and influencing factors of cultivated land in a short period of time36. However, the current research on the temporal and spatial characteristics of cultivated land use change is usually limited to an overall perspective of cultivated land use change. The research results lack the description of the temporal and spatial dynamic change law of cultivated land growth and contraction in multiple periods and lack the latest research on the trends in the cultivated land’s increase and decrease. This is not conducive to the in-depth analysis of the internal characteristics of cultivated land use change in different regions and hinders the formulation of refined and differentiated cultivated land protection policies. In addition, most of the spatial scales studied are provincial or prefecture-level/city divisions, lacking detailed spatial variation characteristics at the county level. Furthermore, most of the existing studies are from the perspective of state policy and government behavior, exploring the law of cultivated land change, and from the perspective of urban development and construction, exploring the space–time change in cultivated land. Based on this, this study analyzes the evolution characteristics of the cultivated land growth and contraction at the county level in China from 1990 to 2022. We predict the expansion and contraction trend of cultivated land in China’s county-level cities for the future. We use statistical analysis to analyze the driving mechanism of urban cultivated land expansion and contraction from the perspective of urbanization, construction land scale, and industrial structure. The work is expected to provide a scientific reference for the refinement and differentiation of cultivated land protection policies, the balanced allocation of cultivated land indicators, and sustainable development in China for county-level cities.

The main structure of this study is as follows. Firstly, we used the ArcGIS 10.2 data space visualization function to analyze the spatial distribution characteristics, expansion and contraction speed, and trends in cultivated land expansion and contraction in China from 1990 to 2020. Then, we selected the indicators related to urban construction and development and used SPSS19.0 for statistical analysis to analyze the key impact of urbanization on cultivated land use in China. An explanatory model of the urbanization level and cultivated land change in China was constructed. Finally, we put forward a cultivated land protection strategy for county cities in China according to the spatial change characteristics, trends, and main influencing factors of cultivated land expansion and contraction.

In this formula,Qis the dynamic degree of cultivated land growth and contraction.andrepresent the cultivated area at the end and the beginning of the study, respectively.jis the length of the study period. WhenQis less than 0, it indicates that the cultivated land in the study area is shrinking in this period. The smaller theQvalue, the stronger the intensity of cultivated land contraction and the more serious the cultivated land destruction in the study area. WhenQis greater than 0, it indicates that the cultivated land in the study area is increasing during this period. The larger theQvalue, the stronger the cultivated land growth intensity in the study area.

whereRis the relative change rate of cultivated land in the study area.andrepresent the total cultivated area at the end and the beginning of the study period, respectively. If R is greater than 1, it indicates that the degree of cultivated land change in the region is greater than the regional average level.

whereprepresents the subject.represents the nuclear density of cultivated land.piis the position of thei-th study object that falls within a circle withpas the circle andras the radius: that is, the width of the extension in space withpas the core. The smaller the core density bandwidth value, the more detailed the spatial distribution; so, we adopted the ArcGIS default minimum bandwidth of 1000 m.

In this formula,represents the cultivated area of city k.is the coefficient explaining the model variable.is a constant term.is the value explaining the model variable.

This study used China land cover raster data and China urban construction statistical yearbook data. Professor Yang Jie and Professor Huang Xin used 335,709 Landsat images from Google Earth Engine to produce the first annual land cover (CLDC) of China from Landsat on the Google earth engine (GEE) platform45. The data include 9 types of land use: cultivated land, forest, grassland, water, barren, impervious, shrub, water land, snow ice. Source:https://zenodo.org/records/8176941. Data downloaded June 1, 2024. The original annual land-cover data were raster data with an accuracy of 30 m. According to the administrative boundary of each province, each prefecture-level city, and each district and county, we summarized and counted the grid values and obtained the annual cultivated area data of the three levels of provinces, cities, and counties in China. Finally, we used the confusion matrix calculation and ROC curve analysis to verify the accuracy of the Google Earth Engine (GEE) data. The verification results were consistent with the current situation of land use in China. In addition, the statistical yearbook of urban construction in China is available from the Ministry of Housing and Urban–Rural Development of China (https://www.mohurd.gov.cn/gongkai/fdzdgknr/sjfb/tjxx/jstjnj/index.html). The data mainly include urbanization- and industrialization-related indicators such as the urban GDP, population size, industrial structure, and land use scale. It is worth noting that due to the delay in the release of urban construction statistics in Hong Kong, Macao, Taiwan, and other regions and the inconsistent statistical caliber, the statistical data we used did not include the above regions. Therefore, these areas were excluded from the scope of this analysis and study.

From the perspective of the provincial total amount, the cultivated land in China showed a shrinking trend from 1990 to 2022 (Figs.1,2), with large regional contraction differences. In 1990, the total cultivated area of China was 1,965,762.9 square kilometers. In 2022, the cultivated area of China was 1884449.71 square kilometers. The total amount of cultivated land in 31 provinces and municipalities decreased by 81,313.19 square kilometers, with a contraction of 4.14%. The cultivated land in 25 provinces and municipalities directly under the Central Government showed a shrinking trend of 131,687.83 square kilometers, 1.62 times the total reduction across the country. The shrinking provinces accounted for 80.64%, which indicates that the cultivated land contraction in China is characterized by a wide contraction range and large contraction area. The cultivated area in the remaining six provinces showed an increasing trend, with a total increase of 50358.64 square kilometers. This means that China’s goal of a dynamic balance of cultivated land has basically been achieved, but regional differences still exist. Comparing (Figs.1,2), the cultivated land contraction is mainly concentrated in the economically developed areas of the southeast coast. The cultivated land growth provinces are mainly concentrated in the northeast, northwest, and southwest and other remote border areas and economically underdeveloped areas. This also shows that the increase and decrease in cultivated land is significantly related to the level of economic development.

Changes in the total cultivated land by province in China from 1990 to 2022.

Dynamics of the growth and shrinkage of cultivated land in various provinces of China.

According to the analysis of the cultivated land change amplitude in each province, Beijing (Q= −33.52%), Shanghai (Q= −24.63%), and Tianjin (Q= −22.91%) are among the top three in China (Table1). Nearly a third of Beijing’s arable land is occupied. A fifth of the cultivated land in Shanghai and Tianjin is occupied. This shows that the large-scale development and construction of municipalities directly under the Central Government has brought a serious decrease in the amount of cultivated land resources. China’s major grain output provinces, including Shandong, Henan, Hunan, and other regions, have also shown a decrease in the cultivated area, posing a serious threat to China’s food security. In addition, cultivated land in Xinjiang (Q= 54.33%), Xizang (Q= 12.81%), Heilongjiang (Q= 8.51%), Hainan, Guizhou, Yunnan, and Jiangxi showed an increasing trend. Most of these provinces are located in areas with low urbanization and a low economic level. Xinjiang has the most prominent increase in cultivated area, with a cumulative increase of 30,549.3 square kilometers, accounting for 37.57% of the country’s cultivated area growth. This shows that cultivated land in China has shown new characteristics in spatial change. After 2005, the cultivated land growth rate in Xinjiang increased rapidly, mainly due to the balance policy of cultivated land occupation and compensation implemented by the state in 2006. A large number of developed regions have used the province’s development funds to purchase Xinjiang cultivated land indicators to achieve a balance between cultivated land occupation and compensation in this region. When cultivated land is occupied by development and construction, the developed areas purchase and construct the same amount of cultivated land in Xinjiang. This mode achieves the balance of inter-provincial cultivated land occupation and compensation, and at the same time, the investment of funds also drives the economic construction of underdeveloped areas. However, this compensation model for cultivated land is unsustainable. Due to the low annual precipitation in Xinjiang and Xizang, much of the cultivated land consumes a large amount of water resources. The shortage of water resources further destroys the already fragile ecological environment. Therefore, as it exacerbates the problem of water shortage in Xinjiang, this excessive cultivated land occupation and compensation balance model is also unsustainable. In addition, Heilongjiang, Hainan, Guizhou, Yunnan, and Jiangxi provinces are located in the main mountainous areas of China, lacking open plain terrain, which is not conducive to large-scale cultivation and offers limited growth in cultivated areas.

From 1990 to 2022, Xinjiang, Beijing, Shanghai, Tianjin, Shaanxi, and Hebei provinces had higher relative change rates in cultivated land. The relative change rate (R) in the cultivated land in 20 provinces was greater than 1, which indicates that the degree of cultivated land change in these areas was greater than the regional average level. The Huang–Huai–Hai Plain, the Sichuan Basin and its surroundings, the Loess Plateau, and other major grain producing areas have undergone dramatic changes in cultivated land area. Before 2010, the Pearl River Delta and Yangtze River Delta had the highest cultivated land loss in China. However, in the past 10 years, Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei, the Central Plains, and the Chengdu–Chongqing regions have had the highest cultivated land loss in China.

From the micro-spatial level of districts (Fig.3a), from 1990 to 2022, 2033 districts and counties experienced a decrease in their cultivated land, accounting for 70.67% of the country. There were 844 districts and counties with cultivated land growth, and the contraction range was significantly larger than the growth range. From 1990 to 1995, the cultivated land increased in 915 districts and counties, and the cultivated land increased by 48,551.37 square kilometers. The cultivated land in 1962 districts and counties decreased by 57938.41 square kilometers. From 2015 to 2022, there were 1214 districts and counties with cultivated land growth, for a total of 46,289.51 square kilometers. The number of districts and counties with cultivated land contraction decreased to 1663, with 54205.48 square kilometers. Comparing the data of the two stages, the basic achievement of the policy goal of a dynamic balance in the increase and decrease in cultivated land in China is proven again. Although the number of growth districts and counties increased significantly, the area of cultivated land growth decreased. This shows that the growth potential of the cultivated land resources in districts and counties of China is limited.

Changes in cropland in Chinese counties and districts from 1990 to 2022, make with ArcGIS 10.2:https://www.arcgis.com/.

The cultivated land in China shows a spatial pattern of planar contraction and banded growth (Fig.3b). The growth districts and counties mainly formed two belt structures of “Xinjiang–Inner Mongolia–Heilongjiang” and “Yunnan–Guizhou–Jiangxi”. The cultivated area of Nenjiang City in Heilongjiang Province increased by 3000.39 square kilometers, ranking first in the country. The cultivated land in six districts and counties in Heilongjiang Province, four districts and counties in Xinjiang, and two districts and counties in Inner Mongolia increased by more than 1000 square kilometers. Large-scale cultivated land growth is mainly concentrated in this belt structure, which is also not conducive to the balanced development of cultivated land resources. The belt structure of “Xinjiang–Inner Mongolia–Heilongjiang” is limited by water resource scarcity and the population scale (Fig.3c), and the growth in cultivated land resources will slow in the future. The belt structure of Yunnan–Guizhou–Jiangxi is restricted by mountains, hills, and water systems, and the growth potential of cultivated land resources will weaken. The districts and counties with shrinkage form a planar contraction mechanism. The planar structure is mainly concentrated in the Huang–Huai–Hai Plain, the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River, the Loess Plateau, and the Sichuan Basin and its surrounding areas. The loss of cultivated land in the Huang–Huai–Hai Plain is mainly concentrated in the Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei region. In particular, the loss of cultivated land along the Shijiazhuang–Zhengzhou line is obvious. In the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River, the cultivated land loss is mainly concentrated in the core areas of the Yangtze River Delta, such as Shanghai–Suzhou–Nanjing, Jiaxing–Hangzhou–Ningbo, and other areas along the Yangtze River. The loss of cultivated land in the Sichuan Basin mainly occurred in the Chengdu–Chongqing urban agglomeration area. In other areas, the loss of cultivated land is mainly in the surrounding areas of provincial capitals.

The cultivated land changes gradually formed a planar spatial clustering model. The hot spot growth areas were mainly concentrated in the northeast, northwest, and southwest regions. The hot spot contraction areas were mainly concentrated in the Central China Plain, Chengdu Plain, and the South China coastal areas. The spatial spillover effect of the cultivated land contraction in the Central China Plain and the Sichuan–Chongqing Plain was the most obvious, which is closely related to the development strategy of the national industrial center moving northward and western development.

In order to describe the spatial evolution characteristics of the cropland growth and contraction in China, we used the kernel density tool in the GIS to analyze the cropland change in China from 1990 to 2022. When the kernel density value of the cultivated land’s increase is positive, it means that the cultivated land in the study area is increasing during the study period. With the opposite, the cultivated land shows a shrinking trend. The results show that the cultivated land in China has the characteristics of alternating growth and contraction. The cultivated land in China no longer shows the previous trend of “increasing in the west and decreasing in the east”, but it shows a new characteristic of “increasing in the southwest, northwest, and northeast” and decreasing in the central part. From 1990 to 2000, China’s cultivated land alternately increased and decreased (Fig.4). The cultivated land contraction structure was dominated by dots, and the cultivated land growth pattern was surrounded by belts. During this period, the total amount of cultivated land was dynamically balanced, and the occupation of cultivated land was linked to the completion of development and reclamation. With the rapid development of urbanization in China, a planar contraction structure centered on the Central Plains gradually formed. From 2000 to 2005, the cultivated land in China showed a significant spatial distribution characteristic of “increasing in the west and decreasing in the east.” The Yangtze River Delta, Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei, and other regions have developed rapidly, and the cultivated land has also rapidly formed a planar contraction structure. In order to curb the rapid spread in the areal contraction of cultivated land, the China government revised the Land Management Law in 1998.The basic cultivated land protection system was improved, and land protection systems such as “occupying one for one” of cultivated land occupied by construction and the collection of paid use fees for new construction land have been established. However, there are loopholes in these systems. For example, there is no reference to the quality of the supplementary cultivated land and no limitation on the scope of the compensation. These loopholes have led to the phenomenon that cultivated land makes up the difference, and a cross-provincial occupation and compensation balance occurs in the implementation process in many areas. This has led to the stable development of the spatial pattern of “increasing in the west and decreasing in the east” in terms of the cultivated land in China. This pattern continued until around 2010. In 2008, China formulated the Outline of the National Land Use Master Plan, reaffirming the strategic orientation of “the red line of 1.8 billion mu of cultivated land.” The cultivated area in the southeast coastal and central plains regions has increased significantly since. In 2017, the state once again issued Opinions on Strengthening Cultivated Land Protection and Improving the Balance of Occupation and Compensation. The opinions once again emphasized the “trinity” protection system of cultivated land and required all regions to implement the strictest cultivated land protection system. From 2015 to 2022, the cultivated land contraction pattern gradually changed into a belt contraction pattern, while the cultivated land growth pattern changed from a belt growth pattern to a plane growth pattern. Under the strict cultivated land protection system, cultivated land in China has seen a remarkable growth trend. Obviously, the growth and contraction in cultivated land in China have shown the characteristics of repeated alternating changes. With the change in the cultivated land system in China, cultivated land in China presented a zonal growth structure with dot growth as auxiliary, and the zonal growth gradually changed into a planar growth pattern. Cultivated land in China also presents a new pattern of cultivated land contraction, which is mainly planar and supplemented by dots. The planar contraction structure gradually changed into a new pattern of belt contraction and shows a trend in which cultivated land growth is stronger than cultivated land contraction.

Distribution in the kernel density for the growth and shrinkage of cropland in China, make with ArcGIS 10.2:https://www.arcgis.com/.

In order to further describe the trend in the contraction and growth of cultivated land in China in detail, we used the standard deviation ellipse tool in ArcGIS10.2 to carry out segmented analysis on the change track of the cultivated land from 1990 to 2022 (Fig.5) in order to depict the change track for the future growth and contraction of cultivated land in China. First, the center of gravity of cultivated land contraction moved to the northeast, then to the south, and then to the northwest. It showed a shrinking trend in the cultivated land across the “Hu–Huanyong Line.” The center of gravity of the cultivated land growth moved southward first, then northwestward, and then retreated southeastward. The center of gravity of the cultivated land growth presented an obvious southeastward moving trend. The growth and contraction in the cultivated land showed reverse trends of development. Secondly, from the perspective of the standard deviation ellipse change, there was no obvious difference in the major axis, minor axis, area, and direction of the cultivated land contraction in China from 1990 to 2005, mainly moving in the northeast direction. The contraction of cultivated land was relatively balanced, mainly concentrated in Beijing–Tianjin–Hebei, the Central Plains, and Northeast China. From 2005 to 2010, industry in Northeast China experienced a depression, and industries in Beijing, Tianjin, Hebei, the Central Plains, and other regions began to grow, and a large amount of cultivated land was occupied by urban construction and industrial development. During this period, the major axis of the cultivated land contraction ellipse became shorter, and the center of gravity moved to the southwest, resulting in the obvious southward movement of the ellipse. In 2008, the government proposed to implement the strictest cultivated land protection system and promulgated relevant laws and regulations. From 2010 to 2015, the major axis and minor axis of the cultivated land contraction ellipse became shorter, and the trend in the cultivated land contraction was obviously inhibited. However, from 2015 to 2022, the major and minor axes of the cultivated land contraction ellipse increased significantly, and the center of gravity moved westward significantly, showing a trend of cultivated land contraction crossing the “Hu–Huanyong Line.” The center of gravity of the cultivated land contraction moved to the periphery of the Chengdu–Chongqing area. This is also closely related to the gradual shift in the focus of industrial development to western China. With China’s western development strategy, the cultivated land around the Chengdu–Chongqing area has also shown an obvious shrinking trend.

Growth and shrinkage trends of cropland in China, make with ArcGIS 10.2:https://www.arcgis.com/.

The major axis, the minor axis, the area, and the direction of the ellipse of cultivated land growth have obviously changed (Fig.5). The major axis, minor axis, and area of cultivated land growth trajectory are larger than those of the contraction trajectory, which indicates that the cultivated land growth scope is relatively dispersed. From 1990 to 2000, the direction in the cultivated land growth and contraction ellipse was basically the same. However, the X axis of cultivated land growth became longer, and the center of gravity of cultivated land growth shifted from the northeast to the northwest. With the introduction of the new Land Management Law in 1998, the land policy of occupation and compensation balance was introduced. Since 2000, the growth track of cultivated land has obviously shifted to the northwest and southwest of China, and the growth center has obviously shifted westward. With the further support of the land policy of a balance between occupation and compensation, the focus of cultivated land growth from 2005 to 2010 was further shifted to Xinjiang, Inner Mongolia, and other economically underdeveloped remote areas. In 2008, the State Council issued the Circular on Promoting Economical and Intensive Land Use. The Third Plenary Session of the Seventeenth Central Committee of the Communist Party of China adopted the Decision on Several Major Issues Concerning Promoting Rural Reform and Development. It is stipulated that a strict and standardized rural land management system should be improved to protect cultivated land and adhere to the red line of 1.8 billion mu of cultivated land. These special laws, regulations, and policies formulated for the protection of cultivated land have greatly promoted the growth of cultivated land. From 2010, the growth center of cultivated land in China began to move to the developed provinces in the southeast coast. After 2010, the growth track of cultivated land moved southward. In 2015, the demarcation of permanent basic cultivated land began, and the policy of cultivated land occupation and compensation balance was improved from 2017 to 2018.The center of gravity of the cultivated land growth completely shifted to the south, and the cultivated land growth in northwest and northeast China slowed. The southeast has become the new center of arable land growth, including Guangdong, Fujian, Zhejiang, and other southeast coastal provinces. To summarize, China’s cultivated land contraction shows a trend of moving westward across the “Hu–Huanyong Line”, and cultivated land growth showed a trend of moving southeast across the “Hu–Huanyong Line”. In the process of cultivated land growth and contraction, industrialization, urbanization, and corresponding national land policies in China have played an obvious driving role.

Maintaining a dynamic balance of cultivated land is the fundamental guarantee to solve the problem of food security, and the policy of cultivated land protection plays an important role in this. From the above research results, the spatial distribution characteristics of the cultivated land growth and contraction in China’s cities are obviously different. The evolution trend of cultivated land is also highly consistent with the urbanization construction stage of each region. The core factor that leads to the difference in cultivated land in different regions lies in the national land policy. Urbanization and industrialization must also depend on national land policy, and the speed and scale of land supply will also directly affect the speed and scale of urbanization and industrialization. Based on this, the increase or decrease in urban cultivated land is also significantly related to urbanization and industrialization. Existing studies mainly analyze the changes in cultivated land growth from the aspects of topography, climate, economy, location, and national policy46–48. Few scholars have analyzed the change in cultivated land in China from the perspective of urban development and construction. Therefore, this study selected the urban development indicators related to urbanization and industrialization to explore the impact of urbanization and industrialization on cultivated land change in China. This study explored the main factors affecting the spatial distribution of urban cultivated land’s increase and decrease in China from the aspects of urban population size, economic level, industrial and agricultural scale, and other land use scales. This study provides a basis for policy making to deal with the contraction in cultivated urban land caused by excessive urbanization and industrialization. We used the correlation analysis and regression analysis in SPSS19.0 software. We analyzed the impact of urbanization on the growth and contraction in urban cultivated land in China, such as the urban population scale, economic level, industrial structure, and other types of land use scales, and constructed a multivariate explanatory model for the growth and contraction in urban cultivated land in China. First, we used correlation analysis to screen out the variables that were highly related to the change in cultivated land in China. Stepwise regression was used to screen variables with multicollinearity and exclude variables with lower explanations from the model. Then, we carried out multiple linear regression analysis between the significantly related variables and the scale of urban cultivated land. The“forced entry”analysis model was adopted to gradually eliminate the influencing factors with weak collinearity and low correlation such as urban tourism, urban construction land area, and urban real estate development investment. Finally, the key variables with a high correlation degree, strong fitting degree, and high collinearity with cultivated land change were obtained (Table2).

Multivariate linear regression analysis of cropland scale and its influencing factors in Chinese cities.

Standardized residual histogram, make with SPSS 19.0:https://www.spss.com.hk/.

The urban population, urban economy, agriculture and industry, urban emissions, and other types of urban land are all significantly related to the increase and decrease in the urban cultivated land area. First, the natural population growth rate has the most significant effect on the increase and decrease in the urban cultivated area. Under the condition that other the independent variables remain unchanged, the cultivated area will decrease by 248.495 square kilometers for every 1‰ increase in the natural growth rate of the urban population. Properly promoting the natural growth of the urban population is conducive to the growth in the urban cultivated land area. However, since 1963, China’s national natural population growth rate has continued to decline, with a national natural population growth rate of minus 1.5‰ in 2023. It is relatively difficult to achieve a positive growth rate in the natural population nationwide. The continuous decline in the natural population growth rate has also become one of the main reasons for the continuous reduction in cultivated land. In addition, the urban GDP per capita significantly inhibited the growth in cultivated land area. When the per capita GDP of the city increases by CNY 10,000, the urban cultivated land decreases by 0.025 square kilometers. The more developed the urban economy, the higher the per capita GDP, which further compresses the cultivated land, which provides a relatively low income. Cultivated land is squeezed by other high-income spaces, and the cultivated area is significantly reduced. Obviously, a rapid improvement in the urban economic level occupies a large area of cultivated land. Local governments need to pay attention to the amount of cultivated land and quality while developing a local economy. In addition, the number of urban industries also showed a significant negative correlation with the cultivated land area. For every increase in the number of industrial enterprises in a city, the urban cultivated area shrinks by 0.497 square kilometers. The more significant the growth in the urban industrial scale, the more obvious the contraction in the urban cultivated area. Local governments should eliminate inefficient industrial enterprises with low production capacity and low output efficiency in time and revitalize inefficient urban industrial land. Local governments should properly control the occupation of basic cultivated land by new industrial land, which will help the growth in urban cultivated land. In addition to the replacement of urban cultivated land by industrial land, our study also found that urban residential land and landfill land have caused a decrease in urban cultivated land. For every 1 square kilometer of residential land added to the city, the city loses 23.560 square kilometers of cultivated land. The scale of cultivated land destruction is very significant. In the era of real estate as the pillar industry of urbanization in China, a large amount of residential land has occupied cultivated land, developing it into real estate. Local governments should pay attention to protecting cultivated land in the process of subsequent urban development and construction, to effectively prevent more cultivated land from being occupied by real estate. In addition, with the increase in the urban resident population, the scale of landfills with urban domestic waste becomes larger. These landfill sites are generally located in suburban areas. Landfill occupies cultivated land itself and also affects the growth of crops in the surrounding cultivated land. Large-scale domestic waste landfills also have a significant squeezing effect on the scale of cultivated land. Finally, we also found that the size of cultivated land was related to the concentration of fine particles in the urban air. The lower the concentration of fine particles in the urban air, the larger the cultivated land scale. Obviously, a large amount of cultivated land helps to absorb some fine particles, purify urban air, and improve urban air quality.

In addition, we also found factors that promoted growth in cultivated areas. The total urban registered population, urban primary industry employees, urban forest area, and urban and rural road area were positively correlated with the cultivated land area. The urban registered population is correlated with the total amount of urban cultivated land. The higher the registered population, the more cultivated land ownership should continue to increase, to ensure the basic food security of the registered population. In addition, in the process of rapid urbanization in China, a large number of rural people have entered the city to work. The scale of employees in the primary industry has decreased greatly, resulting in a large amount of cultivated land in rural areas being abandoned. Appropriate stimulation of the scale of employees in the primary industry and an increase in the wage level of employees in the primary industry are conducive to the growth in the cultivated land scale. The increase in the urban forest area and in urban and rural road area also contributed to the increase in the cultivated area. Forests can introduce water resources, which are conducive to cultivated land. Increases in the forest area and cultivated land scale mutually promote each other. Finally, we were surprised to find that the increase in the urban and rural road areas contributed to the increase in cultivated areas. The construction of large-scale cement roads for rural areas can help large-scale agricultural machinery and equipment to carry out large-scale farming and can help abandoned cultivated land to be developed again. Local governments should further strengthen infrastructure construction such as urban and rural roads. Reducing the cost of the commuting time between cities and rural areas can help increase the scale of cultivated land in rural areas.

To summarize, the urban population size, economic level, agricultural and industrial scale, and other types of land are the main factors affecting the distribution of urban cultivated land growth and contraction in China. These influencing factors have obvious inhibition or promotion effects on cultivated areas, and any change in the influencing factors in the explanatory model causes the cultivated area to fluctuate. China’s urban local governments should actively control the relevant variables suitable for their own development in combination with the influencing factors of the explanatory model. Combined with relevant impact indicators, the government should formulate corresponding policies for cultivated land protection and restoration. Only in this way can we firmly maintain the red line of 1.8 billion mu of cultivated land and gradually build all permanent basic cultivated land into high-standard cultivated land.

Urbanization brings economic prosperity and employment opportunities, providing more space for farmers to develop51. The decline in the population engaged in agriculture will also pose new challenges to the protection and use of farmland. At the same time, urbanization also requires a large number of residential, commercial, and industrial parks. The rapid expansion of urban construction land conflicts with the protection of cultivated land52. Under the dual pressure of cultivated land occupation and rural population transfer, China’s urban cultivated land protection needs improvement53. This study found that urbanization indicators such as the urban population size and economic level have a significant impact on the cultivated land’s contraction and growth. China’s future urbanization construction should pay full attention to cultivated land protection. National and local governments should incorporate cultivated land protection into future urban construction planning programs. Protective measures should be erected in fixed areas between urban construction areas and cultivated land. In the planning and construction plan, strict supervision areas should be designated for cultivated land, and specific preventive measures should be formulated. The government should ensure the harmonious unity of cultivated land and the urban environment in the future development and construction of cities. In addition, local governments in the process of urbanization need to actively develop new mechanisms for land consolidation and deepen land system reform, especially in terms of the cultivated land occupation and compensation balance system, which has a significant impact on the increase and decrease in cultivated land. Local governments should clarify the legal obligations for cultivated land development, consolidation, and reclamation, implement the legal standards for compensation for cultivated land occupation, and ensure that the balance of cultivated land occupation and compensation in their own areas is in place. We need to establish a complete cultivated land reserve system and improve the relationship between urban economic development and cultivated land occupation. Local governments can set up a rating relationship between the cultivated land quality and grain yield potential to ensure the implementation of the urbanization process. Finally, local governments should continue to develop land consolidation industrialization and market development. Land development and consolidation institutions need to strictly manage cultivated land development and consolidation projects and actively promote the market-oriented development of cultivated land and consolidation projects through bidding. We need to actively encourage development and consolidation agencies to raise funds from multiple channels and aspects. According to the principle of who invests, who manages, who benefits, and preferential tax policies, we should mobilize the enthusiasm of developing land consolidation work, to ensure the balance of cultivated land occupation and compensation in this area.

After decades of rapid industrialization, China has become a world manufacturing power. While industry drives China’s urban economic growth, it has also destroyed a large amount of cultivated land54. The trend in cultivated land shrinking westward is also highly consistent with the trend in China’s industrial westward shift. As the state put forward the strategy of developing the western region, a large number of industries began to shift to the central and western regions of China55. Rapid industrialization also leads to the conversion of large numbers of agricultural workers into industrial workers and agricultural land into industrial land56. According to the above research, the number of industrial enterprises is negatively correlated with the scale of cultivated land. The more industrial enterprises there are, the less arable land there is. Local governments should carry out land remediation for enterprises with inefficient production capacity and low land utilization rates, eliminate inefficient industrial enterprises, rectify land damaged by production and construction, and increase the cultivated land area. In addition, industrialization also introduces land pollution and damage to the environment. Local governments should try to avoid cultivated land, especially high-quality cultivated land, when selecting sites for highly polluting industries and intensify the punishment and supervision of enterprises that pollute cultivated land. If enterprises seriously pollute cultivated land, enterprises should invest in restoring the same amount of cultivated land. Finally, the imminent reform of industrial automation production, the liberation of the redundant labor force, and the supplement and enhancement of the employment population scale of the primary industry will also contribute to the growth in the cultivated area.

Overall land use planning is the basic means for the Chinese government to regulate land57. We can forecast the future land demand scientifically and adjust the structure and quantity of all kinds of land by analyzing the present situation of land use and land potential, to balance the situation of land supply and demand comprehensively and achieve the purpose of the macro-control of land58. Urban planning is the overall design of the urban spatial layout and urban morphology based on the needs of urban economic and social development, with the premise of studying urban density and implemented through urban land use planning59. We must link urban planning with the overall land use planning, implement the basic national policy of “cherish and rationally use land and effectively protect cultivated land”, and establish a scientific development concept of the coordinated development of urbanization and cultivated land protection. Local governments need to optimize urban land use structure and layout and adopt engineering technology, land property rights adjustment, and other measures to carry out necessary transformation activities on inefficient urban land, from scattered farmland development and consolidation to the centralized comprehensive improvement in mountains, rivers, roads, forests, and villages. From the results of the study, an appropriate increase in roads, forests, and residential areas will contribute to the growth in the cultivated area. The transformation from simple supplementary cultivated land to the constructive protection of cultivated land combined with the promotion of new rural construction and coordinated urban and rural development will improve the economic benefits and production efficiency of cultivated land and promote the qualitative improvement in the comprehensive benefits of cultivated land. In terms of specific implementation, we should comprehensively consider many factors such as the regional cultivated land development potential, the urbanization level, and the cultivated land remediation willingness, carry out comprehensive analysis and evaluation, and determine remediation measures and contents according to local conditions.

China’s population base is large, and cultivated land resources are extremely scarce60. How to make good use of 9% of the world’s cultivated land to feed 20% of the world’s population sustainably is a problem of concern to China and the world. This study was based on the data of the cultivated land area change in China from 1990 to 2022. From the perspective of the spatial pattern, evolution trend, and driving factors of urban cultivated land contraction and growth in China, this research determined the change characteristics of urban cultivated land contraction and growth in China.

China’s cultivated land shows that the trend of growth is stronger than the contraction in cultivated land. The land contraction shows a trend of crossing the “Hu–Huanyong Line” and moving westward, and the center of gravity of the land contraction has shifted to the periphery of the Chengdu–Chongqing area. The growth in cultivated land shows a trend of moving southeast across the “Hu–Huanyong Line,” with developed provinces such as Guangdong, Fujian, and Zhejiang becoming new centers of cultivated land growth. In the process of cultivated land growth and contraction, China’s urban industrialization, urbanization, and the corresponding national land policy play an obvious driving role.

The increase or decrease in the cultivated land area is significantly related to the urban population scale, economic level, agricultural scale, industrial structure, and other types of land scale. These influencing factors have an obvious inhibition or promotion effect on the change in the cultivated land area.

In order to keep the red line of 1.8 billion mu of cultivated land in China, all regions of China need to pay attention to the consolidation and quality improvement of cultivated land. Especially in the central and western regions, with the development of the economy at the same time, more attention should be paid to the amount of cultivated land resources not just the urbanization construction, regardless of the regional food security. The importance of a cultivated land protection policy is as follows: First, China needs to optimize its cultivated land spatial pattern with land spatial planning. In the past 30 years, the cultivated land gravity center in China has been continuously moving to the northwest, which has led to a decrease in the suitability of cultivated land and a trend of accelerating the migration of the cultivated land’s gravity center. Climate conditions in Northwest China will inevitably lead to a further reduction in the suitability of cultivated land. Therefore, it is necessary to optimize the spatial pattern of cultivated land through land spatial planning and curb the large spatial change in cultivated land. China needs to prioritize existing arable land with high suitability as permanent basic farmland, strengthen the protection of arable land, and control the occupation of arable land by urban construction land. Secondly, the state needs to strengthen the macro-guidance and control of the policy of the"balance of occupation and compensation". In 2017, the state began to balance cultivated land occupation and compensation across provinces, but due to the large differences in economic development between the east and west and the north and south, under the trend of economic interest, the balance of inter-provincial occupation and compensation leads to a large number of cultivated lands in economically poorer areas such as the northwest, northeast, and southwest of China. This phenomenon is likely to accelerate the spatial transfer of cultivated land, reduce the quality of cultivated land, and increase the risk of cultivated land contraction. Therefore, the state should strengthen the macro-control and overall planning of the implementation of the “balance of occupation and compensation” policy. Finally, the implementation of the cultivated land use and protection policy needs to further improve its system design and structural optimization. China needs to actively control and follow up the dynamic characteristics of and regional differences in cultivated land and adopt differentiated policy guidance measures. The cultivated land utilization mode should be changed from a short-term excessive utilization to a long-term conservation utilization. Local governments need to focus on promoting the intensive and economical use of cultivated land and further scientifically optimize cultivated land protection decision making and policy implementation.

This study creatively converted the raster data of land cover in China into vector data. We first graphically analyzed the spatial variation characteristics and evolution trend of cultivated land in China over the past 30 years and analyzed the driving factors affecting the growth and contraction of cultivated land from the perspective of urbanization and industrialization. However, there are still many factors that affect the change in cultivated land, and this study was limited to the indicators related to urbanization and industrialization. Soil fertility, irrigation conditions, terrain conditions, climate conditions, the mechanized farming level, and the urbanization stage are all related to the change in the cultivated land scale. Next, we will analyze the trend of cultivated land change in China from the perspective of the spatiotemporal change in the cultivated land quality, to provide scientific support for different local governments to formulate refined cultivated land protection policies and ensure food security but also provide experience for other countries to use for reference.