Neuromorphic computing has got more attention in various tasks during recent years. The main goal of this field is to explore neural functionality in the brain. The studies of spiking neurons and Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) are vital to understand how brain-inspired neural system work. In this paper, the modified Fitzhugh-Nagumo (FHN) model is proposed based on Coordinate Rotation Digital Computer (CORDIC) algorithm to emulate biological behaviors of the original neuron model. The presented CORDIC method eliminates multipliers by using adder and shifter operations, which provides efficient digital hardware implementation of the FHN model. Error analysis and dynamic assessments confirm that the CORDIC-based FHN model is capable to follow the biological behaviors of the original model with high accuracy. Additionally, to further check the compatibility of the CORDIC-based FHN model with the original model, chaotic behaviors of both models on bifurcation and maximum Lyapunov exponent diagrams are investigated. Considering that the CORDIC-based FHN model has a high compatibility with the original model, its superiority over the original model is the possibility of hardware implementation with low power consumption. To analyze further, two cost functions are defined based on operation frequency, power, and error to confirm the efficiency of the proposed hardware compared to previous studies. As a result of its low power consumption, minimal error rates, and high-frequency capabilities, the proposed hardware demonstrates effectiveness and utility across a range of applications, including the simulation of learning processes in the nervous system that are based on nonlinear and chaotic behaviors.

Neuromorphic computing, which was presented by Carver Mead, is a highly demanding field among researchers during these years [1]. The studies have focused on understanding and implementing the structure and functions of the brain, especially Central Nervous system (CNS) [2]. In fact, the CNS consists of numerous neurons and synapses, and also there are significant connections between them as a complex network. Thus, Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) have been introduced for detailed understanding of how the CNS performs and transmits information by spikes. Due to the real biological behavior of neurons, which be mimicked by SNNs, these networks have been more popular than Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs), which are bio-inspired systems [3,4]. Additionally, SNNs are employed in a wide range of practical applications like image classification [5], pattern recognition [6], robotic control [7], and medical diagnosis [8]. Since the neuron is the most fundamental component of the CNS, the behavior of the single neuron is essential.

To study the dynamical spiking behaviors of a neuron, different mathematical models have been proposed for SNNs [9–16]. These models are typically represented by ordinary differential equations (ODEs) with diverse levels of factors, including the computational complexity and the biological accuracy. It should be noted that a trade-off exists between both factors, so the models with more accuracy require more computational capacity. In general, there are two categories for all spiking neurons, including spike-based and conductance-based models [17,18]. For producing a response in conductance-based models, the biological neuron requires high accuracy with a high cost. The most famous model in the family is Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) [9], which employs four differential equations to create all behaviors of the spiking neuron. Although the HH model provides complete details of the neural behaviors by using the high physiological characteristics, simulations of the large-scale neuron population of the model are not applicable. The second group of the spiking neuron models is spike-based models, which are described by fewer biological parameters, so the complexity of them is extremely lower. Hence, one of the popular models in this group is FitzHugh-Nagumo (FHN) [13], which is simplified from the HH model and represented by two differential equations. For considering the FHN model, having only one nonlinear term to capture neural spiking behaviors with less computational complexity is a main reason to apply it in the large-scale networks. Additionally, one of the most efficiency-focused dynamic models is the FHN model because it can reproduce all features of the spiking neuron. Moreover, the model is capable of generating chaotic behaviors in special values of the external stimulus [19]. Thus, the FHN model can be a successful candidate for hardware implementation, especially in the large neuron populations [20].

The first approach is analog circuits, which employ electrical components to resemble the behaviors of the neuron. The crucial benefits of the method are high performance, well development, and acceptable efficiency. Although the method is applicable based on the aforementioned advantages, it suffers from extended development time and its inflexibility [1,21–23].

The digital method [1,24,25] is the second approach, which improves the drawbacks of the analog circuits, so it is flexible to implement digital hardware of the neuron models with a short device development time. In addition, the impact of noise and error in this approach is less than in analog circuits. On the other hand, the method requires a large area with more power consumption and also slower computations in comparison to another method. During the last few years, using the digital platforms with reconfigurable features has been highly demanding to develop spiking neuron models in the neuromorphic domain. For this reason, Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) [26,27] has been a popular platform to implement digital hardware in this area. In order to parallel imitate neural behaviors, the FPGA-based spiking neural networks make use of digital computing. Thus, the researchers have been motivated to design digital systems by the FPGA platform because of some notable advantages of it, including high speed, high accuracy, flexibility, routing resources, and re-configurability. In contrast, consuming a large area and high power are drawbacks of the approach [28–30].

To accurately evaluate the FHN neuron model, the dynamical behaviors are explored from different mathematical and quantitative perspectives. The analysis confirms the power of the approximated model to reproduce dynamic behaviors as the original model. Researchers from a variety of fields have been interested in chaos since it is a nonlinear phenomenon [31]. Generally, chaotic systems are complex, unpredictable, and sensitive to initial conditions of the system. Examining and analyzing the chaotic behavior in neuron models is important for a number of reasons. The most significant ones of them are neurological diseases, which are related to chaotic behavior and other abnormalities in neural dynamics. By studying chaos, researchers can also better understand how neurons receive information, adapt to changes, and generate complicated behaviors like learning [32]. Chaos, which emerges when the model is stimulated by an externally periodic current, is one of the main reasons why researchers employ the FHN model. A number of the publications concentrate on using various types of externally applied stimuli, including sinusoidal current [21] and hyperbolic tangent stimulus [33]. In general, when the input parameters are modified, the bifurcation diagram, maximum Lyapunov exponent, phase plane, and time-domain waveforms are utilized to visually define chaotic behaviors in the original and CORDIC FHN models. In this paper, we focus more on the dynamical behavior of the proposed FHN model, especially the chaotic behavior. First, we numerically investigate the dynamical behaviors of both models based on the fixed input current. Next, both models are constructed using the sinusoidal stimulus when the values of the frequency and amplitude are altered. Finally, the proposed and original models are compared based on the simulation [19,34–37].

Several studies have addressed the FPGA-based implementation of the FHN neuron model during these years [20,38–45]. The majority of them proposed multiplierless methods to approximate the polynomial nonlinear term by low-cost and simple operations in the original FHN model. The main goals of the presented papers were improving some limitations of using the FPGA platform to realize the spiking neural models. Thus, increasing speed and accuracy and also reducing hardware resources and power consumption, especially in large-scale digital systems, are significant challenges for FPGA-based digital design. It is considered that each modified model was suggested for addressing some of the challenges. For this goal, the presented model in [40] proposed a FHN model that uses hyperbolic functions to implement the dynamic behaviors of the neuron on the FPGA platform. Although realizing the multiplierless FHN model on FPGA for the first time was the novelty of this work, it was only explored in terms of the accuracy of the neural behaviors and hardware resource costs in comparison with the original model. The modified FHN model in [41] used a Piece-Wise Linear (PWL) function to approximate the polynomial nonlinear term of the original model. In addition, the model employed a single astrocyte [46] with the FHN model to achieve an efficient hardware implementation. In [42], the FHN model was approximated by a special type of hyperbolic function to produce the bursting spiking pattern with acceptable results. However, the speed of this work was compared with the original FHN model. The suggested method in [20] used the sine function to remove the nonlinear term of the FHN neuron model. In order to optimize the hardware implementation cost, it was realized by employing the CORDIC IP-Core generator of the FPGA. It is worth noting that employing IP cores in the FPGA family has restrictions, so the realization of the large-scale digital system may be an overhead cost. Moreover, this work was investigated in three aspects of hardware design, including accuracy, maximum frequency, and power consumption. In [45], the modified FHN model, which used a combination of the Piece-Wise Linear (PWL) technique and a base-2 function, was used to implement efficient digital hardware on the FPGA platform.

This paper presents an FPGA-based hardware implementation of the modified FHN neuron model. For this reason, the CORDIC algorithm [47–49] is applied to replace the cubic-polynomial nonlinear term of the original FHN model with simple operations like Shifts and ADDs. Due to the CORDIC algorithm, the computational hardware cost and power consumption are reduced with increasing the maximum frequency. The notable contribution of this work is employing the CORDIC function to eliminate multipliers in the original FHN model for the first time. Although the paper in [20] presented a simple FHN model based on the CORDIC approach, the hardware implementation of the model was realized by utilizing the CORDIC IP-Core on FPGA. Based on the results, the suggested model reproduces the behavioral dynamics of the neuron, such as chaos, and also it can imitate the original FHN model in various states. Moreover, for further assessments, we introduce two cost functions based on three factors to compare the proposed model with other similar works and the original model. As a result, the high-accuracy and low-power CORDIC-based FHN model will be implemented on the FPGA platform. Moreover, because of using simple operations instead of the multipliers, the speed of the proposed system will be higher than the original FHN model. According to the aforementioned benefits of the proposed model, which is applied in the proposed network, it is capable of realizing the large-scale digital implementation.

The rest of this paper is divided into the following sections. In second section, the original FHN model is explained. The proposed model is introduced based on the CORDIC algorithm in third section. The details of time domain, dynamic analysis, chaotic behaviors, and the proposed network are evaluated in fourth section. The hardware implementation of the modified FHN model with the proposed architecture is presented in fifth section. The result of digital implementation is discussed and compared in sixth section. Finally, the conclusion of the work is covered in seventh section.

Differential equations can be used to model and define the activity of neurons by collecting numerous aspects of the neuron’s response to stimuli. One example of such a model is the Fitzhugh-Nagumo (FHN) model [13], which is a prototype of an excitable system. The model is a known spiking neuron that was initially derived from the Hodgkin-Huxley model. The original FHN model is introduced by some parameters, and the dynamical system is represented by the following equations.

whereVandWrepresent the membrane potential of the neuron and the membrane recovery variable, respectively. Furthermore, three parameters,a,b, andT, are the control parameters, which are fixed dimensionless parameters of the neuron. Finally, the parameterIinis an input applied current for the voltage equation. Based on the FHN neuron equations, a nonlinear term can cause some problems for hardware implementation, including diminishing performance and implementation efficiency, reducing frequency or speed of hardware, and rising the number of resources. Consequently, the modified FHN model, which is introduced in the next section, is a way to solve the problems and achieve a system with low cost, high speed, and acceptable performance.

Wheremcan be chosen as −1, 0, or 1 defines a hyperbolic, linear, and circular coordinate system, respectively. The direction of the iteration is shown byμi.

Which can be simplified by the CORDIC algorithm if using multiplication in two stages. For this reason, we use the multiplication in linear vectoring mode. At the first stage, the multiplication in parentheses is approximated, and then the result of the first stage is multiplied by the CORDIC algorithm. A CORDIC implementation of the multiplication is given by pseudocode, which is shown inFig 1, wherex,y,z,i, andnrepresent the multiplicand, the multiplier, the product, the iteration number, and the CORDIC iteration number, respectively. Choosing the number of iterations is the significant part of the CORDIC algorithm because accuracy and resource consumption in digital hardware implementation depend on them. Hence, we calculated two errors, includingMAEandnRMSE, which are introduced in following section, based on different iteration numbers for the nonlinear term of the FHN model inTable 1. This table clearly indicates that reducing the iteration number increases both errors. On the other hand, the accuracy of the algorithm will be high if the number of iterations is chosen to be a big value, but it causes an increase in the number of resources consumed. In addition, we plot both errors, which are illustrated inFig 2, based on various iteration numbers.Fig 2demonstrates that a notable drop innRMSEhappens when the number of iterations is around 16. Furthermore, we achieved the best number of iterations, which is 16, in each stage. The iteration number in the algorithm starts at −7 and finishes at +8. We reformulate the original FHN model as follows to present the proposed approach.

Replacing the nonlinear term in the original model,V3, with the CORDIC function is the first step to developing the new method. According toFig 3, polynomial and CORDIC functions display similar characteristics with small error. In fact, creating a new FHN model by applying the method is possible to approximate the original FHN model with the smallest errors. As a result, utilizing the approximation helps us to simplify multiplication in the main model by add and shift operations.

To evaluate two FHN models, including the original and proposed models, they must be tested in the time domain by performing dynamical analysis. Additionally, different types of errors must be measured to validate the proposed model.

Simulation membrane potential results for the original FHN model and the proposed model based on different input currents (Iin) and time constants (T) are illustrated inFig 3. They show that the modified model can follow the behaviors of the original model successfully, and also it produces spiking patterns with a high degree of similarity. It is essential to calculate the difference between the proposed and original model when the new model is introduced. Thus, we must measure errors from a spiking timing perspective to compare it with other models. In this section, we explain four equations, which were used a lot in the previous papers, to calculate errors between original and CORDIC-based FHN models.

Wheren,VFHN,andVCORDICare the discrete points and the membrane potential values for the original and CORDIC-based FHN models, respectively (Fig 4).

(b) Iin=0.5 mA and T = 12.5 ms. (c) Iin=0.5 mA and T = 30 ms. (d) Iin=1 mA and T = 5 ms. (e) Iin=1 mA and T = 12.5 ms. (f) Iin=1 mA and T = 30 ms. (g) Iin=2 mA and T = 5 ms. (h) Iin=2 mA and T = 12.5 ms. (i) Iin=2 mA and T = 30 ms.

Here, VmaxandVminare the maximum and minimum values of membrane potential in the original FHN model.

WhereCOVandσare covariance and standard deviation, respectively. The Corr value should be close to one because it shows that there is high dependence between both models. It should be pointed out that the value of errors must be small. It means that the spike patterns of VFHNand VCORDICwill become more similar when error values drop. For more verification of our suggested model, we calculate four errors, includingMAE,RMSE,nRMSE, andCorr, inTable 2. Furthermore,Table 2demonstrates a comparison between types of presented FHN models based on the error levels. As can be seen in the table, the error values in our model are lower than in other similar works. Thus, the CORDIC-based FHN model is more accurate than other previous models based on error levels in various criteria.

For determining the stability and types of equilibrium points, the determinant (Δ) and time constant (τ) of the Jacobian matrix must be acquired. Furthermore, thisτis the sum ofAandDin the Jacobian matrix. In terms of eigenvalues, there are four states of fixed points, including spiral source, nodal sink, spiral sink, and saddle point. The sign ofτplays a key role in recognizing the stability of the points. The system will be stable ifτis less than zero, and unstable otherwise.Table 3depicts the numerical results of the dynamical analysis according to the Equations (9)–(14) at varying input currents. FromTable 3, it is clear that the proposed method closely follows the original FHN in terms of the equilibrium points, Jacobian matrix values, and the types of their behaviors. TheV-Wphase portrait of both the original and CORDIC-based FHN models is shown inFig 5. From the trajectory diagrams, it can be seen that the behaviors around the equilibrium points are similar at various input currents. For further considering the dynamic analysis, we plot the Hopf bifurcation, which occurs around the fixed point if a certain parameter changes the stability of the equilibrium point. The Hopf bifurcation plot of the original and proposed FHN model is shown inFig 6. According toFig 6, a limit cycle appears around the fixed point when the input current varies from0.5 mAto1.5 mA. Additionally, both the original and proposed FHN models have the same behavior in the plot. Therefore, the excitability of the neuron is not altered by applying the proposed model to implement the FHN neuron.

whereIinand f refer to the amplitude and frequency of the input stimulus, respectively. During the analysis of the system, varying bothIinandfwill be used to present the simulation results. It is important to note that theOde45algorithm is applied to solve the equation in Matlab software, and also the initial condition is equal to zero for both variables.

A bifurcation diagram is an effective tool for visualizing how a qualitative behavior of the nonlinear system varies when a parameter is changed [21,36,37]. Based on the diagram, some significant data, including stability, period-doubling, periodic window, and chaos, are extracted and visible. To evaluate both the original and CORDIC-based FHN models based on the 1D bifurcation diagram, the frequency and amplitude of the external stimulus are selected asf=0to0.3 HzandIin= 0–2 mA, respectively.Fig 7exhibits the bifurcation diagram for three different frequency values when the amplitude (Iin) of sinusoidal current input is changed from0to2 mA. The period-doubling behavior is produced forf=0.01because2-period and4-period cycles are seen inFig 7a. Furthermore, there are chaotic behaviors forf=0.13andf=0.16 Hzwhen the parameterIinis varied (Figs 7band7c). InFig 8, the bifurcation plot for three amplitude values (Iin= 1, 1.2, and1.4 mA) is displayed when the frequency is varied from0to0.3 Hz. Chaotic behaviors are limited to a particular frequency range based on the plot. forIin= 1and1.2 mA. By comparison, the bifurcation diagrams in both original and proposed FHN models show that the CORDIC-based FHN model accurately produces behaviors that are similar to the original model.

Tables 4and5illustrate the results of calculating the errors forFigs 7and8, respectively. By raising the number of iterations, the errors are reduced from the tables, so theMLEmap of both models is significantly impacted by the number of iterations. In fact, the main reason for this difference between them is the number of iterations in the CORDIC algorithm, which is what distinguishes the original and perturbed initial conditions at the start of the Lyapunov exponent algorithm. Consequently, in disregard of the small variation between models, the modified FHN model has similar behaviors to the original model.

The last method to visually identify chaos in the dynamical system is using the phase plane based on the membrane and recovery voltages. Additionally, applying the time-domain plot for membrane potential is the simplest technique to evaluate the behaviors of the system.Fig 9illustrates phase plane and time-domain waveforms for the original and modified FHN models for various amplitude and frequency values of external sinusoidal current. Whenf=0.01 HzandIin=1 mAare selected, the periodic spiking behaviors are seen for both plots inFig 9a. Furthermore, chaotic behaviors emerged whenf=0.13 HzandIin= 1 mAwere chosen for the external stimulus parameters (Fig 9b). Finally, the period-doubling spikes are generated if the sinusoidal input applies thef=0.16 HzandIin= 1 mA(Fig 9c). Thus,Fig 9demonstrates that both original and CORDIC-based FHN models produce similar phase planes and time-domain signals.

(a)Iin= 1 mA,f = 0.01 Hz. (b)Iin= 1 mA,f = 0.16 Hz. (c)Iin= 1 mA,f = 0.13 mA.

According to simulation results of the bifurcation diagrams, maximum Lyapunov exponents, phase planes, and time-domain waveforms for both original and proposed FHN models in the presence of periodic stimulation, the CORDIC-based FHN model is able to completely follow the dynamical behaviors of the original FHN model. Therefore, the suggested model is an appropriate candidate for applying in hardware implementation because all multiplications are eliminated.

In this part, we generate two networks of 1000 randomly connected original and approximated FHN neurons to assess the efficiency of the CORDIC-based FHN neuron in large-scale networks. In both populations, neurons are linked randomly with a probability of0.1percent (0.1%). It means that each neuron in the networks has a random synaptic connection to100other neurons. Furthermore, it is estimated that80%of neurons function as excitatory, while the remaining20%serve an inhibitory role. In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed networks, an input current of0.5 mAis applied to the networks. Furthermore, the duration of the simulation phase was1200milliseconds. It is important to mention that the last1000milliseconds were cropped for analysis.Fig 10depicts the raster plot of the simulations of the networks in Matlab. The mean time discrepancy between all spike trains of the original model and the approximate model is5milliseconds. It is evident from this figure that the network behaviors of the CORDIC and original FHN models follow each other. In fact,Fig 10signifies a shared adaptive behavior between the original and approximate models. Therefore, the suggested network can function as a component of spiking neural networks (SNNs), which are utilized in particular applications.

This section describes a digital hardware implementation of the CORDIC-based FHN model by using FPGA. The hardware employs ADD and Shift operations to eliminate multipliers completely.

In the upper equations, we assess the different values of the step time (dt) to realize the best match between both models. Thus, the dt is selected by132,which is equal to5right shifts in the whole equation. The scheduling diagram of the original and modified FHN models is indicated inFig 11. Based on the figure, the blockacomputes the original membrane potential by using four multipliers. To achieve the multiplierless implementation, the fixed parameters multiplication must be replaced by shift operators. For the goal, the blockbutilizes the CORDIC function and arithmetic right shift operations to eliminate multipliers in the proposed model equation. The blockc, which includes two multipliers, calculates the original membrane recovery variable. The last block represents a diagram based on the right shift operations instead of multipliers. It is noteworthy that we just require right shifters for avoiding the multipliers in the proposed model because the fixed parameter multiplications are fractions. As a result, the CORDIC-based FHN model can be implemented multiplierless by using shift operations to reach the low-cost and high-speed hardware.

Generally, fixed-point form, which is a method of displaying numbers in digital systems, is applied in implementation by FPGA. For some important limitations, such as speed and resources in digital design by FPGA, the fixed-point arithmetic is the best choice to work them out. Therefore, fixed-point form utilizes low digital resources and raises speed in comparison with floating-point arithmetic during the implementation of the digital hardware. Determining the bit width of digital hardware is an essential step to achieve an efficient and low-cost digital system. For this reason, the range of whole variables and parameters should be calculated, and also considering the maximum shift operations is necessary. For the CORDIC-based FHN model, the range ofV, which is a membrane potential, is−2to+2. Also, membrane recovery,W, is within the range of−0.5to1.5. The other constant parameters containa,b, andT, whose values are0.8,0.7, and12.5, respectively. It is noticeable that the parameterTis written as1Tin the model, so the value of it is0.08. Therefore, they require at least3bits by considering a sign bit. Additionally, the CORDIC part needs to take the left shift into account instead of multiplication operations. The maximum left shift is obtained four times. Based on the calculation, the integer part requires7bits. On the other hand, the right shift operator is used to compute fraction parts for removing whole multiplications. The maximum right shift is selected by8to consider the value of the parameters, variable, and CORDIC part. To prevent any overflow during implementations of the digital hardware, we must regard the extra bit. Finally, the bit width of the digital system is assumed to be16bits, which includes8bits for the integer part and8bits for the fraction part. It should be noted that the digital system is realized based on fixed-point form with16bits for all parts of the system.

The proposed architecture, which is shown inFig 12includes five main blocks. It is designed according to the CORDIC-based FHN model formulas presented in Equation (4). The names of the blocksA,B,C,D, andEare input unit, CORDIC unit, pipeline unit, output unit, and control unit, respectively. The function of each block is explained with details in subsections.

(A) Input Unit. (B) CORDIC Unit. (C) Pipeline Unit (D) Output Unit. (E) Control Unit.

The blockAproduces essential data for the next block to activate the FHN neurons. For this reason, we transfer the fixed parameters and input current of the proposed model to registers.

The blockBconsists of two CORDIC stage parts, whose details are depicted inFig 13. The main duty of the unit is calculating the nonlinear term of the original FHN model based on the CORDIC function without utilizing multipliers. The input signal of the unit isV, a variable that will be produced by the pipeline unit. After entering the signal to the CORDIC stage1, the termV2emerges in the output of the first part. Next, employing the proposed method in the CORDIC Stage 2, the termV3is generated. Finally, the data, which is stored in the register (Reg5), will be transferred to block C.

This is the blockDthat acquires essential data from the previous block. In fact, the data includes the values of theVand W variables, which were generated by the Pipeline unit. The multiplexer (MUX) checks the selection gate after storing the data in two registers (RegVand RegW). If the process is completed, the final waves emerge in the output of the block. Otherwise, theVandWsignals are transferred to blocksEandC, respectively.

The major block of the architecture is the blockE, which controls the other units by generating the required signals. In the unit, two iteration numbers andCNT, which are defined inFig 13, are compared. If theCNTis less than the iteration number, the CORDIC unit is active. Otherwise, the pipeline unit is selected. Indeed, the CORDIC input is includedV[n+1]when the number of iterations is equal toCNT. It should be noted that the signalV[n+1]is provided by the Pipeline unit.

Based on the two CORDIC stages of the proposed architecture inFig 12, it is essential to observe the completed details of them. Thus, more details about how the CORDIC block, which is applied for both CORDIC stage1and CORDIC stage2, is implemented can be seen inFig 13. In the figure, the signalsX, Y, i,andZ(i+1)denote the multiplication, multiplier, iteration number, and product, respectively. First, the up-counter is responsible for counting the iteration of the CORDIC algorithm and producing the numbers, which are saved in theCNTvariable. There is a comparison between theCNTand the zero number to activate one of the shift registers. The first shift register on the left will be activated if theCNTis less than zero, and the right shift register will be chosen otherwise. Following that, a number is generated by the second left shift register using the output of the previous shift register and theYvariable. After that, they are transferred to adder and subtractor blocks to generateX(i + 1)andZ(i + 1). At the end of the architecture, the desired output (Z(i + 1)) is produced in two different states. For this reason, the value ofX(i)and the zero number are compared, and then one of the states will be selected. It is noticeable that theZvariable is equal to multiplying theXby theYvariable. Additionally, the CORDIC structure needs16iterations to perform completely and approximates the multiplication. Furthermore, the total iteration is32to produceV3in the CORDIC unit ofFig 12.

This section consists of results of the hardware implementation using the CORDIC-based FHN model, which was described in the previous sections. Hardware Description Language (VHDL) is applied to implement the scheduling diagrams of the CORDIC and original FHN models in order to validate the modified model. After that, the VHDL code is synthesized on a Virtex-4 FPGA platform in Xilinx ISE. Therefore, the regular tonic pattern of the proposed model in three cases are illustrated inFig 14. The figure shows that the CORDIC model correctly reproduces the similar behavior of the original model. According to the equations of the original model, it utilizes some multiplications, divisions, and a nonlinear term to realize the FHN model.

WhereMAEis a simulation error that is calculated inTable 2, and also the Freq and Power denote the maximum frequency and power consumption, which are obtained in hardware implementation. Considering both cost functions, the minimum values of them are our desired states. In other words, a rise in Freq and a decrease inMAEor power can reduce the cost functions.Table 8illustrates the results of employing the cost functions for all FHN works. From this table, it is clear that both cost functions for our work are less than other proposed methods. Therefore, the results ofTable 8indicate that the high-accuracy and low-power digital implementation is achieved when the CORDIC-based FHN model is applied. The main reason to propose our model is that the CORDIC algorithm hasn’t been implemented for the FHN model. Although the work in [20] presented a CORDIC approach, which used the CORDIC IP-Core of FPGA, to approximate the nonlinear term of the FHN model, we implement the CORDIC-based FHN model by only using Add and Shift operations. Due to the iterative process of the CORDIC algorithm, it was anticipated that the hardware resource of developing the digital system on FPGA wasn’t less than some methods. Nevertheless, the accuracy of the suggested model is more acceptable than other FHN models because the CORDIC function approximates the results by iterating the algorithm. Moreover, the algorithm is suitable for designing low-power digital hardware as it just utilizes ADD and Shift operations instead of nonlinear terms. Thus, the hardware implementation of the CORDIC-based FHN model is an appropriate option for digital design since it is low-power and highly precise.

A multiplierless FHN model has been presented and implemented on an FPGA by employing the CORDIC algorithm in this research. The applied CORDIC method benefits from adders and shifters to remove multiplications. The proposed CORDIC-based FHN neuron, by selecting the suitable number of iterations, accurately mimics the dynamical behavior of the original neural model, providing cost-efficient digital hardware. Additionally, we employed a sinusoidal input current to stimulate the FHN model, so chaotic behaviors were seen in certain values of the input parameters for both the original and proposed digital FHN models. According to the results of the hardware implementation on the FPGA platform, the low-power realization of the proposed model with high accuracy was achievable. It should be mentioned that we have introduced two cost functions for more assessment between the works in the area. The cost functions consist of maximum frequency, power consumption, and error. The results of cost functions proved that the FPGA-based digital implementation of the suggested FHN model is low-power and high-accuracy with acceptable speed. Therefore, due to the low power consumption, low error, and high frequency, the presented hardware is able to be effective and useful in various applications, including the modeling of learning of the nervous system based on nonlinear and chaotic behaviors.