This study aimed to determine the prevalence of social work services in outpatient fracture clinics, and the potential benefits and barriers to integrating these services as perceived by orthopaedic trauma surgeons.

Cross‐sectional survey of orthopaedic trauma surgeons.

A brief, anonymous, self‐administered online survey.

Of 88 respondents, 16% currently had dedicated social work services available at their clinic. Respondents expressed strong agreement that social workers could effectively address various patient needs, including assistance with intimate partner violence (88.6%), transportation (86.4%), home care (85.2%) and addictions support (81.8%). Respondents acknowledged the critical need for social work services in the fracture clinic, particularly in addressing employment, psychological support and housing crises.

This study was limited by a small sample size and possible selection bias. Due to the anonymous online distribution, determining the rate of response was not possible.

These findings underscore the potential for enhanced patient care through interdisciplinary collaboration and social work support in outpatient orthopaedic trauma settings.

The epidemiology of traumatic orthopaedic injuries and their connection to social determinants of health is becoming more widely accepted. Orthopaedic injuries, their sequelae and treatment outcomes have a significant interplay with many of the social determinants of health [1,2,3]. As examples, these injuries are now being connected to issues such as substance misuse, intimate partner violence (IPV), job loss and mental illness, both as causes and effects. There is a well‐established association between post‐injury mental health issues, pain and opioid use [4]. As with many interactions between social issues and physical health, the effects of these can be cyclical: substance use, lack of employment, housing and insurance coverage have all been identified as factors in orthopaedic injury recidivism [5,6].

Orthopaedic trauma is typically an unexpected, life‐changing event for patients that can also be considered psychologically traumatic. The effects can be far‐reaching and long‐lasting including psychosocial issues such as significant interruptions in employment status to moderate‐ to severe depression, [1] among other issues.

IPV, another phenomenon that is inextricably linked with social determinants of health, can result in orthopaedic injury including fractures. The latest National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey shows that 4.5% of United States women have experienced an injury to tendons, ligaments, or muscles and 3.7% have experienced broken bones or teeth due to IPV in their lifetime [7]. Indeed, it has also been observed that 1 in 50 women may be receiving treatment for an injury directly caused by IPV [3]. However, it has also been observed that orthopaedic surgeons still sometimes hesitate to assess and address psychosocial factors [8,9,10,11]. Additionally, orthopaedic surgeons have identified a lack of knowledge and time as barriers to taking action to assist patients with their psychosocial needs [9,10,12].

Given these knowledge and time constraints and the hesitancy among orthopaedic surgeons, a social worker hired specifically to assist patients in the outpatient fracture clinic could potentially help patients address psychosocial issues. As well, they could help identify resources that are beyond the scope and time limitations of the health care providers traditionally found in the fracture clinic. While there is robust evidence that orthopaedic trauma patients could benefit from an array of services and interventions that are commonly associated with social work, there is little known about the relationship between social work and the orthopaedic trauma population. Currently there is no literature on the prevalence of social workers in outpatient orthopaedic clinic settings or orthopaedic surgeons' perceptions of the role of a social worker in their outpatient fracture clinic.

The primary objective of this survey was to determine the prevalence of dedicated social workers or health care professionals otherwise dedicated to the task of assisting patients with non‐physical aspects of their recovery in outpatient fracture clinics. Secondary objectives included: determining what services social workers provide where present; understanding the perspectives of orthopaedic surgeons regarding the need for the addition of a social worker to the fracture clinic; determining the type of resources and services that orthopaedic surgeons believe social workers could provide and identifying surgeons' perceived barriers and facilitators to this addition.

We conducted a cross‐sectional survey of orthopaedic trauma surgeons. This study received ethics approval from the Hamilton Integrated Research Ethics Board (REB #16227) and was funded by the Orthopaedic Trauma Association.

The survey, a self‐administered electronic questionnaire, consisted of a brief screening questionnaire followed by four main sections: Demographics and Practice Setting; Social Worker Support in Outpatient Fracture Clinic; Social Worker Assistance in Clinic; and Perceptions of Social Worker in Clinic. The Demographics and Practice Setting section contained questions about the orthopaedic surgeon's individual demographics as well as their current practice and clinic patient population. The remaining three sections asked about various aspects of having a social worker in the fracture clinic including what resources and services are already available, the surgeon's perceptions of benefits and barriers to including social work in fracture care and short‐answer questions for more detailed commentary.

The survey was pretested with an independent group of orthopaedic surgeons, clinical researchers and social workers who evaluated whether the individual questions adequately addressed the study objectives. The survey was revised based on the recommendations of this independent group and re‐tested until no additional issues or concerns were identified.

The survey was programmed into REDCap Cloud electronic data capture system, which is compliant with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and 21 CFR Part 11 requirements for auditing, back‐ups and disaster recovery. The system provides audit trails for tracking user activity, as well as capability to export data in several formats for analysis.

Treating patients with fractures as part of their practice.

Willing to participate in the study by completing an electronic survey.

The survey was conducted between the months of November 2023 and January 2024. The survey was posted on the Orthopaedic Trauma Association's members survey page. The survey was emailed to the membership of the Canadian Orthopaedic Trauma Association (COTS) and to personal contacts of the researchers. A reminder email was sent after 2 weeks.

To determine the number of respondents needed to sufficiently power our analysis, we assumed that approximately 6% of surgeons surveyed have a dedicated social worker in their clinic and 94% of surgeons do not have a dedicated social worker in their clinic. According to our sample calculation, at least 87 completed questionnaires would facilitate a meaningful analysis.

Descriptive statistics reported as frequencies and percentages were used to summarise all categorical and dichotomous variables. Analyses were conducted in R (version 4.3.2, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).

A total of 88 surveys were completed. The majority of respondents were male (79.5%) and 47.7% had been in practice for greater than 10 years (Table1). Most respondents were practicing in the United States (62.5%) and Canada (26.1%). Most participants (86.4%) worked at an academic practice setting clinic. The majority of surgeons saw more than 20 fracture patients in their fracture clinics in a typical day.

When asked about the patient population at their clinic, 81.8% of the surgeons reported that they often see patients who are financially constrained and 54.5% reported that they often see patients who are considered to have substance abuse issues. Some respondents also indicated that they often treat patients who have severe depression and anxiety (36.4%), are homeless or underhoused (35.2%), experiencing post‐traumatic stress disorder (29.5%), have other psychological illness (26.1%) or are disabled, not from their injury (25.0%) (Table1).

The majority of respondents (57/88, 64.8%) indicated that they did not have a social worker or health care professional dedicated to providing social assistance to patients in their fracture clinics. Sixteen percent of respondents indicated that there was a dedicated social worker in their fracture clinic and 19.3% reported having a different health care professional designated to fulfil a similar role in their fracture clinic. Other professionals providing social support were nurses (70.7%), physician assistants (47.1%) and nurse practitioners (23.5%).

In all cases, whether provided by social workers or other health professionals, this person aided with services including home care (78.6%, 64.7%), transportation (71.4%, 64.7%), financial assistance programmes (64.3%, 41.2%), navigating coordination of services to address social needs (57.1%, 47.1%) and assistance with IPV (64.3%, 35.3%) (Table2). Notably, social workers were more likely to assist with housing (78.6%) and addictions support (57.1%), while other professionals were more likely to assist with education about treatment options (76.5%) and pain management (52.9%).

Social supports provided in outpatient fracture clinic.

When asked if a dedicated social worker would make a positive impact in their outpatient fracture clinic, 90.9% of the surgeons agreed or strongly agreed. Regarding the adequacy of current supports, respondents indicated that areas of assistance currently at a crisis level of inadequacy were employment (62.5%), psychological supports (61.4%) and help with housing (61.4%) (Table3).

Surgeon perception of supports currently available to patients.

When considering the fracture clinic specifically, at least 88% of respondents agreed that the fracture clinic was a feasible place to address various social issues. Agreement about the ability of social workers to assist was slightly lower, but still high across all items (> 65%). The highest level of agreement was in regard to IPV, with 93.2% of respondents agreeing that a fracture clinic social worker would be both effective and appropriately located to assist with this issue (Tables4aand4b). Respondents also agreed that social workers could assist fracture clinic patients by asking about their current housing situation: 95.5% believed that it was acceptable to assist with housing in the fracture clinic and 79.5% believed that they would be effective at doing so.

Agreement with appropriateness of social work assisting in fracture clinic.

Respondents were provided space to describe any perceived barriers or benefits to having social work support in the fracture clinic that were not previously mentioned in the survey. When asked about barriers, the most commonly cited item was cost, with 49 (55.7%) responses mentioning the cost of paying for a social worker. Space, time and clinic flow were the next most cited barriers, mentioned in 29.5%, 25.0% and 14.8% of responses, respectively. These were often interrelated, as lack of dedicated space can create a time pressure for social work appointments, and any changes to clinic flow raised concerns about making already long, busy clinic days even longer. Some respondents also cited that finding qualified social workers, or any social workers, in their region was the major barrier (12.5%). Finally, four respondents (4.5%) indicated that social work services were either not needed by or not appropriate for their patient population.

Respondents were asked if the survey had missed any areas where they believed social work could assist the orthopaedic trauma population. A few respondents mentioned services for amputees: accessing grants for prosthetics, accessing support groups and psychological support for body dysmorphia. Other missed areas mentioned included: vocational retraining, assistance for undocumented immigrants and supports for families and caregivers of patients.

The primary finding of this survey was that 64.8% of respondents work in a fracture clinic that does not have access to a professional dedicated to assisting patients with the psychosocial aspects of their recovery. However, 90.9% of the respondents agreed or strongly agreed that a dedicated social worker would make a positive impact.

Surgeon discomfort with assisting patients with psychosocial issues has been well‐documented [11,12]. As well, increasing patient loads and decreasing budgets across healthcare have created an environment where surgeons consistently identify cost, time and physical space as further barriers to integrating patient support that the majority agree is necessary. Given that interprofessional collaborations have been shown to improve outcomes in trauma patients with nurse practitioners in fracture liaison services, it may be that a similar model with social workers (or similarly trained healthcare worker) may also be the case here [13,14,15]. Indeed, the results of this study show that the orthopaedic surgeons surveyed largely believe that the patient population they treat has broad psychosocial needs affecting their recovery from orthopaedic trauma, and that the fracture clinic is a reasonable place to address these issues.

Strengths of this survey include the varied ages and years of experience represented in the sample. Additionally, the sex/gender distribution of respondents is representative of the general population of orthopaedic surgeons. Our survey received 19.3% responses from women, who represent about 7.4 [16] and 12.2% [17] of the population of United States and Canadian orthopaedic surgeons, respectively. The primary limitation of this study was the small sample size. Additionally, given that the survey was primarily distributed through mailing lists and websites with overlapping memberships, and that the survey link could be shared and forwarded between surgeons, there is no way to measure the rate of response.

This study suggests that there are significant gaps in addressing the psychosocial needs of orthopaedic trauma patients throughout their recovery, including a low prevalence of dedicated social workers in outpatient fracture clinics. There is clear agreement among the orthopaedic trauma surgeons surveyed that patients require assistance beyond the skilled medical care they are able to provide. Such issues as unemployment, housing insecurity, IPV and substance misuse require interprofessional, social and holistic interventions. Despite their recognition of barriers such as cost, time and space constraints, orthopaedic trauma surgeons show overall enthusiasm for the addition of dedicated social work services to outpatient fracture clinics. Moving forward, further research and advocacy efforts are needed to better understand how to overcome these barriers, as well as to assess the impact of integrated social work services on fracture clinic patient outcomes.