At the request of the European Commission, the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) assessed the 2023 post‐market environmental monitoring (PMEM) report on the cultivation of the genetically modified maize event MON 810, which expresses the Cry1Ab protein. The report provides no evidence of adverse effects from maize MON 810 cultivation. It confirms high refuge compliance among farmers in Spain and Portugal. However, uncertainty remains on compliance in areas where clustered maize MON 810 fields exceed five hectares. No signs of practical resistance to Cry1Ab were found in corn borer populations sampled in north‐eastern Spain in 2023, although reduced susceptibility in Mediterranean corn borer populations from this area cannot be excluded. Information collected through farmer questionnaires in Spain and scientific literature searches revealed no unanticipated adverse effects on human and animal health, or on the environment. However, EFSA remains concerned about the potential exposure of non‐target lepidopteran species classified as ‘very highly’ or ‘extremely’ susceptible to Cry1Ab to harmful amounts of maize MON 810 pollen. Several recommendations from previous PMEM report assessments remain unaddressed and new shortcomings were identified. Particularly, EFSA emphasises the urgent need to: (1) increase the sensitivity of the insect resistance monitoring strategy; (2) implement mitigation measures to ensure exposure of non‐target lepidoptera to maize MON 810 pollen remains at levels of no concern; (3) harmonise farmer questionnaires across Spain and Portugal; and (4) revise the remedial action plan. Finally, EFSA acknowledges the proactive initiatives undertaken by the Competent Authorities of Spain in support of the PMEM activities and encourages continued collaboration to strengthen monitoring and risk management measures.

At the request of the European Commission (Directorate‐General for Health and Food Safety), the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) assessed the 2023 post‐market environmental monitoring (PMEM) report on the cultivation of the genetically modified (GM) maize event MON 810, which expresses the Cry1Ab protein. This report presents the results of the 2023 insect resistance management and monitoring activities on maize MON 810 – referred to as case‐specific monitoring (CSM) – as well as results from general surveillance (GS). EFSA's assessment also considered two additional sources of information provided by the European Commission: (1) reports submitted by the Competent Authorities of Spain detailing the status and control measures related to teosinte in Spain; and (2) a summary of stakeholder discussions from the 30 January 2025 meeting on the PMEM plan for the commercial cultivation of maize MON 810, including recommendations and actions involving national competent authorities.

The CSM dataset consists of: (1) a farmer survey conducted in Spain to assess compliance with refuge requirements in areas of Spain where maize MON 810 was grown in 2023, complemented by data on refuge compliance in Portugal reported by the Competent Authorities of Portugal; and (2) diagnostic bioassays conducted using European and Mediterranean corn borers collected from north‐eastern Spain aimed at detecting potential changes in susceptibility to the Cry1Ab protein expressed by maize MON 810.

Full compliance with refuge requirements was reported in Portugal, based on inspections conducted by the national authorities. In contrast, while compliance with refuge specifications among Spanish farmers growing maize MON 810 was generally high, it did not reach 100%. Specifically, 96.4% of farmers managing more than five hectares of maize MON 810 reported planting a refuge. However, EFSA notes persistent uncertainty on the implementation of structured refuges in areas where the combined surface of clustered small maize MON 810 fields exceeds five hectares. To delay resistance evolution in target pests, EFSA reiterates that the consent holder must ensure full compliance with refuge requirements, especially in areas where the adoption rate of maize MON 810 is high, such as north‐eastern Spain. EFSA also recommends that the consent holder and relevant EU Member States develop robust information systems – such as genetically modified organisms (GMO) cultivation registers – to identify and monitor clustered areas exceeding five hectares, thereby supporting the enforcement of refuge planting obligations. EFSA welcomes the initiative of the Competent Authorities of Spain to identify areas with a high concentration of small maize MON 810 plots and intensify communication efforts aimed at raising farmer awareness of the importance of refuge compliance.

Resistance monitoring data gathered during the 2023 maize growing season through diagnostic concentration bioassays with field‐collected corn borer populations revealed that moult inhibition values were lower than the expected > 99% threshold in all the three Mediterranean corn borer (MCB) populations tested and in two of the three European corn borer (ECB) populations. Given the low moult inhibition values observed in MCB populations from north‐eastern Spain for two consecutive years (2022 and 2023), a reduction in Cry1Ab susceptibility in this area cannot be excluded. Nevertheless, plant‐based assays demonstrated that none of the MCB and ECB larvae tested from any of the populations collected were able to complete development when fed maize MON 810 leaf tissue.

As in previous years, EFSA identified methodological and reporting shortcomings in the resistance monitoring activities that must be addressed in future annual PMEM reports. Based on the estimated number of field‐collected ECB and MCB larvae used in the 2023 diagnostic concentration bioassays, EFSA considers the current monitoring strategy insufficiently sensitive to detect the recommended 3% resistance allele frequency – an essential threshold for the timely detection of emerging field resistance in target pest populations. To address this limitation, EFSA strongly recommends enhancing both the sensitivity and precision of the resistance monitoring strategy. This could be achieved by replacing annual diagnostic concentration assays with more sensitive methodologies, such as periodic F2screens, complemented by a robust farmer complaint system. In addition, EFSA advises the consent holder to: (1) evaluate the adequacy of the newly established MCB laboratory strain as a comparator in bioassays; (2) recalculate and validate the diagnostic concentration for MCB using data from geographically diverse populations collected in areas with no or low maize MON 810 exposure; (3) apply the step‐wise approach recommended by the US Environmental Protection Agency for confirming resistance of lepidopteran pests of plants and update the harmonised insect resistance management (IRM) plan accordingly; and (4) address EFSA's previous recommendations on reporting standards and methodological transparency in future resistance monitoring studies.

No dedicated follow‐up studies were performed in 2023 in the Girona region, where unexpected damage to maize MON 810 plants caused by MCB was reported in 2021. The only follow‐up activity undertaken by the consent holder was the inclusion of Girona as a sampling zone in the annual resistance monitoring program, with MCB populations collected near the site of the original damage. Additionally, Girona was covered by stewardship activities coordinated by the National Spanish Breeders Association (ANOVE) to inform farmers about refuge compliance. EFSA considers these activities insufficient to effectively monitor resistance evolution in the area, particularly given the consistently high adoption of maize MON 810 and elevated corn borer pressure in Girona. This concern is reinforced by low moult inhibition values recorded in MCB populations from Girona in 2022 (95.67%) and 2023 (93.06%), both below the expected 99% threshold. EFSA recommends that the consent holder expands monitoring activities in Girona to include: (1) systematic scouting of MON 810 fields for signs of MCB presence and damage; (2) efforts to select a resistant population from individuals collected near the site of the 2021 damage; and (3) strengthened grower education and communication initiatives tailored to the situation in the Girona region. Additionally, EFSA urges the consent holder to promptly revise the remedial action plan to address previous recommendations made by EFSA, including the clear definition of the triggers for implementing remedial measures and the specific actions to be taken.

EFSA considers it timely for the consent holder to perform an F2screen on MCB populations, including those collected from the Girona region – where unexpected damage to maize MON 810 was observed during the 2021 growing season – and from the area where a Cry1Ab resistance allele was first detected in 2016 by Camargo et al. (2018). Additionally, EFSA recommends that an F2screen be performed on ECB populations from north‐eastern Spain, where Cry1Ab resistance alleles frequencies have not yet been estimated. These efforts would significantly enhance the sensitivity of resistance monitoring and support early detection of resistance development.

The consent holder, along with other companies marketing maize MON 810 seeds, has put a farmer complaint system in place for farmers to report issues related to product performance. According to the 2023 PMEM report, no complaints were submitted through this system during the reporting period. EFSA acknowledges the potential value of such a system as a complementary tool for resistance monitoring, particularly for detecting early signs of pest resistance or unexpected field damage. However, EFSA notes that the current system lacks sufficient clarity and structure to serve this purpose effectively. To enhance the utility of the farmer complaint system, EFSA recommends that the consent holder: (1) encourage farmers to regularly scout maize MON 810 fields for corn borer damage; (2) provide clear damage thresholds that should trigger reporting; and (3) implement targeted education and communication initiatives to ensure farmers understand how and when to report potential resistance‐related issues. Additionally, EFSA urges closer collaboration between the consent holder and the Competent Authorities of the relevant Member States, particularly Spain and Portugal, to integrate data from existing national and regional Pest Monitoring Systems into the PMEM framework for maize MON 810.

The GS dataset provided by the consent holder consisted of a survey of Spanish farmers – based on 250 farmer questionnaires – and three relevant scientific publications published between June 2023 and May 2024. These publications were identified through a systematic literature search, which was complemented by an internet search of webpages relevant key organisations involved in the risk assessment of GM plants. The assessment of both the farmer questionnaires in Spain and the relevant publications identified revealed no unanticipated adverse effects on human and animal health or the environment, resulting from the cultivation of maize MON 810.

The farmer questionnaire did not include specific questions on the presence and occurrence of teosinte. EFSA recommends incorporating these in future versions to ensure the identification of teosinte‐related publications that might affect the ERA and risk management of maize MON 810. In Portugal, the consent holder did not conduct farmer interviews, and relied on information provided by the Competent Authorities of Portugal. This approach is less effective in identifying potential unanticipated adverse effects. Therefore, EFSA strongly recommends reintroducing the farmer questionnaire in Portugal to ensure harmonised data collection across both Member States.

EFSA identified several areas for improving future literature searches. These include: (1) actively seeking additional information (e.g. by contacting authors) to clarify the relevance of ambiguous publications; (2) providing a clearer explanation of how the reliability of identified publications is assessed; and (3) offering a more detailed rationale for excluding certain publications from further evaluation. Additionally, to ensure that all relevant scientific evidence on (EU) teosinte is captured and appropriately considered in the ERA and risk management of maize MON 810, the consent holder should include teosinte as a dedicated search term in future literature search strategies.

The 2023 PMEM report on the cultivation of maize MON 810 provides no new evidence on teosinte. Therefore, uncertainty remains about the plausibility of some of the assumptions about the completion of the postulated pathways to harm reported in EFSA's 2016 technical report and 2022 statement on teosinte. To address these uncertainties, additional investigations are needed. These should focus on: (1) assessing the hybridisation potential between maize and EU teosinte under realistic field conditions; and (2) determining whether the acquisition ofcry1Abby teosinte and its expression in teosinte/maize hybrids could increase their persistence and invasiveness potential, thereby posing risks to target organisms and non‐target organisms. EFSA welcomes the ongoing research activities aimed at generating evidence which will enable to further test specific risk hypotheses of the devised pathways to harm. These efforts are essential to confirm or refine previous ERA and risk management assumptions. To further reduce the likelihood of environmental harm, it is critical that comprehensive weed management measures to control and/or eradicate teosinte – including restrictions on the cultivation of maize (including maize MON 810) – continue to be implemented in infested agricultural areas in Spain.

Although the EFSA guidance requests the use of information from existing environmental monitoring networks, the 2023 PMEM report did not retrieve or analyse such information. EFSA acknowledges the methodological challenges involved in integrating this type of information. To address this gap, EFSA recommends that the Competent Authorities of the concerned EU Member States – primarily Spain and Portugal – engage in dialogue with the consent holder and representatives of relevant environmental networks. The aim should be to develop and implement a methodological framework that enables the identification and reporting of unexpected adverse effects from the cultivation of maize MON 810. EFSA welcomes the proactive initiatives initiated by the Competent Authorities of Spain, including the evaluation of the suitability of existing environmental monitoring networks to inform the PMEM of maize MON 810, and encouraging farmers to use available regional pest monitoring schemes to report significant changes in the incidence of lepidopteran pests.

Owing to the absence of information on the implementation of isolation distances between maize MON 810 fields and protected habitats – measures intended to reduce exposure of non‐target lepidoptera (NTL) to levels of no concern – EFSA cannot determine whether NTL species classified as ‘very highly’ or ‘extremely’ sensitive are currently exposed to harmful amounts of maize MON 810 pollen. Therefore, EFSA reiterates its recommendation to risk managers to consider implementing isolation distances that are proportionate to maize MON 810 cultivation levels, and aligned with the applicable protection goals in their respective jurisdictions. EFSA also welcomes the ongoing discussions and initiatives led by the Competent Authorities of Spain to ensure that the most sensitive NTL species, particularly those in protected areas, are not exposed to harmful amounts of maize MON 810 pollen.

Overall, the 2023 PMEM report does not present new evidence that would invalidate previous evaluations by EFSA and the GMO Panel regarding the safety of maize MON 810. However, several uncertainties remain on whether: (1) Cry1Ab susceptibility has decreased in MCB populations from north‐eastern Spain; and (2) ‘very highly’ and ‘extremely’ sensitive NTL are potentially exposed to harmful amounts of MON 810 pollen. Moreover, several recommendations from previous EFSA assessments remain unaddressed, and additional shortcomings were identified in the 2023 PMEM report that require further consideration by the consent holder in future annual PMEM reports. A key concern is the limited sensitivity of the current insect resistance monitoring strategy. EFSA recommends enhancing the sensitivity by adopting more robust testing methods – such as F2screens – which are better suited to detect early signs of resistance. This recommendation is reinforced by the unprecedented low Cry1Ab susceptibility observed in MCB populations from north‐eastern Spain over two consecutive growing seasons, and the unexpected damage by MCB to maize MON 810 reported in 2021 in Girona. These findings stress the urgency of adopting a more sensitive monitoring approach and update the remedial action plan accordingly. EFSA strongly encourages the consent holder to fully address EFSA's recommendations made in both previous and current assessments.

Genetically modified (GM) maize MON 810 expresses the insecticidal protein Cry1Ab, encoded by a gene from the soil bacteriumBacillus thuringiensis(Bt). This protein confers protection against specific lepidopteran pests, notably the European corn borer (ECB),Ostrinia nubilalis(Hübner) (Crambidae) and the Mediterranean corn borer (MCB),Sesamia nonagrioides(Lefèbvre) (Noctuidae). These two species are currently among the most damaging pests affecting maize cultivation in Europe.

The cultivation of maize MON 810 was authorised under Directive 90/220/EEC in the European Union (EU) by the Commission Decision 98/294/EC.1Since 2003, the transformation event MON 810 has been introduced into a wide range of maize varieties grown in the EU. In 2023, maize MON 810 was grown on 46,327 hectares (ha) in Spain and 1898 ha in Portugal, totalling 48,225 ha (DGAV,2023; MAPA,2023). This represents a decrease of approximately 31% compared to the 69,910 ha of maize MON 810 grown in the previous season. It is also noteworthy that the overall maize cultivation area Spain decreased by 17% in 2023 compared to the previous year.

According to the Commission Decision 98/294/EC, Monsanto Europe S.A.2(hereafter referred to as ‘the consent holder’) established a management strategy aimed at delaying the evolution of resistance in corn borer populations. As part of this strategy, the consent holder committed to reporting the results of resistance monitoring to the European Commission and Competent Authorities (CA) of the EU Member States.

As part of the IRM plan, resistance evolution and compliance with refuge requirements are routinely monitored to enable periodic evaluation of the adequacy and efficacy of the IRM strategy. Resistance monitoring is designed to detect early warning signs of increasing tolerance to Cry1Ab in field populations of the target pests. Early detection of such signs allows for the timely implementation of remedial actions to limit the survival of resistant individuals and thereby slow or prevent the spread of resistance. For maize MON 810, the consent holder follows a two‐pronged strategy for resistance monitoring: (1) laboratory bioassays to assess changes in susceptibility to Cry1Ab in field‐collected populations of ECB and MCB; and (2) a farmer complaint system to capture notifications of product‐related issues, including any observed loss of efficacy in controlling the target corn borers.

Ensuring compliance with refuge requirements is critical for the success of IRM plans in delaying the rate at which resistance evolves. Reported cases of field‐evolved resistance to certainBtcrops have been attributed to inadequate or partial compliance with refuge requirements, as well as to failures in the implementation of the operational aspects of IRM strategies5(reviewed by Tabashnik & Carrière,2017; Tabashnik et al.,2023). Grower education (training) and information programs are integral to IRM plans and essential for the effectiveness of the high dose/refuge strategy, as they help farmers understand the importance of adhering to IRM principles (Andow,2008; Bates et al.,2005; Glaser & Matten,2003; Head & Greenplate,2012).

In 2005, the consent holder voluntarily initiated a general surveillance (GS) monitoring program in anticipation of the mandatory PMEM requirement for all market applications for deliberate release submitted under Directive 2001/18/EC and Regulation (EC) No 1829/2003, including the pending application for the renewed market authorisation for the cultivation of maize MON 810. The objective of GS is to detect any adverse effects associated with the commercial use of GM plants that were not anticipated in the Environmental Risk Assessment (ERA). GS activities include farmer surveys – based on questionnaires used to interview EU growers of maize MON 810 – and systematic literature searches to identify relevant scientific publications.

Since 2005, the consent holder reports the results of the IRM activities (including insect resistance monitoring) related to the cultivation of maize MON 810 in the EU (hereafter referred to as ‘case‐specific monitoring’) to the European Commission and the EU Member States, as well as the results of general surveillance. The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) has evaluated the annual PMEM reports for maize MON 810 covering the 2009–2022 growing seasons (EFSA,2018,2019a,2020,2021,2022a,2023,2024; EFSA GMO Panel,2011a,2012a,2013,2014a,2015a,2015b,2016,2017). To date, the data presented in the annual PMEM reports suggest that the cultivation of maize MON 810 does not pose greater risks to human and animal health or to the environment than conventional maize. However, EFSA has identified several methodological shortcomings in both CSM and GS, and has made multiple recommendations to improve PMEM activities and reporting (see also EFSA,2015afor further recommendations on IRM). In recent years, the consent holder has revised the PMEM reports to include some of EFSA's recommendations, particularly those concerning insect resistance monitoring and farmer questionnaires.

On 28 November 2024, the European Commission (Directorate‐General for Health and Food Safety) received the annual PMEM report for the 2023 growing season of maize MON 810 (hereafter referred to as the ‘2023 PMEM report’) from the consent holder. The reporting period covered by the 2023 PMEM report spans from July 2023 to June 2024.

On 9 April 2025, the European Commission (Directorate‐General for Health and Food Safety) requested EFSA to consider, within the scope of its mandate, the reports submitted by the Spanish Competent Authority regarding the presence and management of teosinte in Spain in 2024, as well as a report summarising the discussions held during the stakeholder meeting on the monitoring plan for the commercial cultivation of genetically modified maize MON 810, which took place on 30 January 2025 (hereafter referred to as the ‘Stakeholder meeting report’).

In delivering this statement, EFSA considered the information provided in the 2023 PMEM report,6comments submitted by the EU Member States, the reports on the teosinte situation from Spain and the stakeholder meeting report. The stakeholder meeting report specifically addressed implementation challenges related to EFSA's recommendations concerning refuge strategies, the farmer complaint system, existing environmental monitoring networks (EEMNs), plant health surveillance/monitoring systems, non‐target Lepidoptera (NTLs) and teosinte. In addition, further information on case‐specific monitoring, literature searches and teosinte was provided by the consent holder upon EFSA's request.

In accordance with Annex VII of Directive 2001/18/EC and the terms of reference of the mandate, EFSA assessed the evidence presented in the 2023 PMEM report and evaluated the methods used for the monitoring activities. The assessment was guided by the principles outlined in EFSA's guidelines for the PMEM of GM plants (EFSA GMO Panel,2011b). EFSA also assessed the consent holder's systematic literature search, applying relevant principles and criteria described in EFSA (2010) and the recommendations provided in EFSA (2019b). Furthermore, EFSA employed the ‘weight of evidence’ (WoE) approach as described in its scientific guidance (EFSA Scientific Committee,2017). Comments submitted by EU Member States during the scientific assessment were carefully examined and are addressed inAnnex 1of supporting information accompanying this statement.

In 2023, 250 farmers in Spain completed a questionnaire that included the following question regarding compliance with the refuge strategy:Did you plant a refuge in accordance to the technical guidelines?Ninety‐six percent of the surveyed maize MON 810 growers reported compliance with refuge requirements – 191 farmers indicated that they had implemented a refuge, while 50 stated they were exempt due to cultivating less than 5 ha of maize MON 810. However, nine farmers did not plant a refuge despite growing more than 5 ha of maize MON 810, with most citing the small size of fields as the reason behind (AppendixA).

In the 2023 growing season, farmers cultivating maize MON 810 in Portugal were not interviewed by the consent holder due to the relatively low proportion of maize MON 810 grown (approximately 4% of the total maize MON 810 area grown in the EU was in Portugal) and the availability of data on refuge compliance from alternative sources. Instead, the consent holder relied on the results of inspections performed by the Competent Authorities of Portugal on 14 farms where maize MON 810 was grown (out of the 56 maize MON 810 cultivation notifications registered in 2023) (DGAV,2023). Based on these inspections, the Portuguese authorities concluded that there was full compliance with refuge implementation requirements.

Based on the available compliance monitoring data, the consent holder concluded that ‘the results from the overall surveys (Portuguese authorities and Bayer) during the 2023 season show a high level of refuge compliance (…)’. Additionally, the consent holder proposed to integrate refuge planting ‘…as a requirement for direct payments under the Common Agricultural Policy or other national rules. Compliant farmers would be encouraged to continue implementing refuges, whereas those farmers reluctant to be compliant could be subjected to reductions or exclusions from direct support schemes’.

The stakeholder meeting report concluded that tools are in place to communicate the importance of compliance with refuge requirements and to support their implementation. These measures will continue to be maintained, updated and improved, as necessary. Additionally, the stakeholder meeting report addressed the potential to collect information on refuge compliance during inspections conducted under other GMO‐related campaigns, as well as through declarations submitted by operators regarding the cultivation of maize MON 810.

The stakeholder meeting report highlighted that the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food will request the Autonomous Communities with the largest areas of maize MON 810 cultivation to provide information on the location and size of plots smaller than 5 ha. This initiative aims to support targeted efforts to promote compliance with refuge specifications in provinces or municipalities where such small‐scale fields are predominantly located.

Compliance with refuge specifications was generally high in Spain, albeit not fully achieved: 96.4% of farmers growing more than 5 ha of maize MON 810 indicating that they had planted a refuge (AppendixA). Additionally, uncertainty remains regarding compliance in areas where the combined surface area of clustered maize MON 810 fields exceeds five hectares. Twenty percent of the surveyed farmers did not plant refuges due to the small size of theirBtmaize fields (below five hectares). Nonetheless, these farms may be part of larger clusters where the total area under cultivation surpasses the 5 ha threshold. In such cases, EFSA considers that refuges should also be implemented, regardless of individual field or farm size (EFSA,2009). Future annual PMEM reports should therefore indicate whether small fields are located in clustered areas exceeding five hectares of maize MON 810 cultivation and whether community refuges were implemented accordingly.

EFSA welcomes the various approaches explored by the Competent Authorities of Spain to gather information on refuge implementation and to raise awareness on the importance of complying with the indications in the label. EFSA also supports the initiative of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food of Spain to explore the use of existing tools to identify regions where small maize MON 810 fields are concentrated, in order to focus efforts on promoting refuge implementation in those areas. Nevertheless, EFSA considers that these data could be further used to identify clusters of small maize MON 810 farms with a combined surface area exceeding 5 ha, where the establishment of community refuges should be ensured.

In Portugal, no farmers were interviewed by the consent holder in the 2023 growing season. Instead, the consent holder relied on the data from inspections conducted by the Portuguese authorities, which indicated full compliance with refuge requirements, consistent with observations from previous years. As noted in EFSA's assessment of the 2022 PMEM report (EFSA,2024), EFSA does not support the consent holder's decision to limit farmer questionnaires to Spain and considers that the same farmer questionnaire should be used to interview maize MON 810 growers in both Spain and Portugal to ensure consistency and completeness of the data collected.

Despite the generally high level of refuge compliance in Spain, EFSA notes that full compliance was not achieved in farms growing over five hectares of maize MON 810 (either in a single plot or a combination of plots) in 2023. Additionally, a significant number of farmers did not implement refuges, often due to the limited area of maize MON 810 cultivated. EFSA reiterates the importance of achieving full compliance with refuge specifications, particularly in regions with high adoption of maize MON 810, such as north‐eastern Spain, regardless of individual field size. To support this goal, EFSA encourages the consent holder, EU Member States where maize MON 810 is cultivated and other relevant stakeholders to increase efforts to raise farmers' awareness of the value of refuge compliance. Furthermore, EFSA recommends the development and use of reliable information systems on GM crop cultivation (e.g. GMO registers) to help identify clustered areas exceeding five hectares, where the implementation of structured refuges should be ensured.

Following the IRM plan, the 2023 resistance monitoring activities focused on north‐eastern Spain, around the Ebro basin, where the uptake of maize MON 810 was on average around 60% in the last years (AppendixB) and covered the two corn borer pests ECB and MCB. In 2023, the consent holder collected populations of ECB and MCB in three zones: Huesca (Zone 1), Girona (Zone 2) and Navarra (Zone 3). According to the consent holder these zones were selected based on a high uptake of maize MON 810 and a high pressure of the two corn borers. In Girona, populations of the two target pests were collected from fields close to the location where unexpected damage by MCB was identified in 2021 (Appendix 7).

The susceptibility of field‐collected ECB and MCB populations to the Cry1Ab protein was tested in diagnostic concentration and plant bioassays. An overview of the bioassays conducted for the 2023 PMEM report is presented in Table1.

Overview of bioassays conducted with European corn borer (Ostrinia nubilalis, ECB) and Mediterranean corn borer (Sesamia nonagrioides, MCB) larvae, as documented in the 2023 PMEM report on the cultivation of maize MON 810.

Abbreviations: L2, second instar; L3, third instar; MIC50,95, Cry1Ab concentration causing 50% or 95% moult inhibition; NE, north‐eastern.

In 2023, 556 ECB late‐instars from the last generation were collected at the end of the maize growing season from five sampling sites (refuge areas or non‐Btmaize fields) located in three zones across north‐eastern Spain. Twenty‐three additional sites were scouted, but either no ECB larvae were found, or the minimum number of larvae established in the study protocol could not be reached for those sites.

Field‐collected larvae were shipped to the laboratory (BTL GmbH, Sagerheide, Germany), where their progeny (hereafter referred to as ‘F1larvae’) was tested for susceptibility to Cry1Ab. Larvae were reared following a standardised protocol (Thieme et al.,2018). A total of 164 larvae reached the adult stage (42% of the field‐sampled larvae) and were placed in 45 oviposition cages for mating. Thus, in the 2023 growing season the detection limit9for the recessive resistance alleles in ECB field populations was estimated to be 7.81%. Emerging adults from the different sampling zones were kept separately.

In addition, two laboratory populations were used as negative controls in the diagnostic bioassays and the plant tissue bioassays. The same populations were tested in dose–response bioassays to evaluate potential changes in the biological activity of the test substance. A first population was established from egg masses collected from Niedernberg (Germany) in 2005 (G.04). In 2015, a second population was established from 145 diapausing larvae collected from three sampling sites in Galicia (Spain), of which 75 survived diapause, reached the adult stage and were placed in oviposition cages for mating (ES.ref). Since their establishment, both populations have been reared in the laboratory on non‐Btdiet, i.e. without any exposure to maize MON 810 or Cry1Ab protein.

Concentration‐response assays with both susceptible reference populations.

In the bioassays for the 2023 growing season, 1376 neonates were tested against the diagnostic concentration. One hundred seventy‐six larvae were treated with the same buffer solution used to dissolve the Cry1Ab protein and they were used as a negative control. Larval mortality and moult inhibition, corresponding to dead larvae and larvae not reaching the second instar, were recorded after 7 days. Neonates of the two reference strains were also tested against the diagnostic concentration and the negative control.

In the progeny of field‐collected larvae, corrected moult inhibition was below the expected 99% for Zone 1 (97.98%) and Zone 2 (91.67%), whereas 99.55% of the larvae exposed to the discriminating concentration did not moult for Zone 3. On average, moult inhibition in NE Spain populations was of 96.40%. Moult inhibition in the control treatments was 0.78%, 2.08% and 0% for Zones 1, 2 and 3, respectively (Table2). Average moult inhibition at the diagnostic concentration was lower than the expected value of 99%. In fact, it was the second lowest value reported since diagnostic concentration assays are conducted (AppendixC). For the two reference populations moult inhibition at the diagnostic concentration was 97.92% and 98.96% for G.04 and ES.ref., respectively, whereas no moult inhibition was recorded at the control solution for both populations.

Moult inhibition of European corn borer (Ostrinia nubilalis) larvae at a diagnostic concentration of Cry1Ab protein: 2023 growing season [Table based on data provided in the 2023 PMEM report].

A diagnostic concentration of 28.22 ng Cry1Ab/cm2was used. Values have been corrected using Abbott's formula (Abbott,1925).

Of the 160 larvae tested, one larva died, one survived but did not moult to the second instar, one, 145 and twelve larvae moulted to the second, third and fourth instar, respectively.

Of the 1376 larvae tested, 105 larvae died, 1238 larvae survived but did not moult to the second instar and 33 larvae moulted to the second instar.

Bioassay with maize MON 810 leaves:To complement the diagnostic bioassay, an additional assay was conducted with F1larvae from the field‐collected populations using maize MON 810 leaves. To this end, 3300 of the first instars not used in the diagnostic bioassays were fed maize MON 810 leaves (considered as a ‘positive control’ of the diagnostic concentration bioassay). Expression of Cry1Ab in maize MON 810 leaves used in the bioassay was verified using immunostrips. Larvae were placed in plastic boxes containing detached leaves of maize and a mixture of agar and several components to prevent leaf degradation and microbial contamination (a maximum of 300 larvae per box) where they were fed ad libitum for 7 days, after which mortality and the number of larvae moulting to the second instar were recorded. A negative control group, consisting of 176 larvae fed non‐Btmaize leaves placed on the same agar solution, was included in the study (considered as a ‘negative control’ of the diagnostic concentration bioassay). Larvae from this control group were exposed individually to leaf discs.

All ECB larvae fed maize MON 810 leaves died within the exposure period. In the control group, 30.68% of the larvae died, 0.57% of the larvae survived but did not moult and 68.75% of the larvae moulted to the second or third instar.

Confirmatory bioassay with maize MON 810 leaves:A follow‐up study using maize MON 810 leaves was conducted with the 33 larvae that reached the second instar in the diagnostic bioassays to confirm that they were not potentially resistant to Cry1Ab. The surviving larvae were placed on maize MON 810 leaf discs. All larvae died within 7 days, but no information was provided by the applicant on whether any of the larvae moulted further in this period.

Concentration‐response assays:The susceptibility of the two reference populations was assessed in concentration‐response assays. For each assay, nine concentrations, ranging from 0.2 to 28.22 ng Cry1Ab/cm2of diet surface area and a negative control (the same buffer solution in which the purified Cry1Ab protein was dissolved) were tested. For each concentration, 32 neonates were used (64 for the controls). Larval mortality and moult inhibition were assessed after 7 days of exposure. MIC50and MIC90values, with a 95% confidence interval (CI), were estimated by probit analysis (Robertson et al.,2007).

MIC50and MIC90values estimated in 2023 for both reference populations were within the range of those obtained in previous years (AppendixD).

In 2023, 1803 MCB late‐instars from the last generation were collected at the end of the maize growing season from 11 sampling sites (refuge areas or non‐Btmaize fields) in three zones across north‐eastern Spain. Attempts were made to collect larvae from 17 additional sites, but the minimum number of larvae established in the IRM study protocol could not be reached for those sites.

Larvae were brought to the laboratory (Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, Madrid, Spain), where Cry1Ab susceptibility of the MCB population was assessed. Larvae were reared following a standardised protocol (Farinós et al.,2004; González‐Núñez et al.,2000). A total of 1030 larvae reached the adult stage (57.1% of the field‐collected larvae) and 972 of them were placed in 97 oviposition cages for mating. Emerging adults from the different sampling zones were kept separately. Eighty‐six cages, containing 925 adults, were used to obtain F1progeny for the diagnostic bioassay (i.e. 51.3% of the field‐collected larvae), which would represent a detection limit of 3.3%.

In addition, the consent holder used a new MCB laboratory population collected in June 2024 in Coimbra (central Portugal) as a comparator in the diagnostic concentration and plant bioassays. The new laboratory population was started from the 402 individuals that completed the larval cycle, pupated and emerged as adults out of 639 field‐collected larvae. Offspring of the first generation of the Coimbra population was tested in the susceptibility assays.

Concentration‐response assays with the reference population.

Diagnostic bioassay:Independent diagnostic bioassays were performed with F1larvae from each of the three sampling zones. Neonates were exposed to purified Cry1Ab protein at a diagnostic concentration of 1091 ng Cry1Ab/cm2of diet surface area in an artificial diet‐ overlay assay.11The newly collected reference population was also tested with the diagnostic concentration.

In the 2023 assays, between 1072 and 1307 larvae per sampling zone were exposed to the diagnostic concentration. Larvae treated with the same buffer solution used to dissolve the purified Cry1Ab protein served as negative control. Moult inhibition was recorded after 7 days.

Corrected moult inhibition at the diagnostic concentration was lower than the expected 99% in the MCB populations collected from the three sampling zones (93.06%–98.39%), whereas in the control treatments moult inhibition ranged between 5.60% and 8.48%. Corrected moult inhibition observed in the new reference population was 98.85%, slightly below the expected 99% (see Table3).

Moult inhibition of Mediterranean corn borer (Sesamia nonagrioides) larvae at a diagnostic concentration of Cry1Ab protein: 2023 growing season [Table based on data provided in the 2023 PMEM report].

Note: Statistically significant differences were observed between the north‐eastern population and the expected value of 99% (t= 2.94;df= 2;p= 0.049).

No statistically significant differences were observed between the north‐eastern population and the reference population (t = 2.62; df = 2;p= 0.060).

A diagnostic concentration of 1091 ng Cry1Ab/cm2of diet surface area was used. Values have been corrected using Abbott's formula (Abbott,1925).

Average moult inhibition of the progeny of field‐collected larvae (95.80 ± 1.54%) was significantly lower than the expected 99%.

The consent holder considers that such low moult inhibition is not indicative of resistance evolution as it is not significantly different from the values in the laboratory strain, even if it differs significantly from the expected 99%.

Additionally, the consent holder reported the results of a test of equivalence that, for each reporting year in the period 2016–2022, compared the moult inhibition of the field population with that of the set of susceptible populations used in that period. According to the results of this test, the susceptibility of the field populations fell within the equivalence limits every year in the period 2016–2022 when 10% limits are considered. However, when 5% equivalence limits are considered, non‐equivalence between the field population and the set of susceptible populations cannot be rejected for the years 2017, 2022 and 2023, although equivalence is more likely than not.

Bioassay with maize MON 810 leaves:An additional bioassay using maize MON 810 leaves was conducted with F1larvae from the collected field populations. To this end, 16,610 first instars not used in the diagnostic bioassays (approximately 200 larvae per oviposition cage) were fed maize MON 810 leaves. Expression of Cry1Ab in maize MON 810 leaves used in the bioassay was verified using immunostrips, and by exposing neonates of a susceptible population of ECB to this tissue for a week. A negative control group, consisting of 800 larvae fed non‐Btmaize leaves (approximately 10 larvae per oviposition cage), was included in the study. Neonates from the laboratory reference population were also fed leaves of maize MON 810 (4260 larvae), but this population was not exposed to conventional maize in the reporting season 2023 due to a shortage of conventional maize plants. All larvae were placed in plastic boxes containing leaves of maize MON 810. Larvae were fed fresh leaves ad libitum for 10 days and numbers of larvae moulting to the second instar were recorded.

None of the larvae derived from either field‐collected populations or the reference population reached the second instar and was alive on day 10 after the start of the experiment when fed maize MON 810 leaves. In the control treatment of the field‐collected populations, moulting ranged between 90.69% and 97.62% (see Table4).

Moulting to second instar of Mediterranean corn borer (Sesamia nonagrioides) neonates feeding onBt(MON 810) or non‐Btmaize leaves: 2023 growing season [Table based on data provided in the 2023 PMEM report].

larvae of the laboratory reference population were not tested on non‐Btmaize due to the unavailability of plants at the time of the bioassays.

Confirmatory bioassays:Experiments using maize MON 810 leaves were conducted with the 140 larvae of the field‐collected populations that reached the second instar in the diagnostic bioassays to confirm that they were not potentially resistant to Cry1Ab. Larvae were individually placed on experimental arenas and fed maize MON 810 leaves. None of the larvae moulted after 10 days feeding onBtmaize. Larvae of the reference population moulting to second instar after exposure to the diagnostic concentration were not subject to confirmatory experiments.

Concentration‐response assays with the reference population:Seven concentrations, ranging from 2 to 128 ng Cry1Ab/cm2of diet surface area and a negative control (i.e. the same buffer solution in which the purified Cry1Ab protein was dissolved) were tested.

In all bioassays, three replicates were used per concentration including the control. Each replicate consisted of 32 larvae (64 for the controls), giving a total of 96 larvae tested for each concentration (192 for the controls). Moult inhibition was assessed after 7 days of exposure. MIC50and MIC90values, with a 95% CI, were estimated by probit analysis.

The MIC50value estimated in 2023 and its CI 95% were 15 (4–28), which fall within the range of values estimated in previous years. Historical results of the concentration assays with the reference population are given in AppendixD.

The consent holder states that, during the 2023 growing season, no complaints about the loss of efficacy of maize MON 810 against target pests were received via the farmer complaint system. According to the consent holder, no product‐related complaints have been received so far, including any issues with the efficacy of maize MON 810 to control its target pests, whereas many of the complaints notified refer to maize cultivation topics, including issues with seed quality or crop yield, among others.

The consent holder refers to the outcome of a survey conducted by member companies of ANOVE selling maize MON 810 varieties, as they have the full overview of the farmer complaint schemes. None of the 800 complaints received by these companies in 2023 was attributed to the loss of efficacy of theBtmaize by corn borers.

The consent holder also refers to regional monitoring networks that Spanish regional authorities have implemented for integrated pest management (IPM) (e.g. the Red Fitosanitaria Aragón,13north‐eastern Spain; @RAIF_noticias in Andalucía,14southern Spain). These networks monitor and alert on incidence/outbreaks of agricultural pests and plant health issues and inform about IPM practices and resistance management. Such networks represent another tool that can be used by farmers and agronomic advisors to report any unusual observation, including product failure, which could be indicative of resistance evolution.

In the period 2018–2022, the MCB laboratory strain originated from Galicia, an area in north‐western Spain where maize MON 810 is not commercially grown and thus the target pests have not been exposed to a high selective pressure from maize MON 810. The MCB laboratory strain was replaced by new field populations collected in the same area three times over that period, due to infection of the stock byNosemaspp. and to ‘discrepancies in susceptibility to Cry1Ab’ observed during the laboratory assays. For the reporting year 2023 the consent holder replaced the laboratory strain again, alluding once more to aNosemaspp. infection and to the high natural variability in Cry1Ab susceptibility of the reference strain from Galicia used the previous three seasons. High variability in Cry1Ab susceptibility had been previously reported in MCB populations from Galicia (González‐Núñez et al.,2000). The new population of MCB was collected from Coimbra (central Portugal) in June 2024. However, uncertainty remains on the potential selection pressure that may have been exerted on this new population as no information on the uptake of maize MON 810 in that region is provided.

In 2023 the MIC90and its CI 95% obtained in the dose–response susceptibility bioassay of the new MCB laboratory strain were within the historical range (Section 3.2 in Appendix 7). It must be noted that, due to the high variability historically reported in the MIC90of the MCB reference strains, which could in part be associated to its frequent replacement, it is not unexpected that no significant trend is observed over time.

EFSA is of the opinion that reference strains must exhibit consistent and high levels of Cry1Ab susceptibility over time. The regular replacement of the MCB laboratory strain with new stocks collected in two different areas and the high natural variability in Cry1Ab susceptibility of MCB populations from Galicia suggest that the MCB reference strains used in the last seasons might not be an adequate reference population. Additionally, given that first‐generation offspring of the new MCB reference population were used to assess Cry1Ab susceptibility in this strain, the short time of acclimatisation of this population to the rearing conditions in the laboratory (i.e. feeding on a semi‐artificial diet) could have influenced the results of the susceptibility assays.

Additionally, EFSA reiterates its consideration that a comparison with laboratory strains cannot be used to dismiss the significance of low response values obtained by field populations tested in susceptibility bioassays.

In line with the sampling scheme of the IRM plan implemented in the EU, the consent holder collected ECB and MCB larvae exclusively from three sampling zones in north‐eastern Spain in 2023. North‐eastern Spain currently represents the only hotspot for resistance evolution in the EU, since close to 60% of the total maize acreage of the maize area was cropped to MON 810 hybrids in the last years (AppendixB) and corn borer populations complete two generations annually in this area (Alfaro,1972; Cordero et al.,1998).

Two of the sampling zones considered in 2023 (Huesca and Navarra) had been commonly sampled for several previous growing seasons, including fields located in the municipalities of Candasnos, Lanaja and Sariñena (both in Huesca) and Mendigorría (Navarra). Additionally, populations of the two target pests were collected in Girona (Cataluña) for the second consecutive year as part of the annual resistance monitoring program, due to the consistently high uptake of maize MON 810 in the region and the high corn borer pressure. It must be noted that Girona is the region where MCB populations caused unexpected damage on some maize MON 810 fields in 2021, pointing to the presence of resistance alleles in that area and year at frequencies conducive to maize MON 810 damage. As stated previously, EFSA agrees with the selection of Girona as a sampling zone, but reiterates its recommendation to ensure MCB populations are collected also from the zone where a resistance allele was detected in a F2screen performed in 2016 (Camargo et al.,2018).

In 2023, ECB and MCB populations were collected from non‐Btmaize fields located within 300 m from the nearest maize MON 810 field, for those fields for which information on location is available (Appendix 7. Tables3and4). In 23 out of the 28 (82%) and 17 out of the 28 (61%) sampling sites inspected in 2023, none or very few numbers of ECB and MCB larvae were found, respectively, highlighting that finding fields infested with MCB and especially with ECB larvae for sampling can be a challenge. Nevertheless, for MCB the consent holder managed to reach the target sampling size of 1000 larvae (corresponding to 2000 genomes) as established in the current IRM plan, with a total of 1803 late‐instar larvae collected in the 2023 growing season. For ECB the target sample size could not be reached, as 556 larvae were collected.

Overall pre‐imaginal mortality during the laboratory rearing of field‐collected individuals was high for both target pests: 71% and 43% of the ECB and MCB larvae collected in the field failed to reach adulthood. In the case of ECB this can be in part attributed to the high levels ofBeauveriainfections and parasitism reported after diapause in the populations collected in 2023, which led to the lowest percentage of field‐collected larvae represented in the susceptibility assays since diagnostic assays are used. The consent holder reiterated that the laboratories performing the bioassays have extensive experience working with ECB and MCB populations and have optimised the rearing process. EFSA recognises that rearing and maintenance of insect populations entail some practical challenges, with many factors (some of which are impossible to control (e.g. parasitism of corn borer larvae by hymenopteran species, insect pathogens)) contributing to mortality before susceptibility testing.

High levels of pre‐imaginal mortality together with the limited number of larvae collected in the field prevented from reaching the recommended detection limit of 3% (recessive) resistance allele frequency in the two target pests in 2023, preventing the possibility to detect a possible insurgence of field resistance timely. Special emphasis is made on the case of ECB, for which the recommended value of 3% has never been met since the introduction of diagnostic assays in 2016. Furthermore, in 2023 the estimated upper bound of resistance allele frequency for ECB was 7.81%, the highest value reported since the implementation of diagnostic assays 2016. It is important to underline that to accurately determine the detection limit for resistance allele frequency, offspring descending from single pair crosses must be used in the susceptibility bioassays.

EFSA acknowledges the description of the rearing of the ECB field populations up until the susceptibility bioassays, which was provided for the first time in the 2023 PMEM report (Appendix 8) following EFSA's longstanding recommendation.

Once more, the target sample size of 2000 genomes was not reached for ECB. EFSA acknowledges that it is a challenge to collect large amounts of larvae due to several factors such as natural fluctuation in pest density, environmental conditions and regional pest suppression (Dively et al.,2018). Nevertheless, EFSA reiterates the need to optimise ECB field sampling, so that enough field‐collected individuals are tested to reach the target detection limit of 3%, which, in turn, would allow the early detection of signs of resistance evolution. To ease the detection of fields infested with ECB, the consent holder is strongly encouraged to: (1) strengthen the collaboration with field technicians from seed companies who scout maize areas, including areas that were not considered previously; (2) liaise more closely with the Competent Authorities of the concerned regions in Spain to optimise the use any potentially useful data reported in the phytosanitary alerts and/or reports on the phytosanitary situation, which are regularly published by Pest Monitoring Systems like RedFAragon15and Gencat16; and (3) explore the potential use of the information gathered through the farmer complaint systems and the farmer questionnaires (e.g. in Appendix 1 six farmers reported high ECB infestation). Currently, the TUG provided in Spain instructs farmers cultivating maize MON 810 to observe their fields and immediately report corn borer damage that is higher than expected (Appendix 3.2). The TUG received by farmers that cultivate maize MON 810 in Portugal (Appendix 3.1) does not ask farmers to report unexpected corn borer damage. EFSA recommends the consent holder to encourage farmers from both countries where maize MON 810 is grown to actively and regularly inspect maize MON 810 fields to detect any potential unexpected damage to maize MON 810 plants caused by ECB or MCB as part of their communication and grower education activities, for instance by using a more explicit recommendation in the TUGs used in Spain and Portugal. On this point, it is noteworthy to mention that the results of the farmer questionnaire (Appendix 1. Section 3.1.4.2. Corn borer pressure) indicate there is a need to improve grower education, as 79.3% farmers reporting high corn borer pressure could not correctly tell apart the two target pest species.

Owing to the increasing difficulties to locate maize fields infested with the target pests in north‐eastern Spain, EFSA reiterates the need to follow and implement an alternative more sensitive monitoring strategy (see Section ‘Additional test methods'below for more details).

Since the 2016 growing season, the consent holder conducts diagnostic bioassays with F1larvae from the field‐collected populations to assess the Cry1Ab susceptibility of target pests, instead of concentration‐response assays. EFSA previously agreed with the principles driving the revision of the testing strategy, but it expressed reservations on the actual implementation of this strategy and made considerations on the design of the diagnostic bioassays, the selection of the diagnostic concentrations and the confirmatory studies performed with suspected‐resistant individuals (EFSA,2018,2019a,2020,2021,2022a,2023,2024). While the consent holder has been repeatedly invited to improve the IRM plan accordingly and consider alternative test methods, the consent holder has only implemented part of EFSA's longstanding recommendations.

Design of diagnostic assays:The diagnostic bioassays with both target pests included reference populations that served both as negative control and as an additional comparator. As explained in previous statements (EFSA,2022aand earlier), reference populations must be used solely as a quality control and thus not as an additional comparator for field populations. In this regard, moult inhibition observed in diagnostic bioassays in field‐collected ECB and MCB populations should not be compared statistically with the reference population, it must only be compared with the expected 99%. No statistical comparison is needed, though, given that the DC was estimated as the upper limit of the 95% confidence interval of the MIC99, and thus it already covers the statistical variability (see proposed testing approach in AppendixE). This is further supported by the frequent replacement of reference strains that took place in the last years for both MCB (four different populations from two different areas used since 2018, high variability in Cry1Ab susceptibility reported) and ECB (two different populations used since 2017), which renders these laboratory strains inconsistent comparators across years. Additionally, to detect potential inter‐population variation in the susceptibility of target pest populations and guarantee early detection of resistance, which would emerge at smaller geographic scales, EFSA recommends analysing the data from populations sampled in different zones independently (EFSA GMO Panel,2012a). It must be noted that EFSA does not regard sampling zones as replicates within the area of north‐eastern Spain, but as independent zones of high maize MON 810 adoption. Thus, while EFSA acknowledges that analysing the data of each zone independently results in a reduction of the statistical power of the analysis, this recommendation allows for a more accurate assessment of the status of resistance evolution at smaller geographical scales.

Selection of diagnostic concentrations:The consent holder has not provided sufficient evidence to underpin the appropriateness of the diagnostic concentration selected for MCB (EFSA,2021). Furthermore, the diagnostic concentration currently used might be an overestimation, as it was calculated considering only Cry1Ab susceptibility data from populations from north‐eastern Spain, highly exposed to maize MON 810. Therefore, uncertainty remains on whether the diagnostic concentration for MCB can reliably discriminate between homozygous resistant and susceptible individuals. To overcome this issue, the consent holder should recalculate the diagnostic concentration for MCB, considering data for MCB populations from different areas where maize MON 810 has not been grown or commercial cultivation has been limited. EFSA has recently developed the Bayesian Benchmark Dose (BMD) modelling tool17for the estimation of specific response levels (such as the diagnostic dose) from dose–response data. The BMD tool fits a range of statistical models to the data and combines the results using model averaging to calculate the final estimate, a procedure that often improves the estimation. The consent holder is recommended to consider using EFSA's BMD tool to recalculate the diagnostic dose. The consent holder should provide evidence to prove the validity of the newly calculated diagnostic concentration by comparing it with data generated with a susceptible population, to prove that > 99% moult inhibition values are obtained.

Testing strategy:In the diagnostic concentration assays with F1larvae of MCB populations collected from zones 1, 2 and 3 of north‐eastern Spain, corrected moult inhibition values were 95.95%, 93.06% and 98.39% respectively. These values are lower than the expected > 99%, as happens with the average moult inhibition (95.80%). In fact, the average moult inhibition values recorded in 2022 and in 2023 for MCB populations from north‐eastern Spain are the lowest values since diagnostic tests were first adopted in the growing season of 2016, suggesting the Cry1Ab susceptibility of MCB populations from this area might have decreased.

Similarly, moult inhibition in the progeny of field‐collected ECB populations from zones 1 and 2 and exposed to a diagnostic concentration was below > 99% (97.98% and 91.67%, respectively), and so was the average moult inhibition of the field‐collected populations (96.40%).

For the first time, the consent holder used a test of equivalence to analyse whether Cry1Ab susceptibility of the MCB field populations was equivalent to that of the reference strains. While acknowledging that the tests of difference regularly performed by the consent holder and the test of equivalence recently introduced can provide useful information, EFSA reiterates its strong recommendation not to use reference strains as additional comparators in diagnostic assays, and to compare the MI values only with the expected > 99%.

Additionally, EFSA recommends the consent holder to harmonise the methodology used to assess Cry1Ab susceptibility in the two target pests, including the statistical analysis of the data obtained and reiterates the importance of detailed reporting of the methods used to conduct the bioassays (seeReporting of monitoring data).

According to the consent holder, the results of the confirmatory tests confirmed that none of the larvae from the field‐collected populations moulting to second instar in the DC assays were resistant, as they did not continue moulting when fed with maize MON 810 leaf tissues. It is not possible to conclude on the larvae of the laboratory strain that moulted and survived the diagnostic concentration, as they were not tested in confirmatory assays. EFSA recommends the consent holder to subject larvae from all populations tested to the same confirmatory assays, as done in previous reporting years.

EFSA considers that moult inhibition values lower than the expected > 99% in the diagnostic bioassays should always trigger further investigation to determine if the population has field‐relevant resistance to the trait. EFSA encourages the consent holder to replace the current strategy to confirm suspected resistance by the step‐wise approach recommended by the US Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) for confirming resistance of lepidopteran pests ofBtplants (US EPA,2010,2018) in the corn borer resistance monitoring program (AppendixE). This strategy allows to assess whether resistance is heritable and field relevant. In this respect, EFSA considers that the current IRM plan of CropLife Europe should be updated in line with US EPA's strategy, with each step taken to confirm resistance in a suspected population being described thoroughly. The IRM plan of CropLife Europe differs in two important points from the US EPA's approach. Firstly, in order to assess whether the low response observed in the susceptibility assays can be indicative of resistance evolution, the consent holder tests those larvae that moult and survive the diagnostic concentration, instead of following the US EPA's approach, which dictates that the F1offspring of their siblings should be tested in order to determine if the low susceptibility is reproducible and heritable. Only in case these greatly weakened larvae moult again is the F1offspring of their siblings tested in diagnostic assays. This additional step can lead to underestimate resistance evolution, as larvae need to survive and moult two consecutive periods of high Cry1Ab exposure in order for the next generation to be tested. Secondly, the confirmatory plant assays performed by the consent holder to confirm whether the resistance is field relevant use leaf tissue, whereas the US EPA's strategy indicates that plant assays should be representative of exposure in the field. EFSA recommends the consent holder to explore the feasibility of replacing the current confirmatory plant assays with leaf tissue by assays that rely on whole maize plants. This method would be more realistic to assess resistance evolution of ECB and MCB to maize MON 810 for two reasons. First, it would account for the tunnelling feeding behaviour in stalks of both target pests, especially in the case of MCB, which enters the stalk after only 1–2 days feeding on whorl tissue (Kaçar et al.,2023). Second, it would take into consideration the lower toxin concentrations expressed in stalks compared to leaves in maize MON 810 across phenological stages (Székács et al.,2010). Finally, it must be noted that the methodology provided by the applicant for the leaf tissue confirmatory assays with ECB populations is incomplete, as it does not clearly specify the endpoint(s) considered and the duration of the bioassay. These missing details must be provided.

As previously stated, the monitoring strategy followed by the consent holder is not sensitive enough to allow for the detection of the recommended 3% resistance allele frequency on a consistent manner for the two corn borers. EFSA has recurrently underlined the need to increase the sensitivity and precision of the monitoring strategy, which are key for a timely implementation of remedial measures to delay resistance evolution for both target pests. As indicated in EFSA (2019a), increased sensitivity could be achieved by: (1) increasing the sampling size of field populations and/or reducing the mortality during the laboratory rearing of field‐collected populations; and/or (2) replacing diagnostic bioassays by more sensitive test methods. The consent holder has repeatedly highlighted that it is challenging to find sampling sites with enough corn borer larvae, and to reduce the mortality of field‐collected individuals before laboratory testing. Therefore, in EFSA's view, using a more sensitive method would be the best way forward to increase the sensitivity of the monitoring strategy (see belowAlternative test methods).

Supplementary susceptibility bioassays with plant tissue:In order to verify whether resistant individuals are present in the field‐collected populations, the consent holder conducted supplementary bioassays with ECB and MCB neonates that were not used in the bioassays. Neonates were fed maize MON 810 leaves. It must be noted that the methodology provided by the applicant for the additional leaf tissue assays with ECB populations (‘negative’ and ‘positive’ controls) is incomplete, as it does not specify the endpoint considered and the duration of the bioassay. These missing details must be provided.

EFSA notes the high mortality recorded in the supplementary leaf tissue assays performed with ECB neonates exposed to conventional maize (‘negative control’), where 30.68% of the individuals died within 7 days. Mortality was especially high in some of the replicates tested: 87.5% in one of the four replicates of Huesca 3; 37.5% and 100% in the two replicates of Huesca 4; and 100% in one of the two replicates of Girona 5. Mortality values above 20%–25% under control conditions typically lead to the invalidation of the replicate concerned, as it could be indicative of issues with the population, the starting material or during the assay, but the consent holder did not remove the affected replicates from the analysis. EFSA strongly encourages the consent holder to carry out a more rigorous quality control of the data before its analysis, disregarding those replicates in which the high mortality of the controls points to potential issues in the assay. Furthermore, the consent holder used a different methodology in ECB plant assays with maize MON 810 and conventional maize. To improve comparability of the results, the consent holder is recommended to use the same methodology in plant assays with maize MON 810 and conventional maize.

Alternative test methods:EFSA advocates replacing the current monitoring strategy (which is primarily based on diagnostic concentration assays) by a more precise and sensitive test method, such as the F2screen (Andow & Alstad,1998). F2screens could be performed periodically with ECB and MCB populations. Periodic estimations of resistance alleles through F2screening, together with a robust farmer complaint system (see Section3.2.3.3for further insights), could replace annual diagnostic concentration assays, which would no longer be needed. While performing an F2screen is, overall, more resource intensive than conducting diagnostic assays (Andow & Alstad,1998; Huang et al.,2012), insect collection and rearing and travelling for field sampling would no longer be required every year. Moreover, this strategy would yield more accurate estimations of the Cry1Ab susceptibility in field populations. To obtain adequate sensitivity for detecting Cry1Ab resistance alleles before they become widespread in target pest populations and lead to resistant individuals causing measurable field damage, the target population size to test in the F2generation larvae must be at least 100 isolines, each of which is started from a field‐mated female or two field‐collected individuals (Andow & Alstad,1998). New simulations with resistance evolution models must be run after each F2screen, using the latest resistance frequency estimations and accounting for the relevant changes in the model parameters (e.g. the uptake of maize MON 810, refuge compliance). The newly estimated allele frequency and simulation outcomes will indicate whether the frequency of resistance alleles is increasing in comparison with the last values, which, in turn, will help to decide when to conduct the next F2screen.

There is an urgent need to perform an F2screen on MCB populations from north‐eastern Spain, as: (1) 9 years have passed since the last estimation of the frequency of resistance alleles, in which Camargo et al. (2018) identified a Cry1Ab resistance allele in a MCB population from north‐eastern Spain; and (2) the results of an investigation of unexpected damage of maize MON 810 plants by MCB in 2021 concluded that resistant alleles are potentially present in Girona at frequencies capable of causing damage to maize MON 810 plants. This F2screen should consider MCB field populations from Girona where unexpected damage was reported, as well as the area where a resistance allele was detected in 2016 by Camargo et al. (2018). The consent holder should also estimate the frequency of Cry1Ab resistance alleles in ECB populations from north‐eastern Spain, as there have been no previous estimations of this parameter in ECB populations from this area. It must be noted that ECB populations with low but statistically significant Cry1Ab resistance were identified in Canada for the first time in populations collected between 2018 and 2020 (Smith & Farhan,2023).

As indicated previously (EFSA,2023,2024), the consent holder could also consider the adequacy of conducting a modified F2screen (Santiago‐González et al.,2023) to assess the frequency of resistance alleles to Cry1Ab in the target pests. This could be particularly interesting in case a MCB resistant population is selected in the laboratory.

Reporting of monitoring data:Insect resistance monitoring assays should report sufficient information to facilitate the appraisal of their validity. In this respect, EFSA has developed a list of recommended information to be reported by the consent holder (presented as a checklist in AppendixFof this statement). This list aims at facilitating open data reporting of monitoring assays. The checklist focuses on several elements relevant to the evaluation of study design and interpretation of results. For instance, the methodology of each of the susceptibility assays performed with ECB should be clearly described in the section Materials and Methods (Appendix 8), including the duration of the assay and the measurement endpoint(s) assessed, as well as a detailed description of the follow‐up steps should there be a positive response in the confirmatory assays (i.e. larvae moulting to third instar). The consent holder and study authors should follow these recommendations when preparing the reports of resistance monitoring assays and justify whenever it is not possible to meet a recommendation.

Follow‐up of unexpected damage in Girona in 2021: In the growing season 2023 the activities of the consent holder to follow‐up on the unexpected damage of MCB to MON 810 plants detected in 2021 in Girona were limited to: (1) including Girona as a sampling zone as part of the annual resistance monitoring, with the collection of MCB populations close to the field where unexpected damage was reported; and (2) covering Girona in the stewardship activities carried out by ANOVE in agreement with the consent holder, which aim at ensuring farmers buying maize MON 810 seeds have enough information on the importance of refuge implementation. The consent holder did not follow EFSA's recommendations to try to select a resistant population from this zone and to encourage farmers growing maize MON 810 in Girona to scout theirBtfields for signs of corn borer damage, beyond the indication already contained in the Technical User Guide (TUG) for farmers to monitor theirBtfields.

As previously discussed, moult inhibition of MCB populations from Girona was below the expected 99% when tested in diagnostic assays, with lower values recorded in 2023 (93.06%) compared to 2022 (95.67%). Since no information is available on the Cry1Ab susceptibility of MCB populations from this area before 2021, it is not possible to establish whether the high maize MON 810 uptake in the region over the last years has led to a decrease in the susceptibility of MCB populations to Cry1Ab in Girona. Nevertheless, the low moult inhibition observed in the diagnostic assays both in 2022 and 2023 together with the unexpected damage reported in 2021 call for close monitoring for potential resistance evolution in this region of Girona.

As previously indicated (EFSA,2024), EFSA strongly supports the inclusion of Girona in the annual resistance monitoring program and welcomes the broadening of the geographic scope of ANOVE's stewardship activities to include farmers from this zone. However, EFSA considers that the monitoring and communication activities reported by the consent holder are insufficient to efficiently monitor the situation of potential resistance evolution in the zone. Monitoring activities should not be limited to the sampling of MCB populations from conventional maize fields in Girona. They should include the development and implementation of a protocol to collect MCB populations close to the field where unexpected damage was reported, considering both conventional maize fields and active scouting for signs of MCB presence and damage in maize MON 810 fields. Additionally, EFSA recommends the consent holder to increase efforts to select a MCB resistant population from the area where unexpected damage was reported in Girona. This would allow to confirm the hypothesis that the 2021 incident was caused by resistance alleles present at frequencies enough to exert damage to maize MON 810 plants, and to characterise resistance. EFSA also considers it insufficient to limit communication activities to the instructions provided to farmers as part of the TUG and the routine communication campaigns in which farmers are reminded of the importance of refuge implementation and encouraged to monitor theirBtfields. EFSA recommends the consent holder to further alert the farmers in Girona about the potential presence of resistance alleles in MCB populations in the area at levels that could lead to unexpected damage onBtmaize fields. Moreover, farmers must be instructed to regularly inspect maize MON 810 fields for signs of MCB damage, which should be promptly notified.

Remedial action plan:Crop Life Europe's IRM plan (Appendix 6) establishes that followingBtmaize failure ‘Appropriate integrated pest management (IPM) options will be identified and implemented to minimize spread of the problem. The remedial actions should be implemented as soon as resistance is suspected’. However, the plan does not clearly define what suspected resistance entails, neither does it provide information on the range of IPM options that could be applied to limit the spread of resistance, nor on what would drive the choice among the different IPM options.

EFSA considers that CropLife Europe's IRM plan should be amended, so that it clearly defines what is meant by ‘suspected resistance’ and proposes specific remedial or mitigation actions to be implemented on a case‐by‐case basis. Such actions should be designed to limit the spread of resistance outside the affected area, and they could be implemented already during the investigation of an incident of suspected resistance. Remedial or mitigation actions could include: stopping the sales/growing of maize MON 810 in the region where resistance has evolved/is evolving; intensifying grower education activities; implementing alternative pest control measures; and increasing refuge sizes or increasing insect resistance monitoring in the affected area (US EPA,2010). EFSA welcomes the consideration by the consent holder of these recommendations in their ongoing evaluation of CropLife Europe's remedial action plan for its potential improvement, but retains the plan must be urgently revised for more clarity and detail in these points, considering the signs of reduced Cry1Ab susceptibility in MCB populations from north‐eastern Spain and the 2 years elapsed since these recommendations were first published (EFSA,2023).

EFSA considers that a farmer complaint system could complement the existing IRM strategies as, in principle, it may allow those managing crops to provide relevant information on pest infestation levels and product performance, as well as to report possible damages to maize MON 810 plants. Therefore, a farmer complaint system may provide an additional source of first‐hand information to field sampling and laboratory monitoring assays. Unfortunately, as it was the case for previous annual PMEM reports on maize MON 810 cultivation, EFSA is unable to evaluate whether the existing farmer complaint system can be used as a complementary resistance monitoring tool. This is mainly due to the broad nature of the current invitation to ‘report damages higher than expected’. Based on this requirement, it is likely that farmers will only report the occurrence of borers on maize MON 810 plants whose presence may point to early signs of resistance. The consent holder is strongly recommended to encourage farmers to regularly scout their maize MON 810 fields for signs of unexpected damage, to provide maize MON 810 growers with a clear threshold of ECB/MCB damage that should trigger reporting of unexpected damage and to incentivise the reporting of these instances.

While EFSA has previously requested the consent holder to give more details on the communication mechanisms and grower education programs that make part of the farmer complain system, no further detail has been provided. Therefore, EFSA reiterates its former recommendation for the consent holder to provide more detail on the farmer complaint system, as this may enable EFSA to evaluate whether farmers have enough information to efficiently detect and communicate in a timely manner any potential unanticipated adverse effect of maize MON 810.

EFSA also notes that most Spanish farmers who reported high corn borer pressure in their field(s) in the farmer questionnaires could not distinguish between the two target pests. This underlines the need to improve grower education to increase the reliability of the farmer alert system for insect resistance monitoring. It is therefore key that adequate communication mechanisms and educational programmes (e.g. field scouting techniques, identification of the two main target pests and characterisation of the damage caused by corn borers) are implemented to ensure the prompt and effective reporting of farmer complaints relevant for resistance monitoring.

While the regional monitoring networks mentioned by the consent holder currently do not address resistance evolution in target pests, the data gathered and published by some of these networks may be useful to alert farmers about a possible outbreak, as some of the networks regularly monitor the incidence of pests, including corn borers. However, the consent holder did not clarify whether and how such networks are used for resistance monitoring. For instance, no information was provided either on whether farmers are aware of the availability of this tool to report unexpected observations or on any communication of relevant data between the operators of the monitoring networks and the consent holder.

Diagnostic concentration bioassays with the progeny of the field‐collected corn borer populations resulted in moult inhibition values lower than the expected > 99% in two of the three ECB populations and in the three MCB populations tested. Additional studies with plant material indicated that none of the ECB and MCB larvae tested from these populations could complete development on maize MON 810 leaves. Since these additional studies use highly‐expressing leaves as test tissue and thus mimic worst‐case exposure conditions, it is unclear whether some of the individuals tested could have completed their larval cycle under realistic exposure (field) conditions, where larvae boring into the stalks soon after hatching are exposed to lower concentrations of the toxin Cry1Ab. Taking into consideration the low moult inhibition values recorded in MCB populations for two consecutive years, a decrease in susceptibility to the toxin Cry1Ab in MCB populations from north‐eastern Spain cannot be excluded, especially in the light of the incident of unexpected damage to maize MON 810 plants by MCB reported in north‐eastern Spain in 2021.

Following the observation of unexpected damage to MON 810 plants by MCB in 2021 in Girona, resistance evolution was monitored in 2023 in MCB populations of this region exclusively by including Girona as part of the annual resistance monitoring. The outcome of the assays indicated that Cry1Ab susceptibility of MCB populations collected in this region was lower than the 99% expected both in 2022 and 2023. Monitoring activities in this region must be continued and supplemented by notifying farmers growing maize MON 810 in the area of the need to closely and regularly inspect theirBtfields for signs of damage, to allow for an early detection and investigation of any additional instances of suspected resistance. Additionally, EFSA strongly encourages the consent holder to increase efforts to select a resistant population from MCB populations collected in this area, and to strengthen communication and grower education to increase awareness in farmers growing maize MON 810 in Girona.

The US EPA recommends following a step‐wise approach for confirming resistance of lepidopteran pests toBtplants. The consent holder is strongly encouraged to implement a similar approach and update the harmonised IRM plan accordingly. The strategy should test progeny of the siblings of those larvae moulting in diagnostic assays in order to assess if the low response observed is reproducible and heritable, and the plant assays should consider whole plants so as to be more representative of field conditions.

Whenever resistance evolution is suspected, the consent holder must implement remedial measures that limit further spread of resistance. The trigger for the implementation of the remedial action plan as well as the specific measures to be deployed in specific situations should be clearly described in the remedial action plan included in CropLife Europe's harmonised IRM plan, which should be urgently amended.

Based on the estimated numbers of ECB and MCB field‐collected larvae represented in the diagnostic concentration bioassays, the monitoring strategy implemented in the 2023 growing season was not sensitive enough to allow for detection of the recommended 3% resistance allele frequency in neither of the target species (EFSA,2015a). It is noted that reaching the 3% detection limit in a consistent manner is challenging. This emphasises the need to use an alternative, more sensitive test method, so that the necessary remedial measures to delay resistance evolution can be implemented in a timely manner. In this respect, EFSA recommends the consent holder to replace the current strategy to assess Cry1Ab susceptibility by periodic F2screens. In EFSA's view, it is timely to perform a F2screen on MCB populations from north‐eastern Spain, including individuals from the same area where the Cry1Ab resistance allele was detected by Camargo et al. (2018) and from the area where unexpected damage on maize MON 810 plants was detected in 2021. Likewise, EFSA recommends conducting a F2screen on ECB populations from north‐eastern Spain, where the frequency of resistance alleles has never been estimated. The low values of Cry1Ab susceptibility recorded in MCB populations from north‐eastern Spain collected in 2022 and 2023 reinforce the urgency to implement a more sensitive monitoring strategy.

Overview of farmers surveyed and maize MON 810 area monitored through questionnaires in 2023 [Table based on data provided in the 2023 PMEM report].

Two hundred nine farmers were from Aragón/Cataluña, twenty‐six from Navarra, eleven from Extremadura, five from Castilla la Mancha, three from Andalucía, one from Castilla y Leon and one from Comunitat Valenciana.

Since 2022, the farmer questionnaire template has undergone substantial revisions compared to the version used in the previous years. According to the consent holder, the aim of the revision was to address several of EFSA's recommendations from earlier PMEM report assessments, and to simplify the questions in sections where farmers had consistently provided no new information in past reporting seasons.

The updated farmer questionnaire gathers information across four specific areas: (1) general details on maize cultivation, including cultivated area and local insect pest and weed pressures; (2) typical agronomic practices used for maize MON 810 compared to the conventional maize grown on the same farm; (3) observations related to the susceptibility of maize MON 810 to non‐target insect pests, crop growth, development and yield, and any unusual observations in maize MON 810; and (4) implementation of specific measures related to maize MON 810 cultivation.

Overall, the farmer questionnaire is intended to help identify any unintended effects associated with the cultivation of maize MON 810.

In 2023, the consent holder did not conduct interviews with farmers growing maize MON 810 in Portugal, and instead relied on data gathered by the Competent Authorities of Portugal, who surveyed 13 farmers.

The consent holder concluded that ‘The analysis of 250 questionnaires from the survey of farmers cultivating MON 810 in Spain during the 2023 growing season did not reveal any adverse effects that could be associated with the genetic modification in MON 810.(…) In conclusion, the results from the overall surveys (Portuguese authorities and Bayer) during the 2023 season show no adverse effects of MON 810 to human or animal health, or the environment’.

The farmer questionnaire does not include additional questions to better understand the uptake of maize MON 810 cultivation on farms – such as its frequency in crop rotations or the presence of target pests like borers – using objective and measurable indicators, where possible.

It also lacks questions aimed at capturing information on new characteristics of the receiving environment, including the incidence and infestation levels of teosinte, as well as the emergence of novel pests (e.g.Spodoptera frugiperda) that may arise due to factors such as climate change or international trade, and which could potentially affect maize MON 810.

In 2023, for the second consecutive year, the consent holder conducted interviews with farmers growing maize MON 810 in Spain but not in Portugal. Instead, for Portugal, the consent holder relied on data published by the Competent Authorities of Portugal, with the intention of replacing its own farmer questionnaire by the farmer surveys and inspections carried out by the Competent Authorities of this EU Member State.

EFSA considers that the farmer questionnaire cannot currently be replaced by the farmer complaint system. The inspections and farmer surveys conducted by the Competent Authority of Portugal are not sufficient, as they do not capture much of the specific information gathered through the revised farmer questionnaire. The farmer survey used in Portugal primarily focuses on compliance with coexistence measures, mandatory for maize MON 810 growers, and collects farmers' perceptions of the economic and agronomic performance of the crop. It includes only one general question on potential adverse effects perceived to be associated with the cultivation of maize MON 810 (i.e. ‘Have you detected any negative effects that you think could be associated with the cultivation of GM maize? (e.g. surge of alternative pests and diseases, effects on bees, birds, allergies, etc.)’). However, other information deemed highly relevant for identifying potential unanticipated adverse effects – such as pest pressure (e.g. corn borers, weeds), IPM practices, pest control measures, and efficacy and susceptibility of maize MON 810 – is not collected.

Based on the evidence gathered through the 2023 farmer questionnaire, no unintended effects associated with the cultivation of maize MON 810 were reported in Spain. To gather feedback from Portuguese farmers, the consent holder relied on the farmer survey conducted by the Competent Authorities of Portugal. Given that this farmer survey is not designed to detect any potential unanticipated adverse effects associated with the cultivation of maize MON 810, EFSA considers that the farmer questionnaire applied in Spain should be applied consistently in all areas where maize MON 810 is cultivated, regardless of any parallel data collection by national or regional Competent Authorities.

EFSA supports some of the modifications introduced in the revised farmer questionnaire in 2022. Nonetheless, the updated version still presents several limitations, particularly regarding the sampling frame and the relevance of some of the questions (see Section3.2.1.2).

The consent holder has proposed replacing the farmer questionnaire by the farmer complaint system. However, due to the limited information available about the current farmer complaint system, its adequacy remains unclear. In principle, a well‐designed farmer alert system could support both IRM and GS. Such a system should be linked or integrated with existing pest monitoring systems, such as those established under the Directive on sustainable use of pesticides (2009/128/EC). When combined with data gathered by environmental monitoring networks (see following Section3.2.2), this farmer alert system could form a broader GS framework, as recommended by the EFSA GMO Panel (2011b).

EFSA recommends that Competent Authorities in the relevant EU Member States engage in dialogue with the consent holder to agree on effective mechanisms for farmers to identify and report unexpected adverse effects fromBtmaize cultivation. Until such systems are in place and demonstrated to be effective, EFSA considers that the farmer questionnaire should continue to be used in Spain and reinstated in Portugal.

The consent holder identified four categories of monitoring networks: (1) governmental networks; (2) academic networks; (3) nature conservation networks; and (4) professional networks. While acknowledging the expertise of these existing networks, the consent holder concluded that they are not equipped to establish cause‐and‐effect relationships. This is primarily because none of the networks identified (Smets et al.,2014) explicitly monitor GM crop cultivation as a potential influencing factor, making it difficult to establish accurate correlations from the collected data.

Additionally, the consent holder highlighted several limitations that hinder the use of EEMNs as an early warning system within the context of GS. These include: (1) technical constraints (e.g. delayed publication of monitoring data); (2) limited public access to (raw) data; and (3) lack of harmonisation between networks in terms of data collection and processing.

EFSA has also addressed this issue in a scientific opinion on the use of EEMNs for PMEM reports. This opinion was informed by internal expertise and a report from a contracted consortium (Centre for Ecology and Hydrology et al.,2014). EFSA concluded that while several EEMNs may be potentially suitable for GS of GM plants, they also present notable limitations, such as limited data accessibility, inconsistent reporting formats and poor interoperability with GMO registers (EFSA GMO Panel2014b).

The stakeholder meeting report notes that a previous assessment conducted by the Competent Authorities of Spain identified no EEMNs suitable for the PMEM of maize MON 810. It also concluded that the characteristics of the Catalan Butterfly Monitoring Scheme render it unsuitable for this purpose. However, this evaluation is expected to be updated to cover more recent monitoring initiatives, including those focused on pollinator populations.

Additionally, the report highlights an assessment of Spain's plant health surveillance systems, which acknowledged that certain regional tools could potentially support the early detection of significant changes in the incidence of lepidopteran pest species. Examples include the alert system operated by INTIA21in the Comunidad Foral de Navarra and the monthly phytosanitary bulletins published by the Competent Authority of Cataluña.22Farmers growing maize MON 810 will be informed about the availability of these networks for reporting issues related to lepidopteran pests.

EFSA acknowledges the challenges associated with using EEMNs to detect potential impacts of GM crops. Nevertheless, several networks were identified in an external report commissioned by EFSA (Centre for Ecology and Hydrology et al.,2014) and related scientific publications (e.g. Smets et al.,2014). These networks may offer valuable insights into how agricultural practices more broadly affect the environment and could, therefore, contribute to the GS of GM plants.

However, EFSA recognises a key methodological challenge: the difficulty of attributing observed environmental change specifically to GM crop cultivation, given the presence of multiple confounding stressors. Additional challenges include data heterogeneity, incomplete datasets, limited accessibility, inconsistent exploitation methodologies, non‐standardised reporting formats and poor interoperability with GMO registers (EFSA GMO Panel,2014b). Moreover, the absence of clearly defined protection goals for GM plants at the level of individual EU Member States or regions remains a significant barrier to effective monitoring and interpretation.

EFSA acknowledges that the primary purpose of EEMNs is not to establish cause‐and‐effect relationships. Rather, these networks can serve as tools to detect whether key environmental endpoints or proxies are significantly affected in areas where maize MON 810 is cultivated. Such observations may indicate potential adverse effects linked to GM maize. In cases where notable changes are detected, further investigations would be initiated to assess the extent to which maize MON 810 cultivation may have contributed to the observed impacts. EFSA also notes that this type of surveillance strategy should not be limited to GM crops alone, but should encompass broader agricultural practices to ensure a comprehensive understanding of environmental influences.

Additionally, EEMNs could play a valuable role in tracking NTL pests, including secondary and emerging maize pests such asMythimna unipunctaandS. frugiperda. These species have shown lower susceptibility to maize MON 810 than ECB and MCB or have evolved resistance to it (Eizaguirre et al.,2010; Omoto et al.,2016), even if their risk of resistance evolution is considered lower than that of primary target pests due to factors such as their biology or their migratory behaviour (EFSA GMO Panel,2012b). General surveillance could help detect unexpected damage or survival of these species on maize MON 810, and such observations could be complemented by data from regional pest monitoring systems. This is particularly relevant for quarantine pests likeS. frugiperda, whose presence must be monitored and reported by EU Member States in accordance with existing regulatory frameworks. If such data indicate emerging issues, they should trigger further investigations to assess whether updates to the IRM plan for maize MON 810 are warranted – potentially including case‐specific monitoring for particular NTL pests.

EFSA encourages the European Commission, the consent holder, National Competent Authorities and relevant stakeholders to engage in discussions on how best to leverage EEMNs. As a practical starting point, EFSA suggests that the consent holder liaises with the Competent Authorities in regions where maize MON 810 is grown, with the aim to compile a list of active EEMNs operating in those areas where GM maize is cultivated, accompanied by an evaluation of their suitability to support GS. This assessment should be guided by the criteria outlined in point 3 of the EFSA GMO Panel scientific opinion (2014b).

In this context, EFSA welcomes the initiative by the Competent Authorities of Spain – reported in the stakeholder meeting report – to update their assessment of the suitability of several EEMNs operating in Spain, including those monitoring pollinator populations, for the PMEM of maize MON 810. This effort includes a reassessment of the Catalan Butterfly Monitoring Scheme, which has been suggested as a potentially valuable tool for detecting potential adverse effects of GM crops (Lee et al.,2020).

EFSA also encourages the use of regional pest monitoring systems that have been identified as potentially useful for detecting changes in the incidence of lepidopteran pests. The information gathered through these EEMNs could contribute meaningfully to GS and help assess whether the cultivation of maize MON 810 may negatively impact particular NTL species. To be effective, such networks should operate in agricultural areas compatible with maize cultivation, where exposure to maize MON 810 is likely to occur. According to the stakeholder meeting report, data gathered by plant health surveillance and monitoring systems for maize lepidopteran pests, including emerging or secondary pests, varies across different Autonomous Communities in Spain. Currently, there are no dedicated surveillance tools specifically designed to monitor these pests at the national level. Nonetheless, EFSA considers that the systems operating in certain regions could provide valuable information for the PMEM of MON 810. For instance, in Navarra, the INTIA alert system23reports pest observations in maize fields, including data on lepidopteran pests such as the target species MCB and ECB, as well as the emerging pestM. unipuncta. Similarly, the monthly phytosanitary bulletins published by the Competent Authorities of Cataluña24report on the seasonal presence of pests likeM. unipunctain that region. Additionally, EU Member States are legally required to notify the presence of the quarantine priority pestS. fugiperda, which supports the monitoring of this species in maize MON 810 fields under the existing regulatory framework.

EFSA considers that EEMNs could serve as valuable sources of information for identifying unanticipated adverse effects, including those related to secondary and emerging NTL pests. Recognising current methodological limitations in using data from these networks, EFSA encourages the relevant EU Member States and stakeholders to collaborate on pooling networks and developing a robust methodological framework. Such a framework would help optimise the use of EEMNs involved in monitoring agricultural practices, with the aim of better assessing the specific environmental impacts of maize MON 810 cultivation. In this context, EFSA welcomes the initiatives undertaken by the Competent Authorities of Spain to assess the adequacy and usefulness of EEMNs and regional plant health surveillance systems for the PMEM of maize MON 810.

The consent holder performed a systematic literature search to identify scientific publications relevant to the food, feed and environmental safety assessment of maize MON 810 and the Cry1Ab protein, covering the period from 1 June 2023 to 31 May 2024.

The search was performed using the electronic bibliographic databases SciSearch (Science Citation Index) and CABA (CAB Abstracts®) via the STN® database catalogue. This was complemented by an internet search of the website of nine key organisations involved in the risk assessment of GM plants, also covering the 2023–2024 timeframe.

Altogether, 394 unique scientific publications were retrieved (excluding duplicates). Following a rapid relevance screening, 389 publications were excluded. Two additional publications were excluded after detailed assessment. One publication was considered of unclear relevance, as it could not be confirmed whether the transformation event studies was MON 810.

Applying the pre‐defined eligibility and inclusion criteria, the consent holder ultimately identified one scientific publication as relevant for food and feed safety assessment, and two publications as relevant for environmental safety.

The consent holder assessed the reliability of all relevant scientific publications and evaluated the implications of their findings for the risk assessment of maize MON 810. Based on this analysis, the consent holder concluded that none of the evidence retrieved would modify or invalidate the initial conclusions regarding the safety and risk management of maize MON 810.

A modified version of EFSA's critical appraisal tool for assessing the quality of extensive literature searches (EFSA,2015b) was used to evaluate the systematic literature search conducted by the consent holder. This tool integrates relevant principles and criteria from EFSA (2010) and aligns with the recommendations outlined in EFSA (2019b).

The consent holder excluded two scientific publications identified through the literate search, stating in both cases that ‘it is not a safety study on MON 810’. However, EFSA considers this justification insufficient and recommends providing a more detailed rationale for exclusion, in line with EFSA (2024).

One additional scientific publication was classified as of unclear relevance because it was no possible to determine whether the transformation event studied was MON 810. EFSA notes that the consent holder did not contact the authors of the publication to clarify this point. EFSA considers that, in such cases, the consent holder should reach out to authors to obtain the necessary information to assess the publication's relevance for risk assessment and risk management.

Furthermore, the consent holder did not provide sufficient detail on how the reliability (i.e. internal quality) of the relevant scientific publications was evaluated.

The literature search did identify one scientific publication on teosinte that is relevant to the ERA and risk management of maize MON 810 cultivation. However, EFSA notes that the search strategy used by the consent holder was not designed to specifically identify publications on teosinte, as the term ‘teosinte’ (and its variants) was not explicitly included in the search string. To ensure that all relevant new scientific evidence on teosinte – particularly in the EU context – is identified and appropriately considered, EFSA recommends that the consent holder incorporates ‘teosinte’ as an additional search term in future search strategies.

None of the relevant scientific publications identified by the consent holder indicate new hazards, modified exposure pathways or emerging scientific uncertainties that would modify or invalidate the previous risk assessment conclusions and risk management recommendations for maize MON 810.

While the literature search performed by the consent holder follows the general principles outlined in EFSA (2010,2015b,2019b), some areas of improvement in future literature searches were identified. In particular, when the eligibility of a publication remains unclear after full‐text screening, the consent holder should, where feasible, seek additional information (e.g. by contacting the authors) to determine whether the publication should be included or excluded from the assessment.

Regarding the reliability assessment of all relevant publications identified through the literature searches, the consent holder should provide a comprehensive list of all applied criteria. It should be clearly explained how each criterion was considered in determining the overall reliability classification of the publications. Moreover, a more detailed justification must be provided for the exclusion of any publication from further assessment.

Furthermore, the consent holder has not implemented the improvements recommended by EFSA (2024) to enhance the quality and transparency of literature searches related to maize MON 810. Therefore, EFSA reiterates its previous recommendations and strongly urges the consent holder to apply them in future annual PMEM reports. For example, as previously advised, the term ‘teosinte’ must be explicitly included as a dedicated search term in the literature search strategy to ensure comprehensive identification of relevant scientific publications.

In the 2023 PMEM report on the cultivation of maize MON 810, the consent holder concluded that GS – including the farmer questionnaire and literature searches – did not identify any adverse effects attributable to the potential presence of teosinte in maize MON 810 fields during the 2023 growing season.

The consent holder acknowledged EFSA's previous recommendations (EFSA,2022b) to revise the farmer questionnaire to include reporting on both the occurrence of teosinte and the corresponding levels of infestation, and to consider all new scientific evidence on teosinte relevant to the ERA and risk management of maize MON 810. However, the consent holder maintains that the emergence or presence of teosinte in Spain does not constitute information relevant to the safety assessment of maize MON 810. According to the consent holder, it does not affect the evaluation of the safety of maize MON 810 across all uses – including cultivation – when compared to conventional maize. Consequently, the consent holder argues that reporting teosinte monitoring activities specific to maize MON 810 or summarising scientific literature on teosinte would not add value to the ERA of maize MON 810.

The consent holder is conducting a study (results pending publication) to evaluate the weediness potential of teosinte/maize hybrids, both with and without the MON 810 transformation event. The research focuses on plant and seed characteristics. The consent holder confirmed that the findings will be included in future PMEM reports once published.

Risk concerns have been raised about the potential hybridisation between maize MON 810 and teosinte, including teosinte/maize hybrid progeny (referred to hereafter as teosinte), in regions where both co‐occur. Such hybridisation could potentially lead to the emergence of more persistent and invasive weed populations, introducing previously unconsidered risks to the environment – affecting both target organisms and non‐target organisms (e.g. Bauer‐Panskus et al.,2020; Lohn et al.,2021; Trtikova et al.,2017). In its 2016 technical report and 2022 statement on teosinte, EFSA applied a pathway to harm approach to assess the plausibility and relevance of these concerns for the ERA and risk management of maize MON 810 cultivation (EFSA,2016,2022b). EFSA concluded that the full realisation of the pathway to harm would require a sequence of rare events, each with a very low probability, resulting in an overall negligible risk.

Arias‐Martín et al. (2024) recently provided new empirical evidence of vertical gene flow between maize MON 810 and teosinte in Spain, building on earlier findings reported in conference abstracts (Arias‐Martín et al.,2019,2022; see Table6in EFSA,2024for a high‐level summary). Although the study involved a limited sample size (15 plants), and hybridisation was observed in only one of the 3 years of experimentation, the results suggest that the potential for hybridisation between maize MON 810 and teosinte may be higher than previously assumed under experimental conditions lacking pollen competition (e.g. Lohn et al.,2021). The study also demonstrated that teosinte/maize hybrids can produce viable seeds and may exhibit enhanced vigour – such as increased height, stem thickness and leaf number – compared to teosinte when grown in pots. However, the implications of other observed traits, including reduced secondary stem number and shorter time to reproductive maturity, for the reproductive success and ecological persistence of these hybrids remain uncertain.

Summary of EFSA's recommendations for future PMEM reports on maize MON 810.

To recalculate and validate the diagnostic concentration for MCB using the data on Cry1Ab susceptibility of MCB populations from areas with limited or low maize MON 810 cultivation across Europe. To consider using EFSA's BMD tool to recalculate the diagnostic dose.

Environmental monitoring networks active in the area of cultivation of maize MON 810.

Abbreviations: ECB, European corn borer; MCB, Mediterranean corn borer.

Further details are provided in the respective sections of this Statement.

Research and monitoring activities related to teosinte should be continued and expanded, as they are essential for generating empirical data to further test specific risk hypotheses within the established pathways to harm and to validate the assumptions underlying previous ERA conclusions and risk management recommendations.

EFSA notes that no specific data on the occurrence of teosinte or the corresponding levels of infestation were collected through the farmer questionnaire for the 2023 maize MON 810 growing season. This is partly because the farmer questionnaire has not yet been revised to reflect EFSA's recommendations on teosinte (see EFSA,2020,2021,2022a,2023,2024). While the current version includes a general question about weed pressure in maize MON 810 fields, it does not explicitly mention teosinte as an emerging concern. Adding a dedicated reference to teosinte would help gather more targeted and meaningful data on its presence and infestation levels in maize MON 810 fields, as previously recommended by EFSA (see EFSA,2020,2021,2022a,2023,2024). EFSA notes that the consent holder's search strategy is specifically designed to retrieve publications directly related to maize MON 810. However, this approach may miss publications that, while not explicitly focused on maize MON 810, could still offer valuable insights for its ERA and risk management. Such evidence could help test specific risk hypotheses within the established pathways to harm and support or refine existing assumptions. To ensure that all relevant scientific evidence on teosinte in the EU context is appropriately retrieved and considered, EFSA recommends including teosinte as a dedicated search term in future literature searches.

Communication and awareness: Effective communication and farmer education are considered critical components of the weed management strategy. These efforts aim to promote awareness and encourage the reporting of teosinte occurrences.

The 2023 PMEM report on the cultivation of maize MON 810 does not present any new evidence regarding teosinte. Consequently, uncertainty remains concerning the plausibility of certain assumptions underlying the postulated pathways to harm, as previously outlined in EFSA's 2016 technical report (EFSA,2016) and reiterated in its 2022 statement on teosinte (EFSA,2022b). This lack of new data limits the ability to test specific risk hypotheses within the established pathways to harm, and to confirm or refute previously established assumptions in the ERA and risk management of maize MON 810.

To further minimise the likelihood of environmental harm through the postulated pathways to harm, it is essential to maintain and enforce comprehensive weed management measures. These should include restrictions on maize cultivation – applicable to conventional maize varieties and maize MON 810 – in agricultural areas where teosinte is present. Spain's current implementation of such measures serves as a model and should continue to be applied in all infested regions.

Equally important is the role of effective communication and grower education. These elements must remain integral to the overall weed management strategy to ensure that farmers are well‐informed about the identification, control and reporting of teosinte. Raising awareness and fostering proactive engagement among growers are critical to the long‐term success of containment and eradication efforts.

The consent holder should incorporate teosinte as a dedicated search term in the literature search strategy. This is essential to ensure the identification and retrieval of all new scientific evidence on teosinte relevant to the ERA and risk management of maize MON 810. Such evidence could support the testing of specific risk hypotheses within the established pathways to harm and help confirm or refine existing ERA and risk management assumptions.

EFSA welcomes the collaborative efforts undertaken by the consent holder and the Competent Authorities of Spain to exchange relevant information on teosinte in regions where its presence may coincide with maize MON 810 cultivation. These joint actions are considered essential, and EFSA recommends that such cooperation be sustained and further enhanced. Additionally, EFSA strongly encourages the continuation and expansion of targeted research and monitoring activities related to teosinte. These efforts are critical for generating empirical data that can support the testing of specific risk hypotheses, confirm existing assumptions, and refine future ERAs and risk management strategies for maize MON 810.

The 2023 PMEM report does not contain specific information relevant to assessing potential adverse effects of maize MON 810 cultivation on NTL.

The stakeholder meeting report indicated that the Competent Authorities of Spain support the establishment of buffer zones (i.e. isolation distances) between maize MON 810 fields and protected areas to prevent potential harm to NTL species with the highest susceptibility to the Cry1Ab protein. However, the definition and scope of what constitutes a protected habitat remain unclear. Moreover, efforts to gather information on the presence of highly‐susceptible NTL species near maize MON 810 fields are hindered by limited, fragmented and incomplete information regarding their distribution, abundance and conservation status in Spain. Compounding this challenge is the general lack of data on the susceptibility of most NTL species to Cry1Ab, as well as the absence of standardised experimental protocols for rearing many of these species under laboratory conditions. To address these uncertainties and facilitate the implementation of appropriate risk mitigation measures, a dedicated meeting with EFSA has been proposed to clarify outstanding issues and provide guidance on the operationalisation of the recommendations.

A potential environmental risk associated with the cultivation of lepidopteran‐activeBtmaize is the ingestion of harmful quantities ofBtmaize pollen by NTL, when such pollen is deposited on their host or food plants within or nearBtmaize fields. To quantify this risk for theBtmaize events 1507, MON 810 and Bt11, EFSA's GMO Panel used mathematical models developed by Perry et al. (2010,2011,2012,2013), which provided estimates of larval mortality (see EFSA,2009; EFSA GMO Panel,2011c,2012c,2015c). Based on the model predictions, the GMO Panel (EFSA GMO Panel,2011c,2012c,2015c) concluded that NTL species classified as ‘very highly’ or ‘extremely’ susceptible to Cry1Ab could be at risk from ingesting harmful amounts of maize MON 810 pollen. However, it is important to note that no species with that degree of susceptibility have been identified to date. This is primarily due to the limited data available on the susceptibility of various NTL species toBttoxins, including Cry1Ab, particularly for non‐pest species (Lee et al.,2025). As a result, the associated risk remains hypothetical.

Nonetheless, the GMO Panel adopted a conservative, worst‐case scenario approach to ensure that the full range of potential species susceptibilities was considered in the modelling. Based on the model estimates, the GMO Panel recommended an isolation distance of 20 meters between maize MON 810 fields and protected habitats where susceptible NTLs may occur. While this recommendation to risk managers remains valid and should be applied where deemed necessary and proportionate, depending on regional protection goals and the extent of maize MON 810 cultivation, EFSA notes that the 2023 PMEM report does not provide any information on the implementation of such isolation distances.

EFSA welcomes the ongoing dialogue initiated by the Competent Authorities of Spain regarding the potential classification of maize MON 810 cultivation as an agricultural practice subject to restrictions or good agricultural practices within designated protection zones. These zones – established to safeguard endangered species and their habitats – could host populations of NTL species in the upper categories of Cry1Ab susceptibility. EFSA encourages continued engagement on this matter to ensure that appropriate risk mitigation measures are effectively implemented where needed.

In the absence of information on the implementation of isolation distances between maize MON 810 fields and protected habitats, uncertainty persists as to whether the cultivation of maize MON 810 in the EU during 2023 may have resulted in the exposure of hypothetical NTL species – classified as ‘very highly’ or ‘extremely’ susceptible – to harmful amounts of maize MON 810 pollen. To ensure that such exposure remains negligible, EFSA reiterates its recommendation to risk managers to consider implementing isolation distances that are proportionate to the scale of maize MON 810 cultivation and aligned with applicable protection goals within their respective jurisdictions. Alternatively, the consent holder may provide data and evidence demonstrating the absence of NTL species in the highest susceptibility categories whose larval stages coincide with maize MON 810 pollen‐shedding period within a 20‐meter radius of maize MON 810 fields adjacent to protected habitats.

Exposure of highly‐susceptible NTL species: It is unclear whether the cultivation of maize MON 810 in 2023 exposed hypothetical NTL species – classified as ‘very highly’ or ‘extremely’ susceptible to Cry1Ab and potentially present in protected habitats – to harmful amounts of maize MON 810 pollen.

Additionally, EFSA identified several methodological and reporting issues (see Section5) that the consent holder should address in future annual PMEM reports.

Several of EFSA's recommendations from previous annual PMEM report assessments remain unaddressed, and new issues were identified in the 2023 PMEM report. Given the critical nature of some of these recommendations, it is imperative that the consent holder addresses both past and current recommendations. Failure to do so could compromise the safety of maize MON 810 cultivation for human and animal health and the environment.

Use the same farmer questionnaire in Portugal and Spain to ensure consistency in data collection.

Table6below provides a complete list of EFSA's recommendations from the assessment of annual PMEM reports on maize MON 810 cultivation, including both recurring and newly identified issues.

The consent holder discussed several of the recommendations outlined in this statement – both in the 2023 PMEM report and in reports from previous reporting seasons, as indicated in the table on pages 31–34 of the 2023 PMEM report. However, in most cases, the consent holder did not implement the specific actions recommended. Instead, the consent holder provided justifications for why the recommendations were considered not feasible or appropriate, often without proposing alternative solutions to achieve the same objective. EFSA does not agree with these justifications and maintains that the recommendations must be implemented.

EFSA welcomes the efforts of the Competent Authorities of Spain to address several of its recommendations, particularly in the areas of: (1) ensuring compliance with refuge implementation; (2) assessing the adequacy of EEMNs for providing monitoring data relevant to the PMEM of maize MON 810; (3) managing teosinte; and (4) implementing appropriate risk mitigation measures for NTLs.

Letter from the European Commission, dated 6 February 2025, requesting EFSA to assess the annual PMEM report on the cultivation of maize MON 810 during the 2023 season provided by the consent holder.

Comments from the EU Member States on the 2023 PMEM report.

Reports on the activities for the monitoring and control of teosinte in Spain in 2024 and report summarising the points discussed at the meeting on the monitoring plan for the commercial cultivation of genetically modified maize MON 810) held on January 30th, 2025, provided to the European Commission by the Competent Authorities of Spain, forwarded to EFSA on 9 April 2025 to be considered in the frame of this mandate.

Additional information provided by the consent holder, dated 12 June 2025.

EFSA may include images or other content for which it does not hold copyright. In such cases, EFSA indicates the copyright holder and users should seek permission to reproduce the content from the original source.

EFSA wishes to thank EFSA Staff Franco Maria Neri for the support provided to this Scientific Output.

Note: Shaded row corresponds to the annual PMEM report under assessment.

Abbreviations: Antama, Study sponsored by Spanish foundation supporting the use of new technologies in agriculture. In the surveys conducted by Antama, all farmers were from north‐eastern Spain; FQ, farmer questionnaires; NR, not reported.

Farmers planting < 5 ha of maize MON 810 in the farm are not required to plant a refuge. In the FQ, only farmers who are required to plant a refuge based on the total hectares of maize MON 810 sown were considered for the calculation of non‐compliance with refuge specifications.

Source:https://www.mapa.gob.es/es/agricultura/temas/biotecnologia/omg/registro‐publico‐omg/superficie_cultivada.aspx(Accessed: 16 July 2025).

Avances de superficies y producciones de cultivos:https://www.mapa.gob.es/es/estadistica/temas/estadisticas‐agrarias/agricultura/avances‐superficies‐producciones‐agricolas/(Accessed: 16 July 2025).

Note: Shaded rows correspond to values from the annual PMEM report under assessment.

Abbreviations: NP, not performed; NR, not reported.

Significant difference (p< 0.05) between the field population and the reference population was identified for that season.

Susceptibility data from these populations were used to estimate the diagnostic concentration (1091 ng Cry1Ab/cm2of diet surface area).

Data provided by the consent holder confirmed that the Cry1Ab protein batches 1 and 2, 2 and 2a, 2b and 2c, 2c and 2d, B1 and B2‐1, and B2‐1 and B2‐2 have similar insecticidal activity.

50% and 90% moult inhibition concentration (MIC50and MIC90) and their 95% confidence intervals (CI 95%) are expressed in ng Cry1Ab/cm2of diet surface area.

Resistance ratio (RR) between MIC values of the field‐collected populations and of the susceptible laboratory population for each growing season.

The reference population was tested two times in 2008.

MIC50and MIC90values of the reference population used to calculate RR MIC50and RR MIC90correspond to those estimated in 2004.

Mean ± standard error of independent assays corresponding to the different sampling zones.

Note: Shaded rows correspond to values from the 2023 PMEM report.

50% and 90% moult inhibition concentration (MIC50and MIC90) and their 95% confidence intervals (CI 95%) are expressed in ng Cry1Ab/cm2of diet surface area.

The ‘G.04’ population was established from egg masses collected from Niedernberg (Germany) in 2005.

The ‘ES.ref’ population was established from 145 diapausing larvae collected from three sampling sites in Galicia (Spain) in 2015, of which 75 survived the diapause, reached the adult stage and were placed in oviposition cages for mating.

The population was established from larvae collected from Andalucía (661 larvae), Madrid (793 larvae), north‐eastern Spain (857 larvae) and Galicia (665 larvae) (Spain) in 1998 (González‐Núñez et al.,2000). To preserve its vigour, the population was refreshed periodically with new individuals. To this end, the progeny of the populations collected for the monitoring bioassays is used, and between 10% and 15% of new individuals with respect to the laboratory population are introduced.

The population was established in 2018 from larvae collected from Galicia (Spain), whereBtmaize has never been cultivated.

The population was established in 2019 from larvae collected from Galicia (Spain), whereBtmaize has never been cultivated.

The population was established in 2020 from larvae collected from Galicia (Spain), whereBtmaize has never been cultivated.

The population was established in 2024 from larvae collected from Coimbra (Portugal).

To assist open data reporting, EFSA has compiled a list of recommended reporting information for insect resistance monitoring studies. The list is not comprehensive, and EFSA might revise it in the future.

Abbreviations: GLP, Good laboratories practices; MICx, Cry1Ab concentration at which × % moult inhibition is observed.

The termgeographical areais defined as a zone where maize is typically grown following similar agronomic practices isolated from other maize areas by barriers that might impair an easy exchange of target pest populations between those areas.

For further information, see Raybould et al. (2013): Characterising microbial protein test substances and establishing their equivalence with plant‐produced proteins for use in risk assessments of transgenic crops. Transgenic Research, 22, 445–460.

EFSA assembled, weighed and integrated the evidence provided in the 2023 PMEM report, comments submitted by the EU Member States, the reports submitted by Spain on the situation of teosinte in Spain in 2024, the Stakeholder meeting report and additional information on literature searches, teosinte and insect resistance management following a weight of evidence approach (EFSA Scientific Committee,2017).

The following Table presents EFSA's weight of evidence assessment as comprising three basic steps: (1) assembling the evidence into lines of evidence of similar type; (2) weighing the evidence; and (3) integrating the evidence.

Abbreviations: DC, diagnostic concentration; ECB, European corn borer; MCB, Mediterranean corn borer; MI, moult inhibition; NT, non‐target.

Annex 2: Assessment of the relevant publications for the cultivation of maize MON 810.

Annexes 1 and 2 are available under theSupporting Information section.

Commission Decision of 22 April 1998 concerning the placing on the market of genetically modified maize (Zea maysL. line MON 810), pursuant to Council Directive 90/220/EEC (98/294/EC). OJ L 131, 5.5.1998, 32–33.

Note that Monsanto has become a subsidiary of Bayer AG as of 21 August 2018.

The responsibilities of EuropaBio in coordinating activities of technology providers on the post‐market environmental monitoring of GM crops were taken over by CropLife Europe as of 1 January 2021.

The harmonised IRM plan establishes that farmers planting more than 5 ha ofBtmaize should plant a non‐Btmaize refuge within a distance of 750 meters from theBtmaize field and which corresponds to at least 20% of the surface planted withBtmaize. The 5 ha threshold relates to the total area ofBtmaize, within or among fields, planted by one grower and is independent of the size of the individual fields or the total land area managed by this grower. Refuges can be located near, adjacent to or withinBtmaize fields; refuges within aBtmaize field can be planted as a block, perimeter border or as strips, and they should be managed similarly as theBtmaize field.

Other factors contributing to the field‐evolved resistance to Bt crops may include (1) limited modes of action of Bt proteins used in Bt crops; (2) cross‐resistance among Bt proteins; (3) use of non‐high dose Bt crop traits; (4) that the resistance is complete on Bt maize plants; (5) not very low initial frequency of resistance alleles (> 0.001); and (6) lack of fitness costs/recessive fitness costs of the resistance (Huang,2021).

The 2023 PMEM report is publicly available athttps://food.ec.europa.eu/document/download/1d17ab3f‐2146‐43ea‐9791‐983c91566a61_en?filename=gmo_rep‐stud_mon‐810_report‐2024.pdf(Accessed 16 July 2025).

2023 PMEM report: Sections 3.2.1.3 and 3.2.1.4 and Appendixes 7 and 8; additional information provided on 12 June 2025.

A detection limit of 7.81% indicates that resistance alleles might not be detected in the susceptibility assays until they reached a frequency of 7.81% in the population.

The selected diagnostic concentration corresponds to the mean 99% moult inhibition concentration (MIC99) estimated with data pooled from ECB populations collected in the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Poland, Portugal, Romania and Spain between 2005 and 2012. This concentration was considered validated after moult inhibition values in all validation assays with ECB populations collected in Spain between 2013 and 2015 were higher than the expected > 99% (EFSA,2018). Batch 2d was used for the bioassays: 1.64 mg Cry1Ab/ml in 50 mM bicarbonate buffer; pH 10.25; 91% purity.

The selected diagnostic concentration corresponds to the upper limit of the 95% confidence interval of the MIC99estimated with data pooled from MCB populations collected in non‐Btmaize fields from north‐eastern Spain in 2009, 2011, 2013 and 2015. Batch B2‐9 was used for the bioassays: 1.8 mg Cry1Ab/ml in 50 mM sodium bicarbonate buffer; pH 10.25; purity 91%.

Asociación Nacional de Obtentores Vegetales (ANOVE):http://anove.es/(Accessed 16 July 2025).

Red de avisos Fitosanitarios de Aragón:http://web.redfara.es/(Accessed 16 July 2025).

https://twitter.com/raif_noticias?lang=en(Accessed 16 July 2025).

https://web.redfara.es/?page_id=5808(Accessed 16 July 2025).

http://agricultura.gencat.cat/ca/ambits/agricultura/dar_sanitat_vegetal_nou/avisos‐fitosanitaris/(Accessed 16 July 2025).

Available inhttps://r4eu.efsa.europa.eu/app/bmdbayesian(Accessed 9 July 2025).

2023 PMEM report: Sections 3.1.3.1 and 3.1.5.1 and Appendices 1 and 2.

The questionnaire was completed by 250 out of the 602 farmers that were contacted in Spain. The 334 farmers that did not respond gave the following reasons: (1) because they did not grow maize MON 810 in 2023 (92 farmers); (2) they grew MON 810 in 2023 but refused to answer the interview (69 farmers); (3) they did not grow maize in 2023 (81 farmers); (4) they were absent or could not be localised (59 farmers); (5) they were retired (33 farmers).

https://estacionavisos.agrointegra.intiasa.es/ai/accesoVisor.do(Accessed 16 July 2025).

https://extensius.cat/butlletins/(Accessed 16 July 2025).

https://estacionavisos.agrointegra.intiasa.es/ai/accesoVisor.do(Accessed 16 July 2025).

https://extensius.cat/butlletins/(Accessed 16 July 2025).

2023 PMEM report: Section 3.1.5.5 and Appendix 5; additional information received on 12 June 2025.

2023 PMEM report: Section 3.1.5.6; additional information received on 12 June 2025.

US EPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency),2010. Biopesticide Registration Action Document: Cry1Ab and Cry1FBacillus thuringiensis(Bt) corn plant‐incorporated protectants. US EPA (United States Environmental Protection Agency),2018. White paper on resistance in lepidopteran pests ofBacillus thuringiensis(Bt) plant incorporated protectants in the United States.