Neonatal death and later disability remain common sequelae of hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy (HIE) despite the now standard use of therapeutic hypothermia (HT). New therapeutic approaches to brain protection are required. Melatonin is an indolamine hormone with free-radical scavenging, antiapoptotic, anti-inflammatory and gene regulatory neuroprotective properties, which has extensive preclinical evidence of safety and efficacy. Pharmacokinetic (PK) data suggest it is necessary to reach melatonin levels of 15–30 mg/L within 6–8 hours of hypoxia-ischaemia for brain protection. We developed a novel Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) grade melatonin in ethanol 50 mg/mL solution for intravenous use. In preclinical studies, ethanol is an adjuvant excipient with additional neuroprotective benefit; optimised dosing protocols can achieve therapeutic melatonin levels while limiting blood alcohol concentrations (BACs).

The Acute High Dose Melatonin for Encephalopathy of the Newborn (ACUMEN) Study is a first-in-human, international, multicentre, phase 1 safety study of intravenous melatonin in babies with moderate/severe HIE receiving HT. Sixty babies will be studied over two phases: a dose escalation study including four dose levels to establish the recommended phase 2 dose (RP2D), followed by a 6-month cohort expansion study of RP2D to further characterise PKs and affirm safety. Participants will receive a 2-hour intravenous infusion of melatonin within 6 hours of birth, followed by five maintenance doses every 12 hours to cover the period of HT. Plasma melatonin and BACs will be monitored. The RP2D will be based on the attainment of therapeutic melatonin levels while limiting BACs and the frequency of dose-limiting events (DLEs). A Bayesian Escalation with Overdose Control approach will be used to estimate the risk of DLE per dose level, with a target level of <33%. ACUMEN will establish a network of centres with standardised neurocritical care and harmonised MRI systems for the analysis of the primary outcome—magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) lactate to N-acetylaspartate peak area ratio localised to the basal ganglia and thalamus and include a nested blood biomarker study to explore early disease severity indicators.

Approval has been given by the London Central National Health Service Health Research Authority Ethics Committee (25/LO/0170) and UK Clinical Trials Authorisation from the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. Separate approvals have been sought in Ireland and Australia. Dissemination will be via peer-reviewed journals, conference presentations, public registries and plain language summaries for parent/legal guardian(s), in accordance with national requirements.

The Acute High Dose Melatonin for Encephalopathy of the Newborn (ACUMEN) Trial is a phase 1 safety and dose escalation study which will establish the recommended phase 2 dose of a novel melatonin formulation in the target high-risk population of babies with moderate/severe hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy (HIE) who are being treated with therapeutic hypothermia, a treatment which is only partially effective.

Dose escalation decisions will be contingent on safety and established target melatonin levels, based on robust safety, efficacy and pharmacokinetic preclinical data.

The ACUMEN Trial uses a Bayesian Escalation with Overdose Control approach to estimate risk of dose-limiting events with accumulating trial safety data to support dose escalation decisions.

A network of 10 large, tertiary neonatal units across the UK, Ireland and Australia, with experience of recruiting into neonatal and HIE trials and a standardised level of neurocritical care, will establish a network for future phase 2 trials.

The requirement for the loading dose to be administered within 6 hours is necessary but challenging in this multicentre study.

Further attempts to optimise cooling protocols with longer and deeper cooling did not improve outcomes3and new therapies are urgently needed. Promising therapies such as inhaled Xenon7and Erythropoietin2have not demonstrated treatment benefit in phase 2 and 3 trials, respectively, despite indications of potential benefit in large animal preclinical studies.8,10A phase 3 randomised controlled trial to assess intravenous allopurinol with HT has been stopped early after recruiting 503 babies due to early indicators of lack of benefit of the intervention (EudraCT 2016-000222-19).

The Acute High Dose Melatonin for Encephalopathy of the Newborn (ACUMEN) Study is a first-in-human, international, multicentre phase 1 safety trial of melatonin to augment HT brain protection for moderate/severe HIE.

Melatonin (N-acetyl-5-methoxytryptamine) is a promising therapy to translate from bench to cot side, with a pleiotropic profile for neuroprotection supported by comprehensive preclinical safety and efficacy data. The neuroprotective actions of melatonin include potent free radical scavenging properties, anti-inflammatory and antiapoptotic activities and gene regulatory effects on melatonin receptors (MT1 and MT2).11These benefits inhibit the initiation of the injurious neurotoxic cascade leading to cell death during the period of secondary energy failure (from ∼6 hours after birth), thereby reducing adverse neurological outcomes.

The investigational medicinal product (IMP) is a novel melatonin in ethanol (50 mg/mL) manufactured in accordance with Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) under a manufacturing authorisation licence for intravenous administration. The IMP will require dilution in 5% glucose to a final melatonin concentration of 2.5 mg/mL for intravenous infusion. The dosing regimen for this study has been optimised to maintain therapeutic melatonin levels while limiting the accumulation of ethanol and its by-product, acetaldehyde, as discussed below.

Over the last 15 years the University College London (UCL) Neonatal Neuroprotection Research Group has focused on preclinical studies assessing safety, pharmacokinetics (PKs) and neuroprotective efficacy of intravenous melatonin in the newborn piglet; together, these studies give the foundation for the optimised dosing regimen in the clinical phase 1 ACUMEN Trial.812 20,22These data suggest that the attainment of therapeutic melatonin levels of 15–30 mg/L within 6–8 hours of HI is necessary for optimal brain protection. Critically, a loading dose of 20 mg/kg is required to rapidly achieve therapeutic levels after birth, while 12-hourly maintenance doses of 10 mg/kg every 12 hours from 24 hours ensure therapeutic levels are maintained over time (seefigure 1). This dosing regimen minimised blood ethanol (alcohol) concentrations (BACs), particularly during maintenance dosing (seefigure 1B); we observed no evidence of accumulation of the alcohol by-product, acetaldehyde.22These preclinical studies support the safety, PKs and efficacy of intravenous melatonin for clinical use in neonates.

No significant physiological safety concerns were observed with intravenous melatonin dissolved in ethanol. In study 1 (Table S1), there was no difference in mean arterial blood pressure during the 6-hour melatonin infusion and no difference overall in inotrope use.20Most recently in study 5, there was no difference in mean arterial blood pressure, although we observed a clinically non-significant, mild increase in inotropic support following the loading dose (increase in vaso-inotropic score equivalent to a dopamine dose of 5 mcg/kg/hour).22We observed no toxic effects of intravenous melatonin on haematology (full blood counts) and blood biochemical monitoring (liver function and renal function).

The Monash Group demonstrated robust neuroprotection using a similar melatonin formulation containing ethanol at similar doses of 15–17 mg/kg23 24but with a dosing regimen similar to a continuous infusion. Following umbilical cord occlusion, newborn lambs were administered melatonin 60 mg, dissolved in ethanol, given as 5 mg bolus intravenous injections every 2 hours from 30 mins after birth until 24.5 hours of life. Melatonin-treated animals showed a significant reduction in Lac/NAA, improvement in achieving neurobehavioural milestones and reduction in immunohistochemical markers of cerebral brain injury. There was no report of hypotension or need for increased inotropic support, although increased drowsiness was observed. Treatment benefit was additive to cooling, supporting the data from the newborn piglet studies.24While this dosing regimen also shows promise, a 2-hour infusion used in the piglet studies may be more suitable in critically unwell infants.

Jerez-Caleroet alconducted the only clinical study of intravenous melatonin administration in babies with HIE receiving cooling.30The melatonin formulation contained melatonin 6.5 mg/mL dissolved in propylene glycol and macrogol. Twelve babies with moderate/severe HIE undergoing HT received a daily dose of 5 mg/kg melatonin administered within 6 hours of birth intravenously over 2 hours every 24 hours for 3 days. Compared with HT+placebo (0.9% sodium chloride), melatonin-treated infants demonstrated similar laboratory haematology, renal, liver, metabolic and coagulation parameters. Melatonin was not associated with increased seizure activity and MRI findings did not differ significantly between groups. At 18 months, melatonin-treated infants achieved higher cognitive scores and a trend to improved language scores. Melatonin was associated with reduced systemic proinflammatory cytokines.32The authors concluded that melatonin was considered safe. The benefit on neurological outcomes remains inconclusive given the confounding effects (higher Sarnat Score in the placebo group) and small sample size of the study. Detailed PK data and adverse events (AEs) data were not reported.

Clinical studies of melatonin in babies with HIE meeting eligibility criteria for HT are now needed to assess safety and PKs. Based on reassuring safety data for intravenous melatonin dosing at 5 mg/kg, we plan for dose escalation starting at an intravenous loading dose of 5 mg/kg over 2 hours with five maintenance doses of 2.5 mg/kg over 2 hours every 12 hours from 24 hours. AEs and melatonin, BACs and, insentinelbabies, acetaldehyde levels will be measured to provide a comprehensive assessment of the recommended phase 2 dose (RP2D).

The IMP will be administered intravenously as a loading dose within 6 hours of birth (T0) followed by five (half-dose) maintenance infusions from 24 hours (T0+24 hours) every 12 hours to cover the period of cooling and rewarming. All infusions will be given over 2 hours with close safety monitoring. Multiple doses of melatonin over this period are necessary given the evolving brain injury over hours and days after HI.

Given the lack of PK data in babies, dose escalation will proceed over four dose levels to achieve the target melatonin levels of 15–30 mg/L (based on the preclinical data), while assessing safety, and ensuring the BACs remain <0.25 g/L. Dose escalation will start at a dose of 5 mg/kg (plus five maintenance doses of 2.5 mg/kg), which has already been shown to be safe in this target population in a different formulation.30Incremental increases of 5 mg/kg with subsequent dose levels are based on reassuring PK data for melatonin and BACs from simulations of a population PK model in newborn piglets. Each dose level chosen will be based on predictions from the concurrent human PK data as the ACUMEN Study progresses. Doses up to 30 mg/kg may be given based on the No Observed Adverse Events Level (NOAEL) in piglets.

The overall aim of the ACUMEN Study is to assess the safety of four intravenous dose levels of melatonin in babies with moderate/severe HIE receiving HT.

Safety profile assessment: to assess the safety profile of melatonin across all dose levels being studied based on the occurrence of a dose-limiting event (DLE).

The attainment of putative therapeutic plasma melatonin levels (15–30 mg/L) across dose levels being studied.

The attainment of putative BACs safety (<0.25 g/L) across dose levels being studied.

PK model: To establish the PK profile of intravenous melatonin infusion in term infants with HIE undergoing HT.

Feasibility of the neonatal neuroprotection trial network: To assess the feasibility of developing a neonatal neuroprotection trial network for future phase 2 RCTs.

Recruitment feasibility: To assess the feasibility of recruiting participants within 6 hours of birth.

Biomarker discovery feasibility: To assess the feasibility of developing a standardised approach to exploratory blood biomarker discovery integrated with neuroprotection trials to identify early markers of HIE severity and treatment response.

Dose-response assessment: To evaluate the dose-response curve for intravenous melatonin infusion in the target population.

To develop a physiologically based PK model of melatonin and ethanol.

This multicentre, phase 1 safety study will recruit from level 3 neonatal intensive care units (NICUs) with experience in managing babies receiving HT for HIE across England, Scotland, Ireland and Australia. We aim to recruit 60 babies with moderate/severe HIE receiving HT starting August 2025, in two phases: (1) A 12-month dose escalation phase, to establish safety and identify the RP2D (24–39 babies), and (2) A 6-month cohort expansion phase, to affirm safety and PK of the RP2D (21–36 babies).

The dose escalation phase (illustrated infigure 2) will assess up to four dose levels using the six potential doses listed intable 1. Participants will be allocated to a single dose level and overall, a minimum of three participants will be enrolled per dose level. AEs, based on the Neonatal Adverse Event Severity Score (NAESS)39and blood samples over six time points, will be collected to measure melatonin and BACs as shown infigure 2.

Dose level 1 will start with a loading dose of 5 mg/kg given within 6 hours of birth (T0) followed by five maintenance doses of 2.5 mg/kg from T0+24 hours every 12 hours. Blood melatonin levels and BACs will be measured over six time points based on PK modelling using piglet data.

They must havemoderateHIE based on aEEG/EEG or Modified Sarnat Neurological Examination.

If melatonin, BACs and acetaldehyde levels are not within the stated levels or not available, no further doses will be administered. In addition, further IMP administration to thesentinelbaby mustnotcontinue if thesentinelbaby experiences a DLE.

The clinical summary, safety and PK data will be reviewed by the Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB) following 100 hours after last IMP administration (‘DLE safety window’) to determine whether the recruitment to the dose level may continue. Once safety has been confirmed in thesentinelbaby, recruitment of subsequent babies may occur in parallel. Due to logistical constraints, only melatonin levels and BACs will be measured for the remaining participants at this dose level.

The DSMB will review the safety and PK data following the recruitment of the third baby in a cohort. The DSMB will recommend to the Trial Steering Committee (TSC) one of the following possible outcomes: (1) Recruit at the next dose level, (2) Continue recruitment at the current dose level, (3) Reduce dose to one of the previous dose levels (where relevant), or (4) Stop the trial. Dose escalation decisions will be based on both the concurrent accumulating safety (suspected DLEs) and PK data, and their predictions at the next dose level. For PK, the trial pharmacologist will develop a population-PK model to simulate the plasma melatonin levels and BACs at the next dose level. If PK modelling predicts that melatonin systemic exposure will be equal to or exceed the Cmax of 33.5 mg/L and Area under the serum concentration vs. time curve for 0-24h (AUC24) of 454.7 mg*h/L or the BAC safety threshold (<0.25 g/L), that dose level will not be opened to recruitment. For DLE predictions, a Bayesian Escalation with Overdose Control (EWOC) approach will be used. EWOC uses a statistical model to estimate the risk of DLE per dose level with the target level of DLEs set at 33% for this trial. While awaiting dose escalation decisions (from the second dose level onwards), and in the absence of DLEs in the first three babies, a maximum of three further babies can be recruited to the current dose level after approval from the DSMB. In the event of a DLE, or having recruited the three additional babies, backfilling40to the previous dose level can occur while awaiting the dose escalation decision. Data acquired from additional babies will be included in a subsequent dose escalation report for review by the DSMB/TSC. Backfilling will be limited to a maximum of 15 babies in the dose escalation study.

The model predicts the dose to achieve the melatonin target is lower than the dose to reach the dose-limiting BAC threshold. In this case, dose level 3 will aim to achieve the melatonin target.

The model predicts the dose to achieve the melatonin target is equal to the dose to reach the dose-limiting ethanol target. In this case, dose level 3 will be set at one level below the predicted target dose.

The model predicts the dose to achieve the melatonin target is greater than the dose to reach the dose-limiting ethanol target. In this case, dose level 3 will be set at the level predicted to be immediately below the predicted dose-limiting ethanol cut-off.

Following dose level 3, the PK model will be updated and dose level 4 set according to a dose level predicted to be immediately below the predicted dose-limiting BAC cut-off. At the end of the dose escalation phase, RP2D will be established.

The cohort expansion study will recruit a minimum of 21 and maximum of 36 babies to further assess the safety and PK of RP2D. The DSMB will convene after every 10 participants are enrolled to assess PK and the overall safety data.

It is anticipated that if the acetaldehyde data in the dose escalation study are reassuring, the expansion cohort will not include blood acetaldehyde levels as part of the PK blood analysis.

Exploratory blood marker studies are integral aspects to neonatal neuroprotection trials.41Blood inflammatory cytokines,42,44microRNA,45neurospecific proteins46 47and metabolomics48 49have shown promise in predicting severity of HIE, 2-year neurodevelopmental outcomes and developing our understanding of the molecular pathways activated in babies with HIE. As brain injury is a temporal process, evolving with time, blood samples over several time points are necessary.

The exploratory biomarker study is an optional parallel study aimed to use the next generation of novel technology to identify promising biomarkers of HIE severity. Blood samples at recruitment, T0+24 hours, T0+48 hours, T0+72 hours and T0+96 hours will be taken to assess rapid point-of-care test (POCT) Ubiquitin Carboxyl-Terminal Hydrolase L1 (UCH-L1) and Glial Fibrillary Acidic Protein (GFAP),50NUcleic acid Linked Immuno-Sandwich Assay (NULISA),51micro-RNA, metabolomics and an extensive renal function panel (seefigure 3).

To account for differences in cooling criteria across different neonatal units, the trial is pragmatic and will include babies eligible for HT according to local guidelines. Clinical data including blood gas, neurological examination and background aEEG/EEG activity will be collected for analysis.

Clinically stable* at the time of IMP administration.

Invasive blood pressure monitoring in situ prior to the administration of the IMP loading dose.

All participants will undergo a further assessment of HIE grade as determined by aEEG/EEG and/or a Modified Sarnat neurological examination prior to IMP administration.

Sentinel Participant Criteria Only: must not meet the criteria for severe HIE.

Informed consent from parents/guardians/person with legal responsibility.

Well-placed central venous catheter or patent peripheral cannula in situ.

Mean blood pressure (with or without inotropic support) must be greater than the fifth centile for gestation within 30 mins prior to IMP administration.

Clinical or electrical seizures, if present, are controlled with antiseizure medications.

Clinical observations within an acceptable range for an infant undergoing HT.

No clinical stability concerns from the attending neonatologist.

Initiation of IMP is unlikely to be administered within 6 hours of birth.

Infants born in very poor condition or judged too sick to be included (high risk of mortality) in an experimental first-in-human study, for example, infants that are requiring maximal intensive care therapy or in a condition considered to be life-limiting.

Postnatal hypoxic insult without any evidence of HIE at birth.

Birth weight less than the second centile for gestation on UK-WHO growth charts.

Congenital anomalies, that is, any major antenatally diagnosed congenital abnormalities such as congenital heart disease, suspected or known chromosomal abnormalities.

Head circumference less than second centile adjusted to sex of the baby on UK-WHO growth charts.

Infant is participating or intends to participate in another interventioanl study during the birth hospitalisation (not including oservational studies).

Parents/legal guardians unable to give consent due to leanring or other difficulties.

In the unlikely event of multiple births, if one baby has HIE, participation in the trial will be offered. If both/multiple babies have HIE, participation in the trial will not be offered.

The parent/legal guardian(s) of eligible participants will be identified by the clinical team on admission to the neonatal unit for cooling and asked for their willingness to participate in the trial. Informed consent will be obtained by a medically qualified investigator or authorised delegate of the study team. Given the time-critical nature of the trial and associated traumatic perinatal circumstances, a recruitment video and short patient information leaflet will be provided in addition to a more detailed patient information sheet. Verbal consent may be obtained initially, witnessed by an independent member of the clinical team, followed by written consent no later than 24 hours after birth. Separate consent will also be obtained for the optional biomarker study. Use of local language translation services to facilitate the consenting process in non-English-speaking parent/legal guardian(s) is permissive where the investigator is confident the discussion was accurately understood.

The IMP, melatonin in ethanol 50 mg/mL solution for infusion, is a clear solution presented in 6 mL sterile amber vials, manufactured in accordance with GMP by Eurofins Proxy Laboratories under their manufacturing authorisation licence. Orphan drug designation has been obtained for HIE with the European Medicines Agency (EU/3/23/2757) and the US Food and Drug Administration (DRU-2022–8888). The solution is stored at 2°C to 8°C and requires dilution in 5% glucose to a final melatonin concentration of 2 mg/mL (3.8% v/v ethanol) for intravenous use. The IMP should be started as a 2-hour infusion within 6 hours of birth (T0) via a separate lumen of a well-placed central venous catheter or peripheral 24G cannula. Subsequently, five maintenance doses will be administered every 12 hours from T0+24 hours over 2 hours. Clinical stability (as stated in the eligibility criteria) must be assessed and confirmed prior to each IMP administration. Where the baby is not stable at assessment but subsequently becomes stable within 1 hour of the scheduled dosing event, the IMP may be delivered. Where a dose was missed due to clinical instability, the next IMP dose must be administered in accordance with the treatment schedule. No extra IMP doses outside the treatment schedule will be allowed.

PK exposure cap of melatonin (<33.5mg/L), ethanol (<0.25g/L) or acetaldehyde (<2.2mg/L) exceeded (this will be available concomitantly in thesentinelbaby only). PK exposure cap of melatonin, ethanol or acetaldehyde predicted to exceed at the subsequent dose escalation.

Withdrawal of consent by parent/legal guardian(s).

A decision made by the treating clinician based on any change in the infant’s condition that justifies the discontinuation of treatment.

The analysis will be by intention to treat. Participants who discontinue protocol treatment, for any of the above reasons, should remain in the trial for the purpose of follow-up and data analysis. A blood sample will be collected at the time of termination and an additional sample 24 hours after the last IMP administration. These samples will be analysed for PK purposes to characterise the plasma levels of melatonin and ethanol.

NIRS monitoring provides insight into regional tissue oxygen saturation (rSO2), indicating the balance between oxygen delivery to tissues and tissue oxygen utilisation at the bedside. The ACUMEN Trial will collect NIRS data over the period of cooling and rewarming using the Masimo Root with the O3 Regional Oximetry system. In HIE,55elevated cerebral regional oxygen saturation (CrSO2) within 6 hours of birth,56during cooling57 58and rewarming,58 59correlates with adverse neurological outcomes.

Conventional MRI provides information regarding the nature and severity of the insult, timing and prognosis. This is implied by the location and extent of injury and the signal characteristics on T1-weighted (T1W), T2-weighted (T2W) and diffusion-weighted MRI (dMRI). For optimal detection of evolving injury with dMRI, the scan should be acquired within the first 10 days after birth prior to pseudo-normalisation, with the optimal days of acquisition between days 4 and 6.60 61Conventional MRI with dMRI predicts adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes at 2 years following HIE with a high degree of accuracy (Area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve of 0.89 to 0.91).62An imaging contract research organisation (CRO) (Bioxydyn) will assist with harmonisation of the multivendor 3T MRI scanners (Philips, Siemens and General Electric (GE)) using MRS and dMRI phantoms to ensure reproducibility and standardisation of MRS and dMRI. Data acquisition and analysis will meet regulatory expectations (International Council for Harmonisation (ICH) Good Clinical Practice (GCP)) with a controlled and auditable workflow.

Conventional MRI scans will be reported by the local radiological team and used for routine clinical management and counselling at each site. In addition, conventional MRI scans (including T1W, T2W, dMRI, susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI) and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) sequences) will be pseudonymised and sent to Bioxydyn from where they will be forwarded to two independent neonatal neurologists with extensive experience in assessing neonatal MRIs, who are members of the ACUMEN consortium. MRIs will be scored using the validated Rutherford63and Weeke62Scores. At this stage, the scores will be blinded, but the dose escalation level will be known. These scores will be used throughout the phase 1 study for safety monitoring and will be part of the data assessed by the DSMB at each dose level. At the end of the study, the MRIs will be batched for final radiological scoring, when the assessors will be blinded, including blinding to the IMP dose level administered. Incidental findings are likely to have been picked up by the site clinical radiologist as part of standard care. Unexpected MRI findings that could be related to the IMP will be reported to the DSMB.

The MRS Lac/NAA peak area ratio acquired from the left BGT voxel using a long echo time (TE 288 msec) has a high predictive accuracy with a sensitivity and specificity, respectively, of 100% and 97% for motor outcome, 90% and 97% for cognitive outcome, and 81% and 97% for language outcomes using a Lac/NAA threshold of 0.39.28The Lac/NAA peak area ratio has been used as a surrogate outcome measure in a phase 2 imaging biomarker neuroprotection trial for HIE7and validated against 2-year neurodevelopmental outcomes.64The Lac/NAA is currently the best available, pragmatic predictor of 2-year neurodevelopmental outcomes.28 29The use of a robust surrogate imaging biomarker such as MRS Lac/NAA has the potential to expedite clinical translation by evaluating treatment effects in a timely fashion with smaller sample sizes. Developing a strong infrastructure for a high standard of MRI/MRS harmonisation in the ACUMEN Study will be vital for the success of future phase 2 surrogate imaging biomarker neuroprotection trials.

Safety: The highest dose level that has an estimated probability of DLE closest but below the target DLE level of no greater than 33%. The totality of the safety data will also be considered.

PK: Achieving and maintaining putative melatonin plasma levels of at least 15–30 mg/L and ensuring BAC remains <0.25 g/L. The PKPD (dose-response curve stratified by severity of HIE) model may also be considered.

In the event that a suspected DLE occurs, the sponsor will be notified within 24 hours and the event will be reviewed by an independent clinical reviewer. The DSMB will review the data to confirm the DLE and advise on whether to continue recruitment at the same dose level or recruit to a lower dose level. If a suspected DLE occurs in asentinelbaby, at the discretion of the DSMB and TSC, a secondsentinelbaby may be requested at the same dose level; however, if a further suspected DLE occurs in this secondsentinelbaby, the dose will be considered unsafe, and no further dosing will occur at this dose level or higher.

The infusion of the loading dose of IMP will be given as soon as possible after birth (T0), once arterial and venous access has been obtained and the participant is deemed clinically stable. IMP must be administered no later than 6 hours after birth with five subsequent maintenance doses given at T0+24 hours, T0+36 hours, T0+48 hours, T0+60 hours and T0+72 hours (±1 hour) via an individual lumen of a well-placed central venous catheter or peripheral venous cannula. Screening for clinical stability, assessments and investigations will be performed in accordance with the schedule of events summarised intable 2with a detailed schedule outlined in the supplementary materials (online supplemental table S3). Clinical stability must be confirmed within 30 mins prior to each scheduled IMP administration. Further clinical safety data during the infusion of the IMP will be collected as outlined intable 3. This includes intensive vital signs (including invasive blood pressure) monitoring every 15 mins during the loading dose, liberalising to every hour during the maintenance doses. In the event that invasive blood pressure monitoring is lost after T0+48 hours, IMP administration may continue provided the baby is not on inotropic support and has not experienced a DLE.

The full detailed schedule is included in the supplementary materials (online supplemental table S3).

AE, adverse event; aEEG/EEG, amplitude-integrated electroencephalography; CK, creatine kinase; CRP, C-reactive protein; IMP, investigational medicinal product; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; MRS, magnetic resonance spectroscopy; NIRS, near infrared spectroscopy; SAE, serious adverse event.

In the event that invasive arterial access is lost after 48 hours from the start of the loading dose (L0+48 hours), provided there is no DLE and the baby is not on inotropic support, melatonin may be continued and non-invasive blood pressure monitoring recorded.

Ventilation data will be recorded every 30 mins during the loading dose.

DLE, dose-limiting event; FiO2, fraction of inspired oxygen ; IMP, investigational medicinal product; NIRS, near infrared spectroscopy; rSaO2, regional oxygen saturation.

Blood (PK) samples will be obtained (0.5 mL in sodium fluoride/potassium oxalate) at T0, T0+2 hours, T0+24 hours, T0+26 hours, T0+48 hours, T0+96 hours to measure peak and trough melatonin and BAC levels. Parents, guardians and those legally responsible for the participant may also give consent to the exploratory biomarker study outlined infigure 3with the schedule of blood sampling shown intable 4. Where available, all samples will be obtained from the arterial line; however, if this is no longer available after T0+48 hours, the PK sample must be obtained via venepuncture. The exploratory biomarker sample may be obtained opportunistically with routine bloods. Where the participant is anaemic (haemoglobin (Hb) <100 g/L), the exploratory biomarker sample must not be taken. Standard-of-care blood results (full blood count, renal and liver profiles, coagulation screen, blood culture, CRP) will also be collected as part of the trial.

GFAP, glial fibrillary acid protein; UCH-L1, ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase L1.

Following completion of AE monitoring and neonatal intensive care, babies will be discharged with outpatient follow-up at 3 months. Prior to discharge, neurological assessments including the Hammersmith Neonatal Neurology Examination and video for General Movement Assessment will be performed as part of standard care as shown intable 1. At follow-up, the Ages and Stages Questionnaire, the Hammersmith Infant Neurological Examination and a further General Movement Assessment video will be obtained.

Participants meeting the eligibility criteria for the ACUMEN Trial will be enrolled via the Sealed Envelope online system, which will allocate participants to an individualised participant identification number (PIN) for pseudo-anonymisation of research data. During the dose escalation phase, assignment to the current dose level will be managed via the Sealed Envelope system in accordance with the dosing schedule approved by the TSC. Clinical data from participant records will be collected as illustrated in the schedule of events (seetable 2) under the PIN into the password-protected study database (OpenClinica). MRI/MRS Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) data will be transferred to VoxelFlow software, anonymised and reviewed by two independent experts in perinatal brain MRI interpretation. The aEEG/EEG recording will be uploaded to the Stratus EEG system software for review by a neurophysiologist with expertise in neonatal neurology. Where available, the NIRS trace will be transferred to the UCL Data Safe Haven for review. Laboratory data (including PK) will be provided directly to the sponsor. All PK final reports will be entered into OpenClinica linked to the PIN.

All data will be handled in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018 and the EU General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 2016. The data are stored on secure, GDPR-compliant, cloud-based servers held within the UK and EU. Any transfer of documentation containing personally identifying data between the site and the coordinating centre will be subject to AES-256 industry-standard encryption.

The plasma levels of melatonin, ethanol and acetaldehyde will be measured by a central Good Laboratory Practice (GLP) laboratory (Analytical Services International (ASI), London); plasma melatonin levels will be measured using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), ethanol and acetaldehyde levels will be measured using headspace gas chromatography-flame ionisation detection (Headspace GC-FID).

Whole blood UCH-L1 and GFAP concentration will be measured in real time at the cot side using the Abbott Traumatic Brain Injury cartridge and Alinity POCT device according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All plasma and dried blood spots will be processed at the local sites, stored at −80°C and transferred to the UCL Neonatal Neuroprotection Research Group Laboratory for biobanking at the end of the study. Plasma protein concentrations will be measured using the Alamar NULISA Central Nervous System Disease panel array by the UCL Dementia Research Institute Biomarker Factory. Qiagen will measure an array of microRNA markers previously shown to have predictive potential in HIE.45Plasma metabolomics will be measured using non-targeted rapid liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis by Sapient Bioanalytics. The remaining samples will be stored for future exploratory biomarker studies.

This is a dose-finding, safety study. The sample size of 60 participants is based on the collection of sufficient safety data to estimate the risk of DLE and PK profile at each dose level, plus a cohort expansion cohort to assess recruitment feasibility within the time targets of the trial.

The escalation will proceed according to the principles of the Bayesian Escalation with Overdose Control (EWOC) approach. The maximum tolerated dose (MTD) is defined to be the dose level of melatonin that results in a probability θ=33% that a DLE will occur in the period between the initiation of IMP treatment and 100 hours after the final administration of IMP, that is, P (DLT | dose = MTD) = 33%. The expected proportion of babies treated at doses above the MTD will be controlled at a maximum of 25% (EWOC feasibility bound α, kept constant). We use the classical specification of EWOC with a two-parameter logistic curve between dose and probability of DLE .68The two parameters of the re-parameterised model, γ (the MTD) and ρ (the probability of DLT at the dose level 1), are given Uniform (ie, β (1,1)) prior distributions. For γ, the range is from the lowest dose to the highest dose. For ρ the range is from 0% to θ=33%.

We will use cohorts of three patients during the dose escalation part of the study. The operating characteristics of the dose-finding design are based on DLE occurrence for three key scenarios, based on 1000 simulations of the study per scenario (seetable 5) for 24 dose-finding babies in cohorts of three. The first scenario is such that the MTD is expected to be the fourth dose level (ie, γ=4) and ρ=0.1. The second scenario is one where the fourth dose level is too toxic (P (DLE | dose=4) = 51%) and the MTD is the third one. In the third scenario, the probability of DLE is generally high (ρ=0.15, P (DLE | dose=4) = 79%), and the MTD is the second dose level.

DLE, dose-limiting event; MTD, maximum tolerated dose.

Interim review of the safety and PK data will be performed as follows: (1) After eachsentinelbaby (2) After recruitment of a cohort of three infants per dose level for dose escalation decisions and (3) After a suspected DLE. The purpose of the interim review will be to affirm safety and PK. Following completion of the DLE safety window (100 hours after last IMP administration), the safety and PK data will be source-verified by the sponsor and presented to the DSMB for review. The DSMB will review the data and advise the TSC on whether dosing at the current level may continue (for example after asentinelbaby or DLE event) or whether a dose escalation to the next dose level is recommended (after a cohort of three babies at a dose level). For thesentinelbaby at each dose level, no other baby may be recruited until the interim safety and PK data have been reviewed by the DSMB/TSC. For the purpose of dose escalation decisions, the trial statistician and pharmacologist will provide updated estimates of dose-limiting toxicity and PK predictions at the next dose level. In the cohort expansion phase, the safety and PK data will be reviewed after every 10 babies. No interim analysis will be performed for the secondary and exploratory outcomes.

Emergence of new therapies for HIE of greater benefit to this population.

The DSMB recommends terminating the trial for safety reasons or if any evidence suggests that the risk-benefit ratio of the clinical trial is unfavourable.

AEs: The incidence or severity of AEs in this study indicates a potential risk to patients taking part in the trial. Any isolated NAESS grade 5 AE (death) considered related to the IMP will result in immediate stopping of recruitment at the current dose level. No further participants will be recruited to that dose level until review by the DSMB and TSC.

PK: If the observed or predicted melatonin, ethanol, or acetaldehyde levels exceed their respective Cmax cap in thesentinelbaby, further dosing at this dose level must not proceed until DSMB/TSC review.

Significant protocol deviation, lack of compliance or cooperation on the part of an investigator, which endangers the safety of the participants or the validity of the trial.

The UCL Comprehensive Clinical Trials Unit (CCTU) is the global sponsor for the study and is responsible for the overall trial oversight across all participating countries. UCL CCTU also acts as the sponsor for sites in the UK and Ireland. In Australia, the Flinders University Clinical Trials Unit will undertake sponsor duties at the national level under delegated authority, with UCL CCTU maintaining global trial oversight.

A Trial Management Group (TMG), comprising the Chief Investigator, CCTU, Patient and Public Involvement representative and other lead investigators, will be responsible for the design, coordination and strategic management of the trial. The TSC is an independent group providing trial oversight to safeguard the interest of the trial participants. The TSC, through its independent chair, will provide overall supervision and ultimately decide on the continuation of the trial. The DSMB is responsible for safeguarding the interests of the trial participants and monitoring the data for the trial. They are the only oversight body that has access to the individual participants’ data. Through their appointed chair, the DSMB will make recommendations to the TSC on whether the trial should continue as planned. The DSMB and TSC will independently meet after eachsentinelbaby and after every cohort of three babies for dose escalation decisions. In the situation where the TSC disagrees with the DSMB’s recommendation, a meeting will be held between the TSC and the DSMB to come to a shared decision. If a consensus is not made, then advice from the MHRA will be required.

UCL CCTU will implement a structured communication process to ensure participant safety and consistent site-level actions. Formal electronic notification of all sites will occur during sponsor working hours. In the event of any safety concerns, an urgent review by the DSMB may be convened. Where necessary, recruitment may be restricted via Sealed Envelope to prevent further dose allocation, and all sites will be formally notified by the sponsor.

Clinical trial monitoring will be conducted by the trial team at UCL CCTU in accordance with a predefined Quality Management and Monitoring Plan overseen by the UCL CCTU Quality Management Group. The monitoring strategy will involve 100% source data verification across all dose levels through on-site and remote visits, and central monitoring. Activities will include verification of eligibility, consent, IMP administration, safety assessments and reporting of AEs. Sites will undergo on-site monitoring following recruitment of asentinelparticipant and again after the third participant at a given dose level. This will ensure all data are fully source-verified prior to submission to the DSMB and TSC for dose escalation decisions.

A parent-patient representative from Hope for HIE, a parent-patient advocacy group for HIE, is included within the TSC and TMG. The patient representative has been involved from the early planning stages of the trial. Participant-facing materials have been reviewed and suggestions incorporated to ensure clear communication of the trial risks and benefits.

All AEs related to IMP administration must be reported to the sponsor. All SAEs and severe AEs (defined as grade 3 and above on the NAESS), considered related to the IMP, must be reported within 24 hours of the event. Non-serious AEs related to the IMP must be reported within 7 days.

The reporting window for suspected DLEs extends to 100 hours after the final IMP administration, accounting for the expected five half-lives of the drug. Reporting of all IMP-related and unrelated SAEs must occur within 24 hours until 10 days after birth to account for the period of normalisation after neonatal intensive care. After 10 days, all SAEs related to IMP must continue to be reported within 24 hours, whereas unrelated SAEs will be reported to the sponsor within 7 days.

We anticipate that non-IMP-related AEs are common observations in this patient population; therefore, grade 1 and grade 2 (non-serious) events do not require reporting to the sponsor. These should be recorded in the participant’s medical record so that the sponsor can retrospectively collect these data if required. All serious non-IMP-related events (grade 3 or grade 4 on the NAESS)39must be recorded in the participant’s AEs log and reported to the sponsor within 24 hours. This is with the exception of non-IMP-related events on the sponsor reporting exemption list (seeonline supplemental table S2) which are common complications of HIE. These exempt events will be recorded on the participant’s AEs log. If these events worsen or are more severe than expected, reporting to the sponsor within 24 hours is required.

Similar to IMP-related events, all non-IMP-related SAEs are reportable within 24 hours for the first 10 days after birth. After 10 days, non-IMP-related SAEs should be reported to the sponsor within 7 days. Monitoring and reporting of notifiable AEs will continue until participants reach 90 days from birth. Thereafter, active monitoring for AEs will not take place, but the sponsor must be notified of any serious adverse reactions until trial closure. No formal frequency of audit for this study will be performed, but the study will be overseen by the sponsor. An independent clinical review of all SAEs will be undertaken by the sponsor. All events classified as a Suspected Unexpected Serious Adverse Reactions will be onward reported by the sponsor to the regulatory authorities and ethics committees in accordance with applicable regulations.

The expectedness of events will be determined using the Reference Safety Information section of the approved Investigator’s Brochure.

More than two decades since the introduction of HT for moderate/severe HIE, many infants still face lifelong disabilities, profoundly affecting their lives, as well as the well-being of their families and the broader community. Importantly, cooling remains the only effective therapy available as adjunct therapies including xenon and erythropoietin have failed to show treatment benefit. Safe and effective adjunct therapies are urgently needed to complement cooling for moderate/severe HIE.

While there are no established guidelines to support the readiness of therapies for clinical translation in HIE, melatonin has demonstrated robust efficacy in both small and large animal models across multiple laboratories,18fulfilling the Stroke Therapy Academic Industry Roundtable criteria applied in adult stroke research.19The ACUMEN Study is a first-in-human phase I trial to establish the safe dose of a novel GMP melatonin in ethanol formulation for intravenous use to augment cooling for moderate/severe HIE. The development of highly concentrated melatonin for intravenous use is challenging given its poor solubility in aqueous solution. This study leverages the partial neuroprotective effects of ethanol, included as an adjunct excipient. Drawing on our experience in the UCL Neonatal Neuroprotection Research Group, we have established the safety, efficacy and PK of melatonin for HIE, and developed and refined a clinically relevant dosing regimen leading to the rationale and design of this trial. While a previous study of intravenous melatonin using alternative excipients has been reported,30this first-in-human study of our novel melatonin formulation will comprehensively assess safety and PK through dose escalation. We will build on the safe dose of 5 mg/kg established by Jerez-Calero in the alternative formulation as the starting dose. The safety assessment uses the established NAESS developed by an international neonatal consortium to facilitate the conduct of neonatal clinical trials.39 69The study will centralise PK analysis to an experienced GLP laboratory who have developed methodology to minimise blood volume requirements for the trial. Additionally, this study will comprehensively monitor BAC levels, which are rarely measured despite the presence of ethanol excipients in drugs administered to neonates.

In parallel to the primary objective to establish the R2PD dose of melatonin based on safety and PK, we aim to establish a neuroprotection trials network with optimised neurocritical care, including aEEG/EEG monitoring, NIRS and MRI/MRS. Using an imaging CRO, we aim to harmonise the 3T MRI systems across the network to ensure reproducible and standardised MRI/MRS acquisition. We will focus on the quantification of the MRS BGT Lac/NAA in this population due to its predictive power as a surrogate early read-out outcome biomarker to expedite clinical translation in future phase 2 RCTs. An optional blood biomarker study is integrated into this study to further develop bedside tools over the full time course of cooling and rewarming to accurately identify the babies with HIE at the greatest risk of adverse outcomes and therefore benefit most from further neuroprotective interventions.

The study will be conducted in accordance with Good Clinical Practice. All results and analysis from the study will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at international conferences. A summary of the results will be submitted to the clinical trial registries in accordance with the participating countries’ requirements. A lay summary of the trial results will be disseminated in accordance with ethical and regulatory requirements in each participating country. This includes submission to public trial registries where applicable and sharing results in plain language with parent/legal guardian(s) of participants. This manuscript is based on the UK V.3.0 of the ACUMEN protocol (dated 8 May 2025). Separate protocol versions will be implemented in Ireland and Australia based on the UK protocol V3.0. This study has been approved by the UK National Health Service Health Research Authority and London Central Research Ethics Committee (REC reference 25/LO/0170). Clinical trial authorisation from the MHRA (CTA 11144/0003/001–0001) has been obtained in accordance with The Medicines for Human Use (Clinical Trials) Regulations 2004. Clinical trial authorisation from the Health Products Regulatory Authority under the Clinical Trials Regulation (EU) 536/2014 (Ireland) and from the Therapeutic Goods Administration under the Therapeutic Goods Regulations 1990 (Australia) is in progress at the time of publication.

Amendments to trial protocol, participant-facing materials or essential trial documentation will be submitted for review and approval to the relevant REC and competent authorities in each participating country, as applicable. The sponsor delegate (UCL CCTU) will coordinate communication of approved amendments to the study sites for local implementation.

The authors thank the members of UCL CCTU and UCL Translational Research Office (TRO) for their continued support and contribution to the ACUMEN Study. The authors also thank Professor Christopher Gale as the chair of the DSMB and its members: Professor Alistair Gunn, Professor Katherine Lee, Dr Lauren Jantzie and Professor Khorshid Mohammad. The authors thank the members of the TSC: Professor Jeanie Cheong (chair), Betsy Pilon and Dr Victoria Homer. The authors also thank Dr Ela Chakkarapani as the independent clinical assessor of the study. The authors thank Eurofins for the GMP manufacturing of the IMP, Bioxydyn, the imaging CRO, and ASI analytics for the development, validation and assessment of the PK blood samples. The authors thank Dr Laura Milichamp for her regulatory advice during IMP development. The authors thank the parents of the patient participation group, including Hope for HIE, for their support and contributions to the design of the trial and the review of all patient-facing materials. The authors thank Ashwin Bhardwaj and Alex Hemming-Johnson for their support in developing patient-friendly material for the trial.