The climacteric is the period in a woman's life that includes the transition from reproductive to non‐reproductive. The woman's experience is individual, but common symptoms include irregular bleeding patterns, hot flashes, sweating, and sleep problems. Primary care should be the first instance for women seeking treatment for menopausal symptoms, and the district nurse thus plays a vital role for women in the climacteric.

The study aimed to describe district nurses' experiences working with climacteric symptoms among women in primary care.

Qualitative inductive approach with semi‐structured questions. Twelve district nurses were interviewed; data were analysed based on qualitative content analysis.

District nurses felt they could not give women in the climacteric reasonable and adequate advice due to a lack of knowledge, time, and organisational obstacles. The district nurses experienced that women with menopausal symptoms often felt neglected by the health care system, receiving insufficient support to cope with the climacteric period.

The Swedish district nurses in primary care reported interest in managing women within the climacteric period of life. They emphasised the importance of preventive care and stressed that lack of time and resource prioritisation were the main barriers to offering better counselling and appropriate care. The findings in this study suggested that educational efforts by district nurses in primary care should prioritise climacteric management.

The climacteric is a transitional process in women's lives that can last up to a decade, including the stages before and after menopause [1,2]. The first symptoms often occur around the age of 45 [3], and the last menstruation is for most women around the age of 52 years [4,5,6]. Women entering climacteric early often have a longer transitional process than those who enter at a higher age [4,7]. The level of oestrogen in the woman's body decreases, leading to a change from being reproductive to being non‐reproductive [1,6]. Many women often experience feelings of not being prepared for the transition [8]. The characteristic symptoms of the climacteric period include changes in the menstrual cycle [9], vasomotor symptoms [3], mood changes, concentration difficulties [3,10,11], along with different physical symptoms [3,4,5].

Individuals' experiences differ, as the woman's attitude, expectations, and preparations for menopause, as well as the psychosocial environment around her, may affect the experience [10]. Some see the transition as a natural part of life and can easily accept the symptoms [12,13]. Others experience menopause as the end of the reproductive period and consolidate the spirit of ageing, together with a loss of femininity. It is not unusual for women to experience disorientation, with a fear of being stuck with the negative symptoms that have occurred during this period of life [11,12]. Even close relations can be negatively affected, especially the relationship with the partner, together with a decreased libido [13]. The climacteric period often occurs at the same time as the children flying out and leaving the nest, which may increase the psychological symptoms [3]. Women's support through the climacteric period relies, in many cases, on friends and family, and the picture drawn often describes the climacteric negatively [10]. Many women have described a silence in society about the climacteric and the major changes that come with the transition. There is an experience among women of ignorance from friends and healthcare providers [14].

Primary care has a major role in preventing illness and promoting good health among individuals. In Sweden, primary care should help and support women within the climacteric period [9]. The choice of treatment for climacteric symptoms depends on the subjective experience of the symptoms, their degree of difficulty, and how they affect the quality of life [15]. If the symptoms are only urogenital, treatment with local oestrogen is recommended first‐hand. Even if systemic hormone therapy is more important in climacteric symptom relief and decreases the risk of other chronic diseases, such as cardiovascular disease and osteoporosis [15,16], the first choice in the treatment arsenal is counselling and support regarding healthy habits and a healthy lifestyle (i.e., smoke cessation, healthy foods, sleeping habits, alcohol consumption, physical activity) aiming to strengthen the women's ability to handle the symptoms and increase the quality of life during the climacteric period [5,9].

Women experience a need for more knowledge about the climacteric and treatment alternatives [14,17,18]. To increase their tolerance to symptoms in the climacteric period, women have described a desire to participate in some group activity [14] focusing on lifestyle habits, including training programmes, mindfulness training, yoga/pilates, and education about the climacteric [8].

There is a need for a holistic view of women's situations and person‐centred care to obtain good care for women within the climacteric [4,5]. Person‐centred care enhances the quality of life, improves overall health, and ameliorates climacteric symptoms. It can be distributed as individual counselling or group education among pre‐ or peri‐climacteric women [6]. Even if women know where to turn for help with symptom reduction, they describe insecurity about how to present their experienced inconvenience to healthcare personnel [10]. Due to this insecurity, it is suggested that healthcare personnel should actively ask about climacteric symptoms in women between 45 and 55 years of age [3]. The district nurse is often the first contact for individuals in Swedish primary healthcare. District nurses have a specialist education to prevent and promote good health throughout the patient's lifespan [19]. Specialist education and the licence to prescribe particular medicines, such as local oestrogens, may provide holistic and person‐centred care [20].

As women within the climacteric period of life experience a need for support, and the district nurse is often the first healthcare professional these women encounter, there is a need to explore district nurses' experiences of meeting and managing women in the climacteric and explore the needs of district nurses to support these women with a holistic and person‐centred approach. To the researchers' knowledge, there are no studies about district nurses' experiences of working with women's menopausal problems.

The study aimed to describe district nurses' experiences working with climacteric symptoms among women in primary care.

Information letters were sent to 33 managers at different primary health care centres in the Region of Skåne and the Region of Halland. This resulted in a purposive sample of 12 volunteering district nurses with a median age of 49.5 years (range 35–65). Each district nurse had at least 1 year of experience working in the primary healthcare of the Region of Skåne or Halland (median 9.5 years, range 3–28 years).

Data were collected between April and September 2023 through semi‐structured individual interviews, with the possibility of asking to complement, and deepening questions if needed [21]. They were conducted in the form the district nurse preferred (physical meetings at their clinics or digital via Zoom). All interviews were recorded, stored on an external memory, and transcribed directly after the end of each interview by the first author (AC). Each interview was pseudonymised. The interviews lasted between 15 and 45 minutes.

Data was analysed with an inductive approach, using qualitative content analysis inspired by Graneheim and Lundman [21,22]. Meaning‐bearing units were identified and then condensed without losing the original text's meaning and labelled with a code. Then, the analysis focused on finding differences and similarities in the meaning‐bearing units and codes. All the codes were then divided into different categories (Table1). All parts of the coding and the categorisation were discussed between the first author (AC) and the last author (PN), and a consensus was reached. The study resulted in two main categories and a total of eight subcategories.

Unfortunately, sometimes it happens that we refer to a gynaecologist. Even then, it could be some women who have applied to us and received treatment with oestrogen, etc., but that doesn't help, and then.

The ethical code of conduct was followed and conformed to the Declaration of Helsinki [23]. The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and the Swedish Act concerning the Ethical Review of Research involving Humans (SFS2003:460, 2003) were followed to protect participants' privacy and confidentiality, and the ethical guidelines were adopted by the Swedish Research Council. In accordance with Swedish ethical protocol, no ethical approval was required and therefore not applied for. However, all participants received oral and written information about the study and its aim. They gave informed consent, and all collected data were pseudonymised to minimise the risk of identifying individuals, in accordance with the confidentiality requirement [23]. They also received information about the voluntariness in participation and could withdraw without explanation. The manuscript follows the Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Research (COREQ) [24].

After analysing the 12 interviews, two categories were identified, with eight subcategories total (Table2).

The district nurses described an experience in which women with climacteric problems often sought care for classic symptoms such as irregular bleeding, sweating, insomnia, and distress. Some women actively sought care to get help with their problems, while others gained insight first during the collection of the anamnesis or when other diagnoses had been dismissed. Hence, the district nurses experienced the medical history as very important.

They described a variation in the frequency with which the district nurses were contacted by women seeking care for problems related to the climacteric period, from once a week to hardly ever. For some district nurses, the first contact with women in the climacteric period was established during a visit for urinary incontinence investigation.

The district nurses emphasised the importance of understanding patients' medical histories and being able to identify climacteric issues, among other problems.

The district nurses had similar experiences, describing how management depended on the severity of the symptoms. It ranged from self‐care advice to booking an appointment with a General Practitioner at the health care centre or referral to a midwife or a gynaecologist.

Self‐care advice was primarily delivered when the women called by phone, although sometimes, they were booked for an appointment with a district nurse to discuss their symptoms thoroughly.

A common referral was to visit the national web page with healthcare information (www.1177.se), where the women could get self‐care advice. There were those district nurses who recommended books, different podcasts and social media to gather information about their symptoms and symptom control.

For women with severe symptoms, the district nurses always booked appointments with a General Practitioner at the health care centre or referred them to a gynaecologist. In those cases, the General Practitioner was a specialist with education or a particular interest in gynaecology; the women were booked directly with them.

You look first at the self‐care advice that I mentioned…what they can do by themselves, and what exactly they have troubles with…and if they have severe problems with flushes, mood swings, headaches or whatever, then it is a doctor we need to contact because they might perhaps need medication to cope with all that.

In cases where a General Practitioner appointment was booked, the district nurses often consulted the General Practitioner before the appointment to plan for a blood sampling or other procedure.

The district nurses´ person‐centred approach to managing the climacteric symptoms varied based on the patient´s symptom severity. They described a workflow tailored as a collaboration between healthcare professionals to address climacteric symptoms effectively.

The advice was usually about adapting their lives to a new situation and involving their partner in the transition. The district nurses experienced a greater understanding of the women's situation if they had had their own experiences of the climacteric and thought that the symptoms should not be neglected.

In those cases, the district nurses did not refer the women with climacteric symptoms; they initially gave self‐care advice, especially if the symptoms were mild or had a recent debut. The self‐care advice was about lifestyle, i.e., sleep, diet, cutting down on caffeine and alcohol, stopping tobacco use, and starting physical activity. Further advice could be to have daily routines and not put pressure on themselves. The district nurses expressed that they often tried to encourage the women to make changes in their lives to improve the negative symptoms and pronounced that there was no quick fix for climacteric symptoms.

The district nurses experienced a need among the women in the climacteric period to get an insight into a new phase of life, an adjustment period. For those women who expressed a fear of taking hormones, the district nurses often described themselves as advising about dietary supplements. After a consultation, the most described solution was for the women to try self‐care and return if it wasn't enough to reduce the symptoms.

For women with local genital symptoms, the district nurses advised about hygiene and which products were gentle on mucous membranes. If the women described recurrent problems with dry mucous membranes or urinary tract infections, the district nurses advised about oestrogen cream, gel, or vagitories for local use without the need for a prescription.

The interviews revealed that the district nurses sometimes used their personal experiences managing the climacteric transition and tried to encourage the women to accept the bodily changes and make lifestyle adjustments.

Most district nurses did not use their right to prescribe oestrogen in cream, gel, or vaginal rings for initiation of local oestrogen treatment. The mentioned reasons were a lack of knowledge and the possibility for the women to buy the medication without a prescription. However, renewing a prescription was not considered a significant problem if a GP or a colleague initiated it. The district nurses expressed thoughts about the need for a changed prescription pattern due to the patient's feeling of security, which increases with a prescription.

In summary, district nurses rarely initiate an oestrogen prescription for local treatment but often renew prescriptions initiated by others.

The main concern with further referral to other specialised receptions, such as midwives or gynaecologists, was the low accessibility.

Another barrier was the gynaecologists' recommendation that the GP should examine the woman first.

The private receptions were perceived as more willing to examine and treat those women.

Some district nurses followed a precautionary principle and often referred patients to a gynaecologist. This principle was based on the perception that a gynaecologist was necessary if the patient hadn't been examined since the latest postpartum period. The district nurses also expressed a perception that primary care was not the proper level of care for climacteric symptoms.

However, all the district nurses expressed that they tried several times to help the women as far as possible within primary care. Still, when the treatment wasn't sufficient, the woman was referred to a gynaecologists reception.

Primary health care was, therefore, not always considered to be sufficient for the management of climacteric symptoms.

District nurses' perceptions of their own knowledge level regarding the climacteric phase varied. Some believed they had good knowledge and could deliver adequate care to the women. In contrast, others expressed a lack of expertise in the area due to not actively working with climacteric‐related issues.

It was expressed that meeting and treating women in the climacteric was a part of the district nurses' duties, but there was a lack of training, and it hadn't been highlighted during the education to become a district nurse.

The district nurses expressed that they have gathered their knowledge about the climacteric through lectures organised by the National District Nurses Association. They described experiences of not having more knowledge about climacteric than any layperson can quickly gather with interest. Almost all the district nurses expressed a lack of competence regarding the association between lifestyle, climacteric symptoms, and the oestrogen preparations they were allowed to prescribe.

The district nurses described different levels of knowledge regarding the climacteric transition, and many relied on self‐acquired competence. Some felt confident in their expertise and could provide adequate care, while others lacked experience due to infrequent work with climacteric‐related issues.

There was a pronounced variation in women's knowledge about the climacteric, and the district nurses could have a hard time finding the appropriate level of information for the women. Women without or with little understanding of the climacteric were perceived as easier to handle due to the low effort required to increase their well‐being. However, those with low knowledge usually sought care for one problem at a time, which made it hard to get a whole picture and see that the symptoms were related to the climacteric.

The district nurses described it as more challenging to advise the well‐informed women, who often contacted them first when the symptoms negatively affected their daily lives. Some of these women were also interested in further investigations.

In summary, the district nurses described how women's different levels of knowledge about the climacteric were related to different challenges regarding symptom management and the type of advice.

The district nurses described a lack of time and resources to adequately offer care for women with climacteric symptoms. They also experienced that the management did not prioritise their areas of responsibility at the healthcare centres. Due to the non‐prioritising of preventive work, including work with women in the climacteric period, the district nurses felt they betrayed the women in midlife.

A high workload and poor staffing resulted in a lack of preventive work at some healthcare centres. However, some expressed a satisfactory situation with time to support the menopausal women in the climacteric.

There was a pronounced need for special climacteric receptions with time to work with these issues.

Overall, to address these important issues, the need for prioritising preventive care in terms of time and resources was emphasised.

This study aimed to describe district nurses' experiences working with women experiencing climacteric symptoms. There was a perception that women with climacteric symptoms often either sought care or were referred to midwives and gynaecologists by primary care. Meanwhile, according to the Swedish Health and Welfare Authority, their care should be managed at the primary health care centres [9]. It has been previously described that women with climacteric symptoms do not know where to turn for help, and when contacting health care, they are not taken seriously [25]. However, in this study, the main reason for district nurses to refer women with climacteric symptoms to other professions seemed to be their lack of knowledge in advising women on symptom management, which aligns with the perceptions of women with climacteric symptoms [25].

The climacteric period eventually affects all women [9]. According to the competence description from the Swedish Nurses Association [19], the district nurse shall have knowledge about normal ageing, which is not in line with the present result. Special education and guidelines should be demanded to ensure adequate care for women with climacteric symptoms [25].

The district nurses' own experiences of the climacteric transition made them more compassionate, increasing the chance for women in the climacteric to get the care they need. However, this creates inequality regarding climacteric care, as it depends on the individual district nurse's competence and what care will be given. Together with a diversified knowledge base among women within the climacteric period, it will lead to unequal care.

Even though women with climacteric symptoms call for more information about the climacteric transition, Kracht et al. [14] point out the knowledge gap among women in the climacteric, which leads to them feeling unprepared. One of the goals of Agenda 2030 is equality, which can only be achieved when women, men, girls, and boys have the same rights and opportunities.

Some district nurses described giving women in the climacteric advice over the phone, and only a few interviewees had physical encounters with the women. There was no description of any structured care program aiming to increase knowledge about the climacteric among women. Previous studies have concluded that climacteric care should be person‐centred [4,25]. It has also been shown that long‐term person‐centred support positively affected women's quality of life, even better than group education [26]. A person‐centred approach is also supported by Nola Pender's caring model HPM [27], which concludes that the woman's unique characteristics and experiences should be considered when planning the care. The woman's expectations and preparations for the climacteric, together with the achieved support, have a major impact on women's experience of the climacteric [6,28]. If a woman is well informed and prepared, there is a better chance that she will experience the climacteric as a natural part of ageing, and it is easier to accept the transition [10].

The district nurses in the present study reported beliefs similar to those of women experiencing the climacteric transition: the need for information about changed lifestyle habits and their positive effect on symptoms and life in general [10,11].

The district nurses also expressed concerns about how the women they met were neglected and did not get the care they needed. The majority of the interviewed district nurses were willing to work with women in the climacteric if possible. Increased use of the prescription right could lead to more extended visits, patient‐centred care, and therefore greater work satisfaction [29,30]. However, the nurses in our study reported a lack of time for physical visits containing a drug prescription, which is a well‐known factor that decreases prescriptions [29]. Another previously described obstacle for drug prescribing is low experience as a prescriber, with a fear of doing wrong [30]. In our study, the average experience as a district nurse was 9.5 years, meaning that none of the interviewees could be considered new prescribers. Therefore, it was not a lack of experience but a lack of opportunities that explained why the district nurses did not use their ability to prescribe oestrogen medication to the women.

The main strength of this work is that it is the first study to explore Swedish district nurses' experiences and beliefs of working with women undergoing the climacteric transition. To achieve high reliability, the study used an inductive method to visualise how district nurses work with women with climacteric symptoms. Individual interviews were conducted using semi‐structured questions with the possibility of follow‐up questions, which is preferable when aiming to study a particular area [31,32]. All of the interviews followed the same structure, with the possibility for the interviewees to formulate the answers, which is considered a strength of the study and increases the reliability [32]. The semi‐structured questions were the same at each interview, strengthening the study's reliability [21]. However, data may change over time, together with the researcher's decisions during the analysis process, which may affect the result. The first author (AC) conducted the interviews, transcribed them, identified the meaning‐bearing units and condensed them. The last author (PN) was involved in the coding and categorisation. This way of working ensured reliability; even if the first author may have gained new insights and been influenced by the interviews, the last author has not been influenced and ensured to keep the focus on the study aim [21].

All informants were women, which can be considered a weakness. However, as the distribution of men working as nurses in Sweden is 12 [33], we believe that the studied sample responded well to the reality and is transferable to Swedish primary care. The range of age, work experience, and geographical distribution also increases the study's transferability [21].

The informant's work experience varied greatly, between 3 and 28 years, ensuring a rich variation when the research questions were enlightened from different aspects of experience, which increased the study's credibility [21].

To further increase reliability and credibility, the respondents were free to choose the time and place for the interview, which may increase their feeling of security in sharing their experiences. Ten interviews were conducted through the Zoom digital platform, and two were conducted at two primary healthcare centres. Twelve interviews are considered a proper number since the quantity is not a guarantee for a richer result [32].

All authors work in primary care, and none of them has worked with the management of women undergoing the climacteric transition, with a particular interest area. None of the respondents has any personal relation with the authors, which strengthens the study's credibility [34].

The Swedish district nurses reported interest in managing women within the climacteric period of life seeking primary care, but with varying levels of knowledge, especially regarding prescribing local oestrogens. Despite diverging opinions regarding primary care as the right level of care for women in the climacteric, the district nurses emphasised the importance of preventive care and stressed that lack of time and resource prioritisation was the main barrier to offering better counselling and appropriate care. The findings in this study suggest that educational efforts with a focus on climacteric management by district nurses in primary care should be prioritised.