Depression, affecting 350 million people globally, is notably prevalent among medical students, particularly in South Asia, including Bangladesh. Despite several studies, no meta-analysis has systematically examined the prevalence and contributing factors of depression to address the mental health burden. This systematic review and meta-analysis protocol aims to consolidate findings on the regional prevalence and key risk factors among Bangladeshi medical students.

The research team will search the Medline (Pubmed), Scopus, Web of science, Embase, PsycInfo, BanglaJOL and Google Scholar electronic databases following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-analysis (PRISMA) guidelines for published studies from their inception till 1StMarch 2025, using truncated and phrase-searched keywords and relevant Medical Subject Headings (MeSHs). Observational studies, including cross-sectional, cohort and case-control studies published within the timeframe and following any validated depression assessment tools, with no language restriction, reporting bangladeshi medical students, will be included for the review. Review papers, intervention studies, commentaries, preprints, meeting abstracts, protocols, unpublished studies and letters will be excluded. Two independent reviewers (SS, IA) will screen the retrieved papers using Rayyan, a web-based application, while any disagreements between them will be resolved by a third reviewer (ATS). Exposure will refer to different factors associated with depression among Bangladeshi medical students. Prevalence of depression and associated factors will be extracted. Narrative synthesis (Qualitative information) and meta-analysis (Quantitative data) will be conducted to assess the pooled prevalence using the random-effects meta-analysis (REML) model. For enhanced visualisation of the included studies, forest and funnel plots will be constructed. Heterogeneity among the studies will be assessed using theI2statistic, sensitivity,and subgroup analyses will be conducted, if necessary, based on study heterogeneity. The quality of the included studies will be assessed using the modified Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (mNOS) tool developed for observational study designs. All statistical analyses and visualization will be conducted using the R studio v.4.3.2 with built-in “meta”-packages and GraphPad Prism v.9.0.2.

This review will analyse existing published evidence. Findings will be submitted to a peer-reviewed journal and disseminated through conferences, policy forums and stakeholders to guide future research and interventions.

This review will be conducted in accordance with the established methodological guidelines and their corresponding checklists.

Inter-rater agreement between independent reviewers will be assessed using simple percentage agreement.

Both observational and longitudinal study designs will be included, enhancing the comprehensiveness of the evidence synthesis.

Methodological heterogeneity across studies, including variations in study design, sample size and assessment tools, may limit the comparability and the generalisability of the summary findings.

Self-reported tools to assess depression in the included studies may introduce recall bias.

Depression is a common mental health disorder affecting all ages, with an estimated 3.8% of the population experiencing it, including 5% of adults and 5.7% of those over 60 years.1Approximately 350 million people worldwide are affected by depression, which the WHO has identified as the leading cause of disability.1 2Medical students exhibit higher rates of depression and psychological distress compared with the general population,3including non-medical university graduates.4Global studies have shown that medical students, particularly females aged 15–29 years, are at heightened risk for both depression and suicidal ideation, while the estimated prevalence of depression and depressive symptoms among these students varies across studies from 1.4% to 73.5%.5,7Systematic review and meta-analysis have reported that the global prevalence of depression among medical and university students in many parts of the world varies from 24.4% to 28.0%.8 9However, over 80% of this disease burden is concentrated in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs).10Regarding the prevalence of depression among medical students in South Asian countries—including Nepal (29.78%), Pakistan (70%),11India (50%),12Afghanistan (69.6%),13Bangladesh (39.1%–58.6%),14 15and Sri Lanka (28%)16the data documented in various studies to date are shown infigure 1.

Among South Asian countries, even among broader Asian countries, Bangladesh exhibits a notably high prevalence of anxiety and depression among medical students.14 25 26Numerous factors have been directly or indirectly linked to the increasing trend of depression. However, evidence from various global studies,5 27including those from Bangladesh,14 15 28has documented that medical students with mental health issues, particularly depression, are at significantly higher risk of suicidal behaviour,29with increased likelihoods of suicidal ideation (6.87–12.36 times) and suicide attempts (9.34 times).30 31Bangladesh, as an emerging nation, has an outdated educational system, workload, emotions, social and financial hardship and cultural barriers that may cause significant stress to students.32Beyond this, a much broader public health crisis emerges—one that affects populations worldwide and extends far beyond medical students,33with the pooled prevalence much higher than that reported in Africa (38.80%),34Asia (30.1%), Europe (20%), South America (26.8%), Northern America (30.3%), the Middle East (31.8%)8and Australia (27%).35Given the increasing trend in depression among medical students, it is crucial to consolidate these findings to comprehend the regional prevalence and associated factors of depression among Bangladeshi medical students.

To date, various methodological studies have explored depression and its determinants. Still, disparities in data remain due to different aspects among Bangladeshi medical students. Understanding the prevalence is crucial for addressing this burden, planning preventative strategies, enhancing QoL and intervening in the rising trend of mental health issues through preventive approaches.36Such data on the regional prevalence and key influencing factors are critical for enhancing understanding of the epidemiology of psychiatric disorders in Bangl adesh and for guiding decision-makers in strengthening preventive efforts.37 38Given the strong link between depression and suicidal behaviours, this meta-analysis is also essential for suicide prevention by identifying risk factors and informing targeted mental health interventions. Although several studies have documented depression in Bangladesh, as previously stated, no meta-analysis has ever systematically examined it’s overall prevalence and the contributing factors among Bangladeshi medical students. Thus, this systematic review and meta-analysis protocol aims to address this gap within the Bangladeshi medical student community.

The overall aim of this protocol is to systematically review and synthesise existing evidence on the prevalence and associated factors of depression among the medical students of Bangladesh using meta-analysis. The CoCoPop (Condition, Context and Population) framework,39a tool for developing research questions, was used to formulate the research questions for the study. Here, the condition (Co) is depression, including its prevalence and associated factors, the context (Co) is Bangladesh and the population (Pop) consists of medical students. Based on the framework, the research for the systematic review and meta-analysis is: ‘What is the prevalence of depression and it’s associated factors among medical students of Bangladesh?’. The mentioned research question aims to synthesise existing evidence on the pooled prevalence of depression within the population of Bangladeshi medical students and identify key determinants influencing their mental health.

This protocol will follow a systematic review and meta-analysis design, adhering to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-analysis (PRISMA) 2015 guidelines40and the Meta-analysis of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (MOOSE) guidelines for observational studies.41It will systematically identify, select and synthesise existing literature on the prevalence of depression and it’s associated factors among Bangladeshi medical students. The modified Newcastle-Ottawa Scale (mNOS) will be used for the overall quality assessment.42The study protocol has already been registered in PROSPERO43(Registration number CRD 420251006480).

The study will include all empirical studies with available full texts, published from inception to 1stMarch 2025. This timeframe ensures a comprehensive inclusion of recent research while capturing a substantial body of literature for the systematic review and meta-analysis. All papers published in English or any other languages that report on depression among Bangladeshi medical students will be considered for inclusion in the review. Observational studies, including cross-sectional, cohort and case-control studies, will be included in this study. Studies concerning university students that did not specify the exact number of medical students reporting the prevalence of depression will be excluded. In addition, only studies reporting depression and associated factors, without any other specific diseases (other than anxiety/depression/depressive disorders/symptoms), will be considered in this review for inclusion.

The information sources for this systematic review and meta-analysis protocol will include comprehensive and advanced search strategies for six major databases, including MEDLINE (PubMed), Scopus, Web of Science, Embase, PsycINFO, Google Scholar, to identify relevant studies.In addition to these, grey literature and regional databases, BanglaJOL, will be explored for locally published studies. Reference lists of included studies (citation chaining/snowballing technique) and relevant systematic reviews will also be reviewed to identify additional studies. The search strategy will incorporate key terms related to both exposure and outcome, and database-specific filters will also be applied to refine and optimise the final search results.

Prior to perform the systematic search on selected online electronic and regional databases, initial searches will be conducted, integrating Medical Subject Headings (MeSHs) to identify relevant keywords related to the research problem. Furthermore, a comprehensive search strategy has been developed in consultation with an expert in systematic reviews, which will be adapted for the selected bibliographic databases and combined with MeSH terms. In view of the two key concepts of ‘depression’ and ‘Bangladeshi medical students’, related terms and synonyms will be identified and cross-checked with a second reviewer (another systematic review expert) for their adequacy and coverage of the topic. The tentative search strategy for electronic databases (PubMed) is illustrated intable 1summarising the key search terms. To ensure retrieval of all relevant articles, no limitations on date and language will be applied during the search, and Boolean terms (AND, OR, NOT) will be used used to maximise the search results.

The conditions being studied include depression and its associated factors among medical students from Bangladesh.

The review will include studies from all ethnicities and genders across Bangladesh, encompassing medical students (MBBS: Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery and BDS: Bachelor of Dental Surgery), undergraduate medical students, intern medical students, preclinical or clinical students and resident or non-resident medical graduate trainees.

Understanding depression and its associated factors among Bangladeshi medical students.

Review papers, interventional studies, study protocols, books, chapters, preprints, meeting abstracts, preprints, commentaries, letters or editorials.

Studies that will not provide sufficient data to calculate the aggregate prevalence of depression.

Studies on university students (including medical, pharmacy, dentistry or other allied healthcare students) as part of a student group without specifying the exact number of medical students, making it difficult to retrieve the specific aggregate prevalence of depression.

Studies that could not undergo full review due to the unavailability of complete outcome data.

Studies that had full texts written in languages other than English, French, Japanese, Spanish, Chinese and German that could not be translated by any of the reviewers.

Studies not using any appropriate measures for assessing levels of depression, such as psychiatric diagnoses based on the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) or the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), or validated self-report screening tools like the Patient Health Questionnaire Depression Scale (PHQ-9), the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) or the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS).

The primary outcome of this study protocol is to identify the prevalence of depression using psychometrically validated tools aligned with DSM-IV or DSM-5 criteria. Eligible instruments include PHQ-9 (threshold/cut-off value≥10), BDI/BDI-II (threshold/cut-off value≥14), BDI-Short Form (threshold/cut-off value≥8), HADS-Depression subscale (threshold/cut-off value≥8), Depression Anxiety Stress Scale (DASS-21/DASS-42; threshold/cut-off value≥10). According to the validated tools, depression will be categorised into mild, moderate and severe categories. In addition, the secondary outcome is to address the factors associated with depression among medical students in Bangladesh.

This present systematic review and meta-analysis protocol did not involve any individual patient or public agencies directly.

The selection of studies for review will be based on the PRISMA-P flow diagram, which is a summary of the research articles listed for inclusion and exclusion40 46(figure 2). To identify the studies that qualify based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria, two independent reviewers (SS and IA) will independently check the titles and abstracts of all retrieved papers, and the screening results will be compared. In addition, inter-rater agreement between independent reviewers will be assessed using simple percentage agreement, where ≥80% agreement will be considered acceptable. A third reviewer (ATS) will resolve any discrepancies or disagreements that the two reviewers may have. After excluding irrelevant studies, the inclusion and exclusion criteria will be applied to remove ineligible studies. Subsequently, the full texts of the included studies will be retrieved for eligible articles, and a full review will be conducted independently by two reviewers (SS and IA). The outputs will be collated with another reviewer (ATS) and reviewed for discrepancies. Discrepancies will be resolved through discussion among the reviewers. A log of the reasons for exclusion will be maintained.

Data extraction will be conducted independently by the first author (MMR) using Microsoft Excel 2019 for Windows 11 v. 23H2 (Microsoft Corporation, Washington, USA)46and reviewed by the second (SS) and fourth (IA) authors. Extracted data will be documented on a standard form to present individual study characteristics (author name, year of publication, study design, sample size, sampling technique, gender, measurement tools used to assess depression and cut-off scores used). The main focus will be on extracting data related to the prevalence of depression and reported levels of depression severity (eg, mild, moderate or severe) according to the cut-off scores defined by each validated tool. Furthermore, in addition to the prevalence data, the reviewers will extract information on the associated factors, including sociodemographic factors, academia-related factors, psychosocial and psychological factors and lifestyle-related factors (eg, academic stress, burnout, peer pressure, financial crisis, social stigma, physical activity, substance use, smartphone addiction, sleep quality and relationship conflict). Other related factors like socioeconomic status, gender and institutional support systems will also be extracted if available in the included papers. Data on mental health support mechanisms (counselling sessions, peer support, institutional capacity, online services and wellness and voluntary programmes) will also be recorded to assess their role in mitigating depression and depressive symptoms among medical students.

Furthermore, only if appropriate, a subgroup meta-analysis will also be conducted to explore the source of heterogeneity among subgroups defined by age, gender, geographic location in Bangladesh, academic year, socioeconomic or demographic context and public and private medical students for the pooled prevalence of depression among medical students. This subgroup analysis will allow a deeper understanding of the observed heterogeneity and assess effect modifications, ensuring more precise estimates and targeted interpretations of depression prevalence and associated factors among medical students. Moreover, we will also plan to perform sensitivity analyses (eg, excluding lower-quality studies or those with a higher risk of bias) to identify potential sources of heterogeneity and assess the robustness of the results.

If outcome-related data, including total sample size, prevalence or effect estimates (CI), are missing from included studies, the corresponding authors will be contacted via email. If no feedback is received, such studies will be excluded from meta-analysis but included in the narrative synthesis where possible. For limited missing quantifiable data (SD, CI), appropriate single imputation techniques will be applied based on available data types. All decisions regarding imputation, exclusion or narrative inclusion, along with their potential impact, will be clearly mentioned in the discussion section of the main review.

The quality of the evidence will be assessed using the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) approach for observational studies.54The quality assessment criteria evaluated factors such as sample representativeness, sample size, non-response rate, exposure ascertainment, comparability of study groups, outcome assessment and the appropriateness of statistical tests. The quality scores assessing the risk of bias will be evaluated using a modified NOS.42The maximum score on the scale is 7, with scores categorised as good quality (5–7), medium quality (3–4) and poor quality (1–2). Only studies rated as medium or good quality will be considered in the final analysis.

In addition, the study heterogeneity will also be examined using prediction intervals for a comprehensive assessment. The findings will be visualised using the forest plots, additionally, funnel plots will be used to visually assess publication bias. Egger’s test and funnel plots will assess the risk of publication bias.57Subgroup analysis will be conducted based on the extracted heterogeneity among subgroups by study characteristics, including depression assessment tools (eg, self-report scales and clinical diagnosis), to estimate students’ demographics and regional variations, and to assess whether variations in diagnostic methods could affect reported prevalence rates, providing more accurate and context-specific findings. If quantitative synthesis is not feasible, a narrative synthesis will be conducted to identify factors associated with depression.19Two review authors (SS and IA) will independently assess the risk of bias in studies being considered after full-text review. Disagreements between the review authors over the risk of bias in particular studies will be resolved through discussion, with the involvement of a third review author (ATS) if required.

An electronic search will be conducted across predefined databases, incorporating key search terms. The search strategy will be systematically developed by identifying relevant index terms and keywords from existing databases and literature and applying Boolean operators, truncations, co-occurrence, filters and explode functions, visualised infigure 3. Based on the keywords, a preliminary search conducted in PubMed on 8thMarch 2025 yielded 191 studies related to depression among Bangladeshi medical students. In cases of primary outcomes, data on demographics and the prevalence of the effect measure will be shown as proportions (% and n/N; where, n = number with the outcome in the study, and N = total sample size of the study), along with 95% Confidence Intervals (CIs). Moreover, for the synthesis of secondary outcomes, associated factors will be extracted as ORs or RRs, with 95% CIs (adjusted or unadjusted), and corresponding p values during the data synthesis process. Only eligible studies will be systematically extracted and tabulated for data analysis.

The systematic review is ongoing and is in the preliminary stage. The authors expect to complete it and report the findings within the next 12–14 months.

This systematic review will provide an overview of evidence from longitudinal and observational studies, regarding the overall pooled prevalence of depression and qualitatively synthesise the associated factors triggering depression among medical students in Bangladesh, irrespective of their institutions, regions and academic years. Data will be pooled quantitatively by means of meta-analysis, and subgroup or sensitivity analysis will be conducted following standard guidelines for each analysis. This review will gather all the published data to date reporting depression using specified tools without any other specific diseases among the participants.

Other than finding the overall prevalence of depression, this review could possibly help find the reasons behind it and may contribute to assessing the gaps and future planning to address the vulnerability. For instance, this review could ascertain whether specific patterns of factors influencing depression among medical students in Bangladesh, or globally, are consistent across studies over time. Chomon et al.15reported that depression among Bangladeshi medical students is more than double the global prevalence, with over 75% experiencing mild to severe symptoms, worsened by the pandemic, mostly among the private medical college students. A recent systematic review and meta-analysis of 1, 32, 068 medical students globally identified personal, academic, environmental and cultural stressors, in addition to pandemic-related factors, as predominantly contributing to depression.58If similar findings are observed across studies in our systematic review, our study could pave the way for further large-scale research to investigate these factors more precisely. Moreover, this study may act as a starting point for designing interventions to address the burden of depression among medical students in LMICs such as Bangladesh.

Furthermore, if studies show different findings, potential sources of heterogeneity could be explored, including study design, methodology and sample-specific characteristics, which can be further analysed through subgroup or sensitivity analysis. Thus, applying appropriate methodology to extract data from observational studies for meta-analysis will provide a strong basis and lead to a definitive conclusion that cannot be drawn from a single study.

To our knowledge, this will be the first systematic review and meta-analysis aiming to synthesise and critically appraise evidence from longitudinal and/or observational studies, reporting the prevalence of depression and associated factors among Bangladeshi medical students. This study will strictly follow the Cochrane Handbook’s strict methodology, PRISMA,40MOOSE41and mNOS42guidelines while screening, reporting and checking the quality of the included studies. Moreover, another strength of the study will be the involvement of two independent reviewers (SS and IA) in study selection, data extraction and quality assessment conducted in a blinded manner to minimise potential bias, with a third reviewer (ATS) involved to ensure impartiality. However, a limitation is that a meta-analysis may not be suitable due to the heterogeneity of existing studies, making it challenging to obtain a pooled estimate and self-reported data from depression assessment, which may be susceptible to various methodological biases. In addition, missing data will be handled using an imputation technique or by excluding studies with significant missing data (>20% of key variables) to ensure robustness and integrity of the analysis for more generalisability of the results.

The study will synthesise evidence gathered from existing published studies. Since the review will not involve a primary data collection technique, ethical approval will not be required. After completion of the full review, a manuscript including all the key outcomes will be prepared and submitted to an international peer-reviewed journal following the PRISMA as well as the standard systematic review guidelines and corresponding checklists.40The findings will also be shared through verbal presentations at national and international conferences, webinars and other relevant platforms for broader community engagement. Additionally, summaries of the findings of the study will be further shared with relevant policymakers, stakeholders, practitioners and institutions to inform practice and future research or intervention planning.