Midkine (MDK), a multifunctional growth factor, has been implicated in promoting tumor progression, yet its role in glioblastoma (GBM) remains insufficiently characterized. To investigate MDK’s function in glioma, we integrated four RNA-Seq datasets into a harmonized cohort of 1,017 adult gliomas, including 256 GBM samples. We complemented this with freshly collected human GBM tissues and matched primary cell cultures to evaluate MDK expression and secretion patterns, further contextualized using single-cell RNA-Seq. Finally, we tested the impact of GBM-derived MDK on macrophage secretome composition to validate our in silico observations. We found thatMDKexpression increases with tumor grade inIDHwildtypegliomas, accompanied by a shift in isoform proportions favoring the canonicalMDKtranscript. HighMDKexpression was associated with poor prognosis specifically in GBM, where theMDKhighsubgroup comprised 75% of cases.MDKhighGBMs exhibited a distinctive multiomic signature, including elevated chemokine and cytokine expression. Functionally, GBM-derived MDK induced macrophages to secrete multiple cytokines and chemokines, suggesting its role in reshaping the tumor microenvironment. Our findings reveal MDK’s previously underappreciated role in GBM aggressiveness and immune modulation, underscoring its potential as a biomarker and actionable therapeutic target for most GBM patients.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-16253-5.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common malignant glial tumor in adults and the leading cause of cancer deaths among patients aged 15 to 341,2. According to the 2021 World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of Gliomas, adult-type diffuse astrocytic tumors are grouped based on isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) mutation status, with onlyIDHwildtypetumors with either characteristic morphology or molecular features of glioblastoma being classified as “glioblastoma,IDHwildtype"3. First-line treatment, consisting of radical and safe resection supported by chemoradiotherapy, yields a median overall survival (OS) of approximately 16 months, which has not improved since 1990s1,2,4. There is no standard second-line therapy to prolong OS, with virtually inevitable recurrence less than a year after surgery1,2. While for many systemic cancers, targeted treatments became part of the standard of care, in grade IVIDHwildtypegliomas (GBM), the clinical benefit is only seen in 1–2% of patients with v-Raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) mutations treated withBRAFp.V600E inhibitors5,6. There is a pressing need for new targeted therapies and biomarkers that could allow for early detection and identification of patients benefiting from additional targeted treatment. Despite the advances in understanding glioblastoma biology and promising results of several preclinical studies, new therapies for glioblastoma have failed to improve patient survival7.

There are several reasons why treating glioblastoma is so difficult. Its infiltrative nature and fragility of surrounding brain tissues make complete resection of tumor cells nearly impossible, leading to tumor recurrence at the resection margin2,8. Another is that the presence of mutations in genes such as epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH), protein kinase C (PKC), tumor protein p53 (p53), phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), retinoblastoma protein (pRB), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) leads to the deregulation of major cellular pathways, ultimately resulting in high proliferative activity of GBM cells and the promotion of continuous neovascularization in GBM tumors7–10. Moreover, the blood-brain barrier limits the penetration of chemotherapeutics to the tumor area7,8. Treatment is further impaired by substantial heterogeneity of the tumor and the presence of a population of chemo- and radiotherapy-resistant cancer-stem-like cells (CSCs)8,11. Finally, GBM cells secrete numerous soluble factors that reshape the tumor microenvironment, enhancing cancer cell proliferation and impairing antitumor immune response7,8,12. Some studies have proposed midkine (MDK), a soluble heparin-binding growth factor, as one of them13–16.

In a healthy central nervous system (CNS), MDK is produced by fetal astrocytes during neurogenesis17,18. Then, its expression is progressively decreasing to low levels in adults19,20. However, MDK can be conditionally expressed in adults upon tissue damage due to its involvement in regenerative processes inducing cell proliferation, monocyte chemotaxis, and chemokine expression13. MDK signals through multiple receptors, including proteoglycans such as syndecans and receptor protein tyrosine phosphatase-β (RPTP-β), as well as non-proteoglycan receptors such as anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK), low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein-1 (Lrp1) and integrins (α4β1 and α6β1)21–26. Its multifaceted properties, normally utilized during embryogenesis or tissue regeneration, can be hijacked in cancer13. MDK is overexpressed and has diagnostic and prognostic potential in several cancers, including lung, bladder, esophageal, and breast cancer27. MDK pleiotropic downstream signaling events transduced through its vast array of receptors are involved in multiple hallmarks of cancer, including proliferative signaling via direct activation of its receptors, inducing neovascularization, avoiding immune destruction via a chemotactic effect on macrophages, which are then being M2 polarized, and direct effect on promoting invasion and metastasis, as reviewed in detail by Filippou et al.13,27,28.

In gliomas, studies of midkine (MDK) started in 1997 when Mishima et al. showed that MDK mRNA and protein expression levels were higher in high-grade astrocytomas, e.g., anaplastic astrocytomas and glioblastomas, compared to low-grade astrocytomas and healthy brain29. Further studies indicated that high MDK expression is associated with a worse prognosis in GBM patients30. MDK was also shown to increase GBM cell proliferation, migration, and invasion and induce temozolomide resistance by improving the stem-like properties of GBM through ALK and Notch homolog 1 (Notch1)/phosphorylated c-Jun N-terminal kinase (p-JNK) signaling pathways16,22,31. Additionally, a recent study revealed that MDK rewires tumor-infiltrating T cells to secrete chemokines contributing to protumorigenic microenvironment32. The mechanism of its overexpression in glioma has not been elucidated. However, it’s been suggested that retinoic acid, Wnt/β-catenin, and hypoxia signaling play a role33–35. Despite evidence of its importance in GBM, large-scale studies confirming MDK’s expression patterns and cellular source are lacking. Moreover, many of its biological functions in glioblastoma remain poorly understood.

In view of its multifaceted role and insights from recent preclinical and Phase I clinical studies, we rationalized performing a comprehensive characterization ofMDKexpression patterns together with MDK-associated multiomic footprint in glioblastoma to lay the ground for future investigations and allow for informed design of clinical trials based on identifying patients that will likely benefit from the treatment. We collected primary tumor samples, established matched primary GBM cell cultures, and performed the transcriptomics and proteomics using RNA sequencing, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and Luminex. We then harnessed the power of multiple glioma datasets: The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)-GBM, TCGA-LGG, Chinese Glioma Genome Atlas (CGGA), ERP010930, and SRP044668 to create a large, harmonized RNA-seq dataset with 1017 gliomas and healthy brain tissue samples. Single-cell RNA-seq, methylation, and mutational analysis of primary glioblastoma tumors from the TCGA-GBM cohort further complemented the study. For additional validation, we stimulated macrophages with either MDK or GBM cell culture supernatants to confirm MDKs’ impact on macrophage secretome.

Overall, our study confirmed earlier findings of increased MDK expression in gliomas, proportional to the tumor grade, as well as its association with poor survival in GBM with a diverse 1000 + patient cohort. Additionally, we have discovered a dominant MDK isoform with evidence for selection pressure towards its expression along with an increase in tumor grade. Finally, our multiomic analyses revealed an unfavorable MDK-associated footprint and its role in reshaping the TME by inducing an immunosuppressive secretome of macrophages. Altogether, this underscores the importance of MDK research in developing targeted therapies for GBM.

The study was conducted according to the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and local regulations. Biological material from patients with glioblastoma was obtained and processed as described in Gozdz et al.36. Briefly, glioblastoma (GBM) tissue and plasma samples were collected from patients undergoing surgery at the Medical University of Warsaw Neurosurgery Clinic and the Regional Hospital of the Medical University of Silesia in Sosnowiec. The tissue samples were used to establish primary GBM cell cultures and for bulk RNA-seq, while the plasma was used for proteomics, as described below.

The study was approved by the Bioethics Committee of the Medical University of Silesia (permit number KNW/0022/KB1/2/I/17). All patients participating in the study provided informed consent before the surgery. Shortly before surgical resection, venous blood samples were collected on K2 EDTA from 9 patients (7 males, 2 females; median age 59 years, min. 41, max. 71). Plasma was then obtained by centrifugation (2000 ×gfor 15 min), after which it was partitioned and frozen at −80 °C until further analysis. All tumors were classified histopathologically as glioblastoma. For RNA-Seq analysis, we used tumor samples from 12 donors (8 males, 4 females; median age 61 years, min. 41, max. 71), and 12 ex-vivo cultures established from these tumors.

Tumor tissue was processed one to six hours after resection. A portion of the tissue was quick frozen for later nucleic acids isolation, and the rest was washed twice with PBS containing 5% BSA and antibiotics, then cut into small fragments with a scalpel with blade no.10 until it was well minced (adopted from Leelatian et al.37. The tissue was then transferred to 15 mL conical tubes by flushing the dish with the 5 mL activated dissociation medium (containing collagenase IV and DNAase I) and incubated at 37 °C for 60 min. After this time, the tube was centrifuged for 5 min at 300 ×gand resuspended in ACK lysis buffer for 10 min. After another centrifugation and passing through a 70 μm cell strainer and then a 40 μm cell strainer, the cells were resuspended in a tumor sphere culture medium. The medium was composed of DMEM-F12 with Glutamax (#31331028, Gibco), 2% B27 supplement (#0080085SA, Gibco), 20 ng/mL EGF (#PHG0311, Gibco), 20 ng/mL bFGF (#PHG0026, Gibco), 0,5% Penicilin-Streptomycin solution (#15140122, Gibco), and 1 IU/mL heparin (#7980, STEMCELL Technologies). The culture was started by seeding 2 × 106cells in 10 mL of tumor sphere culture medium in a T25cm2culture flask. Immediately upon reaching an exponential growth rate, cells were propagated for cryopreservation, and the day of the first cryopreservation was acknowledged as the date of cell line establishment.

The primary ex vivo glioblastoma spherical cell cultures were maintained in tumor sphere culture medium composed of DMEM/F12 with Glutamax, 2% B27 supplement, 20 ng/ml EGF, 20 ng/ml bFGF (all Gibco, Thermo Fischer Scientific), 0.5% Penicillin-Streptomycin solution (Gibco) and 1 IU/ml heparin (STEMCELL Technologies) in an incubator under standard culture conditions (37 °C, 5% CO2). Cells were grown as non-adherent, three-dimensional spheroids on 25 cm2cell culture flasks (Sarstaedt), or (2 populations which from the beginning showed a tendency to adhere to surfaces) in an adherent form on laminin-coated 25 cm2culture flasks (Sigma Aldrich). The culture medium was replaced twice a week by centrifugation (5 min at 350 × g). Spheroids were passaged by accutase digestion (ACCUMAX, Sigma Aldrich) every 14 days. Cells between 7 and 14 passages were used for analyses.

To analyze the effect of conditioned medium from GBM culture on the secretion profile of macrophages, cells from the 9 GBM populations were seeded at a density of 3 million cells per well in a 6-well plate in standard GBM medium in three replicates and cultured for 2 days until spheroids were formed. The medium was then replaced, and the cells were cultured in 2 ml of medium per well for 72 h, after which the medium was collected, pooled from 3 replicates into a single sample, aliquoted, and frozen at −80 °C for further use. At the time of medium collection, there were 5–8 million GBM cells in each well, depending on the population.

The U-251 cell line was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Merck), the DKMG line from DSMZ (GmbH) and the U87 line from ATCC. The lines s were cultured in MEM Complete Medium, with non-essential amino acids, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 2 mM L-Glutamine and 10% FBS and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (all Gibco, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Cells were maintained at 37 °C in a humidified atmosphere and 5% CO2 until 80% confluency was achieved and then detached with TrypLE™ Express (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

The effect of midkine (MDK) and conditioned media from GBM spherical cultures on the secretion profile of macrophages was investigated using cells obtained from buffy coats from three healthy donors purchased from the Regional Blood Donation and Blood Treatment Centre in Warsaw, in accordance with the consent of the Bioethics Committee at the Medical University of Warsaw No. AKBE/20/2022. PBMC isolation was performed using Histopaque®−1077 (Merck) with SepMate™ PBMC Isolation Tubes (STEMCELL Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The PBMC were then seeded into 48-well plates for non-adherent culture (Sarsteadt) at 550,000 cells per well (two complete plates from each donor) in RPMI (Gibco) with 10% human serum (Merck). After two hours in the incubator, the plates were removed, the medium was aspirated, and all wells were thoroughly rinsed twice with DPBS (Gibco). The cells adhering to the bottom were cultured for another 4 days in RPMI with 10% human serum. After four days, the cells reached the macrophage phenotype, which was confirmed by flow cytometry, and then treatment with midkine and conditioned medium from GBM culture was initiated. After removing the existing medium, 200 µl of RPMI medium with 10% human serum enriched with 4 concentrations of MDK (#450-16-20UG, Peprotech) were added to the wells: 100 ng, 500 ng, 1 µg, and 2.5 µg. The control cells for these treatments were those cultured in 200 µl RPMI with 10% human serum. To the cells treated with conditioned medium from the culture of 9 primary GBM populations, 200 µl of medium consisting of a 1:1 mixture of conditioned GBM medium (DMEM/F12 + 2% B27 Supplement + 20ng/ml bFGF + 20ng/ml EGF + 1IU/ml heparin, collected after 72 h of spherical culture) and RPMI with 10% human serum were added. To the cells treated with midkine neutralizing antibody (#MA5-32538, Invitrogen, Thermo Scientific) before adding 200 µl of the mixture of conditioned GBM medium with RPMI to the wells with macrophages, neutralizing antibodies were added to the conditioned medium and incubated for 15 min, then mixed with the appropriate RPMI medium and applied to the wells. The final concentration of neutralizing antibody in the GBM and RPMI media mixture was 15 µg/ml. The control cells for this treatment were those treated with 200 µl of a mixture of pure GBM medium and RPMI 10% human serum in a 1:1 ratio. Each treatment was performed in 3 technical replicates (3 wells per treatment) for each of the 3 donors. The treatments were conducted for another 72 h, after which the medium was collected, pooled from 3 technical replicates into one sample, centrifuged at 800 xgfor 4 min, and frozen in Eppendorf tubes at −80 °C for Luminex analysis.

To confirm intracellular midkine expression at the protein level by Western blot analysis, spherical cultures of 10 GBM populations were maintained under standard GBM culture conditions (T25cm2bottles, DMEM/F12 medium with 2% B27 Supplement, 20ng/ml EGF, 20ng/ml bFGF and 1IU/ml heparin, at 5% CO2 and 37 °C) for at least three consecutive weeks until approximately 6 million cells were obtained from each bottle. The cultures were then centrifuged (350 xg, 5 min), the media were discarded, and the spheroids were digested with StemPro Accutase Cell Dissociation Reagent (#A1110501, Gibco, Thermo Scientific). The cells were then washed twice in DPBS (Gibco), and after decanting, the cell pellet was frozen at −80°C. Protein isolation was performed by suspending the cell pellets in 100 µl of RIPA Lysis and Extraction Buffer (Thermo Scientific) with the addition of protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Cell Signalling, #5871 and #5870, respectively) for 30 min on ice. The cell lysates were then centrifuged (14,000 rpm for 20 min at 4 °C), transferred to new Eppendorf tubes, and subjected to protein quantification using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (#23225, Thermo Scientific). After isolation and determination of protein levels, the lysates were frozen at −80°C. For WB analysis, 4xLaemmli Sample buffer (#1610747, BioRad) with 355 mM β-mercaptoethanol was added to samples containing 15 µg of total protein and denatured at 100 °C for 10 min before loading onto the gel. Electrophoretic separation of proteins was performed on a 12% polyacrylamide gel (29:1) in TRIS-HCL, Glycine, SDS buffer at a constant voltage of 180 V using PageRuler™ Plus Prestained Protein Ladder (Thermo Scientific) protein marker, applying 15 µg of protein lysate per well. Next, the proteins were electrotransferred to a methanol-activated Immobilon-FL PVDF Membrane (Millipore, Merck) in TRIS-HCL, Glycine, 20% methanol buffer for 110 min at a constant voltage of 100V. The membranes were then washed, and the protein bands were detected by staining with Ponceau S red and imaged with the ChemiDoc MP System (Bio-Rad) using the colorimetric detection method. The membranes were then rinsed in water until the red dye was thoroughly washed out and blocked for 1 hour in a 5% solution of non-fat milk powder in TBST. The blocked membranes were then incubated overnight at 4 °C in a solution of primary antibodies. The next day, the membranes were washed in TBST (4 × 10 min) and incubated in a solution of secondary antibodies conjugated with HRP for 1 hour at room temperature. After another cycle of washing in TBST, the membranes were developed using Clarity Max ECL (BioRad) for 5 min and imaged on a ChemiDoc MP Imaging System (Bio-Rad) with the ‘Blots’ and ‘Chemiluminescence’ application. Densitometric data were acquired using Image Lab software (Bio-Rad, v.6.1.0 build 7 Standard Edition for Windows, Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, California, USA, www.bio-rad.com/en-pl/product/image-lab-software? ID=KRE6P5E8Z) with data analysis, graphing and statistics performed using GraphPad Prism software (v.10.5.0 for Windows GraphPad Software, Boston, Massachusetts USA,www.graphpad.com). The list of utilized antibodies can be found in Supplementary Table 1.

Quantitative assessment of MDK secretion in patient plasma and media from primary ex-vivo cultures and GBM cell lines culture was performed on undiluted samples by Luminex’s technology on a LUMINEX 200 platform (Luminex Corporation) using the Human Luminex Discovery Assay kit (#LXSAHM, R&D Systems) according to the manufacturer’s protocols. For this purpose, cells from 12 GBM populations (approximately 3 million per population) were cultured for 48 h in 5 mL of tumor sphere culture medium, under standard conditions (37 °C, 5% CO2), on 25 cm2flasks. The culture medium was then collected and centrifuged (350 ×gfor 5 min), divided into aliquots, and frozen at −80 °C for further analysis. The culture medium of the U251, DKMG, and U87 cell lines for secretion assays was collected after 48 h of cell culture in 2 ml of complete MEM medium in 6-well plates after centrifugation of 450 ×g. On the day of analysis, the collected medium was thawed on ice. The assay procedure was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The results were normalized by the values obtained in the basal growth medium and the number of cells collected from the culture flask. As the results of midkine concentrations in GBM patients’ plasma and primary cultures were very high, we decided to verify the analysis with the Human Midkine ELISA kit (Abcam, #Ab193761) according to the manufacturer’s protocol on 5-fold diluted samples.

A Luminex analysis evaluating the effect of midkine and conditioned media from primary GBM cultures on the secretory profile of macrophages was performed using the Human Luminex Discovery Assay kit (#LXSAHM, BioTechne) with the following analytes: CCL2, MIP-1α (CCL3), CCL8, CCL13, CCL14, CCL17, CCL18, CCL26, CXCL5, CXCL6, CXCL10, CXCL11, interleukin 1 alpha (IL-1α), interleukin 10 (IL-10), interleukin 15 (IL-15), interleukin 33 (IL-33), interferon γ (IFN-γ), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), granzyme B, programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1), and platelet-derived growth factor AA/BB (PDGF-AA/BB), selected based on transcriptomic data. On the day of analysis, frozen portions of macrophage culture medium and control media were thawed on ice and applied to the plate without diluting. The analysis was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The results of the analysis were processed using Belysa Immunoassay Curve Fitting Software (v.1.2 for Windows, Cat. No. 40–122, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germanyhttps://www.sigmaaldrich.com/PL/pl/product/mm/40122?srsltid=AfmBOorlbA0a8uh9IhRwaGOPL0JvCiPBc5kNGdiHuWGCs-53IAgFYnFQ).

Cryopreserved tumor sections and cells cultured at 20% and 5% oxygen were harvested at the same or adjacent passage, mechanically disrupted in TRIzol Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and processed along the manufacturer’s instructions to obtain material for RNA sequencing. The integrity of the isolated RNA was assessed using a Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies). RNA sequencing was performed on high-quality RNA samples isolated from 12 GBM tumors and 12 tumor-derived ex-vivo cultures. Sequencing was performed on a HiSeq 1500 (Illumina) in a rapid run flow cell with paired-end settings (2 × 76 bp). RNA sequencing reads were processed using nf-core/rnaseq; they were aligned to the human genome (GRCh38) using the HISAT2 (v2.2.0) algorithm, then transcripts were assembled and quantified using StringTie (v2.1.7)38,39.

All analyses were performed in R (https://www.r-project.org/) using Bioconductor (https://www.bioconductor.org/) packages. Tidyverse R package was used for data preparation. ggplot2, Nebulosa, and ComplexHeatmap R packages were used for data visualization40–42.

The bulk gene expression profiles (raw counts from RNA-seq) of four glioma datasets as well as healthy brain tissues were downloaded from recount-brain, a curated repository for human brain RNA-Seq datasets, with cohort names: TCGA-GBM, TCGA-LGG, Chinese Glioma Genome Atlas (CGGA), ERP010930, and SRP0446689–11,43–46. All available metadata, including age, grade, race, sec,IDHmutation status, and overall survival data, were downloaded from recount-brain, the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and CGGA repositories. Isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) mutation status in SRP044668 was kindly provided by Dr. Peter A. Sims. Data fromhttp://www.brainrnaseq.orgwas kindly provided by Dr. Steven Sloan47,48. Retrieving data from the recount ensured that consistent bioinformatic pipelines were used for these four datasets43. To further ensure no batch effects between the datasets, we performed batch effect removal by the ComBat_seq method from the R package “sva” (v3.48) to remove unwanted variation in our combined dataset. Tumor grade was included as a covariate49.

The transcript isoform percentage of glioblastoma, low-grade glioma, and healthy brain tissues were downloaded from UCSC Xena (https://xenabrowser.net/datapages/) - cohort TCGA TARGET GTEx filtered for gliomas (grade II-IV), and healthy brain tissues, accession date 25th July 2022.

The single-cell gene expression profiles of glioblastoma from 28 patients (24131 cells) were downloaded from Single Cell Portal, accession date 26th October 2021 (SPC393,https://singlecell.broadinstitute.org/single_cell)50.

Patients in the combined RNA-seq dataset were dichotomized for survival analysis into two groups based on MDK expression. The optimal cutoff point was determined using maximally selected rank statistics, defined as the expression threshold that yields the most significant split based on the standardized log-rank test, implemented via the maxstat and survminer (v0.4.9) R packages. Based on this cutoff, patients were assigned to either theMDKhighorMDKlowgroup. The dataset was then stratified by tumor grade or by both grade andIDHmutation status. Kaplan–Meier survival analysis with log-rank testing was performed to assess differences in overall survival between the two groups.

A global cutoff was used to dichotomize samples for survival analysis across all glioma grades andIDHstatuses, ensuring consistent stratification and enabling direct comparison of MDK’s prognostic value across glioma subtypes. For downstream multiomic analyses focused on grade IVIDHwildtypegliomas—where MDK showed significant prognostic relevance—a subgroup-specific cutoff calculated in an identical manner was used to better capture biologically meaningful differences within this cohort.

For differential gene expression analysis, the RNA-seq expression data was either raw count type (combined bulk RNA-seq dataset) or imported from StringTie (our dataset)38. Patients were divided into two groups based on either MDK expression as described above (recount v2 datasets) or divided based on sample type (primary tumor vs. primary cell culture). After assigning the samples to two groups based on risk score, we performed differential gene expression analysis usingDESeq2R package51. To optimize power, we used Independent Hypothesis Weighting (IHW) with an adjusted p-value threshold < 0.05 to report differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and further gene-set enrichment analysis52. Gene set enrichment analysis was performed usingfgseaR package (v1.26)53.

Patients in the combined RNA-seq dataset were divided into two groups based on either MDK expression as described above. We usedCIBERSORTx(https://cibersortx.stanford.edu/) to evaluate the relative abundance of predefined cell types in mixed solid tissues54. Normalized and harmonized TPM gene expression data was used for this analysis. We employed the LM22 leukocyte gene signature matrix downloaded from theCIBERSORTxwebsite. LM22 contains 547 genes distinguishing 22 types of immune-related cells. We set the number of permutations to 1000 for robust analysis. The B-mode of batch correction supplied with LM22 GEP was used.CIBERSORTxenumerated the abundance scores of the 22 infiltrating immune cells, including B cells, dendritic cells, T cells, natural killer cells, macrophages, and others. To simplify the text, we referred to the cell type abundance estimates as “abundance” or “infiltration” alone. The results were filtered with ap-value< 0.05 threshold.

Patients in the combined RNA-seq dataset were divided into two groups based on either MDK expression as described above. The methylation data for the TCGA-GBM cohort was obtained usingELMER(v2.24.0, accession date 8th October 2024) and processed as described in Silva et al.55,56. The mutation data for the TCGA-GBM cohort was obtained usingmaftools(v2.16.0, accession date 16th June 2022) and processed as described in Silva et al.55,56.

Data was accessed as described above and imported into Seurat (v4.1.0) along with meta- and clustering data57. Malignant cells were split based on MDK expression (positive or negative). Differential gene expression analysis was performed using FindMarkers (Seurat). Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using fgsea (v1.26)53. We utilized cell cycle markers from Kowalczyk et al. 201558, to assign cell cycle state to each malignant cell. Cell cycle analysis was performed using CellCycleScoring implemented in Seurat.

To characterize and better understand the role of midkine (MDK) in gliomas, we downloaded uniformly processed RNA-Seq abundance values from recount-brain, a curated repository for human brain RNA-Seq datasets, for four different uniformly processed datasets of adult gliomas and healthy brain tissue controls: 643 glioma samples from the cancer genome atlas (TCGA), 268 glioma samples from Chinese glioma genome atlas (CGGA), 93 glioma samples from SRP044668 and 48 glioma samples from ERP010930. For expression analysis, 35 samples from the resection margin were excluded. For the survival analyses, we included only patients with complete survival data. Retrieving data from the recount ensured that consistent bioinformatic pipelines were used for these four datasets. To further ensure no batch effects between the datasets, we performed batch effect removal using negative binomial regression. Then we retrieved all available metadata and used isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) mutation status and tumor grade to align our cohort to the 2021 World Health Organization (WHO) Classification of Gliomas, which groups adult-type diffuse astrocytic tumors based onIDHmutation status, with onlyIDHwildtypetumors with either characteristic morphology or molecular features of glioblastoma being classified as "glioblastoma,IDHwildtype"3.

Hijacking cytokine-signaling is a hallmark of cancer, and understanding the role of these hijacked cytokines in tumor samples can help researchers design novel treatments. Therefore, we evaluatedMDKexpression in healthy brain tissues and gliomas in our combined dataset. At first, our analysis revealed a consistent picture of highMDKexpression in grade II, III, and IV gliomas compared to healthy brain tissues, with its expression increasing proportionally to the tumor grade (Fig.1a). Stratifying the dataset based onIDHmutation status revealed that MDK expression is low and relatively stable across different tumor grades inIDHmutanttumors (Fig.1a). Conversely, it is higher and increases proportionally to the tumor grade inIDHwildtypetumors (Fig.1a, Supplementary Fig.1). Overall, MDK expression was higher inIDHwildtypegrade III and IV tumors thanIDHmutanttumors of corresponding grade (Supplementary Fig.1).

Midkine expression in healthy brain tissues and glial tumors. (a) Midkine expression (log2(DESeq2 normalized counts + 0.001) in the combined dataset in all gliomas and healthy brain tissues stratified by grade (N= 1017) (left), inIDHmutantgliomas (N= 542) (center), andIDHwildtypegliomas and healthy brain tissues stratified by grade (N= 409). (b)MDKisoform proportions in grade II, III, and IV gliomas and healthy brain tissues from TCGA (672 samples) and GTEX (1146 samples) datasets. Shannon diversity index was calculated for each group. (c) Midkine expression (log2(DESeq2 normalized counts + 0.001) in the tumor tissues (N= 12) and the primary GBM cell cultures (N= 12) in the WUM cohort. (d)MDKisoform proportions in the tumor tissues (N= 12) and the primary GBM cell cultures (N= 12) in the WUM cohort. Wilcoxon rank-sum test was applied to evaluate the differences between sample types in (a) and (c). Significance thresholds: NS p > = 0.05; **p< 0.01; ***p< 0.001; ****p< 0.0001.

Healthy brain tissues were characterized by scarceMDKexpression, with the fetal astrocytes being the only central nervous system (CNS) cell type expressingMDKunder physiologic conditions (Supplementary Fig.2). mRNA isoform analysis revealed that the most prevalentMDKisoform remained the same (ENST00000395566) in all sample types. However, along with the tumor grade, the prevalence of ENST00000395566 increased, while the diversity ofMDKisoforms gradually decreased, as assessed by the Shannon diversity index (Fig.1b).

Cross-section of MDK in different samples. (a) Midkine expression on a single-cell level from primary glioblastoma tumors (N= 28) projected on tSNE plot (N= 7930 cells). (b) Midkine protein expression in lysates from primary glioblastoma cell cultures from the WUM cohort (N= 10) assessed by Western blot. Representative image of the chemiluminescent signal of midkine bands followed by membrane stripping and probing for b-actin. The mean integrated optical density (IOD) from three experiments is presented as a barplot on the right side of the panel (N= 10). Error bars represent the SEM from the average of three separate experiments. (c) Midkine secretion by primary glioblastoma cell cultures (N= 12) and DKMG, U87, and U251 cell lines. Secretion was evaluated on cell culture medium using Luminex. Wilcoxon rank-sum test was applied to assess the differences between cell types. (d) Correlation of MDK serum concentration (pg/ml, y-axis) withMDKmRNA expression log2(normalized counts + 1) on the x-axis (N= 9). Spearman’s rank correlation was used to assess the relationship between variables.

Subsequently, we collected 12 primary glioblastoma (GBM) tumors and derived 12 primary tumor ex vivo cultures. We then performed RNA sequencing on both tumor tissues and matched primary cultures.MDKexpression was comparable in the tumor samples and respective primary cell cultures, suggesting that malignant cells are the predominant MDK source in GBM tumor microenvironment (TME) (Fig.1c). Notably, the meanMDKisoform proportions were similar to gliomas in the combined dataset (Fig.1d). The primary tumor samples had greaterMDKisoform diversity compared to primary tumor ex vivo cultures (Fig.1d).

In search for other cell types potentially contributing to the MDK pool, we analyzed single-cell RNA-seq dataset from 28 GBM patients (7930 cells) that included myeloid cells, oligodendrocytes, and T cells along with malignant cells (Fig.2a). The expression data indicates that malignant cells, indeed, are the predominant source ofMDKin the tumor microenvironment. To further validate these findings, we performed western blotting of ten GBM primary cell cultures, which confirmed expression of MDK in GBM cells (Fig.2b, Supplementary Figs.3and4), as well as western blotting of macrophages and macrophages stimulated with GBM-conditioned media, both with no signs of MDK expression (Supplementary Fig.4). To investigate potential mechanisms leading to high MDK expression, we examined the correlation of MDK with retinol binding protein 1 (RBP1) expression as well as with HALLMARK_HYPOXIA and HALLMARK_ESTROGEN_RESPONSE_LATE signature scores (Supplementary Fig.5a-c). The correlation coefficients wereR= 0.59,R= 0.32, andR= 0.28, respectively (p< 2.2e-16 for all).

Prognostic role ofMDKin gliomas. Kaplan–Meier survival analysis of overall survival based on MDK expression in combined glioma dataset. In (a) the combined dataset is stratified by grade only into Grade II (N = 316), Grade III (N = 311), and Grade IV (N = 263) subgroups. In (b)IDHmutanttumors are stratified by grade into Grade IIIDHmutant(N = 284), Grade IIIIDHmutant(N = 211), and Grade IVIDHmutant(N = 38). In (c)IDHwildtypetumors are stratified by grade into Grade IIIDHwildtype(N = 30), Grade IIIIDHwildtype(N = 100), and Grade IVIDHwildtype(N = 218). Below each plot is a ‘number at risk’ table - the cumulative number of events table and the cumulative number of censored subjects table. Statistical comparison was performed by using the log-rank test.

Comparison ofMDKpositiveandMDKnegativemalignant cells. (a) MDK expression at single-cell level in glioblastoma tumor tissue (N= 28 donors and 7930 cells). (b) Differential gene expression analysis betweenMDKpositive(N= 5041 cells) andMDKnegative(N= 1822 cells) malignant cells (c) Gene-set enrichment analysis (Hallmark gene set) of differentially expressed genes betweenMDKpositive(N= 5041 cells) andMDKnegative(N= 1822 cells) cells. Significantly enriched pathways are shown, with normalized enrichment scores and adjusted p-values.

Comparison ofMDKhighandMDKlowtumors. (a) Distribution of immune cells across the samples inMDKhigh(N= 221) andMDKlow(N= 35) tumors in the combined cohort. Additionally, graphs displaying MDK expression, MDK group assignment, original dataset, and CIBERSORTx p-value are displayed below the heatmaps. Above the heatmap, overall survival is displayed as both length in years and the occurrence of death. (b) Differential gene expression analysis betweenMDKhigh(N= 221) andMDKlow(N= 35) GBM tumors from the combined dataset (N= 256). (c) A table plot of gene-set enrichment analysis (Hallmark gene set) of differentially expressed genes betweenMDKhigh(N= 221) andMDKlow(N= 35) tumors. Significantly enriched pathways are shown, with normalized enrichment scores and adjusted p-values.

After confirming malignant GBM cells as the primary source ofMDKmRNA expression, we proceeded to evaluate MDK secretion to determine whether its expression is reflected at the secretion level. For this purpose, we performed Luminex and Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) assays on supernatants from 12 primary cell cultures and three commercially available GBM cell lines: DKMG, U251, and U87. MDK was secreted by all the primary cell cultures, reaching a median concentration of 2049 pg/ml (per 1 million cells) after a 48-hour culture in 5 ml (Fig.2c). Among commercially available cell lines, DKMG was the only one to secrete significant quantities of MDK (median concentration of 3244 pg/ml per 1 million cells), whereas U87 and U251 only secreted negligible amounts (140pg/ml and 178pg/ml per 1 million cells, respectively).

With the substantial potential of primary glioblastoma cells for MDK secretion, we decided to assess whether local expression correlates to a systemic rise of MDK levels, which could potentially be used for the non-invasive identification ofMDKhightumors. For this purpose, we analyzed plasma samples from 9 GBM patients with matched tumor bulk RNA-seq data. While midkine serum concentration was higher than the norms reported for healthy people, there was no correlation between MDK expression and MDK serum concentration (R= −0.23,p= 0.55) (Fig.2d).

The existing selective pressure for higherMDKexpression, favoring its specific isoform (ENST00000395566), suggests its tumor-promoting role in gliomas. To assess its prognostic significance, we have performed Kaplan-Meier univariate Cox regression analyses in gliomas usingMDKexpression as an overall survival (OS) predictor. First, patients were split intoMDKhighandMDKlowgroups based on the abundance ofMDKusing the maxstat algorithm, as described in detail in materials and methods. Then, the tumors were stratified by either grade (Fig.3a) or grade andIDHmutation status (Fig.3b & c). Both Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression survival analyses showed that patients withMDKhightumors had significantly shorter OS than those withMDKlowtumors in Grade III and Grade IV gliomas (bothIDHwildtypeandIDHmutanttumors combined) (Fig.3a, Supplementary Fig.6a), as well asIDHwildtypegliomas in general (Grades II, III and IV) (Supplementary Fig.6b and Supplementary Fig.7a-b). Further analysis stratified by both grade andIDHmutation status revealed that only in grade IVIDHwildtypetumors highMDKexpression was significantly associated with poor prognosis (HR = 1.94, CI = 1.32–2.85,p< 0.001) (Fig.3b-c and Supplementary Fig.6c-d).

The effect of Midkine on macrophage secretome. The macrophages from different donors (N= 3) were stimulated with a control medium and rising physiological concentrations of midkine (0.1, 0.5, 1, and 2.5 ug/ml, the left plot of each panel) or conditioned medium from different primary GBM cell cultures (N= 9) with a neutralizing anti-MDK antibody added (right plot of each panel), with GBM culture medium serving as a control. The secretion of the following analytes was analyzed: (a) CCL14, (b) CCL17, (c) CCL18, (d) CXCL11, (e) IL-10, (f) Granzyme B, (g) PD-L1, (h) IFN-y, and (i) GM-CSF. The results are presented as bar plots with a median and a dot plot with each data point. The concentration of analytes is displayed in ng/ml.

Somatic mutations inMDKhighandMDKlowtumors. (a) The most frequently mutated genes inMDKhigh(N= 124) andMDKlow(N= 28) tumors. (b) Differentially mutated genes betweenMDKhigh(N= 124) andMDKlow(N= 28) displayed as a forest plot. Bars indicate a 95% confidence interval of the odds ratio. The adjacent table includes the number of samples in both groups with the mutations in the highlighted gene. Statistical significance was assessed by Fisher’s exact test. (c) Differentially methylated probes inMDKhigh(N= 42) andMDKlow(N= 12) tumors. (d) Heatmap of DNA methylation and linked mRNA expression patterns inMDKhigh(N= 42) andMDKlow(N= 12) tumors in the TCGA-GBM cohort.

After confirming MDK’s role in GBM prognosis, we explored its biological effects through multiomic analysis. First, we investigated theMDKexpression in GBM cells at single-cell level in single cell RNA-seq data. TheMDKexpression was heterogeneous in most donors, however, the vast majority of malignant cells wereMDKpositive (Fig.4a). That prompted us to explore the differences betweenMDKnegativeandMDKpositivecells through differential gene expression analysis followed by pathway enrichment analysis (Fig.4b).

Some of the most downregulated genes inMDKpositivecells wereHBB(hemoglobin beta chain),ITM2A(Integral Membrane Protein 2 A), andLOX(Lysyl Oxidase) (Fig.3b and Supplementary File 1). Conversely,MDKpositivecells were enriched inMSMP(Microseminoprotein, Prostate Associated),COL1A2(Collagen Type I Alpha 2 Chain) andCOL3A1(Collagen Type III Alpha 1 Chain), andPLAU(urokinase) (Fig.4b and Supplementary File 1). Then, we studiedMDKexpression in different cell states, as well as assessed the proportion of malignant cells in each phase of the cell cycle inMDKnegativeandMDKpositivecells. A higher proportion ofMDKpositivecells were in the S phase, and similarly, mean MDK expression was higher in cells in the S phase (Supplementary Fig. 8). Holistically,MDKpositivecells were enriched in coagulation and epithelial-mesenchymal transition pathways (Fig.4c).

To further investigate MDK-related footprint we divided the GBM from the combined dataset based onMDKexpression into “High” (n= 221) and “Low” (n= 35) groups. The cutoff point was determined using the maxstat algorithm, as described in detail in materials and methods. We then estimated the cellular composition of GBM tumors with CIBERSORTx using the LM22 signature matrix. Surprisingly, the immune cell composition inMDKhighandMDKlowtumors remained similar, with only differences in the estimated abundance of activated NK cells (1.9% vs. 1.2%,p= 0.006,MDKlowandMDKhighrespectively), regulatory T cells (Tregs, 1.1% vs. 1.8%,p= 0.016,MDKlowandMDKhighrespectively) and naïve CD4 T cells (0.32% vs. 0.18%,p= 0.02,MDKlowandMDKhighrespectively) (Fig.5a). The estimated proportions of infiltrating cell types, together with metadata including MDK status, MDK expression, overall survival (OS) status, OS time, and source dataset, are presented as a heatmap in Fig.5a.

We then performed differential gene expression analysis, followed by exploring the gene-expression pathways associated withMDKhighandMDKlowGBM tumors. One of the most upregulated group of genes inMDKhightumors were C-C chemokines CCL18, CCL2, CCL13, CCL20, CCL14, CCL8, CCL26, CCL17, CCL25, CCL5, CCL3L1, CCL3, and CCL22, as well as C-X-C chemokines such as CXCL3, CXCL8, CXCL5, CXCL11, CXCL10, CXCL2, CXCL6, CXCL1, CXCL13, CXCL16, CXCL9 (Supplementary File 2). Other cytokines and protumorigenic factors such as interleukin 1a (IL-1α), interleukin 15 (IL-15), PD-L1, granzyme B, interleukin 10 (IL-10), interferon γ (IFN-γ), and granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) were also upregulated inMDKhightumors (Supplementary File 2). Pathway enrichment analysis revealed thatMDKhightumors are characterized by a mixed inflammatory profile with evidence of epithelial-mesenchymal transition, DNA repair, oxidative phosphorylation, angiogenesis, and hypoxia. (Fig.5b, c).

To validate the cytokine- and chemokine-rich profile observed inMDKhighGBM tumors, we performed Luminex-based secretome profiling of human macrophages, the most abundant stromal cells in GBM, and key cytokine producers. Macrophages derived from three independent donors were stimulated with physiological concentrations of recombinant MDK, GBM-conditioned media, or GBM-conditioned media supplemented with a neutralizing anti-MDK antibody.

We analyzed the secretion of 21 selected soluble factors—primarily chemokines and immunomodulatory cytokines—chosen based on their transcriptomic enrichment inMDKhightumors. These analytes included: CCL2, MIP-1α (CCL3), CCL8, CCL13, CCL14, CCL17, CCL18, CCL26, CXCL5, CXCL6, CXCL10, CXCL11, interleukin 1 alpha (IL-1α), interleukin 10 (IL-10), interleukin 15 (IL-15), interleukin 33 (IL-33), interferon γ (IFN-γ), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), granzyme B, programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1), and platelet-derived growth factor AA/BB (PDGF-AA/BB).

Stimulation with recombinant MDK led to a marked increase in the secretion of chemokines such as MIP-1α (CCL3), CCL17, CCL18, CXCL5, CXCL10, and CXCL11, as well as immunomodulatory and proinflammatory factors including IL-1α, IL-15, IL-33, IL-10, GM-CSF, granzyme B, PD-L1, PDGF-AA/BB, and IFN-γ (Fig.6, Supplementary Figs. 9 & 10). These effects were dose-dependent and proportional to the concentration of MDK.

Exposure to GBM-conditioned media also significantly increased the secretion of several factors, including CCL17, CXCL11, IL-10, granzyme B, PD-L1, IFN-γ, GM-CSF, CCL13, CXCL5, CXCL6, CXCL10, PDGF-AA/BB, IL-1α, IL-15, and IL-33 (Fig.6, Supplementary Figs. 9 & 10). Notably, this upregulation was partially reversed by the addition of a neutralizing anti-MDK antibody, implicating MDK as an effector in mediating these responses. Interestingly, GBM-conditioned media alone did not elevate secretion of CCL14, CCL18, or MIP-1α; however, their levels decreased upon anti-MDK treatment, suggesting that while mixed factors affect their expression, MDK also plays a role in their upregulation. In contrast, MDK stimulation had no apparent effect on the secretion of CCL2, CCL8, CCL13, or CCL26 within the concentration range tested (Fig.6, Supplementary Figs. 9 & 10).

Taken together, both the recombinant MDK stimulation and the GBM-conditioned media experiments point to MDK as a potent modulator of macrophage function, promoting the secretion of multiple immunologically relevant soluble factors—most notably CCL17, CXCL10, PD-L1, IFN-γ, GM-CSF, CXCL5, and to a lesser extent granzyme B, CCL18, CXCL6, CXCL11 (Fig.6, Supplementary Figs. 9 & 10). Importantly, all of the abovementioned factors were significantly upregulated in the differential gene expression analysis inMDKhighGBM tumors.

We next examined the somatic mutational profiles ofMDKhighandMDKlowtumors.PTEN,EGFR, andTP53were, predictably, the most frequently point-mutated genes. (Fig.7a). While their prevalence remained relatively similar in bothMDKhighandMDKlowtumors,MDKlowtumors were enriched in GPR132, PTCH1, TEAD1, and XKR7 mutations, which were exclusively identified in that group at a frequency of 11% (vs. 0%) (Fig.7b).

Finally, we investigated the genome-wide DNA methylation patterns betweenMDKhighandMDKlowtumors. The latter were characterized by a unique hypermethylated genome, as indicated by the vast majority of probes with only sporadic islands of mild hypomethylation (Fig.7c). Conversely,MDKhightumors were a heterogeneous group with a large set of hypomethylated probes, where the methylation pattern divided the samples into two groups based on four different sets of probes (Fig.7c & d).

In this study, we harnessed the power of a large, harmonized RNA-seq dataset complemented with primary tumor samples and matched primary cell cultures to comprehensively characterize midkine (MDK) expression, secretion, and MDK-associated multiomic footprint in grade IVIDHwildtypegliomas (glioblastomas, GBM). We showed that gliomas express and secrete MDK in excessive quantities with higher expression inIDHwildtypegliomas. Our study also indicates that MDK expression inIDHwildtypegliomas correlates with tumor grade, potentially reflecting selective pressure favoring the ENST00000395566 isoform, and that high midkine expression is associated with a poor prognosis inIDHwildtypegrade IV gliomas (GBM). Utilization of a dataset combined from ethnically and geographically diverse cohorts ensures the robustness and clinical applicability of the expression patterns and survival analyses. Its apparent prognostic effect and heterogenous expression in GBM allowed for the identification of a large group ofMDKhightumors constituting 75% of all GBM, representing a cohort potentially benefiting from MDK-targeting treatment. Additionally, identification of the ENST00000395566 MDK isoform as the most prevalent and selectively increased along the glioma grade shows that while the truncated form of MDK has been proposed to be specific to certain tumors, in gliomas, the full-length transcript is the most prevalent and favored59,60. The ENST00000395566 transcript corresponds to the MANE-selected canonical isoform and contains all functional domains of midkine, including heparin-binding and growth factor activity regions. In contrast, some less abundant isoforms may lack domains necessary for full signaling capacity, suggesting that selection pressure in GBM favors the fully functional transcript.

The mechanism underlying the widespread yet variable MDK expression in GBM has not been elucidated. Originally,MDKhas been described as a retinoic acid-inducible gene34. Given that retinoic acid signaling is commonly overactivated in high-grade gliomas and correlates with adverse prognosis, our findings suggest a plausible involvement of MDK in mediating these effects, warranting further mechanistic investigation. We have found that retinol binding protein 1 (RBP1)expression, in fact, strongly correlates withMDKexpression in our combined dataset. Another possible mechanism is related to estrogen, asMDKis an estrogen-responsive gene61. We show thatMDKexpression weakly correlates with the HALLMARK_ESTROGEN_RESPONSE_LATE gene signature. Hypoxia can further contribute to increased MDK expression due to hypoxia-responsive element inMDKpromoter33,62. In our study,MDKexpression also weakly correlates with hypoxia signature, suggesting a possible contribution of retinoic acid signaling, potentially acting in concert with other pathways.

Analysis on a single-cell level revealed thatMDKexpression is associated with increased cell proliferation as well as pathways related to epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and coagulation. The EMT increases the mobility potential of malignant cells and is a critical step in cancer invasion and metastasis. The increased proliferation, migration, and EMT are likely mediated through MDK-induced (anaplastic lymphoma kinase) ALK and MET pathway activation63–65. High expression of pro-coagulation factors and matrix metalloproteinases can contribute to dysfunctional microvasculature, one of the hallmarks of glioblastoma66,67. On a tissue level, we found thatMDKhightumors are enriched in pathways related to epithelial-mesenchymal transition, DNA repair, oxidative phosphorylation, angiogenesis, and hypoxia. Additionally,MDKlowtumors were enriched in GPR132, PTCH1, TEAD1, and XKR7 mutations, which were not identified inMDKhightumors. Mutations in, e.g., PTCH1 are associated with favorable response to checkpoint inhibitor therapy, which might affect the treatment ofMDKlowtumors in the future68.

MDK is an established regulator of cell migration. It was shown to directly facilitate the migration of monocytes and polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) in soluble and substrate-bound forms. Additionally, MDK was shown to induce chemokine secretion in human T cells32,69,70. In our study, we found that most highly expressed group of genes inMDKhightumors in our study were chemokines including C-C chemokines such as CCL18, CCL2, CCL13, CCL20, CCL14, CCL8, CCL26, CCL17, CCL25, CCL5, CCL3L1, CCL3, and CCL22, as well as C-X-C chemokines such as CXCL1-3, CXCL5-6, CXCL8-11, CXCL13, CXCL16, which are known to attract TAMs, protumorigenic neutrophils and immature NK cells to the TME, as well as synergistically promoting angiogenesis along with MDK71–73. Interestingly, chemokines were not upregulated inMDKpositiveGBM cells, indicating that the chemokine-inducing effect of MDK is mediated by tumor-infiltrating cells, as suggested by a recent study by Guo et al.32.MDKhightumors were also characterized by upregulated expression of interleukin 1a (IL-1α), interleukin 15 (IL-15), PD-L1, granzyme B, interleukin 10 (IL-10), interferon-γ (IFN-γ), and granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF).

Macrophages are key cytokine producers that shape their surrounding microenvironment. In glioblastoma (GBM), they constitute the predominant stromal component, contributing to multiple tumor-promoting processes74. Here, we provide functional evidence that GBM-secreted MDK modulates the macrophage secretome, skewing it toward a pro-tumorigenic and immunosuppressive phenotype. Using Luminex profiling of macrophages from three independent donors, we obtained data supporting the results of differential gene expression analysis betweenMDKhighandMDKlowGBM tumors, and identified 20 soluble factors modulated by MDK, including chemokines: MIP-1a (CCL3), CCL13, CCL14, CCL17, CCL18, CXCL5, CXCL6, CXCL10, CXCL10, CXCL11, cytokines interleukin 1 alpha (IL-1α), interleukin 10 (IL-10), interleukin 15 (IL-15), interleukin 33 (IL-33), interferon γ (IFN-γ), granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), platelet-derived growth factor AA/BB (PDGF-AA/BB), and other soluble factors such as programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1), granzyme B.

Among the prominently MDK-induced chemokines, CCL17, a known CCR4 ligand, is associated with the recruitment of regulatory T cells (Tregs) and immunosuppression in various tumors. Our RNA-seq deconvolution analysis revealed a higher proportion of Tregs inMDKhightumors compared toMDKlow, implicating the role of MDK-induced CCL17 in promoting a Treg-enriched microenvironment75. CCL18, predominantly expressed by tumor-associated macrophages, has been shown to promote epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), tumor cell migration, and invasion76. Using a humanized glioma model, CCL18 was recently demonstrated to drive glioma progression via CCR8-ACP5 signaling77. IL-10, an anti-inflammatory cytokine produced by myeloid cells, has been implicated in mediating T-cell dysfunction in the GBM microenvironment78. GM-CSF, another MDK-induced cytokine, supports the expansion of immunosuppressive myeloid populations in GBM through IL-4R alpha and is associated with the tumor’s characteristic lymphopenia and systemic immune dysfunction79,80. Furthermore, PD-L1, a key immune checkpoint molecule, was significantly upregulated in response to MDK, potentially contributing to T-cell exhaustion in GBM81. Finally, Granzyme B, traditionally associated with cytotoxic lymphocytes, was also increased in MDK-stimulated macrophages. Emerging evidence suggests it may participate in tissue remodeling and immune modulation within the tumor microenvironment82. Crucially, the use of a neutralizing anti-MDK antibody indicated that these effects were MDK-specific: the upregulation of these factors in response to GBM-conditioned media was partially reversed upon MDK blockade. Taken together, our findings identify MDK as a potent regulator of the macrophage secretome, which may indicate that it also has a similar effect in tumor-associated macrophages (TAM) in GBM by promoting the expression of factors that collectively enhance immune suppression, tumor cell invasion, and therapy resistance.

At the single-cell level, the most upregulated genes inMDKpositivecells wereMSMP(microseminoprotein),PLAU(urokinase), and the collagen-encoding genesCOL1A2andCOL3A1.MSMPhas been implicated in the chemotaxis of CCR2-expressing cells and resistance to anti-VEGF therapy in ovarian cancer83,84. While its role in GBM remains unclear, it has been detected at both mRNA and protein levels and is suggested to be associated with tumor stemness85.PLAUand its receptorPLAURhave been shown to induce a mesenchymal gene expression signature in GBM cells, promoting tumor cell survival and correlating with poor prognosis86. Collagens and extracellular matrix components are critical in GBM biology; inhibition ofCOL1A2andCOL3A1significantly suppresses cell proliferation, colony formation, and invasiveness. Notably,COL1A2expression is reduced by phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibition, and since MDK signals through the PI3K pathway, this may explain the observed upregulation ofCOL1A2in MDK-positive cells. Earlier studies also support the role of MDK in promoting collagen expression87–89. Conversely,HBB(hemoglobin subunit beta) andLOX(lysyl oxidase) were among the most downregulated genes inMDKpositivecells.HBB, encoding beta-globin, has been reported to act as both a tumor suppressor and promoter, depending on the cancer type90,91. The downregulation ofLOXis unexpected, given its established role in enhancing glioma invasiveness via extracellular matrix crosslinking and remodeling through enhancing epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) signaling92–94. We hypothesize that inMDKpositivecells, where the MDK receptor LRP-1 (low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1) stabilizes activated EGFR, the EGFR-entrapping function of LOX may become redundant, potentially explaining its decreased expression95. Further investigation is warranted to elucidate the interplay between MDK and LOX signaling in GBM.

All of the above-mentioned rationales may explain the lower survival rate and worse prognostic outcomes in theMDKhighgroup, indicating that MDK plays a central role in GBM biology, and its inhibition might be a feasible strategy to increase the treatment efficacy of larger treatment regimens through inhibition of GBM cell proliferation and EMT as well as rebalancing of the tumor microenvironment. After MDK was discovered in 1988, it soon became a spotlight target in cancer research34,96. However, the discovered complexity of MDK signaling and its receptor network halted further research due to a need for advanced molecular biology techniques that were yet unavailable65. Recent advancements in molecular biology and genetic engineering techniques have made targeting MDK feasible. SeveralMDKinhibition strategies, including MDK inhibitor iMDK, siRNA, and CRISPR-Cas9 liposomes, were evaluated in preclinical studies16,31,97. These initial reports show that MDK inhibition restores temozolomide (TMZ) sensitivity and attenuates the growth of GBM cell lines and patient-derived GBM models16,31,97.

A particularly promising approach is based on crizotinib, an orally available 1st generation ATP-competitive ALK and c-MET dual inhibitor98,99. After encouraging preclinical reports showing potent antitumor activity, a phase I clinical study (NCT02270034) has been launched and completed15,100–102. The treatment was well-tolerated and the initial efficacy report showed that crizotinib combined with standard of care – TMZ (temzolomide) + radiotherapy (RT), resulted in a median progression-free survival (PFS) of 10.7 months and a median overall survival (OS) of 22.6 months102. While no direct comparison with only TMZ + RT was made, both OS and PFS were higher than expected and higher than in other studies combining other small-molecule inhibitors with TMZ and RT3,103–107. Notably, the pharmacotherapy was initiated 5.3 weeks (median) after surgery, and post-treatment MDK serum levels were similar to those observed at baseline. Since MDK is an injury-inducible cytokine, its levels most likely rise after surgery-induced tissue damage, promoting survival and proliferation of residual GBM cells20,96. This indicates that any MDK-targeted therapy should be initiated at the diagnosis if it does not interfere with surgery and post-surgical care. A possible prognostic value of serum MDK concentrations has not been observed. We show that, whileMDKmRNA levels have robust prognostic value, they do not correlate to MDK serum levels. However, both our study and theNCT02270034clinical trial are limited by a small sample size, and further research is needed to evaluate the correlation of MDK mRNA expression and MDK serum levels and a possible prognostic value of the latter.

This study has several limitations. While our aim was to conduct an explorative analysis of MDK expression patterns, survival associations, and its putative effects on GBM biology, much of our work is based on in silico analyses. As such, inferred pathway activation, cell-type deconvolution, and expression correlations are hypothesis-generating and require further validation both in vivo through manipulatingMDK, as well as in additional ex vivo systems. Additionally, macrophage-stimulation experiments were limited to three macrophage donors, which may not fully capture inter-individual variability in immune responses. While our transcriptomic analyses were based on large, geographically, and ethnically diverse datasets corrected for batch effects, functional validation (including serum and conditioned media experiments) was conducted on a relatively narrow patient cohort, limiting generalizability. Importantly, our study does not include in vivo validation of MDK-targeted therapies in GBM models, a critical step before clinical translation. Despite these limitations, we addressed potential biases by integrating multiple independent datasets, applying rigorous statistical controls, and complementing in silico findings with functional macrophage assays and protein-level analyses.

In summary, our study’s combination of computational and functional analyses provides novel insight into MDK as a key contributor to a distinct, aggressive glioblastoma phenotype. We characterized MDK expression patterns in a wide range of gliomas from ethnically different cohorts and revealed coordinated changes in its expression and isoform proportions. We showed that the primary source of MDK in GBM TME are the malignant cells, producing MDK likely upon retinoic acid-, estrogen-, and hypoxia-induced signaling. Multiomic analysis shows that MDK has strong, pleiotropic protumorigenic effects excreted through both direct effects on malignant cells and indirect through reshaping the TME, as confirmed by uncovering MDK’s potential to induce protumorigenic cytokine and chemokine profile in macrophages. These facts underline the potential for MDK inhibition in a large subset of GBM patients, particularly in combination treatment.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.