Pesticides are intensively used but understudied in tropical regions in America. We therefore investigated their occurrence and dissipation in soils of 18 potato (Solanum tuberosumL.) producing farms in Mayabeque, Cuba, between 2018 and 2022. Between two and 17 active ingredients (AIs) were used per site, and the cultivation period and sums of AIs ranged from 0.001 to 26 kgAIha−1. Soil concentrations of 38 individual target compounds ranged from 0.1 to 658 μg kgdry weight−1. Observed half-lives (DT50,obs) of the five most prevalent AIs were up to eight times lower than the DT50from temperate climate in the Pesticides Properties Database. The fate and behaviour of pesticides rather depended on their physico-chemical than on soil properties. Several sites posed a high risk to earthworms (cumulative risk quotient >1) during periods of peak pesticide application to harvest, with azoxystrobin and cyproconazole contributing the most.

While our extended pesticide soil monitoring under potato cultivation confirms generally shorter half-lives under tropical conditions, the corresponding residues might still pose a risk to terrestrial ecosystems.

Applications of modern pesticides is vital to ensure crop production worldwide, but particularly under tropical conditions. Their environmental risk assessment is still mainly based on data from temperate regions, which are hardly representative of conditions prevailing in the global south. Pesticide application records and their residues over time are reported for the first time in Cuban soils under conventional potato production. Degradation was considerably faster than in temperate soils for most of the applied pesticides, but residues still displayed a potential chronic ecotoxicological risk in many cases. With this study, we provide data to validate conceptual and modelling approaches on pesticide fate and behaviour in the tropics and set the ground for the establishment of locally adapted regulatory guidance values.

Regulatory guidance values (RGVs) related to soil pollution with pesticides vary highly.23–25With regard to pesticides and their environmental risks, places such as North America, Europe, Japan, and Australia established legal frameworks, while requirements, such as soil monitoring programs, in tropical countries are either not available, unclear or inadequately implemented.4The little data available on the fate and even more limited data on the effects of active ingredients (AIs) and transformation products (TPs) of tropical areas do not allow databases to be established or risks to be assessed that are tailored to this temperature, for example, for soil-dwelling organisms,26let alone RGVs for tropical soils to be recommended.

Cuba makes a special case in many respects. Data of pesticides in the Cuban environment are scarce. In 1996, the presence of eleven legacy compounds in soil was published.27Only recently, preliminary data became available due to an analytical method development for pesticides in Cuban soils.28Solanum tuberosumL. (potato) is an important crop worldwide, and pesticide use is intensive.29Although Cuba has limited quantities of pesticides available,30potato is the most prioritized crop in the country. About 52 AIs were applied between 2011 and 2013, which correspond to 2–6 kgAIha−1per year.30The Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) estimated for Cuba around 1 kgAIha−1per year during the same period and 0.75 kgAIha−1in 2022. In comparison, the FAO reported 12 kgAIha−1for Brasil, 17 kgAIha−1for Costa Rica, 27 kgAIha−1in Saint Lucia, and 3 kgAIha−1in the USA in 2022.

Due to the data gap in Cuba regarding the monitoring of pesticide residues in agricultural soils and the importance of potato, and also for comparison with other tropical or South American countries, a monitoring program was established and conducted. Unlike many other studies cited throughout this paper, this project monitored a larger number of commonly used pesticides in soils from different farms over four consecutive years at three sampling times per cultivation period (CP) in Mayabeque, Cuba. Sampling took place during wet and dry seasons, accounting for different soil moisture conditions and plant growth stages in accordance with recommendations from the literature.4,5Objectives were (i) to determine AI and TP residues in soils from different potato fields of 18 farms from 2018 to 2022, (ii) to calculate the dissipation rate of some AIs on the basis of predicted environmental concentrations in soil (PECsoilorA0) and compare the observed half-lives (DT50,obs) with the literature and a database, (iii) relate the DT50,obsto soils' and pesticides' physico-chemical properties, and (iv) to calculate risk quotients (RQs) arising from pesticide residues in soils for earthworms (Eisenia fetida).

With this extended monitoring of pesticide residues resulting from repeated applications under realistic agricultural conditions, we aim to provide data to validate conceptual and modelling approaches on pesticide fate and behavior in the tropics.3,4,31In addition to this article, the data will serve as a basis and to foster monitoring databases of Cuba and the Latin American network,32to build consistent RGVs for tropical soils. Finally, it delivers added value of information for stakeholders of different levels of the agricultural production chain such as farmers, pesticide producers, regulatory bodies, as well as consumers not only in Cuba but also in the Caribbean and other tropical areas.

The study was carried out in the Mayabeque Province (SI, Fig. S1), one of the major potato production regions in Cuba (e.g., 29.2 mil tons in 2021,33representing 30% of the total Cuban potato production).34Three municipalities of Mayabeque where potatoes are intensively produced were selected: Batabanó (BT), Quivicán (QV) and San José de las Lajas (SJ). Pesticide application records from farmers managing the sites were collected in 21 sites (Fig. S1). Eighteen conventionally managed sites (S) were sampled in BT (n= 8, Table S1, numbers 1 to 8), QV (n= 8, numbers 9 to 16) and SJ (n= 2, numbers 17 and 18), as well as one organically managed site (Sorg) in SJ (n= 1, number 19) and two forest control sites (Scont) in BT (n= 1, number 20) and SJ (n= 1, number 21). Potato is predominantly produced on rhodic ferralitic nitisol, and all sites belonged to this soil type (Fig. S1). Nitisols are the most productive soils of the humid tropics,35which is why all the farms participating in this study were located on areas of this soil type. Sampling was carried out in four consecutive cultivation periods (2018–2019 (CP1), 2019–2020 (CP2), 2020–2021 (CP3) and 2021–2022 (CP4)) at three time points per growing season: (s1): before planting potato (October–November), (s2): during peak pesticide application (December–January), and (s3): at harvest (March–April). A total of 150 soil samples were collected over the four years in the middle of each field, according to the protocol by the Swiss soil monitoring network (NABO).36In a 10 m × 10 m area, 100 soil cores (one from each m2) were taken with an auger of 1.8 cm diameter at a soil depth of 0–20 cm. Pesticide soil monitoring often focuses on this layer (e.g., Frogeret al.,37Silvaet al.,20and Riedoet al.38), as concentrations often decrease with depth (e.g., Barmettleret al.39and Mangoldet al.40). Four times 25 cores were united to four composite samples per 100 m2, immediately brought to the lab, dried in an air-conditioned room of 25 °C at 5% humidity for seven days until constant weight, crushed and sieved over a 2 mm sieve and stored in the dark at ambient temperature. After extended manual shaking of one of the four composite samples, a subsample of 100 g was gathered before shipping to Agroscope, Switzerland, for analysis. Soil analysis, such as bulk density (bd), organic carbon (OC) content, pH, and texture, and basal respiration (BR) and microbial biomass (MB) determination are described in the SI, chapter S1 and Table S2.

Records of applied pesticides per farmer/site were collected between 2018 and 2021. Application records were not available for 2022 (CP4), which is why the chapters “application–detection scenarios” and “observed half-lives of frequently applied and detected pesticides in Cuban soils” refer to the first three CPs only. Pesticides were applied at all conventional sites (n= 18). In contrast, pesticides were never applied at the organically managed site (n= 1), according to farmers' records over the last 10 years.

Application–detection scenarios were compared for all analyzed compounds (31 AIs and seven TPs) at 19 sites over three consecutive CPs, CP1–3, with 38 incidences in total (note that not all sites were sampled in all CPs and at all timepoints, Table S1). Therefore, for each compound, site and CP, repeated applications were summed up, and median concentrations in the three soil samples collected at different timepoints (s1–s3) were calculated. This resulted in 1178 application–detection cases for AIs, which were then separated into four categories following the procedure of Chiaia-Hernandezet al.,18i.e., (i) pesticide applied at a given site according to the farmers' record and detected in the corresponding soil sample (true-positive), (ii) pesticide applied but not detected (false-negative), (iii) pesticide not applied but detected (false-positive), and (iv) pesticide not applied and not detected (true-negative). The detections of TPs were related to the application of their parents, which resulted in 266 cases. Control sites were not included in the scenarios.

Data were statistically described and evaluated with R version 4.3.2 (2023-10-31 ucrt). Firstly, compound residues detected were evaluated with the non-linear mixed effect model (nlme). It allows the division of independent variables into factors of fixed effects (CP, s1–3, and type of residue found) and random effects, which is the site (Table S4). The influence of random effects is not accounted for in the model because each site was repeatedly sampled per CP, and sampling time and measurements are therefore not independent from each other. This approach corresponds to a split block design that additionally accounts for the fact that not all sites could be sampled over four consecutive years. The dependent variable soil concentration was transformed by logarithmization, whereby no detects or concentrations below the limit of quantification (LOQ) were omitted. The nlme model also served for the evaluation of single compounds most frequently detected, where the logarithmized concentration was the dependent variable and sampling time was the independent variable with fixed effects and again site with random effects (Table S5). The factor CP was deliberately omitted in this evaluation because application or availability might have been overruled by economic constraints rather than infestation of pests. If the sampling time had a significant influence on the nlme model, a pairwise comparison of levels with the Student'st-test was run, where thep-value was adjusted according to Bonferroni as conservative correction accounting for multiple testing.

Secondly, for pesticides with frequent true-positive cases (ametryn, azoxystrobin, chlorothalonil, cyproconazole, andS-metolachlor), residues were quantitatively evaluated in combination with application records (2018–2021) to evaluate their persistence in Cuban soils. Soil concentration after application was predicted (A0; [μg kgdry weight (dw)−1],eqn (1)) considering the application rate (App; [g ha−1]) of an AI, the depth (d, 20 [cm]) and bd [g cm−3] of the soil and the crop interception (fint, [−]) at the time of application according to the FOCUS workgroup.45Crop interception was 0 for pre-emerging H,e.g., ametryn andS-metolachlor, because they were applied between 0 and 15 days after planting the potato tubers when the soil was still fully exposed to the AI. In contrast,fintwas considered 0.5 when F was applied after approximately 40–89 days because flowering of the potato intercepted the way to the soil by about 50% plant coverage.

whereCsoil,detis the detected concentration at a given sampling time. The concentration [μg kgdw−1] in soil (C1,eqn (3a)) at the second application is the result of the first (A0,eqn (1)) degraded according tok[1 per day] betweent1andt0(wheretis time [days] andt0is 0) and the amount appliedA1[μg kgdw−1]. Soil concentrationC2(eqn (3b)) at the third application depends on the AI that degraded betweent2andt1and the amount appliedA2,etc.Eqn (3d)could be adapted to more or less applications and was solved numerically inRto find akfor a specific farm/site and sequential application. With thisk, the DT50,obsof the AIs in soil was derived (eqn (4)).

After an application, the DT50,obsreflected the half-life from an application to the next sampling time,e.g., for pre-emergence H, it is s2. If a lower concentration of the same application was detected in s3, a new DT50,obswas also calculated according to the residues in s2 and s3 and the time elapsed in between. The residue at s2 was then considered a pseudo-application as well as, for instance, s3, of which concentrations were detected in s1.

Thirdly, to discern the influence of the factors physico-chemical properties of the compounds and their sum of detected concentrations and application amounts on the observations, AIs and TPs, principal component analysis (PCA) was performed. PCA reduces the dimensions, where the first two principal components (PC) can be depicted in a two-dimensional plot (biplot), but the variance of the multi-dimensional data is as representative as possible.

Fourthly, soil properties, such as bd, OC, soil texture, and pH, and the microbial activity (BR and MB) and the DT50,obsof ametryn, azoxystrobin, chlorothalonil, cyproconazole, andS-metolachlor were (cor)related and depicted in pairs plots per compound. While the lower half of the pairs plot depicts the scatter plot, the upper half shows correlation coefficients (|r|). For a better overview, the number size correlates positively with |r|.

where RQris the risk quotient for therthAI or TP quantified at a given site, CP, and sampling time.

Out of a total of 150 samples over four CPs, 84% (126 out of 150) of the samples contained F (Fig. S2, sum (Σminimum(min) − maximum(max)): 1.2–423 μg kgdw−1; median: 30 μg kgdw−1), 83% H (Σmin − max: 0.3–688 μg kgdw−1; median: 25 μg kgdw−1), 73% I (Σmin − max: 0.1–35 μg kgdw−1; median: 4.2 μg kgdw−1), and 47% TP (Σmin − max: 0.1–210 μg kgdw−1; median: 7.0 μg kgdw−1). The nlme model (Fig. S3 and Table S4) revealed highly significant (p-value <0.0001) influences of the sampling time, type of compound, and CP. However, when the concentrations were compared amongst CPs, no significant difference was discernible. This result is plausible because pesticide residues in soil primarily depend on the timepoint when the AI was applied with respect to the crop growth, the amount, the pest or disease incidence, and when the soil was sampled, but rather not on the year or CP. Sampling s1 is understood as background sampling, which is why s1 showed minimum sums at most sites. Exceptions to this rule are S02 and S03 in CP4 (Fig. S2), whereS-metolachlor might have been applied to corn, a preceding crop, before s1, and S04 in CP2, where azoxystrobin might have been used to protect, for example, vegetables (Tables S1 and S7). Residue types differed significantly from each other except F and H (Fig. S3).

Azoxystrobin, dicofol, dimethomorph,S-metolachlor, and trifloxystrobin CGA were detected in >30% of the 150 samples and therefore statistically evaluated (Table S5 and Fig. S4). Azoxystrobin (F) was found in 69% of the samples and had min and max concentrations of 0.2 and 294 μg kgdw−1, respectively, (median, 15 μg kgdw−1). Its concentrations were significantly higher in s3 in comparison to s1, which is in line with its multiple applications between s2 and s3. Similar concentration ranges (1.0 to 328 μg kg−1) and frequencies (28% from 110 samples) of azoxystrobin were found in Turkey, although under different temporal and spatial sampling regimes.52Dicofol (I) was detected in 71% of soil samples, and concentrations ranged from 0.1 to 35 μg kgdw−1with a median of 3.8 μg kgdw−1. No differences in residues were found between the sampling times, which is plausible because dicofol was never applied (Fig. 1) during the study period. A similar concentration range (4.3 to 25 μg kgdw−1) was reported for agricultural soils (with an identical sampling depth) of Senegal53and was even found in some humid, sub-tropical Chinese mountain forest soils at concentrations of up to 50 μg kgdw−1.54Although forest soils were sampled in this study (Scont), dicofol was not found at these remote sites. Dimethomorph (F) was detected in 45% of the soil samples at concentrations from 1.0 to 72 μg kgdw−1and with a median of 2.2 μg kgdw−1. Concentrations were not influenced by the sampling time. The AI was clearly less frequently detected in the Turkish study with 5.5% than in the present one, but if, concentrations were higher (4.0–862 μg kg−1; mean: 134 μg kg−1).52S-Metolachlor (H) was detected in 72% of the samples and ranged from 1.1 to 658 μg kgdw−1(median: 17 μg kgdw−1). As this pre-emergence H was applied before s2, its concentrations were significantly higher in s2 and even s3 than in s1. Reported soil concentrations ofS-metolachlor in other countries differ from this study. While investigations in France37(0.7–20 μg kgdw−1; median: 3.3 μg kgdw−1) and Switzerland21(0.3–79 μg kgdw−1; median: 2.5 μg kgdw−1) generally revealed lower values, those of Serbian55(LOQ – 670 μg kgdw−1in 2013; LOQ – 115 μg kgdw−1in 2023; soil depth, 0–30 cm) monitoring campaigns were in the same range as in ours. Frequencies of occurrence varied as well, probably due to different LOQs of the applied analytical methods. The TP trifloxystrobin CGA was detected in 34% of the samples from 1.1 to 95 μg kgdw−1(median: 4.5 μg kgdw−1). Sampling time s1 showed significantly lower concentrations in comparison tos3. This high detection frequency of trifloxystrobin's TP is obvious due to its moderate persistency (DT50,field: 70 days), while the parent AI has a very short half-life of 1.7 days (Table S3). In summary, the occurrence and temporal variability of soil residual concentrations of these prevailing individual AIs over several potato CPs largely reflect the corresponding applications for plant protection, which is now systematically elaborated in the next chapter.

The analysis of 31 AIs in a total of 38 sites (CP1–3) resulted in 1178 cases to evaluate. Detailed information about application amounts of AIs during CP1–3 (data of CP4 not available), including a comparison with FAO data and research articles of applications in tropical and temperate climate, can be found in the SI, chapter S2.

True-negatives (not applied-not detected, white cells inFig. 1) were predominant (72% or 854 cases). Six compounds, benthiavalicarb-isopropyl, fenamidone, clomazone, deltamethrin, pirimicarb, and spirotetramat, were analysed, but neither were applied nor detected. Similar proportions (71%18and 68%38) of true-negative cases were obtained in archived agricultural soils of Switzerland.

True-positives (applied-detected, colored cells with a grey circle;Fig. 1) constituted 11% (126 cases). Generally, most true-positives were found in CP3 for azoxystrobin, benalaxyl, chlorothalonil, andS-metolachlor, while CP2 showed the most for ametryn and CP1 for cyproconazole.S-Metolachlor had the highest number of true-positives (53%, Fig. S6), followed by azoxystrobin (50%), cyproconazole (37%), chlorothalonil (37%), and ametryn (32%). Cyproconazole was detected in soil samples whenever it was applied, only showing true-positives and true-negatives (Fig. 1, S6). For these five AIs (i.e.,S-metolachlor, azoxystrobin, cyproconazole, chlorothalonil, and ametryn), half-lives were calculated (next chapter).

False-positives (not applied-detected, colored cells without a grey point;Fig. 1) were found in 12% (140 cases). The far most false-positives were counted for dicofol (30 cases, Fig. S6). According to the farmers' records, this pesticide was last applied around 10 years ago, and although it is only moderately persistent (DT5080 days, which is not derived from the field, Table S3), it still appeared in soil samples at concentrations between 0.14 and 35 μg kgdw−1. This is in line with the detection of dicofol of up to 50 μg kgdw−1in Chinese mountainous forest soils in climate types ranging from humid continental to humid subtropical and semiarid continental,54where it was never applied, indicating long range transport and ubiquitous background concentrations. The behaviour resembled one of its intermediates during production, dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane, another organochlorine I. However, DT50obtained from lab or field dissipation studies over limited periods of time (usually around 120 days) may fall short of predicting long-term residues of many pesticides, as was shown for atrazine,S-metolachlor, and others in temperate soils.38False-positives were even more surprising in this study as remains of AIs in tropical soils might show shorter DT50than indicated in the PPDB44with field soils of temperate climate (see below). Other reasons for false-positives (Fig. S6) could be cross contamination, for example, from spray drift57(S19 exposed to wind (no aerial pesticide applications in Cuba) of sites S17 and S18 (Fig. S1), where, for instance, azoxystrobin or chlorothalonil was applied (Fig. 1)), an application of the same AI to a preceding crop on the same field (Fig. S2), and/or farmers could have missed to record the application.

Seven TPs were analyzed with its respective AI applied at 38 sites, which resulted in 266 cases. Similar to AIs, true-negatives were also predominantly counted for TPs (78%, 207 cases), followed by false-positives with 9% (24 cases). True-positives accounted for 8.6% (23 cases), which were trifloxystrobin and metribuzin, mostly detected in CP1. Trifloxystrobin CGA was detected whenever trifloxystrobin was applied (14 true-positive cases) due to TP's moderate persistency (see above), and the seven false-positives (Fig. S6) were probably due to earlier applications of trifloxystrobin for which the residue fell below the LOQ. The single true-positive of 2,6-dichlorobenzamide corresponded to the single true-positive of fluopicolide. The behaviour of TPs of metribuzin was mainly the same as for their parent compound. However, metribuzin DA had only one true-positive case and nine false-negatives due to the high LOQ (25 μg kg−1).28For the other three TPs included in our method (Fig. 1), no reports of parent AI applications existed, neither were they ever detected.

The degradation rates (k, 1 d−1) of ametryn and S-metolachlor were fitted according toeqn (2)and for azoxystrobin, chlorothalonil, and cyproconazole according toeqn (3a)–(3d). Observed half-lives (DT50,obs) were calculated according toeqn (4)and shown in boxplots inFig. 2for individual sites categorized by CP and sampling time. The DT50,obsof ametryn ranged from seven to 81 days (Table S8; DT50,median: 16 days), azoxystrobin from five to 138 days (DT50,median: 34 days), chlorothalonil from one to 72 days (DT50,median: 3.3 days), cyproconazole from eight to 52 days (DT50,median: 16 days), andS-metolachlor from five to 135 days (DT50,median: 23 days). While the DT50,medianofS-metolachlor coincided with the value from the PPDB44(dashed-pointed line), the other four AIs had up to eight times (cyproconazole) lower values than the DT50,field. Observed half-lives were smaller when the time between application and sampling was lower, which is well visible for ametryn, azoxystrobin, andS-metolachlor. Ametryn andS-metolachlor, pre-emergence H, were applied before s2, and residues at s3 (crosses) or s1 (circles) were results of “pseudo-applications”. Almost a complete “series” of DT50,obsover three campaigns were visible for ametryn at site S02. The DT50,obsvalues shown in s2 and s3 of CP1 (black triangle and cross) were lower that at s1 of CP2 (red circle). Site 02 experienced another application of ametryn in CP2, which resulted in lower DT50,obs(red triangle) at s2 than at s3 (red cross) and at s1 in CP3 (blue circle). In CP3, ametryn was not applied (Fig. 1), as indicated by the absence of blue triangles and crosses. Typically, for long periods of around 200 days from s3 of the former to s1 of the following CP, the DT50,obsvalues were markedly higher (up to 11 times,S-metolachlor, S11) than the DT50,medianor DT50,fieldof the PPDB.44Residues reflecting such high DT50were notably higher than a few percent ranging up to 30% after application, as was also found in Riedoet al.38and Mangoldet al.40This behaviour points towards a biphasic degradation, as reported in Laabset al.58In summary, s1 seemed to be the main reason for the variation of DT50,obs. By removing s1 values of the H and azoxystrobin and outliers of the latter and chlorothalonil, DT50decreased a quarter (ametryn) to a third (azoxystrobin, geometric mean over all sites, Table S8). These DT50,medianvalues were conservatively evaluated and represented robust values, because firstly only true-positives (11% of scenarios) were taken into account and not false-negatives (applied but not detected, 5%), which could have decreased the DT50. Secondly, the sensitivity analysis of theA0, where soil depths andfintwere varied (Table S9), showed remarkable stability of the DT50,medianwith values remaining far below the DT50,fieldof the PPDB.44This was mainly due to the many pseudo-applications.

Hence, persistent compounds in temperate climate such as, for instance, azoxystrobin and cyproconazole might still degrade in reasonable time periods in the tropics. Lower dissipation rates in temperate than in tropical climate were reported before2,26,58and compared well with those of this study. Ametryn in a banana plantation in St. Lucia, the Caribbean, was three to eight days.59The DT50of azoxystrobin was reported for 16 days60or nine to 13 days61in tropical soils of China where banana was grown. Chlorothalonil's DT50was 2.2–3.9 days in Costa Rican banana plantations.62The DT50values of cyproconazole in an artificial soil without stereoselectivity and diastereoselectivity were around eight days63at 600 μg kg−1application and 20–24 days at 6000 μg kg−1.S-Metolachlor's DT50values in sugarcane fields of Florida, USA, were 12 to 24 days in mineral soils and 50 to 126 days in organic soils.64In temperate climate (Switzerland), azoxystrobin's half-life was recently found to be 41 days,40which was closer to this study than the value from the tropics. Although comparison of our DT50,obswith the literature was difficult due to the lack of matching conditions such as AI, field trials in test plots,60,61lab experiment,63other crops than potato60–62or sampling times only for one CP40,60–63, the half-lives were comparable.

In essence, results from the above chapters could mainly be explained by pesticide application regimes and physico-chemical properties of the compounds. This is in line with findings of, for instance, Materuet al.5for Tanzania and even Hvězdováet al.19who worked in temperate climate. Biplots of the PCA showed the substances in concert with the important factor(s) identified (Fig. S7A) and optimized (Fig. S7B). While trifloxystrobin CGA, dicofol and oxyfluorfen in Fig. S7B rather discriminate along the solubility andKfOCaxis (horizontal axis), azoxystrobin, cyproconazole andS-metolachlor discriminate along their DT50,PPDB44(vertical axis) where the former two have high half-lives and the latter rather shows low half-lives in comparison with the majority of the detected pesticides. Vapour pressure and the sum of applications are less correlated with the other three factors. Azoxystrobin, dicofol, dimetomorph,S-metolachlor, and trifloxystrobin CGA were mostly detected in all four campaigns. These compounds had either highKfOC, DT50,PPDB, solubility, or vapour pressure or were applied in high amounts. AlthoughS-metolachlor and trifloxystrobin CGA have high solubility and vapor pressure, facilitating dissipation, they were nevertheless frequently detected. Application amounts and a moderate persistency, respectively, might have overruled these properties (Table S3). Furthermore, the most true-positive cases were counted for ametryn, chlorothalonil,S-metolachlor, azoxystrobin cyproconazole, and benalaxyl. The first three showed high application amounts, while azoxystrobin had a high DT50,PPDB, and the latter two had no specific properties in comparison to the others (place towards the origin of the biplot). The highKf,OC(Table S3) of ametryn additionally contributed to this result as well as the one of dicofol, having the most false-positives. It remained detectable even 10 years after non-use. It is plausible to assume that ametryn and dicofol sorbed strongly to OC due to their highKf,OC, resulting in limited availability for degradation.

Furthermore, DT50,obsvalues were opposed to soil properties such as OC, pH, texture and BR and MB. Data scattered randomly (Fig. S8–S12) and in contrast to Laabset al.,58who also worked under tropical conditions in Brazil, no positive correlation could be found with,e.g., half-lives and the clay content. However, the researchers worked with a soil with low to intermediate clay contents, while soils in this study had a much broader range of 10–82%. The fact that no trend can be derived from the above findings underlines the statement of Rackeet al.2that tropical soils defy easy generalisations concerning the fate of pesticides.

The soils analyzed, CP1–4 and s1–s3, showed a potential ecological chronic risk for earthworms mostly at s2 and s3 in CP1 and CP2 (Fig. 3and Table S10). The risk emanating from pesticide residues in soil was classified as follows:ΣRQ (eqn (7)) <0.01 indicated negligible, 0.01 <ΣRQ < 0.1 low, 0.1 <ΣRQ < 1 medium, andΣRQ > 1 high ecological terrestrial risks.65In s1, none of the sites exhibited a high risk, as well as in s2 and s3 of CP4. However, for CP1–3, seven sites in s2 and 13 in s3 had a high risk. This finding was expected as pesticide residues were higher before s2 and s3 than before s1 (Fig. S2–3). The compounds that mostly contributed to theΣRQ were ametryn and cyproconazole in s2 of CP1 and CP2, cyproconazole in s3 of CP1, and azoxystrobin in s2 and s3 of CP3. Again, dicofol was prominent in RQs of soils mostly in s1 as background contamination. Not only false-positives but also false-negatives could pose a problem and lead to RQ > 1 for short periods as in the case of trifloxystrobin (short-lived AI applied but not detected,Fig. 1) degrading into trifloxystrobin CGA predominating s3 in CP1. It is difficult to compare our RQs directly with literature data, but the estimated risks based on predicted environmental concentrations emanating from up to 124 pesticides applied in Cuba to crops, such as sugarcane, rice, vegetables, cereals, tubers and root vegetables, and fruits from 2011 to 2014 to earthworms were considered relatively low (0.01–1.0) in comparison to aquatic organisms or bees.66In conclusion, the risk posed by pesticides to soil organisms is highly dependent on the cocktail applied and dominated by relatively few key compounds (i.e., ametryn, azoxystrobin, cyproconazole and dicofol) thoroughly investigated in this study. Ametryn was also reported to be among those posing risks in a Cuban ecotoxicity study.66Moreover, and as demonstrated with sampling times s1–3, risk should not be perceived as static and constant but is subject to pronounced seasonal changes67and environmental conditions.

Pesticides should be monitored in cooperation with farmers who directly provide application data to cooperatives to make them transparent, as official sources as, for instance, the FAO may substantially underestimate the pesticide use, especially in low income countries, due to a recent restructuring of the agrichemical supply chain and agrarian development.72Moreover, data should be of high quality from application over a sampling design adapted to the purpose (background concentration monitoringversuspeak application time) for environmental risk assessments in soils and results communicated to farmers, legislators, and environmental agencies. After all, there is increasing demand forex anteimpact pathways that are place-based, coherent, and plausible to foster effective interventions.73A potential forming of a Central and South American pesticide network32can help understand the pathway from application to detection of pesticides and their impact on the environment. This shall lead to reasonable RGVs, thus not dispersing over several orders of magnitude.25Such a network should also raise awareness among farmers on the use, risk, and hazards associated with human exposure to pesticides,74to improve ONE HEALTH.