People with MS (PwMS) often experience high levels of emotional distress. Interventions to improve emotional wellbeing in PwMS are needed; however, the effectiveness of diverse psychological therapies in PwMS on cumulative outcomes is not well understood. This systematic review and network meta-analysis (NMA) aims to evaluate the effectiveness of psychological therapies in PwMS.

Five databases were searched (CINAHL, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, EMBASE, MEDLINE ALL, APA PsycINFO) from 1984 to April 2025. Randomized controlled trials that compared a psychological intervention with any comparator in PwMS were included. Two independent reviewers performed data extraction and risk of bias analysis. A standard random-effects Bayesian consistency NMA was fitted. Outcome domains included mental health, cognition, physical health, quality of life (QoL), and health economics.

After screening, 111 studies were included in the review, 89 included in the meta-analysis, and 77 included in the NMA (n= 3911 participants). Cognitive behavioural therapy was found to be most effective in improving outcomes overall, with the greatest changes in mean difference (MD 11.0, 95% CI 5.72–16.2) when compared with control conditions. Psychological therapies significantly improved mental health outcomes (SMD 1.41; 95% CI 1.00–1.83;p< 0.00001), physical health outcomes (SMD 1.08; 95% CI 0.41–1.74;p< 0.00001), QoL (SMD 0.77; 95% CI 0.21–1.34), and cognition (SMD 0.66, 95% CI 0.24–1.07) in PwMS.

This systematic review and NMA found that psychological interventions are broadly effective in PwMS across mental health, cognitive, physical and QoL outcome domains, and provides strong support for their use in the care of PwMS.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s00415-025-13315-6.

What is already known on this topic:There is growing evidence to suggest that psychological therapies may be effective, but previous studies have focused on individual therapies rather than considering psychological therapies as a whole. A network meta-analysis can provide valuable information as to which psychological therapies are most effective and should thus be prioritized in care.

What this study adds:This systematic review and network meta-analysis included 111 randomized controlled trials and found effectiveness of psychological therapies in people with multiple sclerosis in mental health outcomes, physical health outcomes, quality of life, and cognition.

How this study might affect research, practice or policy:Psychological therapies should be considered in the routine care of people with multiple sclerosis.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s00415-025-13315-6.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a highly disabling chronic neurological disease affecting the central nervous system [1]. People with MS (PwMS) often experience high levels of stress [2], and anxiety and depression occur three times more frequently compared to the general population [3,4]. Increased stress, anxiety, and depression can negatively impact multiple other symptoms commonly experienced by PwMS, including fatigue [5], pain [6], sleep [7], cognition [8], and quality of life (QoL) [9]. Additionally, untreated mental health comorbidity in PwMS is associated with higher health services use, care costs [10], and attrition from disease modifying drugs [11]. Thus, effective management of mental health comorbidity should be a priority in treatment. However, PwMS often note that their emotional wellbeing is overlooked in care with clinicians defaulting to drug treatments [12].

The prioritization of drug treatments for mental health concerns in PwMS is problematic because antidepressants are poorly tolerated [13] and anxiolytics can exacerbate impairments such as fatigue and cognition [14,15]. Thus, it is important to consider the effectiveness of non-pharmacological treatments for emotional wellbeing in PwMS. There is growing evidence to suggest that psychological therapies (e.g., cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), mindfulness-based interventions (MBI), acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT)), and other forms of psychotherapy may be effective in PwMS, reducing symptoms such as anxiety, depression, fatigue, pain, and improving QoL [13,16–22]. However, previous evidence syntheses have tended to focus on individual therapies (CBT, MBI, ACT), rather than considering psychological therapies as a whole. Furthermore, psychological therapies are known to have ‘common factors’, defined as “characteristics present across psychotherapies” (e.g., therapeutic alliance, client expectations) [23] which impact effectiveness, and as yet, the optimal psychological therapy for PwMS is not known. Given the importance of emotional wellbeing to PwMS, and the important adverse effects mental health impairment can have on symptoms and outcomes, there is a need to synthesize the evidence on psychological therapies as a whole so as to inform health services commissioning and clinical practice guidelines [24].

There has been no network meta-analysis (NMA) to date examining psychological therapies in PwMS. NMA can provide information regarding effects between interventions and provide a hierarchy of intervention effectiveness [25]. Conducting an NMA in examining psychological therapies in PwMS can provide valuable information as to which psychological therapies are most effective and should thus be prioritized in care. Further, NMA can provide information as to which interventions are understudied and require more information before policy decisions can be made.

The aim of this review is to evaluate through systematic review and NMA the effectiveness of psychological therapies in PwMS.

A protocol was prospectively registered with PROSPERO, Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, University of York: CRD42023435206.

Eligible studies were included based on SPIO criteria—Study design, Population, Intervention, and Outcome [26]. Only randomized controlled trials (RCTs) that compared a psychological intervention to an active comparator or control were included. Participants were PwMS of any age and phenotype. The interventions being tested had to be a psychological intervention, defined as activities aimed at changing behaviors, feelings, and emotional states [27]. Only interventions involving live interaction with a trained health professional were included, as the American Psychological Association notes that psychotherapy comprises “any psychological service provided by a trained professional that primarily uses forms of communication and interaction” [28]. For example, asynchronous or self-directed programs were excluded. Only articles reporting quantitative outcomes were collected (i.e., protocol studies or studies reporting solely qualitative outcomes were excluded). Included studies were limited to those published in English in peer-reviewed academic literature.

The search strategy was developed with an information specialist, with a Peer Review of Electronic Search Strategies (PRESS) by a second information specialist. The search was developed in Medline ALL (Ovid), and subsequently translated to CINAHL (EBSCO), Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL, Ovid), EMBASE (Ovid), APA PsycINFO (Ovid). The search strategy consisted of two major concepts, (1) multiple sclerosis and (2) psychological intervention. Terms were sourced using multiple previous reviews. Terms were then combined with a controlled clinical trial filter. We searched from 1984 onwards, as a previous Cochrane systematic review [16] identified that the first published RCT in this area was in 1984. The most up-to-date search was conducted in April 2025. Full search details available in Online Appendix1.

Search results were imported into Covidence (Veritas Health Innovation, Melbourne, Australia) for screening. Each title/abstract was reviewed by two independent reviewers for potential eligibility (blinded for peer review), with those potentially eligible reviewed in full by two independent reviewers (blinded for peer review) against inclusion criteria. In the case of disagreements, consensus was reached through discussion, with a senior reviewer (blinded for peer review) available for arbitration.

Data were extracted by two independent reviewers (blinded for peer review) using an extraction template informed by the CONSORT and TiDIER checklists [29] (Online Appendix2). In cases where data were missing, the study team contacted both the first and last authors via email. If the authors did not respond to the first email, a second follow-up email was sent. Authors were given a total of one month to reply before presuming data was missing.

Objective or patient-reported measures were extracted from included studies. Outcomes were focused on mental health (e.g., stress, depression, anxiety), cognition (e.g., memory, attention), physical health (e.g. pain, sleep, fatigue), quality of life (QoL), and health economics (e.g., contacts with physicians).

We reported the synthesis of findings using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) checklist [31] (Online Appendix3). Findings were synthesized via: (1) narrative synthesis of systematic review findings, based on SPIO [26], and (2) meta-analysis of quantitative outcome data derived from included RCTs.

Statistics were performed using Review Manager (RevMan 5.4 for Windows, Cochrane Institute, GB), SAS 9.4 for Windows (SAS Institute, USA), Just Another Gibbs Sampler (JAGS 4.3) for Windows, R2jags, getmc packages for R (version 4.2) and MetaInsight [32]. Alpha was set at 0.05. Descriptive statistics were performed for reported study demographics using standard methods. Inverse-variance meta-analyses for continuous outcomes using standardised mean differences (SMD) and a random effects model were performed. Improvement in reported outcome measure was coded as positive mean change. Standard deviation (SD) of the mean change when not reported was calculated using appropriate conversions [33] such as standard error of change to SD, interquartile range to SD, 95% confidence interval to SD, etc. When mean change was not reported, mean change for treatment and control arm were calculated using pre-post information and SD was estimated from reported effect size and relevant test statistic orp-value (and determination of appropriate critical value from appropriate table) using methods described by Chi 2023 [33]. Ita squares were converted to Cohen’s d as necessary. If effect size was not reported, Morris’s effect size for pre-post design was calculated [34]. If a vaguep-value was listed (e.g.p< 0.05), critical value obtained from the relevant table was at thep-value stated (e.g.p= 0.05). Effect sizes and test values/p-values used to back calculate SD were the ones reported by the study authors and not the most appropriate analysis if authors did not perform them when they differed, as our statistician did not have access to raw data at the study level. No study reported correctingp-values for multiplicity.

Different interventions and control scenarios between studies were grouped together as a single “treatment” and “control” with assumed equal effect weighing for the meta-analysis (dk=d). Studies with multiple treatment arms were pooled as a single treatment. As 4 primary domains were targets of interventions (mental health, physical health, cognition, and QoL), four separate meta-analyses were performed to address possible heterogeneity between domains. Further sub-group analyses were performed for physical subdomains (pain, sleep, fatigue, etc.) and mental health sub-domains (anxiety, depression, stress, etc.). Heterogeneity was assessed viaI2.

Studies were initially excluded from meta-analysis if: the primary outcome was a biomarker; a number or percentage of participants with an improvement on primary outcome measure was reported without mean change or baseline and/or subsequent outcomes and did not respond to authors request for data; reported solely SPSS generated ANOVA table or sums of squares values without evidence of an ANCOVA being performed and omitted baseline and/or subsequent outcome measures and did not respond to authors requests for data; performed a mediation analysis as primary analysis without baseline and/or subsequent outcome measures and did not respond to authors requests for data, or did not reportnper group and did not respond to authors requests for data. In cases where studies met inclusion criteria for the review but had the aforementioned criteria that excluded them from the meta-analyses, the studies were still included in the systematic review but were not included in the meta-analyses. Sensitivity analyses were then performed were studies with high RoB, potential outliers as defined as effect sizes were more than 4 × greater than typically reported for psychological studies [35] as these studies may have bias due to study quality, or suspicion of potentially incorrect estimation of mean change, SD and therefore biasing effect size to be greater than actual effect size.

A standard random-effects Bayesian consistency NMA was fitted to studies retained for meta-analysis where each intervention effect was assumed to be independent of each other and additive effects were independent as well. Control intervention was pooled from all control scenarios listed in included studies. Studies with insufficiently described intervention(s) and/or expert opinion unable to classify intervention type were excluded from NMA. Multi-arm studies had each separate intervention mean difference and SD reported separately as appropriate. Inconsistency of the NMA was assessed via node-splitting method [36] and visual inspection of deviance residuals. A second NMA was performed where controls were unpooled (i.e. treatment as usual, active control, education, etc.) as control in rehabilitation focused trials are not inert as in placebo or sham controlled RCTs and may contain some aspects of the intervention or exert an influence on the outcome measures as well. Treatment as usual (TAU) was selected as the comparator for this NMA as it was the control scenario least likely to influence outcome. NMA and node splitting models were performed using 20000 iterations with a 5000 iteration burn-in and informative priors were selected for the treatment arms and flat uninformative priors for the bias parameter. Performance of the treatments was assessed by surface under the cumulative ranking curve (SUCRA) [37,38]. Sensitivity analyses were performed and studies with high RoB were excluded from the NMA. Additional NMA were performed to assess the treatments to individual control scenarios for those with a sufficient number of studies to maintain a single network (TAU, control, active control) and studies that had a primary outcome in the mental health domain (Supplemental files).

An exploratory meta-regression was performed using a hierarchical linear mixed model with restricted maximum likelihood estimation and was fitted using a backwards elimination method. To further identify which covariates exert the most effect on the standard mean difference estimates of the included studies, a least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) was performed. Model fit was assessed via Bayesian information criterion (BIC).

Our initial database search identified 7014 studies for possible inclusion. Following deduplication and the addition of four studies identified through reference list searching, 2740 studies were reviewed. After screening, 111 studies were included in the systematic review, 89 in the meta-analysis, 37 in the meta-regression, and 77 in the NMA (Fig.1). The full list of included studies can be found in Online Appendix4.

The characteristics of the 111 included studies are shown in Supplementary Table 1. Studies were published between 1984 and 2024. The main psychological interventions studies examined were CBT (n= 28), MBI (n= 32), ACT (n= 10), dialectical behavioural therapy (DBT) (n= 2), and positive psychotherapy (n= 5). Treatments most commonly ran for 8 sessions, with sessions largely lasting between 45 and 150 min in length.

The characteristics of participants in the included studies, where available, are shown in Supplementary Table 2. The majority of participants were female (individual studies generally did not differentiate between sex and gender. Participant ages ranged from 18 to 78 years old. A majority of participants had a relapse-remitting MS phenotype (71.7%), where reported.

An NMA was conducted on 77 studies, with 7 interventions and 10 pairwise comparisons (n= 3911; Fig.2). The consistency node splitting test showed insufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis of a consistent network (Supplemental Table 3). Studies most commonly compared MBIs (n= 17) and CBT (n= 15) to a control condition. Only CBT (n= 4) and MBIs (n= 4) were compared to an active control comparator, with all other psychological therapies compared to a control condition or another psychological therapy. All interventions were leaning towards improvement, with changes in mean difference compared with control greatest for CBT (MD 11.0, 95% CI 5.72–16.2) (Fig.3). SUCRA results also found that CBT outperformed other psychological interventions when ranked amongst included psychological interventions (Fig.4). Findings from the SUCRA figure can be interpreted by looking at the area under the curve per arm and shading, with greater area under the curve and green shading indicating greater effectiveness. Findings with control conditions combined can be found in Supplementary Figs. 1–3.

A series of meta-analyses were conducted examining the effects of psychological therapies on individual outcome groups (QoL, cognition, physical health, mental health). Information on outcomes included in each outcome group is provided in Supplementary Table 4. Studies were included in the meta-analysis based on the primary outcome for each study. This was chosen given the large number of RCTs included in the meta-analyses and because RCTs were powered based on the primary outcome. Only two studies reported a health economic outcome as their primary outcome; as they used heterogeneous outcome measures, a meta-analysis was not possible in these groups. One study found cost effectiveness following the psychological intervention (reduction of £378 in average patient costs over 8 months,p= 0.03) [39] and one study did not find statistically significant cost-effectiveness in terms of contacts with general practitioners (p> 0.05) [40].

20 studies were included in the meta-analysis looking at the effects of psychological therapies on QoL (Fig.5). Psychological therapies significantly improved QoL (SMD 0.77; 95% CI 0.21–1.34;p= 0.007).

17 studies were included in the meta-analysis looking at the effects of psychological therapies on cognition (Fig.6). Psychological therapies significantly improved cognitive outcomes (SMD 0.66, 95% CI 0.24–1.07,p= 0.002).

14 studies were included in the meta-analysis looking at the effects of psychological therapies on physical health outcomes (Fig.7). Psychological therapies significantly improved physical health outcomes (SMD 1.08; 95% CI 0.41–1.74;p< 0.00001).

48 studies were included in the meta-analysis looking at the effects of psychological therapies on mental health (Fig.8). Psychological therapies were associated with significant improvements in mental health (SMD 1.41; 95% CI 1.00–1.83;p< 0.00001).

In addition to these analyses, a series of additional meta-analyses were conducted for clinical outcome measures including anxiety, depression, sleep, and pain using clinically validated tools (Supplementary Figs. 4–7). Psychological therapies showed significant improvements on the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (SMD 3.20, 95% CI 1.99–4.41,p< 0.00001), Beck Depression Inventory (SMD 12.13, 95% CI 7.62–16.63,p< 0.00001), and Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (SMD 3.74, 95% CI 2.59–4.90,p< 0.00001), but not for the Numeric Pain Rating (SMD 0.10, 95% CI − 0.36 to 0.55,p= 0.68).

Of the 36 meta-regression variables identified a priori, only four were assessed due to the inconsistent reporting in the included studies (intervention delivery mode, intervention instructor, study RoB, and intervention tailoring). Studies were excluded from the meta-regression if they did not report on any of these variables (e.g., no reporting on demographic information or study components). In-person delivery (Estimate = 3.0319; SE = 4.7599; 95% CI − 6.30 to 12.36), online delivery (Estimate = 2.8542; SE = 4.9449; 95% CI − 6.84 to 12.54), telephone delivery (Estimate = 0.3373; SE = 5.6813; 95% CI − 10.80 to 6.26), low RoB studies (Estimate = 0.1426, SE = 1.9471, 95% CI − 3.67, 3.96) and delivery by a psychologist (Estimate = 1.3092; SE = 1.6724; 95% CI − 1.97 to 4.59) had a positive effect on outcomes. Hybrid (Estimate = − 3.8069; SE = 5.1355; 95% CI − 13.87 to 6.26) modes of delivery, and not tailoring interventions to PwMS (Estimate = − 1.5445; SE = 2.1652; 95% CI − 5.79 to 2.70) had a negative effect on outcomes.

Individual RoB outcomes are presented in Fig.9. Overall RoB was judged to be low for 10 studies, unclear for 80 studies, and high for 21 studies. Very few studies reported examining treatment fidelity, with only 18 studies reporting that treatment fidelity was assessed. Of these 18 studies, 16 studies included observation through audio or visual recording, the gold standard for assessing fidelity delivery per the NIH Behaviour Change Consortium [41].

This is the first NMA assessing the effects of psychological interventions in PwMS. Our findings showed effectiveness across a range of outcomes, including physical, mental, cognitive, and quality of life outcomes in PwMS. This provides robust evidence for the efficacy of psychological therapies for improving symptoms and wellbeing of PwMS generally.

These findings are consistent with previous literature on psychological interventions among PwMS, which has found improvements for certain psychological therapies (e.g., CBT, MBI) in mental health [42–44], physical health [45,46], and QoL [47]. A previous meta-analysis [8] found borderline significant benefits for MBIs on cognitive functioning in PwMS. Compared with other non- psychological treatments, this review showed superior findings for psychological therapies. One meta-analysis examining pharmacological interventions in PwMS found a significant reduction in depression when compared with inactive comparators (SMD 0.87, 95% CI − 1.38, − 0.35), but not when compared to active comparators, nor for improvements in fatigue [13].

This review was not without limitations. First, there was some heterogeneity between studies due to the wide range of interventions and outcomes included. This included wide variability in measures used for outcomes and where minimal clinically important differences (MCID) [48–51] can differ considerably making an overall comment on the clinical meaningfulness of mean differences challenging. Additionally, prior studies have largely not included people with clinical ‘case-ness’ of the outcomes being studied, which further limits interpretation of clinical meaning. Next, we found the Cochrane RoB tool limited in reporting RoB in behavioural studies due to the limited blinding ability in RCTs measuring psychological interventions. If applying the same criteria to psychological interventions as placebo controlled pharmacological trials, most studies would be scored as “high” RoB. We were unable to find a RoB tool that would accurately assess bias in RCTs examining psychological interventions against control/usual care. Future research should seek to develop a tool to assess risk of bias in RCTs with interventions that have limited blinding ability (e.g., psychological interventions, exercise interventions) to appropriately assess study quality, which is important in considering fairly whether findings should be interpreted with caution [52]. Further, sample size, adherence, and data completeness was sparsely reported in several studies, with review authors emailing the authors of 27 included studies to determine the number of participants from whom data was collected. This further applied to information on study adherence and data completeness. Further, study interventions were not always well-defined or described, so on occasion it was unclear as to which type of intervention was examined in PwMS. The study team worked with expert neuropsychologists to help define the included studies where there was a lack of clarity on intervention typology but were still limited to the information presented. Additionally, our analysis suggests that very few studies (~ 10%) engaged a statistician in their analyses and a few studies reported findings that were more than 4× greater than typically reported effect sizes for psychological intervention studies [35]. In these cases, studies were thus not included in the main meta-analyses nor NMA out of concerns of accuracy and skewing results. Further, few studies explicitly reported measuring fidelity in their trial, which is an important consideration regarding study quality. Additionally, the authors were limited to looking at psychological interventions based on their definition and excluded studies that did not clearly define their psychological intervention based. For example, cognitive rehabilitation interventions, although having some overlap with psychological interventions, were not included if the intervention could not clearly be defined as a psychological intervention based on this definition. Finally, studies generally did not include objective measures of cognition or brain functioning. This is important, as MS modifies cognitive processing through neural inflammation and degeneration, creating network dysfunction and disconnection [53], and this has important implications for understanding the mechanisms and effects of psychological therapies in this population. Future RCTs of psychological therapies should include objective measures of brain function, such as functional MRI, and objective measures of cognition to determine for whom these interventions are most appropriate and effective [54].

Our findings provide strong support for the inclusion of psychological interventions in the routine care for PwMS. This has important policy implications, as access to psychological care is currently not routinely available to PwMS [55]. This matters because depression and anxiety are the most common comorbidities among PwMS [56] and mental health disorders are consistently among the top ten most disabling conditions of global burden of disease [57], with an estimated prevalence of over 970 million people worldwide in 2019 [58]. Our review suggests mental health comorbidities are treatable with psychological therapies, with additional benefits in physical, cognitive and QoL domains. Further, our findings from meta-analyses suggest clinical significance, as results showed mean differences on the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale and Beck Depression Inventory were in the range of minimal clinically important difference. Indeed, this NMA highlights robust evidence for psychological therapies benefiting PwMS. The inclusion of these interventions in routine care for PwMS may conceivably decrease the incidence, prevalence and recurrence of these conditions which in the case of anxiety and depression are often chronic, relapsing conditions. This is likely to be associated with health economic savings [10,59].

Thus, it is important to consider the availability of psychological therapies at the population level for PwMS and implementation may best be considered through a ‘preventative’, ‘stepped’ and/or ‘stratified’ care approach, whereby psychological therapies are available to PwMS broadly and then increasingly tailored to populations with specific or more complex needs, such as those typical for PwMS. Clinical expertise plus patient choice can determine the optimal psychological intervention (CBT, MBI, ACT, DBT, other), including timing, duration, delivery strategy etc. for PwMS. This may allow for the development of patient decision aids to assist patients in deciding which type of therapy is best suited for them. While previous studies provide useful evidence for outcomes regarding one type of psychological therapy (e.g., CBT, MBI, etc.), the use of psychological therapies more broadly in PwMS had not yet been studied, nor has comparative effectiveness. Our review provides useful information as to the effectiveness of different types and modes of psychological interventions compared to each other on various outcomes. For example, CBT outperformed other psychological therapies when looking at changes in mean difference. This can provide important feedback for care decisions in PwMS when considering options to address emotional wellbeing.

Future RCTs in this area may consider comparing psychological interventions against an active comparator (e.g., adaptive cognitive training), as interventions such as ACT and DBT, to the best of our knowledge, have not been studied in an RCT against an active comparator. Future research should consider which comparator group will best address their research question and fill the current gap in knowledge [60]. Additionally, future studies should look at the effectiveness of these interventions in PwMS with mental health diagnoses (or at least ‘case-ness’).

Research should also consider the moderating role of participant, study, and intervention characteristics, as well as mediators of change to determine what drives beneficial effects so that intervention content can be optimized and redundancy minimized. This is important to consider so as to understand how to match PwMS for the psychological intervention best suited to their needs. Previous research in non-MS populations have shown potential moderating effects of therapist experience, geographical region, sex/gender, and clinical severity on psychological outcomes [61–63]. Future research should examine whether these characteristics also moderate effects of psychological interventions in PwMS to best understand how to provide tailored recommendations for interventions.

Future research must also study the role of participant diversity, as our findings found limited reporting of diversity in studies and a primarily White population in those that reported race/ethnicity, which matters for many reasons, not least when considering social and cultural determinants of health and intersectionality as moderating factors in engagement with and response to treatment among PwMS [64]. Further research is required to understand how findings from our review apply to diverse populations of PwMS and how psychological therapies should be tailored to be truly inclusive and accessible to a wide population, including those from historically marginalized groups. These studies would provide crucial information as to formally calling for psychological therapy use in care and informing guidelines. Thus, future research should include participants of diverse age, race, and gender and report these characteristics to understand the applicability of these findings to various populations [65]. Further, future research should consider which components of these interventions are associated with the greatest benefits across domains. Finally, future research could examine whether live psychotherapy is superior to mental health interventions without a live interaction (e.g., app-based intervention), as we did not consider these types of interventions, and they are becoming more common with limited access to therapists [66,67].

Finally, we provide a series of recommendations for improving the quality of future RCTs when reporting their findings. First, future RCTs should provide adequate information on the intervention, including reporting the therapist characteristics, treatment dose (i.e., number and length of sessions), session content, and intervention location. Next, research should consider engaging a statistician in their work to ensure appropriate power calculations, statistical analyses, and robust reporting of findings in a way that can be replicable. Third, future research should also consider using clinically meaningful, validated outcome measures and examine whether findings showed MCID of outcomes in addition to statistical significance. Finally, future research should support inclusive recruitment practices to enhance recruitment of diverse populations and report the characteristics of participants in their study so researchers can contextualize the applicability of findings to diverse audiences.

Our findings demonstrate that psychological therapies should be considered in the routine care of PwMS for a wide range of outcomes. CBT has shown the greatest changes in mean difference in outcome compared to other psychological interventions, but more description on the components of interventions and how diversity influences outcomes is required.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

We would like to thank Dr. Mohammad Alavinia and Menelaos Konstantinidis for guidance on the network analysis and Drs. Robin Green, Lesley Ruttan & Liesel-Ann Meusel for expert opinion on psychotherapies.