Urbanisation and ageing populations are global challenges for ageing well. This mixed-methods study examines the health and social needs of older adults in urban areas in Berlin, Germany and in Singapore, focusing on three key dimensions of healthy ageing and wellbeing: health, mobility, loneliness, and equity as a cross-cutting theme.

The design follows a mixed-methods approach combining a quantitative longitudinal cohort study with qualitative interviews. For the quantitative cohort study, a standardised survey is carried out via home visits with a random sample ofn= 1,050 adults aged 65 + years each in selected neighbourhoods in Berlin (three neighbourhoods) and Singapore (five neighbourhoods). The questionnaire comprises questions on health and health care utilization, neighbourhood, loneliness and social contacts, mobility and sociodemographic characteristics. Additionally, three functional tests (cognitive functioning, hand grip strength, and walking speed) are carried out with participants. Participants are followed-up after 12 months with a second survey interview. The survey data is linked with openly available geospatial data to allow for more in-depth study of the built-up and social environment and physical barriers in the selected neighbourhoods.

For the qualitative component, walking interviews are conducted withn=50 people each in Berlin and Singapore focusing on older adults’ subjective perspective on health, mobility, green spaces and loneliness in their urban neighbourhood. The results of the different study components will be triangulated.

The Ageing Well Study offers a valuable opportunity to assess the health and social needs of older adults in two distinct urban contexts. The mixed-methods design and utilization of multiple data sources enables an examination of the various dimensions of ageing well from disparate angles and perspectives. The extensive quantitative data set permits the examination of associations and interlinkages between the various dimensions of ageing well and the living environment, as well as the identification of changes over a 12-month period. By opting for home visits, participants with limited mobility are more likely to participate. Minor adaptations of the instruments and methods were implemented to best suit local context, administrative regulations, and feasibility at the study site.

The study has been registered prospectively at the German Register for Clinical Studies (DRKS) (DRKS00033043, registration date: 16th Nov 2023) which is part of the WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (WHO ICTRP).

Urbanisation and demographic change are global trends that pose challenges to ageing well. Germany and Singapore face similar macro-level trends albeit in different socio-cultural contexts. Both populations are rapidly ageing with the proportion of persons aged ≥ 65 years projected to be around one-third of the population in each country by 2050 [1]. Ageing is associated with an increase in chronic non-communicable diseases, as well as social and financial needs that in turn increase demands on health and social services [2,3]. “Ageing well” occurs when “people can maintain satisfying and healthy lives as they age by making choices that optimize healthy, active, and safe living“ [4]. Given the increasing number of older adults in urban areas [5], this project focuses on three dimensions of ageing well: health, mobility, loneliness, and health equity as a cross-cutting theme in the urban settings of Berlin, Germany and Singapore.

The Ageing Well study is a collaborative study between the National University of Singapore (NUS), Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, and the Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin (HU). It is funded with a grant from the Berlin University Alliance (BUA)-NUS Global Health Exploration Project.

An individual’s health status is shaped by a combination of factors, including medical conditions and social determinants. Older adults need services that reduce the risk of worsening health, transfer to assisted living, or death [6,7]. An incongruence between having medical problems that require care, and receiving the necessary social and health care services can lead to unmet health needs of older persons. [8]. The Singapore Principal Investigators (PIs) in this project have developed the Simple Segmentation Tool (SST), a measurement scheme that identifies a hierarchy of health conditions combined with corresponding healthcare utilization that yields a categorization of the intensity and frequency of health needs [9]. The SST is an operationalisation of the ‘population segmentation’ approach to planning and evaluating health services and has been demonstrated to be predictive of worsening of health status, acute service use, and mortality [7,10]. The BUA-NUS Global Health Initiative 2020-21 seed funding enabled the application of the SST to data from the Berlin Aging Study II so as to assess levels of unmet health and social needs. This preliminary work facilitated an expansion of the collaboration between BUA and NUS to situate health and social needs assessment within a broader framework, encompassing health needs, recreational/cooling greenspace, mobility, and loneliness.

Mobility is a central component of ageing well and mobility limitations affect about 35% of those aged 70 and most aged over 85 years [11]. Observational studies show mobility is connected to important factors for healthy and independent ageing, such as social support, walking speed, and a lower likelihood of falling due to minimizing barriers [11,12]. Life-space mobility is defined as moving through geographically defined environments such as residential indoor and outdoor environments including green spaces [13–15]. It is related to physical health, but also includes social aspects that affect well-being, such as meaningful activities and social participation [16].

Loneliness results from a perceived discrepancy between the desired and the realized quantity and quality of one’s social relationships [17–19], and is a key dimension of wellbeing at older ages [12,20–22]. Loneliness is distinct from weak social ties [19] or depression [23]. At older ages, loneliness is associated with adverse health effects: depression, cognitive decline, functional limitations, chronic ailments, reduced healthcare utilization, and mortality [24–30]. Sociodemographic correlates of loneliness [30] as well as the relation between living environment and satisfaction, quality of life, and mental wellbeing are well studied [31–34]. In contrast, less is known about the roles of the living environment, neighbourhood cohesion, and the perception of an age-friendly environment for individual differences in loneliness.

Health equity is generally assessed in terms of differential outcomes as a function of social determinants, such as socioeconomic status, and other features associated with ‘vulnerability’ such as gender, ethnicity, and age. The socio-economic status is known to impact wellbeing via multiple mechanisms, including differential access to basic service needs (i.e. housing, health care services, food), access to health and social services, and education. However, moderating factors have not been thoroughly studied yet [35,36].

The overall aim of the study is to examine associations between characteristics of the living environment of older adults (i.e., including health service availability and accessibility, built environment and recreational green space characteristics, and perceived age-friendliness) and three key dimensions of wellbeing, i.e., health, mobility, loneliness, and the crosscutting theme health equity. A secondary aim is to investigate changes across the different dimensions of wellbeing over 12 months.

Ageing Well has a longitudinal mixed-methods design, comprising a cohort study and qualitative interviews. In nine neighbourhoods in Berlin and Singapore (three neighbourhoods in Berlin and five neighbourhoods in Singapore), we will conduct a two-wave cohort study of randomly chosen older adults as a survey using computer assisted personal interviews (CAPI). Participants will receive a 12-month follow-up (between 12 and 18 months after the initial interview). In addition to the cohort study, we carry out qualitative interviews with older adults including non-participatory observation of their use of built and greenspaces, as well as walking interviews conducted in outdoor and/or greenspace settings. These activities will be scheduled in the summer season to capture the effects of heat and hot days as health-impacting drivers. Data collection for the first wave of the cohort study in Berlin takes place from December 2023 onwards (first wave data collection: December 2023-June 2024, second wave data collection: December 2024 to July 2025, qualitative data collection: July to October 2024). In Singapore, data collection takes place February 2024 onwards.

The goal is to sample a total ofN= 1,050 older adults each in Berlin and Singapore (i.e.n= 350 respondents in each of the three neighbourhoods in Berlin,n= 210 respondents in the five neighbourhoods in Singapore) for the cohort study, andn= 30 for the qualitative interviews. The differences between Berlin and Singapore in the number of neighbourhoods is due to differences in estimated response rates at baseline. Based on attrition rates in other longitudinal ageing studies, we estimate a 60% participation rate in the second wave [37,38]. In Berlin, to boost our cross-sectional sample size, we will resample approximately 40% new participants in additional neighbourhoods in the second wave, who will only complete the first survey without a 12-month follow-up.

The city of Berlin is officially divided into 542 administrative neighbourhoods, known as LOR-planning areas (Life-space oriented planning areas), each with an average population of approximately 7,000 inhabitants [39]. Multiple datasets on these neighbourhoods are updated regularly and are made publicly available, providing insight into the proportion of older adults in each neighbourhood, their socio-economic status, and their migration background. In terms of public green spaces, land use, urban structure as well as structural density and population density, the Environmental Atlas of the city of Berlin provides extensive open-access datasets that serve as a starting point for our research.

Three neighbourhoods were selected for in-depth case studies based on a combination of official neighbourhood and environmental datasets, as well as our own previous research. The selection was made in collaboration with representatives from the local government and administration. The following criteria were considered for selection of neighbourhoods: (1) absolute number of older persons in the neighbourhood larger than sample size (minimum of 1,750 people over age 65), (2) medium to low socioeconomic status of the neighbourhood (3) variability in the built environment. Based on these criteria, three neighbourhoods in three districts were selected: (a) Tegel Süd (Reinickendorf), (b) Kurstraße + Eiswerder (Spandau, two adjacent planning areas were selected to fulfil minimum sample size requirements) and (c) Springpfuhl (Marzahn-Hellersdorf). For the resampling in the second data selection wave, the three additional adjacent neighbourhoods Alt Tegel (Reinickendorf), Auersbergstraße (Marzahn-Hellersdorf) and Ackerstraße (Spandau) were selected.

In Singapore, studies of older adults have often focused on public housing residents and detailed the experiences of those living in more mature housing estates. A key contribution of this project will therefore be the inclusion of and comparison between participants in both public and private housing and mature and non-mature estates. The following criteria were considered for selecting the neighbourhoods for the study in Singapore: (1) a sizeable older adult population, (2) mix of relatively older and newer housing estates, i.e., those that developed in different decades since the 1950s to the mid-1990s. Five planning areas were chosen in Singapore: Tampines, Sengkang, Clementi, Ang Mo Kio and Kallang. Within each planning area, one sub-zone with a substantial proportion of older adults to the total population was selected. Planning areas, currently 55 in number, are used in Singapore primarily as development guide plan (DGP) areas, i.e., the level at which the statutory board, Urban Development Authority, draws up detailed land-use plans [40]. The study will obtain a random sample of 5,700 potential residential addresses across the sub-zones from the Singapore Department of Statistics. The sample frame from which addresses were chosen were residential addresses with at least one Singapore citizen or permanent resident aged 65 years and older. The distribution of addresses across housing types (i.e., government-built or Housing Development Board [HDB] 1–2 room apartments, 3-room apartments, 4-room apartments, 5-room or larger apartments) in the sample was proportional to the distribution of housing types in within each sub-zone.

A random sample of 5,250 registered adults aged 65 or older in the four planning areas is drawn from the Berlin registration office. Participants receive an invitation letter explaining the study objectives, the participation process, the privacy policy, and a copy of the informed consent form. If more than one person per household is selected in the random sample, each receives an individual invitation to participate. Participants who do not wish to take part in the study can opt out by e-mail or telephone. Those who do not opt out receive a second letter with an appointment for the home visit, with another opportunity to opt out of the study or choose another interview date by telephone or e-mail. On the day of the home visit, participants are given the opportunity to participate then and there, to participate at another time, or to refuse to participate. Those who refuse are considered active refusals. Those who cannot be reached on the day of the announced site visit, receive at least one more letter with an announced home visit. Those who do not respond to any letters or home visits are considered passive refusals at the end of data collection. If participants agree to take part in the survey, the eligibility criteria (see Table1) are checked. The same eligibility criteria apply for follow-up. Persons who move to a different neighbourhood between baseline and follow-up are only included if they move to a neighbourhood that is part of the study in the same district. All interviews are conducted in German.

Written informed consent is obtained from all participants prior to the interview at both study sites.

The inclusion criterion for participants in the study in Singapore first stipulates that a participant should be among the regular residents of the address in the sample (i.e., they should not be visitors or living at the address temporarily for any reason), be a Singapore citizen or permanent resident, and be aged 65–95 years. The specification of an upper age was mandated by the NUS Institutional Review Board.

During a visit to the address, an interviewer will first seek to prepare a list with the initials of all such individuals living at that address, by asking any adult household member with the exception of domestic helpers who are unlikely to provide this information to interviewers. At that time, the interviewer will ask if any of the listed older adults is unavailable or unable to answer the survey questionnaire, and if case of any affirmative responses ascertain if this is the case because he/she is (i) unable to hear, or unable to speak, or has a chronic physical or mental illness or disability which would prevent him/her from being able to respond to a survey questionnaire on their own, or (ii) currently admitted to a hospital, nursing home, hospice, or another institution for health or other reasons, and unlikely to be available for an interview during the study period. Such individuals are deleted from the list. At addresses where two or more older adults remain on the list, the interviewer will first use a random sequence generator (available gratis onhttps://www.random.org/) and assign each remaining individual in the list a serial number in the same sequence as generated. Then, the interviewer will use the true random number generator (on the same website) and specify the number of the older adults on the list. The random number generator will yield one of the serial numbers, and this individual is therefore the randomly selected potential participant. This process ensures that in addresses where more than one older adult is eligible and able to participate in the study, the selection of one potential participant is done at random.

Subsequently, the selected potential participant is administered a cognitive status test. If the selected potential participant answers five or more questions correctly from the ten-item Abbreviated Mental Test– Singapore, a criterion that has been used previously in surveys administered with community-dwelling older adults [41], he/she is deemed eligible to continue [42].

Data collection is conducted as a computer-assisted personal interview (CAPI) at the participants‘ home. There will be a baseline data collection and a follow-up data collection after twelve months (earliest 12 months and latest 18 months after the initial interview). A standardized questionnaire has been developed, with minor adaptations to best suit local context and feasibility at the study site. The following instruments are used to assess the different dimensions of ageing as well as potential outcomes and risk factors (Table2).

To identify health needs of older adults, we assess health status, diagnosed health conditions, frailty, health care utilization, continuity of primary care, activation of care, medication and tobacco consumption.

Participants are asked to rate their health status (general health, vision, and hearing) using five categories (“excellent”, “very good”, “good”, “fair” and “poor”). For questions regarding vision and hearing, two additional categories are included (“loss of vision (no vision) in both eyes” and “not able to hear in both ears”).

In addition, we assess self-reported medical professional-diagnosed health conditions (over the lifetime) as well as disease-specific health care utilization (past 6 months) using questions from the community survey version of the SST [10]. The ever-diagnosed health conditions are classified into potentially severe or life-threatening conditions (e.g., cancer, heart attack, cerebrovascular disease such as stroke, chronic respiratory illness) and others (e.g., hypertension, arthritis, chronic back pain). This information is used in combination with healthcare utilizations for these conditions and the Global Activity Limitation Indicator (described below) to segment participants into different global impression of health categories.

We assess the presence of symptoms of anxiety and/or depression using the PHQ-4 (Peoples Health Questionnaire-4). The PHQ-4 is an established, validated 4-item screening tool for depression and anxiety and is highly correlated with disability days, functional impairment and health care use [43,44]. It includes two-items on depressive symptoms and two-items on symptoms of anxiety.

Frailty is a clinical syndrome that is predictive of a range of health outcomes in older adults, including falls, hospitalizations, and death [45]. Frailty is determined according to Fried´s Frailty phenotype, which is defined by the presence of at least three of the following criteria: unintentional weight loss (> 5 kg in the past 12 months), weak grip strength, slow walking speed, self-reported exhaustion and low physical activity [45], measured using the Short -Form of the International Physical Activity questionnaire (IPAC-SF).

Questions from the German version of the European Health Interview Survey (GEDA/EHIS 2014/2015) [46] are used to assess the type of insurance, number of consultations with a General Practitioner (last 12 months), number of consultations with a specialist (last 12 months), visits to the emergency room (last 6 months), and overnight hospital stays (last 12 months). Additionally, we assess disease-specific health care utilisation (past 6 months) as part of the SST.

Primary care continuity is related to a range of health outcomes including reduced mortality, lower health care costs, and hospitalisations [47,48]. We use items on longitudinal continuity of care (care site and provider duration) from a continuity of care model used in the National Health and Health Services Use Questionnaire (NHHSUQ) [49]. The items assess the most frequently visited health care site, duration of care at care site, presence of a specific care provider, duration of care from care provider and changes in care provider in the last 12 months.

Patient activation refers to the knowledge, confidence, skills, and abilities of patients to manage their own care. Patient activation is a known predictor for a range of health and treatments outcomes, health behaviours, as well as lower hospitalization rates and visits to A&E [50]. Patient activation is assessed using three items as used in the SST: patient perceived knowledge about their own condition (“very little”, “something”, “a lot”), confidence in management of own physical ailments (“not at all confident”, “a little confident”, “somewhat confident”, “quite confident”, “extremely confident”), and problems in understanding information about their own health (“always”, “often”, “sometimes”, “occasionally”, “never”) [10].

As many older patients have multimorbid health needs and require polypharmacy, we ask for the use and number of prescription drugs taken regularly.

As smoking is a risk factors for many health outcomes, tobacco use is evaluated using three questions from the GEDA/EHIS 2014/15 questionnaire [46] on current use of tobacco products, past tobacco use and total duration of tobacco use in years.

Loneliness is linked to outcomes in mental health, general health, well-being, physical health, sleep and cognition [51]. We use adapted and abbreviated versions of the UCLA Loneliness Scale [52]. We employ an 8-item version, adapted from the revised UCLA Scale (Version II), with a 5-point response scale, to allow for comparison with other ageing studies (BASE II Berlin Ageing Study) [53].

The Lubben Social Network Short Scale is used as a screening tool to identify persons at risk of social isolation. The six-item scale assesses social ties with family and friends and has been used and validated in older populations in a European and Singaporean context [54–56]. Social Isolation has been linked to higher mortality among other health outcomes [57,58].

Both control beliefs and resilience are associated with wellbeing in older age [59,60]. We use three items on internal locus of control as used in the BASE II study in Germany [61]. Participants are asked how much the following three statements apply to them on a scale of 1 = not at all applicable to 5 = very much applicable: “I can determine the good things that are happening in my life”, “If I get what I want, it is usually because I have done a lot for it myself”, “I can influence the good and beautiful things in my life myself”.

In Singapore, resilience is measured using the Brief Resilience scale (BRS) [62]. The six-item BRS asks participants to what extent they agree (five response options from strongly agree, disagree, neutral, to agree and strongly agree) with statements about bouncing back after hard times, making it through and recovering from or getting over from stressful events.

To determine general life satisfaction participants are asked: “Overall, how satisfied are you currently with your life?” and given a 10-point response scale. 0 = completely unsatisfied and 10 = completely satisfied [63].

The University of Alabama at Birmingham Study of Aging Life-Space Assessment (UAB-LSA) measures mobility of older adults in their home and community [64]. It has been validated and is associated with a range of outcomes, including limitations in activities and instrumental activities of daily living, functional mobility and self-rated health [15,16].

We measured functional capacity among participants by assessing the extent to which health- or physical limitations affected the ability to independently perform different everyday activities (Basic and Instrumental Activities of Daily Living). The GALI Score (Global Activity Limitation Index) [65] is used to determine the overall (6 month) limitations in everyday activities due to health conditions. The presence of limitations reported on the GALI are used for population segmentation as per the SST framework, for example, in classifying participants with chronic conditions as having symptoms that interfere with or restrict usual function even if they are not necessarily hospitalized for that condition.

Participants are asked in what type of housing they live (e.g. rented, owned, apartment, etc.). The answer choices are adapted to the local Singapore/Berlin housing context. Participants are then asked how long they have approximately lived in the current housing (in years/months).

Self-perceived neighbourhood cohesion is measured using 7-items, which have been used in the Health and Retirement study (HRS) [66]. Participants are asked to rate the 7 statements about the neighbourhood regarding the community, trustworthiness, safety, cleanliness, friendliness, helpfulness, attractiveness using five answer categories (“strongly disagree, disagree, neither agree/disagree, agree, strongly agree”). Self-perceived neighbourhood social cohesion has been found to be associated with a lower risk for a range of physical and mental health outcomes, e.g. myocardial infarction, falls, anxiety and depression [67–69].

Age-friendliness of the environment is a strong predictor for quality of life and loneliness in older adults [70]. The Age-friendly environment Assessment Tool (AFEAT) is a reliable, validated instrument, that has been developed based on the WHO age-friendly environment checklist [70]. It assesses individual perceptions of the individual environment (e.g. accessibility and availability of services, medical care, public transportation etc.) using 10-items on a 5-point Likert scale [70]. We use an adapted version of the AFEAT questionnaire with some additional items. In Singapore, the module is expanded, with the aim of collecting data on the perception of additional context-specific services: e.g., whether neighbourhood centres such as Active Ageing Centres (a major public policy initiative aimed at older adults in Singapore) had activities and events of interest to participants, or the ease with which participants are able to read/understand information about programmes and services on posters, flyers, notice boards, etc.

To determine subjective access to green spaces, a 5-point Likert scale statement (“I live close to public green spaces such as parcs, gardens or woodlands”) is added in the same format as the AFEAT items.

To assess sociodemographic variables a range of standardized questions are used. The following socioeconomic characteristics are measured: gender, household size, marital status, number of living children, native language, migration background (Berlin only), ethnicity (Singapore only), East/west German background (Germany only), educational attainment, income sufficiency, and housing type (Singapore only; housing type has been found in previous research to be proportional to household income and frequently used as a proxy for household socioeconomic status [71]). In the German version the majority of questions are based on the Diversity Minimal Item Set (DiMIS) [72].

The MacArthur Scale of Subjective Social Status [73] is selected as a measure for individual socioeconomic status (SES) as it highly correlated with more objective multidimensional SES measures, that tend to yield high levels of missing values in surveys, e.g. on questions on income [74].

Cognitive status is assessed using a paper-and-pencil digit symbol substitution test (DSST). The DDST is a valid and established instrument for cognitive disfunction, that is quick to implement [75]. DDST is a strong predictor for mortality and functional outcomes [75,76].

Hand grip strength and walking speed are assessed as part of the criteria for frailty. Unless any counterindications are present, the participant’s hand grip strength is determined twice for each hand using a standardized dynamometer. For walking speed, the time it takes participants to cover a marked distance of 2.5 (using a walking aid if necessary) is stopped. The walking speed measurements are taken at a clear and level space (uncarpeted, if possible) of 2.5 m at the participants homes. Start and end points are measured out by the interviewer and marked with masking tape. Measurements are taken twice and the average of the two times is taken as a participant’s walking speed.

The survey data will be merged with openly available geospatial data from sources such as Open Street Map (OSM), or datasets from the Berlin Senate’s Geodata Portal. Among the data used will be Points-of-interest from OSM, which will be filtered and classified into categories relevant to the elderly. Additionally, we will model walkability of the target neighbourhoods with a focus on recreational use of urban green spaces (UGS), using two indices, namely the local significance (LS) and detour index (DI). LS will be used as to model recreational flows and potential overcrowding effects of UGS, while DI will serve as a proxy for barriers that elderly people may encounter on their ways to UGS. All data will be modelled in 300 m, 500 m and 1000 m network distances around all residential buildings in the target LORs and later matched via address to the survey data to fulfil data protection requirements.

We will conduct and analysen= 50 qualitative walking interviews with older adults to understand their usage patterns, activities and perceptions of physical and other barriers encountered in urban green spaces and streets.

After data cleaning, we will conduct both cross-sectional and longitudinal analysis of the data. We will first examine missing values and if there is a need for multiple imputation. We will then conduct descriptive data analyses and regression analyses taking the multilevel type of the data into account. Sensitivity analyses will be conducted to ensure the robustness of our results.

We will triangulate the quantitative and qualitative results on neighbourhood level and a general level. In joint triangulation workshops researchers will bring their results together discussing the results and topics from an interdisciplinary mixed methods perspective.

The mixed-methods design, which incorporates multiple study sites and data sources, enables an examination of the various dimensions of ageing well from a range of perspectives. The large sample survey provides a substantial data set for quantitative analysis and can be linked to objective geographical geographic indicators at the neighbourhood or street level. The large dataset allows for pooled analyses of the sample using multilevel analysis to account for differences in the study sites as well as comparative or stratified analyses, where deemed relevant, to identify differences between or within the subsamples. As the samples are drawn at random from the registry offices at both study sites, the pool of potential candidates reflect the populations aged 65 or older of the respective neighbourhoods in terms of the socioeconomic characteristics including gender, age distribution and ethnic or cultural diversity. By opting for home visits (including visits in nursing homes), older people with reduced mobility are more likely to participate and the burden of participation is reduced. Furthermore, the qualitative data offer a more subjective insight into the needs of individuals and their perceptions of their neighbourhoods, which may not be fully captured in the standardised interviews.

The longitudinal design can capture short-term changes in the participants health and social needs within 12 months. The study has the potential to be expanded into an ongoing longitudinal study with multiple follow-ups in the long term.

The study also comes with several methodological limitations. Due to the differences in context and administrative regulations, the methodology and questionnaires had to be adapted slightly between Singapore and Berlin with regards to sampling, data collection and sociodemographic measures. Secondly, individuals who are advanced in age, experience significant health limitations, or express reservations about a home visit are less likely to participate in the study. Additionally, at the Berlin study site, the interviews are conducted in German, which limits participation from those who do not have sufficient German skills to complete the interview.

The selection of three to five neighbourhoods in each city may limit the generalisability of the results, however, the use of many standardised instruments allows the results to be compared with other cohort studies of ageing.

The authors thank all study participants as well as the Ageing Well study team (in Singapore: Nur Diyana Binte Azman and Jing Ting Ng, in Berlin: Mariyan Madzharov, Jasmin Frank, Cedrik Barth, Yana Zhou, Bela Rhode, Georg Nickel, Hélène Hauch, Doreen Kuschick, Anton Holtz, Benjamin Kirsten) involved in the data collection at both study sites.

W.H., M.B., and A.V. wrote the first draft of the manuscript. W.H. initiated the study. W.H., A.C., P.G., D.G., A.V., D.M. and D.H. were all involved in the study conception and funding acquisition. M.B. coordinates the study implementation and quantitative data collection at the Berlin site, A.V. coordinates the study implementation and data collection at the Singapore site. W.H., D.H., D.G., P.G., A.C. and A.V. supervise the overall project. B.L., T.S. and D.H. are responsible for qualitative and geographic/spatial data acquisition and assessment. R.K. is responsible for the data management at the Berlin site. All authors read, commented on and approved the manuscript.

Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL. The study was funded with grants from the Berlin University Alliance (BUA) and National University of Singapore (NUS).