Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) pose a huge public health challenge in sub-Saharan Africa, where prevalence rates are among the highest globally. Barriers such as limited healthcare access, stigma and inadequate diagnostic facilities impede timely detection and treatment. Self-sampling for STI testing offers a potential solution to these challenges. This scoping review will systematically map the available evidence on self-sampling for STIs in sub-Saharan Africa, focusing on its feasibility, acceptability, implementation and outcomes.

The scoping review will be guided by the Arksey and O’Malley framework. The review will include a comprehensive search of peer-reviewed and grey literature from various repositories and databases. The following databases will be searched: PubMed, Scopus and Global Health. Studies that will be included will meet specific criteria. The results of the review will be reported according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Protocols checklist.

The methodology used for this study is a scoping review of existing literature; therefore, ethical approval is not required. Findings of this study will be shared at national, regional and international conferences and published in a peer-reviewed journal.

We registered the protocol with the Open Science Framework.

The scoping review will follow the Arksey and O’Malley framework, ensuring methodological rigour and robustness.

Various electronic databases will be searched, including PubMed, Scopus and Global Health.

The literature search will be complemented with a grey literature search to reduce publication bias.

Two independent reviewers will conduct the selection of studies in a two-step process: screening of titles and abstracts and full-text screening.

The limitation of the scoping review is that, due to limited financial resources to undertake translation of non-English studies, there is potential for the introduction of bias towards English studies.

Our scoping review seeks to explore the breadth of literature on the feasibility, acceptability and use of STI self-sampling in settings where it is offered to sexually active individuals in sub-Saharan Africa. We have deliberately excluded HIV and focused on other STIs, as evidence on HIV self-sampling/testing is already well developed in the literature. Few studies have examined the feasibility, acceptability and use of STI self-sampling among sexually active individuals in sub-Saharan Africa. This study will add context-specific evidence from sub-Saharan Africa, adding to previous reviews on the feasibility, acceptability and use of STI self-sampling, which were global, focused on high-income countries and specific to certain groups such as women and key populations.

A scoping review methodology will be adopted because of the broad intent of the review, which is to provide an overview of the feasibility, acceptability and use of STI self-sampling among sexually active individuals in sub-Saharan Africa. We will employ the methodological framework developed by Arksey and O’Malley,17consisting of five stages: (1) identifying the research question; (2) identifying the relevant studies; (3) selecting studies; (4) charting the data and (5) collating, summarising and reporting the results. The stages will be iterative, and modifications will be undertaken as necessary. To enhance reporting quality and ensure procedural rigour, the review will be conducted following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Protocol guidelines.18The scoping review protocol was registered with the Open Science Framework.

Self-sampling for STIs is an approach where individuals take their own samples and send them to laboratories for testing, with the results sent back to them.5Self-sampling may involve individuals collecting samples and handing them over to health workers to complete the process of sample testing.9The typologies of samples are diverse, including urine, swab-collected samples, blood, discharge, semen and lesion samples. Studies will be included in the review regardless of whether samples were self-collected at a health facility, at home or elsewhere.

In developing this scoping review, we are interested in the following outcomes. We are interested in mapping evidence on acceptability and feasibility of STI self-sampling. We will also consolidate evidence on the uptake of self-sampling when offered to sexually active individuals, as well as the uptake of treatment among those testing positive following self-sampling.

Results from the initial search will be exported to EndNote for referencing and removal of duplicates. This will be followed by exporting into Covidence software for title and abstract screening and full-text screening. Title and abstract screening will be conducted by two independent reviewers, informed by the inclusion and exclusion criteria detailed below. Disagreements between the two will be resolved through discussion with the third author. Studies meeting the inclusion criteria will be subjected to full-text screening by two independent reviewers, with disagreements between the two reviewers resolved through discussion. Where full-text papers cannot be obtained, the authors of the papers may be contacted to provide the full text of the papers. Eligible studies will proceed to the stage of data extraction.

Studies reporting feasibility, acceptability and use of self-sampling among sexually active individuals in sub-Saharan Africa aged 15 years and above.

Studies that are qualitative, quantitative, mixed methods or organisational reports reporting STI self-sampling.

An Excel data charting tool developed beforehand will be used to extract data. Initially, two independent researchers will chart 10% of the selected papers, followed by a review of the consistency, usability and comprehensiveness of the charting tool. We anticipate the charting to be iterative, and the charting tool may be refined during the process of piloting and full-scale charting. Agreed changes will be added to the charting tool. Key information that will be extracted from the studies includes author(s), year of publication, location where the study was conducted, the goal of the study, research design, population and sampling, STI focus of the study, types of samples/sampling and key findings on feasibility, acceptability and use of self-sampling. At the end of data charting, we will compare the results of full-text data extraction done by the two independent researchers. Discrepancies will be resolved through team discussion.

The screening process will be visualised through a flowchart. Following Arksey and O’Malley’s methodological framework, results will be presented numerically and thematically.17We will analyse the studies’ characteristics and summarise the findings using descriptive statistics presented in tables, charts and maps. Thematic analysis will be deployed to identify common ideas and patterns in the data. We will summarise narratively key findings on the feasibility, acceptability and use of STI self-sampling. Finally, we will discuss the interpretation of findings to inform implementers, policymakers and researchers.

The design of this scoping review was without involvement of patients or the public.

WHO has recommended self-sampling to expand STI services;10however, evidence on the feasibility, acceptability and utility of self-sampling is still undeveloped, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa. This scoping review will present evidence on the acceptability, feasibility and use of STI self-sampling in sub-Saharan Africa. Such evidence is required by programme planners and policymakers to expand STI services beyond those provided by clinicians. Expanding STI services beyond clinician sampling can potentially address the workload for work health workers in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), who are usually overburdened.23This can allow health workers to focus on other critical demands.

STI services in SSA are predominantly provided in health facilities by clinicians or health workers. This excludes vulnerable groups who do not have access to health facilities,10individuals uncomfortable with health workers’ attitudes24and individuals uncomfortable with health workers’ examinations3from accessing STI services. It is important to generate evidence on feasibility, accessibility and uptake of STI self-sampling to inform the expansion of STI services beyond clinician sampling, which could increase access to STI services.

SSA has traditionally relied on syndromic management to diagnose and treat STIs. However, the use of syndromic management misses many asymptomatic STIs.10Self-sampling is effective for screening of asymptomatic infections. Policymakers and programme planners need evidence supporting the feasibility, accessibility and uptake of STI self-sampling before widespread adoption of STI self-sampling.

We have identified the exclusion of non-English studies as a potential limitation of this scoping review. We are cognisant that this limitation potentially eliminates studies with valuable data on the feasibility, acceptability and use of self-sample collection for STIs. However, the English texts should be able to generate useful evidence on the utility of self-sampling for STIs in sub-Saharan Africa, where health systems are overburdened and there are many barriers to providing STI sampling services.

The study will not seek ethical approval, as it will be using already published secondary data and grey literature. The findings of the study will be published in a peer-reviewed scientific journal and disseminated at appropriate regional and international conferences.

The authors would like to acknowledge the comments received from reviewers that helped to strengthen the paper.