We have studiedab-initiodensity functional theory (DFT) calculations of the new Chevrel phases, MgMo6S8-ySey, which has the potential to be used as unique cathode materials for rechargeable Mg batteries.Mechanical, electronic properties and thermophysical parameters including Debye and melting temperature were investigated for the first time. According to our study, the lattice constants increase with the increase of Se content y in MgMo6S8-ySey. The mechanical stability of MgMo6S8-ySeycompounds has been verified. The dynamic stability of crystal structure of MgMo6S8was also confirmed by the phonon analysis. The increase of Se content y, increases the stiffness of MgMo6S8-ySey. Based on the calculated bulk modulus, Young’s modulus and shear modulus of MgMo6S8-ySeycompounds can be regarded as soft materials. According to electronic band structure investigation all the phases of MgMo6S8-ySeyshow semiconducting property with indirect bandgap. The density of states (DOS) demonstrates considerable hybridization between S-3pand Mo-4d, Se-4pand Mo-4d, Mg-3sand Mo-4dstates resulting in the formation of upper valence band (VB) and bottom conduction band (CB). The estimated redox potential of MgMo6S8-ySeypredicts that the increase of Se content y will make the compounds suitable for the cathode material which can lead to a higher overall cell voltage and, consequently, greater energy density.

The modern world’s growing energy demand has greatly accelerated the hunt for dependable, affordable, and environmentally benign power sources. Lithium-ion battery research has been ongoing for decades1,2as a possible substitute for fossil fuels in automobiles. Nonetheless, one of the main obstacles to this substitution is its high cost. However, if Mg ion batteries are used in place of Li ion batteries, this issue can be resolved. The high concentration of magnesium in the earth’s crust is the reason for this benefit. The benchmark for magnesium ion batteries is lower voltage but greater capacity (theoretical capacity) than lithium-ion batteries2. Greater capacity results from the transportation of 2e during charge and discharge, as opposed to 1e in Li-ion batteries, per formula unit of magnesium-electrode material. Compared to lithium (2061 mA h cm−3)3,4, magnesium is relatively more common and, because of its divalent nature, it can theoretically support a larger volumetric energy density (3833 mA h cm−3)3,4. Studies5,6have shown that magnesium metal anodes provide better efficiency and cycle life.

Chevrel phases (CPs), MgxMo6T8(T = S, Se, Te) are highly desirable due to their unique electrical, thermoelectric, magnetic, and catalytic properties7. The development of magnesium batteries utilizing the insertion/extraction of Mg2+ions into/from electrode materials demonstrated the suitability of the sulfide, Mo6S8, and the selenide, Mo6Se8, as cathode materials7. However, one notable constraint is the slow rates of Mg2+diffusion within the structure, which are caused by strong Coulombic interactions between Mg2+and the CP framework. This leads in lower power densities. Furthermore, the production of these minerals can be complicated and costly. Despite limitations, the CP is a promising candidate for rechargeable magnesium batteries (RMBs) due to its large theoretical capacity (~ 128 mAhg−1) and ability to work in non-aqueous electrolytes.

The ternary molybdenum chalcogenides MgMo6S8have already been characterized structurally and electrically7,8. The most encouraging aspect of Mo6S8was its outstanding cyclability (cycle stability 580), which allowed for an initial discharge capacity of 80 mAhg−1. It was reported9that partial substitution of Sulfur (S) by Selenium (Se) alters the geometry of Mo6S8in such a way that Mo6S8-nSenChevrel phases (where n = 0, 1, 2) affects the reversible intercalation of magnesium (Mg) ions. The replacement alters the transition state geometry and influences the thermodynamics of magnesium ion insertion, which facilitates their kinetic action of insertion into the structure. That experimental works found that increasing number of substituted Se in the Chevrel phase (Mo6S8-nSen) makes it a better cathode material where at 100 cycle of coin cell battery the battery capacity goes from 95 to 105 mAhg−1for n = 2. Since it was an experimental work, it was not quite clear what will happen if we further increase Se amount (n = 0 to 8). A theoretical model, such as DFT analysis, of that compound can provide a quick insight and a comparison with the available experimental data would confirm the predictability of the model.

In this study, we have developed a model through DFT and simulated the formation possibility of MgMo6S8-ySeywith y = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. We also confirmed the dynamic stability of crystal structure of MgMo6S8by phonon analysis. We investigated the elastic, mechanical, electronic and thermophysical properties of new materials MgMo6S8-ySeybased on Chevrel phase for the first time. A detailed knowledge of the elastic, mechanical, electronic, and thermophysical response of this compound needs to be acquired to unravel the full promise of MgMo6S8-ySeyChevrel phases for rechargable battery applications.

In this work, the ground state of a system is performed with the Kohn–Sham density functional theory (KS-DFT)10using CAmbridge Serial Total Energy Package (CASTEP) code11. The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) with Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE)12has been employed for the exchange–correlation functionals. Taking into account the experimental structural parameters the optimal ground state crystal geometry findings are obtained by using GGA (PBE). Ultrasoft Vanderbilt-type pseudopotentials13were used to define the electron–ion interactions and express electronic wavefunctions using a plane wave basis set14. We treated [2p63s2], [4s24p64d55s1], [3s23p4], and [4s24p4] as valence electron configurations for Mg, Mo, S, and Se atoms, respectively. The cut-off energy for the plane wave expansion in this research is fixed at 350 eV, and the Monkhorst–Pack grid of k-point meshes with sizes of 4 × 4 × 4 has been chosen. The BFGS (Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno) algorithm15was employed as the minimization procedure, and density mixing was employed to determine the electronic structure. The convergence criterion of relaxation on the lattice unit cell has been maintained with a limit of 5 × 10–6eV-atom−1for energy, 0.02 GPa for maximum stress, 0.01 eV Å−1for maximum force, and 5 × 10–4Å for maximum atomic displacement.

The stress–strain relationship16is used to get the elastic constants,Cij. All the other polycrystalline elastic parameters are estimated using the Voigt-Reuss-Hill (VRH) method17,18.

The Chevrel phase (CP) of MgMo6S8conforms to triclinic structure with a space group of(No. 2)7. Figure1(a) and Fig.1(b) depict the schematic crystal structure of MgMo6S8and MgMo6S6Se2respectively and Table1displays the atomic coordinates of Mg, Mo, and S atoms in a unit cell of MgMo6S8. In this work, we infer the position of S atoms by analogy with Chevrel compound as reported in Ref.7. The structure of Levi et al.7is used, with S replacing Se in the MgMo6Se8compound. The optimized structural parameters, hexagonal ratio, and unit cell volume of MgMo6S8-ySeyfor selected y values are tabulated in Table2along with the experimental and theoretical results7,8for comparison. The calculated lattice parameters match the experimental findings well within acceptable level of deviations. The calculated lattice parameters and cell volume increase with the increase of Se content y. The hexagonal ratio shows a decreasing tendency with the increase of y, which indicates that the lattice constant,a, increases more significantly than lattice constant,c. This in turn implies that for the entire range of y, the compressibility along the c-axis is easier than that along the a-axis. According to Pearson’s criteria19for stable phases, the ratio c/a should fall between 0.59 and 1.2. Thus, from the data obtained, it may be concluded that all the phases of MgMo6S8-ySeyshould be stable.

Schematic crystal structure of (a) MgMo6S8(b) MgMo6S6Se2. Crystallographic axes are shown on the middle.

Atomic coordinates of Mg, Mo, and S atoms in a unit cell of MgMo6S8used in this work as reported in Ref.7.

The calculated lattice constants (all in Å), hexagonal ratio, volume Vo(Å3), and formation enthalpy(eV/atom) of MgMo6S8-ySeyfor different values of y.

where,is the total enthalpy of MgMo6S8-ySeycompounds;is the total enthalpy of the Mg atom,is the total enthalpy of the S atom,is the total enthalpy of the Se atom andis the total enthalpy of the Mo atom in the solid state. We havex= 1 for Mg,y= 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 for S and Se, andz= 6 for Mo atoms in the unit cell. The formation enthalpy was found to be considerably negative. The increased trend of negative formation enthalpy indicates that the phase stability increases with the increase of Se content y.

Calculated elastic constants Cij(all in GPa) of MgMo6S8-ySey.

(a) & (b) variation of elastic constantsCijand (c) variation of elastic moduli B, G and Y with respect to Se content y.

All the phases of MgMo6S8-ySeysatisfy the above-mentioned conditions, indicating the mechanical stability of the new MgMo6S8-ySeyChevrel phases. The elastic constantdefines the elasticity in length and stiffness of solids under (1 0 0) < 1 0 0 > uniaxial strain. Table3shows that the stiffness of MgMo6S8-ySeyphase decreases with increasing Se content y [except y = 2]. The low value ofC44evaluates the shearability of the compounds. Thus, all the studied solid solutions are shearable. Additionally, the elastic tensorC44signifies the indentation hardness of materials. The higher theC44value, the greater the indentation hardness. Table3signifies that the new MgMo6S8-ySeyChevrel phase is the somewhat soft material.

The results obtained are disclosed in Table4and shown in Fig.2(c). The ability of solids to withstand volume compression is reflected in their bulk modulus, which makes it a crucial tool for assessing their mechanical behavior. Bulk modulus values in materials can be regulated at the atomic level by the type of chemical bonds present. It is observed from Table4that in solid solutions of MgMo6S8-ySey, the substitution of Se results in an irregular increase in shear modulus. A solid’s plastic deformation, or change in shape, is largely dependent on its shear modulus G. Greater rigidity, or the ability of the material to resist shape change, is indicated by larger G values. Higher Young’s modulus corresponds to increase stiffness of a material. Moreover, greater values of Young’s modulus indicate a higher degree of covalency in a material. The stiffness of MgMo6S8-ySeysolid solutions is calculated to be increased with Se content y. From Table4, it appears that the change of stiffness of MgMo6S8-ySeyfollows the same trend as shear modulus.

Bulk modulus, B and shear modulus, G (all in GPa), Young’s modulus, Y (GPa), Pugh’s indicator or ratio,B/G, and Poisson’s ratio, σ of MgMo6S8-ySey.

Indicators such as Pugh’s ratio (B/G)27and Poisson’s ratio (σ) are used to assess a material’s brittleness or ductility. Poisson’s ratio and Pugh’s ratio have critical values of 0.26 and 1.75, respectively28. When the B/G ratio is greater (less) than 1.75 and the σ value is greater (less) than 0.26, the material is considered ductile (brittle)29. The calculated values of these parameters, which are shown in Table4. The calculated Pugh’s ratio and Poisson’s ratio for MgMo6S8-ySeywith all selected y predict the ductility of the studied compounds. The values of Poisson’s ratio indicate that the ductility of MgMo6S8-ySeydecreases with the increase of Se content y.

The obtained hardness values are represented in Table5. It appears that MgMo6S8-ySeyChevrel phases are somewhat soft materials. It is observed that the hardness of MgMo6S8-ySeycompounds increase gradually with the increase of y.

Micro hardnessor Vicker’s hardness(GPa), mass density ρ (kg/m3), longitudinal velocity of sound νl(ms−1), transverse velocity of sound νt(ms−1), average sound velocity νa(ms−1), elastic Debye temperature ϴD(K), and melting temperature Tm(K) of MgMo6S8-ySey.

wherehis the Planck’s constant,is the Boltzmann’s constant,nis the number of atoms in the unit cell,Mis the molar mass,ρis the density of the solid,is the Avogadro number, anddenotes the average sound velocity.

Our studied MgMo6S8-ySeycompounds possess moderate melting point. The value of melting temperature decreases with the increase of Se content y. But still these values are greater than melting temperature of lithium-ion battery cathode materials ()35.

The study of electronic structure is one of the most significant fields of solid-state physics which explain a wide range of material properties, including magnetic properties, Hall voltage, electrical conductivity, electronic thermal conductivity, electronic heat capacity, and optoelectronic characteristics. In this study, we have used GGA functional to calculate the band gaps of MgMo6S8-ySeycompounds. Figure3(a-e) depicts the predicted electronic band structures of MgMo6S8-ySeycompounds along different high symmetry directions in the first Brillouin zone (BZ). In this instance, the horizontal broken line represents the Fermi level,EF, which is set to zero. Therefore, all the phases show indirect electronic transition which results in an indirect bandgap. It is seen that the band gap values in MgMo6S8-ySeycompounds increase with the increase of Se content y. The increase in band gap is due to the fact that the bond length decreases by substituting small size S anion with large size Se anion. In another words, the addition of Se dopants can create new energy levels within the band structure, which can affect the overall band gap and this can lead to an increase in the effective band gap.

The electronic band structures of (a) MgMo6S8, (b) MgMo6S7Se, (c) MgMo6S6Se2, (d) MgMo6S5Se3, and (e) MgMo6S4Se4compounds in the first Brillouin zone.

In order to gain a more comprehensive understanding of the electronic characteristics of the MgMo6S8-ySey, we utilized the energy dispersion curves to compute the electronic energy density of states in relation to energy inside the conduction and valence bands. Figure4(a-e) shows the calculated total density of states (TDOS) and partial density of states (PDOS) of our chosen compounds. The vertical broken line represents the Fermi level (EF), which separates bonding and antibonding states. The figures make it evident that all three of the compounds have zero TDOS at the Fermi level, proving that they are semiconductors. It is also seen that the energy difference between the top of the valence band and the bottom of the conduction band increases as we increase the Se content y. There are two significant peaks near Fermi level in the TDOS at−3.50 eV and−2.64 eV. The Fermi level and these peak positions are quite sensitive to stress, doping, lattice distortion, and other variables. The various contributions of electronic orbitals at various energies are depicted in the PDOS plots. Figure4(a-e) shows that near Fermi level, the valence bands and conduction bands of MgMo6S8-ySeyare mostly generated by the Mo-4delectronic state. Moreover, the S-3pand Se-4pstates contribute to form the upper valence band and Mg-3sstates also contribute to form the bottom conduction band hence there are strong hybridizations occurred between S-3pand Mo-4d, Se-4pand Mo-4d, Mg-3sand Mo-4dstates.

Total and partial electronic energy density of states of (a) MgMo6S8, (b) MgMo6S7Se, (c) MgMo6S6Se2, (d) MgMo6S5Se3, and (e) MgMo6S4Se4compounds.

where theandrepresent the band-edge potential of CB and VB, respectively, andXis the absolute electronegativity of MgMo6S8-ySey. On the hydrogen scale,andrepresent the energy of free electrons (4.5 eV) and the electronic bandgap of MgMo6S8-ySeyrespectively.

The calculated electronegativity, the band edge potentials of valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) of MgMo6S8-ySeyare presented in Table6. The value of electronegativity, the band edge potentials of VB and CB increases with the increase of Se content y. In the aspect of photocatalysis, a more positive CB edge potential can affect the material’s ability to reduce certain molecules. For example, it might be less effective at reducing water (H₂O) to hydrogen (H₂) in photocatalysis, since the electrons in the conduction band are less energetic. However, a positive CB edge potential allows the cathode to accept electrons during the discharge process efficiently, making it crucial for high energy storage capacity. In batteries, this translates to the material’s ability to operate at higher voltages, leading to higher energy densities. Therefore, this can be vital in photodetectors, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), and photocatalysis (e.g., in water splitting), where electrons need to be efficiently transferred for chemical reactions or light emission. Otherwise, materials with a more positive valence band-edge potential are more capable of oxidizing species in electrochemical or photocatalytic reactions. For example, if the valence band is more positive than the oxidation potential of water, the material can oxidize water into oxygen. The calculated VBM potentials (for all the phases), are higher than that of O2/H2O (1.23 eV), provide insight into the development of O2from water. Therefore, this is crucial in applications like solar cells, where the efficient movement of holes to the anode is required for generating electricity.

Absolute electronegativity X (eV), band-edge potential of conduction band(eV), band-edge potential of valence band(eV) of MgMo6S8-ySey.

In this equation,Eis the energy of the crystal anduis the atomic displacement. The derivative has to be evaluated at the equilibrium atomic coordinates.

The phonon dispersion spectrum provides information on a material’s phase transition, structural stability, and vibrational contribution to its thermal properties40. As shown in Fig.5, the absence of negative frequencies in the phonon dispersion curves encompassing the entire Brillouin zone guarantees that the MgMo6S8compound remains dynamically stable. The zero frequency of acoustic modes at theΓpoint also indicates that the compound is dynamically stable.

Calculated ground state phonon dispersion curve (PDC) and phonon density of states (PHDOS) for the MgMo6S8compound.

In summary, we have carried out a density functional theory investigation of Chevrel phase MgMo6S8-ySey. We have studied a comprehensive study of the structural, mechanical, electronic, and thermophysical properties of MgMo6S8-ySeycompounds.

MgMo6S8-ySeycompounds are shown to be stable based on the findings of mechanical parameters, electrical structure, and formation enthalpy. Phonon analysis confirms the dynamic stability of crystal structure of MgMo6S8. The increase trend of negative formation enthalpy indicates that the thermodynamically stability increases with the increase of Se content y. This stability is crucial for battery longevity, as it helps prevent decomposition or unwanted reactions within the battery, especially during cycling. The Se content y can significantly change the lattice parameters and elastic constants of MgMo6S8-ySeyChevrel phases. These compounds should behave as ductile materials. These compounds in particular have low hardness value. The compounds MgMo6S8-ySeyare expected to be stiffer with y = 0 than other compositions. The average sound velocity is found to be decreased with the increase of Se content y. Consequently, the Debye temperature and melting temperature are found to decrease with the increase of Se content y consisting with the elastic constants. The band structure and total density of states investigations indicate that MgMo6S8-ySeycompounds are semiconductor with indirect band gap. The band gap is seen to increase with the increase of Se content y. A larger band gap can sometimes mean better ionic conductivity, which is beneficial for the transport of ions within the cathode material. Materials with larger band gaps are often more chemically stable, which could improve the battery’s overall life and safety. The most interesting features of MgMo6S8-ySeycompounds are their strong redox potential, making these compounds fit as cathode materials. The positive band-edge potential for both the valence and conduction bands are found to be increased with the increase of Se content y. A more positive band-edge potential for both the valence and conduction bands can be crucial for enhancing efficiency, stability, and functionality in a variety of semiconductor applications, from photovoltaics and photocatalysis to electrochemical reactions and power electronics. It helps in fine-tuning charge carrier dynamics, band alignment, and material stability.