An 11‐month‐old male castrated shorthaired cat was presented with a tremor in both pelvic limbs, which only occurred when standing (ie, countering gravity) or during active extension of the stifle. General clinical and neurological examinations were normal aside from the tremor of the pelvic limbs, which disappeared on performing a weight‐bearing lifting test. Needle electromyography of both pelvic limbs in the conscious state confirmed a low‐frequency (6 Hz) tremor. The cat was diagnosed with pseudo‐orthostatic tremor. The tremor amplitude waxed and waned over time. The cat remained ambulatory and playful, but often assumed lateral recumbency and seemed to have difficulty jumping. Treatment with gabapentin (10‐20 mg/kg PO q8h) for 3 weeks followed by clonazepam (0.1 mg/kg PO q12h) for 1 day (with unacceptable adverse effects) did not result in improvement.

Video medley of the cat diagnosed with pseudo‐orthostatic tremor. The tremors only occur when the cat is standing still or when the respective limb is weight‐bearing during ambulation. The tremors also occur when the cat is placed in lateral recumbency and external force is applied to the plantar surface of the paw. When the stifle is immobilized and the paw is relaxed, the tremors disappear. In a video taken after 6 months, the cat showed a wide‐based stance and had difficulties jumping.

General clinical examination and neurological examination were unremarkable apart from a subjectively low‐frequency postural tremor of the pelvic limbs that occurred when standing. The tremors were noticeable in the limb supporting weight during ambulation. The tremor was absent in each limb during the protraction phase. The tremors disappeared in both limbs when performing a WEBLT and in lateral recumbency when the limb was relaxed and the stifle immobilized (Video1). A slow helicopter sound could be auscultated. The tremors also occurred when external force was applied to the plantar surface of the paw when the cat was in lateral recumbency.

Differential diagnoses considered included postural tremor (specifically pseudo‐OT), postural (orthostatic) myoclonus (pending confirmation of visually observed rhythmicity for confirmation of tremor), essential tremor (benign idiopathic rapid postural tremor), neuropathic tremor, and restless legs syndrome.

A CBC, serum biochemistry, and serum electrolyte concentrations performed by the general practitioner (DS) showed no abnormalities. In the referral hospital, needle EMG of the quadriceps femoris and cranial tibial muscles of the pelvic limbs, while the cat was standing, showed rhythmic muscle discharges at a frequency of 6 Hz (Figure1and Video2). Electromyography of the triceps brachii of the thoracic limbs showed electrical silence; no muscle discharges consistent with tremor were observed. The quadriceps of the left pelvic limb were tested again in lateral recumbency without resistance to the plantar surface (no muscle discharges) and with resistance to the plantar surface (rhythmic muscle discharges at a frequency of 6 Hz). The EMG results confirmed the nature of the observations to be consistent with the definition of a tremor.

Tracing of needle electromyography in the conscious state while standing of the cat with pseudo‐orthostatic tremors. Electromyography revealed rhythmic muscle discharges of a frequency of 6 Hz in the pelvic limbs (0.3 mV/Division, 100 ms/Division).

Video of the electromyogram of the quadriceps femoris muscle of the conscious cat in standing position.

The clinical and EMG findings were interpreted to be consistent with a diagnosis of a postural tremor, specifically pseudo‐OT. Differentiation between primary pseudo‐OT and pseudo‐OT plus was not possible, because underlying causes including degenerative central nervous system (CNS) disorders, inflammatory diseases, and unidentified toxic or metabolic disorders could not be excluded.

Initially, the cat was left untreated because the tremor did not seem to have any effect on the functional use of the limbs or quality of life. However, because the tremors in the pelvic limbs seemed to increase in severity (amplitude) over the next 3 months, a trial treatment was started using gabapentin 10 mg/kg PO q8h for 2 weeks and 20 mg/kg PO q8h for 1 week. Treatment had no effect on the OT over the course of 3 weeks. Sedation was noted as an adverse effect. Treatment with gabapentin was discontinued and clonazepam 0.1 mg/kg PO q12h was prescribed. After administration of clonazepam, the tremor did not improve and the cat showed marked signs of ataxia and polyphagia, which were considered to be adverse effects of the clonazepam. Therefore, this treatment was discontinued after 1 day and long‐term effectiveness could not be evaluated.

Clinical follow‐up (2), videos (Video1), and phone calls during the next 12 months disclosed variable tremor amplitude (possibly corresponding to difference in outdoor temperatures [worse when cold, better when warm]) and difficulty rising, sitting, and jumping as well as a wide‐based stance to a variable degree in association with tremor development. Overall, these features waxed and waned but did not indicate a clearly progressive underlying disorder. The cat continued to be ambulatory, playful, and otherwise neurologically normal.

Recently, a study retrospectively evaluating different types of tremors in cats was published.13The most common diseases in cats with tremors were degenerative encephalopathies, hepatic encephalopathy caused by congenital portosystemic shunts, feline infectious peritonitis, or intoxication. Postural tremors of the pelvic limbs were not included in that study and have not been described in cats.

In the case we report here, the cat was confirmed to have tremors based on the results of EMG in the conscious state in standing position, showing rhythmic muscle discharges. The tremor was action‐related (not present at rest), postural, and most obvious when standing (orthostatic), but also present during the weight‐bearing phase of ambulation and when pressure was placed on the plantar surface of the paw to mimic opposition of extensors to gravity. The EMG‐determined frequency of 6 Hz was consistent with a diagnosis of pseudo‐OT.

In dogs, only 13 to 18 Hz OT has been reported. In 1 study, 88% of dogs were not diagnosed with an underlying disorder.5It mostly occurs at a young age, with large breed dogs overrepresented.5,6,8,11A case series showed that 80% of dogs were <2 years old when clinical signs started, with a median age of 12 months.5More than half of owners described worsening of the condition over time. In our case, the progression of signs initially was reported, but during the follow‐up period waxing and waning were noticed.

The most frequently presenting clinical signs of OT in dogs are comparable to what was found in our case: limb tremors while standing and difficulty rising or sitting (noted during follow‐up). In the majority of cases in dogs, all 4 limbs were affected.5,6,9This finding contrasts with our case, where the cat only showed pelvic limb tremors.

A few features in our cat deserve discussion. The first is the fact that the tremors were noticeable in the pelvic limb that supported weight when the cat was walking. This finding might be a result of the subjectively large amplitude coupled with low frequency, enabling appreciation of this feature (Video1). Visually, the limbs did not exhibit a tremor during the protraction phase but we cannot exclude that it was present. In the veterinary literature, OT is reported to disappear when walking.5However, OT research in humans has shown that tremors persist when the patient is walking.16Tremors tend to increase in frequency and usually are not observed by eye during walking, but are confirmed on ambulatory EMG.16The relatively low frequency and high amplitude of the tremors in our case might have resulted in its being conspicuous when the cat was walking and using the supporting limb. We could not perform ambulatory EMG in our cat. Second, no “dancing sign” was noticed in our cat.5This feature was reported in dogs with high‐frequency OT. Whether or not this sign would be lacking in pseudo‐OT in dogs as well as in our cat remains to be determined. Finally, difficulties jumping were reported in our cat. Postural instability in humans with OT has been reported and it has been shown that people with tremors of <10 Hz have more difficulty walking and fall more frequently compared with patients who have tremor frequencies >10 Hz.4Differences in bipedal posture and ambulation versus quadrupedal posture and ambulation might play a role in the observation of such signs in veterinary patients. The tendency to lie down and difficulty jumping reported in our cat may reflect this observation in human patients. The act of jumping would require more fine‐tuned action of muscles, especially those of the pelvic limbs which were affected by OT in our case, and might have added to the difficulty with jumping as noticed.

Currently, no consensus exists for the treatment of primary OT in veterinary medicine. In dogs, treatment of primary OT using gabapentin, pregabalin, phenobarbital, primidone, or clonazepam can result in a decrease or remission of tremors in 85% of cases.5However, in 15% of dogs, tremors worsened. No significant difference has yet been found for the different types of medications used.5In humans, treatment of primary pseudo‐OT with clonazepam, gabapentin, or primidone is mostly used and can lead to partial remission of tremors. Overall, efficacy rates varied between 51% and 100%.12,17Clonazepam and gabapentin were effective among all tremor frequencies, whereas primidone was only effective in frequencies of 5 to 10 Hz.12Other treatments include levodopa, carbidopa, pregabalin, propranolol, and topiramate.17Importantly, both in humans and dogs, treatment can be disappointing. Results are inconsistent because not all patients respond to treatment, and adverse effects can occur.4,5,6,9,17Our cat was first treated with gabapentin at a dosage of 10 mg/kg PO q8h. However, this treatment did not lead to any improvement, and the dose was increased but discontinued after 1 more week without effect. Sedation was noticed as an adverse effect. Therefore, a trial with clonazepam 0.1 mg/kg PO q12h was started. This treatment also did not seem to improve the clinical condition and resulted in notable adverse effects (severe ataxia and increased appetite), leading to discontinuation of the treatment after just 1 day.

Our report has some limitations. These include the lack of additional diagnostic tests, such as advanced imaging (magnetic resonance imaging) of the CNS or cerebrospinal fluid analysis, lack of long‐term evaluation of the treatments that were employed, and lack of histopathological examination of the CNS. These limitations preclude a classification as primary pseudo‐OT or primary pseudo‐OT plus, because we cannot exclude the possibility of an underlying neurodegenerative disorder. Many of these same limitations apply to the veterinary reports on OT in dogs.5,6,7,8,9,10,11Nonetheless, the reports on OT in dogs and our report on pseudo‐OT in a cat advance our knowledge of this type of postural tremor in these species.

In conclusion, we describe the first case of pseudo‐OT in a cat. It shows that, as in humans, OT can occur at a frequency <13 Hz and that it is a possible differential diagnosis in cats with tremors. Because it is a single case, no definitive conclusions can be drawn. More research is necessary to fully understand this type of OT in veterinary medicine.

Authors declare no off‐label use of antimicrobials.

Authors declare no IACUC or other approval was needed.

Authors declare human ethics approval was not needed for this study.

The authors thank for covering the article processing charges via IVC Evidensia’s fund for publication of peer‐reviewed scientific articles.