Following three years of complex negotiations, the Intergovernmental Negotiating Body announced consensus among Member States on 16 April 2025, leading to the adoption of the Pandemic Accord at the Seventy-Eighth World Health Assembly on 19 May 2025. The accord aims to address the systemic inequities and failures exposed by the COVID-19 pandemic by enhancing early detection and rapid response capacities, promoting equitable access to pandemic-related health products, and ensuring sustainable financing for pandemic activities. This commentary highlights why the accord is of critical importance to Africa and describes the strategic options for its effective implementation on the continent.

Africa, with its unique pandemic vulnerabilities and weaknesses in global health security capacities, stands to gain the most from the Pandemic Accord. The continent faces challenges such as high-threat pathogens, weak health systems, political instability, and limited domestic financing. Additionally, Africa’s low capacity to influence global negotiations and fragmented public health governance complicates the implementation of global health agreements. To overcome these challenges, eleven priority recommendations are proposed, including joint analysis and domestication of the accord’s provisions, strong political commitment, better alignment of regional and global health security initiatives and public health organizations, leveraging digital technologies, prioritizing local manufacturing, and community engagement.

We urge African stakeholders to collaborate in ensuring the transformation of the accord from a global commitment into meaningful pandemic prevention and control action for the continent.

Following three arduous years of complex negotiations, the Intergovernmental Negotiating Body (INB), mandated to draft and negotiate an international legal instrument under Article 19 of the WHO Constitution, on global pandemic preparedness and response, announced consensus among Member States in the early hours of 16 April 2025 [1]. The resulting Pandemic Accord (PA) emerged as a response to the catastrophic failures and systemic inequities exposed by the COVID-19 pandemic. The PA aims to strengthen pandemic preparedness and response by enhancing early detection and rapid response capacities; promoting equitable access to pandemic-related health products such as vaccines, diagnostics, and therapeutics; and ensuring sustainable financing for pandemic activities [2]. In addition, the Accord highlights the importance of preventing future pandemics by adopting the One Health approach. This integrated framework addresses the interconnectedness of human, animal, and environmental health to promote sustainable health outcomes and strengthen early detection and response systems. The PA is yet another opportunity to enhance global health security and build more resilient health systems, ultimately contributing to improved public health outcomes and a safer, more prepared world.

Nevertheless, the PA negotiation process brought to the fore several deep-rooted geopolitical sensitivities and divergences, notably, the issue of Pathogen Access and Benefit Sharing (PABS). PABS is a mechanism aimed at promoting equitable access to pathogens and the fair distribution of benefits arising from their use, especially during pandemics, by enabling the timely sharing of biological materials and genetic sequence data [2]. Also contentious is the mechanisms for technology transfer required to enable equitable production and distribution of pandemic-related health products, particularly in low- and middle-income countries [3]. With the formal adoption of the PA at the Seventy-Eighth World Health Assembly (WHA78) on 19 May 2025, urgent and coordinated efforts are needed to secure its signature, ratification, and implementation by all concerned parties.

Despite this adoption, the unresolved issues around article 12.2 of the accord on the PABS system may delay the formal signature and implementation of the PA [4]. Key pending issues, including the definition of pathogens with pandemic potential, the scope of PABS materials, the inclusion of genetic sequence data, and the terms and conditions governing access and benefit-sharing have proven challenging during negotiations [2]. As a result, these sensitive elements have been deferred to a separate annex, which will be subject to further negotiation. While this approach facilitates the immediate adoption of the less controversial components of the PA, it may ultimately hinder the timely and effective operationalization of the Accord [4].

In this commentary, we highlight why the PA is of critical importance to Africa. We also outline eleven key recommendations that we consider essential for the effective implementation of the accord and negotiating the complex PABS annex to ensure that Africa derives maximum benefit from it.

The successful implementation of the PA is a critical necessity for Africa, given the continent’s unique pandemic vulnerabilities and weaknesses in its global health security capacities, thus it stands to gain the most from the accord [5]. This is due to several contextual and interrelated factors.

First, Africa is home to numerous high-threat pathogens, including the Ebola virus disease (EVD), yellow fever, cholera, mpox, and other diseases with epidemic and pandemic potential [6]. However, its pervasively weak health systems, particularly the fragile disease surveillance systems, inadequate emergency health workforce capacity, disrupted supply chain systems and limited domestic financing of healthcare among others continue to constrain the continent’s capacity to timely and effectively prepare for and respond to outbreaks of these diseases [7]. These challenges are further exacerbated by political instability, ongoing humanitarian crises, and inequities in access to the social and economic determinants of health which are prevalent in several African countries.

Second, the continent’s low capacity to meaningfully engage in and influence global negotiations around critical components of the PA such as PABS and technology transfer places it at a disadvantage. This has been evident in the protracted and polarized nature of the accord’s negotiation process, which pitted high-income countries against low and middle-income ones [3]. This underscores the complexity of implementing global health agreements in an unequal world. This calls for increased continental capacity to address sensitive issues such as sovereignty, vaccine nationalism, and geopolitical influence, all of which have historically marginalized the mostly low-income African countries in matters of global health governance.

Third, Africa’s public health governance system is characterized by a proliferation of regional and international public health initiatives and frameworks, many of which lack coordination or operate in silos. The overlapping mandates of regional public health institutions and regional economic communities (RECs) frequently complicate harmonization efforts and undermine regional efforts to negotiate global protocols. The implementation of the PA within such a fragmented environment will require deliberate alignment, coordination, and integration.

Fourth, the recent decline in global development and humanitarian assistance have further constrained the continent’s ability to manage public health threats [8]. The PA offers an opportunity to mobilize and consolidate regional efforts, reinforce regional health security mechanisms, and build resilient health systems to fill this growing gap. In the current context of a progressively narrowing multilateral landscape, effective implementation of the Accord also presents an opportunity to address longstanding inequities in access to life-saving pandemic-related products among African countries.

Lastly, the continent’s limited investment in infrastructure for public health research and development poses additional challenges [9]. Strengthening this capacity would be essential for the continent to participate in an equal footing and benefit from the PA’s provisions on innovation, knowledge sharing, and equitable access to pandemic products.

To overcome the foregoing challenges and fully leverage the transformative potential of the PA, we propose eleven priority recommendations, essential for its effective implementation across the continent.

African countries should jointly analyze, interpret, and domesticate the provisions of the PA to foster a mutual understanding and facilitate integration into regional and national frameworks. This will be key to ensuring ownership, coherence, and enhanced capacity to navigate the accord particularly its contentious provisions. Additionally, analysis of how the PA intersects relevant national laws will be essential in clarifying issues such as cross-border surveillance, data and pathogen sharing.

Strong political commitment is essential. Advocacy targeting the African Union (AU) including its organs such as the Pan-African Parliament (PAP), Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (AfCDC), African Union Development Agency (AUDA-NEPAD) and RECs, to galvanize continental support is crucial [10]. At the national level, engagement with civil society, communities, parliaments and executive leadership would be vital to secure legal backing, sustainable domestic financing, and a whole-of-government approach, all of which are prerequisites for effective implementation of the PA.

A better alignment of regional and global health security initiatives is critical. For example, harmonizing the protocols for declaring Public Health Events of Continental Security (PHECS) and public health events of international concern, two frameworks used by the AfCDC and WHO, will ensure consistency in emergency declarations. Similarly, emergency health workforce training programmes such as the community health workers, the African field epidemiology, Africa Epidemic Service, the African volunteer health corps initiative and strengthening and utilizing response groups for emergencies training programmes should be standardized and harmonized to enable mutual recognition and licensing across the continent.

It is essential for African countries to conduct a comprehensive analysis of the regime interactions between the provisions of the PA and existing global and continental legal instruments, such as the PHECS, the African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA), and the World Trade Organization’s Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS). This analysis should include a systematic mapping of potential areas of complementarity as well as legal and operational conflicts. The outcomes of this exercise should guide anticipatory policy and legal measures aimed at resolving inconsistencies, thereby facilitating the smooth and effective implementation of the PA across the African continent.

Leveraging the transformative power of digital and other innovative technologies to leapfrog the implementation of the PA should be a continental imperative. Artificial intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning, should be deployed to enhance syndromic and genomic surveillance and to fast-track development of new pandemic products, integration of multi-source epidemiological, meteorological, and environmental datasets for outbreak forecasting, and improve disease reporting systems [11]. Digital tools can also improve supply chain management, as well as tracking, supervision and managing infodemics thus promoting timely, evidence-based risk communication.

Africa must prioritize sustainable, and equitable local manufacturing of vaccines, medicines, diagnostics and personal protective equipment through increased domestic investments, stronger research and development capacities, and active North-South and South-South technology transfer. Regional institutions such as the Partnership for African Vaccine Manufacturing, the African Vaccine Regulatory Forum, and the African Medicines Agency should be empowered to perform the regulatory aspects of local production [12]. Additionally, frameworks like AfCFTA and the TRIPS should be strategically leveraged to support local production and fair distribution of health products across the continent.

Africa’s experience with recurrent outbreaks such as EVD, yellow fever, Lassa fever, and COVID-19 has generated valuable strategic and operational lessons that informed Africa-led initiatives such as the Partnership to Accelerate COVID-19 Testing, the Africa Medical Supplies Platform, and the African Vaccine Acquisition Task Team [10,13]. These mechanisms should be leveraged to enhance equitable access to pandemic-related products. Additionally, global treaties such as the 2005 International Health Regulations, the National Action Plans for Health Security would be additional platforms for effective implementation of the PA.

Given the intrinsic link between global health security and resilient health systems, investments in health system strengthening should be central to the implementation of PA in Africa [14]. This aligns with broader development frameworks such as the AU Agenda 2063 “the Africa We Want” [15], the Sustainable Development Goals, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, the Saving Lives and Livelihoods Partnership [16], and other regional public health frameworks. Key priorities should include expanding access to diagnostic, curative, and rehabilitative services for pandemic-related conditions, enabling post-emergency system recovery, and strengthening the humanitarian-development-peace nexus in conflict-affected settings.

Community participation is fundamental to effective public health programmes. The operationalization of the PA must therefore be underpinned by systematic, evidence-informed community engagement strategies [17]. Expanding research in social sciences and medical anthropology will help identify the socio-cultural drivers of health behaviors, improving the design of communication strategies and addressing infodemics through context-specific and trusted messaging [18].

The growing African private sector has a key role in accelerating local production of pandemic-related health products as well as contributing to improving public health in the communities where they operate. Its engagement through public–private partnerships should be actively pursued to improve research and development, strengthen supply chains, and mobilize sustainable financing [19]. National and regional incentives such as tax relief, trade concessions, and preferential treatment under frameworks like AfCFTA should be promoted to encourage greater private sector participation and investment in health.

Importantly, regional public health institutions are central to providing technical assistance for PA implementation. Greater coordination and integration among these bodies in Africa is essential to minimize duplication and conflicting guidance. Establishing a formalized partnership among regional public health institutions will ensure more cohesive, streamlined support to Member States, and drive forward a unified continental approach to pandemic preparedness and response and the monitoring and evaluation of the PA’s implementation.

The PA is a renewed global effort to strengthen health security and equity in pandemic preparedness and response. Its adoption by WHA78 is a welcome sign of revived multilateralism and global solidarity, amidst the current challenges facing the international development and humanitarian aid systems. However, as with many global treaties, its ultimate success will lie in timely, effective and sustained implementation. Realizing the considerable benefits that the accord has for Africa will require deliberate efforts to ensure its full and context-specific implementation across the continent. This will need coordinated action, strategic positioning, and high-level political commitment, anchored by the AU, national governments, and supported by the regional public health institutions. Evidence-based and collective bargaining will also be required to safeguard African interests and priorities. Equally important is the development of contextually appropriate, sustainable home-grown solutions that reflect local realities and actively engage African communities who are the hardest hit by pandemics. We call on African stakeholders to remain steadfast in collectively negotiating the PABS annex and to collaborate closely to ensure the effective implementation of the PA, transforming it from a global commitment into tangible action that delivers meaningful impact for populations across the continent.

The authors alone are responsible for the views expressed in this article, which do not necessarily represent the views, decisions, or policies of the institutions with which they are affiliated.