One-third of the population in sub-Saharan Africa does not have access to adequate hygiene and sanitation facilities. Many still lack decent and functional toilets, impacting health, dignity, and development. Therefore, this study aimed to assess the geographical distribution and factors associated with unimproved sanitation facilities in sub-Saharan Africa.

This study used Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) data from 500,845 households within 20,492 clusters across 34 sub-Saharan African countries, which were weighted, cleaned, and analysed using STATA version 17. Spatial analyses were conducted using ArcGIS software version 10.7 and Kulldorff’s SaTScan software version 10.1. Multilevel analysis was employed to identify contributing factors, with associations presented as adjusted odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals (p< 0.05).

Significant spatial clustering and hotspots of unimproved sanitation facilities were identified within sub-Saharan Africa. The magnitude of unimproved sanitation facilities in sub-Saharan Africa was 48.88% (95% CI: 48.74–49.02%). The magnitude of unimproved sanitation was lowest in Malawi at 16.70% and highest in Chad at 88.52%. Several individual and community level factors were significantly associated with the utilization of unimproved sanitation facilities. At the individual level, female-headed households and those with access to improved drinking water source were less likely to use unimproved sanitation. In contrast, households headed by individuals aged 11–35 and 36–50 years, divorced households, and households with more than four members were associated with greater use of unimproved sanitation facilities. Additionally, households in the poorest, poorer, middle, and richer wealth categories were also associated with a greater use of unimproved sanitation facilities. Furthermore, households with water sources located in the yard/plot and off-premises had higher odds of using unimproved sanitation. At the community level, rural residence and lack of media exposure were associated with greater use of unimproved sanitation facilities.

Unimproved sanitation facilities remain a major public health challenge in sub-Saharan Africa, with significant regional disparities and a 48% magnitude. Addressing this issue requires targeted government policies, financial support for sanitation infrastructure, improved water supply, hygiene awareness campaigns, increased media exposure, and better sanitation facilities in rural areas.

Sanitation involves providing facilities for the safe disposal of human waste and urine, along with promoting hygiene practices such as using a secure toilet and washing hands with soap [1]. In 2022, 57% of the global population (4.6 billion people) had access to safely managed sanitation services, while over 1.5 billion people still lacked basic sanitation, such as private toilets or latrines [2]. Sanitation facilities access remains a major challenge in developing countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa, where most of the people without improved sanitation live [3]. Approximately one-third of the population in sub-Saharan Africa does not have access to adequate hygiene and sanitation services [4]. Many still lack decent, functional toilets, impacting health, dignity, and development [5,6]. During the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) period (1990–2015), sub-Saharan Africa’s (SSA’s) population doubled, but access to improved sanitation rose by only 6% points [7].

Initiatives like the International Drinking Water Supply and Sanitation Decade, Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and declarations such as Dakar and Ngor aimed to expand access. SDG Target 6.2 seeks universal sanitation by 2030, while Target 6.3 focuses on water quality and wastewater management [8–10]. However, despite these efforts and the clear benefits of sanitation, access in SSA has seen limited improvement [8,10]. Sanitation coverage in SSA remains uneven, with urban areas (40% in 2016) having nearly double the coverage of rural areas [11]. However, rural sanitation saw greater progress, rising from 18% in 1990 to 23% in 2015, a 5-percentage-point increase, while urban areas improved by just one point [11].

Poor sanitation negatively impacts human well-being, social and economic development by increasing anxiety, the risk of sexual assault, and lost opportunities for education and work, while also contributing to the transmission of diseases like cholera and dysentery, as well as typhoid, intestinal worm infections, and polio, exacerbating stunting, and promoting the spread of antimicrobial resistance [2,12–15]. Despite progress in improving household level hygiene and sanitation, the indiscriminate dumping of solid waste remains a persistent environmental and public health concern in many sub-Saharan African communities [16,17]. Open dumping contaminates water sources, fosters breeding grounds for flies and mosquitoes, and contributes to the spread of waterborne and vector-borne diseases [18]. Even households with adequate hygiene and sanitation are affected due to community-wide exposure to pollution [19]. Shared public spaces and drainage systems allow refuse-related contamination to spread quickly across neighbourhoods [16].

Unimproved sanitation facilities result from a combination of factors, including insufficient investment in infrastructure, particularly in rural and informal settlements; high construction and maintenance costs make sanitation facilities unaffordable to most households; weak policy enforcement on sanitation and lack of support by governments; rapid urbanization where sanitation development has not kept pace; cultural beliefs, taboos, and lack of awareness on sanitation; inadequate water supply restricts proper use and maintenance of the facilities; environmental challenges such as flooding, high water tables, and unsuitable soil conditions; conflict, natural disasters, or displacement disrupts activities; poor community involvement in the planning and maintenance of sanitation facilities; and insufficient hygiene and sanitation education has led to low demand for improved facilities [1,20–24].

Although several studies have explored sanitation access in sub-Saharan Africa, many rely on descriptive statistics or single-level analyses, failing to account for the hierarchical structure of data (individuals nested within communities) [25–28]. Furthermore, few have examined how spatial factors contribute to disparities in sanitation access across regions, limiting the geographic specificity of interventions [29–31]. There is also limited integration of both individual and community-level determinants in a unified analytical framework. As a result, current evidence may overlook critical drivers of unimproved sanitation in sub-Saharan Africa.

In this study, we combine multiple national Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) data from sub-Saharan African countries to apply spatial statistical methods and multilevel analysis. Despite ongoing efforts to improve sanitation, a significant portion of the population in sub-Saharan Africa still relies on unimproved sanitation facilities, posing serious public health risks. However, there is limited evidence on how individual and community level factors interact with sanitation facilities in sub-Saharan Africa. Previous studies often overlook spatial disparities and multilevel determinants. This study will combine multilevel and spatial analysis to provide evidence-based insights that can help policymakers, Non-Governmental organisations, and international organisations in their efforts to address regional inequalities in sanitation. The findings will inform investment priorities, enhance infrastructure, and support targeted public health interventions. This research further contributes to the achievement of Sustainable Development Goal 6, Clean Water and Sanitation, by proposing the main barriers standing in the way of sanitation improvement, supporting efforts toward universal access, and thereby helping to achieve better health and well-being in sub-Saharan Africa. Therefore, this study aims to determine the magnitude of unimproved sanitation facilities and their determinants in sub-Saharan African countries using spatial and multilevel analysis of Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) data.

The DHS data is a large-scale cross-sectional survey, a nationally representative survey conducted in over 90 countries [32]. Sub-Saharan Africa encompasses the regions of the African continent situated south of the Sahara Desert, including Central, East, Southern, and West Africa [33]. This area is characterised by a rich diversity of cultures, languages, and ecosystems. According to the Pew-Templeton Global Religious Futures Project, as of 2020, approximately 62% of the population identifies as Christian, 31.4% as Muslim, 3.2% adhere to traditional faiths, and 3% are unaffiliated with any religion [34]. Like other least-developed regions, SSA did not meet the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) target but made progress during the MDG period [35]. We utilized the most recent Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) data from 34 sub-Saharan African countries(Angola, Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Chad, Comoros, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe) for analysis covering the period from 2012 up to 2023/24 (Fig.1) (Table1).

Data were obtained from the DHS program (https://www.dhsprogram.com). The survey collects data on key indicators of health and health-related events, including data regarding sanitation facilities. We obtained a permission letter from the DHS program to use the data.

A total of 500,845 households and 20,492 clusters from 34 sub-Saharan African countries were included in this study. The Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) in sub-Saharan Africa use a multi-stage, stratified sampling method to gather representative data [36]. First, the country is divided into regions or strata, often based on administrative divisions or urban/rural settings. Then, primary sampling units (PSUs) are randomly selected from each stratum, typically using census enumeration areas or similar local divisions [37]. Within each selected PSU, households are chosen using a systematic random sampling approach. These households are invited to participate, and women of reproductive age (15–49) are typically interviewed, along with other individuals as per the survey’s objectives. In some cases, additional household members are also included for further data collection [37].

Unimproved sanitation facilities: pit latrines without a slab or platform, hanging latrines, bucket toilets, open defecation in fields or bushes, and composting toilets [38].

Improved sanitation facilities: flush or pour-flush toilets connected to a piped sewer system, septic tank, or pit latrine; ventilated improved pit latrines; composting toilets; and pit latrines with a slab [38].

We classified the independent variables into two levels: individual-level and community-level variables. Level 1 (Individual-level variables) include the household head’s sex (male or female), age, number of household members, educational attainment, marital status, drinking water source, time taken to reach the water source (in minutes), location of the water source, and household wealth category. Level 2 (Community-level variables) include residence (urban or rural), region, and community media exposure (radio and television).

Microsoft Excel 2010 was used for data cleaning and coding in preparation for both spatial analysis and multilevel analysis. The data were analysed using STATA version 17.0 for multilevel analysis. In DHS, oversampling can exaggerate trends in certain areas, while undersampling may mask disparities or underestimate issues, so sampling weights were calculated for each household record (HR) in the DHS datasets for both spatial analysis and multilevel analysis. This study described the weighting procedure in detail [39]. ArcGIS software version 10.7 was used for geospatial analysis and mapping. Kuldorff’s SaTScan software version 10.1 was used to identify spatial clusters using statistical models.

Spatial autocorrelation (Global Moran’s I) analysis examines the degree to which a set of spatial features and their associated data values tend to cluster together in space (positive spatial autocorrelation) or disperse (negative spatial autocorrelation). Positive autocorrelation occurs when Moran’s I value is closer to + 1, indicating clustering of similar values, while negative autocorrelation occurs when the value is closer to −1, suggesting a dispersed pattern of dissimilar values [40–42]. This analysis helps identify patterns, such as whether high values are found near other high values or spread across the study area and was conducted using ArcGIS software version 10.7. Hot spot and cold spot analysis, a spatial analysis technique, is used to identify areas with statistically significant clusters of high values (hotspots) and low values (cold spots) [43]. The Getis-Ord Gi* statistic, commonly used for this type of analysis, was employed in ArcGIS software version 10.7 to identify spatial clustering. Additionally, spatial scan statistical analysis was performed using Kuldorff’s SaTScan software v.10.1 with the Bernoulli model to determine the purely spatial cluster of unimproved sanitation facilities in sub-Saharan Africa. The Bernoulli model, applied in spatial scan statistics for binary or dichotomous data, treats those with unimproved sanitation facilities as cases and those with improved sanitation facilities as controls. It evaluates whether the observed distribution of events aligns with a null hypothesis of spatial randomness or if significant clusters exist. Details regarding spatial autocorrelation, hot spot and cold spot analysis, and spatial scan statistics are explained elsewhere [44–46].

A mixed-effects multilevel analysis was conducted to examine the factors associated with unimproved sanitation facilities across 34 sub-Saharan African countries. Given the hierarchical structure of the DHS data—where households are nested within communities and communities within countries—a two-level mixed-effects logistic regression model was employed to account for both individual-level and community-level variations.

Fixed-effects models were used to assess the relationship between the likelihood of unimproved sanitation facilities and independent variables at the individual and community levels. Multivariable analysis presented the associations between dependent and independent variables as adjusted odds ratios with 95% confidence intervals. Statistical significance was defined as ap-value of less than 0.05.

Random-effects models were used to estimate the variation in the outcome, quantified by the Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC), Median Odds Ratio (MOR), and Proportional Change in Variance (PCV) [47–49].

The ICC reveals the variation of unimproved sanitation facilities between clusters. It is calculated as;Where VA = cluster level variance [48–50].

The MOR is defined as the median odds ratio comparing the risk between the lowest-risk and highest-risk areas when randomly selecting two clusters.

MOR = exp.[√(2 × VC) × 0.6745], or, Where VC is the cluster level variance [48,49,51].

The PCV represents the variation in unimproved sanitation facilities among households that is explained by both individual and community-level factors.

The PCV is calculated as;, where Vnull = variance of the model zero or initial model, and VC = cluster level variance of the next model [48–50].

Overall, a mixed-effect analysis was conducted to examine factors associated with the use of unimproved sanitation facilities, considering both individual and community-level determinants. Four hierarchical models were fitted. The null model (Model 1) included only the outcome variable to assess the variability in unimproved sanitation use across clusters, with the intra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) measuring the proportion of variance attributable to cluster-level differences. The individual level model (Model 2) incorporated individual factors affecting unimproved sanitation facilities. The community level model (Model 3) included community factors affecting unimproved sanitation facilities. Finally, the fully adjusted model (Model 4) combined both individual and community level variables to provide a comprehensive understanding of the factors affecting unimproved sanitation facility use [51,52].

Model comparison was conducted using the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), and the deviance test. The model with the lowest AIC, BIC, and deviance was selected as the best-fitting model [51,52].

A total of 500,845 individuals or household members were surveyed across all sampled households in 34 sub-Saharan African countries. The majority (71.24%) of households were headed by males, while 34.79% of household heads were aged above 50 years. Additionally, 72.81% of household heads were married, 34.41% had no formal education, 22.11% were categorised under the poorest wealth category, and 62.88% resided in rural areas. In addition, 41.48% were found in the East Africa region, and 55.20% have community media exposure. Furthermore, 61.47% of households used unimproved drinking water sources, and 39.87% shared toilets with other households (Table2).

The magnitude of unimproved sanitation facilities in sub-Saharan African was 48.88% (95% CI: 48.74–49.02%).

East Africa has the highest burden, accounting for 43% of unimproved sanitation facilities, followed by West Africa at 38%. Central Africa contributes 12%, while Southern Africa has the lowest magnitude at 7%, indicating relatively better access to improved sanitation coverage.

The magnitude of unimproved sanitation was lowest in Malawi at 16.70% and highest in Chad at 88.52%. Additionally, the remaining 32 sub-Saharan African countries also exhibit a varied magnitude of unimproved sanitation facilities (Table3).

The spatial autocorrelation (Global Moran’s I) results indicate significant clustering of unimproved sanitation facilities in sub-Saharan Africa, with ap-value < 0.001, a Moran’s Index of 0.13, and a z-score of 192.83(Fig.2). The highest proportion (0.85–1.00) of unimproved sanitation facilities was observed across all 34 sub-Saharan African countries (Fig.3). The majority of hotspots were observed across three regions of sub-Saharan Africa: East, West, and Central sub-Saharan Africa. (Fig.4).In addition, spatial SaTScan analysis identified significant clustering of unimproved sanitation facilities across all 34 sub-Saharan African countries, with 194 windows containing clusters. The log-likelihood ratios (LLR) for these clusters ranged from 7.29 to 5,996.23 (Fig.5).

In the null model of the random effects analysis, the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) indicated that approximately 30% of the variation in unimproved sanitation facilities among study households was attributed to differences at the cluster level. The MOR value in the null model indicated that the median odds of having an unimproved sanitation facility were 3.15 times higher when comparing clusters with the highest risk to those with the lowest risk.

Moreover, the proportional change in variance (PCV) (12.41%) in the final model indicates that the variation in unimproved sanitation facilities among study households was explained by both individual and community level factors simultaneously. Model fit was compared using the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC), Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), and the deviance test. Model 3, which had the lowest AIC, BIC, and deviance, was selected as the best-fitting model.

In the fixed-effect analysis, households headed by females have 14% lower odds of having an unimproved sanitation facility compared to those headed by males [AOR = 0.86; 95% CI: 0.84, 0.88]. Age of household heads 11–35 and 36–50 were 1.02 times more likely to have an unimproved sanitation facility compared to those aged over 50 [AOR = 1.02; 95% CI: 1.00, 1.05] and [AOR = 1.02; 95% CI: 1.00, 1.05], respectively. Divorced individuals were 1.03 times more likely to use unimproved sanitation facilities compared to those who were married [AOR = 1.03; 95% CI: 1.00, 1.07]. Households with wealth category categorized as poorest, poorer, middle, and richer were 8.51, 4.67, 2.88, and 1.85 times more likely to have an unimproved sanitation facility compared to the richest households [AOR = 8.51; 95% CI: 8.20, 8.83], [AOR = 4.67; 95% CI: 4.51, 4.84], [AOR = 2.88; 95% CI: 2.78, 2.98], and [AOR = 1.85; 95% CI: 1.79, 1.92], respectively. Households with more than four members were 1.11 times more likely to have an unimproved sanitation facility compared to those with four or fewer members [AOR = 1.11; 95% CI: 1.09, 1.14]. Households that have improved drinking water sources were 17% less likely to have unimproved sanitation facilities than those that have improved drinking water sources [AOR = 0.83; 95% CI: 0.81, 0.85]. Households with the location of their water source in their yard/plot or elsewhere were 1.82 and 2.37 times more likely, respectively, to have an unimproved sanitation facility compared to those with a water source located within their dwelling [AOR = 1.82; 95% CI: 1.69, 1.96] and [AOR = 2.37; 95% CI: 2.21, 2.54]. Households located in rural areas were 1.62 times more likely to have an unimproved sanitation facility compared to those in urban areas [AOR = 1.62; 95% CI: 1.59, 1.66]. Households with media exposure were 39% less likely to have unimproved sanitation facilities compared to households without media exposure [AOR = 0.61; 95% CI: 0.54, 0.69] (Table4).

This study assessed the spatial variations and determinants of unimproved sanitation facilities in sub-Saharan Africa using DHS data. The results revealed a high regional disparity, with an overall magnitude of unimproved sanitation facilities at 48.88% (95% CI: 48.74–49.02%). Spatial autocorrelation, hotspots, and cluster analyses showed that access to unimproved sanitation services is highly heterogeneous in sub-Saharan Africa. Specifically, East SSA, West SSA, and Central SSA were identified as hotspots for unimproved sanitation facilities. This reflects the uneven distribution of access to sanitation facilities, with these regions facing greater challenges in sanitation infrastructure and related health outcomes.

This means that targeted interventions and investments are urgently needed in these hotspots to ensure access to improved sanitation and reduce risks to public health and well-being. This variation likely stems from differences in economic growth, overpopulation, unplanned urbanisation, limited infrastructure access, government focus on other pressing daily issues, sociopolitical instability, and varying levels of awareness and adoption of improved sanitation facilities [53].

The magnitude of unimproved sanitation facilities in sub-Saharan Africa was 48.88%. This finding is higher than those of a study conducted in Nepal (16%), a study conducted in 13 African countries (47%), and three studies conducted in India (17.8%, 22.3%, and 31%, respectively) [54–58]. In addition, the present study’s results demonstrated a higher magnitude of unimproved sanitation facilities compared to the SDG baseline rate of 33.3% [59,60]. The higher magnitude of unimproved sanitation facilities in sub-Saharan Africa, when compared with that of Nepal, India, and the SDG baseline rate is attributed to a number of factors. Key factors among these are the economic constraints and lack of infrastructures as many countries in sub-Saharan operate under severe financial constraints that result in limited investment in sanitation infrastructure and not supported by large-scale programs unlike India, where large-scale programs like Swachh Bharat Abhiyan (Clean India Mission) were initiated to scale up sanitation coverage [61].

Alongside rural-urban disparities and rapid urbanisation, the other reason why people in Sub-Saharan Africa find it difficult to access improved sanitation is that relatively more people live in rural areas where access to improved sanitation is very limited [62,63]. Unplanned urbanisation growth leads to very overcrowded slums, with very little or no sanitation infrastructure. The water scarcity and environmental disadvantage in sub-Saharan Africa worsen the situation, due to the chronic water shortage in many regions; and factors such as a high groundwater table, flooding, and poor soils make the construction of durable latrines important [64]. The differences between the present study and the previous study in 13 African countries can be attributed to variations in study periods, public health approaches, and context-specific issues.

This finding is lower than the study conducted using the 2017 Ghana Maternal Health Survey, 81.6%, Cambodia 69% and Indonesia 56.0% [65–67]. The lower magnitude of unimproved sanitation in our study may result from differences in data sources, definitions, and geographic scope. Our study uses DHS data from multiple countries in sub-Saharan Africa, while the other studies rely on national or regional surveys such as the 2017 Ghana Maternal Health Survey. Additionally, variations in the definition of unimproved sanitation across surveys may impact comparability. The geographic scope of our study also plays a role, as it covers a diverse range of countries with varying sanitation conditions. This broad coverage likely results in a more balanced and potentially lower average magnitude, unlike the other studies, which focus on specific nations or rural communities where unimproved sanitation rates tend to be higher. Furthermore, differences in the timeframe of data collection may contribute to the discrepancy. The Ghana study, for instance, uses data from 2017, whereas our study incorporates more recent DHS datasets, reflecting improvements in sanitation due to government programs and investments over time. Another crucial factor in understanding this discrepancy in the magnitude of unimproved sanitation is socio-economic and cultural diversity. Industrialisation, varying levels of education, and cultural attitudes toward sanitation significantly influence sanitation coverage. Additionally, compared to the urbanising regions of sub-Saharan Africa, higher engagement in unimproved sanitation facilities in some rural communities in Cambodia and Ghana may further explain the observed disparity.

In this study female headed households prioritise improved sanitation more than male headed ones; this finding is supported by studies conducted in rural India and Ethiopia [68,69]. This could reflect the fact that women and girls are more likely to ask for better sanitation on the grounds of privacy, safety, and health. Open defecation and shared facilities expose women and girls to risks of harassment, violence, and loss of dignity, which makes access to private and secure facilities vital. Furthermore, proper menstrual hygiene management requires clean and accessible facilities, often unavailable in unimproved sanitation facilities [70]. Our study revealed that household heads aged 11–35 and 36–50 are more prone to using unimproved sanitation facilities compared to those over 50 years old. This finding is consistent with studies conducted in Benin and Ethiopia, which showed that the use of unimproved sanitation facilities is associated with a lower age of the household head [71,72]. This could be likely due to factors such as limited financial resources, lower awareness of sanitation benefits, and reduced decision-making power [72]. Younger household heads may have fewer economic opportunities, making it difficult to invest in improved sanitation infrastructure [72]. Additionally, they may lack experience or knowledge about the long-term health and environmental benefits of proper sanitation, leading to lower prioritisation of sanitation improvements [73].

The findings showed that divorced household members had a higher tendency to utilise unimproved sanitation facilities. A study from Ghana indicated that household members who were married or living with a partner were more likely to have access to improved sanitation facilities compared to those who were divorced [74]. This could be due to marital status can influence household dynamics and economic stability, which in turn may affect access to improved sanitation [74]. Divorced individuals might face economic challenges or social stigmas that could impact their ability to afford or prioritise improved sanitation facilities [75].

The data indicated that households in the poorest, poorer, middle, and richer wealth categories had a greater tendency to use unimproved sanitation facilities when compared to the wealthiest households. This finding is supported by a study analysing data from the National Family Health Survey in India and another study conducted using the 2019 Ethiopia Mini Demographic and Health Survey [76,77]. One possible explanation is that lower-income households simply do not have the resources needed to support investment in improved sanitation facilities. Households with limited financial resources may, therefore, prioritise food and shelter over improved sanitation and hygiene [78]. The households of lower wealth quintiles may also have little or no access to either information or support towards sanitation improvements, are limited in technical skills needed for installation or maintenance of improved sanitation infrastructure, or both [77].

Compared to households with four or fewer family members, those with more than four family members were more prone to have unimproved sanitation facilities. Two cross-sectional studies from Ethiopia also indicated that households with larger family sizes are more likely to use unimproved sanitation facilities [69,79]. It could be due to increased demand and overcrowding, which can strain existing infrastructure. Large household sizes can only invest less due to a smaller budget al.location. Sharing between several members means facilities deteriorate more quickly, and maintenance or upgrading is even more difficult [80].

Analysis revealed that households using improved drinking water sources had a higher likelihood of accessing improved sanitation facilities. A study conducted in Ethiopia indicated that households that utilised surface water were 73% less likely to access basic sanitation services [79]. This could be for several reasons: first, improved water access often reflects better overall infrastructure and living conditions, which may also include improved sanitation; second, households that take priority for safe drinking water for health reasons are more likely to adopt better hygiene and sanitation practices; and finally, government and NGO programs promoting improved water access often also promote sanitation improvements, leading to a combined effect in adopting both services.

Households whose water source was located in their yard/plot or elsewhere had an increased tendency to use unimproved sanitation facilities compared to those with a water source inside their dwelling. A study from Ethiopia suggested that households with water sources located outside the dwelling may face challenges in accessing improved sanitation facilities, possibly due to factors such as convenience, infrastructure limitations, and socioeconomic status [81]. Households residing in rural areas had a greater likelihood of using unimproved sanitation facilities. A study conducted in Ghana found that rural households face significant challenges in accessing improved sanitation, resulting in a higher likelihood of using unimproved facilities [82]. Several factors make it likely that households in rural areas are using unimproved sanitation facilities. Firstly, infrastructures and resources to operate improved sanitation are lacking in rural areas [82]. Secondly, many rural households may not afford the cost that has to do with the upgrade of sanitation facilities [83]. Thirdly, lower population density and less governmental and NGO focus in rural areas mean fewer interventions in sanitation. Lastly, a lack of awareness on better health hygiene may be related to cultural practices in rural areas as a limiting influence on constructing improved sanitation facilities [71].

Households exposed to community-level media had a reduced likelihood of using unimproved sanitation facilities. This finding is consistent with studies from Ethiopia and sub-Saharan Africa [53,84]. Accordingly, households exposed to community level media are less likely to use unimproved sanitation facilities because of increased awareness via media of the health risks and benefits associated with sanitation [85]. Media can support community interest in improvements and often draw attention to interventions by governments or NGOs [86].

Unimproved sanitation facilities in sub-Saharan Africa show significant spatial clustering, with distinct hot and cold spots, indicating regional disparities in sanitation access. This study depicted that unimproved sanitation facilities remain one of the biggest challenges in the field of public health in sub-Saharan Africa, with a magnitude of 48%. In addition, female-headed households, younger age of the household head, divorced marital status, a lower rank on wealth category, bigger household size, unimproved drinking water sources, and water sources outside the dwelling were significantly associated from individual level factors with unimproved sanitation facilities. At the community level, households residing in rural areas and households with limited media exposure were significantly associated with unimproved sanitation facilities in sub-Saharan Africa.

These findings have critical health implications. Inadequate sanitation is a key driver of preventable diseases such as diarrhea, cholera, typhoid, and intestinal parasitic infections, particularly affecting children under five and vulnerable populations [87,88]. Poor sanitation contributes to child malnutrition, stunting, and increased mortality [89]. Unsafe sanitation facilities can also pose safety risks, especially for women and girls, increasing exposure to gender-based violence and hindering menstrual hygiene management [90,91]. Targeted interventions to improve sanitation in sub-Saharan Africa should focus on government policies supporting sanitation programs for male-headed households, low-income families, and rural residents.

Social protection programs that widen financial assistance disparities for investment in sanitation infrastructure, like subsidies for the construction of latrines, are highly needed. Sanitation initiatives need to be integrated with improvements in water supply, since most households with unimproved water sources are also likely to lack proper sanitation facilities. Scaling up community-led total sanitation programs and behavioural change campaigns should be undertaken to create hygiene awareness and ensure sustainable sanitation practices.

Increasing media exposure on issues concerning sanitation at the community level is also needed. Governments and organisations have a role to play in wide awareness through radio, television, and mobile platforms so that communities understand the health risks of poor sanitation. In rural areas, more infrastructure development regarding the building of shared but well-maintained toilet facilities and improved waste management systems is needed.

The strengths of this study include the use of advanced spatial analysis techniques and the incorporation of both individual- and community-level determinants, providing a comprehensive understanding of the factors contributing to unimproved sanitation. The limitations of this study include the cross-sectional nature of the DHS surveys, which provide only a snapshot of sanitation status at a specific point in time. Additionally, some countries in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) did not have DHS data available, while others lacked information on key outcome variables, and several countries had outdated DHS datasets. Furthermore, this study utilized DHS data collected over a time span from 2012 to 2024, which may introduce temporal variability. While this allowed for broader regional representation, variations in data collection years particularly for countries like Comoros and Niger may affect comparability.

The authors gratefully acknowledge the Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) program for granting permission to use the data.

The study was designed by L.D. M.T, E.A.W and H.B participated in the data processing and coding. Z.G. A.H.T and G.Y participated in the data analysis and interpretation of the findings. L.D prepared the manuscript. All the authors read and approved the final manuscript.

The author(s) declare that no financial support was received for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.