The focus of this review is to provide an overview of
the nomenclature,
structure, and properties of perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances
(PFAS) that dictate the selection of analytical methods for analyzing
PFAS in treated semiconductor wastewater. The review is organized
by introducing the fundamental concepts of how structure dictates
the physical-chemical properties of PFAS and how these properties
determine the suitability and applicability of standardized analytical
methods for individual PFAS as well as methods for total fluorine.
Structures for PFAS measured in semiconductor wastewater or known
to be in use by industry are given with tables intended as guidance
for method selection. This review includes current guidance on sample
collection, storage, and handling along with a comparison of U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency and American Society for Testing and
Materials analytical methods for target PFAS as well as methods for
ultrashort PFAS. Methods are reviewed for volatile PFAS in wastewater
as well as workflows for suspect and nontarget nonvolatile and volatile
PFAS. Nonspecific methods for PFAS including the total oxidizable
precursor assay, total fluorine analyses, and extractable and adsorbable
organic fluorine assays are reviewed. Alternative detectors for total
fluorine are reviewed along with nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
and sensors for online wastewater monitoring.

A growing body of literature describes
the semiconductor industry
as a source of PFAS emissions.−To date, there are no convenient guides that compile PFAS known
to be used by the semiconductor industry, either through patent searches
or expert knowledge or from measurements of PFAS in treated semiconductor
wastewater. Discovering molecular structures is a time- and resource-intensive
endeavor; thus, it is much more expedient to know the structure of
PFAS used by the semiconductor industry, since structure guides the
selection and optimization of analytical methods. Likewise, analytical
methods can provide insight into PFAS behavior such as the potential
for oxidation and sorption. Several excellent reviews exist on subtopics
covered by this review, including analytical methods that cover a
wide range of individual PFAS and nonspecific
PFAS methods; however, the focus of previous reviews is on meeting
the needs of the semiconductor industry.,The overarching goals of this review are to highlight methods for
analysis, with their advantages and limitations, for PFAS in treated
semiconductor wastewater and provide reference guides for selecting
analytical methods for detecting the potentially wide range of PFAS
in treated semiconductor wastewater.

Sensors for online monitoring of PFAS
in wastewater.

This review offers an overview of the key structural
aspects of
PFAS and a guide to selecting analytical methods based on the PFAS
structure. Target PFAS (Tables S1 and S9) are PFAS for which analytical standards are currently commercially
available, while suspect PFAS (Tables S2–S6) are those that have been previously identified but for which there
are no commercial analytical standards and nontarget PFAS which refer
to unidentified PFAS. For the purposes of this review, standardized
methods available in the U.S. for the analysis of target PFAS in water
including U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Method 1633, 537, 537.1, 533, 3512, and 8327 are reviewed
along with ASTM International (ASTM) Method D7979-20 for their applicability to PFAS associated with treated
semiconductor wastewater. In addition, methods for ultrashort chain
PFAS are reviewed. Reference guides in the form of tables present
inSupporting Informationallow users to
quickly identify which methods are applicable in their current form
or could potentially be modified to include suspect (previously identified
but with no analytical standard) or nontarget (previously unidentified)
PFAS in wastewater. Workflows for the detection of volatile suspects
and discovery of nontarget PFAS are also discussed together with nonspecific
analytical methods and alternative detectors for total fluorine. While
no universal methods exist for volatile PFAS in wastewater, published
methods for target, suspect, and nontarget volatile PFAS as well as
instrumental considerations are discussed. The utility of nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) is discussed for its applicability
for PFAS detection in wastewater. A review of the status of sensor
for online methods for PFAS detection in wastewater will be addressed.
For all methods, their advantages and limitations are presented as
part of the guidance with a convenient “stoplight” approach
for selecting analytical methods for PFAS detection in semiconductor
wastewater. The semiconductor industry uses PFAS that range from highly
volatile fluorinated greenhouse gases, including hydrofluorocarbons
and perfluorocarbons, to higher-molecular weight volatile PFAS (e.g.,
fluorotelomer alcohols (FTOHs)), to ionogenic PFAS that are capable
of ionizing in water as a function of pH, to higher-molecular weight
polymer-bound PFAS, and fluoropolymers (Figure). The range of chemical properties associated
with PFAS is wide and includes vapor pressure, aqueous solubility,
ionizability, and tendency to partition to solids (e.g., sorbents).
Knowledge of the chemical properties must be considered when selecting
approaches for sample concentration, analyte separation, and detection.
For example, fluoroalkanes and other volatile PFAS typically require
gas chromatography (GC)-based approaches, while ionogenic PFAS require
liquid chromatography (LC)-based approaches. Together, GC and LC with
mass spectrometry (MS) are the most commonly used analytical separation
and detection method. The choice of the method used to cover a range
of PFAS generally requires more than one analytical method, with some
overlap between methods. For the purpose of this review and brevity,
semivolatile PFAS will be hereafter termed volatile PFAS unless otherwise
noted. High-molecular weight, polymer-bound PFAS and fluoropolymers
require alternative methods (Figure). For the purposes of this review, the focus is on
volatile and nonvolatile PFAS.

Range in chemical properties of PFAS associated
with semiconductor
activities.

The nomenclature of PFAS has evolved over time
to categorize PFAS.,,Perfluorinated substances are
those in which all of the hydrogens on carbons are replaced by fluorine.
Relatively few PFAS subclasses meet this definition, and these subclasses
include perfluoroalkyl sulfonates (PFSAs), perfluoroalkyl carboxylates
(PFCAs), perfluoroalkyl sulfonamides (FASAs), and perfluoroalkyl ether
acids (PFEAs), as well as perfluoroalkyl fluorides, iodides, or aldehydes. Each subclass has a unique headgroup but may
have one or more homologues that vary by their fluorinated or fluorinated
polyether chain length. Polyfluorinated PFAS make up the remaining
myriad of subclasses in which the fluorinated chain contains carbons
that are not fully fluorinated. However, as the diversity of PFAS
structures increases, alternative approaches are being developed to
classify PFAS using their structural elements. In this review, it is necessary and convenient to specify
a specific carbon chain length when referring to a PFAS. In this case,
the number of carbons specified refers to the total number of carbons
and not the number of fluorinated carbons. For example, the C4 PFCA,
perfluorobutanoic acid (PFBA), has three fluorinated carbons and one
nonfluorinated carbon. In contrast, PFAS synthesized via fluorotelomerization,
such as the 6:2 FTOH, would be referred to as the C8 FTOH because
it has six fluorinated carbons and two nonfluorinated carbons. The
“n/m” nomenclature,
associated with fluorotelomerization, represents the number of fluorinated
carbons (n) and the number of nonfluorinated carbons
(m).

The length of the fluorinated chain ranges
from ultrashort- (e.g.,
C1–C3)−to longer-chain PFAS (e.g., C8–C14) and higher. In the case of polyether compounds, the fluorinated
chain is broken into smaller segments by oxygens, such as HFPO–DA
(e.g., GenX) and 4,8-dioxa-3H-perfluorononanoic acid
(ADONA). The diversity among PFAS subclasses
is determined by the head groups. The most well-known head groups
are those with carboxylate (e.g., PFCAs), sulfonate (e.g., PFSAs),
and sulfonamide (e.g., FASAs) head groups.

The key to selecting
analytical methods for PFAS analysis is understanding
their structure and how that structure governs their properties. Chemical
structure governs speciation (e.g., charged state) of any molecule.
Many PFAS are ionogenic (the ability to become ionized), where the
charged state determines key physical-chemical properties, including
solubility, volatility, and hydrophobicity, that, in turn, inform
the sample preparation and detection methods for that molecule.

Many PFAS used in the semiconductor industry
are sold in salt forms,
where anionic PFAS are paired with counter cations such as potassium,
ammonium, or as more complex organic
sulfur- or iodine-containing onium cations.,However,
once in contact with water, the salts of ionogenic PFAS dissociate
into their respective ions, and the PFAS
will speciate according to their acid-dissociation constant (pKa). Likewise, any
PFCAs and PFSAs sold in their free acid (protonated forms) will also
dissociate in water to form H+and the PFCA or PFSA anion.
As very strong acids with very low pKavalues, PFCAs and PFSAs are present in their anionic forms at all
environmental pH values. In contrast, perfluorobutane sulfonamido
ethanol, which is sold to the semiconductor industry as an alternative
to perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS), has a very high pKa(∼12–14)
and occurs in wastewater in its un-ionized, neutral form. What is
interesting and perhaps unique to the semiconductor industry is the
strongly acidic to basic conditions required for many fabrication
processes. There may be stages within semiconductor fabrication systems
where the pH of the waste stream is low or high relative to the pKaof PFAS that will impact the speciation of
ionogenic PFAS and therefore the PFAS physical-chemical properties
(Figure). For example,
a significant fraction of FASAs may be in the neutral, volatile form
at low pH but in their anionic, nonvolatile form at a higher pH.

There are a number of weak
acid PFAS classes, including the unsubstituted
(FASA), substitutedN-methyl (Me), andN-ethyl (Et) FASAs (e.g.,N-Me-perfluorooctane sulfonamide
(FOSA),N-Et-FOSA) with estimated pKavalues near neutrality. The sulfonamido acetic acid forms, including Me-perfluorooctane
sulfonamido acetic acid (FOSAA) and Et-FOSAA (Table S1), are weak acids since the carboxylic acid groups
are not bonded directly to fluorinated carbons. Cationic PFAS are
those with a fixed positive charge (e.g., quaternary amines) or have
ionogenic nitrogen atoms that become cationic at pH values according
to their pKa. In addition, there are many subclasses of zwitterionic PFAS that
possess two or more ionogenic head groups.−However, to date, there are no reports of cationic
or zwitterionic PFAS used by the semiconductor industry.

Volatile PFAS are those with head groups that do not ionize
in
the environmental pH range of wastewater (Table S2). Subclasses including FTOHs and substituted perfluoroalkyl
sulfonamido alcohols (FOSE), Me- and Et-FOSE, have very high pKavalues, such that they occur in their neutral
forms at environmental pH values (note the proton is not red inTable S1since it is not ionogenic at environmental
pH values (4–10)). Other head
groups on target volatile PFAS include acrylates, methacrylates, olefins,
iodides, acetates, ketones, and aldehydes. In addition, ionogenic
perfluorooctane sulfonamide (FOSA), Me-FOSA, and Et-FOSA with pKavalues near the pH of wastewater will speciate
such that their neutral and ionized forms are present (Table S2).

At present,
there are few published papers that document the measurement
of nonvolatile PFAS in treated semiconductor wastewater.,,There are some peer-reviewed
papers that describe PFAS in surface waters that are downstream from
semiconductor facilities but may be attributable to more than one
source.,,,To the best of our knowledge, there are no papers
that measure volatile PFAS in treated semiconductor wastewater. In
addition, publications that list PFAS associated with the semiconductor
industry from an expert point of view and patent analysis but lack
data on occurrence in treated semiconductor wastewater are presented
inTables S4–S6.

Treated semiconductor
wastewater is defined for this review as
wastewater treated onsite using physical, chemical, and/or biological
treatment to meet national, local, and company-specific effluent discharge
requirements, before discharge to local wastewater treatment facilities
or surface water. The typical treated
semiconductor wastewater effluent ranges in characteristics such as
pH 6–11, fluoride ion concentrations
(0.66–100 mg/L), and PFAS concentrations in the ng/L to μg/L
range. However, additional characteristics
such as ionic strength, organic solvents, and oxidant concentrations
in treated semiconductor wastewater that may affect analytical method
performance are not well documented and may vary between semiconductor
facilities. Although effluents may vary
in their aqueous chemistry, the matrix is likely analogous to other
municipal and industrial wastewater effluents. The methods for sampling
and analysis of PFAS in this review were developed for matrices other
than treated semiconductor wastewater, such as surface water and groundwater.
However, wastewaters discharged from fabrication unit processes (tools)
may vary more widely in pH, ionic strength, organic solvent, oxidant,
and PFAS concentrations compared to more dilute, treated semiconductor
wastewater effluent. Therefore, for many of the sampling and analysis
protocols, the performance of the analytical methods for treated semiconductor
wastewater effluent and wastewater effluent coming from fabrication
unit processes is unknown and represents a research need.

The
PFAS reported in semiconductor wastewater in the U.S. by Jacob
et al. are a combination of target PFAS
(Table S1) including PFCAs (C4–C10)
and perfluorobutanesulfonic acid (PFBS) and mostly strong-acid suspects
including carboxylates, acidic alcohols, ether-, and polyether-based
PFAS (Tables S2 and S3) that were discovered
through nontarget workflows. The shortest chain length evaluated included
PFBA and PFBS (Table S1); ultrashort-chain
PFAS (<C4) were not evaluated in this study. Extraction from wastewater
was accomplished using solid phase extraction (SPE) with the capacity
for acidic, basic, and neutral PFAS, followed by reverse-phase separation
and detection in negative mode by HRMS. Due to detection being in negative mode, no PFAS with positively
charged head groups were detected, while estimated concentrations
of suspects exceeded that of target PFAS. Many of the suspects are composed of carboxylate and very acidic
alcohol head groups (OH group bonded to fluorine-bearing carbon),
while others are ether- and polyether-based structures (Table S2). Jacob and Helbling performed a second study in which they reported ultrashort-chain
PFAS in semiconductor wastewaters, including trifluoroacetic acid
(TFA), pentafluoropropionic acid (PFPrA), trifluoromethanesulfonic
acid (TFMS; also known as triflate in the semiconductor industry), and perfluoropropanesulfonic acid (PFPrS).

Chen et al. reported target and suspect PFAS in treated semiconductor
wastewater,and in downstream river water
in Taiwan. Analyses were conducted using
weak anion exchange (WAX) SPE with detection in negative mode by HRMS
and a workflow that focused on molecules that gave fragments unique
to PFAS. No analyses were conducted to determine if PFAS with positively
charged head groups were present. Target PFAS included PFCAs (C4 and
C14) and PFBS (Table S1). Suspect PFAS
found were largely composed of four fully fluorinated carbons and
were detected in negative mode due to their anionic carboxylate, sulfinate
(e.g., –SO2–), and substituted
sulfonamide headgroups (Table S3). However,
they also reported the presence of ultrashort-chain PFCAs including
TFA, PFPrA, and TFMS. Disubstituted sulfonamido ethanols were also
detected (class 8;Table S3) even though
they are unlikely to be anionic in wastewater. Thus, it is likely
that they were extracted in their neutral form and detected as adducts
in negative mode. It is interesting to note that while both groups
used nontarget workflows, they found very different classes of PFAS
in their wastewater samples, which may reflect the PFAS chemical market
in the U.S. versus Taiwan. Finally, a lack of data exist on a number
of categories of PFAS that make up significant fractions of the PFAS
used by the semiconductor industry, including water-soluble fluoropolymers
(17,182 kg/yr or 50.9%).

Given the unique properties of PFAS, several studies have provided
overviews on issues surrounding sampling collection techniques, sample
storage conditions, and steps taken prior to analysis that may be
the source of negative or positive artifacts.,,This section is organized into sampling
wastewater, sampling materials, sample container types, storage considerations,
and filtration. The storage and stability characteristics for the
suspect PFAS reported by Chen et al.,and Jacob
et al. have not been determined, in part due to the lack of standards
available to conduct experiments. To
increase confidence in novel PFAS identified in semiconductor wastewater,
high quality analytical standards and stable isotope-labeled standards
will be needed.

For certain chemicals
in wastewater that exhibit short-term temporal variability, grab samples
are not the most appropriate approach for obtaining representative
samples, especially if the end goal is to estimate mass flows (mass/day).,However, if the goal is to establish the temporal variability in
a given chemical’s concentration, grab samples are appropriate.
Given that there is limited data for PFAS in semiconductor wastewater,
and even less is known about the temporal variability in the PFAS
composition of semiconductor wastewater, sampling campaigns should
use recommended techniques for obtaining representative samples of
wastewater, depending on the question being asked.−One of the alternatives for sampling wastewater is
passive sampling, which obtains a time-weighted average of the freely
dissolved concentration of a chemical over an extended period of time.,Consequently, this approach has received increasing attention for
its application to PFAS.−At present, the variability in the PFAS composition of semiconductor
wastewater over time is unknown and may vary by the facility. However,
average semiconductor wastewater effluent flow (m3/day)
is reported and can be used to compute
PFAS mass flows as PFAS concentration data become available. Thus,
composite sampling or passive sampling may more accurately capture
the PFAS mass flows in semiconductor wastewater.

Two studies report
PFAS associated with sampling materials used in the field. Rodowa
et al. examined sixty-six materials for
52 PFAS, but only 22 materials had the potential to come in direct
contact with water samples, and none of the 22 gave quantifiable PFAS
concentrations. Leaching of PFAS from polytetrafluoroethylene and
low-density polyethylene (LDPE) tubing, bailer lines, and water level
tape into deionized water was reported after 24 h of soaking the articles
in deionized water. However, a 24 h contact
time with these materials is unlikely for field samples under typical
sampling conditions (temperatures above 4 °C). Despite these reports of PFAS associated with materials
used in the field, there are few plausible pathways for the PFAS to
cross-contaminate a water sample unless the materials come into direct
contact with the water sample. Given these findings, it may be unnecessary
to place strict limitations on materials used in the field, such as
reusable ice pack, but it remains prudent to eliminate materials composed
of fluoropolymers that come into direct contact with water samples.,,With increasing instrument sensitivity
and lower acceptable levels of PFAS in water, this topic should be
revisited.

There is a growing body of literature that provides
data to support the most appropriate choice of bottle type for sampling
PFAS in (waste)­water. Woudneh et al. and others,demonstrated
most loss of PFAS, particularly long-chain, from water when stored
in glass and polypropylene compared to high-density polyethylene;
however, when the bottle was rinsed with methanol, the PFAS were recovered.
Whole bottle analysis is part of U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA) Method 1633. Zenobio et al. also
reported loss of all PFAS from water onto six types of container materials
with greater losses for long-chain PFAS and for PFSAs compared to
PFCAs and for sulfonamides. Lenka et
al. reported up to 20% losses of short-chain PFBS, PFBA, and PFPrA
to polypropylene samples tubes. The most
appropriate type of sample container and the need for whole-bottle
analyses should be confirmed for the potentially large spectrum of
PFAS found in treated semiconductor wastewater.

Sample storage
temperatures and hold times were examined by Woudneh et al. They reported the formation of select PFCAs,
FOSA and Me- and Et-fluoroalkyl sulfonamido acetic acid (FOSAA) and
degradation of Me- and Et-FOSE to Me-FOSAA and Et-FOSAA, respectively,
over 14 days of storage at 4 °C in waters including wastewater
and surface water. Thus, Woudneh et al. recommend storage of wastewater and other environmental waters at
−20 °C. The stability of PFAS during storage in solvents
was investigated by Zhang et al. They
found that while PFCAs, PFSAs, andn:2 FTS were stable
when stored at room temperature in deionized water, methanol, or isopropyl
alcohol over 30 days, polyfluoroalkyl ether acids degraded with increasing
temperature and with decreasing water-to-organic solvent ratio. The
findings of Zhang et al. indicate that, over time and with regard
to storage, care must be taken when making analytical measurements
of polyfluoroalkyl ether acids, which
are reported for semiconductor wastewater.

There is a significant
body of work that demonstrates the loss of PFAS during the filtration
of water, and there is a growing consensus about avoiding filtration
to prevent false negatives through loss from solution.−Loss of PFAS occurs for a wide variety of reasons, including losses
to filters for PFAS as chain-length increases.−Some reports
indicate filtration losses are caused by headgroup effects, while others report little effect of the headgroup.−Although filtration did not impact the recovery of target PFAS from
semiconductor wastewater, additional
research is needed to understand potential effects of filtration on
suspect and nontarget PFAS.

The U.S.
EPA currently has four PFAS methods available for target PFAS in aqueous
matrices (Table S1). These methods focus
on anionic PFAS, with the exception of Method 1633, which includes two neutral FOSEs. At present, Method 6133
does not include neutral FTOHs. U.S. EPA Methods 533, 537, and 537.1 were designed and validated for drinking water,
which is a relatively clean matrix with few interferences, while U.S.
EPA Methods 1633, 3512 (extraction) used in combination with 8327 (analysis), and ASTM D7979–20, ASTM D8421, ISO 21675:2019, and DIN 38407 are
for matrices other than drinking water, such as wastewater (Table S7). Methods 537 and 537.1 were available
prior to the wastewater specific methods.

Method 537 was the
original U.S. EPA method for PFAS in drinking water and included 14
target PFAS among PFCA, PFSA, FASA, and substituted FASA classes. Method 537.1 is intended for finished drinking
water, which is a simple sample matrix with potentially few interferences
(Table S7). When Method 537 was executed, the method stipulated that it must
be performed as written without modification. Method 537 was updated
to Method 537.1 to include a total of 18 PFAS (Table S1).

Both Methods 533
and 1633 utilize isotopic dilution. Isotopic dilution is a quantitation
scheme where stable isotope-labeled PFAS standards are added prior
to sample extraction to compensate for native (nonlabeled) PFAS loss
that occurs during extraction and analysis (Table S7). A small subset of PFAS has a second isotopically labeled
version, which is typically added after sample preparation steps and
is used to quantify the recovery of the first stable isotope added
prior to extraction. Within the various EPA and ASTM methods, the
nomenclature associated with the stable isotope PFAS standards vary.
For the purposes of this review, the first stable isotope added prior
to extraction is termed MPFAS, while the second stable isotope is
termed M2PFAS. An example of a MPFAS is13C4-PFOS, and the M2PFAS is13C8-PFOS.

The
behaviors of the native PFAS and their MPFAS and M2PFAS analogues
regarding extraction and chromatographic separation are equivalent.
However, their masses are sufficiently different such that mass spectrometers
can distinguish the native PFAS, MPFAS, and M2PFAS. The ratio between
a native PFAS and its MPFAS is then used to calculate the native PFAS
concentration and accounts for any loss of the native PFAS. For target
PFAS that do not have matching MPFAS, a MPFAS is selected based on
how closely it matches the target PFAS in terms of functional headgroup
and chromatographic retention time. The recovery of MPFAS is determined
as the ratio of MPFAS to M2PFAS. Stable-isotope dilution is a powerful
tool when used in analytical methods for PFAS in complex matrices
such as wastewater. The price of MPFAs and M2PFAS adds to the analytical
costs. However, despite its limitations, isotope dilution is considered
to be the best practice for determining PFAS concentrations in wastewater
and other environmental media.

Method 537.1, which does not
employ isotope dilution, provides
PFAS concentrations that do not consider any losses during sample
preparation and thus may underestimate PFAS concentrations. Method
533 is an isotopic dilution method for 25 target PFAS, 16 MPFAS, and
three M2PFAS (Table S7). Like Method 537.1, Method 533 is intended for finished
drinking water; however, due to the fact that it utilizes isotope
dilution, Method 533 is more suitable for matrices other than drinking
water. Since Method 537 was replaced by Method 537.1, Method 537 is
not discussed further.

Method 1633 utilizes isotope dilution
for the analysis of 40 target
PFAS in a multitude of matrices, including groundwater, surface water,
wastewater, soil, sediment, landfill leachate, and fish tissue. Of the 40 target PFAS, 24 have matched MPFAS,
and seven have matched M2PFAS. The more matched MPFAS that are used
translates to higher confidence in the accuracy of the reported target
PFAS concentrations in complex aqueous matrices such as wastewater.
In January 2024, Method 1633 was finalized though a multilaboratory
validation study that developed statistically derived quality control
limits. With the final version of Method
1633, laboratories may now modify it and add new PFAS as standards
become commercially available, as long as the method performance is
within quality control limits. International
methods that similarly utilize isotopic dilution and solid phase extraction
(SPE) are ISO 21675:2019 and DIN 38407-42. U.S. EPA Method 3512 (extraction) is used in combination with US EPA Method 8327 (analysis) as well as ASTM D7979-20, and is designed for nondrinking water matrices,
such as wastewater. Methods 3512 and 8327 are used together for 24
target PFAS and 19 MPFAS, where Method 3512 pertains to the samples
preparation, and Method 8327 pertains
to the analysis. These methods do not
require SPE and are thus faster and less expensive to perform. Method
3512 and the international method ASTM D842 utilize solvent dilution
of a wastewater matrix prior to injection onto an instrument instead
of SPE. The ASTM D7979-20 is an international
method that utilizes direct injection (no sample preparation) for
21 target PFAS and nine MPFAS. Both the
EPA 3512/8327 and ASTM D7979-20 methods utilize MPFAS to assess the
method performance and accuracy (Table S7). The advantages of U.S. EPA Method 3512/8327 and ASTM D7979-20
are quick turnaround times and low cost. However, disadvantages include
the use of external calibration, which does not account for instrumental
variability and relatively high reporting limits compared to SPE methods,
due to the lack of sample concentration. Recent data on PFAS concentration
on semiconductor wastewater were acquired using a modified version
of EPA Method 537.1 for wastewater, EPA Method 1633, and ASTM 7979-20.

U.S. EPA Methods
537.1, 533, and 1633 and international methods
ISO 21675:2019 and DIN 38407-42 use solid phase extraction (SPE). SPE is a process
where water is passed through a sorbent-filled cartridge. Aqueous
matrices much as wastewater are passed through SPE sorbent cartridges,
thus allowing sample concentration. Sorbed PFAS are eluted, and the
extract is further concentrated to achieve lower detection limits.
There are many different types of sorbents available, and the type
of sorbent selected determines the mechanism of interaction for concentrating
PFAS and thus the classes of PFAS concentrated. At present, three
types of SPE sorbents are primarily used for PFAS extraction. Method
537.1 utilizes a reverse-phase sorbent where PFAS are concentrated
onto the sorbent according to their hydrophobicity. A more widely used SPE sorbent is WAX, which is used in
Method 1633. By controlling the pH of
the sample, the WAX sorbent adopts a positive charge, thus concentrating
anionic PFAS by electrostatic interactions (e.g., ion exchange). Compared
with reverse-phase sorbents, WAX sorbents are more selective at removing
anionic PFAS from a matrix and generally give better analytical performance
(accuracy and precision). In the case of WAX SPE, its suitability
for other neutral, cationic, or zwitterionic PFAS has not been thoroughly
evaluated, although neutral FOSEs are determined by Method 1633 and
ASTM D8421. Method 533 uses mixed-mode SPE, which is a hybrid that
includes both reverse phase and WAX properties. For a wide range of anionic PFAS, WAX SPE retains the widest
range of PFAS based on functional group.

For
the analysis of target PFAS (Table S1),
separations are performed by utilizing liquid chromatography followed
by detection by mass spectrometry. The most common interface for anionic
PFAS is an electrospray ionization interface (ESI), since most target
PFAS are “preformed” ions or are easily ionized. An
alternative ionization interface, atmospheric pressure chemical ionization
(APCI), is not commonly used for PFAS analysis as it ionizes poorly
ionized compounds but yields higher background. Most analytical methods
for target PFAS use a triple quadrupole or “tandem”
mass spectrometer (i.e., LC–MS/MS). The LC–MS/MS has
the advantage of being highly sensitive, allowing for low levels of
detection and robustness at a relatively low instrument price. The
LC–MS/MS uses a mass filter to select a precursor (unfragmented)
ion, which is then passed into a collision chamber where the precursor
ion is fragmented into product ions. Multiple reaction monitoring
(MRM) consists of filtering the precursor ions, fragmenting them,
and filtering the resulting fragments, resulting in a high degree
of confidence in the identity of the PFAS detected. Confidence in
the identity of the PFAS detected is increased when multiple fragments
are produced by a precursor ion, where the most abundant (based on
area count) fragment ion is used for quantification of the target
PFAS, while the next most abundant ion is used as the qualifier ion
used to confirm the target PFAS identification. The area counts of
the quantification and qualifier ions are ratioed and are required
to match that of PFAS standards; deviations from the expected ratio
indicate the presence of an interference that can cause a false positive.

The best method for wastewater analysis depends on the analyte
concentrations and class of analytes tested. For trace level analysis
of anionic PFAS, an isotopic dilution method utilizing whole bottle
extraction yields the most accurate measure of the PFAS concentrations.
The “industry standard” is rapidly becoming the US EPA
Method 1633. This method is designed for wastewater and is expandable
to any anionic and potentially some neutral PFAS for which analytical
standards exist. The downside of this method is its cost and the focus
on PFAS that interacts with WAX SPE during extraction. For the screening
of all neutral, anionic, cationic, or zwitterionic compounds at higher
microgram per liter or higher concentrations, either U.S. EPA Methods
3512/8327 or
ASTM D7979-20 or ASTM D8421 is recommended. These methods potentially capture
all forms of PFAS at a significantly lower cost; however, they should
only be applied if concentrations reaching microgram per liter or
higher of PFAS of interest are expected.

The
occurrence of ultrashort-chain PFAS in semiconductor wastewater
was recently demonstrated.,Ultrashort chain PFAS
are defined as those PFAS with less than four fluorinated atoms.,The hydrophilic nature of ultrashort-chain PFAS presents analytical
challenges, namely, their extraction from water and subsequent ability
to focus and separate them chromatographically. Therefore, analytical
method development for ultrashort-chain PFAS focuses on optimizing
SPE media for their concentration from water along with selecting
analytical columns for focusing and separating these very water-soluble
PFAS. Chromatographic separation approaches divide into applications
that rely upon hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC),
reversed-phase columns, and ion-exchange columns (Table S8). Instruments used for ultrashort-chain PFAS separation
and quantification range from LC–MS/MS to LC-HRMS, as well
as supercritical fluid chromatography (SFC) with MS/MS. Given the
analytical challenges, the analysis of ultrashort-chain PFAS requires
an analytical method separate from those used to concentrate and separate
≥C4 PFAS.

A review by Björnsdotter et al. from
2020 includes methods
for ultrashort-chain homologues among the PFCA and PFSA classes. Initially, analyses of TFA were performed on
rain and snow by evaporating aqueous samples (500–1000 mL),
derivatizing the residue, followed by separation and detection by
gas chromatography–mass spectrometry (GC–MS) (Table S8).−This laborious process was replaced with off-line SPE-based sample
preparation approaches for sample volumes ranging from 50–500
mL, typically involving WAX,,−
,,mixed mode ion exchange phases,,,and hydrophilic–lipophilic balance (HLB) SPE
sorbents (Table S8).,,Only one report documents an
online mixed-mode SPE approach for ultrashort-chain PFAS. The various SPE-based approaches gave (limits
of quantification) LOQs ranging from <1 to 200 ng/L (Table S8). The LOQs for TFA tend to be higher
than those for other PFCAs, due to instrumental TFA background levels,
which is in contrast to low instrumental background levels for TFMS.,Instrumental background is defined as obtaining a signal for an
analyte (e.g., TFA) that originates from within the instrument. In
some cases, concentrations of TFA could not be reported due to high
instrumental background. Others indicate
that the volatility of TFMS limited their ability to report concentrations. An alternative to previously described methods
utilizing SPE but with higher detection limits is the relatively simple
direct injection of up to 25 μL aqueous sample with analysis
by SFC-MS/MS. A recent review described
a combination of target and suspect screening for ultrashort PFAS,
which indicated that C2 and C3 homologues of PFAS classes other than
just PFCAs and PFSAs are present in wastewater.

Definitions
of volatile and semivolatile organic compounds based
on boiling point, vapor pressure, and relative chromatographic retention
time are reviewed by Eichler and Little. ASTM defines semivolatile organic compounds as those with vapor
pressures from 10–2to 10–8kPa
at 25 °C, while volatile molecules are defined by vapor pressures
>10–2kPa at 25 °C. The World Health Organization (WHO) defines semivolatile
compounds
as those having boiling points between 240 and 400 °C and vapor
pressures of 10–2to 10–12kPa. Measured and computationally modeled estimates
of PFAS vapor pressures are listed on the EPA CompTox Dashboard. Additionally, vapor pressures have been experimentally
determined for nine PFAS. Eichler and
Little used the WHO definition to indicate that homologues within
a PFAS class range from volatile to semivolatile, with higher fluorinated
chain length homologues falling into the semivolatile category. It is important to use the vapor pressures
of the protonated free acid forms of PFCAs and PFSAs with caution
since these neutral forms of PFCAs and PFSAs are not relevant in semiconductor
wastewater at circumneutral pH. For wastewater analysis, it is likely
that the volatile PFAS listed in EPA Method OTM-50, such as fluoroalkanes
and fluorinated greenhouse gases, will partition out of water into
the gas phase, thus requiring the need for gas-phase capture and analysis
methods that are not covered in this review.

For simplicity
and the purposes of this review, the target PFAS
listed inTable S9will be referred to
hereafter as “volatile” PFAS. The PFAS listed inTable S9occur as neutral, nonionized molecules
because they either do not have an ionizable functional group (e.g.,
fluorotelomer acylates and methacrylates) or possess ionizable functional
group, such as a hydroxyl group, with a pKathat is too high for the molecule to occur in its ionized form in
circumneutral pH wastewater (e.g., FTOHs).

Sample preparation for volatile PFAS in
wastewater.

Another method of SPE that interrogates the liquid
phase is stir
bar sorptive extraction (SBSE) using stir bars coated with polydimethylsiloxane
(PDMS;Table S10). The stir bar is spun in a vial of water, removed, rinsed
with deionized water, dried with tissue paper, and desorbed via thermal
desorption (TD) into a GC–MS. This method utilizes minimal
sample preparation and low method detection limits (≤6.7 ng/L). While SBSE was successfully demonstrated for
FTOH analysis in water, future work
is needed for other classes of volatile PFAS. Additionally, a TD unit
is necessary to desorb volatile PFAS from the stir bar, which increases
the cost of analysis. Sample preparation for volatile PFAS in water
is also performed by methods like those reported for nonvolatile PFAS
(Figure). For example,
liquid–liquid extraction,is used to
extract volatile PFAS from water.

A common
method for the analysis of volatile PFAS in water is to interrogate
the gas phase of a sample in a closed system. Published methods for
volatile PFAS in water include purge-and-trap and head space-solid phase microextraction (HS-SPME) for the determination of volatile PFAS, including
FTOHs, FOSAs, fluorotelomer acrylates (FTACs), fluorotelomer methacrylates
(FTMACs), perfluoroalkyl iodides (PFAIs), and fluorotelomer iodides
(FTIs) (Table S10). In the purge-and-trap
method, nitrogen is used to purge volatile PFAS from water onto an
activated charcoal filter and subsequently eluted from the filter
using a volatile solvent and analyzed via GC–MS. Other studies describe purging sample headspace
onto an HLB or C18 SPE cartridge. Once SPE cartridges are eluted with a volatile
solvent, extracts are then analyzed via GC–MS or LC–MS.
The purge-and-trap method can also be used in line with GC–MS,
minimizing the need for solvent elution.

For HS-SPME, a divinylbenzene/carboxen/polydimethylsiloxane
(DVB/CAR/PDMS) fiber,is typically utilized for extraction
from a sample’s headspace in a closed system. The vial, containing
a water sample, is agitated via stirring and heated to promote complete
volatilization into the headspace. Sodium chloride salt may also be
added to promote volatilization through electrostriction of the volatile
PFAS. The fiber is exposed to the headspace for 5 to 30 min to reach
equilibrium. No solvent is needed for extraction since the fiber is
desorbed directly in the inlet of the GC. Recoveries by HS-SPME range
from 92–130% for spiked tap water. The HS-SPME method has a simple sample preparation with high precision
while mitigating the potential for contamination. However, when using
HS-SPME, other molecules in the sample matrix may compete for adsorption
to the fiber, which would result in lowered detection limits. Additionally,
carryover occurs if the fiber is not fully desorbed in between sampling,
with larger molecules being more strongly retained to the fiber’s
coating.

Typically,
separations of volatile PFAS are conducted via GC. For GC separation,
wall-coated open tubular columns are utilized for separation. The
most common types of detectors for volatile PFAS analysis by gas chromatography
are the electron capture detector (ECD) and MS (FigureandTable S11).

Separation and detection techniques for volatile PFAS in wastewater.

The ECD
is a selective detector commonly used for organo-halogen detection
when coupled with GC. For ECD, an electron is released from a radioactive
beta-emitter such as63N, which is then attracted to electronegative
atoms such as fluorine or chlorine. As the electron is captured, there
is a change in current, allowing for halogenated molecule detection.
Few studies utilize GC-ECD for volatile PFAS. Historically, GC-ECD
was used for the detection of derivatized PFCAs,and for monitoring FTOH biodegradation. Total organic fluorine following PFAS defluorination and derivatization
has also been conducted with ECD. However,
ECDs do not offer structural information. Furthermore, comparative
studies between GC-ECD and GC-single-quadrupole MS illustrated that
LODs (limits of detection) are higher for GC-ECD analysis and therefore
less sensitive. The ECD is also sensitive
to all halogens, which may be an issue with the presence of chlorinated,
iodinated, or brominated volatile organic compounds.

In contrast to the ECD, single-quadrupole MS is the most utilized
detector. Sources of ionization for GC–MS are electron ionization
(EI) and chemical ionization (CI) (FigureandTable S11). For volatile PFAS detection, both EI and CI are used for volatile
PFAS. For EI, this ionization method is considered a “hard”
ionization because the molecule is extensively fragmented with electrons
produced by a heated filament, typically at 70 eV. The resulting fragmentation
of the molecule allows for structural database matching. However,
there exists a potential for artifacts that may confound interpretation
of data for PFAS by GC–EI–MS. Roth et al. reported the
presence of PFOA in the headspace above water (containing aqueous
film-forming foam) at neutral pH. In
response to the work by Roth et al., Titaley et al. demonstrated the formation of perfluoro-1-heptene
upon injection of PFOA into a 280 °C inlet of a GC–MS,
indicating that PFOA cannot be distinguished from the thermal degradation
product, perfluoro-1-heptene, using GC–EI–MS. Others report perfluoroalkenes as thermal degradation
products of PFCAs.,Hayes et al. later confirmed
that PFOA degrades to perfluoroheptene, which gave similar fragments
as PFOA (m/z69, 119, 131, and 169)
under GC–EI–MS conditions. Thus, a body of evidence indicates that PFOA and perfluoroheptene
as well as other analogous PFCAs and their corresponding perfluoroalkenes
cannot be differentiated by GC–EI–MS used in soil gas
and vapor intrusion studies.−They speculated that Roth et
al. detected the aerosolized PFOA in
the headspace above circumneutral pH water due to agitation of the
solution. Thus, caution is urged when using other analytical techniques
that can generate aerosol forms of nonvolatile PFAS, such as purge-and-trap.
Furthermore, recent reports of Henry’s law coefficient measurements
forn:2 FTS are also
based on fragments and not molecular ions resulting in identifying
artifacts as FTS. Thus, without molecular
ion confirmation, the data should be treated cautiously.

In
contrast, CI is a “soft” ionization that produces less
fragmentation and enhances the abundance of the molecular ion, allowing
for molecular weight confirmation, which is used to confirm a chemical’s
identity. The use of CI also allows for differentiation between individual
volatile PFAS based on their molecular weights.−For volatile PFAS, it is common to use positive CI (PCI) since the
functional group of the PFAS picks up a proton from a reagent gas,
typically methane, to form the [M + H]+ion, where M is
the unfragmented molecule/analyte. With CI, the molecular ion has
a greater intensity and provides an additional line of evidence for
chemical identification. Lowering the eV used in EI-MS could be done
for molecular ion enhancement as a “pseudo-CI”. Ayala-Cabrera et al. reported instrumental
LODs for fluorotelomer olefins (FTOs), FTOHs, FOSAs, and FOSEs using
GC-EI-MS and GC–CI–MS ranging from 0.2–6 μg/L
and 0.06–4 μg/L, respectively, with the exception of
the 4:2 FTO, which was 17 μg/L and 429 μg/L, respectively. Thus, there is little difference in instrumental
LODs for EI-MS or CI-MS.

Triple quadrupole mass spectrometry
(TQ-MS) is coupled with GC
for target volatile PFAS analysis. The use of MRM increases both sensitivity
and specificity with respect to the single-quadrupole MS. An application
note from Shimadzu couples HS-SPME with GC–MS/MS for the analysis
of several classes of volatile PFAS. While the instrumental LOD is
not reported, the lowest point on the calibration curve ranges from
2.5 to 25 ng/L due to increased sensitivity from MRM. The lowest calibration point reported here
is up to 1000-fold more sensitive than other reported instrumental
limits of detection for volatile PFAS using the single-quadrupole
MS.

Recently, GC-HRMS, using
quadrupole time-of-flight (QTOF),and Orbitrap
MS, was used for suspect and nontarget
volatile PFAS in matrices of soils,,drinking
water,,and incinerated soils. Only a small fraction of GC-HRMS databases contain mass
spectral fragmentation for PFAS, resulting in a research gap surrounding
nontarget volatile PFAS analysis.,Casey et
al. developed a nontarget work flow for volatile PFAS in incinerated
AFFF impacted soils, but the workflow was not applied to water samples. Additionally, an accurate mass library for
volatile PFAS using GC-EI-QTOF was developed by Agilent and applied
to drinking water; however, the accurate
mass library only contains EI spectra. In contrast, GC-PCI-QTOF was used to identify long-chain FTOHs and
FTACs, FTMACs, Ft-esters, and FT-ether dimers in industrial soils
(but not water) following methylt-butyl ether solid–liquid
extraction. The use of EI is typically
favored due to spectral database matching. However, Casey et al. note
negative chemical ionization (NCI) needs to be explored because more
PFAS were observed in NCI in contrast to PCI or EI.

Potential artifacts arise in GC–MS analysis due to the presence
of nonvolatile PFAS in sample extracts. For example, nonvolatile 6:2
dialkyl fluorotelomer phosphate (diPAP) underwent thermal degradation
in the GC inlet at 280 °C to form 6:2 FTOH in a methanol extract.
The phenomenon resulted in a false positive for 6:2 FTOH in subsequent
injections. Therefore, strong anion exchange SPE was used to remove
6:2 diPAP from extracts. A cooled GC
inlet may also mitigate thermal transformation. However, as a result of using a low-temperature inlet,
nonvolatile PFAS will remain in the GC inlet until it is replaced.
Another noted artifact was identified with isotopically labeled FTOH
standards. When using PCI, hydrogen abstraction of isotopically labeled
FTOH standards yielded false positives for native (nonisotopically
labeled) FTOHs, thus requiring blank subtraction or the use of alternative
isotopic standards. Further research
on other PFAS thermal transformations in the GC is needed to understand
potential artifacts that may arise.

While
GC–MS is historically used for the determination of volatile
PFAS, LC–MS/MS methods list several classes of volatile PFAS,
such as FTOHs,,,,,FASAs, and FOSEs (FigureandTable S9). There are no standardized
(e.g., EPA) methods for volatile PFAS analysis in water, with the
exception of EPA Method 1633 that targets two FOSEs, namely, Me- and
Et-FOSE. Using ESI, FASAs, specifically
Me- and Et-FOSA, are readily ionized to form the [M – H]−ion, but other classes of volatile PFAS are poorly
ionized, resulting in a high LOD. In buffered aqueous mobile phases,
FTOHs and FOSEs (Table S9) are detected
in negative mode as acetate adducts when undergoing ionization by
ESI.,Alternatively, FTOHs are observed as their
[M – H]−ion in ESI–but
only with unbuffered mobile phases. However, without buffered mobile
phases, nonvolatile PFAS give higher detection limits, which complicates
attempts to simultaneously analyze nonvolatile PFAS and volatile FTOHs.

Berger et al. compared the use of an
ion trap MS, TOF MS, and TQ-MS and reported LODs as a function of
mass on column. The ion trap MS had
LODs ranging from 1 to 10 ng on column for the 4:2, 6:2, and 8:2 FTOH.
In contrast, the TOF MS had LODs ranging from 0.005 to 0.15 ng on
column, and the TQ-MS had LODs ranging from 0.001 to 0.02 ng on column. Therefore, the LC-TQ-MS is the most sensitive
for the quantification of FTOHs with LC. The LC-TQ-MS LOD is an order
of magnitude higher than reported instrumental LODs for GC-TQ-MS (0.0001–0.002
ng mass on column). Thus, GC–MS
tends to be more common for volatile PFAS analysis. Additionally,
most volatile PFAS analysis by LC–MS/MS has focused on FTOHs,
FOSAs, and FOSEs. Further research is needed on other classes of volatile
PFAS, ionization efficiency, and detection with ESI.

While most volatile
PFAS LC–MS analyses are conducted in ESI negative mode, a few
studies have also compared different modes of ionization for volatile
PFAS when using LC–MS (Table S11).,,The most
comprehensive was described by Ayala-Cabrera et al. in which they
compared different ionization methods for FTOHs, FOSAs, FOSEs, and
FTOs using APCI and atmospheric pressure photoionization (APPI) with
tandem MS. To the best of our knowledge,
this was the first study to identify four classes of volatile PFAS
targets simultaneously with alternative interfaces in combination
with MS/MS detection. In the same study, LC-APCI-MS/MS and LC-APPI-MS/MS
gave instrumental LODs ranging from 0.3 to 100 μg/L and 0.1
to 4000 μg/L, respectively. The
LODs were higher for LC-APPI-MS/MS and had LOD ranges larger than
those of GC–MS methods. However, LC-APCI-MS/MS yielded less
than 1 μg/L LODs for the volatile PFAS studied except for the
4:2 and 6:2 FTO.

To overcome the poor ionization and high detection limits of FTOHs
via LC–MS/MS analysis, Peng et al. demonstrated the use of
derivatization for FTOH. Derivatization is the process by which an
analyte is chemically altered to improve chromatographic separation
and/or detection. Derivatization was performed using dansyl chloride
with a 4-(dimethylamino)-pyridine catalyst so that FTOHs could be
analyzed via LC–MS/MS. This method
yielded lower LC–MS/MS detection limits by 7.5–841-fold
when compared to nonderivatized FTOH analysis and 57–357-fold
lower detection limits for FTOHs when compared to a GC-MS method. This derivatization method was applied to analysis
of FTOHs in sediment, wastewater, and food packaging. While derivatization is useful for FTOH analysis, FTOHs constitute
one class of volatile PFAS. Thus, derivatization of other volatile
PFAS needs to be explored for improving detection via LC–MS.
Furthermore, it is unknown how this derivatization reaction may impact
other PFAS. Additionally, derivatization is time-consuming and requires
multiple transfer steps that could lead to loss and reduced precision.

Volatile PFAS were measured in wastewater of fluorochemical-related
facilities such as a durable water repellent facility and a textile manufacturer, and volatile PFAS were detected in air surrounding wastewater. Ma et al. determined FTOHs in municipal wastewater, and Mok et al. determined FTOHs, FTACs, and
fluorotelomer acetates (FTATs) in wastewater from fluorochemical-related
facilities, using targeted and nontargeted GC–MS approaches.

Neutral PFAS noted in orange inTables S4 and S5used by the semiconductor industry
are not ionized in the environmentally relevant range of pH values,
nor under electrospray (LC-HRMS) conditions. Therefore, extraction
methods for volatile PFAS coupled with GC-HRMS are needed for nontarget
analysis of neutral PFAS since their ionization under LC-HRMS conditions
is unknown. While the molecules shown inTables S4 and S5are potentially used by the semiconductor industry,
their occurrence and fate in semiconductor wastewater is currently
poorly understood. Additionally, the identification of volatile PFAS
is necessary for calculating total fluorine mass balances in semiconductor
wastewater.

It is challenging to know all of the potential
PFAS present in
semiconductor wastewater given the number and complexity of semiconductor
fabrication units. Nondisclosure agreements also limit the information
available to the public on the PFAS used in semiconductor processes.
Furthermore, PFAS used in semiconductor processes may react to generate
novel, unknown transformation products. Additionally, PFAS intentionally
added to formulations used during semiconductor processes may contain
up to 0.5% byproducts. Finally, intermediate
transformation products are formed during biological oxidation in
wastewater treatment plants receiving semiconductor waste. Impurities and transformation products are generally
not captured by analytical methods focusing on target PFAS, such that
nontarget workflows must be used to account for these potential PFAS.

Sample
preparation and chromatographic separation constrain the
PFAS that can be detected and ultimately identified. As discussed, nonvolatile and volatile PFAS require different
approaches to sample preparation and separation methods prior to detection. One limitation of MS is the prerequisite that
PFAS must be ionizable. A recent model offers guidance on how to determine
if a chemical is amenable to LC–MS analysis. Using MS, PFAS is detected as either negatively or positively
charged molecules. Most target PFAS (Tables S1 and S9) are negatively charged and are thus detected in negative
mode only. Consequently, PFAS detected in positive mode (e.g., zwitterionic
and cationic), if present in semiconductor wastewater, would go undetected
if only negative-mode detection is employed. To the best of our knowledge, only Jacob et al. looked for PFAS
in semiconductor wastewater under positive mode but found none.

To date, QTOF and Orbitrap
HRMS are the most common instruments for suspect and nontarget PFAS
studies. Both QTOFs and Orbitraps are becoming more cost efficient,
such that they are now used by contract laboratories. There are excellent
reviews that give an overview of nontarget analysis and best practices,,as well as practical reviews on discovering novel PFAS.,Since such reviews exist, this section focuses on a practical overview
of workflows used to find novel PFAS in semiconductor industry wastewater.

Suspect and nontarget PFAS identification using HRMS data features
are performed using workflows (Table S13), which are multistep methods meant to elucidate the identity of
unknown chemicals. Prioritization of masses of interest is made by
matching the mass of peaks to those on suspect screening lists.,,,An accurate mass corresponding to a PFAS is selected by mass-defect
filtering along with Kendrick mass defect
(KMD) analysis to find PFAS that occur as a homologous series.,,Mass fragment patterns are matched
to those in suspect PFAS databases. In
case of nontarget PFAS, characteristic mass fragments and differences
between mass fragments are used to identify or suggest potential PFAS
structures.,,,This last step is assisted using computer-based
methods (e.g., in silico, MS2 reconstruction). The retention time of an unknown PFAS also provides an
additional line of evidence to assist in assigning confidence in the
identity of the unknown PFAS. For example, the retention time of a
higher-molecular weight homologue within the same PFAS class should
be at a greater retention time than those of lower-molecular weight
homologues. Several vendor or open-source
software tools generally contain a combination of methods, many of
which were previously compared.,−All workflows contain pros and cons that should be evaluated to
meet specific goals. The capability to investigate the structure is
mainly dependent on the MS2 fragmentation quality, which depends on
the type of HRMS acquisition (Table S12).

Calibration
curves cannot be made for suspect and nontarget quantification since
they do not have analytical standards. Thus, diverse strategies have
been developed and applied to give estimated concentrations of suspect
and nontarget PFAS.,,,−Despite the lack of best practices, the most common semiquantitative
method is to use the “best matched” approach. Using
the “best matched” approach, a suspect or nontarget
PFAS is assumed to have the same response factor as that of a target
PFAS that most closely matches the suspect or nontarget PFAS molecular
structure or chromatographic retention time.,,However, the response factor is a function
of the ionization efficiency, which varies depending on the PFAS structure
(e.g., number of fluorine atoms as well as the headgroup). Moreover, selecting the “best match”
is subjective and thus may result in variability in estimated suspect
and nontarget PFAS concentrations. A more complex estimation method
was recently described but has some
practical limitations. On the other hand, Cao et al. proposed a simpler
approach using “an average calibration curve” based
on all target PFAS that was used to estimate suspect PFAS concentrations. This method is very practical and easy to implement
and has the advantage that the uncertainty about the estimated concentration
is calculated.

Total fluorine is defined as the combination of inorganic forms
of fluorine (e.g., fluoride ion and inorganic anionic fluorine salts)
and organic fluorine.,Nonspecific methods are a collection
of methods aimed at capturing organic fluorine by incorporating steps
to remove forms of inorganic fluorine and are valuable as targeted techniques account for less than 10%
of total organic fluorine detected in samples.,,Nonspecific analytical methods
could benefit the semiconductor industry as target PFAS are a fraction
of the PFAS in semiconductor wastewater.,,Nontarget screening approaches reveal unidentified
PFAS that contribute to total organic fluorine.,,,At present,
there is only one EPA-approved nonspecific PFAS method (EPA Method
1621) for adsorbable organic fluorine. For the purposes of this review, nonspecific methods are divided
into those that are generally practiced with sample preconcentration,
and those that are not (FigureandTable S14).

Sample preparation and
instrumental analysis approaches for nonspecific
methods of PFAS detection.

The total oxidizable precursor (TOP) assay provides a quantitative
estimate of precursors that form target PFCA and PFSA upon oxidation.,The TOP assay is the only nonspecific method that relies on the
measurement of target PFAS (i.e., PFCAs). For the TOP assay, there
are two approaches. In the first approach, the water sample is preconcentrated
by WAX SPE after which the extract is split and one aliquot is treated
by heat- and alkaline-activated persulfate oxidation, while the other
aliquot is left untreated (Figure).,,In the second approach, the sample is split first and one fraction
is oxidized while the other fraction is not, then the two fractions
are preconcentrated by WAX SPE (Figure).−Precursors are then quantified as the net production of PFAAs after
oxidation. Note that concentrations are often reported as the summed
concentration of ng/L for convenience rather than in molar concentration
units. To date, there is a single report of PFSA and PFASAs as minor
oxidation products from the oxidation of an electrofluorination (ECF)-derived
zwitterion precursor. There is one study
highlighting mixed-mode SPE to evaluate the cationic-, zwitterionic-,
and anionic-precursor fractions in AFFF impacted sites. This study evaluated groundwater, untreated
influent, and treated effluent from wastewater plants, signifying
potential value to the semiconductor industry in utilizing the methods
outlined elsewhere.

The TOP assay
has low detection limits compared to other indirect methods for PFAS
(Table S14) and is attributed to the low
instrumental LC–MS/MS detection limits as well as the preconcentration
steps.

Originally, the TOP assay measured PFCAs ≥C4
(e.g., PFBA)
due to the availability of analytical standards. Most sample preparation
and chromatographic separation methods (e.g., LC–MS/MS) are
therefore optimized for PFBA and PFCAs of longer chain lengths. Recently,
ultrashort-chain PFCAs including TFA,and PFPrA
were included. Thus, omitting ultrashort-chain
PFCAs from the TOP assay is recognized as a potential source of low
bias in estimated precursor concentrations since ultrashort chains
are common products of oxidation. Patch
et al. determined that maintaining the postoxidation sample above
a pH of 7 resulted in limited conversion of PFCAs to shorter chain
products; such that with thermal activation alone, it is possible
to limit conversion of precursors into ultrashort-chain analytes. Patch et al. also determined that UV radiation
at 254 nm activated the oxidant more rapidly than solely thermal activation,
resulting in 93% activation within the first hour, resulting in partial
conversion of PFOA into PFHpA and PFHxA, while 6:2 FTS underwent rapid
transformations both in thermal and UV-activated experiments. Further, Patch et al. determined that, in their
UV experiments, the least loss of PFOS resulted from quenching the
oxidation reaction immediately with methanolic acetic acid and then
diluting to subsample and run the extracts on the instrument. Tsou et al. recommend monitoring the oxidation
of a stable isotope precursor (e.g.,13C8FOSA)
compared to the labeled product (13C8PFOA) or monitoring for oxidizable precursors as
target PFAS alongside PFCAs.

Recent
investigations have characterized the reactivity of a more
diverse array of PFAS under TOP assay conditions. Structures that
are resistant to oxidation include perfluorinated ethers,,,unsaturated PFSAs, and bistriflimide (Table S6). In contrast, polyfluoroalkyl
ether acids with an –O–CFH– moiety were readily
oxidized into ultrashort-chain PFAS. The perfluorinated alcohol, hexafluoropropanol, gave 17% molar conversion
to TFA. In studies looking at environmental
water impacted by AFFF, cationic precursor PFAS yielded 74–103%
recovery, while zwitterions and neutral recovery were as low as 28%
recovery. This signifies that more PFAS
can be selectively quantified using mixed mode SPE, which could be
of potential value to the semiconductor industry.

Further investigations to improve the TOP assay include
removal
of dissolved organic matter, which is shown to interfere with the
TOP assay. Patch et al. determined that
an application of 500 mM hydrogen peroxide for 22 h gave the highest
yield of PFCA in the presence of up to 1000 mg/L total organic carbon. However, relevance to the semiconductor industry
may be limited, as the effluent is typically not considered high in
organic matter.

The TOP assay preserves some information about
the nature of the
fluorinated chain of precursors, including both chain length and branching.
The fluorinated chain length of ECF-based precursors is preserved
in the PFCAs that result from oxidation.,,For example, many C8 ECF-based precursors
yielded primarily PFOA as a product. However,
chain length information is not conserved for fluorotelomer-based
PFAS, since oxidation of these PFAS generates an array of shorter-chain
PFCAs.,For fluorotelomer precursors, the longest
chain length PFCA generated carries the same number of fluorinated
carbons as the precursor as well as an additional carbon in the carboxylic
acid functional group. For example, 4:2 FTS yields the C5 PFCA (PFPeA)
as the highest chain length PFCA after oxidation. While such interpretation is possible with individual precursor
standards, interpreting the PFCA distribution from environmental samples
is more challenging. However, Antell et al. reported that incorporating
the TOP assay PFCA distributions gave improved separation of PFAS
source waters (e.g., wastewater effluent and landfill leachate) by
principal component analysis.

At the time of this review, several comprehensive
reviews exist that provide the history and detailed discussions on
extractable organic fluorine (EOF) and adsorbable organic fluorine
(AOF). Both
reviews document several alternatives for sample preparation and fluorine
detection.,There are numerous reports that
compare the performance of EOF and AOF for individual target PFAS
as well as for environmental samples.−Given the extensive
literature on this topic, only the most common are discussed in this
review with a focus on those most potentially applicable to semiconductor
wastewater.

Given
the premise of the EOF, selection of the SPE sorbent is critical.
The original as well as more recent EOF methods utilize WAX SPE, thus
focused on the concentration of anionic PFAS.,,,Alternative SPE sorbents used for EOF include combinations of WAX
and graphitized carbon black (GCB) and
HLB. The LOD of EOF methods depends
on a number of sample preparation factors but ranges from 0.05 to
11 μg/L fluoride.

The effect
of chain length and EOF recovery was documented with recoveries ≥70%
for ≥C3 PFCAs and ≥C4
PFSAs.,However, ultrashort-chain PFAS, e.g., TFA
and TFMS, gave recoveries of 21% and 52%, respectively. The low observed
recovery was attributed to incomplete elution, loss during the SPE
drying step, and loss from the washing step to remove fluoride. A number of per- and polyfluoroether-based
carboxylates and sulfonates gave good recoveries by EOF on a WAX/GCB
sorbent. Neutral PFAS (FTOHs) gave lower
recoveries (44–55%) while zwitterionic PFAS gave comparable
but lower recoveries than equivalent chain-length PFCAs or PFSAs. The recovery of weak acids, such as the FASAs
and their Me- and Et-substituted forms, from water at pH less than
five by WAX SPE has not been investigated. While weak acids may sorb
more onto a mix of WAX/GCB sorbent, loss of volatile PFAS may occur
during the SPE drying step and reduce the final calculated concentrations
of PFAS.

After evaluating the roles that the pH of water sample,
sample
volume, SPE wash step, SPE drying time, and elution strategies have
on PFAS recovery, Forster et al. recommend adjusting the pH to less
than five with nitric acid and washing with 0.1% NH4OH. The performance of a WAX-based EOF method was
sensitive to other parameters, including initial PFAS concentrations,
WAX drying times, and CIC parameters. The use of 0.1% NH4OH is a compromise between fluoride
removal and retention of short-chain PFAS. Because of the significant inorganic fluoride present in semiconductor
effluent, EOF methods may need further optimization to exclude fluoride
while retaining short-chain PFAS. Dixit et al. state that background
measurements of materials should be included, as well as potentially
utilizing larger sample volumes or different carbon felt sorbents
for lower detection limits. The limits
of detection for EOF vary greatly depending on the extraction steps
as well as the analytes (Table S14). Typically,
ultrashort chain PFAS perform poorly compared to longer-chain PFAS,
and the performance of polyfluoroethers has not been evaluated in
EOF methods.

Recoveries of ≥C4 PFCAs and PFSAs by AOF methods are
most commonly reported and are typically >80%.,,,,However, recoveries of PFBA
vary from ∼80% to 70% but are reported as low as 50% and 40%. For
the short-chain C3 PFCA (PFPrA), recovery from river water samples
at pH <1 was 80%, but <30% for
samples at pH 5 that was attributed to the wash step and losses during
the evaporation, while no recovery was
reported from samples at pH <2. The
lack of recovery of C3 PFCA and TFA from pH <2 sample may be due
to the activated carbon pretreatment with 0.2 M NaNO3or
the washing step with 0.01 M NaNO3since sorption from water samples pH <2 is demonstrated
by Forster et al. Recovery of PFPrS
at pH 7 was >80%, whereas the recoveries for TFMS and TFA were
<20%
and attributed to loss during the wash step. Short-chain ethers (and PFBA) also gave low recovery from AOF when
water samples were amended with 0.01 M KNO3(potassium
nitrate) and carbon pretreatment and rinses with 0.05 M KNO3.

Forster et al. attributed higher
recovery of the C3 PFCA to the
low sample pH <1, which also minimizes fluoride retention by activated
carbon and to the use of 0.01 M NH4OH (ammonium hydroxide)
instead of KNO3as a wash step. For example, at low pH, granular activated carbon becomes cationic,
potentially sorbing anionic PFAS to a greater degree. However, acidification
leads to retention of HF (pKa= 3.1) and may protonate weak-acid PFAS (e.g., FASAs
and fluorotelomer carboxylates). For
example, von Abercron reported <30% recovery of the C4 and C6 FASAs
when water samples were pH <2. Recovery
of neutral PFAS (FTOHs) were 40–55%, while zwitterionic PFAS
were similar to that of PFCAs and PFSAs of similar carbon-chain length.,Forster et al. also reported a reduction in PFAS recovery with higher
dissolved organic carbon (DOC) levels; therefore, recommending dilution
of samples >5 mg/L DOC.

The
major factors that influence the performance of AOF methods,
especially for short-chain PFAS, include the type of carbon sorbent
used and the wash step to remove fluoride.,Potential loss of long-chain PFAS during filtration or upon transferring
a subsample from original sample bottles for AOF analyses is also
described as an area of potential concern. Incomplete combustion efficiency of PFSAs was indicated as an area
that merits optimization by Pan and Helbling. Limits of detection for AOF, when used in conjunction with
CIC, are typically higher than those of other techniques (Table S14). However, when particle induced gamma
ray emission (PIGE) spectroscopy is used as the detector, the detection
limit is comparable to those of the TOP and EOF (Table S14). However, PIGE cannot distinguish between fluoride
and organic fluorine.

Alternatives
to CIC include graphite furnace molecular adsorption spectrometry
(GF-MAS), which is based on the formation and detection of GaF (gadolinium
fluoride). Despite its better sensitivity,
the behavior of PFAS using this approach is not as thoroughly investigated
as for CIC. Gehrenkemper et al. note
that GF-MAS was a more sensitive detector but gave comparable concentrations
of total fluorine to CIC.

Particle-induced
gamma emission (PIGE), another alternative for quantifying total fluorine,
is a nondestructive, high throughput, surface technique (maximum depth
of proton penetration is 220 μm) that involves the excitation
of atomic nuclei via proton bombardment.,Concentrations of total fluorine are determined by comparing counts
for the sorbent surface to that of calibration standards, either PFAS
standards or sodium fluoride.,,Because PIGE detects both organic fluorine and inorganic fluoride,
sample preparation and removal of inorganic fluoride is required.,There is one report of PIGE as an alternative detector for AOF where
Tighe et al. passed a 2 L water sample through an activated carbon
felt sorbent (Figure). The sorbent was removed, dried,
and subjected to PIGE analysis. They report fluoride removal for water
samples pH ≤2, with a detection limit of 50 ng/L fluoride. In the study by Dixit et al., AOF quantified
by PIGE gave lower detection limits than with CIC analysis, such that
PIGE was determined to be a more sensitive detector.

Instrumental neutron activation analysis (INAA) is
another alternative
for total fluorine analysis. To utilize INAA for water samples, sample
preconcentration onto a solid sorbent is required. Total fluorine
by INAA is accomplished by bombardment of the solid with neutrons,
producing radioactive isotopes, which are then measured.,,Quantification is performed
by external calibration. The advantage
of INAA over PIGE is that INAA interrogates the entire solid sample,
not just the surface. To the best of
our knowledge, INAA has not been utilized as a detector as part of
the AOF methods. However, aluminum can interfere with the detection
of fluoride, such that samples with high aluminum content are not
suitable for this technique. Historically,
aluminum has been used to remove excess fluoride from effluent in
the semiconductor industry. As a result,
there is a potential to have high aluminum levels, thus making INAA
unsuitable for semiconductor samples.

Total fluorine (TF)
is a measure of all fluorine (inorganic and organic) concentrations
in a sample. While simple, the method has higher detection limits
and captures any inorganic fluoride since there is no sample preparation. For this reason, TF limits of detection are
significantly higher compared with any other indirect methods (Table S14). TF is used to estimate total organic
fluorine by subtracting fluoride ion concentrations.,If present but not accounted for, any other anionic fluoride forms
would contribute to the organic fluorine fraction.,,Shelor et al. note that if background
fluoride ion concentrations are high relative to organic fluorine
concentrations and comprise nearly 100% of TF, the attempt to quantify
total organic fluorine may not be applicable. TF measurements were performed on semiconductor materials (photoresists
and top antireflective coatings ) by placing the materials in boats
and combusting the material in an oxygen/argon atmosphere. The HF produced was trapped in water, and the
fluoride was quantified by ion chromatography. Semiconductor wastewater
was also directly combusted (no sample preparation) for TF. TF measurements are then compared against separate
fluoride ion concentrations, measures of target and suspect PFAS,
and other measures of organic fluorine (see below) to compute and
understand mass balances. For example, the inability to close the
mass balance on TF was attributed to the presence of nonextractable
or adsorbable fluoropolymers.

The shift to short-chain PFAS by the semiconductor industry indicates
that monitoring only for the ≥C4 PFCAs or greater may miss
many C1–C3 short-chain precursors, unless methods for ultrashort-chain
PFCAs are utilized. To better characterize the PFAS composition of
semiconductor materials and wastewater, there may be PFAS that do
not oxidize during the TOP assay. For example, the TOP assay did not
account for a significant fraction of TF by AOF, which indicates that
PFAS in semiconductor wastewater are not oxidizable. The perfluoro mono- and polyfluoroether acids reported
in semiconductor wastewater (Table S3) are among the classes that do not oxidize in
the TOP assay. Zhang et al. report that
resistance to oxidation in the TOP assay corresponds with stability
during oxidation-based wastewater treatment. Given that PFAS are selected for use by the semiconductor industry
due to their chemical stability under a range of conditions, it is
not surprising that PFAS in semiconductor wastewater may go unobserved
by the TOP assay. Thus, caution is urged when using the TOP assay
for semiconductor wastewater characterization since it may yield a
significant underestimation of precursor concentrations.

In the case of nonspecific methods for
organic fluorine, most rely on the quantification of fluoride as a
measure of organic fluorine. However, extensive use of hydrofluoric
acid creates significant levels of background
in organic fluoride in semiconductor wastewater. Reported fluoride
concentrations in semiconductor wastewater range from 500 to 2000
mg/L.,The removal of 99% of fluoride could result
in concentrations several orders of magnitude greater than measured
PFAS concentrations in semiconductor wastewater (10–10,000
ng/L).,Therefore, the suitability of nonspecific
methods that rely on fluoride detection will depend on extremely efficient
fluoride removal steps to ensure that organic fluorine concentrations
are not overestimated.

Advantages of19F NMR over other commonly used PFAS
characterization techniques include minimal sample preparation, ability
to identify and discriminate non-PFAS fluorine (such as inorganic
fluoride ion) from organic forms of fluorine, minimal matrix interferences,
and its nondestructive nature. NMR tolerates a wide range of sample
conditions, being amenable to both organic and aqueous solvents and
a relatively broad range of pH values. Like all techniques, NMR has
disadvantages, including relatively low sensitivity, susceptibility
to interference from paramagnetic ions, and sensitivity to high salt
concentrations (>150 mM sodium chloride (NaCl)). While NMR can
detect
fluorinated compounds, there is no standardized U.S. EPA or ASTM NMR
method that has currently accepted NMR-based methods for wastewater
analysis.

The basic NMR experiment is relatively straightforward.
A lock
solvent, such as deuterated water (D2O) or methanol (CD3OD), and an internal reference standard with a known chemical
shift and concentration are added to a sample or extract, transferred
to an NMR tube, and loaded into the NMR spectrometer. The sample is
then subjected to one or more radiofrequency pulses, and the resulting
signal is recorded. The sample remains in the NMR tube for the entire
analysis, so there is minimal chance of carryover between samples
or contamination during analysis, unless NMR tubes are reused. The
sample is not consumed during the analysis, so subsequent analysis
using a different NMR experiment or an orthogonal analytical technique
(such as LC–MS) is possible. A single internal reference standard,
such as hexafluorobenzene or trifluoroethanol,
is usually sufficient for chemical shift referencing and quantification. In cases where the reference standard cannot
be added to the sample, a coaxial tube (a thinner tube that is placed
inside the regular NMR tube) is used to keep the sample isolated from
the internal reference standard. Chemical shift, δ, is defined
asδ=ν−νrefνref×106ppm, where ν is frequency, and νrefis the frequency of the internal reference standard. Thus,
the chemical shift is normalized by νref, which makes
chemical shifts comparable across magnetic field strengths. It is
important to note that chromatographic separation is not required
for NMR analysis, which simplifies the analysis workflow while retaining
the ability to identify individual compounds in complex mixtures. In cases where resonance overlap is too severe,
a chromatographic step could be incorporated to separate the components
of the mixture, or multidimensional (2D or higher) NMR experiments
are employed. NMR is also an invaluable
tool for structure characterization and determination. Numerous 1D
and 2D NMR experiments exist and are commonly used to determine the
structures of organic compounds.,While it
is beyond the scope of this review to explore these methods in detail,
many of these methods are applicable and/or adaptable to fluorine-containing
molecules.

Data from NMR contain a wealth of information about
the structures
of the detected molecules. Moreover, the chemical shift range of19F is large, resulting in good separation of resonances associated
with various structural moieties (e.g., CF3typically appears
from ∼−60 to −90 ppm, while CF2appears
from −120 to −150 ppm). This good separation is expected
to further improve at higher magnetic field strengths, at least for
PFAS with molecular weights less than ∼1000 Da, such as PFOS
(molecular weight of 500 Da).,The high resolution
obtained in a high magnetic field strength19F NMR spectrum
often enables the differentiation of PFAS from other forms of organic
fluorine that do not meet the PFAS definitions, such as molecules
with only one fluorine on a carbon, and inorganic fluorine, such as
a fluoride ion, based on the chemical shifts of the resonances and
the multiplet patterns. For example, fluoride ion appears as a sharp
singlet at ∼−121 ppm in aqueous solution, making it
relatively easy to identify, even in complex mixtures. Larger molecules,
such as fluorinated proteins or fluoropolymers, result in increased
line widths (e.g., peak broadening) due to enhanced relaxation associated
with chemical shift anisotropy, making higher magnetic fields less
beneficial because this relaxation increases as magnetic field strength
increases. However, such peak broadening
provides an important piece of evidence that either polymers are present
in the sample or the compounds form larger complexes. Increasing the
analysis temperature can increase molecular motion and offset these
losses for larger molecules. Thus,19F NMR may be a viable
approach for the detection and quantification of water-soluble fluoropolymers
that may make up a significant fraction of the organic fluorine in
semiconductor wastewater and that cannot
be easily determined by LC-HRMS approaches.

Simple total fluorine
analysis is performed by integrating the
fluorine spectrum and comparing the integrated area with that of the
internal reference standard. Signals for the fluoride ion are separately
integrated and subtracted from the total integral, resulting in total
organic fluorine. It is also possible to identify specific PFAS in
a mixture using libraries of chemical shifts to identify those that
belong to the particular compound of interest. Similar techniques are used extensively in the metabolomics
field with 1D1H NMR, which has a much narrower chemical
shift range (10 ppm) and consequentially increased resonance overlap
compared to19F NMR (150 ppm for most PFAS). Chemical shifts are a measure of the chemical
environment of a nucleus, which is often impacted by the solvent,
so libraries of chemical shifts should be obtained in the same solvent
as the sample analysis to minimize the differences between the library
and sample chemical shifts. At least one large NMR spectral library
of PFAS is reported; however, care must
be taken when using this library because the NMR spectra were collected
in one of three solvents, chloroform, dimethyl sulfoxide, or methanol.
Nevertheless, analysis of a firefighting aqueous film-forming foam
sample using this library yielded the identities of several individual
PFAS compounds. To the best of our knowledge,
there is no comprehensive library of19F NMR PFAS spectra
collected entirely in water or methanol, which would be most relevant
to the direct analysis of wastewater samples or to organic solvent
extracts (e.g., SPE extracts) of wastewater, respectively. Also,J-coupling constants (spin–spin interactions that
lead to peak multiplets) do not change with field strength; therefore,
they will change when displayed on the chemical shift scale, which
should be considered when comparing spectra collected at field strengths
different from those in the library. Compounds previously identified
by matching chemical shifts for the associated resonances against
a chemical shift library are quantified using all of the matched resonances
or using only a single resonance.,If using
only a single resonance for quantification, care must be taken that
the resonance is correctly identified and that it does not overlap
with resonances from other compounds. Using a single resonance alone
for quantification may be desirable if the resonance is well resolved
and unambiguously identified, and other resonances for the compound
of interest are overlapped.

The primary disadvantage of19F NMR for PFAS analysis,
especially for environmental matrices such as wastewater, is its low
sensitivity. NMR is considered a low-sensitivity technique because
the population differences between the ground and excited spin states
that give rise to the NMR signal are small. The advent of high-field
superconducting magnets and pulsed Fourier Transform NMR techniques
provides substantial sensitivity boosts through increases in the ground/excited
state population differences and signal averaging, respectively. The
signal-to-noise achieved from a pulsed Fourier transform 1D NMR experiment
depends on the number of scans performed, with the signal-to-noise
ratio increasing with the square root of the number of scans. Thus, by increasing the number of scans and
associated experimental time, the signal-to-noise ratio is increased;
however, practical limits on available instrument time limit the gains
possible from collecting more scans. The pulsed nature of NMR also
makes stating explicit LOD dependent on the number of scans performed,
which varies between studies. It is important to note that the LOD
is expressed in the literature using various concentration units such
as molar (M) or mass per unit volume (g/L). For NMR, the integrated
area of a resonance is proportional to the number of nuclei contributing
to the resonance, which is related to the molar concentration based
on the molecular structure of the molecule. Therefore, in NMR, it
is common for the LOD to be expressed in molar concentration units.
Moreover, if the exact identity of a single compound is unknown, but
a moiety of the compound (such as a CF3) is identified,
then a molar concentration can still be determined, whereas a mass
per volume (e.g., ng/L or μg/L) concentration cannot be unambiguously
reported. The advent of cryogenic probes has further enhanced the
signal-to-noise ratio by a factor of 2 to 4. Early cryoprobes were typically limited to1H detection
with the highest signal-to-noise, but more recent probes are able
to tune to19F, enabling large sensitivity gains for19F NMR. Using an 800 MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with a19F capable cryoprobe, a limit of quantification of 19 μM
total fluorine (e.g., 520 μg/L PFOA) was achieved with approximately
30 min of acquisition, without additional steps to improve the signal-to-noise.
While cryoprobes are considerably more sensitive than room temperature
probes, they are also more sensitive to salt concentrations in the
sample. High inorganic salt concentrations (e.g., >150 mM NaCl)
can
adversely impact the sensitivity of a cryoprobe and should be avoided
when possible. In general, high salt
concentrations, such as NaCl, that increase the sample conductivity
will increase sample resistance, which results in a loss of signal-to-noise.
The loss of signal-to-noise ratio is proportional to the conductivity
of the sample. Different solutes, such as Cl–vs
PO42–, also have different effects on
conductivity, so different salt concentrations can result in different
impacts on signal-to-noise. The effects
of high salt are mitigated by changing the NMR tube diameter and geometry
if removing the salt is not possible. Changes in the tube diameter and geometry reduce the total sample
volume in the detection coil, which reduces the signal-to-noise ratio;
therefore, these remedies should only be used when salt concentrations
are high enough that the improvement gained from the change in geometry
is larger than the loss from the smaller sample volume.

Additional
optimizations of experimental parameters can further improve the signal-to-noise.
For19F detection, the relaxation delay between scans often
needs to be long so that the nuclear spins return to equilibrium prior
to the next radio frequency pulse, ensuring quantitative analysis.
If the relaxation delay is too short and the nuclear spins do not
return to equilibrium, the NMR signal will be saturated, and the resulting
spectrum will no longer be quantitative. A recycle delay of 15 s is
required for some quantitative19F experiments at 800 MHz.,A recent study showed that using a steady state pulse sequence combined
with Complete Reduction to Amplitude Frequency Table (CRAFT) processing could significantly increase sensitivity;
however, this approach was not quantitative. Previous studies show that including a paramagnetic relaxation agent,
such as chromium­(III) acetylacetonate (Cr­(AcAc)3), enables
much shorter relaxation delays (≤1 s), resulting in more scans
per unit time and subsequently higher signal-to-noise.,The concentration of a paramagnetic relaxation agent must be optimized
to avoid resonances becoming overly broad. A concentration of Cr­(AcAc)3of 4 mg/mL allowed a relaxation delay of less than 1s while
still retaining good spectral resolution.

Further improvements in the signal-to-noise ratio are achieved
by concentrating the PFAS in the sample. A method based on SPE with
an anion exchange sorbent was used to prepare PFAS-containing samples
for NMR.,,Using a combination of relaxation agents and sample preconcentration,
a LOD of 0.14 nM (16 ng/L) for TFA was obtained with approximately
2 h of acquisition on a typical room temperature-probe equipped 500
MHz spectrometer. Further enhancements
to signal-to-noise ratios were proposed using additional statistical
analysis of an array of NMR experiments collected on the same sample.
Using this method with an approximately 6 h data acquisition, a relaxation
agent, and a room temperature probe resulted in an LOD of 7.8 nM of
an unknown PFAS, where quantification of the unknown compound was
based on integration of the alkyl CF3resonance alone. These enhancements to signal-to-noise have
enabled the use of NMR to directly quantify the leaching of PFAS from
several types of plastic tubing, some of which are commonly used in
semiconductor manufacturing.

Semiconductor manufacturing involves the use of inorganic (e.g.,
HF) and organic fluorine compounds, making the ability of NMR to differentiate
between classes (e.g., aromatic, aliphatic, polymeric) of PFAS potentially
invaluable. Inorganic fluorine may interfere with other analysis techniques
such as those that rely on CIC but is easily identified and distinguished
from organic forms of fluorine. Moreover, the ability of NMR to tolerate
a wide range of sample conditions and solvents enables it to be used
with both aqueous and organic solvents. NMR is also applicable to
water-soluble fluoropolymers (MW greater than 1200 Da), which are
found in antireflective coatings used in semiconductor manufacturing
processes and are challenging for current
MS-based methodologies. As noted above, increased sample temperatures
may be employed for fluoropolymer analysis to reduce relaxation and
improve signal quality. As noted previously,
high salt/solute concentrations may reduce the signal-to-noise ratio
due to increased sample resistance. For these samples, the experimental
design will require optimization for the application. While NMR is
often not severely impacted by the sample composition, the presence
of high concentrations of paramagnetic ions will significantly enhance
relaxation resulting in severe line broadening. Therefore, wastewaters with high (>1 mg/mL) concentrations
of paramagnetic ions, such as Cu­(II) or Cr­(III), may be difficult
or impossible to analyze with NMR if those ions are not first removed
from the sample.

Methods, as described earlier, for analyzing target PFAS generally
involve sample preparation, followed by LC–MS or GC–MS,
which requires time, money, and trained laboratory staff to prepare
and process samples. Alternatively, screening strategies using sensors
could be deployed to prioritize samples that might then be analyzed
for compliance purposes using conventional LC- or GC-based methods.
Sensors could be used for online target PFAS monitoring as an early
warning tool at wastewater treatment plants for rapid intervention.
Alternatively, sensors could help to track down sources of PFAS along
the unit of semiconductor manufacturing processes. Properties of PFAS,
including the fact that they are neither UV–vis- or fluorescence-spectroscopically
active nor electrochemically active, are problematic for direct measurement
using traditional sensors that rely on spectroscopic or electrochemical
detection. Therefore, indirect electrochemical methods have been developed
that give better sensitivity over UV–vis or fluorescence indirect
methods.,The most promising electrochemical
indirect method, in terms of sensitivity (<10 ppt) and selectivity,
is based on the use of an electrode coated with a molecular-imprinted
polymer (MIP). The MIP creates molecular-specific cavities that are
similar in size, shape, and functional group of one specific target
PFAS and consequently highly selective to this target PFAS. An other promising road is the development
of direct quantum cascade laser mid-infrared sensor, which is able
to measure target PFAS such as PFOA, but question remains in term
of sensitivity and selectivity. Despite
several submitted patents, the road to a commercial device remains
at an early stage.,The U.S. EPA’s PFAS action
plan (EPA’s Small Business Innovation
Research Program) is an assistance program for the development and
support of promising, commercially available prototypes; for example,
the technology 2Witech solution used
MIP-based technology. Other promising prototypes based on indirect
electrochemical methods involve electrically read lateral flow assay
(e-LFA), metal–organic frameworks, and bubble-nucleation-based methods that exploit the surfactant properties of PFAS
for measurement. In addition to sensitivity and selectivity, the stability
of the sensor over time and the reliability of the technology needs
to be improved before a commercial product is available on the market.

This review provides a
comprehensive guide for wastewater sampling,
nonvolatile and volatile PFAS analysis, total fluorine, and online
monitoring with an emphasis on semiconductor wastewater. Feasibility
to apply those methods to water exhaust of fabrication unit processes
is unknown due to extreme pH condition and very high ionic strength,
and this represents a research need. This review emphasizes the importance
of considering the PFAS structure and properties to aid in understanding
chemical behavior. Consequentially, knowing PFAS behavior aids in
determining the most suitable analytical approaches for detection
based on advantages and limitations of an instrument. This review
also stresses the need for advanced techniques, including high-resolution
mass spectrometry for suspect and nontarget analysis as well as nonspecific
methods for total organic and inorganic fluorine.

While literature
exists for nonvolatile PFAS occurrence in semiconductor
wastewater, no comprehensive studies have been done to identify volatile
PFAS, calculate total fluorine, or conduct mass balance. Additionally,
future work is needed on conducting storage-stability tests for PFAS
identified in semiconductor wastewater, expanding PFAS targets, Method
1633 (including ultrashort chain PFAS), and modifying total fluorine
methods to account for high fluoride backgrounds in semiconductor
wastewater. Furthermore, there is a need for exploration of alternative
ionization techniques for poorly ionized PFAS for better detection
and applying19F NMR for quantifying total fluorine in
semiconductor wastewater, including high molecular weight water-soluble
fluoropolymers. By highlighting these research needs alongside current
methods and workflows, this perspective aims to assist industry professionals
and researchers in overcoming existing challenges. Advancing detection
and environmental monitoring of PFAS emissions in semiconductor wastewater
aids in the development of proper separation, and abatement processes
can be developed to reduce PFAS concentrations and mitigate potential
release.

The authors gratefully acknowledge the Semiconductor
PFAS Consortium for financial support and feedback in the preparation
of this manuscript. We thank Carrie L. Marean-Reardon for feedback
and useful comments on an early draft of this manuscript. We acknowledge
that Oregon State University in Corvallis, Oregon, is located within
the traditional homelands of the Marys River or the Ampinefu Band
of Kalapuya. Following the Willamette Valley Treaty of 1855, Kalapuya
people were forcibly removed to reservations in Western Oregon. Today,
living descendants of these people are a part of the confederated
Tribes of Grand Ronde Community of Oregon (grandronde.org) and the confederated
tribes of the Siletz Indians (ctsi.nsn.us).

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsmeasuresciau.5c00021.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.