Exercise is increasingly recognized by patients, clinicians, and allied health professionals globally as an important component of cancer care. In this paper, we provide a viewpoint on developments in exercise oncology over the past 4 decades leading up to the creation of the International Society of Exercise Oncology (ISEO). We briefly review research in adult and pediatric cancers from early foundation studies to larger randomized controlled trials published in mainstream oncology journals alongside critical work undertaken in exercise and cancer biological mechanisms. We also discuss potential strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats facing ISEO in becoming a global forum for exercise oncology. Building on the foundational work undertaken over the past 4 decades by researchers, clinicians, and practitioners, ISEO provides an opportunity to support research, leverage collaborations and partnerships, facilitate education and training, increase awareness of exercise oncology, and support translation of research to clinical practice, ultimately improving the quality and quantity of life for people with cancer.

It is important to retrospectively examine past milestones in exercise and cancer to inform future directions and continuing progress in a field that is increasingly recognized by patients, clinicians, and allied health professionals globally as a critical component of cancer care. Here we provide a viewpoint on developments in this exciting field of exercise medicine for cancer, termedexercise oncology, which continues to mature and gain recognition with strong evidence of improved patient outcomes, and endorsement by oncology and exercise science organizations internationally. In undertaking this endeavor, we selected a few key seminal events acknowledging that there are many contributions to the field that will have been missed as this was not a systematic attempt to highlight all events.

To facilitate the progression of the field of exercise oncology, the International Society of Exercise Oncology (ISEO) was proposed in 2024. The ISEO mission statement is provided inBox 1.

We also discuss potential strengths and opportunities for ISEO to become a global forum for exercise oncology to support research, leverage international collaborations and partnerships, mentor students and early midcareer researchers, provide training and translation of research outcomes to practice, promote exercise oncology to other health and medical organization, and governments, ultimately improving the quality and quantity of life for people with cancer. Much has been accomplished since the mid-1980s, and further critical work is underway for an increasing population of people with cancer who will receive earlier and longer oncological treatments. ISEO is well placed to make a difference in this rapidly advancing field.

The first report of an association between muscular activity and cancer incidence goes back more than a century. In 1921, Siversten and Dahlstrom1reported an observation that muscular work associated with occupation was inversely related to cancer mortality.

In 1944, one of the first preclinical experiments by Rusch and Kline2in mice undergoing forced exercise and inoculated with cancer resulted in lower tumor (fibrosarcoma) size (by approximately 25%-34%) compared with controls. This work was replicated in subsequent decades forming the genesis of preclinical research in exercise suppression of cancer.

In one of the earliest reports of exercise in cancer patients, Buettner and Gavron3in 1981 presented at the Third International Symposium of Adapted Physical Activity that objective and self-reported outcome measures from patients with cancer were improved after 8 weeks of aerobic exercise. In 1983, Schüle4evaluated group exercise for patients with breast cancer and reported that the intervention did not harm and provided benefits for the participants. Subsequently, Winningham et al.5published in 1986 in thePhysician and Sports Medicinean opinion review that exercise was initially proposed as a potential restorative technique for cancer patients but considered a novel concept. The basis of this work was a 10-week aerobic exercise intervention in women with breast cancer receiving chemotherapy where the exercise intervention group reported improved nausea compared with the usual care group6and the earlier study from Buettner and Gavron.3A timeline of key subsequent events is presented inFigure 1.

Exercise oncology: key timeline events from 1980s to the International Society of Exercise Oncology. Abbreviations: ACSM = American College of Sports Medicine; ASCO = American Society of Clinical Oncology;CEPB=Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and Prevention; ESSA = Exercise and Sports Science Australia; ISEO = International Society of Exercise Oncology;JCO=Journal of Clinical Oncology;JNCI=Journal of the National Cancer Institute; MSSE = Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise;NEJM=New England Journal of Medicine; RCT = randomized controlled trial.

In the mid-1990s, Friendenreich and Courneya7advocated the critical need for additional studies in exercise and cancer after reviewing 7 published studies specifically in breast cancer. Preliminary findings at the time were improvements in functional capacity and lean mass; reduction of fat mass, nausea, and fatigue, and enhancement in quality of life. Their recommendations for future research included (1) larger number of patients from a defined population (same cancer site and treatment period) and those with high survival and with comorbidities whereby exercise would have potential to improve outcomes; (2) improvements to study design and incorporation of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and considerations of a placebo exercise group; (3) longer length of exercise interventions (greater than 12 weeks), timing of exercise interventions in relation to cancer treatment, variation of key components of exercise prescription, individual vs group exercise, home vs clinic-based programs, cancer-specific barriers to exercise, and the addition of objective measures of exercise and physical activity; (4) attention to physiological and psychological measurements (correct tools and techniques and repeat assessments over time); and (5) attention to logistics of recruitment and exercise adherence for people with cancer to inform clinical recommendations. Many of these research questions and recommendations have been addressed throughout numerous clinical trials over the subsequent 3 decades of research and clinical practice with notable advancements achieved in several areas of exercise oncology.

Other advancements in the late 1990s comprised a series of studies from Dimeo and colleagues8-10investigating the effect of aerobic exercise during chemotherapy treatment and in patients followed by autologous stem cell transplantation. Overall findings were preservation of physical function during hospitalization, reduction in fatigue and improvements in physiological parameters such as duration of neutropenia, and reduced thrombocytopenia after exercise intervention.

Physical activity and cancer control framework. Reproduced with permission from Courneya et al.19This article was published inSeminars Oncology Nursingjournal, copyright Elsevier (2007).

Simultaneously, initial epidemiological studies showed an association between higher levels of exercise and increased survival in breast29and colon30,31cancer; a new narrative with increased clinical depth and relevance started to evolve and raised the question, does exercise have an impact on cancer progression and patient survival? An increasing number of epidemiological studies showed an association between higher levels of exercise in patients with cancer and increased survival.

In 2009, Exercise and Sports Science Australia (ESSA) produced the first national position statement on exercise and cancer: optimizing cancer outcomes through exercise.35In this publication, exercise prescription guidelines (aerobic and resistance exercise), considerations, and contraindications were presented with a summary of potential benefits from exercise. Conclusions were that exercise should be seen as “adjuvant therapy” with the aim to maintain and/or improve function, alleviate symptoms, and assist with recovery.

The effects of exercise on breast, prostate, colon, hematological, and gynecologic cancers were jointly presented for the first time with clinical evidence on safety and efficacy weighted and assessed from original data and expert opinion by a team of researchers and clinicians from the United States, Canada, Australia, and Spain.38The overall outcome was rated as level of evidence B (determined as “few RCTs exist, or they are small and results are inconsistent”), and general recommendations were to avoid rest and adhere to the physical activity guidelines for healthy adults, with specific exercise programming adaptations based on disease and treatment-related adverse effects—this was a considerable shift in clinical recommendation as clinicians at the time would advise patients with cancer to rest and avoid exercise. The global reach of this document was enormous with the work being cited in more than 70 countries (Web of Science).

Proposed biological mechanisms. Abbreviations: IL = interleukin; NK = natural killer cell.

In a follow-up from American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) 2010, 40 clinicians, researchers, and consumers from 20 national and international organizations participated in a second ACSM roundtable to advance and update exercise recommendations for patients with cancer. Three documents were produced from this roundtable: (1) physical activity, sedentary behavior, and cancer prevention and control discusses biological and epidemiologic evidence for the role of exercise in cancer prevention and survival;49(2) exercise guidelines for cancer survivors, consensus statement, discusses exercise recommendations extending beyond public health guidelines toward prescriptive programs based on cancer type, treatments, and/or outcomes;50and (3) exercise is medicine in oncology discusses engaging clinicians to help patients move through cancer focuses on exercise programming and opportunities for exercise referrals by oncology clinicians and provides summary and key points of the 2 previous papers.51This was a important effort, and as of December 2024, these 3 publications collectively attracted more than 2500 citations (Scopus) demonstrating a substantial interest, growth, and impact of exercise oncology globally.

Understanding the effects of exercise on cancer biology is a particularly exciting avenue of investigation as this will pave the way for more precision exercise oncology prescription and enhanced patient outcomes and potentially inform new drug development and treatments. If mechanistic proof of exercise increasing cancer-specific survival is realized, then strong clinical and government support will ensue. However, larger and more sophisticated trials are required to translate biological mechanisms into clinical trials and practice, and ISEO could be a platform to facilitate these activities.

A strategic tool Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats (SWOT) was used to guide discussions on potential merits for ISEO.

Overall strengths relate to the following 4 areas.

The creation of a global forum for exercise oncology: ISEO to become a unique ecosystem where researchers and clinicians globally could come together to advance education, research, and clinical practice of exercise oncology.

People and level of expertise: The exercise oncology community has people across multidisciplinary areas with high levels of expertise in clinical exercise science, oncology, behavioral science, cancer biology, clinical trials, epidemiology, and imaging. This existent capacity can be leveraged extensively.

Build on established international networks: There are numerous opportunities to increase collaborations and partnerships internationally to advance the field, and ISEO can facilitate this process.

Well established research foundation: As presented above, exercise oncology has a large body of research developed over the past 4 decades with multiple trials published in mainstream oncology journals and recommendations endorsed by professional national and international organizations.

Weaknesses identified in discussions relate to the following 3 areas.

Lack of processes and/or disparity of skill levels and/or experience in research and clinical practice: Translation from research to clinical practice has not been widely implemented. More work is required to translate new knowledge from research into practice, and ISEO can contribute to these efforts.

International clinical trials in exercise oncology have been challenging: A limited number of large-scale multinational clinical trials have been successfully completed in exercise oncology, and there is an opportunity for ISEO to support some of these efforts.

Lack of trained exercise professionals: Overall, there is a lack of trained exercise oncology professionals globally. Although initial efforts in addressing these gaps have been proposed, more work is required to address this shortfall in capacity. Differences exist across countries and continents with specific needs related to geographical areas.

Potential ISEO opportunities relate to the following 6 areas.

Recognition by oncology clinicians: Although gaining acceptance in medical oncology, exercise is not universally recognized by all clinicians, hospitals, and practices, and as such, continuing work is required to further improve collaborative clinical care, research, and access to this potentially beneficial therapy.

Global accreditation in exercise oncology: There is a need for training professionals in exercise oncology and ensuring quality control. ISEO could contribute to an accreditation or level of quality control with continuing education points such as undertaken by other professional organizations.

Further networks and collaborations: As a global forum for exercise oncology, ISEO would bring individuals and teams together (virtually and in person) creating an opportunity for collaborations and development of new partnerships nationally and internationally.

Mentoring of trainees, early and midcareer researchers: A structured plan for mentorship could be developed by ISEO to further support and develop the next generation of researchers and clinicians.

Consistent communication on exercise oncology: ISEO could develop and support a clear and concise channel for information on exercise oncology globally. This would require an online presence with a dedicated ISEO website and social media channels.

Research and multinational clinical trials: There could be opportunities in multinational clinical trials to further improve the logistics, promotion, and recruitment of large phase III trials via ISEO and avoid research duplication.

Integration of research findings into clinical care: RCTs and their lack of integration with clinical practice is recognized in all areas of medicine as clinical trials and care delivery can function as separate entities,71and this is no different in exercise oncology research—this is a considerable threat to ISEO.

Funding for exercise oncology clinical care: Lack of funding for implementation of exercise oncology into clinical practice is also a major risk.

Other established societies and meetings: How will ISEO fit in the presence of existing societies and meetings? There are opportunities for ISEO meetings to be conducted independently or jointly with other international societies (eg, ACSM and ESSA).

Long-term sustainability of ISEO: Long-term sustainability will require efforts from members and a sound governance structure to oversee activities and foster growth.

Building on the foundational work undertaken over the past 4 decades by researchers, clinicians, and practitioners, ISEO provides an opportunity for a global forum for exercise oncology to support research, leverage collaborations and partnerships, facilitate education and training, increase awareness of the field, and support translation of research to clinical practice. Europe 2026 is planned for the first ISEO meeting where researchers, exercise professionals, clinicians, and stakeholders can further enhance the field of exercise oncology.

Daniel A Galvão, 
Exercise Medicine Research Institute, Edith Cowan University, Joondalup, Western Australia, Australia; 
School of Medical and Health Sciences, Edith Cowan University, Joondalup, Western Australia, Australia.

Kerry S Courneya, 
Faculty of Kinesiology, Sport, and Recreation, College of Health Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

Alejandro Lucia, 
Research Institute of the Hospital 12 de Octubre (‘imas12’), Madrid, Spain; 
Faculty of Medicine, Department of Sports Sciences, Health and Sports Universidad Europea de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Anne M May, 
Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands; 
Department of Psychosocial Research and Epidemiology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Karen Mustian, 
Department of Surgery, Wilmot Cancer Institute, University of Rochester Medical Centre, Rochester, NY, United States.

Allison B Warner, 
Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Stanford Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States.

Wiskemann Joachim, 
Working Group Exercise Oncology, Division of Medical Oncology, National Centre for Tumour Diseases Heidelberg and Heidelberg University Clinic, Heidelberg, Germany.

Karen Wonders, 
Exercise Science Program, Wright State University, Dayton, OH, United States.

Kathryn H Schmitz, 
Division of Hematology and Oncology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States.

Robert U Newton, 
Exercise Medicine Research Institute, Edith Cowan University, Joondalup, Western Australia, Australia; 
School of Medical and Health Sciences, Edith Cowan University, Joondalup, Western Australia, Australia.