Artificial intelligence (AI) technologies are increasingly being developed and deployed to support clinical decision-making, care delivery and patient monitoring in healthcare. However, the adoption of AI-driven solutions by nurses, who comprise the largest segment of the healthcare workforce and are central to patient care, has been limited to date. Understanding nurses’ perceptions of barriers and facilitators to AI adoption is critical for successful integration of AI in nursing practice. This systematic review aims to identify, appraise and synthesise qualitative evidence on nurses’ perceived barriers and facilitators to adopting AI-driven solutions in their clinical practice.

We will conduct systematic searches across eight electronic databases (PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, CINAHL, MEDLINE, The Cochrane Library, PsycINFO and Scopus) from inception to January 2025, supplemented by hand-searching reference lists and grey literature. Primary qualitative studies and qualitative components of mixed-methods studies exploring licensed/registered nurses’ perceptions of AI adoption in clinical settings will be included. Two independent reviewers will screen studies, extract data using standardised forms and assess methodological quality using the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme checklist. We will employ meta-ethnography to synthesise the qualitative evidence, involving systematic comparison and translation of concepts across studies to develop overarching themes and a theoretical framework. The Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation Confidence in the Evidence from Reviews of Qualitative Research (GRADE-CERQual) approach will be used to assess confidence in review findings. The protocol follows the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P) guidelines and the Enhancing Transparency in Reporting the Synthesis of Qualitative Research (ENTREQ) statement.

No ethical approval is required as this systematic review will synthesise data from published studies only. The findings will provide valuable insights to inform the development, implementation and evaluation of nurse-oriented strategies for AI integration in healthcare delivery. Results will be disseminated through peer-reviewed publication, conference presentations and stakeholder engagement activities.

This systematic review employs rigorous meta-ethnography methodology with independent duplicate screening, data extraction and quality assessment using validated tools (Critical Appraisal Skills Programme checklist and Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation Confidence in the Evidence from Reviews of Qualitative Research (GRADE-CERQual)), ensuring high methodological quality and transparency in evidence synthesis.

The meta-ethnography approach will enable deep interpretative analysis to generate new theoretical insights beyond simple aggregation of findings.

The rigorous methodology includes independent duplicate screening, data extraction and quality assessment, with systematic use of GRADE-CERQual to assess confidence in findings.

The review is limited to English language publications, potentially missing relevant evidence from non-English speaking countries.

The synthesis will be dependent on the quality and quantity of available qualitative studies, which may be limited given the emerging nature of AI implementation in healthcare.

Nurses, as the largest group of healthcare professionals and the primary providers of direct patient care, play a critical role in the adoption and effective use of AI technologies at the point of care.20 21Nurses’ perceptions, attitudes, skills and behaviours related to AI can significantly influence the success of AI implementation efforts in healthcare organisations.22The successful integration of AI-driven solutions into nursing practice relies heavily on nurses’ adoption and acceptance of these technologies.23Nurses’ willingness to embrace AI-driven solutions is influenced by a complex interplay of individual, organisational and technological factors.24Understanding these factors is crucial for the effective implementation and utilisation of AI technologies in nursing care.

The Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) and its extension, the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT), provide established theoretical frameworks for understanding technology adoption in healthcare settings. TAM emphasises perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use as key determinants of technology acceptance, while UTAUT incorporates additional factors including social influence, facilitating conditions and effort expectancy. These theoretical models will guide our synthesis by providing a conceptual lens through which to interpret nurses’ perceptions and experiences with AI adoption. The multilevel factors identified in our secondary research questions (individual, professional, organisational and technological) align with the broader socio-technical systems approach to technology implementation, recognising that successful AI adoption depends on the complex interplay between human, organisational and technological elements.

Understanding the barriers and facilitators influencing nurses’ adoption of AI-driven solutions is crucial for the effective implementation and utilisation of these technologies in clinical practice.34Identifying the factors that hinder or facilitate nurses’ acceptance of AI can inform strategies to support the successful integration of these innovative tools into nursing care.28Qualitative research methods, such as interviews and focus groups, provide valuable insights into nurses’ perspectives, experiences and attitudes towards AI adoption.35Synthesising the qualitative evidence on this topic can provide a comprehensive understanding of the complex factors influencing nurses’ adoption of AI-driven solutions.

Previous reviews have not explored the unique perspectives of nurses.36 37A few recent studies have qualitatively investigated nurses’ experiences with and perceptions of AI in different practice settings,38,42but their findings have not been systematically synthesised. Therefore, this systematic review aims to address this gap by identifying, appraising and synthesising available qualitative evidence on nurses’ perceived barriers and facilitators to adopting AI-driven solutions in their clinical practice.

Individual-level factors: What demographic characteristics, technology attitudes and AI knowledge/skills do nurses perceive as barriers or facilitators to adopting AI solutions in practice? This level will examine personal attributes, self-efficacy and individual readiness for change.

Professional-level factors: What education/training needs, scope of practice considerations, professional standards/ethics concerns and interprofessional collaboration issues do nurses perceive as barriers or facilitators to adopting AI solutions in practice? This level will focus on professional identity and role-related factors.

Organisational-level factors: What leadership support mechanisms, resource availability, policies/procedures and implementation processes do nurses perceive as barriers or facilitators to adopting AI solutions in practice? This level will examine institutional and systemic influences.

Technological factors: What design/usability features, interoperability requirements, workflow integration capabilities and technical support needs do nurses perceive as barriers or facilitators to adopting AI solutions in practice? This level will focus on the AI technology characteristics themselves.

The synthesis will explicitly examine how these levels interact and influence each other, avoiding conceptual overlap by clearly delineating the scope of each analytical category during data extraction and analysis.

This systematic review will follow best practice guidelines for the synthesis of qualitative research, including the Enhancing Transparency in Reporting the Synthesis of Qualitative Research (ENTREQ) statement43and the PRISMA 2020 statement.44The review protocol was developed using the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P) checklist45and the ENTREQ statement.43The protocol was registered in the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO) prior to commencing the review. This protocol was registered in PROSPERO in December 2024 (CRD42024602808). The systematic searches will commence in January 2025, with study selection and data extraction planned for completion by July 2025. Data synthesis and manuscript preparation are anticipated to be completed by September 2025.

This review will include primary qualitative studies that explore nurses’ perceptions of factors influencing their adoption of AI technologies in clinical practice. Qualitative studies of any design will be eligible, including, but not limited to phenomenology, grounded theory, ethnography, case study and qualitative description. Mixed-methods studies that report qualitative findings will also be included. For mixed-methods studies, we will extract only the qualitative components and ensure these can be clearly distinguished from quantitative findings. We will assess whether the qualitative data collection and analysis methods are adequately described and whether the qualitative findings are reported separately from quantitative results. Studies where qualitative and quantitative findings are inseparably integrated or where qualitative methods are inadequately described will be excluded. We anticipate challenges in isolating qualitative data from mixed-methods studies, particularly when findings are presented in integrated formats. To address this, we will contact study authors when necessary to obtain separate qualitative findings or additional methodological details. If qualitative components cannot be adequately isolated, these studies will be excluded from the synthesis. Studies must use qualitative methods for both data collection (eg, interviews, focus groups, observations and documents) and data analysis (eg, thematic analysis, grounded theory and framework analysis). Studies that collect qualitative data but do not analyse it using a qualitative approach will be excluded. Non-research publications such as editorials, commentaries and literature reviews will also be excluded.

Studies must include licensed/registered nurses of any level (eg, registered nurses, nurse practitioners and licensed practical/vocational nurses) who provide direct patient care in any healthcare setting (eg, hospitals, primary care practices, long-term care facilities, community health centres and schools). Studies may include nurses from a single setting or from multiple settings. Studies with mixed samples of healthcare professionals will be included if nurses’ perspectives are reported separately and can be clearly distinguished from those of other professionals.

The phenomenon of interest is nurses' perceptions of factors influencing their adoption of AI technologies in clinical practice. AI technologies refer to any applications or systems that use AI techniques (eg, machine learning, natural language processing, computer vision and robotics) to perform tasks that typically require human-like intelligence, with the goal of supporting or augmenting nurses’ clinical decision-making, care delivery and patient monitoring. Examples of AI technologies relevant to nursing practice include CDSS, predictive analytics tools, intelligent documentation assistants, care coordination platforms, patient risk stratification models, remote monitoring devices, among others. Studies may focus on a specific AI application or discuss AI technologies more broadly.

Studies must explore nurses’ perceptions related to the adoption or use of AI technologies in real-world clinical practice settings. Studies conducted in educational or simulation settings without a practice component will be excluded. Studies from any geographic location and healthcare system will be eligible.

The outcome of interest is nurses’ perceived barriers and facilitators to adopting AI technologies in their clinical practice. Barriers refer to any factors that nurses perceive as hindering or challenging their ability or willingness to adopt AI technologies. Facilitators refer to any factors that nurses perceive as enabling or motivating their adoption of AI technologies. Barriers and facilitators may be identified at multiple levels, including the individual nurse, the healthcare team/profession, the healthcare organisation and the technology itself. Perceived barriers and facilitators may be related to nurses’ knowledge, skills, attitudes/beliefs, role/scope of practice, workflow/workload, interprofessional collaboration, leadership/organisational support, education/training, resources/infrastructure, policies/protocols, technology design/performance, among other factors.Table 1outlines the inclusion and exclusion criteria for selecting studies included in this systematic review.

AI, Artificial Intelligence ; LPNs, Licensed Practical Nurses; LVNs, Licensed Vocational Nurses; NPs, Nurse Practitioners; RNs, Registered Nurses.

A comprehensive search strategy will be developed in consultation with a health sciences librarian to identify potentially eligible studies. The following electronic databases will be searched from inception to January 2025: PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, CINAHL, MEDLINE, The Cochrane Library, PsycINFO and Scopus.

((artificial intelligence(MeSH Terms) OR artificial intelligence[Title/Abstract] OR machine learning[Title/Abstract] OR deep learning[Title/Abstract] OR natural language processing[Title/Abstract] OR computer vision[Title/Abstract] OR automated reasoning[Title/Abstract] OR intelligent agent[Title/Abstract] OR intelligent system[Title/Abstract] OR smart technology[Title/Abstract] OR virtual reality[Title/Abstract] OR augmented reality[Title/Abstract] OR robotics[Title/Abstract] OR automated decision support[Title/Abstract]) AND (nurses(MeSH Terms) OR nursing(MeSH Terms) OR nurses[Title/Abstract] OR nursing[Title/Abstract] OR nurse practitioner[Title/Abstract] OR nurse specialist[Title/Abstract] OR nurse leader[Title/Abstract] OR nurse manager[Title/Abstract] OR nurse educator[Title/Abstract] OR nurse informaticist[Title/Abstract] OR registered nurse[Title/Abstract] OR advanced practice nurse[Title/Abstract] OR licensed practical nurse[Title/Abstract]) AND (barrier*[Title/Abstract] OR challenge*[Title/Abstract] OR obstacle*[Title/Abstract] OR impediment*[Title/Abstract] OR facilitator*[Title/Abstract] OR enabler*[Title/Abstract] OR driver*[Title/Abstract] OR acceptance[Title/Abstract] OR acceptability[Title/Abstract] OR adoption[Title/Abstract] OR attitude*[Title/Abstract] OR perception*[Title/Abstract] OR perspective*[Title/Abstract] OR belief*[Title/Abstract] OR knowledge[Title/Abstract] OR skill*[Title/Abstract] OR training[Title/Abstract] OR education[Title/Abstract] OR self-efficacy[Title/Abstract] OR motivation[Title/Abstract] OR intention*[Title/Abstract] OR readiness[Title/Abstract] OR willingness[Title/Abstract] OR ability[Title/Abstract] OR capacity[Title/Abstract] OR capability[Title/Abstract] OR workflow[Title/Abstract] OR workload[Title/Abstract] OR professional role[Title/Abstract] OR scope of practice[Title/Abstract] OR organizational culture[Title/Abstract] OR leadership[Title/Abstract] OR strategy[Title/Abstract] OR resources[Title/Abstract] OR infrastructure[Title/Abstract] OR policy[Title/Abstract] OR ethics[Title/Abstract])). The complete search strategies for all databases are provided inonline supplemental file 1. The search results will be limited to English language qualitative studies. We will also hand-search the reference lists of included studies and relevant reviews, as well as conduct targeted searches of key nursing informatics journals and conference proceedings, to identify additional eligible studies.

We acknowledge that limiting our search to English-language publications represents a significant methodological limitation that may introduce cultural and linguistic bias to our findings. This restriction potentially excludes valuable insights from AI implementation experiences in non-English speaking healthcare systems, which may differ substantially in their technological infrastructure, regulatory environments and cultural approaches to AI adoption. To partially mitigate this limitation, we will conduct targeted searches of key international nursing and health informatics journals that publish English-language abstracts of non-English articles, and we will identify and acknowledge in our discussion any major AI initiatives or research programmes in non-English speaking countries that our search strategy may have missed. Future research should prioritise multilingual systematic reviews to capture the full global landscape of nurses’ experiences with AI adoption.

Where study data are unclear or missing, we will contact the authors for clarification or additional information (detailed data extraction form is provided inonline supplemental Appendix 1).

The methodological quality of included studies will be critically appraised using the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP) Qualitative Studies Checklist.49The CASP checklist includes 10 questions that assess different domains of quality in qualitative research, including appropriateness of qualitative methodology, data collection and analysis methods, consideration of researcher reflexivity and clarity of reporting. Two reviewers will independently apply the CASP checklist to each study, with disagreements resolved through discussion. The appraisal results will be used to inform data synthesis and interpretation, but studies will not be excluded based on quality.

The appraisal results will be used to inform data synthesis and interpretation in several specific ways. Studies with significant methodological limitations will be clearly identified, and their contributions to the final synthesised themes will be explicitly noted and contextualised. While studies will not be excluded based on quality alone, we will employ a differential weighting approach where higher-quality studies with robust methodological rigour will be given greater emphasis in developing overarching themes and theoretical insights. Studies with moderate to high risk of bias will contribute to the synthesis but their limitations will be explicitly acknowledged, and we will examine whether patterns differ between higher and lower quality studies. This approach ensures transparency about how study quality influences our confidence in specific findings while maximising the use of available evidence.

Two reviewers will independently assess the risk of bias of each included study, with disagreements resolved through discussion. Studies will be categorised as ‘low risk’, ‘moderate risk’ or ‘high risk’ based on the CASP criteria. The risk of bias assessments will be presented in a table and narrative summary in the full review.

Read and re-read the included studies to become familiar with their content and contexts.

Determine how the studies are related by comparing their concepts, themes and interpretations.

Translate the studies into one another by identifying common and divergent concepts across studies and developing overarching concepts that encompass the meanings of individual studies.

Synthesise the translations by constructing a line-of-argument that integrates the concepts into a coherent theoretical framework that addresses the review questions.

Extract key concepts, themes and participant quotes from each study and enter them into NVivo qualitative data analysis software (QSR International, Melbourne, Australia).

Compare and contrast the concepts across studies and group them into descriptive categories based on their similarities and differences.

Translate the concepts in each category into each other, maintaining their original meaning and context while developing overarching concepts that encompass the individual studies.

Synthesise the translations within and across categories into a line-of-argument that addresses the review questions and provide a new interpretative understanding of the phenomenon of nurses' perceptions of barriers and facilitators to AI adoption.

The synthesis will result in a theoretical framework that describes the relationships between the key concepts and illuminates the multilevel factors that influence nurses’ adoption of AI technologies in different clinical contexts. The framework will be illustrated with a concept map and narrative description. The quality and quantity of available qualitative evidence may limit the depth and breadth of synthesis. Meta-ethnography can accommodate studies of varying quality through conceptual synthesis rather than aggregation; however, if included studies lack theoretical depth, the explanatory power may be limited.

Two reviewers will independently conduct the initial synthesis, and the entire team will collaborate to refine the overarching concepts and line-of-argument through discussion and consensus. We will maintain a reflexive stance throughout the synthesis process by considering how our backgrounds, perspectives and assumptions may influence our interpretations.

Managing divergent and contradictory findings across studies will require systematic attention to context and methodology. When conflicting findings emerge, we will first examine whether these differences can be explained by variations in study context (eg, practice setting, healthcare system and AI technology type), participant characteristics (eg, experience level and specialty) or methodological approaches. We will use the constant comparative method to identify patterns in these divergences and will explicitly report both convergent and divergent themes in our findings. Where contradictions cannot be resolved through contextual analysis, we will present these as areas of uncertainty or debate within the field, highlighting the need for additional research. To address potential publication bias, we will examine whether our included studies represent a diverse range of study contexts, methodologies and findings, and will discuss any apparent gaps in the literature that might indicate selective reporting of positive or negative experiences with AI adoption.

For each review finding, we will assess the four CERQual components and make an overall judgement about the level of confidence in the finding (high, moderate, low or very low). The CERQual assessments will be conducted by two reviewers independently and then discussed with the full team to reach consensus. The CERQual evidence profiles and summary of findings will be presented in tables and narratives in the full review.

No ethical approval is required as this systematic review will synthesise data from published studies only. The findings will provide valuable insights to inform the development, implementation and evaluation of nurse-oriented strategies for AI integration in healthcare delivery. Results will be disseminated through peer-reviewed publication in a high-impact nursing or health informatics journal, presentations at relevant international conferences including the International Medical Informatics Association (IMIA) and American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA) meetings and stakeholder engagement activities with nursing professional organisations. We will also develop practical implementation toolkits based on our theoretical framework for different stakeholder groups, including technology developers, healthcare administrators and nursing educators.

This systematic review will provide a comprehensive and rigorous synthesis of qualitative evidence on nurses’ perceived barriers and facilitators to adopting AI technologies in clinical practice. By consolidating evidence from multiple qualitative studies and interpreting their findings through a higher-level theoretical lens, this review can generate novel insights into the complex, context-dependent and multilevel factors that influence AI adoption in nursing.

This review will address this gap by foregrounding nurses’ firsthand experiences and perceptions related to AI technologies in real-world clinical settings. By synthesising evidence on both the barriers and facilitators to AI adoption, the review can inform strategies to mitigate challenges and leverage enablers at multiple levels—from the individual nurse to the wider healthcare system. The review findings can guide efforts to design AI technologies that fit with nurses’ workflows and decision-making processes, prepare nurses with the necessary knowledge and skills to effectively use AI, create organisational environments that support AI implementation and develop policies and standards that ensure the ethical and equitable use of AI in nursing practice.

The meta-ethnography approach used in this review is particularly suited for synthesising qualitative evidence on complex social phenomena like technology adoption.47By going beyond aggregation of findings to translation and interpretation of concepts across studies, meta-ethnography can yield new theoretical understandings that are greater than the sum of the individual studies. The line-of-argument synthesis can provide an explanatory framework that accounts for the variability and contextual nuances in nurses’ experiences with AI, while still identifying common themes and mechanisms that cut across different settings.

The review findings can also highlight areas where further research is needed to advance the knowledge on AI adoption in nursing. For example, the review may identify gaps in understanding the perspectives of certain subgroups of nurses (eg, by specialty, setting and demographics) or the influence of specific contextual factors (eg, organisational culture and implementation strategies). The review may also reveal methodological limitations or biases in the existing qualitative evidence that can inform future study designs and research questions.

Despite the limitations, this systematic review has significant implications for research, practice, education and policy related to AI in nursing and healthcare.

For researchers, the review can identify priorities and directions for future qualitative and quantitative studies on AI adoption in nursing. The review findings can inform the development of research questions and hypotheses, selection of theoretical frameworks and study designs, and identification of key variables and outcomes to measure. Researchers can also use the review findings to guide the development and testing of interventions to support AI adoption, such as educational programmes, organisational change strategies and user-centred design approaches.

For practitioners, the review can provide evidence-based insights into the factors that may hinder or enable their adoption of AI technologies in different clinical settings. The review can help nurses and other healthcare professionals to anticipate and address potential challenges, as well as to recognise and leverage facilitators to AI adoption. The review can also inform the selection, implementation and evaluation of AI technologies that are more likely to be accepted and effectively used by nurses in practice.

For educators, the review can guide the development of curricula and training programmes to prepare nurses for the use of AI in practice. The review can identify the knowledge, skills and attitudes that nurses need to effectively adopt and integrate AI into their clinical decision-making and care delivery. Educators can use the review findings to design educational interventions that target the individual and organisational barriers to AI adoption, as well as to foster the facilitators such as self-efficacy, motivation and readiness for change.

For policymakers, the review can inform the development of guidelines, standards and regulations related to the use of AI in nursing and healthcare. The review can highlight the ethical, legal and social implications of AI adoption that need to be addressed through policy and governance mechanisms. Policymakers can use the review findings to create policies and programmes that support the safe, effective and equitable use of AI in healthcare, while also protecting the rights and interests of patients, providers and communities.

Translation of findings into practice will be facilitated through the development of evidence-based implementation toolkits and educational resources. We will create practical guidance documents that translate our theoretical framework into actionable strategies for different stakeholder groups, such as (1) AI design recommendations for technology developers based on nurses’ usability and workflow integration needs; (2) organisational readiness assessment tools for healthcare institutions planning AI implementation; (3) competency-based training curricula for nursing education programmes and (4) policy briefs for healthcare administrators and policymakers. Each practical output will clearly link back to the evidence synthesis and specify the level of confidence in recommendations based on our GRADE-CERQual assessments. We will also establish partnerships with nursing professional organisations and healthcare technology companies to ensure our findings reach relevant implementation audiences.