Compliance with the WHO 24‐Hour Movement Guidelines (i.e., physical activity, screen time and sleep duration) has been reported in studies comprising children in the early years. Despite the importance of these behaviours for healthy development, there is limited data on the proportion of toddlers who meet these recommendations. This study reported the compliance with the 24‐h movement behaviours guidelines among low‐income Brazilian toddlers.

Physical activity (PA) was objectively measured using Actigraph wGT3X accelerometer in 144 toddlers (73 girls; 12–35 months of age). Sleep duration and screen time were parent‐reported. Descriptive analyses were performed, and toddlers were classified as compliant/noncompliant with the 24‐h movement guidelines, according to age and sex. The chi‐square test and the Mann–Whitney test were used to explore differences and association according to age and sex.

Only 21% of the assessed toddlers complied with the overall movement behaviours guidelines. The highest prevalence of compliance was observed for PA among both boys and girls (98.63% and 98.59%, respectively), and among 1‐ and 2‐year‐old toddlers (100% and 97.61%, respectively). In contrast, the lowest compliance rates were observed for screen time (23.94% for boys and 32.87% for girls; and 16.66% for 1‐year‐old and 36.90% for 2‐year‐old toddlers). More than 60% of the assessed toddlers complied with sleep duration recommendation (74.64% and 67.12% for boys and girls, respectively; 73.33% and 69.04%, for 1‐year‐old and 2‐year‐olds, respectively).

Implementing strategies to encourage toddlers’ compliance with the 24‐h movement guidelines in Brazilian low‐income families should focus on maintaining PA levels and reducing screen time.

The results of the present study revealed that only 21% of the assessed toddlers complied with the overall 24‐h movement behaviour guidelines, mainly due to low adherence to screen time recommendations. Compliance with screen time was higher among girls and 2‐year‐olds.

This study suggests that the promotion of healthy movement behaviours in early childhood should prioritize a balanced approach that supports physical activity, limits screen time, and ensures adequate sleep duration.

Toddlers' average screen time exceeded 1.5 h per day. Strategies should prioritize reducing screen time and increasing sleep duration, while maintaining physical activity levels.

Adequate levels of physical activity (PA) reduced sedentary time, particularly in recreational screen use, and adequate sleep duration is essential for healthy growth and development in the early years (Carson et al.2017; Chaput, Gray, et al.2017), with reported benefits on the emotional, motor and cognitive domains (Poitras et al.2017; Veldman et al.2023). The adequate combination of movement behaviours (i.e., PA, sedentary behaviour and sleep) throughout the day has been a focus of research across different age groups, particularly in early childhood. This is a crucial period for developing healthy behaviours that can track throughout life (Boyd and Bee2019), making it a key point of interest.

Scientific evidence suggests that movement behaviours may have significant implications for health over the years (Janssen et al.2020; Marques et al.2023; Rollo et al.2020). For instance, physical inactivity in children under 5 years old is associated with overweight and obesity, low skeletal health, risk factors for cardiometabolic diseases, low cognitive development and low proficiency in fundamental motor skills (Chaput, Colley, et al.2017; Feng et al.2021; Tapia‐Serrano et al.2022). Additionally, a significant portion of children accumulate excessive time on screen‐based technologies and spend few hours sleeping (Kariippanon et al.2022; Okely et al.2021; Tapia‐Serrano et al.2022), thereby increasing the chances of experiencing detrimental health effects due to the disruption of their daily routines (World Health Organization2019).

In 2019, the World Health Organization (WHO) published the Guidelines on PA, sedentary behaviour and sleep for children under 5 years of age. It is recommended that toddlers aged 1 and 2 years should accumulate 180 daily minutes in PA of varied intensities and between 11 and 14 h of good quality sleep regardless sex, cultural context and socioeconomic level. Moreover, at the age of 1 year, toddlers should not be exposed to any type of screen time, and at 2 years old, they should not accumulate more than 60 min of daily screen time (WHO2019). Over the past decade, important research has focused on compliance with these guidelines in the early years, with most of the evidence focusing on preschoolers aged 3–4 years. In general, the available evidence highlights that a significant proportion of young children do not comply with the guidelines (Rollo et al.2020). Moreover, existing studies have also suggested adverse effects on children's allocation of time to various movement behaviours, particularly impacting disproportionately those from lower socioeconomic backgrounds (Jáuregui et al.2022), who are more vulnerable and more prone to developmental delays and unhealthy behaviours later in life.

Five years after the publication of the guidelines, few studies have focused on describing compliance with 24‐h movement behaviours guidelines among toddlers. The existing evidence, limited to studies developed in high‐income countries such as Canada and Australia, showed that similarly to the preschool ages, toddlers face a low compliance with the guidelines, with rates of compliance between 8% and 12% (Lee et al.2017; Sousa‐Sá et al.2019). More recently, in a study conducted with a large sample of Australian toddlers, Rivera et al. (2024) reported a 20.1% compliance with the guidelines, mostly driven by low compliance with screen time recommendations. These findings are in line with a meta‐analytic study showing that toddlers tend to exceed the total PA recommendation of 180 min/day, but that limited time is spent at higher movement intensities, and a substantial time is sedentary (Bruijns et al.2020).

In fact, there is lack of data from low‐middle‐income countries. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, few available studies were conducted in the global south, particularly in South America, which comprises almost 6% of the world's population and experiences a high prevalence of physical inactivity among children and youth. For instance, the 2015 Pelotas birth cohort study, developed in the south of Brazil, provided data of 2974 1‐year‐old Brazilian toddlers and reported that children spend their daily time in low‐intensity PA, with minimal upper limb movements (Ricardo et al.2019). Nonetheless, Brazil has high inequalities between regions, and data on children who living in the most socially vulnerable regions of Brazil is still scarce. Therefore, this study is aimed at reporting the prevalence of compliance with the WHO 24‐h movement behaviours guidelines among Brazilian toddlers. This research may provide a useful contribution to policymakers to support public policies benefiting children most affected by precarious living conditions, which can restrict their opportunities for healthy movement behaviours.

This cross‐sectional study is part of the Movement's Cool project, conducted between April and December 2023, which aimed at reporting the prevalence of compliance with the WHO 24‐h movement behaviours guidelines among northeast Brazilian toddlers. The recommendations for reporting observational studies (STROBE) were followed (Von Elm et al.2007). Petrolina City has 49 Early Childhood Education Centers (ECECs), located in four geographical regions (East, West, North, and South‐Centre). A preliminary contact with the Municipality Department of Education was established to identify ECECs which accommodate children aged 12–35 months, and a total of 17 ECECs were previously identified in three of the regions. To ensure geographical representativeness, the study included seven ECECs that enrolled toddlers aged 12–35 months. Based on the number of ECECs in each region, the following distribution was considered for this study: 1 ECEC in the East, 3 in the West and 3 in the North. Meetings with the ECECs principals were scheduled to provide detailed information on the study's aims and procedures, and the administrative staff provided a list of eligible children, according to their date of birth. Then, parents’ meetings were scheduled (one in each ECEC). Participation in the meetings were mostly from children's mothers (> 80%). During these meetings, a face‐to‐face interview was conducted by the research team to collect sociodemographic and behavioural data. Finally, the data collection was scheduled, following the ECEC routines and priorities.

Data collection took approximately 1 week at each ECEC, during which children were assessed for anthropometric measures, and accelerometers were placed on participating children for a duration of seven consecutive days. During this period, the research team was present in the ECECs to register children's nap routines.

Petrolina is situated in the São Francisco Valley, in the Pernambuco state hinterland, approximately 712 km from the capital Recife, in the Northeast region of Brazil. In 2021, Petrolina had an estimated population of around 359 372 inhabitants, making it the fourth largest city in the northeastern hinterland. Agriculture is the primary economic activity, with formal workers earning approximately $260.00 per month, which corresponds to 35% of the Brazilian population living on up to one minimum salary per month. The city is segmented in four regions (east, west, north and central‐south), where 49 ECECs are located. These centres predominantly accommodate children aged 1 to 5 years, during a full‐day period. According to data from the Early Childhood Directorate, in March 2022, a total of 863 children aged 1 and 2 were enrolled in ECEC in Petrolina, who were distributed in 17 ECEC located in the east, west and north regions. For the purpose of this study, the seven largest ECECs (3 in the west, 3 in the north and 1 in the east region), according to the number of registered 1‐ to 2‐year‐old toddlers, were conveniently invited to be part of the study. This allowed a diverse sample of 318 toddlers, reflecting different geographical and sociodemographic characteristics of the city. To be eligible for participating, toddlers had to be typically developing, independently walking, and parents should provide signed consent. Thus, from the 318 toddlers registered in the seven invited ECEC, 178 eligible children aged 1–2 years (12–35 months of age) were invited to participate in the study, and a final sample of 144 (80.8% response rate) was included in this study, as detailed in Figures1and2.

Prevalence of compliance with 24‐h movement guidelines. PA: physical activity.

For children under 24 months of age, body mass was measured using the Balmak paediatric scale, while for those aged 24 months or above, a scale (Seca 708 portable digital beam scale) was used, with the participant lightly dressed and barefoot (Marfell‐Jones et al.2011).

For children under 24 months of age, body height was assessed with the using Taylor paediatric anthropometric ruler on a flat surface. The child lied on a mat, with their head touching the top of the ruler, while their shoulders and head rested on the flat surface, and their legs were stretched out. The child's head was positioned at the fixed end of the anthropometric ruler, and the movable parts were slid until it reached the child's heels, ensuring good extension of the knees at the same time (WHO1995).

For those children aged 24 months or above, height was obtained using a Seca 254 portable stadiometer, through the measure of the nearest 0.1 cm, with the participant standing barefoot, feet together and head positioned in the Frankfurt horizontal plane (WHO1995). BMIz‐scores were calculated according to the WHO growth standards (Onis2006).

PA was objectively measured using an accelerometer (Actigraph, Model WGT3‐X, Florida), a valid instrument for measuring PA among toddlers (Trost et al.2012). Teachers and parents received verbal and written instructions about the correct use of the accelerometer, including proper placement and positioning. The accelerometer was worn on the right hip for 24 h each day over a period of seven consecutive days, following the procedures adopted in previous studies with a similar age group (Santos et al.2017; Veldman et al.2018). Text messages or phone calls have been sent reminding parents and caregivers about the children's use of the device. Accelerometer data was collected using a sampling rate of 90 Hz, using 1‐s epochs and later being reintegrated into 15‐s epochs for analysis, using the Actlife software (Version 6.11.7). Periods of ≥ 20 min of consecutive zero‐count sessions were defined as nonuse time and removed from analysis (Esliger et al.2005). The nap time periods registered through direct observation were classified as nonwear time in accelerometer data analysis to avoid misinterpretation of movement signals during nap time. Valid data were considered for a minimum of 10 h of usage time, during at least 1 day (Veldman et al.2018), between 6 a.m. and 10 p.m., without requiring a valid weekend day. This criterion was based on Bingham et al. (2016), who have previously reported no difference between weekdays and weekend days (p≥ 0.05), nor between day‐to‐day variability (p≥ 0.05) when describing a sample‐specific wear‐time criterion for the early years.

According to Trost et al.'s (2012) cutoff points, sedentary time was defined by values 0–48 counts/15 s, light physical activity (LPA) by values between 49 and 418 counts/15 s, and moderate‐to‐vigorous physical activity (MVPA) by values > 418 counts/15 s.

Although toddlers have worn the accelerometer continuously for a 24‐h period, the data corresponding to sleep and naps were excluded from the analysis due to potential inaccuracies in sleep detection for this age group, which are associated with the absence of valid cutoff points when placing the device on the hip.

Thus, parents reported children's usual daily sleep hours. They were asked to recall the total average hours their child slept as follows: “On weekdays, how many hours of sleep does your child usually have during the night?” and “On weekend days, how many hours of sleep does your child usually have during the night?”. Separate questions were asked for weekdays and weekend days and were subsequently merged for analysis. Overall sleep hours were calculated using the following formula: ((Sleep on weekdays × 5) + (Sleep on weekend days × 2))/7. The results were then multiplied by 60 to represent minutes per day. This approach has been previously used in similar population (Vale and Mota2020) and validated against estimates from sleep logs and objective actigraphy in young children (Goodlin‐Jones et al.2008).

As part of the ECEC routine, the children nap after lunch. Nap time was directly observed and registered by the research team at the daycare centre during the period the accelerometers were being used. The researchers documented the beginning and the end times of each nap on a spreadsheet. For each registered nap, the duration was calculated by subtracting the start time from the end time. The durations of all recorded naps were then summed, and the total was divided by the number of naps recorded. For the weekend nap, information was reported by parents. Overall naps time was calculated using the following formula: ((Nap on weekdays × 5) + (Nap on weekend days × 2))/7. The results were then multiplied by 60 to represent minutes per day. These nap time periods calculated were included in the daily nonwear time for analysis.

Parents were also asked to recall the total average duration their child watched TV, used the computer, smartphones and videogames. For screen time, the questions were as follows: “How many hours during a weekday does your child usually watch TV, use computer, smartphones or electronics games?” and “How many hours during a weekend day does your child usually watch TV, use computer, smartphones or electronics game?”. Then, the same procedure used for sleep time was applied to calculate the average daily screen time. This procedure has been previously used in studies with similar samples (de Lucena Martins et al.2021).

All variables were checked for normality using the Shapiro–Wilk test. Descriptive analyses for continuous variables and frequency analyses for categorical variables were performed. Descriptive statistics, including means and standard deviations or percentages, were calculated for demographics and movement behaviours variables.

Considering the nonnormality nature of the data, the Mann–Whitney test was performed to compare body weight, body height, body mass index scoreZ, PA, sedentary time, screen time, sleep time and naps between sexes and age groups. Children were classified as compliant with the movement behaviours guidelines when: (a) PA: for total physical activity (TPA), defined as the sum of LPA with MVPA was calculated, TPA ≥ 180 min/day; (b) screen time: zero min/day for 1 year‐old (12–23 months of age), and ≤ 60 min/day for 2 years old (24–35 months of age); (c) sleep time: 11 ≥ 14 h/day (Tremblay et al.2016; WHO2019). Frequency analyses were performed to obtain the proportions of children who met the movement behaviours recommendations by age and sex. The chi‐square test was used to evaluate the association between the independent variable (age) and the dependent variables (movement behaviours). The level of significance was set at alpha level of 0.05. Data were analysed using SPSS Windows 28.0 (SPSS Inc, Chicago, Illinois).

Ethical guidelines outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki were followed (World Medical Association2013). The Health Science Research Ethics Committee Center and the local education council in Petrolina approved the study (IRB protocol no. 47542921.7.0000.8267). Parents or legal guardians of the children were provided with detailed explanations regarding the research procedures and invited to sign the informed consent.

Of the 171 assessed participants, 17 were excluded due to not meeting the minimum wear time for accelerometers; and 10 parents did not answer the sociodemographic data interview, resulting in a total sample of 144 children.

The final sample included 144 children (50.69% girls) who provided parental consent and valid accelerometry measures. Significant differences were observed between age groups for body weight, BMI, and nap duration, with 2‐year‐olds exhibiting higher body weight and BMI, as well as longer nap duration compared to 1‐year‐olds. Conversely, 1‐year‐olds spent more time in LPA. The assessed toddlers already had access to electronic devices, with an average of more than 1.5 h per day.

On average, boys spent almost 1.5 times more minutes in PA than the recommended 180 daily minutes, though they also spend more time than the recommended on screen‐based activities. Boys engaged in more MVPA and spent more time napping than girls. Finally, when combining nighttime sleep and naps, boys and girls sleep duration were close to the minimum recommended (11.88 ± 1.49 and 11.43 ± 1.07 h/day), respectively, as presented in Table1.

Abbreviations: BMI = body mass index; LPA = light physical activity; min = minutes; MVPA = moderate to vigorous physical activity; TPA = total physical activity.

Compliance with each single movement behaviour recommendation by age and sex is presented in Table2. The highest compliance prevalence was observed for PA, according to sex (98.63% and 98.59% for girls and boys, respectively), and age (100% and 97.61% for 1‐year‐olds and 2‐year‐olds, respectively), while the lowest compliance has been observed for screen time. Compliance with screen time was associated with sex and age, in favour of girls and in favour of toddlers aged 2 years.

Percentage of toddlers compliant with the guidelines by age and sex.

Abbreviations: PA = physical activity; SC = screen time; ST = sleep time.

Less than one quarter of the toddlers complied with the overall 24‐h movement behaviours recommendations (21%), and 54% complied with two out of three recommendations. Only 1% of the toddlers did not comply with any of the recommendations.

The current study reports the prevalence of compliance with the 24 h movement behaviours recommendations among Brazilian toddlers. The main results highlighted that (a) only 21% of the assessed toddlers complied with the 24 h movement behaviours guidelines, while 54% met two out of three recommendations; (b) the highest compliance was observed with PA recommendations, whereas the lowest compliance was with screen time; (c) being a girl and being 2 years old were associated with the compliance with screen time recommendations.

Few studies have explored toddlers’ compliance with the 24 h movement behaviours guidelines, especially in the global south. In high‐income countries, overall prevalence rates of 8.9% and 11.9% have been reported for Australian and Canadian toddlers, respectively (Lee et al.2017; Santos et al.2017). The current results highlight a higher compliance rate of 21% among the assessed Brazilian toddlers compared to the aforementioned studies conducted in high‐income countries, which is similar to the most recent study in Australia (Rivera et al.2024). The mixed results may be due to different contexts in which Australian, Canadian or Brazilian toddlers grow up. For example, the Brazilian toddlers attend ECEC for a full day, from 7 a.m. to 5 p.m. They are supervised by trained staff applying established routines that might in some way favour PA opportunities. More research on the ECEC contexts is, however, needed to substantiate this argument.

The current results also showed that the great majority of the assessed toddlers complied with PA recommendations, irrespective of sex (98.63% girls and 98.59% boys) and age (100% 1‐year‐olds and 97.6% 2‐year‐olds). These findings corroborate with previous studies which have shown that children up to 3 years old comply with the 180 daily minutes of PA (Bisson et al.2019; Bruijns et al.2020; Kwon et al.2019; Lee et al.2017; Santos et al.2017). For instance, studies conducted with children of the same age range in Canada (Lee et al.2017) and Australia (Santos et al.2017) reported a 96.5%, and 99.3% compliance with PA recommendations, respectively. Notably, approximately 80% of the TPA that toddlers in the present study engaged in was of light intensity. PA patterns among toddlers typically consist of a series of brief bursts of intense activity throughout the day, interspersed with longer periods of LPA (Lee et al.2017; Taylor et al.2018). Children's curiosity and need to explore could facilitate their engagement in PA, especially because the recommendations are based on TPA, with no recommendation for intensity. Moreover, these children spend nearly all their awake time at the ECECs. In general, these institutions located in low‐income areas support a high number of children, with two assistants responsible for approximately 20 toddlers in each class. Thus, it is expected that children have more opportunities to move freely during the day. However, support and encouragement are recommended to ensure that toddlers progress toward the 60 min of MVPA each day during throughout their preschool years.

Early access to screen devices among children of similar ages is habitual (Carson et al.2016; Lee et al.2017; Santos et al.2017). In contrast with the high PA percentage compliance observed, the current results showed that less than a third of both boys and girls complied with screen time recommendations. None of the assessed toddlers complied with the single recommendation for screen time or in combination with sleep time, and only 7% complied with both screen and PA recommendations. This prevalence is much lower than the 15% and 11.4% compliance reported for Canadian and Australian toddlers (Lee et al.2017; Santos et al.2017), respectively.

When investigating older children, Williams et al. (2014) reported that preschoolers who accumulate more time in TPA show less total sleep time and stay awake for a more extended periods at night than the less active preschoolers. In the assessed Brazilian context, when toddlers leave the ECEC, they are predisposed to sedentary screen‐based activities at home, similarly to what has been previously reported in a low‐income population‐based study in Brazil (Rocha et al.2021). In fact, children from low‐income families tend to go to bed later (Blair et al.2012). Moreover, high screen exposures, which is widespread in middle and low‐income families, can harm toddlers sleep duration. Besides, longer awake time may also provide children with greater screen exposure in a bidirectional negative cycle.

Moreover, the current results showed that being a boy and 1 year old was associated with a higher noncompliance with screen recommendations, which is consistent with previous research indicating that 2‐year‐olds were more likely to comply with screen time recommendations than the 1‐year‐olds (odds ratio: 2.925;p= 0.009). On the other hand, a recent systematic review reported no consistent evidence on exposure to screens between boys and girls in the first 2 years of life (Veldman et al.2023). In fact, toddlers aged 1 year are still acquiring walking pattern competences. At home, parents/caregivers may be more likely to entertain them with screen devices. Even within the ECEC, with an established routine, Brazilian toddlers have dedicated daily time for screens, specifically for television. Considering that early exposure to screens, combined with prolonged screen time, has been associated with cognitive development impairment, attention deficits, delayed language development, reduced short‐term memory, and poorer academic performance (Carson et al.2016; Santos et al.2016; Vanderloo2014), strategies to reduce toddlers’ exposure to screen devices are urgent and should encompass the entire day.

The overarching strength of the current study is in reporting the compliance with the 24‐h movement behaviours Brazilian toddlers. Data concerning adherence to 24‐h movement behaviours in the early years have, to date, generally covered 3‐ to 5‐year‐old preschoolers. Those available evidence covering toddlers are from high‐income countries, which cultural and social backgrounds substantially differ from the ones presented in the current study. As consequence, movement patterns are also different. The data presented in the current study extends understanding of movement behaviours in the broader context of toddlers. Nonetheless, limitations should be highlighted. Although reflecting Brazilian low‐income context characteristics, the assessed participants are from a unique city, and low external validity and lack of generalizability should be underlined. As there are no prior published studies that the authors are aware of, which have addressed the 24‐h movement behaviours compliance among Brazilian toddlers, direct comparisons are difficult to establish. In fact, several of the existing studies with this age group (Bisson et al.2019; Santos et al.2017; Wijtzes et al.2013) also differed in methodological procedures used to analyse the data, thus making difficult direct comparisons (Bruijns et al.2020; Prioreschi and Micklesfield2016). For instance, Wijtzes et al. (2013) used a uniaxial accelerometer to estimate toddlers’ PA and sedentary behaviours, which can underestimate their levels. In the study developed by Santos et al. (2017), naps were parent reported. Considering assessments were done at ECECs, where toddlers are supervised by caregivers, this could lead to a measure‐related bias. These aspects reinforce the need of multicentric studies using harmonised protocols to ensure reliable, comparable and generalised findings to subsidize advocacy in public health policy for the early years.

Finally, parent‐reported sleep and screen time, along the researchers’ reported nap times represent clear limitations. However, it should be noted that there is no validated direct method for assessing screen time in toddlers. Lastly, we individually interviewed parents, which is a considerable asset to reduce potential errors compared to parent‐report via questionnaires.

This study highlighted that 21% of the assessed toddlers complied with the overall 24‐h movement behaviours guidelines, especially due to the low compliance with screen time recommendations. Compliance with screen time guidelines was higher among girls and 2‐year‐olds. Implementing strategies to encourage toddlers’ compliance with the 24‐h movement guidelines in Brazilian toddlers should focus on maintaining PA levels, reducing screen time and increasing sleep duration.