Bone tissue engineering aims to produce bone substitutes that are crucial for tissue repair. In this study, a three-dimensional (3D) host-guest scaffold model was developed. A porous polylactic acid (PLA) framework (host) was fabricated using a 3D printing technique to provide mechanical stability. The pores in the framework were subsequently occupied with nano-hydroxyapatite (HA), gelatin (G), and blueberry extract (BB) mixed with different ratios (guest). The physicochemical, mechanical, and biological behavior of the scaffolds were investigated. The results exhibited that all fabricated scaffolds degraded gradually as time progressed, with less than 20% degradation occurring within 56 days. The host-guest scaffolds favorably influenced the viability and attachment of MC3T3-E1 cells in vitro. Based on the MTT assay results, all scaffolds showed excellent cell viability, particularly HA10-BB40. Furthermore, the cell attachment increased on the surfaces of scaffolds with increasing HA and BB content. Specifically, high number of cells were observed on HA10-BB20 and HA10-BB40. Meanwhile, the best cell mineralization was detected in HA10-BB40 group. Additionally, the scratch assay also showed the ability of BB to enhance cell migration. According to these findings, HA10-BB40 was identified as the best scaffold composition and further analyzed for mechanical properties, wettability, apatite formation ability, and gene expression. The compressive strength of HA10-BB40 was 4.92 MPa, and its surface demonstrated hydrophilic characteristic. This scaffold formed a uniform apatite layer on its surface after 7 days of immersion in SBF. In addition, the expression of Runx2, Col1α1, and VEGF genes in HA10-BB40 significantly enhanced compared to the control group. This study showed the potential of the fabricated host-guest scaffolds, particularly HA10-BB40, as a favorable substrate for engineered bone replacements.

Bones comprise 15% of body weight and play a vital role in maintaining gait and protecting organs. Bone defects, as a common orthopedic complication, and their repair, particularly the critical size defects, is an important challenge in regenerative medicine [1,2]. Therefore, the implantation of bone substitutes is necessary for the treatment of large bone defects. Although, autologous bone is considered the gold standard for bone defects, there are still limitations such as a limited amount of bone available, harsh bone harvesting, pain at the harvesting site, and infection. The lack of suitable biological activity in allografts also causes infections and immune reactions leading to graft rejection [3–5]. Accordingly, bone tissue engineering (BTE) offers promising treatment methods for bone grafting in the defects. Bone tissue is formed on naturally derived and synthetic tissue-engineered scaffolds with or without culturing autologous cells or induced stem cells [6–9]. In recent years, the rapid development of tissue engineering (TE) technology has enabled a new therapeutic strategy for bone repair [1,10,11]. TE involves the production of scaffolds made of hydrogels, bioceramics, and composites, which can be produced by different approaches such as molding, electrospinning, and 3D bioprinting processes [12–14]. Porous three-dimensional (3D) scaffolds are currently being developed by these approaches to treat the defects in large bones. The ability to control the geometry and internal architecture of tissue-engineered scaffolds can be achieved by using 3D printing to create patient-specific bioactive scaffolds that ensure cell function, viability, and mechanical integrity under high loads [15–17]. Due to its ease of use, and the possibility of using different materials, fused deposition modeling (FDM) is one of the most cost-effective and simple 3D printing machines that produces a scaffold with predefined and controlled internal architecture [18–21]. By control of printing parameters including layer thickness, printing temperature, and infill angle, FDM can be employed to produce bone scaffolds with precise cross-linked microarchitecture [22].

By blending polymers with bioactive materials such as hydroxyapatite (HA), biologically active hybrid composites can be made, which significantly improve biocompatibility, mechanical strength, and hydrophobicity [23,24]. Poly lactic acid (PLA) is a biodegradable polymer that is often used in the FDM process due to its low density, relatively low cost, ease of machining, availability, moderate mechanical strength, and non-toxic degradation products [24–26]. The PLA properties such as low degradation rate and bioactivity can be improved by using materials such as HA [27]. HA is a biocompatible bioceramic that exhibits favorable biological behavior such as osteoconductivity, particularly in nano-scale [28,29]. Composite scaffolds can be reinforced with HA nanoparticles to simulate natural bone tissue, where mineral apatite particles are arranged in a 3D structure near collagen fibers [30]. In equivalence to collagen, gelatin (G) can be used along with HA. Gelatin is a multifunctional polymer derived from the partial hydrolysis of collagen and forms a thermally reversible gel [30,31]. It contains Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) conjugation sequences, which are required for favorable cell anchorage [32]. Cross-linking (physical or chemical methods) increases the mechanical strength of gelatin. For example, glutaraldehyde is one of the chemical substances used to make cross-linking [33].

To make the bone scaffolds more bioactive, the use of natural compounds derived from plants is a possible way forward. Wild lowbush blueberry (BB) (Vaccinium angustifolium) as a fruit is obtained from North America. BB contains an enrichment source of bioactive compounds such as organic acids, phenolic and flavonoid compounds, sugar, minerals, vitamins, fibers, and pectins [34]. The use of polyphenol-containing BB to prevent bone loss has increased in recent years [35]. The presence of phenolic acids and flavonoids in blueberries may help prevent bone loss caused by the lack of ovarian hormones [36]. Blueberries also improve bone formation through influence in osteoblastic activity. The stimulation of osteoblastic differentiation by phenolic acid metabolites extracted from blueberry polyphenols is responsible for this bone-strengthening effect [37].

Therefore, the present study aimed to fabricate PLA/G-nHA-BB host-guest bone scaffolds and evaluate their physicochemical and mechanical properties, and biological characteristics by in vitro test assays. Host-guest scaffolds in tissue engineering are innovative structures designed to support and enhance tissue regeneration. The host is typically a three-dimensional framework that provides mechanical support and stability and serves as a structure that can withstand mechanical loads, while allowing for biological interactions. The guest component fills the voids within the host construct. This can include bioactive molecules, growth factors, or other materials that enhance the biological activity [38–41]. In the present study, 3D-printed PLA served as the host component integrated with different G-nHA-BB composites as the guest.

The computer-aided design model, known as CAD model, of the PLA framework was generated using Abaqus 2018, which was then exported as a sat. file subsequently converted to stereolithography (STL) file format. This file was next imported into Simplify3D software to create the G-codes. The PLA frameworks were then printed by a conventional FDM machine. The PLA filament was heated to a temperature exceeding its melting point (nozzle temperature: 210 °C) and extruded through the stainless-steel nozzle (bed temperature: 60 °C). The frameworks (7.6 mm diameter and 1.6 mm height) were produced in a layer-by-layer manner with a 0/90° lay-down pattern. The layer thickness was 400 μm and the pore size (distance between the struts) was 800 μm. Figure1shows the CAD model of the PLA framework (host).

The 3D-printed PLA frameworks were soaked in 0.6 M NaOH (Sigma-Aldrich) solutions for 24 h at room temperature for surface modification. Subsequently, the NaOH-treated PLA frameworks were washed with deionized water and maintained to dry at the ambient temperature.

The n-HA powder synthesized from carp bone waste [29] and gelatin (Merck, USA) were employed to make the G-nHA suspension. The blueberry extract used in our study was self-prepared following a method previously published [42]. Briefly, wild lowbush blueberries were purchased from a reputable local supplier and authenticated. The berries were then freeze-dried using standard procedures (American Lyophilizer Inc., Bridgeport, PA), and ground into a fine powder. For extraction, 2 g of the blueberry powder was mixed with a solvent mixture of acetic acid, methanol, and distilled water in a ratio of 1:25:24, respectively, under magnetic stirring for 2 h in the dark. The mixture was then centrifuged, filtered, and allowed to dry using a Savant SpeedVac system (Freeze-dryer 4.5; Labconco Corp., Kansas City, MO). The dried extract was stored at − 20 °C until use. To make PLA/G-nHA-BB scaffolds, the gelatin powder was first added to distilled water and dissolved to obtain a 10 w/v% gelatin solution under vigorous stirring at 400 rpm and 40 °C. When a completely uniform solution was obtained, nHA was slowly added to obtain 5 and 10 w/v% suspensions. The blueberry extraction was dissolved in distilled water at different concentrations and mixed with the solution to have the final concentrations of 0, 5, 10, 20, and 40 w/v%. The final solution was stirred for 10 ​minutes until it became homogenized. The PLA frameworks were successively immersed in the suspension for 5 min to fill the pores with gelatin-nanohydroxyapatite-blueberry mixture. Then, the scaffolds were frozen at– 20 ℃ for 24 h and freeze-dried for 24 h. Next, the PLA/G-nHA-BB scaffolds were crosslinked by immersion in glutaraldehyde (1%, Merck, Germany) for 6 h. The scaffolds were lastly rinsed with distilled water twice to remove the unreacted glutaraldehyde and allowed to dry at ambient temperature. Table1shows the different compositions used to make PLA/G-nHA-BB scaffolds. The scaffolds were weighed prior to and following immersion in the guest phase and freeze drying to ensure about the deposition of guest component.

The PLA and NaOH-treated PLA frameworks was examined for their morphology by scanning electron microscopy or SEM (Philips XL30 SEM, Philips, Netherlands). They were first sputter-coated with a conductive material and then imaged by SEM.

To evaluate the degradation profile, the scaffolds were initially weighed (W0) and then soaked in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). The test was conducted at 37℃ for 8 weeks in a thermostatic oven (Behdad Company, Iran). The weight of the scaffolds was measured in different time intervals (Wt), and the PBS solution was replaced with a new solution once a week. The degradation rate of the scaffolds was estimated using Eq.1.

The 3D-printed host-guest scaffolds were sterilized in 70% alcohol and then exposed to UV radiation for 20 min each side under a laminar-flow hood (3 scaffolds per group).

Pre-osteoblast MC3T3-E1 cell line (Mouse C57BL/6 calvaria) was provided from Sigma-Aldrich, Sweden, and cultured in complete Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s medium or DMEM (DNAbioTech; Iran) enriched with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco Life Technologies; USA), penicillin (100 IU), and Streptomycin (100 µg/mL). The cells were kept in a 37 °C incubator with 5% CO2and 95% humidity and passaged every 3–4 days using trypsin–EDTA solution (Gibco Life Technologies; USA). To prepare the scaffold medium extract, sterilized scaffolds were put in 24-well plates containing DMEM complete growth medium (2 mL/scaffold), which were then incubated at 37 °C with humidity and 5% CO2for 3 days (based on ISO 10993-5-1999). After incubation, the scaffolds were removed and the extracts were utilized for cell experiments [43].

The MC3T3-E1 cell viability was analyzed by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) kit (Cell Growth Determination Kit, Sigma Life Science), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The cells were seeded at 5 × 103cells/well in a 96-well plate for 24 h. After that, the cells were cultured with extracts from the scaffolds for 5 days. Then, the supernatant was replaced with serum-free medium (90 µL/well) and MTT solution (10 µL/well). After 4 h of incubation, the precipitated formazan was dissolved in 100 µL of Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). At the end, the optical density (OD) of each well was determined at 570 nm by a microplate ELISA reader (Synergy H1 Hybrid Multi-Mode Microplate Reader, BioTek, USA).

The control group consisted of cells cultured in complete growth medium under identical culturing conditions (same medium, incubation time, and seeding density) but without exposure to the test material extract. The viability of all treated groups was expressed relative to the control group (normalized to the mean absorbance of the control group), based on Eq.2.

The MC3T3-E1 cells’ ability to adhere to the surfaces of scaffolds was evaluated using SEM (SERON Technology, South Korea). First, 2 × 103cells were seeded on the scaffolds. After 24 h of incubation time, the cells adhered to scaffold surfaces were fixed with paraformaldehyde (4%, 4 °C, 15 min), followed by washing and drying. The morphology of the cells on the scaffolds was analyzed using SEM images.

For the alkaline phosphatase (ALP) assay, MC3T3-E1 cells were first seeded, 2 × 103cells in each well of a 96-well plate. After cell monolayer formation, the culture medium was removed (except for the control group) and the scaffold extracts were added to each well. The osteogenic agents (ascorbic acid 50 µg/mL and ß-glycerophosphate 10 mM (Sigma-Aldrich, USA)) were also inserted to all wells. The ALP concentration was measured after 5 and 10 days. Briefly, the supernatant of the cells was removed, and 50 µL diluted Triton X100 in buffer solution was transferred to the wells, then the supernatants were incubated with the ALP substrate (20 min, room temperature). After the incubation, 50 µL of stop solution was added to the wells. The ODs were measured at 405 nm by a microplate ELIZA reader (Synergy H1 Hybrid Multi-Mode Microplate Reader, BioTek, USA).

Alizarin red staining was done to identify the calcific deposition by MC3T3-E1 cells after incubation for 9 days. The Ca2+in the mineralized extracellular matrix (ECM) can form a complex with Alizarin red, displaying bright orange-red stains. First, 1 × 104cells/well were cultured in a 24-well plate for 24 h. After forming the MC3T3-E1 cell monolayer, the culture medium was discarded, and the medium extract of different groups was added to the cells. The osteogenic agents (ascorbic acid 50 µg/mL and ß-glycerophosphate 10 mM (Sigma-Aldrich, USA)) were inserted to each well (twice a week). After the incubation, the medium was discarded, the wells were washed (PBS), and the cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde (4%, 4°C, 15 min). Then, Alizarin red 1% (w/v) was added to the wells and incubated at ambient temperature (40 min). Finally, the dyes were removed, and the wells were rinsed with PBS to eradicate excess unbound stains. The images were captured from the calcific deposition and compared with the control group.

Nodule size (red area) measurement was performed using ImageJ Software. In each of the three replicate experiments, the area of calcific red region in each well was measured using ImageJ software. Subsequently, the obtained values were divided by the total area of the well and then multiplied by 100 to obtain the percentage of mineralization, based on Eq.3.

A min: Area of mineralized nodules (calcified red regions).

A total: Total area of the well (experimental substrate).

The effect of PLA/G-nHA-BB scaffolds on cell migration was examined by the scratch cell migration assay. To do this, the MC3T3-E1 cells were cultured in a 24-well plate with a density of 1 × 104cells/well. After the incubation for 24 h and the formation of the confluent monolayer, the media of the wells were removed. Pipette tip (yellow, 100 µL) was used to make the scratch. One person created the scratches, trying to apply the same pressure to avoid size variations. The cells in wells were then washed with PBS twice to completely eliminate the cell debris before adding the extracts. The medium extracts were then added without cell surface touch, and the culture plates were incubated at 37 °C. The images from the scratched zones were taken with an inverted optical microscope (Olympus IX-71, UK), at 0, 6, and 24 h from the time of scratch formation using a digital camera. In this study, three control wells including cells without scaffold extract were also tested. The scratch width was measured at different time points using ImageJ software. The wound closure rate was calculated using Eq.4[44].

Where W0 and Wt signify the scratch widths measured initially and at different time points, respectively. The scratch assay was conducted at designated time points (0, 6, and 24 h), and the extent of wound closure was measured using the above equation.

Based on the above-mentioned tests, the best scaffold composition (HA10-BB40) was selected for further analyses.

The surface of the HA10-BB40 and HA10-BB0 (as control) scaffolds were observed using a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Philips XL30 SEM, Philips, Netherlands). To make the surfaces conductive for SEM observation, the scaffolds were sputter-coated with gold.

The mechanical behavior of the HA10-BB40 and HA10-BB0 (as control) scaffolds were determined at room temperature using a Universal Testing Machine (Instron Ltd., High Wycombe, UK). The load cell was 5 KN. Four samples with different height to diameter ratios were tested in each group (diameter: 7 mm and heights: 7, 9, 11, 15 mm). To conduct the test, the scaffolds were compressed gradually (loading rate: 1 mm/min) and the strain measured up to 80% of their initial height. The stress–strain (σ–ε) curves were documented, and the elastic moduli were obtained from the slope of the linear region of these curves.

The wettability of scaffolds (HA10-BB40 and HA10-BB0 (as control)) was evaluated with a water contact angle (CA) measurement instrument. Nearly, 3 µL of distilled water was applied to the surfaces of the scaffolds using a dosing system (ASTM D724-99 (2003)), and the measurement was done after 1 s for each sample. Drop shape analysis (DSA) software was used to determine the baseline and calculate the contact angle. Three measurements were performed for each sample at different positions of the scaffold surface.

To assess the bioactivity of the scaffolds, they were immersed in simulated body fluid (SBF) at 37 °C up to 7 days. To determine the amount of SBF needed for the samples, the apparent area of the specimen was divided by 10 (. After immersion, the scaffold surface was analyzed for apatite formation using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and field emission SEM (FE-SEM, ZEISS, Germany).

Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR, PerkinElmer, USA) was performed in absorption mode over the range of 4000–500 cm⁻¹ to analyze the functional groups and interactions occurring in the composite scaffolds.

Phalloidin-fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) solution (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany), which stains the live cells green, was employed to observe live cell distribution under a fluorescence microscope (Nikon Eclipse Ti-e, Nikon Imaging, Czech Republic). In the complete growth media, MC3T3-E1 cells (5 × 103cells/well) were seeded on a sterile cover slip. After 24 h, the media were discarded, and the scaffold extracts were added to the cells. The cells were treated with the scaffold medium for 5 days, then the medium was taken out, and the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (15 min at 4 °C), after washing with PBS. The fixed cells were then washed again with PBS and treated with 0.1% Triton (15 min) to permeabilize the cells. After that, 2% Bovine serum albumin (BSA) was added to the cells for 1 h. Lastly, 100 µL FITC was inserted to each well, and the incubation was done in dark for 30 min.

Based on the results of the above-mentioned tests, only HA10-BB40 group was analyzed for gene expression. MC3T3-E1 cells (5 × 105cells/well) were cultured in a 6-well plate. After 24 h, the extract of HA10-BB40 was transferred into each well and the cells were cultured with scaffold medium for 3 days. The osteogenic agents (ascorbic acid 50 µg/mL and ß-glycerophosphate 10 mM (Sigma-Aldrich, USA)) were added to each well (every day). The effect of scaffold extract on the expression of osteogenic-related gene including runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), collagen 1 (Col1α1), and Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was investigated. The β-actin served as an internal standard. Total RNA was extracted from the cells with the TRIZOL™ reagent (Sinacolon, Iran) as stated by the manufacturer’s instructions. 5 µg ofRNA yields extracted from each sample was used in the Revert Aid™ First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Yekta Tajhiz Azma Co, Iran), which was then converted into cDNA. Real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed using the SYBR Green qPCR Master Mix (cat. no. YT2551, Yekta Tajhiz Azma). Oligo 7 software was utilized for primer design, and a BLAST search was performed to assess the quality of the primer sequences. The primer sequences used for RT-PCR amplification are listed in Table2. The Real-Time PCR protocol consisted of three steps: denaturation (95 °C for 15 s), annealing (X °C for 30 s), and extension (60 °C for 30 s). All experiments were conducted in duplicate, and relative gene expression levels were calculated using the Delta-Delta Ct (DDCt) method, which was then converted to a relative expression ratio (2− DDCt) for statistical analysis.

All numerical data were statistically analyzed, and the graphs were plotted with GraphPad Prism version 9.00. The statistical tests were done by one-way or two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), or T-test. A p-value of less than 0.05 was used to identify the significance.

SEM was employed to examine the surface morphology and topography of the scaffold before and after treatment with NaOH (Fig.2). The results, in Fig.2b, showed that the alkaline treatment resulted in an increase in surface roughness and the formation of pores. This indicates that the treatment with NaOH has a noteworthy influence on the surface properties of the PLA framework, which could potentially provide the adhesion of guest component (G-nHA/BB) to the struts of PLA.

The scaffolds were weighed prior to and following immersion in the guest phase and freeze drying, as depicted in Table3. The observed increase in weight confirms the deposition of the guest phase onto the scaffold.

Figure3shows the weight loss percentages of the scaffolds in relation to degradation time in PBS. All scaffolds experienced an increase in mass loss over time, although each scaffold displayed distinct behavior. During the initial hours, rapid destruction occurred in HA5-BB40, HA10-BB5, and HA10-BB10, followed by a more steadily progression thereafter. HA5-BB0 showed a steady increase in biodegradability, reaching a significant level by the end of the time. HA5-BB40 exhibited a high biodegradability at around 24 h, suggesting a rapid initial degradation, but it was stabilized afterward. HA5-BB5, HA5-BB10, and HA5-BB20 showed similar behavior in biodegradability. Among the scaffolds with HA10 content, HA10-BB10 appears to have the highest biodegradability percentage throughout the time intervals. HA10-BB40 showed the lowest biodegradability during 672 h of immersion.

An important factor for tissue engineering scaffolds is the ability to maintain cell growth and survival. Therefore, the cell viability was evaluated by MTT assay. The control group consisted of cells cultured in complete growth medium under identical culturing conditions (same medium, incubation time, and seeding density) but without exposure to the test material extract. As it is demonstrated in Fig.4, the viability of MC3T3-E1 cells cultured in the scaffold extracts was high in all groups (> 100%). The ANOVA results revealed that the composition of scaffold (P-values < 0.05) was a significant factor in MC3T3-E1 cell viability%. The data indicated a notable increase in cell viability rate with higher levels of HA and blueberry.

The MC3T3-E1cell attachment was observed with SEM after 24 h of cell culture. It is obvious from Figs.5and6that the attached cells on all scaffold surfaces were quite in a spheroid shape. Furthermore, the cell attachment increased on the surfaces of scaffolds with increasing HA and BB content. As shown in Figs.5and6, high number of MC3T3-E1cells formed a monolayer morphology on HA10-BB20 and HA10-BB40 and well spread on these scaffolds. These results can be interpreted as suitable cell–scaffold interactions.

ALP is an enzyme associated with the cell membrane that plays a role in the mineralization of the bone extracellular matrix and is often regarded as an early indicator of osteogenesis [45]. Figure7shows the results of ALP concentration after culture in an osteogenic medium for 5 and 10 days. It was found that ALP concentration was almost the same in all groups, indicating that all scaffolds could support osteogenesis. HA10-BB0 and HA10-BB40 groups had a significant increase in ALP concentration on day 10 compared to day 5. The ALP concentration of the cells in the other groups was almost comparable to that of the control group during the initial stage (day 5). It was found that the certain levels of blueberry and HA (HA10-BB40) influenced favorably the ALP concentration.

To evaluate the ability of the scaffolds to support mineralization of MC3T3-E1 cells, after 10 days, the cells cultured in the scaffold medium extracts were stained with a calcium-staining Alizarin Red kit (Fig.8). All groups showed evidence of matrix mineralization as indicated by red stain at day 10 of culture. The stained nodules were present in some but not all regions. An increased intensity of stained nodules was seen with increasing the amount of HA and time as well. The percentage of the red area was measured. The highest mineralization area was found in the HA10-BB40 group. A significant difference was observed in the formation of mineral nodules between the cells cultured in the scaffold media and those in the control group. As shown in Fig.8a, the red nodules differ in size and color intensity. In the groups with higher HA, the color was darker in the center and faded towards the edges. The amounts of nodules were higher in the HA10 groups than in the HA5 and control groups (Figs.8b and c). The mineralization in the HA10-BB40 group was significantly distinct from that in the other groups.

The scratch (cell migration) test was performed to estimate the scaffolds’ wound healing potential (Figs.9and10). The cells seeded in the DMEM were considered as controls. All the HA5 groups exhibited a significant increase in wound closure in comparison with the control group after 24 h from initial scratching (Fig.9b). Furthermore, the results indicated that the gap area between cell edges in the HA10-BB40 group was significantly inferior compared to the other groups at 24 h (Fig.10b).

Based on the results of the conducted tests, the HA10-BB40 group was selected as the optimal group, and the remaining tests were performed on this group and HA10-BB0 as control group.

The SEM images of the surfaces of HA10-BB0 and HA10-BB40 scaffolds are shown in Fig.11The scaffold pores were filled with composite materials, indicating the presence of guest structure within the scaffolds. Furthermore, as evidenced by the SEM images, the guest phase not only infiltrated and filled the scaffold pores but also formed a coating on the scaffold struts. This along with the weigh measurement (Table3) confirms the deposition of the guest phase onto the scaffold structure.

The compression assessments were conducted to determine the maximum load-bearing capacity of the fabricated scaffolds (HA10-BB0 and HA10-BB40). The results indicated that the stress-strain curve for HA10-BB0, and HA10-BB40 scaffolds exhibited three distinct areas including a linear elasticity region, a long plateau zone, and a densification area (Fig.12a). The elastic moduli (E) were estimated from the stress-strain curve linear regions. The elastic moduli for HA10-BB0 and HA10-BB40 scaffolds were 35.0, and 57.35 MPa, respectively. HA10-BB40 had a higher average compression modulus than HA10-BB0, suggesting it may be stiffer or more resistant to deformation under compression. The ultimate compressive strengths (UCS) were also measured to assess the maximum resistance of the scaffolds to compression; both HA10-BB0 and HA10-BB40 exhibited similar mechanical properties in terms of compression strength and no significant differences were observed among the groups.

The surface wettability of the HA10-BB0 and HA10-BB40 scaffolds is displayed in Fig.13. The contact angle of the HA10-BB0 scaffold was about 74.5°, whereas that of HA10-BB40 was 68.2°, meaning that the hydrophilicity of the scaffold was influenced by its chemical composition.

To evaluate the biological activity, the samples were immersed in simulated body fluid (SBF) at 37 ℃ for 7 days to observe the apatite formation on the scaffold surface. As shown in Fig.14, immersion of the scaffolds in SBF led to notable surface changes. After 7 days of immersion, a rather uniform layer of bone-like apatite precipitated, fully covering the scaffold surfaces. The HA10-BB40 scaffold exhibited a more uniform and continuous hydroxyapatite layer across its surface. In contrast, the HA10-BB0 scaffold, while also coated, showed areas where the hydroxyapatite layer was less consistent, leaving some regions partially exposed. Overall, the scaffold surfaces were coated with a thick, flower-like apatite layer, indicating favorable bioactivity and the potential for bone tissue regeneration.

Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) was employed to analyze the elemental composition of the biomineralized layer, confirming the presence of apatite. According to Fig.15, the precipitates primarily consisted of calcium (Ca) and phosphorus (P), which is indicative of hydroxyapatite formation. The results of the bioactivity assessment showed that the Ca/P atomic ratio in the mineralized HA10-BB0 scaffolds was 2.12, and in HA10.BB40 scaffolds, it was 2.04. The Ca/P ratio is an important measure in the formation of apatite layer and new bone, where the molar ratio should be in the range of 0.58–2.34 (theoretically 1.67) [46]. Both Ca/P ratios obtained here were in the identified range.

The FTIR spectra in Fig.16demonstrate the characteristic peaks of the HA10-BB0 and HA10-BB40 scaffolds. The FTIR spectra exhibited all characteristic absorption peaks of hydroxyapatite, particularly those associated with phosphate ions (PO₄³⁻), the principal molecular components of HA, which appeared in the 550–1200 cm⁻¹ region. Notably, the prominent band at 1050 cm⁻¹ corresponds to the P–O stretching vibrations of phosphate groups. The presence of hydroxyl (OH⁻) ions in hydroxyapatite was confirmed by absorption bands around 630 cm⁻¹ and at 1641 cm⁻¹, attributed to in-plane H–O–H bending [44]. In the composite samples, this band shifted to 1619 cm⁻¹ in HA10-BB40 and 1635 cm⁻¹ in HA10-BB0, which can be ascribed to hydrogen bond formation between the –OH groups of HA and the–C = O groups of gelatin, as well as electrostatic interactions between Ca²⁺ ions in HA and the carbonyl groups of gelatin. Additionally, a broad absorption band in the 2900–3600 cm⁻¹ region further supports the presence of hydroxyl groups. For PLA, the characteristic bands usually observed at approximately 2994 and 2944 cm⁻¹ are assigned to the–CH stretching vibrations in the –CH₃ groups [47]. In the composite scaffold, this band was detected at 2925 cm⁻¹, indicating a noticeable shift to lower wavenumbers. This shift is indicative of strong intermolecular interactions, such as hydrogen bonding, between the polar functional groups of gelatin and HA with the PLA chains. These interactions can modify the local chemical environment around the PLA chains, decreasing the vibrational frequency of the –CH bonds and restricting the mobility of the polymer chains, as evidenced by the observed spectral shift. The main FTIR peak in blueberry, due to O–H stretching in water and phenolics, overlapped with gelatin’s O–H band. Similarly, the C = O stretching peak (1730–1750 cm⁻¹) overlaid with absorption bands from gelatin detected in the composite materials. Phenolic compounds and O-H groups present in blueberry extract can form hydrogen bonds or surface complexes with phosphate groups in hydroxyapatite. These interactions lead to a decrease in the intensity of the phosphate peak and changes in its width and sharpness in the FTIR spectrum.

To examine the distribution of cells in the presence of the scaffold extracts, the cells were stained by phalloidin and imaged. In the presence of HA10-BB0 and HA10-BB40 extracts, the elongated cells (indicated by arrows in Fig.17) covered the culture surface, indicating confluent growth. As expected, the distribution of cells was indeed influenced by the type of scaffold biomaterials used.

We studied several essential marker genes during osteogenesis to clarify the effect of HA10-BB40 scaffold on the osteogenic differentiation-related gene expression in MC3T3-E1. As shown in Fig.18, Col1α1 and VEGF showed significant increases in expression with HA10-BB40 treatment, while Runx2 showed a modest increase, which could benefit tissue repair and regeneration.

The main aim of this paper was to examine the effects of combining biomaterials including gelatin, nano-hydroxyapatite, and blueberry on the physicochemical, mechanical, and biological properties of 3D-printed PLA scaffolds. PLA is widely used in tissue engineering owing to its satisfactory range of behavior such as biocompatibility, degradability in biological environment, and processability in various architectures [48]. PLA is a hydrophobic material that does not mix well with hydroxyapatite due to insufficient interfacial adhesion. This lack of compatibility compromises the overall quality of the composite, affecting its structural integrity, mechanical strength, and biological performance [49]. Pure PLA has multiple ester bonds that exhibit low hydrophilicity. Therefore, it has poor bioactivity, which can be improved by employing surface treatment approaches and the biologically active materials [50,51]. Recently, host-guest scaffold systems have been developed, in which a polymer with high strength and low degradation rate such as PLA or PCL prepares a porous framework (called “host”) to support the structure during bone regeneration process [38–40]. This host component is enriched by osteogenic materials with higher degradation rate filling its pores. Therefore, the host-guest structure can integrate conflicting requirements for bone tissue engineering.

Here, we developed new host-guest scaffolds incorporating different amounts of nHA and blueberry extract. The PLA frameworks were, first, 3D-printed based on the CAD model. Subsequently, the pores of the scaffolds were filled by immersion in gelatin, nano-hydroxyapatite, and blueberry mixture, and freeze-dried. The NaOH treatment serves as an effective approach for enhancing the surface properties of 3D printed PLA. By breaking ester bonds, NaOH introduces hydrophilic groups to the surface, while simultaneously altering surface roughness through controlled erosion [52]. The degree of these changes can be adjusted by varying the NaOH concentration and treatment duration, offering a versatile method for tailoring surface morphology or chemistry without compromising the structural integrity of the PLA scaffold [53]. The ECM of natural bone is mainly composed of nanofibrous type I collagen and carbonated HA, which promotes osteoconductivity and bone grafting [54]. However, the brittleness and shaping difficulties of nHA limit its independent use. Combining nHA with gelatin in composite scaffolds could take advantage of the strengths of both materials, while reducing their weaknesses [55,56]. The combination of nHA with PLA improves osteoconduction, ossification, and mechanical strength [57,58]. The nHA has desirable properties such as strong chemical interactions with tissue and facilitation of tissue growth without causing inflammation or toxicity. It also induces cell adhesion and proliferation [59,60]. However, the effect of nHA on osteoblast behavior is dose-dependent, and cytotoxic effects were observed at higher doses [61]. Gelatin is a well-known biodegradable and biocompatible polymer having a very similar molecular structure to collagen. The gelatin structure contains important components for cell attachment. For this reason, gelatin can replace and fulfill the same biological functions as collagen for cell growth in vitro [62,63]. Gelatin does not cause toxicity, antigenicity, or other adverse effects in human cells. However, depending on the reagent used to cross-link the gelatin solutions, toxicity may occur [64]. Gelatin enhances cell adhesion to scaffolds primarily due to its biochemical similarity to the natural extracellular matrix and the presence of specific peptide sequences, such as RGD-like motifs, which serve as ligands for cell integrins. These motifs facilitate the attachment of cells to the scaffold surface, promoting initial cell anchorage and subsequent proliferation [65]. In our study, the incorporation of gelatin into the scaffold also resulted in improved cell adhesion. The main disadvantages of natural gelatin are its poor mechanical properties and its relatively simple, less cross-linked structure compared to collagen. With the development of bone repair by bone tissue engineering, gelatin is often used in combination with a wide range of natural and synthetic polymers, and minerals to achieve synergistic effects in the complex physiological process of bone repair [66]. The use of plants as medicine has been done since ancient times and it can even be considered as the origin of modern medicine. Some plants have been employed as an important medicinal compound source [67]. The blueberry plant is a small shrub that has increased scientific attention due to its polyphenol content and its beneficial effects on human health, according to epidemiological studies [68]. Anthocyanin in blueberry has many effects, including reducing anti-cancer/anti-tumor, coronary heart disease, anti-diabetic effects, and anti-inflammatory, as well as improving vision and cognitive behavior [69]. Masoudi and Movahedi showed that anthocyanins from blueberry have anticancer activity by suppressing cell proliferation and acting as anti-invasive agents and chemical inhibitors [70]. Blueberry is involved in the induction of cell cycle arrest and mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis [71]. Yi et al. found that the phenolic compounds in blueberries are able to prevent proliferation of cancer cells and cause them to undergo apoptosis. Flavonol and tannin increase HT-29 and Caco-2 cells proliferation by 50% at 70–100 and 10–50 µg/mL, respectively [72]. BBs have been identified to enhance the human bone marrow cell proliferation, which are also known as osteoblast progenitor cells [73]. Therefore, we used this natural component in the developed scaffolds to evaluate its effect on osteogenesis.

After the scaffold fabrication from these materials, their biodegradation rates were determined using a weight loss test. Given that previous and similar studies have usually performed biodegradation experiments in PBS solution, we also performed our degradation experiments in PBS to ensure consistency and comparison with the existing sources [74,75]. New bone formation usually occurs within 4–8 weeks, and the scaffold should ideally degrade within this time frame to be replaced by new bone tissue [76]. The degradation rate of the scaffold should be carefully matched to the rate of bone regeneration for optimal outcomes. Our scaffold meets this need, as the guest phase takes approximately two months to degrade. This degradation rate provides sufficient time for new bone formation, with the host phase serving as a supportive framework during the initial stages of bone remodeling. During degradation, the hydroxyapatite releases calcium and phosphate ions that support bone mineralization and regeneration. Gelatin degrades into peptides and amino acids, which are non-toxic and can be utilized by cells. Both degradation products are biocompatible and contribute to bone tissue repair [77]. The degradation time of PLA typically ranges from 1 to 5 years, depending on its molecular weight and environmental conditions. PLA degrades through hydrolysis to lactic acid, which is further metabolized to water and carbon dioxide. These degradation products are biocompatible and non-toxic, making PLA suitable for medical and tissue engineering applications [78].

In a 3D printed scaffold system with a host phase of polylactic acid (PLA) and a guest phase consisting of hydroxyapatite and gelatin, the guest phase degrades first, followed by the host phase. This sequential degradation occurs because gelatin, a natural polymer, degrades faster than synthetic PLA. Hydroxyapatite, although degrades slowly, is embedded in the gelatin matrix, causing the guest phase of the composite to degrade first. The PLA host phase maintains structural integrity for a longer period of time due to its synthetic polymer composition and controlled degradation profile [79]. Gelatin rapidly degrades in physiological conditions due to enzymatic and hydrolytic activity, releasing hydroxyapatite particles. This creates initial porosity for tissue integration. The degradation rate of composites depends not only on the type and percentage of hydroxyapatite but also on the particle size and overall composition of the composite materials, and these factors can reciprocally affect the biodegradation behavior [80]. Degradation of polylactic acid (PLA) occurs through a two-step process. First, water molecules penetrate the amorphous regions, causing random hydrolysis of ester bonds and increasing crystallinity. This step progresses rapidly due to autocatalysis by the carboxyl end groups. Second, hydrolysis slowly attacks the crystalline domains after most of the amorphous regions have been degraded [81]. Degradation proceeds heterogeneously, with internal decomposition occurring more rapidly than surface erosion. This process is self-accelerating and strongly dependent on the initial crystallinity; higher crystallinity slows down degradation. These unique degradation characteristics make PLA suitable for controlled release applications in biomedical applications such as bone tissue engineering [82].

The degradation rate of all groups became plateau at different time points. The enhanced hydrophilicity causes peptide bonds and gelatin crosslinks to undergo hydrolysis, ultimately resulting in the degradation of the material [83,84]. The cell viability results, and the shape of cells adhered to the scaffold showed that the cell growth increased with increasing hydroxyapatite and blueberry concentrations. Similarly, previous studies showed that with increasing HA content in the HA/gelatin composites, cell proliferation, and adhesion, ALP content and expression of bone differentiation genes also increased [85,86]. It appeared that the interaction between nHA and gelatin forms a robust matrix having a rougher surface that promotes cell adhesion and growth rather than a smooth surface of the scaffold. One study showed that 10% HA can increase cell adhesion on PLGA films due to its rough surface after HA doping [86]. In another study, synthetic gel and colloid hydroxyapatite nanoparticles were spray-dried into microparticles for potential use as slow-release vaccine carriers. The researchers compared the physico-chemical properties of these gel, colloid, and commercial HA particles and evaluated their cytotoxicity to human monocyte-derived macrophages. The results showed that cytotoxicity varied by particle type, with gel-based particles being the most toxic at lower concentrations [87]. These results highlight the significance of the composition and concentration of hydroxyapatite-based materials in determining their biocompatibility and cytotoxic effects. For assessing the effects of scaffolds on differentiation and mineralization, the ALP concentration and calcium deposition were evaluated. The ALP is expressed in mineralized tissue cells and plays an important role in hard tissue construction. ALP activity is one of the markers of osteoblast phenotype. In general, an increase in ALP-specific activities in a population of bone cells indicates a change to a more differentiated state [88]. ALP appears to play a significant contribution in the initiation of matrix mineralization, as the expression of this enzyme decreases after the onset of mineralization [89]. When the cells cultured with the extract from each scaffold, an increase in concentration of ALP was detected in the HA10-BB40 and HA10-BB0 groups after 10 days of incubation. These results indicated that HA and BB at higher doses accelerate osteoblastic differentiation and promote extracellular matrix formation. Blueberry has been reported to enhance osteoblastic bone formation. This bone-promoting effect is due to the stimulation of osteoblastic differentiation caused by phenolic acid metabolites from blueberry polyphenols [90]. Bickford et al. reported that BBs increased the human bone marrow-derived stem cell proliferation, demonstrating the potential of berries for osteogeneses [73]. Polyphenols might affect the development of bone by osteoblasts through cellular signaling pathways that interact with estrogen receptors, mitogen-activated protein kinases, and the osteoprotegerin activator/receptor, which in turn influences the NF-kB ligand [91]. The interaction of calcium with alizarin red results in red-orange nodules that indicate the site of their mineralization [92]. In this study, these nodules were bolder in the groups with a higher concentration of hydroxyapatite and blueberry.

Hydroxyapatite, due to its high content of calcium and phosphate ions, plays a crucial role in bone tissue mineralization. The gradual release of these ions from HA within the scaffold creates a favorable environment for the formation and growth of new mineralized matrix, thereby accelerating osteogenesis [93]. Our experimental results also demonstrated significantly higher mineralization in the HA groups compared to the control. Devareddy et al. investigated the bone-protective effect of blueberry in an ovarectomized rat model. The rats were analyzed in three groups including sham, ovarectomized, (Ovx, control), and Ovx + blueberry (5 w/w% BB). Their results showed that the OVX + 5% BB group exhibited an increase in overall bone mineral density and serum ALP levels [36]. In another study, Swetha et al. fabricated PLA scaffolds coated with Gel/Mg/n-HA and evaluated mineralization and differentiation into the osteoblastic lineage. The 3D PLA/Gel/Mg-nHA scaffolds stimulated the MSC differentiation into the osteoblastic lineage [30].

The optimal scaffold composition was selected based on: (1) low degradation, (2) high cell viability, (3) superior cell adhesion, (4) enhanced osteogenic activity, (5) greater matrix mineralization (alizarin red), and (6) faster scratch wound closure. The additional complementary tests were conducted on the HA10-BB40 group, identified as the optimal group, and on the HA10-BB0 group, which served as the control. The analysis of compression strength and compression modulus in materials with and without blueberry reveals important insights into their mechanical behavior. While the compression strength remains relatively unchanged with the addition of blueberry, the increase in compression modulus indicates a beneficial enhancement in stiffness. A clear and definitive relationship between blueberries and enhanced mechanical strength has yet to be comprehensively studied. The observed modest increase in compressive modulus may be attributed to the interaction with hydroxyapatite within the composite scaffold. In a previous experiment, the PLA scaffold was created using 3D printing technology, and the scaffold’s pores were filled with gelatin, nHA, and platelet-rich plasma (PRP). The greatest mechanical strength (UCS) was recorded for the PLA/G-nHA/PRP group at 10.95 MPa, followed by the PLA/G-nHA group at 6.62 MPa, and the PLA group at 5.15 MPa [38]. These findings were consistent with those observed in this study.

The hydrophilicity of the scaffold surfaces was measured via the water contact angle. Adequate hydrophilicity is crucial for tissue-engineered scaffolds, as it strongly affects cell attachment and tissue repair [94]. The surface of PLA is highly hydrophobic, but it can be coated with hydrophilic materials [95]. It was found that a higher amount of BB increased the hydrophilicity and decreased the water contact angle to 68.2 for HA10-BB40. This can be associated with the hydrophilic OH group of the HA, and hydrophilic (acidic) phenolic hydroxyl groups presented in the anthocyanins in blueberries [96]. With increasing blueberry dosage in the HA5 group, cell viability was enhanced. Similarly, cell adhesion improved with higher blueberry concentrations in both HA5 and HA10 groups. Mineralization also increased significantly with elevated blueberry doses, particularly in the HA10 group. Consistent trends were observed in the scratch assay, where higher blueberry content led to improved outcomes. Furthermore, the expression of osteogenic genes was upregulated in the blueberry-containing groups compared to those without blueberry. We concluded that the incorporation of both BB and HA into the scaffold structure resulted in enhanced hydrophilicity, which is a desirable property for promoting cell adhesion, growth, and osteogenic differentiation.

The results of the bioactivity evaluation and elemental analysis confirmed that the scaffolds exhibit favorable bioactive properties and their ability to promote biomineralization, which is essential for successful bone tissue regeneration. Compared to the scaffold surface shown in Fig.11(which represents the scaffold before immersion in SBF), a significant deposition of a hydroxyapatite layer was observed after the bioactivity test (Fig.14). This substantial mineral accumulation highlights the scaffold’s strong affinity for calcium and phosphate ions and its capacity to support apatite formation. The increase in bioactivity is due to the presence of both organic (collagen) and inorganic (hydroxyapatite) content [97]. The organic component of bone tissue comprises 90% type I collagen (Coll-1) and 10% non-collagenous protein [98]. The Col1α1 gene is an early osteoblast marker upregulated during the transition from osteoprogenitor to preosteoblast cells [99,100]. Runx2 is also a transcription factor required for the initiation of osteogenic differentiation. However, after cell maturation, Runx2 expression decreases [101]. Furthermore, the VEGF can promote the differentiation toward osteogeneses and angiogenesis. It is suitable for bone regeneration because of its positive influences in angiogenesis, cell migration, and matrix mineralization [102]. Vascular regeneration is crucial for bone formation as it can effectively transport nutrients and remove metabolic waste products [103]. Our findings showed that HA and BB significantly enhanced Coll-α1, Runx2, and VEGF. The HA activates a specific signaling pathway and regulates particular transcription factors that induce the differentiation of osteoblasts, because transcription factors like Runx2 and collagen are essential for osteoblast differentiation. The expression of these factors is commonly used as a marker in osteoblastic differentiation studies, including those involved the use of HA for bone formation [104]. Furthermore, HA (both HA-coated surfaces and HA composites) has been demonstrated to induce gene expression and collagen protein synthesis in osteoblasts [105]. In a study by Zhang et al., a bicellular complex composed of osteoblasts and vascular endothelial cells with osteogenic and angiogenic potential was established. When this bilayer diaphragm and hydroxyapatite complex were implanted under the skin of mice, they exhibited more mature mineralization and produced more capillaries after 12 weeks, compared to the group without hydroxyapatite [106]. Blueberry fruit extract also has been shown to have beneficial effects on bone formation and resorption in both animal and cellular investigations [107]. The antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties of phytochemicals, including anthocyanins, in blueberries, play a role in bone protection [108]. Devarredi et al. showed that blueberry prevents the deterioration of bone density in the whole body and has an advantageous effect on bone density of the tibia and femur in ovariectomy (OVX) rats by suppressing bone turnover [36]. These findings suggest that both hydroxyapatite and blueberry-derived compounds have the potential to promote bone regeneration and improve bone health through their distinct mechanisms of action, involving the enhancement of osteoblast and vascular function.

Fabricating biologically active tissue-engineered scaffolds has engrossed significant attention as a promising alternative to autografts and allografts for repairing injured or lost tissue. From bone regeneration perspective, the PLA phase of the scaffold could provide the necessary physical and mechanical support for cells to grow. In contrast, the HA along with blueberry could support cells to proliferate and adhere, and induce osteogenic activity, promoting the differentiation and mineralization of cells towards the osteogenic lineage. These materials also induced apatite layer deposition. In conclusion, the fabrication of PLA/G-nHA-BB bioactive tissue-engineered scaffold, HA10-BB40 (10 and 40 w/v% of HA and BB respectively), represents a promising approach for repairing bone defects and promoting bone regeneration. The unique combination of the scaffold’s structural, physicochemical, mechanical, and biological properties and its ability to support cells to grow and differentiate, make it a valuable tool in regenerative medicine and tissue engineering.