Multiple myeloma (MM) and plasmacytoma metastases to the spine are extremely rare, with 9 cases reported in the literature. Only 2 describe cases of solitary plasmacytoma (SP) specifically in the cervical spine, both in patients without known histories of MM. Therefore, the natural history of MM recurrence as SP in the cervical spine remains unknown.

The authors describe the case of a 67-year-old woman with a history of MM after stem cell transplant and chemotherapy in remission for a year who presented with progressive cervical myelopathy found to have an intradural extramedullary solitary lesion at C2–3 on MRI of the whole spine. The patient underwent C1–3 laminectomies for decompression and intradural biopsy of the lesion, with pathology consistent with plasmacytoma. The patient’s motor examination improved significantly postoperatively.

SP should be included in the differential diagnosis for intradural extramedullary lesions found in the spine, particularly in patients with a history of MM and tumor resistance to radiotherapy. Despite plasmacytoma’s classically radiosensitive nature, it is possible to have residual tumor after radiation therapy. In these cases, patients may benefit greatly from surgical biopsy and decompression followed by adjuvant radiotherapy.

While up to 70% of cancer patients will see vertebral metastases in the course of MM or SP disease progression, it is very rare for these tumors to affect the cervical spine, and only 8%–15% of vertebral metastases occur in this region.14–16Here we describe the case of a 67-year-old female with a history of MM in remission presenting with rapidly progressing left greater than right upper extremity weakness, found to have an intradural extramedullary SP lesion at C2.

A 67-year-old woman with a history of MM treated with stem cell transplant and two rounds of chemotherapy in remission for 1 year was referred to the hospital by her oncologist for 10 days of progressive left hand weakness and bilateral leg weakness after a car accident. On outpatient MRI of the whole spine, the patient was found to have a 3-cm intradural extramedullary postcontrast-enhancing mass concerning for plasmacytoma versus meningioma. The tumor demonstrated homogeneous postcontrast enhancement and an isointense signal on both T1- and T2-weighted imaging (Fig. 1A), without other lesions seen in the spine. On axial imaging, the mass spanned more than two-thirds the width of the canal at the C2–3 junction and centered preferentially toward the left C2 foramen (Fig. 1B). Radiological differential diagnosis included meningioma versus plasmacytoma.

A:MR images of the cervical spine demonstrating a T1- and T2-isointense intradural extramedullary lesion.B:On axial postcontrast imaging, the mass is seen to span more than two-thirds the width of the canal at C2–3, with left to right shift of the spinal cord.

On presentation, the patient’s motor examination demonstrated weakness throughout the left upper and lower extremity, as well as bilateral hand grip weakness with negative Hoffmann reflexes. The patient’s outpatient dexamethasone was stopped in anticipation of posterior cervical decompression and biopsy on hospital day 4. After consultation with the radiation oncology and medical oncology teams, the patient consented for a biopsy with the goal of decompression and diagnosis.

Tumor biopsy was performed with a complete C2 laminectomy and partial C1 and C3 laminectomies. Motor and somatosensory evoked potentials were obtained and remained stable from baseline. The tumor was firmly attached to the cervical cord both ventrally and dorsally on the left side without extension into the foramen. The tumor had a gross, rubber-like consistency and was firmly wrapped around the cord on the left side, both dorsally and ventrally. Biopsy of the lesion demonstrated significant tumor vascularity. Intraoperative frozen section was consistent with plasmacytoma. Given the radiosensitivity of plasmacytoma, the space created from posterior decompression alone, and the cohesive nature of the dura to the tumor, the decision was made to avoid an aggressive ventral resection or bony decompression. Hemostasis was achieved. The dura was closed with Prolene and reinforced with DuraGen. Epidural and muscle hemostasis was achieved prior to closure. The incision was closed with nylon in order to reinforce wound healing during postoperative radiation therapy.

Preliminary pathology was consistent with plasmacytoma (Fig. 2). Immediately postoperatively, the patient exhibited continued weakness in the bilateral upper extremities and left lower extremity that was pain limited, for which she was started on standing dexamethasone. On postoperative day 2, on examination the patient had improved to full strength in her left lower extremity and right hand grip, with residual weakness in left hand grip. Radiation therapy was started on postoperative day 3 for a total of 10 planned sessions. Immediate postoperative MRI of the cervical spine demonstrated residual tumor, as expected (Fig. 3A), with a small area of T1-hyperintense material on the left side at the site of biopsy read as a possible hemorrhage, thought to be surgical products (Fig. 3B).

The tumor is densely cellular and is composed of plasmacytoid cells (A; hematoxylin and eosin stain, magnification ×400, scale bar = 100 μm). Immunohistochemical analysis reveals that the cells are diffusely positive for CD138, confirming their identity as plasma cells (B). Additionally, immunohistochemistry (C) and in situ hybridization (D) are positive for lambda light chain.

Sagittal (left) and axial (right) postoperative MR images of the cervical spine demonstrating residual postcontrast-enhancing lesion and small foci of T1-hyperintense material thought to be surgical material.

The patient subsequently re-presented to the emergency department 1 month after surgery with increasing left upper extremity weakness despite completing 15 of 22 fractions of radiation therapy. MRI of the cervical spine at the time demonstrated continued ventral cord compression with decreased tumor volume (Fig. 4). The patient subsequently received two more steroid tapers during which she reported her left upper extremity symptoms improved and remained improved. At the most recent outpatient follow-up, 4 months after surgery, the patient exhibited intact gross motor function, and outpatient MRI of the cervical spine demonstrated a notably decreased tumor size. Postoperative seroma was noted, but the patient denied neck pain and declined further intervention for seroma.

A:MR images 1 month postoperatively demonstrating continued ventral cord compression by the lesion despite continued outpatient radiation therapy.B:MR images 4 months postoperatively demonstrating markedly reduced tumor size without evidence of continued cord compression.

The necessary informed consent was obtained in this study.

EOR = extent of resection; GTR = gross-total resection; Hx = history of; LE = lower extremity; LL = lower limb; NA = not applicable; RT = radiation therapy; STR = subtotal resection.

SP in the cervical spine as the initial presentation of MM relapse is extremely rare, with no reported cases in the literature. In this case, the patient presented with a T1- and T2-isointense and homogeneously contrast-enhancing extramedullary intradural lesion, initially concerning for possible spinal meningioma versus schwannoma versus relapsed plasmacytoma. Spinal meningiomas only represent 12% of all meningiomas but are the most common intradural spinal tumor.28Similar to plasmacytoma, they typically have a well-circumscribed T2-isointense appearance and enhance homogeneously postcontrast.29Spinal schwannomas are the third most common intradural spinal lesion and, unlike spinal meningiomas, are more common in men than in women.30While both spinal meningioma and schwannoma present more commonly, SP should be considered in the differential diagnosis in patients with a history of MM presenting with new intradural extramedullary lesions.

The initial decision to proceed with surgery was based on 1) the patient’s rapid neurological decline requiring decompression; 2) a differential diagnosis that included meningioma versus schwannoma, both of which would benefit from resection; and 3) a need for tissue diagnosis to guide treatment given the patient’s presentation with a solitary lesion. While MM was in the differential diagnosis and it was understood that surgical biopsy could potentially delay radiation therapy, non–radiation-sensitive tumors such as meningioma and schwannoma were high in the differential diagnosis given the tumor’s appearance and location. In this case, radiation treatment was not delayed after surgery, with the patient starting radiation therapy on postoperative day 3.

Intraoperatively, the decision was made to forego further decompression and potential destabilization of the cervical facets once the pathology came back as plasmacytoma. The aims of the surgery, cord decompression and biopsy, had been achieved, and the benefits of further ventral decompression did not outweigh the risks of destabilization and potentially committing the patient to instrumentation/fusion in the setting of active MM treatment in the immediate future.

In this case, surgical decompression was found to play a crucial role in alleviating the patient’s symptoms of cervical myelopathy due to left foraminal stenosis from the lesion. Surgical debulking in this case provided the patient with space for the cord to swell and time for the lesion to regress in size while undergoing radiation treatment, which ultimately required 4 months until an appreciable decrease in lesion size was noted on imaging. Therefore, surgical decompression may play an important role in cases of intradural SP that present with neurological deficits and may require longer than expected to respond to radiation therapy.

Although extremely rare, SP may present as an intradural extramedullary lesion in the cervical spine. While plasmacytoma and MM are classically radiation sensitive, there may be a role for surgical decompression for patients with symptomatic cord compression, as seen in this case report.

The authors report no conflict of interest concerning the materials or methods used in this study or the findings specified in this paper.