Phosphorylation and glycosylation are two important protein
post-transitional
modifications (PTMs). However, quantification of these PTMs is challenging
due to the lack of protein or peptide standards. In this study, we
introduced a novel approach using coulometric mass spectrometry (CMS)
for absolute quantitation of phosphopeptides and glycopeptides without
using standards. First, phosphorylated tyrosine peptides such as TSTEPQpYQPGENL
and RRLIEDAEpYAARG can be converted into electrochemically active
tyrosine peptides via enzymatic phosphate removal using alkaline phosphatase
prior to CMS quantitation. Accurate quantitation was obtained with
small quantitation errors (0.3–6.6%). Alternatively, for electrochemically
inactive phosphopeptides and glycopeptides, derivatization of their
N-termini with an NHS ester reagent, 2,5-dioxo-1-pyrrolidinyl 3,4-dihydroxybenzene
propanoate (DPDP), was conducted to introduce one electroactive catechol
tag, allowing the DPDP-derivatized peptides to be quantified by CMS.
This strategy was first validated using peptides RGD, GGYR, phosphopeptide
RRApSVA, and glycopeptide NYIVGQPSS­(β-GlcNAc)­TGNL–OH,
and successful quantification was achieved with quantification errors
less than 6%. Taking one step further, we applied this approach to
quantify glycopeptides generated from tryptic digestion of the NIST
monoclonal antibody (mAb). Through hydrophilic interaction liquid
chromatography column separation, five N297 glycopeptides were successfully
derivatized, separated, and quantified by CMS without the use of standards.
Due to the biological significance of PTMs, this study for quantifying
peptides carrying PTMs would have a high potential for quantitative
proteomics and biological research.

In proteomics research, quantitative information on peptides
and
proteins is critical for helping us understand biological processes.
Quantification in mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics research
relies on two fundamental strategies: relative and absolute quantitation.−Relative quantitation methods involve comparing the levels of peptides
or proteins among different samples. A
traditional label-free approach involves analyzing samples and comparing
their mass spectra to determine peptide abundances relative to another
sample.,Alternatively, isotopic labeling is commonly
used in relative quantitation, where peptides from two samples are
labeled with heavy and light isotopes, respectively.,The intensities of these labeled peptides are then compared to discern
changes in abundance between the samples.,−Elegant approaches like tandem mass tag, isotope-coded
affinity tags, stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture
(SILAC), isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation, metal
element chelated tags, isotope-coded protein labeling, andN,N-dimethyl leucine (DiLeu) isobaric tag
methods fall under this category.−Likewise, absolute quantitation of proteins involves spiking a known
quantity of isotope-labeled target peptide or protein into an experimental
sample, followed by LC–MS or LC–MS/MS analysis.,,,−The three most well-known methods for absolute quantitation are
absolute quantification (AQUA), quantification conCATamer (QconCAT),
and protein standard absolute quantification. While these elegant techniques offer the advantage of determining
the absolute amounts of target peptides across different samples,
the necessity of using standard or isotope-labeled peptides poses
challenges. These standard peptides may not always be readily available,
and their synthesis can be expensive and time-consuming.,,Thus, the quest for a standard-free
absolute quantitation method remains an ideal goal in proteomics research.
This is particularly true for quantifying protein PTMs such as phosphorylation
and glycosylation, in which the standard phosphopeptides or glycopeptides
may be even more difficult to obtain.

With this CMS method, we conducted
absolute quantitation of peptides
and proteins based on electrochemical oxidation of oxidizable cysteine,
tyrosine, and tryptophan residues.−


,−For peptides without oxidizable residues, they could be derivatized
to carry an electrochemical tag such as methylene blue, allowing them to be quantifiable by CMS after
derivatization. In this study, we extended the CMS quantitation approach
for peptides with PTMs such as phosphopeptides and glycopeptides.
For phosphorylated tyrosine peptides, their phosphates were removed
enzymatically to generate electroactive tyrosine peptides (Schemea), before CMS quantitation.
Alternatively, for electrochemically inactive phosphopeptides or glycopeptides,
peptide derivatization with DPDP (Schemeb) was performed to introduce one electroactive
catechol tag, prior to CMS quantitation. Upon electrochemical oxidation
at a low oxidation potential (0.7 V vs Ag/AgCl), the catechol tag
tends to lose two protons and two electrons to form a quinone product
(z= 2,Schemeb), facilitating CMS quantitation. Using these strategies,
several phosphopeptides, glycopeptides, as well as glycopeptides from
NIST mAb digest were successfully quantified, without using standards.

N-terminal-protected amino acid BOC-Lys-OH,
Gly-Gly-Tyr-Arg (GGYR, HPLC grade), Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD, HPLC grade),
and 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) buffer
were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO). Phosphorylated RRApSVA
(HPLC grade) was obtained from EMD Millipore (Temecula, CA). RRLIEDAEpYAARG,
TSTEPQpYQPGENL, alkaline phosphatase (1 KU) from bovine intestinal
mucosa, and NIST mAb antibody were bought from Sigma-Aldrich (St.
Louis, MO). NYIVGQPSS­(β-GlcNAc)­TGNL–OH was purchased
from Sussex Research (ON, Canada). 2,5-Dioxo-1-pyrrolidinyl 3,4-dihydroxybenzene
propanoate (DPDP) was bought from Aquila Pharmatech LLC (Waterville,
OH). Trypsin (sequencing grade) was purchased from Promega (Madison,
WI). Dithiothreitol (DTT), iodoacetamide (IAA), ammonium bicarbonate
(ABC), and sodium hydroxide were procured from Fisher Chemical (Fair
Lawn, NJ). Formic acid (FA) and acetonitrile were obtained from Fisher
Chemical (Fair Lawn, NJ), and deionized water used for sample preparation
was obtained by using a Millipore purification system (Burlington,
MA).

Our CMS system (apparatus shown inFigure S1) consisted of LC, electrochemistry
(EC), and MS. Basically, an ultraperformance LC (UPLC, Waters, Milford,
MA) was connected with an electrochemical thin-layer flow cell equipped
with either a glassy carbon electrode (GCD, 6 mm ID) or a boron-doped
diamond electrode (BDD, 8 mm ID) as the working electrode (WE). The
flow cell was further coupled to a high-resolution Orbitrap Q Exactive
mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). A Ag/AgCl (3
M NaCl) electrode (reference electrode (RE), catalog no.MW-2021, BASi, West Lafayette, IN) was employed as a RE,
while the stainless-steel body of the cell functioned as the counter
electrode (CE).

Separation of peptides was achieved using either
an Agilent poroshell reversed-phase column (HPH–C18, 2.1 mm
× 100 mm, 1.9 μm, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA), a reversed-phase
column (BEH C18, 2.1 mm × 100 mm, 1.7 μm), or a hydrophilic
interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) column (HALO Penta HILIC
column, 2.1 mm × 250 mm; 2.7 μm, used for the separation
of NIST mAb glycopeptides). The mobile phase flow rate was set at
0.2–0.3 mL/min. Mobile phase A used was water with 0.1% FA,
and mobile phase B was acetonitrile with 0.1% FA.

OriginPro
2018b was used to import and integrate the recorded electric
current peak to calculate the total electric charge ofQ. The peptide flowing out of the electrochemical cell was online
analyzed using the Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a heated
electrospray ionization (HESI) source with the following parameters:
sheath gas flow rate, 35; auxiliary gas flow rate, 10; spray voltage,
3.0 kV; sweep gas flow rate, 0; capillary temperature, 300 °C;
auxiliary gas heater temperature, 100 °C; and S-lens RF level,
50. Mass spectra were acquired by a Thermo Xcalibur (3.0.63). Before
each use, the glassy carbon WE underwent thorough cleaning by polishing
with an alumina slurry. In situ cleaning involved applying alternative
positive and negative potentials of + 2.0 V and – 2.0 V was
used for the BDD electrode.

We first derivatized
the GGYR peptide using DPDP and isolated the derivatized peptide,
denoted as *GGYR (* represents the derivatized peptide), via fractionation
by Shimadzu LC (LC 40B XR). Using a homemade undivided cell, we utilized
20 mL of 200 μM intact GGYR or 30 μM of *GGYR for the
cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments conducted in H2O:ACN:FA
(70:30:1). A 3 mm GCE electrode with an area of 0.07 cm2served as the WE, while a Ag/AgCl RE was positioned in close proximity
to the WE to regulate the potential. Additionally, a carbon cloth
of 5 cm2size was positioned opposite to the WE, serving
as the CE. Monitoring and recording of the oxidation current were
facilitated by an Epsilon EClipse potentiostat (BASi, West Lafayette,
IN, USA).

Phosphatase was dissolved
in 1 mL of 10 mM tris–HCL (pH 8.0) containing 1 mM magnesium
chloride and then stored in the fridge (4°C). 50
μL of RRLIEDAEpYAARG (1 mM) or 100 μL of TSTEPQpYQPGENL
(0.5 mM) was mixed with 20 μL of alkaline phosphatase (0.86
KU/mL) and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. FA was added (final FA
concentration: 1% by volume) after the dephosphorylation reaction.
The sample was cooled to room temperature and diluted with 0.1% FA
to a final concentration of 1.0 μM for CMS analysis.

A 40 μL portion of 10 μg/μL
(400 μg) of NIST mAb (ref: 8671) was denatured using 80 μL
of 8 M urea at room temperature and then vortexed for 15 min. Five
μL of 1 M DTT (freshly prepared) was added to the sample and
then shaken for 1 h at 37 °C in a water bath. A 20 μL portion
of 500 mM IAA was then added to the sample at room temperature in
the dark for 30 min. The sample mixture was then desalted and buffer-exchanged
with 50 mM ABC buffer by an Amicon 10 K molecular weight cutoff filter
(MWCOF) and then digested overnight with 20 μg of trypsin (protein/trypsin
ratio: 20:1).

For the proof-of-concept
experiment, we first derivatized the N-terminal-protected amino acid
BOC-Lys-OH with DPDP-NHS ester in a 1:10 molar ratio using H2O:ACN (50:50) as a solvent with pH 8.3 adjusted by NaOH. The sample
was derivatized for overnight reaction using mild vortexing in dark.
The same derivatization condition was applied for peptides RGD, RRApSVA, and NYIVGQPSS­(β-GlcNAc) TGNL–OH. To maintain
a good buffering system for controlling pH and reduce reaction time,
we also derivatized the GGYR peptide using 100 mM HEPES buffer (pH
8.3) and using a 1:10 molar ratio (peptide/DPDP) for the derivatization
process.

For the derivatization of glycopeptides from mAb, the
mAb digest sample was vacuum-dried and reconstituted in 20 mM HEPES
buffer (pH 8.5) to prepare a 5.3 μM sample, which was then shaken
with DPDP (159 mM, 3000-fold in excess) overnight in the dark for
derivatization. The sample was dried out and reconstituted in ACN/H2O (65:35 v/v) to prepare a 5.3 μM derivatized sample.
An underivatized sample was also prepared to assist in the measurement
of the glycopeptide derivatization yields.

For CMS quantitation
of phosphopeptides RRLIEDAEpYAARG and TSTEPQpYQPGENL, after removal
of phosphate, 10 μL of 1.0 μM peptide solution was injected
by LC (10 pmol injection amount). The mobile phase flow rate was 200
μL/min. In a 10 min gradient elution, mobile phase B increased
from 2% to 70% in 3 min and reached 90% in 1 min. Then, mobile phase
B was kept at 90% for 3 min before returning to 2%.

For CMS
quantitation of derivatized peptides, the LC elution program was similar,
and the mobile phase flow rate was set 300 μL/min, and 5 μL
of 1 μM derivatized peptides (5 pmol injection amount) was injected
for analysis For the derivatized BOC-Lys-OH, the LC gradient elution
program started with 90% A for 1 min, 90% A to 40% A in 8 min, linear
gradient at 5% A for 2 min, and then 90% A for 2 min. For the derivatized
RGD and phosphopeptide RRApSVA, the LC gradient elution
program started with 90% A for 1 min, 90% A to 80% A in 3 min, linear
gradient at 5% A for 1 min, and then 90% A for 1 min. For the derivatized
NYIVGQPSS­(β-GlcNAc) TGNL–OH LC, the gradient elution
program started with 95% A for 1 min, 95% A to 70% A in 10 min, linear
gradient at 5% A for 3 min, and then 95% A for 2 min. For the derivatized
GGYR, the mobile phase started with 95% A, 95% A to 91% A in 10 min,
linear gradient at 5% A for 2 min, and then 95% A for 2 min. To avoid
interference of the HEPES buffer in the GGYR sample, the first 3 min
of eluate was directed to waste.

For CMS quantitation of derivatized
mAb glycopeptides, the mobile
phase flow rate was set at the 200 μL/min A gradient elution
program starting with 25% A for 5 min (the first 5 min of eluate was
directed to waste), 25% A to 35% A in 30 min, linear gradient at 60%
A for 5 min, and then 25% A for 5 min. A 10 μL portion of the
derivatized mAb digest (5.3 μM, injection amount 53 pmol) was
injected for CMS quantitation.

The integration of MS with electrochemistry
(EC), namely, EC/MS,
has drawn considerable attention and found many applications, including
drug metabolism study, protein structural analysis, and electrochemical
reaction mechanism elucidation.−The method can also be used to capture elusive reaction intermediates−and enable electrosynthetic reaction screening.−As a new application
of the EC/MS technique, the unprecedented advantage of CMS is the
capability of absolute quantitation without using any standards or
establishing a calibration curve. In our previous research, we successfully
demonstrated the capability of CMS to quantify peptides containing
electroactive residues like cysteine, tyrosine, and tryptophan.−


,−In this study, a similar CMS
approach was adopted to quantify peptides containing phosphorylated
tyrosine residues after enzymatic removal of phosphate to generate
electrochemically active tyrosine peptides. As the removal of phosphate
by phosphatase is quantitative, the measured quantity of the resulting
tyrosine peptide can reflect the amount of the phosphopeptide precursor.
On the other hand, in a more general approach, phosphopeptides or
glycopeptides can be selectively derivatized by DPDP to carry an electrochemical
tag of catechol (Schemeb), prior to CMS quantitation. In comparison to our previously used
methylene blue tag, the catechol tag
is more polar and water-soluble, leading to better peptide separation
by LC and therefore benefits CMS quantitation.

To explore the feasibility of CMS quantitation of phosphorylated
tyrosine peptides, one standard peptide TSTEPQpYQPGENL was first tested.
As shown inFigurea,b, after incubation with alkaline phosphatase, the TSTEPQpYQPGENL
was quantitatively−converted into TSTEPQYQPGENL (the original peak of
TSTEPQpYQPGENL at 3.2 min disappeared (Figurea); instead, the product TSTEPQYQPGENL peak
appeared at 3.5 min in the TIC diagram (Figureb). When the intact TSTEPQpYQPGENL was injected,
no electric current peak was observed with an applied voltage of +
1.05 V for oxidation (Figureg), indicating that phosphorylated tyrosine is not electrochemically
active. In contrast, after the injection of the dephosphorylated peptide
TSTEPQYQPGENL sample, a sharp electric current peak was observed under
the same oxidation conditions (Figureh), which is in line with our previous observation
of electrochemical oxidation of tyrosine-containing peptides.,Indeed, this was further confirmed by the corresponding MS spectra
recorded upon electrochemical oxidation (Figurec,d). Compared to the MS spectrum (Figurec) without electrolysis,
the +2 ion of TSTEPQYQPGENL was observed atm/z731.84, whereas a new peak atm/z730.84 (Figured), corresponding to the +2 ion of the oxidized peptide product
and resulting from 2 electron and 2 proton losses upon tyrosine oxidation,,,was detected, when +1.05 V was
applied to the cell for oxidation. The integrated extracted ion chromatogram
(EIC) peak area ofm/z731.84 shown
inFiguref was reduced
by 18.4% compared to the same peak inFiguree, suggesting that the oxidation yield for
TSTEPQYQPGENL was 18.4% (see the detailed data inTable S1). The amount of the oxidized TSTEPQYQPGENL was calculated
to be 10.64 pmol based on the integration of the current peak area
shown inFigureh
and the oxidation yield usingeq. Therefore, the measured amount of TSTEPQYQPGENL was 10.64
pmol (Table S1). A triplicate measurement
gave the average amount of TSTEPQYQPGENL to be 10.66 pmol, which turned
out to be close to the theoretical amount of 10.0 pmol, with a measurement
error of 6.6% (Table S1).

TICs of TSTEPQpYQPGENL
(a) before and (b) after adding phosphatase.
MS spectra of TSTEPQYQPGENL (c) when the cell was off and (d) when
the cell was turned on (applied potential: +1.05 V). The oxidation
product of TSTEPQYQPGENL was detected atm/z730.84. EICs of TSTEPQYQPGENL atm/z731.84 were acquired (e) when the cell was off and (f)
when the cell was turned on (applied potential: +1.05 V). Electric
current diagrams were collected from (g) the oxidation of TSTEPQpYQPGENL
and (h) the oxidation of TSTEPQYQPGENL.

RRLIEDAEpYAARG, another phosphopeptide that contains
phosphotyrosine,
was also analyzed in the same way by CMS. RRLIEDAEpYAARG was also
quantitatively converted into RRLIEDAEYAARG by phosphatase (Figure S2a,b). No electric current was detected
for RRLIEDAEpYAARG (Figure S2g), while
a sharp current was observed for the dephosphorylated peptide RRLIEDAEYAARG
sample (Figure S2h). The oxidation product
was seen atm/z506.27 after electrolysis
(Figure S2d). The oxidation yield was measured
by the comparison of the EIC peak area ofm/z506.94 before and after oxidation (Figure S2e,f). In a triplicate measurement, the averaged quantity
of this peptide measured by CMS was 10.03 pmol, which is very close
to the initial amount of the expected value of 10.00 pmol with a measurement
error 0.3% (detailed data is shown inTable S2). The results shown above confirm that CMS can be used for absolute
quantitation of phosphorylated tyrosine peptides, in combination with
enzymatic phosphate removal.

In
this study, we also developed an alternative CMS approach for quantifying
phosphopeptides and glycopeptides, in combination with the DPDP derivatization
strategy. First, we tested some model peptides to validate the quantitation
method and then applied it to quantify phosphopeptides and glycopeptides.

We initially chose the N-terminal-protected amino acid BOC-Lys-OH
as a model compound for our investigation. We observed a 94% reaction
efficiency for this amino acid, as evidenced by a decrease in the
EIC peak area of the intact peptide ion atm/z247.1 from 5.80 × 106before DPDP derivatization
to 3.44 × 105after DPDP derivatization (shown inFigure S3). For CMS quantitation, we injected
5 μL of 1 μM BOC-Lys-OH after its derivatization (injection
amount: 5.0 pmol). Additionally, a minor potential of 0.7 V (vs Ag/AgCl)
was applied to the WE of the flow cell to facilitate the sample oxidation.
Prior to oxidation, the +1 ion of DPDP-derivatized BOC-Lys-OH was
detected atm/z411.2 (Figure S4a). Another peak atm/z409.2 was also seen, probably due to in-source
oxidation during sample ionization (Figure S4a). Upon electrochemical oxidation, the intensity of the +1 ion of
the DPDP-derivatized BOC-Lys-OH decreased (Figure S4,b). Conversely, the intensity peak atm/z409.2 increased (Figure S4,b) due to electrochemical oxidation. The EIC peak area of the DPDP-derivatized
BOC-Lys-OH atm/z411.2 decreased
by 21% following oxidation (Figure S4,d) compared to its preoxidation EIC peak (Figure S4,c), indicating an oxidation yield of 21% (Table S3). The total charge involved in peptide oxidation
was determined to be 1.67 × 10–7C through integration
of the peptide oxidation current (Figure S4,f). According toeqandz= 2 for the oxidation of the catechol moiety,
it was determined that the amount of BOC-Lys-OH by CMS was 4.4 pmol,
after considering 94% derivatization yield. In triplicate measurements,
the average value of the three runs was calculated to be 4.7 pmol
(Table S3). The theoretical amount of BOC-Lys-OH
used for CMS quantification was 5.0 pmol. The quantitation error of
BOC-Lys-OH was −5.4% (Table S3),
suggesting the quantitation feasibility of this alternative CMS approach.

Peptide RGD was then chosen as an additional test sample for CMS
quantification method validation. A derivatization yield of 94% for
this peptide using DPDP was measured using LC/MS in a similar way
as described above for sample BOC-Lys-OH.Figure S5,adisplays the +1 ion of the derivatized RGD (m/z511.2) and its oxidized product (m/z509.2, probably due to in-source oxidation).
The EIC peak area ofm/z511.2 decreased
by 10% following oxidation, indicating an oxidation yield of 10% (Figure S5c,d). The total charge Q during oxidation
was recorded at 7.16 × 10–8C. A theoretical
5.0 pmol of the peptide was injected, with an actual measured amount
of 4.7 pmol (calculated based oneqwith further consideration of the 94% derivatization
yield, see details inTable S4), reflecting
a slight measurement error of −6%.

Another peptide GGRY
was also selected and derivatized by DPDP
for testing, for the reason to show that the catechol tag can be selectively
oxidized without oxidizing its tyrosine residue when the applied potential
is low. In order to gain deeper insights into the oxidation properties
of the DPDP-derivatized peptide, we conducted CV of intact GGYR and
the derivatized GGRY, *GGYR. *GGRY was obtained by the reaction of
GGYR with DPDP followed by LC purification. A CV of 20 mL of 200 μM
intact GGYR peptide (dissolved in H2O:ACN:FA, 70:30:1 by
volume) was conducted. Upon initiating the CV experiment with a positive
scan from 0 to 1400 mV (vs Ag/AgCl), a discernible peak (I) at a potential
of 1050 mV corresponding to the oxidization of the tyrosine residue
of GGYR was observed as shown inFigurea (the observed onset oxidation potential
for tyrosine is 900 mV). The oxidation of tyrosine at 1050 mV is consistent
with our previous observation. In contrast,
CV of 20 mL of 30 μM *GGYR (dissolved in H2O:ACN:FA,
70:30:1 by volume) was performed, two peaks (I and II) were noticed,
corresponding to the oxidation of the tyrosine moiety of *GGYR at
1050 mV (peak I,Figureb), and the oxidation of the catechol tag of *GGYR at 700 mV (the
observed onset oxidation potential for the catechol tag is 620 mV,
peak II,Figureb).
A background CV in H2O:ACN:FA (70:30:1 by volume) marked
by dashed lines inFigurea,b was also collected to separate faradaic current from its
nonfaradic counterpart. From the CV plots shown inFigurea,b, it was clear that the
selective oxidation of the tag of the derivatized peptide without
oxidizing the tyrosine residue can be achieved at a potential range
between 620 and 900 mV. Therefore, in our experiment, 700 or 800 mV
was selected as the oxidation potential for our CMS experiments. It
can be seen that our newly employed derivatizing agent DPDP offers
a distinct advantage by undergoing oxidation at a lower potential
of 0.7 V vs Ag/AgCl during CMS quantitation. This characteristic shows
that it is less susceptible to the phenomenon of surface fouling on
the electrode. Throughout our experimental endeavors, we observed
a reduction in the frequency of electrode cleaning procedures.

Cyclic voltammetric
behaviors of (a) GGYR and (b) derivatized GGYR.
Mass spectra of derivatized GGYR (c) before electrochemical oxidation
and (d) after electrochemical oxidation at 0.7 V; EIC peaks of derivatized
GGYR atm/z616.2 (e) before oxidation
and (f) after oxidation; diagram showing the electrochemical oxidation
currents of (g) the blank solvent and (h) the derivatized GGYR sample.

In order to improve the efficiency of peptide derivatization
using
the DPDP reagent, 100 mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.3) was used as the buffer
for GGYR derivatization, and a 100% derivatization yield was achieved
(no intact GGYR was seen after derivatization for 4 h), thus avoiding
the necessity of measuring the derivatization yield. This process
also significantly shortened the reaction time compared to that of
the traditional overnight protocol. Subsequently, *GGRY was subjected
to CMS measurement. Before introducing the sample to the electrochemical
cell, the first 3 min were diverted to waste to eliminate the HEPES
buffer. When the cell was turned off, an ion ofm/z616.2 was observed (Figurec), corresponding to the protonated *GGRY.
Another ion atm/z614.2 was also
seen (Figurec), probably
due to in-source oxidation. The integrated EIC peak area form/z616.2 decreased by 7.2% following oxidation
(Figuree,f), indicating
a peptide oxidation yield of 7.2%. The total oxidation charge (Q) was calculated as 6.92 × 10–8C
(Figureg,h). We injected
an expected 5.0 pmol of peptide with an actual measured amount of
4.7 pmol (triplicate measurements,Table S5), yielding a small measurement error of −5.4%.

To verify
that the oxidation did occur to the catechol tag located
in the N-terminus of the *GGRY peptide, both the oxidized peptide
product ion (m/z614.2) and the
intact peptide ion (m/z616.2) were
subject to MS/MS analysis. For this analysis, the *GGYR sample was
introduced into the electrochemical cell for oxidation at 0.7 V using
a syringe pump. The oxidation product was collected for analysis by
nanoelectrospray ionization, resulting in the detection of the oxidized
G’GYR ion (’ indicates the oxidized catechol tag) atm/z614.2. As depicted inFigure S6, upon collision induced dissociation,m/z614.2 produced a fragment ion b2-2H
(m/z277.1), whereas the intact
*GGYR ion (m/z616.2) generated
b2(m/z279.1), which
is in line with the occurrence of oxidation to the N-terminal catechol
tag of *GGYR indeed.

Our method’s quantitation sensitivity
was also evaluated
by investigating CMS quantitation by injecting 6 μL of 25 nM
*GGYR sample (total amount: 150 fmol *GGYR). The integrated EIC peak
area form/z616.2 decreased by
9.5% following oxidation (Figure S7c,d),
indicating a peptide oxidation yield of 9.5%. The total oxidation
charge (Q) was calculated as 2.54 × 10–9C (Figure S7f). The actual measured amount
of 146 fmol by CMS (triplicate measurements,Table S6) showed a small measurement error of −3.0% in comparison
with the theoretical injection amount of 150 fmol.

After
quantifying standard peptides, we applied the method to quantify phosphopeptides
and glycopeptides, as a demonstration of its application. A phosphorylated
peptide, RRApSVA, was selected as a test sample that had no oxidizable
amino acid residue. The derivatization yield of this peptide was determined
to be 68% by comparing the EIC peak area of the intact peptide (m/z739.4) signal before and after the
derivatization reaction (Table S7). Prior
to oxidation, the +1 ion of derivatized RRAPSVA was detected
atm/z903.4 (Figurea). An in-source oxidation peak was seen
atm/z901.4 (Figurea), and its signal intensity increased after
triggering the oxidation by applying 0.7 V (vs Ag/AgCl) to the WE
of the cell (Figureb). In-source oxidation caused the measurement complexity due to
an overlap ofm/z903.4 with the
M + 2 isotope peak ofm/z901.4.
To avoid this complexity, we selected the peak atm/z904.4 to calculate the oxidation yield. Upon
oxidation, the integrated EIC peak area form/z904.4 was reduced by 5.5% (Figured) compared to before oxidation (Figurec), indicating an
oxidation yield of 5.5%. The total chargeQinvolved
in the oxidation in this case was determined to be 3.65 × 10–8C (Figuree,f). ThisQvalue, along with the oxidation
yield (i.e.,eq), was
utilized to calculate the quantity of the derivatized peptide to be
3.43 pmol (Table S7). Considering the 68%
derivatization yield, the total peptide amount was calculated to be
5.0 pmol. Triplicate measurements gave an average peptide amount of
5.2 pmol (Table S7). Once again, this value
aligns well with the theoretical peptide amount of 5 pmol with a small
quantitation error of 3.4% (Table S7).

Mass spectra
of the *RRApSVA (a) before electrochemical oxidation
and (b) after electrochemical oxidation at 0.7 V; EIC peaks of the
*RRApSVA ion atm/z904.4 (c) before
oxidation and (d) after oxidation; diagrams showing the electrochemical
oxidation currents of (e) the blank solvent and (f) *RRApSVA.

To investigate the CMS quantification method for
glycopeptide analysis,
a glycosylated peptide, NYIVGQPSS­(β-GlcNAc)­TGNL–OH, was
selected for testing. The derivatization yield of this peptide was
determined to be 98% by comparing the EIC peak area of the intact
peptide (m/z776.9) signal before
and after the derivatization reaction (Table S8). The derivatized peptide was then measured using CMS. Before oxidation,
the +1 ion of *NYIVGQPSS­(β-GlcNAc)­TGNL–OH was detected
atm/z858.9 (Figurea), and its isotope peak atm/z859.9 was used for calculation of the oxidation
yield. Upon peptide oxidation, the intensity atm/z859.9 decreased by 5.3% after oxidation (Figured) compared to no
oxidation (Figurec), indicating a peptide oxidation yield of 5.3%. The total chargeQinvolved in the oxidation in this case was determined
to be 5.2 × 10–8C (Figuree,f). ThisQvalue, along
with the oxidation yield, was utilized to calculate the quantity of
the derivatized peptide, which was 5.13 pmol. Considering the 98%
derivatization yield, the total average peptide amount was calculated
to be 5.25 pmol (Table S8). Once again,
this value aligns well with the theoretical peptide amount of 5 pmol,
with a small quantitation error of 5.0%.

Mass spectra of *NYIVGQPSS­(β-GlcNAc)­TGNL–OH
(a) before
electrochemical oxidation at 0.7 V and (b) after electrochemical oxidation;
M represents *NYIVGQPSS­(β-GlcNAc)­TGNL–OH. EIC peaks of
the *NYIVGQPSS­(β-GlcNAc)­TGNL–OH atm/z859.9 (c) before oxidation and (d) after oxidation;
diagrams showing the electrochemical oxidation currents of (e) the
blank solvent and (f) *NYIVGQPSS­(β-GlcNAc)­TGNL–OH.

As shown above, several peptides including phosphopeptides
and
glycopeptides were tested in this study, and the quantitation errors
were good and within ±7%. The results are summarized inTable. The results suggest
the feasibility and accuracy of our CMS for quantitation.

As a demonstration
of the application of our CMS approach, we applied it for quantifying
glycopeptides of the antibody IgG. MS techniques for antibody quantification
in biotherapeutics typically employ a “bottom-up” strategy,
in which proteins are enzymatically digested into peptides. However,
quantitation ofN-glycosylation is a challenging
task. The lack of commercially availableN-glycosylated
standards precludes absolute quantitation, and thus, relative quantitation
of glycosylation is performed by the multiple reaction monitoring
method where relative comparisons of glycan/glycopeptide signals are
taken into account. In our study, using
CMS after peptide derivatization, we enabled standard-free quantification
of several glycopeptides originating from the heavy chain Fc of the
IgG (located on residue N297, see the sequence information on NIST
monoclonal antibody (mAb) in theSupporting Information).

A HILIC column was used for the separation of these glycopeptides
due to the high affinity of the glycopeptides. Previously, we reported NIST mAb glycopeptide quantitation
by CMS, but the direct electrochemical oxidation of those glycopeptides
was complicated due to the presence of two oxidizable tyrosine residues
in them. As the oxidation of one or both
of the tyrosine residues occurred, the CMS quantitation required the
assumption that the oxidation product resulting from one tyrosine
oxidation has the same ionization efficiency as the oxidation product
resulting from the oxidation of two tyrosine residues, making the
calculation not straightforward. In this study, we took the protocol
to derivatize these glycopeptides with DPDP, so the oxidation at a
low oxidation potential of 0.8 V could selectively occur in the catechol
tags of the derivatized glycopeptides rather than the tyrosine residues,
thus simplifying the quantitation calculation.

In our study,
the NIST mAb was subjected to trypsin digestion,
from which five glycopeptides (each with glycosylation at the N297
residue of the Fc heavy chain), EEQYNSTYR-G0F, EEQYNSTYR-G1F, EEQYNSTYR-G2F,
EEQYNSTYR-G1F­(-GlcNAc), and EEQYNSTYR-G2F­(Hex) (structures shown inTable) were identified.
The glycopeptides were derivatized using DPDP, and the derivatization
yields were found to be 93–98% (Table S9). Subsequently, the derivatized glycopeptides were separated by
a HILIC column, and their EICs are shown inFigurea. The major glycoforms detected were *EEQYNSTYR-G0F,
*EEQYNSTYR-G1F, and *EEQYNSTYR-G2F based on observed EIC peak intensities,
while minor glycoforms included *EEQYNSTYR-G1F­(-GlcNAc) and *EEQYNSTYR-G2F­(Hex).
It is noteworthy that *EEQYNSTYR-G1F exhibited a split peak at 22.4
min (the third panel ofFigurea) due to partial separation of glycan isomers resulting from
differences in galactose α-3/6 linkage. Additionally, the glycopeptide *EEQYNSTYR-G1F­(-GlcNAc) eluted at
20.4 min (second panel ofFigurea), with an extra peak observed at 22.4 min, most likely
due to in-source fragmentation of the *EEQYNSTYR-G1F ion. The electric
oxidation current peaks of these derivatized glycopeptides are shown
inFigureb.

Structures using the consortium
for functional glycomics notation. Symbol representations of glycans:
galactose = yellow circles, mannose = green circles, N-acetylglucosamine
= blues boxes, and fucose = red triangles.

(a) EICs of +2 ions of 5 glycopeptides from tryptic digestion of
IgG after derivatization. (b) Electric current responses of the derivatized
glycopeptides from IgG digest upon electrochemical oxidation.

For CMS quantitation, prior to electrolysis, the
doubly charged
ion of *EEQYNSTYR-G0F was detected atm/z1399.5 (Figure S8,a) along with an in-source
oxidation product peak atm/z1398.5,
whereas postelectrolysis analysis revealed the increased intensity
of the oxidation product atm/z1398.5
(Figure S8,b). To avoid interference of
the isotope peak of the oxidized product to the ion intensity of the
intact peptide ion, we chose the EIC area change fromm/z1401.0, the M + 3 peak ofm/z1399.5, for the oxidation yield calculation. The oxidation
yield for *EEQYNSTYR-G0F was determined to be 4.3% (Table S9) based on the EIC peak area drop ofm/z1401.0 upon oxidation (Figure S8g,h). The oxidation current was recorded as 2.86 × 10–7C. According toeq, the measured amount of *EEQYNSTYR-G0F was 29.4 pmol
(triplicate measurements,Table S9). Considering
the 94% derivatization yield for this glycopeptide (Table S9), the amount of EEQYNSTYR-G0F was found to be 31.3
pmol. Similar calculations were performed for *EEQYNSTYR-G1F, *EEQYNSTYR-G2F,
*EEQYNSTYR-G1F­(-GlcNAc), and *EEQYNSTYR-G2F­(Hex), yielding the measured
quantities of 33.2, 6.2, 0.9, and 1.3 pmol, respectively (seeTable S9,Figures S8 and S9). These glycopeptide quantities were also calculated relative
to the theoretical total amount of IgG glycopeptides, which was 106
pmol (10 μL of 5.3 μM IgG, totaling 53.0 pmol which would
produce 106 pmol glycopeptides in total by considering that one IgG
has two symmetrical heavy chain totals) and listed inTable. The summative amount of the
five measured glycopeptides was 72.9 pmol, which is in reasonable
agreement with the theoretical value of 106 pmol, with a discrepancy
of approximately −31.3% (Table). This discrepancy likely arose from sample losses
during sample preparation such as enzymatic digestion or from the
presence of additional minor glycopeptides that were not quantified. Nevertheless, our CMS results thus provide an
effective estimation of the precursor glycoprotein quantity. Furthermore,
our CMS results were compared with data from previous NIST mAb glycosylation
studies by Zhao et al. which involved
relative quantification of glycosylated peptides based on MS peak
areas. As presented inTable, the relative abundances of the three major glycopeptides
(*EEQYNSTYR-G0F, *EEQYNSTYR-G1F, and*EEQYNSTYR-G2F) determined by
CMS were close to the value reported by Zhao et al., representing
(29.5% vs 38.4%), (31.3% vs 34.7%), and (5.9% vs 7.4%) of total antibody
abundance, respectively. While the relative abundances determined
by CMS and Zhao’s method are similar, our CMS method uniquely
provides absolute quantification for each glycopeptide. These findings
underscore the effectiveness and potential utility of CMS for precise
glycopeptide quantification.

In this study, we demonstrated an absolute
quantitation strategy
for quantifying phosphopeptides and glycopeptides by using the CMS
approach in combination with an electrochemical labeling technique.
Standard peptides, phosphopeptides, and glycopeptides were successfully
quantified by CMS with good quantitation accuracy. We also quantified
glycopeptides from digested IgG. By this approach, we were able to
estimate the amount of glycoprotein based on the abundances of surrogate
glycopeptides. The highlight of CMS is that it does not require an
isotope-labeled standard to achieve absolute quantity, which has the
potential to break the bottleneck in many current methods. It can
be seen that our method could be also applicable for quantifying peptides
or proteins with other types of PTMs such asS-nitrosation,N-acetylation, methylation, or lipidation, which could contribute
to quantitative proteomics.

This work was supported by NSF (CHE-2203284), NIH
(1R21GM148874-01), and New Jersey Health Foundation grants (PC 23-23
and PC 38-25).

The
Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsmeasuresciau.5c00047.

MTAH, YA,
BD, TY, AS, and QY performed the investigation and analysis. HC conceived
the project idea and directed the research, and HDD guided us on the
electrochemistry experiments. MTAH, YA, and HC wrote the manuscript.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.