This study aimed to investigate the potential role of cesium chloride (CsCl), ivabradine (IVA), and isoproterenol (ISO) on the sensory transmission of bladder afferents to graded urinary bladder distension (UBD). We specifically selected these drugs to target the hyperpolarization‐activated cyclic nucleotide‐gated (HCN) cation channels to determine their role in afferent encoding.

The bladders of C57BL/6 female mice were harvested with attached pelvic nerves in continuity, and the stimulus–response function (SRF) of bladder afferents to stepped bladder distension (20, 40, 60, 80 cmH2O) was recorded by single‐fiber recordings. Their changes in SRF to bath application of CsCl, IVA, and ISO were then evaluated. The presence of HCN on bladder afferent endings was assessed through immunohistological staining on bladder sections from mice with genetically labeled bladder afferents.

IVA and ISO did not significantly reduce afferent responses to UBD, whereas CsCl increased afferent responses. Bladder afferents in the pelvic nerve pathway were categorized into low‐firing (LF, < 10 Hz) and high‐firing (HF, > 10 Hz) groups. SRF in both the LF and HF groups showed similar trends with no significant changes in response to IVA and ISO. CsCl increased SRF only in the HF group but not in the LF group. Immunohistological staining revealed that HCN1 does not extensively co‐localize with afferent endings, showing only sporadic presence.

Our targeted pharmacological studies with single‐fiber recordings and immunohistological staining collectively suggest that HCN channels do not play a significant role in bladder afferent sensory transmission.

Pelvic disorders such as interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome (IC/BPS), overactive bladder (OAB), and lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTs) are debilitating conditions with overlapping symptoms that significantly impact patients' quality of life. These disorders can lead to increased urinary frequency, urgency, incontinence, and/or bladder pain [1]. Such functional disruptions often result in reduced social engagement, depression, and physiological distress [2]. Pelvic disorders are more prevalent in older adults [2] and the female population [3]. Management of pelvic disorders remains a significant unmet clinical need, particularly with regard to drug‐based treatments for bladder pain [4,5]. Bladder afferents, which mediate sensory transmission, represent a promising pharmacological target for alleviating symptoms of bladder disorders. Notably, drugs such as Ivabradine and Isoproterenol that were originally developed for cardiac disorders have demonstrated clinical efficacy in improving pelvic symptoms. However, their precise mechanisms of action on bladder sensory pathways remain poorly understood [4,5].

Changes in bladder morphology in aged mice are thought to contribute to an increased likelihood of bladder dysfunction. Preclinical studies in aged rodents have shown increased bladder weight [6] and muscular thickening [7,8], which are consistent with detrusor smooth muscle (DSM) changes observed in aged humans [9,10]. However, despite these morphological changes, aged mice continue to exhibit normal and consistent voiding cycles with preserved detrusor strength [11]. This suggests that a potential compensatory mechanism exists in response to these muscular changes to maintain voiding behavior, possibly in the sensory nerve pathway [12,13]. These mixed findings on the DSM in bladder dysfunction have shifted research focus away from muscular changes and toward sensory transmission of bladder distension, prompting investigations into the neural signaling underlying normal bladder function (including continence, voiding, and nociception). Previous studies have systematically examined bladder afferent innervation from both the lumbar splanchnic and pelvic nerve pathways [14], identifying a predominant presence of stretch‐sensitive afferents in the pelvic nerve. These stretch‐sensitive afferents likely encode bladder distension and relay signals to the central nervous system (CNS), where higher cortical centers determine whether micturition is behaviorally appropriate. Additionally, prior research has reported that stretch‐sensitive bladder afferents consist of high‐firing and low‐firing groups, which correspond to thinly myelinated Aδ fibers and unmyelinated C fibers, respectively [15].

Recent studies highlight the critical role of hyperpolarization‐activated cyclic nucleotide‐gated (HCN) cation channels in the bladder during mechanical distension and voiding behavior [13,16,17,18]. HCN channels are activated by hyperpolarized membrane potentials, generating an inward “funny current” that depolarizes the membrane potential and returns it to its resting level. In cardiac myocytes, particularly pacemaker cells, HCN channels are essential for maintaining heart rate in the sinoatrial node. Given their presence in bladder muscle cells, studies have explored HCN's potential pacemaking role in DSM [16]. While all four HCN channel isoforms are expressed in the human bladder, HCN1 has been identified as the dominant isoform in the mouse bladder [18]. Recent studies on the role of HCN1 on bladder DSM suggest that it plays a minor role in modulating detrusor relaxation. Rhythmic contractions of bladder muscle strips remained unaffected by pharmacological inhibition of HCN1 [16,17]. In addition, HCN channels are known to be distributed in sensory afferent neurons in the dorsal root ganglia (DRG) [19], and are likely present in afferent endings within the bladder wall, making them potential pharmacological targets for treating pelvic disorders associated with rhythmic bladder contractions.

Several clinically used pharmaceutical agents can directly or indirectly influence HCN channel gating. Oral intake of cesium ion has unsubstantiated anti‐cancer effects. Cesium chloride (CsCl) is a well‐established HCN channel blocker in patch‐clamp electrophysiological studies, including those on bladder DSM [18]. When present in the internal solution of the patch electrode, Cs+also blocks most voltage‐gated potassium channels due to its similar size to K+[20]. Ivabradine (IVA), a more selective HCN channel inhibitor, is FDA‐approved for treating chronic heart failure [21]. Interestingly, in cardiac patients with comorbid bladder disorders, IVA treatment has been shown to significantly alleviate bladder symptoms, reducing urinary frequency [22]. Moreover, IVA has been investigated as a potential analgesic for blocking HCN channels in afferent central terminals and spinal cord neurons to treat neuropathic pain [23,24]. Isoproterenol (ISO), a non‐selective beta‐adrenergic agonist used to treat heart block and cardiac arrest, enhances HCN channel activation by stimulating the synthesis of cyclic AMP [25]. While ISO has been shown to relax DSM in vitro [13,16], its effect on bladder afferent sensory transmission remains unexplored.

In this study, we aim to systematically investigate the potential role of three clinically used pharmaceutical agents in modulating the sensory transmission of bladder afferent endings during graded urinary bladder distension (UBD) [26]. All three agents have potent effects on HCN channels and may have translational potential for managing LUTs and IC/BPS. We will perform ex vivo single‐fiber recordings by harvesting mouse bladders with attached pelvic nerves in continuity and recording the stimulus–response function (SRF) of bladder afferents during stepped bladder distension (20, 40, 60, 80 cmH2O). The bladder wall will be exposed to CsCl, IVA, and ISO to evaluate their modulatory effects on the SRF of bladder distension. Additionally, the presence of HCN channels in bladder afferent endings will be assessed using immunohistological staining in mice with genetically labeled bladder afferents.

All experiments were reviewed and approved by the University of Connecticut Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). To be consistent with prior bladder urodynamic studies, we conducted the current study on female C57Bl/6J mice of 10–12 months old (mature adults) obtained from the rodent colony of US National Institutes of Aging [11,13]. All the mice used in the following experiments were housed in pathogen‐free facilities which are Public Health Service assured and American Association for Accreditation of Laboratory Animal Care (AAALAC) accredited following theGuide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals Eighth Edition. Mice resided in individual ventilated caging systems in polycarbonate cages (Animal Care System M.I.C.E.) and were provided with contact bedding (Envigo T7990 B.G. Irradiated Teklad Sani‐Chips). Mice were fed ad lib with either 2918 Irradiated Teklad Global 18% Rodent Diet or 7904 Irradiated S2335 Mouse Breeder Diet, supplied by Envigo and supplied with reverse osmosis water chlorinated to 2 ppm using a water bottle. Nestlets and huts were supplied for enrichment. Rodent housing temperature was set for 73.5°F with a range from 70° to 77°F. Humidity was set at 50% with a range of 35% to 65%. Mice were housed with a maximum of five animals per cage. All animals were housed on a 12:12 light–dark cycle. Animals were observed daily by the animal care services staff. Cages were changed every 2 weeks.

The harvesting of bladders with pelvic nerves attached follows our prior published procedure [27,28], and multi‐channel single‐fiber recordings were conducted using a custom‐built multiwire electrode array made of Pt/Ir wires (Φ100 μm) as reported previously [29,30]. Mice were anesthetized by 2% isoflurane inhalation and euthanized via transcardiac perfusion with oxygenated Krebs solution (in mM: 117.9 NaCl, 4.7 KCl, 25 NaHCO3, 1.3 NaH2PO4, 1.2 MgSO4, 2.5 CaCl2, 11.1d‐glucose) bubbled with 95% oxygen and 5% carbon dioxide. The L‐type calcium channel blocker nifedipine (4 μM) was added to the Krebs solution to eliminate the spontaneous smooth muscle contraction. The perfused carcass was then transferred to a dissection chamber where ice‐cold Krebs solution was circulated. The bladder and attached pelvic nerve up to its projection to the L6 dorsal root ganglion (DRG) were carefully dissected and transferred to a custom‐built two‐chamber recording platform (Figure1A). The bladder was pinned down in the tissue chamber and perfused with constant circulation of oxygenated Krebs solution, and the attached pelvic nerve was carefully pulled through a hole to the adjacent recording chamber filled with mineral oil (Fisher Scientific, East Greenwich, RI) to enhance the signal‐to‐noise ratio of extracellular single‐fiber recordings (Figure1B). A removable gate with a hole was lined with vacuum grease to separate the two chambers. The pelvic nerve was placed on a glass mirror, gently de‐sheathed, split into fine filaments about 10 μm in thickness, and mounted to the multiwire electrode array for single‐fiber recordings (Figure1C,D). The bladder was then cannulated at the bladder dome with a 26‐gauge needle and distended with a custom‐built solenoid valve system controlled by an Arduino unit connected to a hydrostatic pressure column at 20, 40, 60, and 80 cmH2O [31,32]. Single‐fiber action potentials from all five electrodes were recorded simultaneously and digitized at 20 kHz using the Intan RHD multichannel neural stimulation and recording system. The recordings were also monitored live using a Micro1401 data acquisition system and Spike2 v9.0 software (CED, Cambridge, UK).

Ex vivo single‐fiber recordings from harvested bladder and attached pelvic nerve. (A) Schematic of the two‐chamber recording system. The bladder is placed in the tissue chamber perfused with oxygenated Krebs solution, and the pelvic nerve is pulled into the adjacent recording chamber filled with mineral oil. The bladder was distended by hydrostatic columns at 20,40 60, and 80 cmH2O. (B) A photograph of the bladder‐pelvic preparation with the bladder in the recording chamber inflated by a 26‐gauge needle. (C) The pelvic nerve is laid on a glass mirror and finely split into thin filaments of ~20 μm thick as indicated by white triangles. (D) The thin nerve filaments are mounted on a custom‐built 5‐channel multiwire electrode array.

Once the bladder was catheterized and the pelvic nerve fibers were placed on the recording electrode, single‐fiber action potentials were recorded from individual afferents in response to graded bladder distension (20, 40, 60 and 80 cmH2O, 5‐s steps with a 5‐s inter‐step interval) and quantified as a stimulus response function (SRF), with representative responses shown in Figure2A. After establishing a consistent response to four step distension, a 20‐min rest period was provided to allow the bladder wall to return to the load‐free condition. Then, pharmacological assessment began with recording a baseline SRF, followed by replacing the Krebs perfusion solution in the tissue chamber with drug‐containing Krebs, which is consistent with previous pharmacological studies on harvested bladder tissue strips [13,16,17]. Another SRF was recorded after 20 min of bath pharmacological application. Then, the tissue chamber was perfused with regular Krebs solution to wash out the drug, and a final SRF was recorded after 20 min to assess recovery of afferent sensory transmission. All three drugs were prepared in oxygenated Krebs solution. CsCl and ISO were used at concentrations consistent with prior studies on bladder tissue strips: 5 μM CsCl (BP1595‐1, Sigma‐Aldrich) [17] and 1 μM ISO (I5627‐5G, Sigma‐Aldrich) [13]. To our knowledge, IVA has not been tested in bladder strip muscle assays, but it has been effective at 10 μM in patch‐clamp studies [23] and peripheral nerve block experiments [24]. Initial testing of 10 μM IVA on five bladder afferent fibers showed no effect on SRF to UBD. However, given previous reports of increased efficacy with a high IVA concentration in peripheral nerve block studies (50 μM) [24], we used 100 μM IVA (SML0281, Sigma‐Aldrich) for the entirety of this study.

Representative single fiber recordings of bladder afferent responses to urinary bladder distention (UBD). (A) Afferent responses to UBD under baseline conditions before drug exposure. (B) Isolated responses to the highest distending pressure (80 cmH2O). (C) Enlarged view confirming single fiber activity.

HCN channels have been identified in the bladder wall [18,33,34], particularly within the DSM. However, their presence in afferent nerve endings of the bladder remains undetermined. We performed antibody‐based histological staining on bladder tissues from mice heterozygous for both VGLUT2‐Cre and floxed channelrhodopsin2‐EYFP (ChR2) genes. The VGLUT2‐Cre promoter drives expression of membrane‐bound ChR2, which fluorescently labels most sensory neurons in the DRG [35]. Age‐matched VGLUT2/ChR2 mice (10–12 months old) were deeply anesthetized and euthanized by transcardiac perfusion from the left ventricle with ice cold oxygenated Krebs solution (in mM: 117.9 NaCl, 4.7 KCl, 25 NaHCO3, 1.3 NaH2PO4, 1.2 MgSO4, 2.5 CaCl2, and 11.1d‐glucose). The bladder was removed from the mouse and immediately placed in ice cold, oxygenated Krebs solution. The bladder was then cut open, gently stretched both axially and circumferentially, pinned flat in a Sylgard‐lined Petri dish, and fixed with 10% buffered formalin at 4°C overnight. Following fixation, tissues were washed three times with phosphate‐buffered saline (PBS, 10 min each) to remove the fixative, cryoprotected in 20% sucrose in PBS at 4°C overnight, embedded in OCT compound (Sakura Finetek, Tokyo, Japan), frozen, and sectioned at 20 μm thick. Triple immunostaining was performed using guinea pig anti‐HCN1 (1:200, Alomone, APC‐056‐GP), goat anti‐CGRP (1:200, Abcam, ab36001) and rat anti‐GFP (1:200 MBL International Corp, D153‐3) antibodies at 4°C overnight. On the following day, the tissue sections were incubated with the respective secondary antibodies at room temperature for 2 h. Fluorescent images were captured with a 60× oil immersion objective (60×/1.40 Plan Apo oil, DIC, Nikon) on a Nikon A1R confocal microscope, with az‐step set of 0.5 μm.

Nerve fiber colocalization was quantified following the procedure reported in our prior study [36]. Briefly, each bladder image in the image stack was processed in ImageJ using “maximum intensity z‐projection” to generate an 8‐bit grayscale image. To minimize background interference, a threshold was applied to exclude at least 99.99% of background intensity, assuming a Gaussian distribution. This threshold was determined using the standard normal distribution (Z) equation: threshold = 3.72 SD + M, where 3.72 represents theZ‐score atp= 0.9999, and SD and M correspond to the standard deviation and mean of background intensities within the 8‐bit grayscale range (0–255), respectively. The proportion of fluorescent signals was quantified as the area fraction exceeding this threshold in the 8‐bit grayscale image.

Single unit action potentials were characterized by the Spike 2 wave mark analysis function following previously reported procedure [37,38]. Action potential thresholds were determined by the noise level of each recording, typically set at three times the root mean square of the baseline noise (Figure2C). To ensure rigor, recordings containing no more than three groups of easily discriminable spikes were analyzed. Principal component analysis was conducted to sort spikes based on their distinct shapes [39,40]. The SRF was defined as the number of spikes evoked by four ascending steps of UBD at 20, 40, 60, and 80 cmH2O, each lasting 5 s. The SRFs recorded from each afferent fiber were normalized by the number of spikes elicited at 80 cmH2O distension during the baseline recording. Two‐way ANOVA with repeated measures and Bonferroni's post hoc comparisons were conducted to compare SRF recorded at baseline, 20 min post‐pharmacological application, and 20 min after the washout period. Statistical analyses were performed using Graphpad Prism software (Version 10.1.0; GraphPad, San Diego, CA, USA) and Sigma stat (version 4.0; Inpixon, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Results are presented as means ± standard error (SE).

The effect of IVA, CsCl, and ISO on the SRF of bladder afferents was assessed by single‐fiber recordings from 25 afferents per group (Figure3). Each afferent was exposed to no more than two pharmacological agents, with a minimum 20‐min washout period between applications. Each compound was tested on 25 afferents from 10 mature female mice. Bath applications of IVA (100 μM), a selective HCN antagonist, did not significantly alter the SRF to UBD (F(2,150)= 1.5,p= 0.23). In contrast, the non‐selective HCN antagonist CsCl significantly increased the SRF, which returned to baseline level after washout (F(2,150)= 8.01,p= < 0.001, post hoc comparison,p= < 0.001 for control vs. CsCl,p= 1.0 for control vs. recovery). Similar to IVA, ISO, an indirect activator of HCN channels, did not produce a significant effect on the SRF, although there was a trend toward increased firing in response to 20 cmH2O UBD (Treatment,F(2,150)= 0.628,p= 0.54).

The effect of pharmacological agents on SRF to UBD. (A–C) SRFs recorded at baseline, 20 min after bath application of IVA, CsCl, or ISO, and 20 min after washout, respectively.

Displayed in Figure4Aare typical single‐fiber afferent responses to 80 cmH2O UBD, illustrating both low‐firing (LF) and high‐firing (HF) rates. Summarized in Figure4Bare the mean firing frequencies in response to 80 cmH2O UBD from 25 bladder afferents, revealing a clear separation between LF (4.38 ± 0.78 Hz,n= 11) and HF (20 ± 2.5 Hz,n= 14) groups, with a threshold around 10 Hz. This finding aligns with previous reports on rat bladder afferents [41]. The pharmacological effects on the HF and LF groups are summarized in Figure5. IVA did not significantly affect the SRF in either the LF (F(2,60)= 0.23,p= 0.79) or HF groups (F(2,78)= 1.2,p= 0.33). CsCl significantly increased the SRF only in the HF group (F(2,78)= 11.1,p= < 0.001, post hoc comparison,p= < 0.001 for control vs. CsCl,p= 1.0 for control vs. recovery), but not in the LF group (F(2,54)= 0.19,p= 0.36). Similar to IVA, the effect of ISO on SRF was insignificant in both HF (F(2,78)= 3.01,p= 0.06) and LF groups (F(2,60)= 0.02,p= 0.73). There was a trend toward increased firing in response to 20, 40, and 60 cmH2O distension in the HF group following ISO application.

Classification of bladder afferents into low‐firing (LF) and high‐firing (HF) groups. (A) representative responses of a LF and a HF bladder afferent to 80 cmH2O bladder distension. (B) The mean firing frequency to 80 cmH2O bladder distension from 14 HF (20 Hz) and 11 LF bladder afferents (4.38 Hz) separated by a threshold frequency of 10 Hz. The magenta and cyan dots represent the representative responses in panel A.

The effect of pharmacological agents on HF and LF bladder afferents. (A–C) SRF of HF afferents recorded at baseline, 20 min after bath application of IVA, CsCl, or ISO, and 20 min after washout, respectively. (D–F) SRF of LF afferents assessed with bath application of IVA, CsCl, and ISO, respectively.

Representative immunofluorescence images illustrate the expression patterns of VGLUT2 (Figure6A), HCN1 (Figure6B), and CGRP (Figure6C) within the bladder. Merged images demonstrate colocalization of VGLUT2 with HCN1 (Figure6E) and VGLUT2 with CGRP (Figure6F). Quantitative analysis of fluorescent signal colocalization, utilizing the thresholding methods described above, revealed that VGLUT2‐positive puncta colocalized with HCN1‐positive signals in an average of 1.82% ± 0.29 of the total VGLUT2‐labeled afferent area, whereas colocalization with CGRP‐positive signals was higher, averaging 53.78% ± 3.98% (Figure6D). The low colocalization between VGLUT2‐labeled afferents and HCN1 is consistent with findings from Lemtiri‐Chlieh et al. [18] which reported that HCN1 expression in the bladder is predominantly localized to DSM cells, with minimal expression in other cell types.

Representative immunohistological staining of bladder tissue sections showing EYFP‐labeled bladder afferents (A), HCN1 (B), and CGRP (C). (D) Scatter plot quantifying the percentage of colocalization between EYFP‐labeled bladder afferents and HCN1 (1.82% ± 0.29), and between EYFP‐labeled bladder afferents and CGRP (53.78% ± 3.98). (E) Colocalization of EPFP‐labeled bladder afferents with HCN1, with a 17 × 17 μM insets highlighting sparse HCN1 puncta on afferent endings. (F) Colocalization of EYFP‐labeled bladder afferents with CGRP.

The current study provides direct evidence that pharmacological modulation of HCN channels in bladder wall tissue does not significantly affect sensory afferent transmission to bladder distension. Our objective was to explore the proposed role of HCN channels in the neural signaling of bladder distension to the CNS, as previous pharmacological studies have suggested their involvement in detrusor muscle tone regulation. The presence of HCN1 channels and their colocalization on nerve endings were confirmed through immunohistological imaging. However, the lack of inhibitory effect on the SRF to UBD by HCN channel antagonists (IVA and CsCl) indicates a minor role of HCN channels in bladder afferent mechanotransduction. Additionally, indirect activation of HCN channels through ISO showed no significant effect on bladder sensory transmission.

We employed single‐fiber recordings on an excised bladder‐pelvic nerve preparation to directly assess the role of HCN channels in afferent sensory transmission of UBD, eliminating potential confounding factors present in in vivo studies [42]. The current study of HCN on bladder afferent sensory transmission was informed by prior ex vivo bladder strip studies on mature female mice of 10 months old, which demonstrated HCN channels' role in stabilizing detrusor muscle tone [7,13,16,17,18]. These studies underscored the need for further investigation into HCN channels' involvement in afferent mechanotransduction [13]. Consequently, we assessed the effect of IVA and CsCl, two HCN channel blockers used clinically, on modulating the SRF of bladder afferents to UBD, following the same bath application protocols as in bladder strip studies [13]. We observed robust and consistent afferent responses to graded bladder distension with little to no spontaneous activity. Theoretically, blocking the HCN channel prolongs the recovery from afterhyperpolarization, thereby reducing neural excitability [43]. The absence of a significant effect of IVA on the SRF suggests that HCN channels do not significantly contribute to bladder afferent encoding in response to stretch. Contrary to expectation, CsCl did not attenuate the SRF to stretch; instead, it increased the response. This effect is likely due to CsCl's non‐specific action on other potassium ion channels. In addition to blocking HCN channels, CsCl can inhibit voltage‐gated and inward rectifier potassium channels [44], leading to membrane depolarization and enhanced action potential firing. Our current finding is consistent with a prior study, which also reported increased bladder afferent firing upon blockade of KCNQ channel by XE991 [45]. In support, retigabine, a KCNQ agonist, suppressed afferent activities to bladder distension. ISO was also used in prior bladder muscle strip studies to decrease muscle tone by activating beta‐adrenergic receptors [17]. In the current study, we eliminated the confounding factor of detrusor muscle tone by applying the L‐type calcium channel blocker nifedipine throughout the experiments. There was a trend toward increased SRF by ISO application, likely from the activation of beta‐adrenergic receptors that can elevate cyclic GMP [46] and protein kinase A signaling [47], subsequently sensitizing afferent endings through phosphorylation of sodium and potassium channels [48,49]. In addition, the increased afferent response to rapid bladder distension may be attributed to enhanced bladder compliance. Although nifedipine was used to inhibit detrusor muscle tone, ISO could further relax the residual tone by activating β‐adrenergic receptors in the detrusor muscle, thereby increasing bladder compliance.

The bladder afferents responded to 80 cmH2O distension pressure with different firing frequencies, revealing the low‐firing (~5 Hz) and high‐firing groups (~20 Hz), consistent with prior reports [41]. Although afferent conduction velocity was not measured in this study, the HF and LF populations likely correspond to thinly myelinated Aδ‐ and unmyelinated C‐fibers, respectively. In a previous study, dorsal root single‐fiber recordings were performed on rat bladder afferents in vivo [50]. Conduction velocities were measured to classify the afferents into Aδ‐ and C‐fiber groups. However, afferents were not further categorized into HF and LF groups, likely due to the use of slow bladder distension via saline infusion at a rate of 0.08 mL per minute and a limited maximum distension pressure of 30 cmH2O. This contrasts with the current study, which employed rapid, graded distension up to 80 cmH2O. When we analyzed the SRF to UBD in these distinct firing populations, we observed that IVA did not significantly affect either the HF or LF groups. However, since HCN channels are widely expressed in DRG neurons [51], they likely contribute to sensory signaling at central terminals in the spinal cord. Indeed, both intraperitoneal and intrathecal injection of IVA have demonstrated analgesic effects in mouse models of inflammatory pain, likely by reducing spinal dorsal horn neuron firing through suppressed pre‐synaptic signaling by C‐fiber afferents [23,24]. This mechanism may underlie the improved bladder function observed in cardiac patients treated with IVA [22]. However, the use of IVA to improve bladder function in patients with pelvic disorders may lead to side effects due to its action on cardiac tissues. Additionally, further investigation is warranted to elucidate the role of IVA in suppressing bladder sensory transmission, particularly by examining its effects on upstream dorsal horn regions. CsCl differentially affects the SRF of the HF and LF groups, increasing firing only in the HF population. This suggests a differential composition of potassium channels between the presumed Aδ‐ and C‐fiber afferents.

The lack of involvement of HCN channels in afferent encoding to bladder stretch is further supported by the sparse presence of HCN1 channels along afferent terminals in bladder wall tissues, as reported by our immunohistological staining. We implemented VGLUT2‐Cre to drive the expression of ChR2‐EYFP in sensory neurons, a membrane‐bound protein that efficiently labels fine nerve terminals, as previously reported in colon tissues [36,52]. The labeling of afferent endings was further confirmed by CGRP antibody staining, which extensively colocalized with the EYFP signal. RNA sequencing data from age‐matched mice revealed that HCN1 predominantly clusters with DSM and only minimally associates with peripheral Schwann cells [18]. This strengthens the notion that HCN1 channels primarily mediate functions within the DSM, with little involvement in bladder afferent sensory transmission.

In conclusion, our targeted pharmacological studies using single‐fiber recordings and immunohistological staining collectively indicate that HCN channels do not play a significant role in bladder afferent sensory transmission. Pharmacological agents that modulate HCN channels, including clinically used IVA, CsCl, and ISO, likely exert their effects either peripherally on detrusor muscle cells or centrally at afferent terminals in the spinal cord.