This study investigated how various advertisers engage in vaping‐related marketing on social media, with a focus on message stance, audience targeting and advertising strategies, using data from the Meta Ad Library. This is particularly relevant given the growing concern around vaping among young people and recent policy reforms in Australia.

We analysed vaping‐related advertisements from Meta platforms between May 7, 2018 and July 31, 2024. Keyword searches identified relevant advertisements. Descriptive statistics were applied to the number of impressions, spending, duration, year posted, audience size and platform distribution, with advertisers classified into government, politicians/political groups, non‐governmental organisations (NGOs)/universities, commercial entities, news sources and undisclosed groups.

A total of 861 advertisements were identified. After duplicates and non‐vaping related advertisements were removed, 394 were included in the final analysis. Of the anti‐vaping messages (n= 269), 37% were posted by NGOs/universities and 35% by politicians/political groups, while pro‐vaping messages (n= 87) primarily originated from commercial entities (44%) and undisclosed groups (47%). Anti‐vaping campaigns had higher audience reach, targeted all ages and spending varied widely compared with pro‐vaping messages, which predominantly targeted the 18–34 age group.

The advertisers of pro‐ and anti‐vaping messages on social media differ in their expenditure and demographic targeting. Commercial entities were still able to post pro‐vaping content despite Meta's advertising restrictions.

These findings offer timely insights for health promotion practitioners and policymakers. Better understanding of paid social media advertising practices can inform the development of more targeted, transparent and effective digital health campaigns.

E‐cigarette (vaping) use among Australian individuals aged 14 years and older has increased, both in their lifetime and in their current use [1]. Subsequently, in March 2024, the Australian government introduced the Therapeutic Goods and Other Legislation Amendment (Vaping Reforms) Bill 2024 to parliament, marking a significant step towards protecting the health of Australians from the adverse effects of vaping [2]. This legislation addresses concerns expressed by public health advocates, policymakers and health practitioners regarding vaping in Australia. It was enacted to ‘prohibit the importation, domestic manufacture, supply, commercial possession and advertisement of non‐therapeutic and disposable vaping goods’ [2]. However, some proponents want vaping to be regulated similarly to alcohol and tobacco, through a licensed retail network and available only to people over 18 years old [3]. Social media has emerged as a crucial platform to advocate for both policy positions.

There are typically two main social media marketing strategies to advance stakeholders' campaigns and support their propositions: organic (non‐paid) and paid social media approaches. Compared to organic strategies, paid social media advertising offers the advantage of being able to target specific demographics of users based on age, gender and geographical location. As a result, paid social media campaigns can facilitate more precise audience engagement for campaigns and advocacy efforts. Nonetheless, it remains unclear who uses paid advertising for vaping‐related campaigns and how they construct their paid advertising strategies, information that may be useful for public health practitioners, advocates, policymakers, grassroots communities, political actors and others involved in regulation and health communication. Understanding these tactics can inform the development of more targeted and effective public health responses, for example by identifying how harmful content is promoted or bypasses moderation. This insight can also contribute to evidence‐based policymaking by revealing regulatory gaps and guiding improvements in advertising standards, content monitoring and enforcement practices.

Meta Ad Library is a publicly accessible database of paid social media advertisements running across Facebook, Instagram, Messenger and Audience Network. Audience Network is a tool provided by Meta that allows advertisers to extend their reach by displaying advertisements on mobile apps that partner with Meta. Advertisements on the Meta Ad Library platform require authorisation and disclaimers, and others can use this information to help categorise the advertisements' stakeholders. Meta Ad Library classifies advertisements into two categories: sensitive topics with a high level of transparency and commercial advertisements with a low level of transparency. Sensitive topic advertisements are about ‘social issues, elections and politics’. Advertisers seeking to publish advertisements in this category must apply for prior authorisation [4]. Under Australian policy, Meta defines social issues as sensitive topics if they are intensely debated and related to existing or proposed legislation, and it considers content related to health to be a sensitive social issue [5]. Specifically, advertisements about health that include discussions, debates, or advocacy for or against topics such as healthcare reform and healthcare access are subject to review and potential censorship [5].

This research primarily aims to use information about paid advertisements and disclaimers on the Meta Ad Library platform to investigate and summarise stakeholders' for or against positions regarding social issues related to vaping, as presented on social media. This work may provide insights for health institutions to run campaigns and engage in policy advocacy. This research details the strategies behind paid advertising in vaping‐related campaigns, including the average duration of ad campaigns, the most frequently used platforms for publication, the budget range allocated for running ad campaigns, target demographics and the range of impressions achieved.

This study examined vaping‐related advertisements using Ad Library across Meta platforms, from May 7, 2018 (when Meta Ad Library first became operational) to July 31, 2024. To search for relevant advertisements, Boolean search logical operators, such as ‘AND’ and ‘OR’ used in systematic reviews, could not be applied in the Meta Ad Library search. Therefore, we conducted keyword searches using terms one by one within the advertisement categories and specified the location as Australia. Search terms used were: ‘vape’, ‘vapes’, ‘vaping’, ‘vaper’, ‘vapers’, ‘ecig’, ‘ecigs’, ‘ecigarettes’, ‘e‐cig’, ‘e‐cigs’, ‘e‐cigarettes’, ‘e cig’, ‘e cigs’ and ‘e cigarettes’. All search results were reviewed to ensure the posted content matched the search terms. Unmatched content defined as irrelevant to vaping and e‐cigarettes was removed from the extracted data. Duplicate search results, according to the unique advertisement archive identifier, were removed.

Advertisements were categorised according to the stance of the vaping message and by the characteristics of the advertiser. The message stance was categorised into ‘Pro’, ‘Neutral’, or ‘Against’ for vaping advertisements. The classification approach for the stance of an advertisement was adapted from a codebook described in previous research [6,7]. Stance is a mutually exclusive category which means only one choice could be made per category. In determining stance, the posted text components of the advertisements were prioritised over images and videos, as most content was primarily text‐based. However, when images or videos were present, they were assessed equally to support stance classification. E‐cigarette (vaping) use, sale and legislation were the only considerations when determining the message stance, and any other topic or concept was excluded from this study. ‘Pro’ vaping advertisements included Facebook posts that supported vaping, such as promoting its use as a replacement for tobacco, advocating for consumer autonomy, or criticising market interventions and perceived unfair competition. ‘Neutral’ vaping advertisements were those that did not clearly support or oppose vaping; for example, posts that discussed both sides of the issue without expressing a definitive position, or that acknowledged both the benefits of individual autonomy and the harmful effects of vaping. ‘Against’ vaping advertisements were those that opposed vaping, citing concerns such as health risks, the negative impact on the younger generation, harm to the natural environment, or the need for restrictive legislative intervention. As defined above, we grouped various calls to action under the broader categories of ‘Pro‐vaping’ and ‘Anti‐vaping’ to ensure clear and consistent classification. Messages that primarily emphasised individual interests, such as consumer choice or personal freedom, even when accompanied by calls for legislation, were classified as ‘Pro vaping’. In contrast, messages that highlighted public interests, such as protecting younger populations while also advocating for legislative action, were categorised as ‘Anti‐vaping’. This approach helped avoid overlap within each stance, even when a single message presented multiple perspectives. Descriptions and illustrative examples for each stance category were presented in TableS1.

Advertisers were grouped into five categories:‘Government’, ‘Politicians and Political Groups’, ‘Non‐Government Organisations or Universities’,‘Commercial Entities’, ‘News Source’, and‘Undisclosed Organisations or Individuals’. These groupings are based on the information provided in Meta Ad Library disclaimer section. In this section, advertisers are required to supply accurate details identifying the entity or individual funding the advertisements. This includes the name of the organisation, individual, or page, along with a phone number, email, website, address and the unique and exclusive industry category. ‘Advertiser’ is also a mutually exclusive category, meaning only one choice of category can be given to an advertiser. The ‘Government’ category is defined as encompassing authorities who hold governing power at the time of posting vaping‐related messages. In the Australian context, this includes governing bodies at national, state and local council levels. Other individual politicians, political candidates or political parties were excluded from this category and instead grouped under the ‘Politicians and Political Groups’ category in this study. ‘Politicians and Political Groups’ category is defined as individuals or groups publicly expressing a particular policy, position, or opinion on vaping in their posted messages.‘Undisclosed Organisations or Individuals’refers to entities or individuals who have not disclosed the mandated information as required by Meta. In some cases, advertisements did not include a disclaimer; therefore, although we could sometimes infer the advertiser's identity from the Facebook account name, we still categorised these under‘Undisclosed Organisations or Individuals’to maintain consistency, as the disclaimer was the only official method used to identify advertisers in the Meta Ads Library. In addition to the categories discussed above, descriptions of the other advertiser categories, along with a list of advertisers in each category, are presented in TableS2. Irrelevant topics were excluded from the data, and only e‐cigarette use/sale and legislation were considered for this research.

Additionally, we verified advertiser details based on the information provided in the disclaimer section, where applicable, by reviewing official websites or Australian Business Numbers to ensure the information in the Meta Ad Library was as accurate as possible. However, the disclaimer section could not provide sufficient information to identify affiliation with the tobacco industry or vape companies. Two researchers (X.L. and R.G.) independently reviewed a sample equivalent to 10% of the posts, achieving at least 85% agreement. Discrepancies were resolved through discussion or by consulting the other two researchers (L.G.S. and A.N.A.), finally reaching 100% agreement. One researcher (X.L.) then reviewed the remaining posts. Discussions with R.G., L.G.S. and A.N.A. resolved any concerns or uncertainties.

It should be noted that the Meta Ad Library archives both compliant and non‐compliant advertisements. Some advertisements are classified as non‐compliant due to violations of Meta's advertising policies or insufficient disclosure. Non‐compliant advertisements may be rejected during the initial review or, if already active, flagged, reviewed and subsequently removed for policy violations. Although certain advertisements were not shown to audiences due to non‐compliance or lack of disclosure, they were still retained in the Library. Therefore, our analysis includes advertisements that may have either met or violated Meta's policies, as long as they aligned with the classification criteria described earlier. Non‐compliant advertisements were also assigned a message stance, and an advertiser type was included where applicable. Since it was not possible to determine the exact timing of advertisement removal, these entries were retained because they still provided valuable information, such as message stance and spending.

Data extracted were cleaned and organised into 10 variables:impressions(i.e., the number of times an advertisement was displayed),spending(amount spent),currency, duration of the advertisements(days),age groups targeted,delivered region(the geographic location of Meta users at the time the ad was shown),publisher platforms,estimated audience size(expected by Meta based on spending),year postedandlanguages. We calculated descriptive statistics for the extracted variables, including means, standard deviations, medians and interquartile ranges for continuous variables, and minimum, maximum, counts and percentages for categorical variables. Figures were prepared to show distributions and patterns of advertising according to time, costs, advertisers, social media platforms and audiences reached. Some variables were provided from Meta as intervals (i.e.,impressions,spendingandestimated audience size) and were treated as categorical ordinal variables.

Meta Ad Library search yielded a total of 861 advertisements, of which 390 were included in the analysis, including 18 ongoing advertisements. This selection was made after excluding 388 duplicate advertisements and 83 irrelevant posts. The average (SD) duration of the advertisements was 15.2 (15.0) days, with a median (IQR) of 8.0 days; this calculation excluded the 18 ongoing advertisements. The median interval of impressions was 6000 to 6999. There were 354 advertisements paid in Australian dollars, 35 in Hong Kong dollars and one in US dollars. The median spending interval for the advertisements paid in Australian dollars was $0–$99, with a maximum spending range of $70 000 to $79 999. The median estimated audience size interval was 500 001 to 1 000 000. Most publishers used both Facebook and Instagram platforms (n= 239, 61.3%), followed by Facebook alone (n= 92, 23.6%).

Table1summarises advertising information by type of advertiser. There were 269 anti‐vaping messages in total. Anti‐vaping messages were posted mainly by politicians or political parties (35% [95/269]) and non‐government organisations or universities (37% [99/269]). In contrast, pro‐vaping messages were mainly posted by commercial entities (44%, 38/87) and undisclosed organisations or individuals (47% [41/87]). More than half (60% [64/106]) of the anti‐vaping messages posted by politicians or political parties fell into the 0–999 impression interval category. Among non‐government organisations, 43% (43/99) of the anti‐vaping messages fell into impression interval categories ranging from 0–999 to 3000–3999. Pro‐vaping messages posted by commercial entities had a relatively uniform distribution of impressions, ranging from the 2000–2999 to 800 000–899 999 categories.

The summary of the duration, impressions, and spending of advertisement campaigns by advertiser type.

Figure1presents the number of advertisements over time, by stance and by type of advertiser. When viewing advertising trends over time, a clear shift is evident in both pro‐ and anti‐vaping messaging. In 2020, 11 pro‐vaping messages were recorded, compared to the absence of any anti‐vaping messages. In 2021, one pro‐vaping message appeared, while no anti‐vaping content was observed. By 2022, pro‐vaping messages rose to 20, alongside 26 anti‐vaping messages. This pattern intensified in 2023, a year marked by significant policy developments, with 39 pro‐vaping messages and 103 anti‐vaping messages. Among the anti‐vaping messages, 20 unique individuals from politicians and political groups were responsible for posting 83 messages, making politicians the primary source of these posts. During 2023, 24 of the pro‐vaping messages were posted by a single commercial entity. In 2024, there were 16 pro‐vaping messages and 140 anti‐vaping messages. Of the pro‐vaping messages, 13 were posted by undisclosed organisations or individuals, three by two commercial entities. Among the anti‐vaping messages, four unique government entities were responsible for posting 47 of them, while three unique individuals from non‐governmental organisations or universities were responsible for posting 85.

The number of advertisements delivered per year by advertisement stance and type of advertiser.

There are notable variations in spending on pro‐vaping messages posted by commercial entities and undisclosed organisations or individuals, as well as on anti‐vaping messages by the government. Government expenditure on anti‐vaping messages typically ranged from the $0–$99 interval to the $10 000–$14 999 interval. Notably, 70% of anti‐vaping messages fell within the $0–$99 and $3000–$3499 intervals. Non‐government organisations or universities expenditure on anti‐vaping messages was within the $0–$99 to $2000–$2499 range, with 60.6% of anti‐vaping messages falling into the $0–$99 spending interval. Most politicians' spending on either anti‐vaping or pro‐vaping messages fell into the $0–$99 range, accounting for 92.6% of anti‐vaping messages and 87.5% of pro‐vaping messages. Pro‐vaping messages posted by commercial entities showed a bimodal distribution, with spending peaking in the $0–$99 (21.1% [8/338]) and $1000–$1499 (13.2% [5/38]) categories. In contrast, spending on anti‐vaping messages by commercial entities fell within the $300–$399 and $3000–$3499 ranges.

Figure2summarises the distribution of the reach of vaping advertisements by age, advertisement stance and type of advertiser. The reach of 72 advertisements was not provided by Meta due to violations of Meta Advertising Standards. For the data provided, the results were sorted by stance and publisher for the advertisements that reported demographic reach. The 35–44 years age group was the most frequently targeted demographic, while the 13–17 age group was the least. The variation in reach percentages for pro‐vaping messages differed between commercial entities and politicians across age groups. Observed differences in reach percentages for pro‐vaping messages varied across advertiser types and age groups. Commercial entities had a higher median reach in the 18–24 age group by 18.1% and in the 25–34 age group by 20.3%; whereas, politicians had a greater reach in the 55–64 age group by 22.8% and in the 65+ age group by 25.7%. For anti‐vaping messages, the government achieved a higher median among the 18–24, 25–34 and 35–44 age groups, while non‐governmental organisations or universities achieved a higher median reach among the 45–54, 55–64 and 65+ age groups.

The distribution of the reach of vaping advertisements, by age, advertisement stance and type of advertisers.

A key finding of this research was evidence of targeting vaping messaging to age demographics, where commercial entities posted more pro‐vaping messages targeting individuals aged 18 to 34; whereas messages from government and non‐government organisations or universities aimed to reach all age groups. The finding aligned with a systematic review that reported the average age of vape advertising campaign audiences is 30.5 years [8]. That review also highlighted that pro‐vaping advertising has a strong positive effect on consumers' vaping tendencies. This may indicate a potential association between commercial strategies and the most prevalent vaping demographic group in Australia. Data from Australia's Health 2024 suggests the effectiveness of these commercial strategies, where vaping use is increasing much faster among people aged 18 to 24 (9.3%, 95% CI 7.4%–11.2%) than those aged 50 to 59 (1.9%, 95% CI 7.4%–11.2%) in 2022 to 2023 [9]. This finding supports other evidence, such as Huang et al. and Ali et al. who both reported that vape companies have a broad reach on social media, particularly to young people [10,11]. Similarly, other research has reported that tobacco industry‐related advocacy groups use Facebook as a mobilisation point to support the goals of the vaping industry [12].

Meta has policies restricting the promotion of vaping through paid advertising; commercial entities continue to market vaping products. Our study observed that Meta only removed some campaign messages for violating its Restricted Goods and Services policy [13]. This policy prohibits promoting the purchase, sale, gifting, donation, or trade of vaping products [13]. Despite these restrictions, commercial entities found ways to overcome restrictions and post pro‐vaping advertisements on social media platforms. In our case, although under the social and political issues topic, the disclosure information did not work well as it is not transparent enough to determine paid partnerships or sponsorships (e.g., using a page name as disclosure). Similar concerns have been raised in previous research, with several studies reporting vaping‐related promotional content on social platforms from e‐cigarette companies or social media influencers [14,15,16]. For example, Jancey et al. pointed out that vaping is being promoted on Instagram by influencer‐generated content with minimal compliance with sponsorship disclosure regulations [17]. These findings highlight that Meta's current Restricted Goods and Services policy is ineffective, even though regulations such as Australia's Public Health (Tobacco and Other Products) Bill 2023 have been enacted [18]. The Bill defines an e‐cigarette advertisement as any form of communication, recommendation, or action that promotes, or is likely to promote, vaping or an e‐cigarette product or the use of such a product [18]. Despite this regulation, Meta's enforcement remains insufficient to prevent advertisers from targeting young people with pro‐vaping content. Relying solely on platform self‐regulation is unreliable, as the vague disclosure system creates a grey area that allows vaping‐related content to circulate widely. Therefore, it is critical to develop more effective methods for assessing and enforcing content policies within the social media environment.

Another important finding from this study relates to patterns of expenditure and campaign duration in the analysed advertisements. As shown in Table1, although politicians, political parties, non‐governmental organisations and universities were the primary sources of vaping‐related campaigns, their spending was relatively low, mostly falling within the $0–$99 interval. In contrast, government campaigns dominated overall advertising expenditure, allocating more funding to anti‐vaping messages than commercial entities spent on pro‐vaping content. We also observed differences in campaign duration by stance, with anti‐vaping messages generally running longer than pro‐vaping messages (Table1). However, no clear pattern was observed betweenspendingandimpressionsacross advertiser types. These results suggest that focusing on exposure and engagement may matter more than increasing budgets or extending campaign durations. The lack of a consistent link between estimated audience size and impressions in Table1can further support this. Although Meta'sestimated audience sizeis based on spending, a largeestimated audience sizedoes not guarantee higherimpressions, indicating that theestimated audience sizemay not accurately reflect actual exposure. Public health practitioners and relevant stakeholders should be aware that, although the government invested relatively high financial resources compared to other advertising groups, this may not achieve the intended impact of the campaigns, especially given the continued rise in vaping prevalence in Australia. It remains important to focus on crafting impactful, high‐quality messages that can spread widely, rather than relying solely on larger budgets or extended campaign durations.

One of the interesting findings from our current study is the timing of campaign launches in relation to policy shifts. In 2023, the Federal Government announced plans to implement new measures to strengthen e‐cigarette regulations across Australia, leading to the introduction of legislation in 2024. Notably, anti‐vaping advertising from politicians or political parties spiked in 2023. An upswing in anti‐vaping advertising by government and non‐government institutions occurred in 2024, as the new legislation was enacted. The announcement to implement new measures made by the federal government most likely prompted politicians to publicly express their positions on vaping to appeal to voters. Additionally, the timing of these posts may have been influenced by upcoming elections in 2024. Five Australian states and territories—Tasmania, Queensland, New South Wales, the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory—held local government elections in 2024. A pattern has emerged linking the timing of these elections with individuals or groups posting vaping‐related content. In contrast, the government and non‐government institutions and universities advertising campaigns peaked after the federal government announced its planned legislation. This pattern aligns with findings that public health institutions strategically time their messaging shortly before or after the introduction of legislation to enhance public engagement and emotional response [19]. Over this same period, commercial entities posted pro‐vaping messages more frequently between 2022 and 2023 than in 2024. It is possible that earlier increases in pro‐vaping messaging were intended to shape public opinion in favour of vaping, in an effort to discourage the government from implementing more restrictive legislation. However, the reduction in 2024 suggests that commercial entities may have recognised the difficulty of reversing policy direction and subsequently shifted their resources away from public lobbying efforts.

We found that the timing of advertising sharing the same anti‐vaping stance in 2024 partially overlapped between the government and non‐government institutions or universities. Collaboration efforts between government, non‐government organisations and universities could conserve resources, expand message reach and avoid duplication. For example, VicHealth, the Victorian Government‐led health promotion organisation, has partnered with the advocacy campaign UNCLOUD and more than five universities to establish anti‐vaping advocates and provide education and onsite training to staff [20]. Collaborating in this way allows both the government and non‐government institutions or universities to efficiently increase message exposure.

Anti‐vaping advertising campaigns by the government, non‐government institutions and universities peaked after the federal government announced the introduction of regulations on vaping in 2024. Furthermore, these agencies targeted their social media campaigns about vaping to all age groups. In contrast, commercial entities and politicians/political groups posted most of their pro‐ and anti‐vaping campaigns on Meta before the announcement of new vaping legislation. Commercial entities primarily targeted individuals aged 18 to 34, whereas politicians and political groups focused on all age groups. The study also found that despite Meta's advertising policies, commercial entities were still able to disseminate pro‐vaping content. Overall, this analysis provides insights into vaping‐related advertisement timing, expenditure, duration, audience targeting and platform policy enforcement, which can inform the design of anti‐vaping campaigns on social media.