Individuals categorized into distinct periodontitis risk levels often demonstrate substantial disparities not only in the likelihood of developing periodontitis but also in the rate at which the disease progresses. However, the oral microbial communities and their functional characteristics corresponding to different periodontitis risk levels remain to be further explored. Therefore, 52 subjects with periodontitis were selected and categorized into different periodontitis risk groups based on the periodontal risk calculator (PRC). Unstimulated saliva was collected, and metagenomics sequencing was performed to compare microbial diversity, taxonomy, and functional annotation among groups. There was no significant difference in species richness and evenness between the very high risk group and the high risk group, but beta diversity increased in the former group. A higher abundance ofFilifactor alocis,Streptococcus cristatus,Klebsiella pneumoniae, andStreptococcus anginosuswas attributed to the very high risk group, whilePseudopropionibacterium propionicumandAbiotrophia defectivawere found in higher abundance in the high risk group. Functional annotation revealed that biosynthesis of amino acids (lysine biosynthesis; phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan biosynthesis; valine, leucine, and isoleucine biosynthesis), citrate cycle (TCA cycle), carbon fixation pathways in prokaryotes, oxidative phosphorylation, lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, fatty acid biosynthesis, ubiquinone and other terpenoid-quinone biosynthesis, pantothenate and CoA biosynthesis, and glutathione metabolism were enriched in the very high risk group. The combined results indicate that the periodontal pathogens associated with a higher risk of periodontitis and the regulation of their related functional pathways increase the risk and likelihood of periodontitis development.

•There were differences in microbial diversity among different periodontitis risk-level groups.

•Some previously overlooked species and pathogenic pathways were linked to periodontitis risk differences.

•Combining PRC with metagenomic sequencing revealed more potential pathogens.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s00253-025-13574-3.

In the medical and dentistry sectors, risk refers to the likelihood that a hazard may result in a negative outcome. A risk factor is a trait that increases the possibility of this occurring, and it can be linked to the initiation or progression of a disease (Beck et al.1995; Borrell and Papapanou2005).

Periodontal disease is becoming an increasingly significant portion of the global disease load (Nascimento et al.2024). Under the 2018 classification system for periodontal and peri-implant diseases, periodontitis is primarily categorized into stages I–IV and grades A, B, and C (Tonetti et al.2018). Higher stages indicate more severe disease and greater management complexity, and higher grades indicate faster progression (The detailed staging and grading criteria are available in the Online Resource TableS1,S2). Effective prevention and treatment can have a big impact on global public health. The cause of periodontitis, a major component of periodontal disease, is unknown. However, it is now recognized as the outcome of complicated interactions among microbes, the host, and the environment (Hajishengallis and Lamont2021). Overall changes in the structure and function of oral microbial populations, as well as uncontrolled immune-inflammatory responses in humans, can all contribute significantly to periodontal tissue deterioration (Curtis et al.2020; Hajishengallis et al.2020). There are several risk factors that influence these interactions, including local, systemic, behavioral, and mental aspects (Darby2022). This explains why patients with periodontitis who are clinically classified into different risk levels have varying rates of disease development and progression.

Accurate risk assessment promotes the transition of periodontal treatment from a passive to an active healthcare strategy (Bartold and Ivanovski2022). Simultaneously, communication based on periodontal risk assessment might increase patients’ awareness of disease severity and compliance (Asimakopoulou et al.2015,2019). In terms of risk assessment methods, when compared to more objective computer-aided risk assessment tools, such as the periodontal risk calculator (PRC, PreViser) (Page et al.2002), even expert clinicians showed significant heterogeneity in their subjective assessment of patients’ risks, and they appeared to underestimate periodontitis risk (Persson et al.2003). PRC is currently the only periodontal risk assessment instrument that has been assessed for use both at the initial visit (Page et al.2003) and throughout periodontal maintenance (Saleh et al.2021).

Investigating potentially significant diagnostic bacteria and other compounds in people with different risk levels is critical for refining periodontitis risk assessment models and enabling disease-targeted therapy. Metagenomic shotgun sequencing has been widely used in dental plaque pathogenicity research due to its high potential for studying the genetic or community composition and microbial–environmental relationships of microbial populations (Altabtbaei et al.2021; Shi et al.2020a), thereby opening up a new avenue of research for understanding the etiology and pathogenic mechanism of periodontal disease.

This study assessed individuals with periodontitis using a risk assessment tool (PRC) and a microbiologic test based on shotgun sequencing. The goal is to investigate the phenotypic aspects of the salivary microbiota in patients with varying periodontitis risks and find potential microbial indicators linked with an increased risk of periodontitis.

Given the geographical variation in microbial distribution and the fact that Yunnan Province in China is an area inhabited by ethnic minorities, we employed metagenomic sequencing rather than analyzing data from the human oral database to gain deeper insights into the characteristics of the oral microbiota in the periodontitis population and potential microbes associated with increased disease risk. In this cross-sectional observational study, 52 consecutively enrolled patients were chosen from the clinic population at Kunming Medical University Affiliated Stomatological Hospital from 2021 to 2022. This study was carried out in accordance with the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki. The inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) patients diagnosed with periodontitis. The diagnostic criteria for periodontitis were shown in the Online Resource. (2) patients who were willing to follow all study-related procedures. The exclusion criteria were defined as follows: (1) pregnancy or nursing, (2) antibiotic and/or non-steroidal anti-rheumatic medication therapy in the preceding three months, (3) any systemic illness other than diabetes that may affect the course of periodontitis or treatment (e.g., AIDS and joint replacements), and (4) individuals with insufficient medical history information.

All examinations were performed by qualified periodontists. Date of birth, gender, periodontal treatment history, dental hygiene condition, smoking status, diabetes status, and glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level were all collected and recorded by Ying Leng. All patients were evaluated using panoramic radiographs or cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT), and the following clinical parameters were measured by Yanan Xu: (1) probing depth (PD), (2) clinical attachment loss (CAL), (3) bleeding on probing (BOP), (4) furcation involvement exist, (5) vertical bone lesion exist, (6) subgingival restoration, (7) subgingival calculus, and (8) the x-ray distance from cemento-enamel junction (CEJ) to bone crest. An intraexaminer calibration exercise was performed before the study enrollment. Measurement data such as PD, CAL, and the x-ray distance from CEJ to bone crest were measured twice on the same quadrant of four patients within a 1-week period. The calibration was accepted if the difference in measurements was no greater than 1 mm at 90% of the time (Hur et al.2016). Based on this criterion, the examiner (Yanan Xu) showed an agreement of 90%. The results of the Kappa test for other categorical data showed a Kappa coefficient of 0.84.

In this investigation, the commercialized online assessment tool PreViser (http://www.previser.com) developed by the PRC was utilized to assess patients’ periodontal disease risk. After entering clinical information mentioned above such as gender, date of birth, and PD into the system, patients were automatically classified into risk score categories (1, very low risk; 2, low risk; 3, moderate risk; 4, high risk; or 5, very high risk; lower score is better). The risk score describes the potential that patients’ gums may deteriorate without appropriate home and professional treatment, resulting in infection and inflammation of the gums, as well as the possibility of tooth loss. The detailed evaluation form is shown in the Online Resource.

Each individual collected one sample of unstimulated saliva in sterile cryopreservation tubes according to Justino’s procedure (Justino et al.2017). The samples were promptly transferred to liquid nitrogen tanks at − 196 °C for storage and then delivered via cold chain to the Beijing Genomics institution for metagenomics sequencing.

Metagenome sequencing consisted of three parts: extraction of microbiome DNA, library sequencing, and data analysis. Detailed processes were described in the Online Resource.

The chi-square test and two independent samplest-test were used to compare baseline characteristics between groups. SPSS (Version 22.0, IBM Corp., Armonk, NY) was used for statistical analyses withp< 0.05 indicating significance.

The samples were randomly sampled, and the species accumulation curve was built using the number of species in the sampled specimens. When the curve flattened, it suggested that there was enough sequencing data, and adding more data would only result in the discovery of a tiny number of new species.

R (Version 4.1.3; R Core Team, Vienna, Austria) was used for bioinformatics analysis. The alpha diversity of species was estimated using the Chao1 index (Colwell et al.2004), Shannon index (Shannon1948), and Simpson index (Simpson1949), and group-wise significance was examined using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. The Bray–Curtis distance matrix (Bray and Curtis1957) and partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) were used to assess beta diversity.

To find substantially distinct features in the statistical analysis of metagenomic profiles (STAMP) and linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe), the Wilcoxon rank-sum test was used, adjusted by the Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR). Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) was then used to assess the impact of these diverse species on group differentiation, and the LDA scores were calculated. The differential species’ prediction performance was evaluated using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves (Robin et al.2011).

Comparing functional potential between groups was done using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (Kanehisa and Goto2000). In the KEGG pathway enrichment analysis, the Reporter Score method was used to run a rank-sum test on all KEGG Orthology (KO) entries implicated in a certain pathway, yieldingpvalues for significance. TheZvalues for eachpvalue were then calculated using the inverse normal distribution. The pathway’sZvalue was computed using the KOs’Zvalues. Permutation was conducted 1000 times on a given pathway to obtain the random distribution ofZvalues. This random distribution was then utilized to calibrate the pathway’sZ-value to resemble a typical normal distribution. The calibratedZ-value was the Reporter Score value. AZvalue <  − 1.65 or > 1.65 indicates apvalue < 0.05.

A total of 52 individuals were recruited, including 29 males and 23 females. After periodontitis risk assessment, 31 individuals (16 males and 15 females) scored 5 (“very high” risk of periodontitis), while 18 patients (11 males and 7 females) scored 4 (“high” risk). The remaining three patients were assigned a risk score of 3 (“moderate” risk) and were ultimately omitted from this study due to the insufficient sample size. The subjects finally enrolled (n= 49) were categorized as stage III (n= 33) or stage IV (n= 16) and grade B (n= 3) or grade C (n= 46). The average ages of the very high risk group and high risk group were 51.1 ± 10.0 and 45.5 ± 10.3 years, respectively (p= 0.073). Table1shows that the very high risk group had significantly greater levels of BOP (%), PD, and CAL compared to the high risk group (p< 0.05). We suggest that this may be because BOP, PD, and AL are inherently among the parameters considered in risk assessment. The percentage of smokers was also different between the two groups (p< 0.05), while diabetes status showed no difference (p= 0.265).

The species accumulation curves showed that the end of curves were flattened, indicating that the sample size was adequate (Fig.1a). There was no significant difference in species richness or evenness between the two groups (Fig.1b). Compared to the high risk group, the very high risk group had higher microbial community beta-diversity and dispersion (p< 0.05; Fig.1c). This suggested greater disparity of community composition among samples within the very high risk group. PLS-DA revealed that the sample clusters of the two groups were well separated (Fig.1d).

In both groups, the top five phyla in terms of abundance wereProteobacteria,Bacteroidetes,Firmicutes,Fusobacteria, andActinomycetota(the Online Resource Fig.S1a, the Online Resource TableS3).Nucleocytoviricota,Verrucomicrobia, andTenericuteswere considerably more common in the very high risk group (the Online Resource Fig.S1b, the Online Resource TableS4,S5;p< 0.05), although the statistical significance was lost after FDR correction. At the genus level, the top five genera wereNeisseria,Prevotella,Streptococcus,Haemophilus, andFusobacteriu(the Online Resource Fig.S2a, the Online Resource TableS6).Filifactor,Klebsiella,Phocaeicola,Mycoplasma(p< 0.01),Staphylococcus, andBurkholderiawere significantly more abundant in the very high risk group (p< 0.05), whilePseudopropionibacterium(p< 0.05) andAbiotrophia(p< 0.01) were relatively abundant in the high-risk group (the Online Resource Fig.S2b, the Online Resource TablesS5,S7). At the species level, we found 574 species in total. The vast majority of species (489) were shared by both groups. The very high risk group contained 55 distinct species, whereas the high risk group contained just 30 species (Fig.2a). The top 10 most common species in both groups includedNeisseria subflava,Prevotella melaninogenica,Haemophilus parainfluenzae,Neisseria mucosa,Porphyromonas gingivalis,Rothia mucilaginosa,Fusobacterium pseudoperiodonticum,Prevotella intermedia,Prevotella jejuni, andNeisseria flavescens (Fig.2b; the Online Resource TableS8). The very high risk group had higher levels ofFilifactor alocis(p< 0.05),Streptococcus cristatus(p< 0.01),Klebsiella pneumoniae(p< 0.05), andStreptococcus anginosus(p< 0.05) than in the high risk group. The abundances ofPseudopropionibacterium propionicum(p< 0.05) andAbiotrophia defectiva(p< 0.01) were in contrast (Fig.2c, d; the Online Resource TablesS5,S9).

We then used ROC curves to assess the ability of the top 30 bacteria that differed between the two groups to distinguish risk levels. The area under the curve (AUC) values were determined to assess the diagnostic bacteria’s performance (Fig.3; the Online Resource TableS10). Finally, we discovered thatF. alocis(AUC: 0.711),S. cristatus(AUC: 0.738),K. pneumoniae(AUC: 0.710),S. anginosus(AUC: 0.708),Abiotrophia defectiva(AUC: 0.729),StreptococcusspNSJ-72(AUC: 0.722),Clostridioides difficile(AUC: 0.717),Streptococcus equi(AUC: 0.710),Schaalia cardiffensis(AUC: 0.735),Streptococcus pseudoporcinus(AUC: 0.749),Capnocytophaga haemolytica(AUC: 0.731),Treponema phagedenis(AUC: 0.713),Streptococcus porcinus(AUC: 0.717), andRoseburia intestinalis(AUC: 0.735) could distinguish or predict these two groups to some extent.

Next, we proceeded to calculate the differences in relative abundances of 16 previously known periodontal pathogens between the two groups, includingAggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans,P. gingivalis,T. forsythia,T. denticola,P. intermedia,Parvimonas micra,Prevotella nigrescens,F. nucleatum,C.rectus,Eikenella corrodens,Eubacterium nodatum,Campylobacter showae,Campylobacter concisus, and threeCapnocytophagaspecies (Capnocytophaga sputigena,Capnocytophaga gingivalis,Capnocytophaga ochracea). The results showed thatP. nigrescensandE. nodatumwere not found in any of the risk score groups in our experiment. OnlyP. micraexhibited a marginally significant difference between the two groups (p= 0.055), whereas the remaining species showed no statistical differences (Table2).

We examined the functional potentials encoded in the saliva microbiome and their relationship with periodontal risk scores. We found 5694 KO genes, 5583 of which were shared by both groups, while 76 and 35 genes were unique to the very high risk group and the high risk group, respectively (Fig.4a). Beta-diversity analysis revealed no difference in the degree of dispersion between the two groups of samples (Fig.4b;p> 0.05). All of the aforementioned genes were assigned to roles in six categories: cellular processes, environmental information processing, genetic information processing, human diseases, metabolism, and organismal systems (the Online Resource Fig.S3).

We then investigated whether various microbial functional pathways were connected with periodontal risk score levels. We noticed that 11 pathways were more common in the very high risk group. These pathways included amino acid biosynthesis (lysine, phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan, valine, leucine and isoleucine), citrate cycle (TCA cycle), carbon fixation in prokaryotes, oxidative phosphorylation, lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, fatty acid biosynthesis, ubiquinone and other terpenoid-quinone biosynthesis, pantothenate and CoA biosynthesis, and glutathione metabolism. In contrast, the high risk group had a higher prevalence of four metabolic pathways: fructose and mannose metabolism, butanoate metabolism, lipoarabinomannan (LAM) biosynthesis, and D-amino acid metabolism (Fig.4c; the Online Resource TablesS11,S12).

The connection between periodontitis and microbiota has been extensively researched (Hajishengallis et al.2012). Periodontitis is undoubtedly linked to the microbiota. Nonetheless, few studies have related varying periodontitis risk levels to oral microbiome. Single  risk factors such as diabetes (Shi et al.2020a; Balmasova et al.2021), smoking (Jiang et al.2020; Tamashiro et al.2023), and obesity (Khocht et al.2023) have all been linked to microbial dysbiosis in periodontal disease. However, in many circumstances, the situations that individuals encounter are a random combination of various risk factors, and risk assessment tools make it easier to integrate them. PRC and its commercialized assessment tools (e.g., PreViser PRC, DEPPA, YDEPPA) have been validated in assessing risk factors and prognosis in untreated patients and those receiving supportive periodontal care (Farina et al.2024). Consequently, this risk assessment technique was used in this investigation. Unfortunately, no current risk assessment tool incorporate microbiological markers, even though such testing aids in risk assessment and treatment planning for periodontally damaged patients. In terms of sample selection, the salivary microbiota reflects both local bacterial changes in supragingival/subgingival environments (closely resembling subgingival plaque microbiota (Kim et al.2022)) and systemic influences on oral microbiota (Belstrøm2020). It may include some diagnostic compounds. Furthermore, saliva collection is simple and non-invasive. Therefore, saliva samples were taken from the subjects for this investigation.

For all the reasons mentioned above, we used risk assessment tools to incorporate multiple factors that may influence the occurrence and development of periodontitis, and we investigated the differences in salivary microbiome between the very high risk group and the high risk group at the metagenome level.

Our analysis found no substantial difference in alpha-diversity between the two groups of species. This could be explained by the fact that the participants in the experiment had moderate to severe (stage III or IV) periodontitis, and the risk level was pretty close, resulting in no significant difference in overall microbe abundance. However, we could see a decline in species richness using the Chao1 index, although the Simpson and Shannon indexes showed an increase in evenness. This may be because ecological niche shifts favor dominant species, which outcompete less adapted ones, thereby leading to a homogenized microbe structure. When studying dissimilarity, the two groups showed significant differences. The very high risk group showed higher inflammation/severity indicators (BOP (%), PD, CAL) than the high risk group, and the proportion of smokers differed between the two groups. These findings support the notion that high BOP values at baseline (Modin et al.2023) and smoking (Apatzidou2022) are associated with an increased risk of periodontitis. The beta-diversity was lower in the high risk group, and a similar trend has been reported in previous studies when comparing the subgingival microbiome of periodontal healthy and periodontitis populations (Altabtbaei et al.2021).

Certain nuances were highlighted by relative abundance at the phylum level: The relatively abundant phyla in both of these two groups were consistent with the findings of Iniesta et al (2023). The very high risk group showed a significant rise inNucleocytoviricota,Verrucomicrobia, andTenericutes. Despite limited research on oralNucleocytoviricota, it infects mammals (Rodrigues et al.2021) and resides in the human gut (Liu et al.2022), interacting with other microbes and potentially impacting health.Verrucomicrobiain the oral cavity is rarely described, thoughAkkermansia-like sequences were found in a choledocholithiasis patient’s oral cavity (Ye et al.2016), and the potential role ofVerrucomicrobiain the oral cavity is still unclear.

The very high risk group showed much greater levels ofMycoplasma, the dominant genus of theTenericutesphylum. Studies have demonstrated that the isolation frequency and numbers ofMycoplasmain the saliva of the periodontitis group were higher than those in the periodontally healthy group (Mazzali de Ilja1990), and the same is true for subgingival plaque (Chen et al.2018). Furthermore,Mycoplasmais thought to be strongly related with periodontal inflammation (as measured by BOP, gingival index, and plaque index scores) (Narayanan et al.2023) and smoking (Maki et al.2022).Filifactor,Klebsiella,Phocaeicola,Staphylococcus, andBurkholderiaconcentration followed a similar pattern, whilePseudopropionibacteriumandAbiotrophiawere significantly reduced in the very high risk group. Previous investigations have also found thatFilifactorwas significantly enriched in individual with stage III–IV periodontitis (Iniesta et al.2023) and aggressive or chronic periodontitis (Nibali et al.2022). This is consistent with the current pattern, which shows thatFilifactorcontent increases in the very high risk group.Klebsiella, though understudied, is an invasive periodontal pathogen. Periodontitis increases the presence of oralKlebsiella(Kitamoto et al.2020), which has been linked to medication resistance (Dong et al.2022; Jepsen et al.2022). We hypothesize that this may partially explain its association with higher risk periodontitis group.Phocaeicolahas also been found to be more abundant in the saliva (Srila et al.2025) and subgingival plaque (Camelo-Castillo et al.2015; Chen et al.2018) of the periodontitis patients compared to the healthy controls. Stage III–IV periodontitis patients showed strikingly high subgingivalStaphylococciprevalence and highly prevalent penicillin resistance (Colombo et al.2023).Staphylococcus aureushas also caught the attention of researchers and has been identified as a novel periodontal pathogen with moderate evidence (Veras et al.2023). Its higher prevalence in nonsmoking patients with aggressive periodontitis (Fritschi et al.2008) supports our findings.Burkholderia,a genus linked to periodontal disease, notably exhibited high abundance in smokers’ oropharynx (Paulo et al.2023), and smoking was precisely a risk factor with strong evidence for periodontitis.

The species-level investigation produced more detailed results.Filifactor alocis, a species closely related with periodontitis, was discovered through the production of 16S rRNA gene amplicons (Griffen et al.2012) and was significantly enriched in the very high risk group. The taxon appears to co-occur withA. actinomycetemcomitans, promoting progression of periodontitis (Razooqi et al.2022), and is known to promote osteoclastogenesis by secreting extracellular vesicles that interact with Toll-like receptor 2 (Kim et al.2021).Filifactor alocisincreases periodontitis severity by suspected virulence mechanisms such as adhesion and invasion proteins, oxidative stress resistance, the release of toxins that cause tissue destruction, inhibition of the host complement system, and the subversion of neutrophil antimicrobial systems (Aja et al.2021). When paired with the current study, it may be a useful microbiological indication for assessing periodontitis risk. Furthermore, in addition to its noteworthy drug resistance,K. pneumoniaeappears to remain transcriptionally active and recoverable following long-term starving of the entire salivary microbiome (Liu et al.2024), which may explain the increased risk level of periodontitis. Most studies onS. cristatusfound an antagonistic connection between the species and a key pathogenic periodontal bacterium—P. gingivalis(Wang et al.2021,2024). Regions with a higher risk of periodontitis may have a subgingival microbial composition that contains fewerS.cristatus(Wang et al.2021). But consistent with our findings, a research of smokers’ subgingival microbes found thatS.cristatusis substantially related with the advancement of periodontal disease (Tamashiro et al.2023). Larger sample size research is required to better understand these conflicting results.Streptococcus anginosusis another species that was more prevalent in the very high risk group, which can induce macrophages to overexpress inflammatory cytokines and mediators such as TNF, IL-6, IL-1β, NOS2, and COX2 (Senthil Kumar et al.2024). Furthermore, there is a link between the salivary level ofS. anginosusand 8-hydroxy-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG), which could be related to the ongoing production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) associated with chronic inflammation (Sugano et al.2003). To the best of our knowledge, there were no findings on the relationship between the two species that decreased in the very high risk group and periodontitis.Pseudopropionibacterium propionicumhas been identified as the most common taxon in secondary endodontic infections (Ordinola-Zapata et al.2024). Its potential role in additional oral illnesses remains to be determined.Abiotrophia defectivahas previously been identified as a species associated with caries-free children (Kanasi et al.2010), and it has been reported prevalent in children and adolescents undergoing orthodontic treatment (Rego et al.2010). Finally, in comparison to the similar study of Hur et al (2016), our investigation found no difference in the abundance ofTreponema denticolaandP. intermediabetween the very high risk group and the high risk group. The discrepancy from this study may be due to the fact that we used shotgun sequencing to detect saliva rather than subgingival plaque.

We also found 11 pathways associated with bacterial anabolic metabolism that were more prevalent in the higher risk group. Three of these pathways were related to amino acid biosynthesis. Lysine and its precursor meso-2,6-diaminopimelic acid (meso-DAP) are essential components of the peptidoglycan cell wall in both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria (Wolf and Underhill2018). The phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan biosynthesis pathway was reported to be the primary metabolic pathway in the periodontitis group when compared to periodontal health and gingivitis groups (Brito et al.2022). This pathway was also activated in mice treated withP.gingivalis(Kato et al.2018). Another study found that aggressive periodontitis drastically altered the levels of chemicals involved in the biosynthesis of leucine, isoleucine, and valine (Shi et al.2020b). At the same time, increased plasma levels of branched chain amino acids (BCAA) have been linked to insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes (White et al.2021). The TCA cycle is one of the metabolic pathways that varies dramatically between chronic and aggressive periodontitis (Wei et al.2022). The TCA cycle and carbon fixation pathways were found to be enhanced in the gut microbiota of mice with endotoxemia caused by the injection of ultrasonically treatedP. gingivalis(Sasaki et al.2018). We predict that related Gram-negative bacteria (such asK. pneumoniae) will induce similar effects. The oxidative phosphorylation pathway is one of the important ways for bacteria to obtain energy, which was found to be enriched in the gut microbiota of experimental periodontitis rats (Wu et al.2022). The facts that lipopolysaccharide is the major component of the outer membrane of Gram-negative bacteria and is an important virulence factor for periodontitis are well known. The influence ofK.pneumoniae’ lipopolysaccharide on periodontal tissues was not investigated, despite the fact that it is a critical virulence factor of highly abundantK.pneumoniaein the very high risk group. Additionally, fatty acid biosynthesis is crucial for bacteria to construct cell membranes and regulate the secretion of their virulence factors. Ubiquinone, a lipophilic quinone found in cell membranes, plays an important role in energy metabolism, respiratory chain electron transport, and oxidative phosphorylation (Wang and Hekimi2016). Some disorders associated with inflammation and oxidative stress have been linked to dysregulation of ubiquinone and other terpenoid-quinone production (Wang et al.2023; Blackmore et al.2020). Furthermore, pantothenic acid is the precursor of CoA, while low molecular weight thiols including CoA and glutathione help bacteria adapt and survive under adverse conditions (such as against oxidative stress) (Masip et al.2006; Gout2019), and simultaneously affects the virulence of bacteria (Ku and Gan2021).Filifactor alocishas a single peroxidase, glutathione peroxidase (HMPREF0389_01233), which reduces H2O2into water, reducing oxidative damage. However, the exact process is still unknown. To some extent, the dysregulation of the aforementioned functional pathways of bacteria may be associated with an increased risk of periodontitis.

Based on the findings, we hypothesize that the periodontitis risk increase in this study was caused by bacterial metabolism, glutathione-related oxidative stress resistance ofF.alocis, lipopolysaccharide synthesis ofK.pneumoniae, andS.anginosus-related oxidative stress. Relevant molecular mechanisms are for future research, not for today’s duties. In subsequent investigations, we will test the postulated mechanisms.

Our study’s weaknesses include its tiny group size. We examined 49 samples from the very high risk group and the high risk group; additional studies with larger cohorts are required. Another potential drawback is the lack of samples from various risk categories, making it unable to properly identify more diversified compounds across all risk groups.

In conclusion, more research is needed to understand the involvement of the oral microbiota and functional genes in periodontitis risk stratification. High-resolution characterization of microbial populations and pathways yields new insights for future research. In the very high risk group, four species with increased abundance and 11 virulence/pathogenicity pathways are important indications. These findings provide microbial data for periodontitis risk assessment, potentially facilitating diagnostic classification and risk model optimization. They also support improved periodontal care with microbiological insights, offering new directions for oral drug development (e.g., probiotics and targeted therapies).

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

Periodontitis risk assessment was done with Previser (https://www.previser.com/). We would like to sincerely thank the participants for their cooperation in sample collection and invaluable assistance throughout the study.

Y. Xu: methodology; visualization; writing—original draft; investigation; formal analysis. Y. Liu: methodology; writing—review, funding acquisition; Y. Leng: data curation, investigation; J. Qian: investigation; Q. Yang: investigation; J. Zhu: investigation; G. Li: conceptualization; methodology; writing—review. Y. Peng: supervision; writing—review and editing; resources. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.

This work was supported by the Joint Fund of Yunnan Provincial Science and Technology Office and Kunming Medical University (grant numbers: 202501AY070001-052, 202401AY070001-365); Natural Science Foundation of Yunnan Province (grant number: 202401AU070088); Xingdian Talents Support Program (grant number: XDYC-YLWS-2023–0048); National Key Clinical Specialty Development Project of Pediatric Dentistry Division of China (grant number: EYQ2024001).