Template-stripped substrates provide on-demand access
to clean,
ultraflat gold surfaces, avoiding the need for laborious cleaning
procedures or the use of expensive single-crystal electrodes. While
these gold/adhesion layer/support sandwich structures are most conveniently
prepared through the application of epoxy or optical adhesives, such
composites exhibit instabilities in organic solvents that limit their
wider application. Here we demonstrate that substrates with solvent-impermeable
metal films can be used in previously problematic chemical environments
after integration into a protective, custom-built (electrochemical)
flow cell. We apply our methodology to probe different self-assembled
monolayers, observing reproducible alkanethiol reductive desorption
features, an exemplary redox response using 6-(ferrocenyl)­hexanethiol,
and corroborate findings that cobalt­(II) bis­(terpyridine) assemblies
exhibit a low coverage. This work significantly extends the utility
of these substrates, relative to mechanically polished or freshly
deposited alternatives, particularly for studies of systems involving
adsorbed molecules whose properties are strongly influenced by the
nanoscopic features of the metal-solution interface.

Gold surfaces are extensively utilized in studies spanning molecular
self-assembly,,electrocatalysis,,biosensing, and molecular electronics,due to their electrical conductivity, resistance to oxidation, and
straightforward chemical functionalization. In many applications it
is important that these surfaces are flat at atomic length scales
(ideally with a single crystallographic orientation) and free from
contamination. This enables the resolution of nanoscale surface features
in scanning probe microscopy (SPM) experiments,,and
helps improve measurement reproducibility. Pristine surfaces can be
produced directly using techniques such as the Clavilier method (involving
careful polishing and thermal annealing), evaporation of gold onto freshly cleaved mica held at 300 °C
(facilitating epitaxial growth), or chemical
mechanical polishing. While the quality
of gold surfaces decreases rapidly upon exposure to air (through the
adsorption of water and adventitious contaminants),,they may be reconditioned through exposure to “piranha”
solution, mechanical or electrochemical
polishing, or UV-ozone/plasma cleaning. However,
such formation and cleaning methods are often expensive and/or time-intensive,
particularly when substrates must be freshly prepared before every
experiment, and sometimes require specialized equipment.

In
stark contrast, the use of “template-stripped”
substrates,,provides convenient,
on-demand, access to clean, ultraflat gold surfaces (AuTS). Here, a gold thin film is first evaporated onto a well-defined
template such as silicon,or mica.,Next, ∼ 1 cm2pieces of silicon or glass support
are attached to the “as-deposited” metal surface using
an epoxy,or optical adhesive.
As needed, individual gold/adhesion layer/support sandwich structures
are then chemically (through immersion in an appropriate solvent,
alkanethiol solution) or mechanically (by flexing the template, using
a blade) cleaved from the substrate.,The gold surface
that was previously in contact with the template, and so protected
from the ambient atmosphere, is then immediately utilized. SPM imaging
studies have demonstrated these surfaces, which can exhibit a root-mean-squared
roughness of <0.5 nm over micrometer length scales, are flatter than as-deposited,or
even single-crystal substrates. This
general methodology has been extended to prepare high-quality thin
films of other metals including silver,,platinum,,palladium, and nickel.,The early developments and principal applications of template-stripped
substrates were reviewed in 2012 by Vogel et al.

Despite clear advantages, a major practical limitation
to the use
of such substrates results from the poor solvent resistance of the
adhesive (Figurea).
Swelling of this polymeric material, or even delamination, can significantly
damage the metal film. With NOA 61, a commonly utilized optical adhesive,
this occurs after relatively short exposure to dichloromethane (CH2Cl2, 10 min), acetone, acetonitrile (MeCN, 5 h),
or tetrahydrofuran (THF, 1 d; see theSupporting Information,NOA 61 Adhesive-Solvent Screening). As a result, many molecules of interest cannot easily be exposed
to these near-perfect surfaces to form self-assembled monolayers (SAMs),
given their poor solubility in adhesive-compatible solvents (e.g.,
H2O, EtOH). Interfacial chemical reactions and analytical
experiments (including solution/surface voltammetry) may not be performed
in preferred media. While these challenges have been addressed through
several creative strategies over the past 30 years, which focus on
improving or replacing the adhesive to improve the solvent resistance
of the substrate (described in theSupporting Information,Alternative Strategies to Form Solvent-Resistant
TS Substrates), no single approach has yet been advanced
that completely resolves this problem.

(a) Straightforward access
to ultraflat and clean gold surfaces
is provided using template-stripped gold (AuTS) substrates,
which are cleaved immediately prior to use from a silicon wafer support.
However, the adhesives commonly applied in the preparation of these
substrates are incompatible with several solvents. (b) We propose
the solvent-incompatibility of these substrates can be circumvented
by restricting solvent/solution exposure to the top surface of the
thin metal film using a chemically resistant O-ring. (c) A schematic
of the electrochemical flow cell developed here for use with template-stripped
substrates (open configuration). This comprises the following major
elements:(i)septum with inserted electrodes;(ii)electrochemical flow cell top;(iii)cell compartment base; (iv)substrate holder;(v) spring compression mechanism. Additional features of
the cell are labeled inFigure S2. (d)
A photo of a first-generation electrochemical flow cell (closed configuration).

In contrast to these methods, here we show that
AuTSsurfaces may be used in any (gold-compatible) chemical
environment
by protecting the supporting adhesive to maintain its integrity. By
limiting solvent exposure to a well-defined area of the metal thin
film, the film itself, along with a chemically resistant O-ring, serves
as a robust barrier that safeguards the substrate from damage (Figureb). This strategy
enables the extended use ofadhesive-incompatiblesolvents with template-stripped substrates for the first time. Specifically,
we show that template-stripped gold/copper bilayer substrates (Au/CuTS) uniquely exhibit solvent-impermeable metal films which
facilitate their use in previously problematic chemical environments
after integration into a protective, custom-built (electrochemical)
flow cell (Figurec,d). We demonstrate these Au/CuTScan be used as (modified)
working electrodes for electrochemical measurements in CH2Cl2solutions, and apply them here to characterize SAMs
formedin situfrom CH2Cl2or
MeCN solutions. While AuTShave been extensively used for
surface electrochemical studies, and to form SAMs, we stress that
such investigations have typically only exposed the substrate to adhesive-compatible
solvents. The proof-of-concept experiments presented here highlight
the wider range of experiments that can be conducted using our distinct
approach, while further underscoring the utility of applying these
contaminant-free, structurally consistent electrode surfaces to evaluate
the properties of adsorbed molecular assemblies. Unless stated, all
metal thin films used here were prepared through thermal evaporation
onto silicon wafer templates, and NOA 61 was used to attach ∼
1 cm2glass supports to the as-deposited surface (Figurea, full details provided
in theSupporting Information). When relevant,
we note the thickness of each film in nanometers using subscripts
(for example, Au200/Cu600TSindicates
200 nm of gold and 600 nm of copper).

(a) Schematic showing the composition
of template-stripped substrates
prepared with a single gold film (AuTS) or a gold/copper
bilayer film (Au/CuTS). (b) Images of backlit substrates
(cropped to show an area of ∼ 1 cm2) comprising
films with visible defects (left; bright white regions) and without
apparent defects (right). We indicate the thickness of each metal
film in nanometers using subscripts; for example, Au200TSdescribes a substrate with a 200 nm layer of gold.
(c) Representative images of backlit substrates (cropped to show an
area of ∼ 1 cm2) after 1 h exposure to CH2Cl2to the top of the film (solvent restricted to a well-defined
area using an O-ring). When solvent can interact with the adhesive
through defects in the film, we observe the formation of blisters(left)or near complete film delamination(right;the example provided here corresponds to a substrate that was intentionally
damaged by forming a single hole with a sharp needle). Diffuse features
in the images are reflections of the microscope used to take these
photos.

We first evaluated the stability of different AuTSand
Au/CuTSthin films toward contact with CH2Cl2, a notoriously problematic solvent. Here, each substrate
was inspected with a backlit microscope, both immediately after cleavage,
then again after 1 h of continuous, O-ring localized, solvent exposure
to a well-defined surface area. As illustrated inFigureb for Au200TS, this imaging technique allows us to identity visible imperfections
in the freshly cleaved film. We suggest defects form where the metal-adhesive
layer is weaker/thinner (proximal to residual air bubbles), and/or
result from the poor structural integrity of the metal film itself,
which allow portions of the film to remain on the template after the
substrate is cleaved. This observation is consistent with an early
report that Au200TSprepared with epoxy did
not survive exposure to solvents such as THF or CDCl3/MeOH
using an O-ring-connected reaction chamber due to small and infrequent
discontinuities in the gold film. Accordingly,
we prepared and tested AuTSwith greater film thicknesses
(≤2000 nm), reasoning that the deposition of additional material
would ultimately yield robust and complete substrates after template-stripping.
Certainly, as the film thickness increased, fewer obvious defects
were observed. However, after 1 h of CH2Cl2exposure,
all AuTStested exhibited signs of damage – from
blister formation to complete film loss (illustrative examples are
shown inFigurec).
While it has been proposed that a thickness of 600 nm should be sufficient
to ensure there are no cracks or pinholes in the gold film, our results indicate that solvents such as CH2Cl2can in fact penetrate films up to 2000 nm thick.
We note, in attempting to reconcile the origin of these persistent
defects, that there is a large difference in the coefficients of linear
expansion for gold and silicon (α = 14.2 and 2.6 × 10–6K–1at ∼ 25 °C, respectively). This mismatch could lead to the film shrinking
relative to the template as it cools after deposition, separating
individual crystal grains and facilitating solvent interactions with
the adhesive.

To identify a deposition protocol that provides
solvent-impermeable
metal surfaces, we set out to deposit bilayer films comprising copper
deposited onto gold. Here, copper was chosen primarily to avoid the
use of substantial quantities of gold, which is more expensive. Surprisingly,
our initial analyses of Au200/Cu200–1000TSshowed they often yielded cleaved metal films with
fewer visible defects than pure gold films of the same total thickness
(Figureb). After
careful placement of O-rings to avoid any visible imperfections, these
films typically also survived exposure to CH2Cl2without apparent damage. Additional studies are needed to establish
the exact origin of this improved solvent resistance; however, we
suggest this may result from postdeposition growth of native copper
oxide on the as-deposited surface which serves to bridge any open
channels in the film. While this approach to form robust gold substrates
can be further improved, for example, to mitigate the possibility
of surface contamination with copper (see theSIfor
additional discussion), these model Au/CuTScould be immediately
applied across a series of proof-of-concept experiments.

We
subsequently developed a low cost, custom-built (electrochemical)
flow cell that can be used with any template-stripped substrate, illustrated
inFigurec,d. Full
details of the construction and use of this apparatus is described
in theSupporting Information. Briefly,
the cell is built using commercially available and/or three-dimensionally
(3D) printed parts. Substrates are interfaced with an O-ring using
a guided, spring-loaded platform to minimize damage to the exposed
surface, then secured by tightening the thumb nuts and/or clamping
in place. The O-ring engaged with the substrate forms the bottom of
a cell compartment of approximate volume ∼ 1 cm2. The system can be fitted with different flow cell tops for experiments
involving aqueous or organic media, which are introduced and removed
using a peristaltic pump that transfers liquid or gas through the
compartment via the in/out ports. Critically, our cell design ensures
only a well-defined area of the template-stripped surface is exposed
to the solvent/solution environment. By introducing counter and reference
electrodes via a septa cap positioned in the cell top, we can exploit
electrically contacted template-stripped metal surfaces as working
electrodes in electrochemical experiments. Substrate loading in the
flow cell takes <5 min, faster or comparable to the time typically
required to clean a mechanically polished substrate (AuMP). The integrity of each substrate is verified after every experiment.

We first demonstrate the capabilities of our substrates and flow
cell by performing solution electrochemical studies of ferrocene in
0.1 MnBu4N-PF6/CH2Cl2using an Au200/Cu400TSworking
electrode. Critically, this medium is incompatible with such substrates
utilized through conventional methods (Figure S13b). Our cell design can accommodate O-rings with three distinct
inner diameters (IDs): 0.120” (small), 0.150” (medium),
and 0.195” (large). InFigurea, we plot overlaid cyclic voltammograms obtained using
these different O-rings that clearly show that the intensity of the
reversible ferrocene Fe2+/3+redox wave increases with
the size of the exposed working area (seeFigure S5for voltammograms obtained at different scan rates,Vs). We plot, inFigureb, the theoretical area calculated using
the ID against the measured area (determined using the Randles–Ševčík
equation) for each O-ring size (data
provided inTable S3), which yields an
excellent linear correlation. Notably, the measured areas are consistently
∼ 90% of the theoretical value, which we attribute to O-ring
compression and/or solvent swelling during use. Importantly, we find
no significant change in working electrode area or visible signs of
damage, even after extended exposure to CH2Cl2electrolyte solution (5–17 h,Figure S6). Together, these results firmly illustrate the improved
stability of optical adhesive-based template-stripped substrates employed
with this approach (otherwise compromised in <10 min), and the
efficacy of our cell design to perform electrochemical experiments.
Cells equipped with the large O-rings are used in all subsequent experiments,
unless stated.

Solution electrochemical data.(a) Overlaid
solution
cyclic voltammograms for a 0.1 mM solution of ferrocene (FcH, structure inset) in 0.1 MnBu4N-PF6/CH2Cl2(scan rate (Vs) = 0.1 V/s) obtained using Au200/Cu400TSas working electrodes, with small (pink), medium (teal),
and large (blue) substrate O-rings. Voltammograms at differentVsare provided inFigure S5. (b) A plot of the theoretical working electrode surface
area (determined using the inner diameter of the O-ring) against the
measured area (obtained through application of the Randles–Ševčík
equation, usingipafor cyclic voltammograms
ofFcHmeasured atVs= 1
V/s) reveals an excellent linear correlation. (c) Overlaid cyclic
voltammograms obtained using AuTSand mechanically polished
gold (AuMP) electrodes in 0.01 M H2SO4/H2O using a conventional large volume electrochemical
cell (Vs= 0.05 V/s). The current of the
AuMPelectrode is multiplied by a factor of ∼15
to normalize the intensity of the gold reduction features observed
at ∼0.8 V.

These template-stripped surfaces were subjected
to further characterization
using aqueous electrochemistry. InFigurec we plot representative cyclic voltammograms
obtained using AuTSand AuMPworking electrodes
in 0.01 M H2SO4/H2O using a conventionallarge volumeelectrochemical cell (data from repeated experiments
is provided inFigure S7). We find that
voltammograms obtained using AuTSexhibit comparable gold
oxidation features (observed at potentials >1 V) with a principal
component at ∼1.24 V (vs Ag/AgCl) that we attribute to oxidation
of Au(111) crystal facets. Crystallites
with this orientation are expected to dominate the AuTSsurface.,,,In contrast, voltammograms obtained using
AuMPshow noticeable variation in the oxidation features
from experiment to experiment, as is expected given the rougher, polycrystalline
surfaces of these electrodes generated through mechanical polishing
by hand. Notably, voltammograms obtained for AuTSunder
the same conditions, but now using ourlow volumeflow cell, provided oxidation features that changed in form and
intensity with repeated potential cycling (Figure S8). This voltammetric response has previously been associated
with the presence of Cl–ions in solution that have
leaked from the Ag/AgCl (3 M KCl) reference electrode. While this issue may be circumvented by using
a different reference electrode, we emphasize that our flow cell can
already be utilized for other aqueous electrochemical experiments,
as further evidenced below.

Surface electrochemical data.(a) Structures
of
the molecules used to form self-assembled monolayers (SAMs). (b) Overlaid
voltammograms for SAMs ofCnSH(n=
6, 8, 10) on an AuTSworking electrode (preparedex situ), measured in 0.1 M KOH/H2O (Vs= 0.05 V/s). Each voltammogram shows a dominant
peak feature attributed to the reductive desorption of the SAM. (c)
A plot ofnagainst the desorption peak potential
(average of 6 measurements) exhibits a linear correlation (dashed
line fit, slope = −24 mV/n), in agreement with previous reports.,Error bars correspond to one standard deviation. (d) A cyclic voltammogram
for a SAM ofFcSHon a Au200/Cu400TSworking electrode, preparedin situusing a 0.1 mM CH2Cl2solution, and measured
in 0.1 MnBu4N-PF6/CH2Cl2(Vs= 0.1 V/s). (e) A
cyclic voltammogram for a SAM ofCoSSon a Au200/Cu200TSworking electrode, preparedin situusing a 1 mM MeCN solution, and measured in 0.1
MnBu4N-PF6/CH2Cl2(Vs= 1 V/s).

InFigureb, we
present overlaid linear sweep voltammograms for AuTSelectrodes
modified with 1-hexanethiol (C6SH), 1-octanethiol (C8SH), and 1-decanethiol (C10SH) SAMs formedex situ, measured in 0.1 M KOH/H2O (a representative
cyclic voltammogram is provided inFigure S9). In each case, we observe a dominant, sharp peak feature upon the
first cathodic sweep that we assign to reductive desorption of the
monolayer. Consistent with previous studies, the peak potential for
this redox event shifts to more negative values as the length of the
alkane chain increases, reflecting the improved thermodynamic stability
of longer chain alkanethiol SAMs.,The well-defined
nature of each peak provides additional evidence that these monolayers
are well-organized. Disordered SAMs, or SAMs formed on polycrystalline
surfaces, are found to exhibit significantly broadened desorption
peaks, or multiple features of significant intensity.,We further plot, inFigurec, the number of carbons in each alkane (n) against the average
reductive desorption potential for each SAM (obtained from measurements
of six modified electrodes). The excellent linear correlation (dashed
line) highlights the highly reproducible properties ofCnSHSAMs formed on AuTS.

InFigured and e, we plot
voltammograms measured in 0.1 MnBu4N-PF6/CH2Cl2using Au/CuTSelectrodes
that have been functionalized
with SAMs formedin situfrom 6-(ferrocenyl)­hexanethiol
(FcSH) or [Co­(tpySS)2]­(PF6)2(CoSS, where tpySS = 4′-(methyldisulfide)-2,2′:6′,2″terpyridine),
respectively. To form the SAM, the cell compartment was fitted with
a freshly cleaved substrate then charged with aFcSH/CH2Cl2orCoSS/MeCN solution. After 1
h, pure solvent was flowed through the system to wash away any unbound
species, followed by electrolyte solution. For each modified electrode
we observe an electrochemical response characteristic of a single,
surface-immobilized reversible redox-active species (ipa/ipc∼ 1,ip∝Vs;Figure S10a, Figure S11,Table S4).,We emphasize again here that
such experiments cannot easily be performed with template-stripped
substrates using conventional approaches due to the incompatibility
of the adhesive with CH2Cl2(Figure S13b). The preparation and study ofCoSSSAMs at such high-quality electrode surfaces using any other method
would have required the use of single-crystal electrodes, as this
compound exhibits relatively poor solubility in AuTS-compatible
solvents such as EtOH or H2O.

We attribute the redox
feature of theFcSHSAM to
the Fe2+/3+event of adsorbed ferrocenyl groups. The redox
peak separation (Ep) < 10 mV at slow
scan rates (Figure S10b), and full width
at half maximum (Efwhm) of 77 mV (atVs= 0.1 V/s), observed for this SAM approach
the theoretical values for noninteracting redox sites.,Using the measured electrode area (Table S3) we calculate a surface coverage (Γ) of 224 pmol/cm2. This is ∼73% of the value reported for a saturation coverage
(Γsat.) SAM formed on an AuTSsubstrate. We attribute the near ideal redox response of
ourFcSHSAM to Γ < Γsat.,
which reduces unfavorable intermolecular steric interactions in the
adsorbed layer; the atomic flatness of the underlying substrate which
minimizes monolayer inhomogeneities; and the organic electrolytic
microenvironment that homogenizes the redox-response through better
interfacial solvation of the adsorbed components.−The voltammetric
response presented inFigured contrasts sharply with the broad, multicomponent peak features
typically observed in studies of analogous monolayers in aqueous electrochemical
environments (even when using AuTS).,,,This exemplary
result clearly highlights the advantages of studying SAMs formed on
clean, ultraflat gold surfaces in different (organic) solvent environments,
experiments facilitated here using solvent-impermeable Au/CuTSsubstrates.

The redox waves observed for theCoSSSAM are assigned
to the Co2+/3+couple. We have previously observed these
charged complexes yield SAMs on AuMPsubstrates with consistently
low saturation surface coverages (∼40 pmol/cm2),
as well as ΔEpand ΔEfwhmvalues indicative of significant lateral intercomponent
repulsive interactions.,This was attributed
to the loss of mobile PF6–counterions
fromCoSSupon surface binding, such that the resulting
adsorbed [Co­(tpySS)2]2+species may form only
loosely packed 2D arrays which mitigate unfavorable lateral long-range
Coulomb forces. We find, as indicated inTable S4, thatCoSSSAMs formed here on pristine Au200/Cu200TSsurfaces exhibit highly comparable
electrochemical properties to those formed on AuMP. Importantly,
this reveals that the unusual adsorption behavior ofCoSS, and analogous compounds with Fe2+, Zn2+,
and Ru2+centers,,is not attributable
to the relatively large surface roughness or adventitious contamination
of AuMP(e.g., following contact with alumina slurry or
piranha solution), further motivating additional studies of these
and other charged SAMs to evaluate the role of electrostatic interactions
on their structure, composition, and stability.

In conclusion,
we have shown how solvent-impermeable thin metal
films, integrated within an (electrochemical) flow cell, can be exploited
to utilize template-stripped substrates in otherwise challenging chemical
environments. As demonstrated here using Au/CuTS, our approach
significantly extends the range of possible experiments involving
these near-ideal electrodes. Specifically, it facilitates the reproducible
formation of well-ordered SAMs comprising a greater number of components
(accommodating different solubilities), also providing a facile mechanism
to characterize and modify them,,in different media. More broadly, this work introduces a conceptually
distinct process to obtain such solvent-resistant substrates, targeting
procedures which provide continuous, defect-free films rather than
improvements to the adhesive. In principle our strategy is compatible
with substrates prepared usinganytemplate or adhesive,
allowing these to be selected independently on their own merit (primarily
targeting, for example, an adhesive’s temperature stability,
or thermal/electrical conductivity, rather than its solvent resistance).
We anticipate these methods may ultimately be extended to thin films
of other materials, studies under an inert atmosphere or at different
temperatures, and the use of flow cells as reaction vessels, further
expanding the utility of template-stripped substrates in all areas
of surface science.

This work was primarily supported by University
of Southern California (USC) startup funds and the National Science
Foundation (NSF CAREER Award to M.S.I., CHE-2239614). We thank Thomas
M. Czyszczon-Burton for assistance with acquiring X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopic data, and Temin Sohn for help with refining our approach
to constructing the flow cell. M.S.I. thanks Latha Venkataraman for
the use of her laboratory to perform the NOA 61 Adhesive-Solvent Screening
study. Instrumentation in the USC Chemistry Instrument Facility was
acquired with support from the USC Research and Innovation Instrumentation
Award Program. Additionally, funds provided by the NSF (DBI-0821671,
CHE-0840366) and National Institutes of Health (S10 RR25432) supported
the acquisition of the NMR spectrometers used in our work.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.5c00018.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.