We designed and validated a speech recognition test for Persian-speaking children aged 36–71 months.

This project was a cross-sectional and methodological study. Different steps of test development, encompassing item generation, content validity, construct validity, and reliability, were used to develop the scale.

The percentages of agreement among the experts’ answers concerning test characteristics were all greater than 88%. After this phase, 20 items were removed. In the second phase of content validity, 18 additional pictures were suggested to be removed by the experts. Finally, a test with 162 pictures was developed among which 120 corresponding words were presented orally (the remaining pictures were distractors). The Persian speech recognition test revealed an age difference in speech recognition for both ears (p-value < 0.001,df = 5). There was no significant association between sex and total score on the Persian speech recognition test for right ear (U = 3063,p-value = 0.092) and left ear (U = 3009,p-value = 0.063). Test-retest values were excellent for both ears (right ear:r= 0.97, left ear:r= 0.98),p-value < 0.001).

Given the findings in typically developing (TD) children, the Persian speech recognition test is valid and reliable. However, future studies are highly recommended to apply this test in hearing-impaired children.

In clinical settings, audiologists frequently apply hearing assessments, including otoscopy, tympanometry, air and bone conduction testing, and speech testing, although differences may occur among specialists. Speech recognition is one type of speech assessment frequently used in audiology clinics.

Speech recognition is defined as the ability to perceive and identify speech expressed by the speaker [1]. Speech recognition testing provides audiologists with valuable clinical information, for instance, guiding them as to whether more comprehensive assessment is needed. Also, the result of recognition testing is regarded as a cross check with other elements of auditory assessment. Moreover, the performance of each client in this evaluation might be monitored to examine any possible change over time. Several methods have been proposed to measure speech recognition. Different procedures and materials are suggested for use in pediatric and adult populations because of the developmental differences between children and adults [2].

The measures used to quantify speech recognition contain several words. To identify each word, the examinee responds by pointing to one of several pictures on a board. Styles of testing speech recognition include speech recognition thresholds, play based assessments, and closed-set testing [3]. Closed-set tests are usually applied in the assessment of auditory perception in children because they decrease the cognitive demands required for speech perception. The scoring and administration of these tests are faster and easier. Moreover, the results have been proven to be reliable, and the individual does not learn during task performance. Thus, the benefits of such tests have resulted in their popularity in audiology clinical settings [4].

Several commercially available speech recognition tests, such as the Phonetically Balanced Kindergarten (PBK-50), Discrimination by Identification of Pictures (DIP), Auditory Numbers Test (ANT), Northwestern University Children’s Perception of Speech (NU-CHIPS), Sound Effect Recognition Test (SERT), Pediatric Speech Intelligence (PSI) and Word Intelligibility by Picture Identification (WIPI) tests, are available. The PBK-50 and includes words that are balanced regarding phonetic characteristics. The PBK-50 items were chosen from the expressive vocabulary of kindergarten children. Therefore, younger children may not perform satisfactorily on this test [5]. The DIP, which was validated consists of forty-eight cards with two images each. This scale was standardized for 295 children who had normal hearing aged 3–8 years [6]. For ANT [7], the child should count from one to five, and these numbers should be used for sets of items ranging from one to five. The NU-CHIPS involves fifty monosyllabic lexical items for measuring the speech recognition of normally hearing children who are older than 48 months. Word intelligibility by picture identification is another popular measure that is commonly used by audiologists for evaluating speech recognition. This scale was developed to investigate speech recognition through pictures in preschool children [8,9].

Overall, lexical items applied for assessing speech recognition in children should be in their vocabulary, and the method used to elicit the response should be suitable for the child’s age, culture, and languages spoken.

Persian is the main and official language of almost 110,000,000 people in several countries, including Iran, Afghanistan, and Tajikistan. Because of the linguistic and cultural differences between Persian and English, scales developed for English-speaking children cannot be applied to the Persian-speaking population and the appropriate scales need to be validated to fill this gap in Iranian audiology clinical settings [10]. Few studies have developed tests to measure speech recognition. However, some of these test have focused on central auditory assessment by presenting a competing noise. Relevant to the routine tests measuring the peripheral auditory discrimination in practice, a disseminated study only reported the content validity in a limited age group (3–4 years) without studying the TD children’s performance. Another Persian speech recognition test exists but has been validated only on 33 TD children aged 4–6 years [11,12]. Therefore, our purpose was to design and validate a new speech recognition test that was administered to a larger sample size. Also, we considered the individual word lists for each ear. The picture-pointing tests are frequently applied to children whose behavioral or chronological age is younger than six years. For younger children (younger than 3 years), tasks such as pointing to their body parts are performed [10]. Hence, we considered children aged 3–6 years for validating this measure [2].

To evaluate the content validity of the Persian speech recognition test.

To assess the construct validity by investigating the ability of this test to differentiate among participants in different age groups.

To measure the association between sex and speech recognition in Persian-speaking children.

To compute the speech recognition between the right and left ears because of the potential auditory processing asymmetries that might be found between two ears, and to determine the effect of hearing impairment on each ear (for further studies on hearing impaired children).

To investigate the test-retest reliability of the Persian speech recognition test.

A cross-sectional, methodological study was conducted to determine the validity and reliability of the Persian speech recognition test. There were 60 target words for each ear. Plichta and colleagues [13] suggest each item in a test must be considered 2–7 times to establish the construct validity. Therefore, we recruited 170 children. The participants were 170 normally developing children aged 36–71 months who were monolingual and randomly selected from kindergartens and nursery schools in Babol city. The participants were divided into six groups of six month intervals: Group 1 (36–41 months), Group 2 (42–47 months), Group 3 (48–53 months), Group 4 (54–59 months), Group 5 (60–65 months), and Group 6 (66–71 months).

The exclusion criteria were as follows: visual and hearing impairments, speech and language development delay, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, orofacial anomalies such as cleft lip and palate, born preterm, autism spectrum disorders, cerebral palsy, and intellectual disability. The diagnosis of neurodevelopmental disorders was made based on the examination and observations of an experienced audiologist, reports of parents and teachers, children’s medical records that were available at nursery school, and the available information obtained from a form that parents completed about different stages of communication, speech-language, and motor development of their children. The current research received ethical approval from the Ethics Committee of Babol University of Medical Sciences (Ethics code: IR.MUBABOL.REC.1402.161).

After completing this step, 20 words were omitted. These items were ones that all the experts had lower than 70% agreement regarding the questions of content validity. They included the following: 1. “Whale”/vɑl/, 2. “Cone”/ɢif/, 3. “Skyscraper” /bordʒ/, 4. “Swan”/ɢu/, 5. “Comfit”/noɢl/, 6. “Cauldron”/dig/, 7.” Razor” /tiɢ/, 8. “Bald” /tɑs/, 9. “Gaz” (a type of the Iranian sweet) /gæz/, 10. “Goose” /ɢɑz/, 11. “Sickle”/dɑs/, 12. “Tub”/tæʃt/, 13. ” dam” /sæd/, 14. “Far” /dur/, 15. “Prickle” /χɑr/, 16. “Bath” /duʃ/, 17. “Mane” /jɑl/, 18. “Thigh” /rɑn/, 19. “Wing” /bɑl/, and 20. ‘’Bath’’ /vɑn/. In this step, the pictures of words were prepared (size: 10 × 9 cm). Next, the pictures were sent to the experts to check whether they were suitable. In this stage 18 words were proposed to be omitted by experts. These items were: (1) “Garden” /bɑɢ/, (2) ‘’Roof ‘’ /sæɢf/, (3) “Step”/gɑm/, 4.” Thumb” /ʃæst/ 5. “Jasmine” /jɑs/, 6. “Line” /χæt/, 7. “Salty” /ʃur/, 8. “Bent” /χæm/, 9. “Frame” /ɢɑb/, 10. “Team” /tim/, 11. “Ram” /ɢutʃ/ 12. “Raw” /χɑm/, 13. “Blonde” /bur/, 14. “Tɑr” /ɢir/, 15. “Body” /tæn/, 16. “Face” /ru/, 17. “Wet” /tær/, and 18. “Stamp” /tæmr/. From 162 words, 120 lexical items were the target words, and the 42 remaining items were distractors whose pictures were distributed in the word rows. Finally, the words were categorized into thirty rows of six words. The lexical items rhymed with each other in each row in such a way that four words were target words and two were distracting items (with only their pictures presented). The target words were recorded in an acoustic recording studio with a microphone (Model: Sea Electronics X1 A) and edited by Adobe Audition software.

Before administering the test to the children, their parents were asked to complete the informed consent and demographic information form. Information such as the child’s history of otitis media, chronological age, and motor, language, and speech milestones was gathered to meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria.

The corresponding images of lexical items of the Persian speech recognition test and their carrier sentences were developed using software by a computer engineer who was an expert in the development of educational software. The words were presented by a female Persian speaker considering the phonotactic rules of the language in an acoustic booth in a recording studio and recorded using the Adobe Audition v.3.5.1.12 and a sound monitoring package and sound card in the WAVE format (1.44 kHz,16-bit mono). All speech stimuli were recorded with the standard accent and a clear voice while maintaining the speech rhythm and avoiding emphasis on the key words. Afterwards, the recorded materials were edited in terms of sound level, noise, and hesitations between words. Pauses were removed from distracting words to ensure that the stories were presented smoothly at a constant intensity. A 1000-Hz tone-burst stimulus was presented for 200 ms before each word to increase the child’s awareness, and a 500 ms gap separated the tone-burst stimulus from the beginning of the word. Immediately after presenting the word, four images and a question mark appeared at the top of the screen. The child’s task was to select one of the pictures corresponding to the target word. The test lasted around 20 min.

A desktop platform (Microsoft Windows) was employed using C# programming language. The software was compatible with Microsoft Windows, Android, and IOS. At the end, the user’s data and performance were saved in a text format. The application designer also included data such as hearing threshold and the comfortable hearing level for each ear. The pictures and the carrier sentences were synchronized together and presented to the child simultaneously so that the child could respond to the question. The sampling was performed in a quiet and well-ventilated room at a temperature of almost 22 °C by the principal investigator. A laptop (Model: Lenovo idea pad z500–20202) was placed on a table (height: approximately 69 cm), and the participant sat on an appropriate chair. After establishing rapport with the child, the sampling procedure began. Both external ears of each child were examined using an otoscope (Model: Riester). Then, otoacoustic emission (OAE) and pure tone average testing (PTA) (Model: Peja Ava) at frequencies of 500, 1000, 2000, and 4000 Hz were employed. Before playing the sentences through a curcuma-aural headphone, the examiner explained how to respond during the administration of the Persian speech recognition test. The examiner instructed each participant to listen carefully to the audio played through the headphones and to point to the corresponding picture that matched the spoken word (e.g., which is the cow? ). Each row of words was presented, and there was a ten-second interval between playing each row through the headphones.

The total score of this test was 100, meaning that a child who answered all the items correctly obtained 100, and the minimum total score would be zero for a child who could recognize none of the words. There were 120 target words for the right and left ears (60 words for each ear). Therefore, the score of each correct response for each ear was 1.66.

The Statistical Package for the Social Sciences, version 25.0 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL), was used for statistical analysis. We used a quantitative approach to investigate the content validity of the items. The correlation between total scores on the Persian speech recognition test and test-retest reliability were reported. First, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was applied to check the normality of the distribution of data. Then, based on the findings of this test, nonparametric tests were used to statistically analyze the data. Descriptive statistics were also employed to calculate the percentage values of the correct answers for the item analysis. The Kruskal‒Wallis test was applied to assess construct validity (the ability of the Persian test of speech recognition test to differentiate the different age groups). Likewise, comparisons were reported to compare each age group with the other age groups individually using Dunn’s test. The Mann‒Whitney U test was employed to study the association between sex and speech recognition. For test-retest reliability, the correlation (Pearson’s correlation coefficient) between two administrations of the test on thirty-six children who were randomly selected from the sample with two-week intervals was evaluated.

In total, 170 children (78 males and 92 females) with a mean and standard deviation value of age 55.37 ± 9.59 months were recruited for investigating the construct validity. The demographic data of the participants are summarized in Table1.

The findings of the content validity tests are provided in Table2. No statistically significant differences were found among the experts’ responses regarding the characteristics of the Persian speech recognition test. Therefore, similar findings for the features of this measure were reported. The experts assigned values exceeding 88 to the features of the test, indicating high scores for the test’s characteristics.

We administered this test to 20 participants (10 males and 10 females) before applying this scale to a larger sample to study the participants’ performance for each item. As seen in Table3, the percentage values of the participants who gave the correct answer for all these 120 items (which were orally presented) were higher than 94%.

The findings for construct validity of the Persian speech recognition test showed significant differences between the six age groups on the Persian speech recognition test, indicating that this test could distinguish between the age groups in the right ear (p-value < 0.001,df = 5) with the effect size of 0.76, and left ear (p-value < 0.001,df = 5) with the effect size of 0.76 (see Table4). Moreover, post hoc comparison testing revealed that older children frequently had better speech recognition ability than younger children, except for 42–47-month-old children, whose speech recognition ability was like that of 36–41-month-old participants in the right ear (p-value = 0.060,df = 5) and left ear (p-value= 0.30,df = 5). Children aged 42–47 months performed in a similar way to the group of children aged 48–53 months in the left ear (p-value = 0.051,df = 5). Also, children aged 60–65 months were similar to children 66–71 months in the right ear (p-value= 0.13,df = 5) and the left ear (p-value= 0.21,df = 5) (see Table5).

The findings of the Mann‒Whitney U test revealed that females and males performed similarly on the Persian speech recognition test for the right ear (U = 3063,p-value= 0.092) and left ear (U = 3009,p-value= 0.063).

The Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed that the left and right ears of the participants did not significantly differ in terms of function on the Persian speech recognition test (Z = -0.11,p-value= 0.600).

There was a high correlation between the two administrations of the Persian speech recognition test in the right ear (r= 0.97,p-value< 0.001). In addition, we found an appropriate and satisfactory association between two administrations of the Persian speech recognition test in the left ear (r= 0.98,p-value< 0.001).

Measuring speech recognition is an essential part of hearing assessment. Thus, we designed and validated a test for Persian-speaking individuals, which is crucial for Persian audiologists. This study described the steps towards achieving this goal.

We applied a quantitative procedure to determine the content validity of the test, a method commonly used in speech and hearing studies [14–16]. Content validity is an initial and critical steps of test design and development [17], where experts in the field are asked to rate the generated items either qualitatively or quantitatively. Based on the findings of this stage, appropriate items are selected.

In our study, the ability to recognize speech improved with increasing age – as expected – given that older TD children perform more satisfactorily than younger ones on speech recognition tasks [18]. An important finding was the high mean value of the total score of this scale for the youngest age group (36–71 months). One reason for this finding might be the criteria considered to select the lexical items. All the words were monosyllabic, popular and picturable, making speech recognition easier. Speech recognition is an ability that develops early from when children are about 9 months of age.

This measure did not reveal any difference in speech recognition in terms of sex. The connection between sex and some speech and language skills was contradictory. In several Persian research projects, a significant association between speech and language measures and sex has not been reported [10,16,19]. However, these findings cannot be easily generalized to speech recognition, and further surveys should be conducted on the relationship between speech recognition in both TD children and those with hearing impairment.

The reliability values were found to be excellent as evidenced by high test-retest reliability coefficients, showing that this instrument can stably measure speech recognition. This finding mirrors the reliability values of Ross and Lerman’s study (1970) [20]. Generally, an appropriate value for reliability is deemed a prerequisite prior to applying the measure in clinical practice.

The current research was not without limitations. Initially, TD children were targeted, and we did not study hearing-impaired children. Undoubtedly, investigating the performance of children with hearing impairment using this measure and comparing them with the scores of TD children, as evidence of clinical validity, is necessary to include such an instrument in the Iranian clinical setting. Our ultimate goal is to validate this test for measuring the speech recognition of children with different types of hearing impairment. We aimed to select words that were appropriate for the studied age range. However, the word characteristics (being picturable, monosyllabic, and familiar for children) may have resulted in the items being very easy for children. Difficulty level is a critical factor to consider in further steps of validating this test in future. Also, standard scores were not obtained in this work. Therefore, future research could obtain age-standardized scores and percentiles, reporting the norms in a larger sample size and broader age range. Furthermore, the effects of a number of factors related to participants’ receptive and expressive vocabulary were not examined. We will consider such factors in further studies.

The Persian speech recognition test was shown to have satisfactory psychometric properties when administered to TD children. However, its validity and reliability require further evaluation in a hearing-impaired population.

We are deeply thankful to the colleagues who assisted us in the content validity step. Also, we are grateful to the children and their parents who included in the current research.