The incidence of total knee arthroplasty (TKA), an effective orthopaedic procedure for end-stage osteoarthritis, is increasing substantially. The shift toward performing this procedure in the outpatient setting necessitates precise patient selection criteria to ensure optimal postoperative outcomes. This study examines the predictive value of preoperative patient-reported outcome measures (PROMs), including the Brief Resilience Scale (BRS), in determining candidacy for outpatient TKA.

A retrospective analysis of 2,167 patients undergoing elective primary, unilateral TKA from May 2020 to June 2023 was conducted. Preoperative PROMs, including Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score for Joint Replacement (KOOS, JR), Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS)-10, Risk Assessment and Prediction Tool (RAPT), and BRS, were collected. Patients were stratified into three groups by BRS score: low (BRS score < 3), average (BRS score ≥ 3 and < 4.3), and high (BRS score ≥ 4.3) resilience. Length of stay (LOS), discharge disposition, and complications were assessed postoperatively. Logistic regression and receiver operative characteristic (ROC) curve analyses were used to assess the predictive validity of PROMs for discharge to a skilled nursing facility (SNF) in conjunction with extended LOS.

Patients with low resilience (BRS score < 3) were found to have a significantly higher likelihood of discharge to a SNF and extended LOS compared with the other two groups (11.5% vs. 1.6%,P< 0.001). Logistic regression demonstrated that BRS, RAPT, and PROMIS-10 scores were also notable predictors, with a combined model predicting an extended LOS and discharge to SNF with 82.4% sensitivity and 79.9% specificity.

Preoperative PROMs such as BRS can serve as a valuable tool in predicting the failure of outpatient TKA. Incorporating preoperative PROMs into presurgical decision making can enhance patient selection for ambulatory procedures and improve surgical outcomes. Additional prospective studies are warranted to validate these findings within other elective surgical populations and to determine how to best modify resilience.

Total knee arthroplasty (TKA) is a highly effective treatment of knee osteoarthritis that has failed conservative management.1As the population ages, the incidence of TKA has also increased in kind, with a 143% rise expected by 2050.2The average hospital stay after TKA has decreased substantially in recent years, especially after 2018 when the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services removed TKA from their inpatient-only list,3with most of the TKAs performed either in a hospital and billed as an “extended recovery” outpatient overnight stay, or at an Ambulatory Surgery Center (ASC) as an outpatient same-day surgery.

Resilience, defined as the ability to bounce back from stress or adversity, has been a popular focus of clinical research in recent years. There are numerous orthopaedic studies across all subspecialties that assess resilience in relation to surgical outcomes. However, these studies often assess resilience at a single postoperative time point. Few studies have looked at preoperative resilience as a factor in outcomes. The Brief Resilience Scale (BRS) is a validated instrument developed to assess resilience and may help provide new insights into the relationship between resilience and postoperative outcomes. Greater resilience is associated with lower anxiety responses, suggesting that resilient patients may experience better postoperative outcomes, including lower analgesic requirements.14-16Higher scores on the BRS are correlated with better mental health and improved knee function after TKA.17A small 2019 prospective study used the BRS in TKA to show that preoperative resilience is a notable predictor of physical health and overall quality of life at 12 months postoperatively.18While this study looked at long-term patient-reported outcomes, short-term outcomes such as discharge to a skilled nursing facility (SNF) or extended length of stay (LOS) have not been assessed with a focus on resilience.

The purpose of this study was to determine whether the BRS along with other preoperative PROMs could be used to determine whether a patient was at risk of failing outpatient TKA. SNF discharge or extended LOS (greater than 3 days) was used as a surrogate for failure of outpatient TKA. We hypothesize that patients with low preoperative BRS scores are at higher risk of failing the ASC setting, whereas patients with a high BRS score are more likely to succeed in the ASC setting.

Institutional review board (IRB) approval was granted before beginning this retrospective study (HHC-2023-0227). The data set included all patients aged 18 to 89 years undergoing elective, primary, unilateral TKA between May 15, 2020, and June 30, 2023. This yielded a total of 3,370 patients. Patients with incomplete preoperative patient-reported outcomes or patients taking preoperative opioid medications were excluded, as pain and morphine milligram equivalents (MMEs) were examined. This yielded a final study group of 2,167 patients who had completed all of their preoperative patient-reported outcome measures, including the Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score for Joint Replacement (KOOS, JR), the PROMIS-10 Global Health Survey (PROMIS-10), the Risk Assessment and Prediction Tool (RAPT), and the Brief Resiliency Scale (BRS). All patient-reported outcomes were completed in the 30 days before their index procedure. Surveys were collected using Force Therapeutics (New York, NY), an online engagement platform.

All surgeries were performed by fellowship trained arthroplasty surgeons. Each surgery was performed using a medial parapatellar approach, without resection of the posterior cruciate ligament. Multiple vendor implants and implant designs, including cruciate-retaining, posterior-stabilized, and medial-congruent, were included without restriction, with equal distribution. Both noncemented and cemented fixation techniques were included, although 90.1% of implants were cemented. All patients were enrolled in a dedicated preoperative class and received postoperative physical therapy support multiple times while inpatient. Extensive counseling was provided to all patients to ensure that the patient could return home, including confirming a care partner in place. Patients were not approved for surgery unless they met these criteria.

The patient's electronic medical record was used to extract demographic data, medical and social history, surgical and inpatient stay parameters, and 30-day complications such as emergency department visits. Single outcome measures, such as discharge disposition, psychiatric history (confirmed diagnosis of anxiety or depression), or a 30-day complication, were compared using Chi-squared tests of proportion. Continuous variables, such as surgical time or ambulation distance, were compared using one-way analyses of variance or Kruskal-Wallis tests. The statistical analysis conducted depended on the underlying distribution of the variable. For values that were reported multiple times over the LOS, such as pain and MMEs, an average was taken. Physical therapy parameters, such as ambulation distance, and Timed Up and Go (TUG) tests were assessed using the best score that the patient was able to achieve.

Preliminary data analysis showed no difference in BRS scores based on implant type or fixation; therefore, the entire data set was used. Univariate logistic regression models were used to determine whether the BRS was predictive of discharge to a skilled nursing facility or a LOS greater than two standard deviations from the mean. Patients who had an extended LOS and who were discharged to a skilled nursing facility were assigned a categorical variable of 1, whereas those who did not meet criteria were assigned a value of 0. A nonparametric receiver operative characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was conducted, and variables with an area under the curve of greater than 0.7 were considered to be predictive in the model. Sensitivity and specificity were calculated, as were cut points for all variables of interest. Analyses were completed using STATA (Version 17, StatCorp) or Microsoft Excel 2016 (Microsoft). IfP< 0.05, the result was considered to be statistically significant.

Table1lists the demographic characteristics of the 2,167 patients included in the study. The low resilience group (BRS score < 3) was the smallest, consisting of 156 patients. Patients with low BRS scores were more likely to be female (P< 0.001) and were much more likely to have a psychiatric history (P< 0.001), with 28% of patients having a known diagnosis of anxiety or depression, compared with 10% of patients in the high resilience group (BRS score ≥ 4.3). The preoperative RAPT score was lower in patients with a BRS score < 3 (P< 0.001). Patients in the low resilience group were also much more likely to be discharged to a SNF, with 11.5% of patients going to a SNF instead of home. Among patients in the high resilience group, fewer than 1.6% were discharged to a SNF (P< 0.001) instead of home.

Data presented as mean and standard deviation or a number of patients and percentage.

No differences were seen in surgical time, postanesthesia care unit time, return to the emergency department, or readmissions within 30 days in any of the groups.

Pain levels and MMEs were also assessed across groups, as given in Table2. No differences were seen in pain levels with activity or at rest among groups, but the MME requirements were much higher in the low resilience group, with these patients requiring approximately 13 more MMEs compared with those in the high resilience group (P= 0.039).

Data are presented as mean and standard deviation.

Patients in the low resilience group also had shorter ambulation distances (P= 0.047) and longer Timed Up and Go (TUG) test durations (P< 0.001) compared with the other two groups, as given in Table3. PROMs showed a similar trend, with lower KOOS scores and PROMIS-10 Physical Function and PROMIS-10 Mental Health T-scores seen across all time points in the low resilience group (Table4). As BRS score increases, a stepwise increase is seen in all PROMs at all time points.

Data are presented as mean and standard deviation.

Univariate modeling of preoperative factors showed that RAPT score, age, PROMIS-10 Physical Function score, and BRS score were all highly predictive of a SNF discharge, with an area under the curve greater than 0.70. The BRS and RAPT scores were predictive of an extended LOS. Combining these two models, a multivariate model was used to obtain cutoffs for a combination of extended LOS and SNF discharge (Table5), which would make a patient more likely to benefit from an inpatient stay. Supplementary Figure 1 (http://links.lww.com/JG9/A429) shows ROC curves for these variables, as well as the PROMIS-10 Mental Health and Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score for Joint Replacement scores for the combined model. This multivariate model had a sensitivity of 82.4% and a specificity of 79.9% in predicting an extended LOS plus a SNF discharge. Every one-point decrease in the BRS score was associated with 2.78-fold increased odds of SNF discharge in conjunction with an extended LOS (P< 0.001).

Because 36% of the cost after total joint arthroplasty can be attributed to SNF discharge, and because patients discharged to SNFs are at greater risk of postoperative complications, minimizing discharge to a facility is advantageous for both the surgeon and the patient.20,21As more patients undergo their TKAs in ASCs, the ability to use preoperative PROMs to predict which patients might be poor candidates for outpatient surgeries should be critically evaluated. These patients, who might require extended LOS and subsequent discharge to a SNF, may not have standard comorbidities but may lack the resilience needed to bounce back from a painful procedure like a TKA. As healthcare costs continue to increase, there is a strategic push to optimize care and minimize costs where applicable.

This study demonstrates that patients with low resilience, as evidenced by a preoperative BRS score less than three, are much more likely to be discharged to a SNF after TKA and require an extended LOS. While patients with low resiliency were not more likely to have a complication, their initial physical function and mental health were much less robust than those with a higher BRS score. These patients were more likely to have a provider-diagnosed psychiatric history and have a lower RAPT score than patients with a BRS score greater than 4.3. While psychiatric history alone is not predictive of SNF discharge, it is associated with extended LOS.22We did not see an increase in postoperative emergency department utilization or readmission associated with low resiliency or psychiatric history, as had been reported previously,23although the absolute numbers do trend toward significance.

In addition, while patients in the low BRS group had significantly lower PROMIS-10 Mental Health T-scores, the PROMIS-10 Mental Health T-score did not contribute to the extended LOS/SNF discharge model in a statistically significant way. Conversely, the PROMIS-10 Physical Function T-score was a statistically significant part of the model, with patients scoring below 40 more likely to require extended LOS/SNF discharge; this correlates with the results of Hays et al,24indicating that scores in this range are two standard deviations below the mean.

If a patient has a BRS score less than 3.8, especially combined with a low RAPT score (less than 6) or PROMIS-10 Physical Function T-score (less than 40), we recommend avoiding the ambulatory surgery setting. The involvement of a care partner or care partners preoperatively might also help support this patient so that they can have a better outcome after TKA27because shared decision making is crucial for patient success. In addition, referral to psychotherapy before their TKA might be beneficial to certain patients to address their expectations and potential catastrophizing behavior. If lifestyle modification programs are available, referral to these programs is also recommended. Preoperative physical therapy may also be of benefit as our physical therapists use an ambulation distance of 50 feet as a benchmark for home discharge. We found that while BRS scores were the same for patients who walked 50 feet compared with those who did not while inpatient, 12% of those who did not walk 50 feet were discharged to a SNF, compared with 2% of those who could walk that distance.

This study does have limitations. This was a retrospective review, and a number of patients were excluded because of incomplete preoperative PROMs, which does increase the risk of selection bias. The PROMs evaluated were statistically significantly different, although one might argue that a difference of six points is not clinically relevant. In addition, only preoperative PROMs were assessed during model development, and postsurgical outcomes, such as physical therapy parameters, were not incorporated. The addition of these parameters might improve the model, but we chose to focus on only preoperative factors in this study. The BRS cutoffs were based on a previously established threshold, which may not be accurate in the total joint population. Although the study population was large, all patients came from a single institution and were relatively homogeneous regarding race, ethnicity, and insurance status. Therefore, the results of this study might not be generalizable for a more diverse population.

The results of this study suggest that it would be beneficial to measure the BRS scores in all patients scheduled to undergo a TKA, especially those who are opting for a same-day procedure. Patients with a score below the cutoff should be further evaluated to determine whether they would still be a candidate for surgery in the ambulatory setting. The BRS, in combination with the RAPT, PROMIS-10 Physical Function, and age, is sensitive and specific in determining patients who might require an extended LOS and SNF discharge. These can be incorporated in a standard presurgical evaluation for all patients undergoing TKA, especially for patients wanting to undergo TKA in an ASC.