Cadonilimab, recognized as the most rapidly developed Chinese drug in the field of cervical cancer, received marketing approval in China in 2022. We conducted a study to investigate the safety and efficacy of Cadonilimab, combined with and without chemotherapy or bevacizumab treatment, in patients with recurrent / metastatic gynecological malignancies.

We retrospectively enrolled 60 patients with recurrent / metastatic gynecological malignant tumors, confirmed by pathology or cytology from July 2022 to December 2024. All patients received at least two cycles of Cadonilimab. The primary endpoints were the investigator-confirmed objective response rate and disease control rate according to RECIST v1.1. Secondary endpoints included progression-free survival and safety.

Fifty-six patients were included in the efficacy analysis. In the study population, This study is a retrospective real-world study, although it lacks a control group. There were 16 first-line patients with advanced cervical cancer, ORR was 81.3%(13/16,95% CI,57 to 93.4),DCR was 93.8%(15/16,95% CI 71.7 to 98.9); There were 30 second-line patients, ORR was 36.7%(11/30,95% CI,21.9 to 54.5),DCR was 90%(27/30,95% CI 74.4 to 96.5)。A total of 41 patients (73.2%) reported at least one treatment-related adverse event, with the most common being anemia (71.4%), nausea (28.6%), and myelosuppression (25%). 9 patients (16.1%) experienced G3-4 TRAEs. Additionally, 11 patients (19.6%) developed immune-related adverse events of G1-2. Importantly, no treatment-related deaths occurred during the study.

Cadonilimab with or without chemotherapy/bevacizumab had a promising antitumor activity and manageable safety profile in the treatment of recurrent/metastatic gynecological malignancies.

According to the 2022 Global Burden of Cancer Data Report released by the World Health Organization's International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), there are projected to be 19.96 million new cases of cancer and 9.74 million cancer-related deaths worldwide in 2022. Approximately one in five individuals, regardless of gender, will develop cancer in their lifetime, while about one in nine men and one in twelve women will succumb to the disease [1]. In China, women face significant threats from various cancers, including lung cancer, breast cancer, thyroid cancer, and gynecological malignant tumors [2]. The three most prevalent gynecological malignant tumors are cervical cancer, endometrial cancer, and ovarian cancer, with trophoblastic malignant tumors and other reproductive tract malignant tumors also being notable [3]. In 2022, there were an estimated 1.57 million new cases of cervical cancer in the country, resulting in approximately 55,700 deaths. Additionally, the number of endometrial cancer cases in 2022 was around 77,000, with about 13,500 deaths [4]. Furthermore, there were 52,100 new cases of ovarian cancer reported in the Chinese population, leading to 22,500 deaths [5]. Currently, the primary treatments for gynecological tumors include surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and targeted therapy. Despite these interventions, patients continue to experience high rates of recurrence and metastasis, leading to poor prognoses, low survival rates, and shortened survival periods. Specifically, the survival rate for patients with recurrent and metastatic cervical cancer is only 17% [6], while the 5-year survival rate for those with recurrent or metastatic endometrial cancer is approximately 15% [7]. In the case of ovarian cancer, most patients are diagnosed at an advanced stage. Overall, the 5-year survival rate for cancer patients is around 40% [8]. For patients who have undergone systematic surgical treatment and chemotherapy, the 5-year survival rate for those with advanced stage cancer falls below 30% [9].

With the continuous and in-depth development of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) in tumor treatment, immunotherapy has emerged as a prominent approach among various anti-tumor therapies. As early as 2013, immunotherapy was recognized as the leading scientific breakthrough of the year by Science magazine [10]. Immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) primarily restore the patient's immune system's capacity to attack cancer cells by blocking or inhibiting immune checkpoint molecules present on the surface of tumor cells. In the field of gynecological oncology, the results of the Keynote-A18 trial demonstrated that the addition of pembrolizumab increased the 2-year progression-free survival (PFS) rate of patients from 57.3% to 67.8%, and the 3-year PFS rate improved from 56.9% to 69.3%. An update on overall survival (OS) data indicated that the 3-year OS rate rose from 74.8% to 82.6% [11]. The Keynote-B21 trial revealed that in high-risk postoperative patients with endometrial cancer, pembrolizumab in combination with adjuvant therapy significantly enhances disease-free survival (DFS) in the deficient mismatch repair (DMMR) population [12]. Additionally, the Atalante study illustrated that atezolizumab, when combined with platinum-based chemotherapy and bevacizumab, can elevate the 5-year survival rate of patients with platinum-sensitive recurrent epithelial ovarian cancer from 17 to 27% [13]. As research progresses, immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) are expected to play an increasingly vital role in the immunotherapy of various gynecological tumors.

Cadonilimab is a novel PD-1/CTLA-4 bispecific antibody tumor immunotherapy drug independently developed by China Kangfang Biologics. It received marketing approval from the National Medical Products Administration of China on June 29, 2022, primarily for the treatment of patients with recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer (R/MCC) who have failed previous platinum-containing chemotherapy.

Around 2017, based on the discovery of the core role of PD-1 and CTLA-4 in tumor immune evasion, as well as the significant efficacy shown by combination therapies (such as Drug O + Drug Y) in certain tumors, scientists aimed to design a bispecific antibody that simultaneously targets PD-1 and CTLA-4 to enhance therapeutic efficacy and reduce toxicity.Cadonilimab exhibits high affinity and operates by effectively blocking the PD-1 and CTLA-4 pathways, which in turn enhances the secretion of interleukin-2 (IL-2) and interferon-γ (IFN-γ) [14]. This mechanism activates T cells to counteract immunosuppressive responses, promotes tumor-specific T cell immune activation, and ultimately inhibits tumor growth. Cadonilimab is currently being investigated not only in the field of cervical cancer but also in various studies involving other malignant tumors, including lung cancer, gastric cancer, and liver cancer. In 2019, Phase I clinical trial (AK104-210) was initiated to evaluate the safety, tolerability, and dose-limiting toxicity of Cadonilimab in patients with advanced solid tumors. A high response rate was observed in cervical cancer patients, regardless of their PD-L1 expression status. The results of the COMPASSION-03 trial indicated that during the phase 1b dose escalation phase, no dose-limiting toxicities were observed, suggesting that the overall safety profile of Cadonilimab is favorable. In the phase 2 clinical trial, Cadonilimab demonstrated significant anti-tumor activity and long-term survival benefits. Specifically, it exhibited a high overall response rate (ORR) in patients with cervical cancer. The median follow-up time for the cervical cancer cohort was 14.6 months, as assessed by the Independent Imaging Review Committee (IRRC). This committee evaluated the ORR of Cadonilimab monotherapy in patients with advanced cervical cancer who had previously failed platinum-containing chemotherapy. The ORR was found to be 32.3%, comprising a complete response (CR) of 14.1% (14 cases) and a partial response (PR) of 18.2% (18 cases), the median PFS and OS are positive [15]. The above data confirms the significant efficacy of Cadonilimab in cervical cancer, leading to its successful approval for marketing. Currently, the confirmatory Phase III study of Cadonilimab (AK104-303) was published last year, and its results scientifically and objectively reflect the outstanding survival benefits of Cadonilimab combined with standard therapy for Chinese cervical cancer patients. Additionally, Cadonilimab demonstrated manageable safety and robust anti-tumor activity in the treatment of advanced solid tumors. Consequently, we aim to further investigate the effectiveness and safety of Cadonilimab in treating gynecological cancer patients in real-world settings.

In this study, we retrospectively included patients with pathologically or cytologically confirmed diagnoses who received cadonilimab as second-line or later-line therapy from July 2022 to December 2024. The patient cohort comprised individuals with recurrent or metastatic gynecological malignancies. Inclusion criteria were as follows: pathologically or cytologically confirmed recurrent or metastatic gynecological malignancy, an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status (ECOG PS) of 0–1, at least one measurable lesion, and a minimum of one cycle of cadonilimab. Exclusion criteria included: high bleeding risk, severe autoimmune disease, grade III hypertension, cardiac insufficiency, gastrointestinal dysfunction, intestinal obstruction, failure to follow up, incomplete clinical data, and the absence of measurable lesions. A total of 60 patients'clinical data were collected, summarizing demographic and clinical characteristics such as age, gender, diagnosis, stage, pathological subtype, presence of liver or brain metastasis, ECOG PS, previous treatment lines and regimens, laboratory and radiological data, as well as adverse events (AEs) (Fig.1). The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Guizhou Provincial People’s Hospital. Informed consent was waived due to the retrospective nature of this study. Ethics Approval Number: 2025–081.

In this study, the treatment regimen of Cadonilimab combined with chemotherapy ± Bevacizumab involved administering Cadonilimab at a dose of 10 mg/kg in conjunction with Paclitaxel and Cisplatin/Carboplatin ± Bevacizumab, with treatments given every three weeks for a total of six cycles. Following this, maintenance therapy with Cadonilimab ± Bevacizumab was administered every three weeks until disease progression, the occurrence of unacceptable toxic reactions, or the completion of two years of Cadonilimab treatment. The combination therapy regimen was prescribed according to the guidelines of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) or the Chinese Society of Clinical Oncology (CSCO).

According to the evaluation criteria for solid tumor efficacy (RECIST 1.1), assessments were conducted using pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) every two cycles during the treatment period, starting from the baseline of the patients. This assessment was performed retrospectively through centralized review of the imaging reports retrieved from the electronic medical record system. The solid tumor response evaluation criteria (RECIST) version 1.1 classifies efficacy indicators into complete response (CR), partial response (PR), stable disease (SD), and progressive disease (PD). The objective response rate (ORR) is calculated as the proportion of CR and PR; the disease control rate (DCR) is calculated as the percentage of CR, PR, and SD. Clinical benefit is defined as patients achieving CR, PR, or SD as the best response. Non-clinical benefit is defined as patients experiencing PD as the best response. Adverse events were recorded from the first day of treatment until one month after the treatment ended, and were graded according to the National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 5.0.

The primary endpoints are Objective Response Rate (ORR) and Disease Control Rate (DCR). ORR is defined as the proportion of patients whose tumor volume decreases to a predetermined value after treatment and who can maintain this minimum for the specified duration according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST 1.1). This includes both complete response (CR) and partial response (PR) and is expressed as the sum of these proportions. DCR, also based on RECIST 1.1, refers to the percentage of cases that achieve either a response (PR + CR) or stable disease (SD) after treatment, relative to the total number of evaluable cases. Secondary endpoints include progression-free survival (PFS), which is the time from the first dose to disease progression (PD) or death from any cause.

Statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS version 26.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA). Continuous data are presented as means with 95% confidence intervals (CIs), while categorical data are reported as frequencies or percentages (%).This study is a retrospective investigation, and all collected data will undergo strict anonymization procedures prior to analysis. The specific measures are as follows: 1. We will remove all direct identifiers of the patients. 2. Each patient will be assigned a unique, irreversible research code to replace the original identifiers. 3. The anonymized research data will be stored on encrypted hard drives. 4. The anonymized dataset will be retained for 10 years from the date of publication of the primary study results, after which it will be securely destroyed.

A total of 60 patients were screened between July 2022 and December 2024, including 46 patients (76.7%) with cervical cancer, 8 cases of endometrial cancer (13.3%), 1 case of endometrial adenosarcoma (1.7%), 1 case of vaginal melanoma (1.7%), 1 case of vulvar cancer (1.7%), 1 case of choriocarcinoma (1.7%)and 2 case of ovarian cancer (3.3%). 54 patients (90.0%)were in menopausal state, 32 patients(53.3%) had previous surgery, 11 patients (18.3%) had previously received chemotherapy, 23 patients(38.3%) had previously received concurrent chemoradiotherapy, 2 patient(3.3%) had previously received chemotherapy plus Targeted therapy and 3 patients (5%)had previously received radiotherapy. 15 patients (25%)had only local recurrence, and 8 patients(13.3%) had recurrence and distant metastasis (Table1).

According to the patients'use of Cadonilimab, 4 patients were excluded because they had only used Cadonilimab for one cycle and did not return to the hospital to continue treatment, making it impossible to evaluate the patient's efficacy. As of the data cutoff, 18 (32.1%) patients were still receiving treatment, and 38 (67.9%) patients had stopped treatment, of which 7 (12.5%) patients stopped due to PD and 1(2.3%) patient stopped taking medication due to hypothyroidism.

In the Efficacy-Evaluable Population, 2 patients (3.3%) achieved a complete response (CR), 24 patients (40.0%) achieved a partial response (PR), 26 patients (43.3%) developed stable disease (SD), 4 patients (6.7%) developed progressive disease (PD) (Fig.2). One patient (1.8%)with ovarian cancer experienced disease progression after treatment with a combination regimen including Cadonilimab, one patient (1.8%)with vulvar cancer was evaluated as having stable disease (SD) following combination therapy, one patient (1.8%)with choriocarcinoma was assessed as SD after combination therapy, one patient (1.8%)with vaginal melanoma showed disease progression after monotherapy with Cadonilimab, five patients (5.4%) with endometrial cancer were evaluated as SD after combination therapy; two patients (3.3%) with endometrial cancer were assessed as having progressive disease (PD), and one patient (1.8%)with endometrial cancer was evaluated as having partial response (PR).This patient had received only one cycle of Cadonilimab treatment, and due to not returning to the hospital for further treatment and efficacy evaluation, the patient's efficacy could not be assessed.

Among the responding patients, in the study population, there were 16 first-line patients with advanced cervical cancer, ORR was 81.3%(13/16,95% CI,57 to 93.4),DCR was 93.8%(15/16,95% CI 71.7 to 98.9); There were 30 s-line patients, ORR was 36.7%(11/30,95% CI,21.9 to 54.5),DCR was 90%(27/30,95% CI 74.4 to 96.5; Table2). Median PFS was not reached, As shown in Fig.3, there was no significant difference in survival rates between first-line and second-line treatments (Log-rankP= 0.289), with an HR of 2.992 (95% CI: 0.357–23.895). The hazard ratio did not reach statistical significance, which may be related to the small sample size of this study. After conducting survival analysis using the COX regression model, no variables reached statistical significance. Surgical history may have increased the risk (HR = 4.75,P= 0.057), but it did not reach statistical significance (Table3).

In the responder population, 41 (73.2%) patients experienced at least one treatment-related adverse event (TRAE), the most common of which were anemia (71.4%), nausea (28.6%), and myelosuppression (25%). Nine (16.1%) patients experienced Grade 3–4 TRAEs, including 5 (8.9%) due to anemia and 4 (7.1%) due to myelosuppression. 9 (16.0%) patients experienced vomiting, 2 patients (4.7%) experienced cardiotoxic reactions. The electrocardiogram and cardiac enzyme results of these 2 patients were mildly abnormal. No treatment-related deaths occurred during treatment. Immune-related adverse reactions occurred in 11 (19.6%) patients, including 1 (1.7%) patient who developed immune osteitis and myositis, and 1 (1.7%) patient who developed immune myocarditis. 8 (14.3%) patients experienced infusion-related adverse reactions, of which 1 (1.7%) patient showed mild palpitations, chest tightness, and shortness of breath after infusion of Cadonilimab, which resolved spontaneously after rest; 3 (7.0%) patients After the infusion of Cadonilimab, not only palpitations, chest tightness, and shortness of breath occurred, but also systemic itching, rashes, etc. The patient's discomfort was relieved after anti-allergic treatment; 2 (3.6%) patients suffered from Cadonilimab infusion. After taking the monoclonal antibody, the patient developed chills and high fever, but the patient's condition improved after treatment (Table4).

Since 2022, Cadonilimab has shown good efficacy and safety in various malignant tumors such as liver cancer [16], lung cancer [17], and nasopharyngeal cancer [18]. Many dual-immunity combination studies, such as Checkmate-227 [19,20], have suggested that PD-1 combined with CTLA-4 can bring better survival benefits to people with negative PD-L1 expressions. In comparison to the combination therapy of anti-PD-1 monoclonal antibodies and anti-CTLA-4 monoclonal antibodies [14], Cadonilimab exhibits significantly lower toxicity and demonstrates clear advantages in both safety and efficacy. Cadonilimab was designed with an Fc-empty backbone to eliminate Fc-mediated effector functions, thereby reducing the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6 and IL-8.Elevated IL-6 levels in patients undergoing anti-PD-1 therapy play a critical role in immune-related adverse events (irAE), and increased IL-6 is associated with poor clinical responses to PD-1 blockade therapy. Additionally, high levels of IL-8 are linked to reduced efficacy of immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy. One study [14] found that Cadonilimab resulted in the lowest secretion of IL-6 and IL-8 compared to nivolumab and ipilimumab. This characteristic may represent a distinct mechanism of action for Cadonilimab differing from the combination of anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA-4 antibodies, which may influence both safety and efficacy.

The GOG-240 study [21] demonstrated that patients receiving comprehensive treatment that included anti-angiogenic drugs experienced improved overall survival, with a median overall survival extension of 3.5 months, compared to those treated with chemotherapy alone. This finding establishes the basis for standard chemotherapy in combination with bevacizumab. Additionally, Lizumab is recognized as the standard first-line treatment for recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer (r/m CC). The KEYNOTE-826 study [22] investigated the efficacy of incorporating pembrolizumab, with or without bevacizumab, into chemotherapy regimens. The findings demonstrated that the addition of the PD-1 inhibitor pembrolizumab extends the first-line treatment duration for patients with cervical cancer, resulting in a median overall survival (OS) of 26.4 months. The subsequent phase III BEATcc study [23] demonstrated that, when chemotherapy and bevacizumab were combined with atezolizumab, the median progression-free survival (mPFS) for patients increased from 10.4 months to 13.7 months, while the median overall survival (mOS) improved from 22.8 months to 32.1 months. The OS of patients with advanced first-line cervical cancer is approaching 3 years. These studies are gradually improving survival times for advanced cervical cancer. The current first-line treatment options for recurrent/metastatic cervical cancer are carboplatin, paclitaxel, and bevacizumab, but the survival rate of this treatment option is still limited [24]. The development and accumulation of the above research have laid the foundation for subsequent research advancements. The recently announced COMPASSION-16 study [25] is a randomized, placebo-controlled, multi-center, double-blind phase III clinical trial. The results of the study showed that the median PFS of the Cadonilimab group and the placebo group were 13.3 months and 8.2 months, respectively. Months, the risk of disease progression or death was reduced by 38%. The current median OS has not been reached, but there is a significant benefit trend, and the study also included 28% of patients with negative PD-L1 expression (CPS < 1). The KEYNOTE-826 study [22] shows that immunotherapy can significantly benefit patients with positive PD-L1 expression (CPS ≥ 1), but the benefit is not significant for patients with negative PD-L1 expression (CPS < 1). Therefore, current guidelines recommend pembrolizumab. The application population of anti-PD-L1 is mainly limited to patients with positive PD-L1 expressions. The COMPASSION-16 study showed that for patients with negative PD-L1 expression (CPS < 1), the median progression-free survival reached 12 months (vs 8.2 m), and the risk of disease progression or death was reduced by 27% (HR 0.73); For patients with positive PD-L1 expression (CPS ≥ 1), the median progression-free survival reached 13.5 months (vs 8.3 m), and the risk of disease progression or death was reduced by 38% (HR 0.62). Regardless of PD-L1 expression status, all patients can benefit from Cadonilimab combination therapy. And because in clinical practice many patients have contraindications to the use of bevacizumab or are not suitable for bevacizumab, in the subgroup analysis of COMPASSION-16, for patients who are not suitable for bevacizumab, The OS of previous chemotherapy and chemotherapy + pembrolizumab did not reach 2 years, while the OS of chemotherapy + Cadonilimab was as high as 28.2 months. Cadonilimab has achieved real benefits for the entire population to a certain extent.

The AK104-210 study is a pilot trial focused on various solid tumors, while COMPASSION-03 aims to observe the efficacy and safety of Cadonilimab in cervical cancer within a rigorously selected population. This study, as a real-world research endeavor, significantly differs from previous clinical interventional trials. We collected survival data from advanced gynecological malignancy patients who had previously received treatment with Cadonilimab, either in combination with chemotherapy/bevacizumab or not, in a real-world medical setting. The results are more aligned with clinical reality, showcasing the performance of Cadonilimab across a broad population and in authentic clinical environments.

In this study, Cadonilimab combination therapy demonstrated good therapeutic effect and controllable safety in the population with advanced gynecological malignancies. Among the population with evaluable efficacy, the ORR was 46.4% (95% CI, 34 to 59.3) and DCR 92.9% (95% CI, 83 to 97.2). In addition, there were 46 patients with advanced cervical cancer in this study, 16 of whom were treated with Cadonilimab combined with chemotherapy ± bevacizumab as the first-line regimen, with an ORR of 81.3% (95% CI, 57 to 93.4), with a DCR of 93.8% (95% CI, 71.7 to 98.9). The AK104-210 trial [15] is a prospective, multi-cohort phase II clinical trial designed to evaluate the efficacy of different doses of Cadonilimab combined with platinum-based chemotherapy with or without bevacizumab in the first-line treatment of recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer. Efficacy and safety, the ORR of the three cohorts in the study were 66.7%, 68.8% and 92.3% respectively; among them, Cadonilimab (10 mg Q3W) + chemotherapy ± bevacizumab (A10 + B10 cohort), the overall ORR in the entire population was 79.3%, which was higher than the entire population of pembrolizumab + chemotherapy ± bevacizumab in the keynote-826 trial ORR 65.9%. The COMPASSION-16 study [25] is a randomized, double-blind, multi-center, placebo-controlled trial in patients aged 18–75 years with untreated refractory, recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer, according to 1: 1 ratio random distribution The patients were enrolled in the Cadonilimab group (10 mg/kg once) or the placebo group. Both groups received platinum-containing chemotherapy, with or without bevacizumab, once every 3 weeks for a total of 6 cycles; then Maintenance treatment is given every 3 weeks for up to 2 years. In this study, the Cadonilimab group had a high tumor response rate, with an ORR of 82.9% and a DCR of 94% in the ITT population. In this study, the Cadonilimab combination treatment regimen was effective in patients with advanced first-line cervical cancer. The ORR and DCR are similar to the data of the first two studies, proving the high efficiency and high tumor response rate of Cadonilimab combined with chemotherapy ± bevacizumab in the first-line treatment of advanced cervical cancer. In this study, 30 people used Cadonilimab combined with chemotherapy ± bevacizumab as the second-line regimen. The ORR was 36.7% (95% CI, 21.9 to 54.5), and the DCR was 90% (87%). CI,74.4 to 96.5). AK104-201 [15] is a single-arm, phase II clinical trial designed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of Cadonilimab monotherapy in the second-line treatment of recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer. The results of this study showed that in 100 patients with evaluable efficacy Among patients, the objective response rate (ORR) of Cadonilimab in the entire population was 33%. The ORR of Cadonilimab combination therapy in the second-line treatment of neck cancer is 36.7%, slightly higher than the AK104-201 study, and much higher than Keynote-158 [26], which has a similar sample size, the same number of lines of population, and a similar treatment plan as AK104-201. In the trial, the ORR of pembrolizumab in the entire population was 14.3%.

In terms of safety, the treatment-related adverse events of Cadonilimab were grade 2 and below. 41 patients (73.2%) experienced at least one treatment-related adverse event (TRAE), and the incidence of greater than grade 3 was only 16.1%, which is slightly lower than the incidence of treatment-related adverse reactions used in studies of patients with advanced cervical cancer [27]. The most reported adverse events were anemia (71.4%), nausea (28.6%), and bone marrow suppression (25%). Nine patients (16.1%) experienced treatment-related adverse events (TRAEs) of grade G3-4 or higher. Following symptomatic and supportive treatment, such as blood transfusions and leukocyte elevation, the adverse reactions were significantly alleviated. Additionally, 11 patients (19.6%) developed immune-related adverse reactions of grade G1-2. The incidence of anemia in this study (71.4%) was significantly higher than that reported in the COMPASSION-16 and AK104-201 studies, which may be related to the drug regimen used in the combination therapy. For clinical settings, it is essential to routinely monitor complete blood counts when using Cadonilimab, paying close attention to the patients'anemia status. The overall incidence of TRAE in this study was lower than that in the aforementioned studies, but the incidence of infusion reactions was higher (14.3% vs. 5.6%). Unlike the more commonly observed endocrine-related irAEs in the aforementioned studies, this study also observed atypical irAEs (myocarditis, osteitis, myositis), suggesting that close monitoring during the infusion of Cadonilimab is necessary, along with timely cardiac function assessments and observation for any occurrence of bone pain or myalgia in patients.

This study has several limitations. First, within the collected population of gynecological malignant tumor patients, cervical cancer patients constitute the largest group, followed by those with endometrial cancer. In contrast, other cancer types, such as ovarian cancer and vaginal melanoma, each had only one case represented. Moreover, there were 16 cases of first-line treatment for cervical cancer patients, with a small sample size. This disparity limits our ability to fully assess the effectiveness and safety of Cadonilimab in treating a diverse range of gynecological tumors. Secondly, because this study is a retrospective study, the patients'genetic information and biomarkers such as PD-L1 were not collected for in-depth exploration. We will further improve this aspect in the future. This study is a retrospective real-world study, and although the lack of a control group somewhat limits the assessment of treatment effectiveness. Although this study has a small number of cases, a short follow-up period, and is a retrospective case analysis, it lacks prospective clinical randomized study data, and there are certain limitations in the study conclusions, but the results of this study preliminarily show that for patients with recurrent or metastatic cervical cancer, combination therapy containing Cadonilimab can achieve better clinical efficacy, and treatment-related adverse events can be controlled.

Cadonilimab with or without chemotherapy/bevacizumab had a promising antitumor activity and manageable safety profile in the treatment of recurrent/metastatic gynecological malignancies.

All authors contributed to this study. H. conceived and designed the experiments, analyzed and interpreted the data, and contributed to writing the manuscript. Z.conducted, Z. analyzed research results, Y.Z.and assisted in manuscript preparation and editing. L.L.L.B.L. contributed to data acquisition and analysis, reviewed literature, provided intellectual input, and approved the final version of the manuscript. L. provided logistical and administrative support, ensured compliance with ethical standards, and reviewed and approved the manuscript for submission.

The authors declare that no funds, grants, or other support were received during the preparation of this manuscript.