The study reports the fabrication of undoped and Er-/Yb-doped ZnO thin films using the sol-gel spin coating technique. The structural and optical properties of the films were analyzed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy. Electrical characteristics were studied through current-voltage (I-V) measurements using an HP 4140BpAmeter/voltage source, capable of detecting currents as low as 10−14A. The XRD analysis confirmed that all films exhibited a hexagonal wurtzite structure, while the PL measurements at room temperature revealed a strong ultraviolet emission with a peak wavelength at 380nm. The I-V measurements demonstrated good rectification behavior across all temperature ranges. Schottky diodes based on Er and Yb-doped ZnO thin films showed improved rectification, a lower ideality factor, and a higher barrier height. With increasing temperature, the ideality factor decreased while the barrier height increased, indicating enhanced diode performance. It is found that the lowest ideality factor is 1.6 in Er-doped ZnO at 300 K and the highest barrier height is 0.81 eV in Yb-doped samples. It is worth noting that while the ideality factor decreased and Schottky barrier height increased with temperature indicating more ideal thermionic transport, while the rectification ratio (1.4 × 104) was highest in Yb-doped samples at 50 K due to reduced reverse leakage current.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-13210-0.

Wide bandgap semiconductors are of significant interest because of their essential role in manufacturing various devices such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs), dye-synthesized solar cells, photovoltaic systems and Schottky diodes1. Zinc oxide (ZnO) is a prominent wide bandgap semiconductor with a bandgap of 3.37eVand a high exciton binding energy of 60meVmaking it the subject of extensive research over the last decades2. In addition, owing to its cost-effectiveness, ease of nanostructuring, and, resistance to radiation damage, non-toxicity and abundance, that makes ZnO ideal for applications in electronics, gas sensors, laser diodes, and UV photodetector devices1,3. Moreover, doped zinc oxide is widely used in a variety of industrial and technical applications as the main constituent of electronic and optoelectronic devices3–8.

Several studies have explored the rare earth doping of ZnO, including Erbium, Ytterbium, Lanthanum, and Samarium9. Similar studies reported that both cerium- and ytterbium-doped ZnO nanorods have demonstrated promising Schottky diode performance with indium tin oxide and palladium serving as ohmic and rectifying contacts, respectively10,11. Thus, adding rare earth elements effectively alters the optical and electrical properties, leading to an investigation of the resultant properties of ZnO5,12. Erbium (Er) and ytterbium (Yb) are chosen as dopants due to several reasons, such as enhanced electrical conductivity, modification of band structure, improved optical and electronic properties, reduction of interface states and defects, enhanced carrier mobility, improved thermal stability, enhanced light absorption and emission. In particular, Er3+doping is known to enhance photoluminescence and electrical transport by reducing grain boundary defects, while Yb3+has been reported to improve crystallinity and conductivity through secondary phase formation and grain boundary passivation10.

There are various techniques that have been employed for the synthesis of ZnO based nanostructures as well as device fabrication. These techniques include molecular beam epitaxy, spray pyrolysis, pulsed laser deposition, and sol-gel spin coating7,13–20. The advancement of precise Schottky barrier diodes based on Er- and Yb-doped ZnO thin films has driven the demand for high-quality rare earth-doped ZnO thin films. While previous studies have synthesized Er-ZnO and Yb-ZnO thin films using various doping techniques, conventional doping methods often suffer from poor reproducibility and labour-intensive processes. Recent research in Nature has demonstrated the successful synthesis of nanostructured, high-quality rare earth-doped ZnO thin films with remarkable tensile ductility using a sol-gel approach21. However, there remains a significant gap in research regarding innovative sol-gel techniques for rare earth-doped ZnO films, particularly in achieving uniform doping and scalable fabrication. In this study, we introduce a novel acid-assisted sol-gel doping technique designed to stabilize and homogenize precursor solutions for the synthesis of high-quality Er-ZnO and Yb-ZnO thin films. The acid-assisted sol-gel spin-coating technique offers unique advantages in the synthesis of doped ZnO. It provides excellent control over composition, homogeneity, and microstructure while being low-cost, scalable, and compatible with large-area fabrication. Importantly, the incorporation of acid in the sol-gel route enhances precursor solubility, promotes uniform doping, and stabilizes the solution thereby reducing defect states and agglomeration. By optimizing precursor composition and reaction environments, we investigated doping mechanisms, precursor morphology, and the liquid-phase incorporation of erbium and ytterbium into ZnO. Additionally, we explore the evolution of thin film morphology and composition during drying and reduction processes.

Despite the fact that extensive studies have explored rare-earth doping in ZnO, few have systematically investigated the temperature-dependent electrical behaviours of Schottky diodes fabricated using acid-assisted sol-gel-deposited Er-/Yb-doped ZnO thin films22. Thus, the present study focuses on the synthesis of doped ZnO thin films with erbium and ytterbium-doping and investigated Schottky barrier diodes behavior. The microscope slide substrate and n-Si substrates were employed for thin film formation and Palladium metal and Au-Sb alloy were utilized as Schottky and ohmic contacts, respectively, for electrical characterization. Moreover, analysis of the structural, optical, and electrical properties of the Schottky diodes and thin films fabricated on undoped ZnO, Er-/Yb-doped ZnO thin films is presented. The fabricated diodes exhibit good rectification behaviour, with improved ideality factors and higher Schottky barrier heights, which contribute to reduced reverse leakage currents and better performance.

In this section, we present the materials and experimental procedures used for the synthesis of pure and doped ZnO samples, a basic description of the characterization techniques, and a detailed explanation of the experimental setup utilized for testing the functionalities of the materials.

The following materials were used without further purification: zinc acetate dihydrate (98%, Sigma Aldrich) as the precursor, ethanol (99.5%, Sigma Aldrich) as the solvent, and citric acid (CA) and monoethanolamine (MEA) were used as the complexing agent and stabilizer, respectively. Deionized water, acetone, trichloroethylene, isopropanol, and methanol are used for substrate cleaning. Erbium nitrate pentahydrate (99.9%, Sigma Aldrich) and ytterbium nitrate pentahydrate (99.9%, Sigma Aldrich) served as dopant sources (see Table1).

Zinc oxide solution was prepared by dissolving zinc acetate dihydrate in 60mLof ethanol, followed by agitation at 500rpmwhere stirring was conducted using a digital magnetic stirrer (IKA C-MAG HS 7) with hotplate at 60 °C for 1hour. Monoethanolamine (MEA) for undoped sample was then carefully added drop-wise at a 1:1 molar ratio with zinc acetate as a stabilizer, along with 2mLof citric acid (for doped samples). The solution was continuously stirred for an additional hour under the same conditions. For the doped ZnO solutions, erbium nitrate pentahydrate and ytterbium nitrate pentahydrate were incorporated 3 at% into the ZnO solution using the same preparation procedure. The resulting solutions were then aged for 48hoursto enhance viscosity before use. Correspondingly, the solutions underwent hydrolysis and condensation through stirring at 60 °C temperature longing for 2hours. Moreover, to prevent evaporation, beakers were sealed with aluminum foils during aging.

Glass/microscope slide substrate was cleaned sequentially using deionized water, ethanol, and acetone in an ultrasonic bath, followed by drying with nitrogen gas. Also, n-Si substrates underwent sequential cleaning with trichloroethylene, isopropanol, methanol, and deionized water, each for 5minutesin an ultrasonic bath. Before deposition, Si substrates were etched in a dilute hydrofluoric acid (HF) solution (1%) for 60secondsto remove native oxide layers23. Thin films were deposited via spin-coating on the cleaned glass and Si substrates. The sol-gel solutions were applied in five layers at 4,000rpmfor 40secondsper layer, followed by drying at 200 °C for 5minutes. This process was repeated until the desired thickness was achieved. The coated substrates were then dried at 150 °C for 15minutesto remove residual organic matter. For final processing, samples deposited on glass substrates were annealed at 500 °C in air for 1hour, whereas those on n-Si substrates were annealed at the same temperature under a nitrogen gas flow. The prepared samples were labeled as ZnO (undoped), Er-ZnO (Er-doped), and Yb-ZnO (Yb-doped).

The prepared Schottky diodes involves; Pd/ZnO/n-Si/AuSb configuration. This is achieved via sequentially coating Au-Sb alloy and Pd metal spots onto the back (ohmic) and front (Schottky) sides of ZnO/n-Si thin film using a resistive evaporation system. In the first stage, the ZnO/n-Si thin film and metal (Pd) spots were thoroughly sterilized through a standard cleaning process. This process includes sequential washing using an ultrasonic bath in deionized water, acetone, and ethyl alcohol for 5 min in each medium. Following this, the ZnO/n-Si thin films are etched in a hydrofluoric acid (HF) solution for about 60seconds, rinsed with deionized water, and dried with flowing nitrogen gas. Next, the back side of the ZnO/n-Si surface was coated with 150 nm thick of Au-Sb alloys. This thickness of Au-Sb alloy as an ohmic contact for ZnO/Si Schottky barrier diodes depends on factors such as contact resistivity, adhesion, interfacial reaction, and mechanical stability. In the third stage, an ohmic contact with ZnO/n-Si/AuSb layer was created and then allowed to anneal at 350 °C for10 minunder a flow of argon gases. This step facilitates the diffusion between the ZnO/n-Si and AuSb surfaces. Finally, a mechanical shadow mask with small holes to cover the front face of the ZnO/n-Si surface was performed. A circular Schottky contact of a 100 nm thick (0.6mmdiameter) is formed by evaporating the palladium (Pd) metal on the exposed areas. Both Au-Sb and Pd contacts were deposited (by evaporation) in a vacuum chamber at a pressure of 10−6mbarand deposition rate of 0.1nm/s.

Characterization techniques are essential for understanding the structural, optical, and electronic properties of ZnO nanoparticles and thin films. In this regard, a lot of work has been done on characterizations of rare-earth metals doped ZnO10,24–29. These techniques help to determine fundamental properties such as crystallinity, grain size, surface morphology, and optical absorption, which are crucial for optimizing ZnO-based applications in electronics, sensors, and biomedical devices. In this section, the principle of the characterization process and its significance are discussed in details.

The thin film of samples designated as ZnO, Er-ZnO and Yb- ZnO were analyzed by performing XRD, PL and current-voltage measurement analysis techniques. Structural and optical characterizations were performed on films deposited on glass substrates, while electrical measurements were performed on ZnO/n-Si diode structures. That is, electronic properties of the Schottky diodes on pure ZnO, Er, and Yb doped ZnO thin films were performed at room temperature using an HP 4140B pA meter/DC voltage source, while temperature-dependent I-V characteristics were studied in the 50 K to 290 K range.

XRD measurement is based on the constructive interference of monochromatic X-rays with a crystalline material. When X-rays interact with a crystal lattice, they are scattered in specific directions, creating diffraction patterns that correspond to the atomic structure. XRD measurement were performed to (a) confirm the crystalline phase of ZnO (wurtzite structure), (b) determine preferred orientations and crystallite size using Scherrer’s equation and (c) evaluate the effect of annealing on film crystallinity. The XRD analysis was carried out using a monochromatic radiation of wavelength (λ= 0.15406 nm). The2θscan range of 24° − 44° with a 0.02° step size, was selected to capture the primary ZnO peaks (100, 002, 101) to confirm phase, crystallinity, lattice strain, and dislocation density while avoiding background noise and overlapping peaks from the substrate.

Photoluminescence (PL) measures the light emission from ZnO materials when excited by a light source. This emitted light corresponds to energy transitions within the material. The PL measurements helps to (i) identify defect states and oxygen vacancies in ZnO, (ii) determine excitonic emissions important for LED and (c) explore potential applications of ZnO for photonic and biomedical applications. Thus, PL analysis of the as-synthesized samples in the range of 300–850nmwas examined using a Cary Eclipse fluorescence spectrometer to investigate optical transitions and defect states.

The current-voltage (I-V) characteristics of a Schottky barrier diode (SBD) provide critical insights into its electrical behaviour, including barrier height, ideality factor, and series resistance. A Schottky diode is a metal-semiconductor junction with rectifying behaviour, meaning it allows current to flow easily in one direction (forward bias) while restricting it in the opposite direction (reverse bias). The diode’s I-V response follows the thermionic emission theory. The I-V measurements were conducted using a two-point probe configuration via an HP 4140B pA meter/DC voltage source. Current-voltage curves were recorded from 50 K to 290 K in a closed-cycle helium cryostat with ± 2 V bias sweep and step size of 0.02 V. I-V Characterization is used to determine the Schottky barrier height and nonideality factor, which are essential for device performance. Moreover, by evaluating the nonideality factor, one can understand charge transport mechanisms. The I-V characterization helps in optimizing material parameters and fabrication processes for better rectification efficiency. It also helps in measuring reverse leakage current that is important for diode reliability.

Figure1shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of undoped and doped with Er and Yb with atomic percent (3 at%) ZnO thin films deposited onto microscope slide substrate. The peaks observed in the XRD spectrum are attributed to the hexagonal (wurtzite) ZnO structure (JCPDS No. 00-036-1451). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns show two small peaks corresponding to ZnO (100) and ZnO (101) planes, which is an indicative of the polycrystalline nature of pure ZnO thin films, with a textured structure oriented along the ZnO (002) plane. Notably, there is no noticeable peaks associated with impurities for Er phases while the Yb-doped ZnO thin films exhibit indications of Yb2O3phase, with the identification of the (222) peak at2θ= 29.500(JCPDS No. 00-036-1451)16. The presence of Yb2O3peaks suggests incomplete substitution of Yb3+ions into the ZnO lattice, possibly due to solubility limits. This can lead to the formation of secondary phases at grain boundaries, which may introduce trap states or defect centers and potential scattering sites that could influence leakage current or modify the barrier height and contributing to non-ideal I-V behaviour30. Unlike Er3+, Yb3+has a slightly smaller ionic radius (0.86 Å), and although energetically favorable for substitution, Yb tends to form stable oxide phases under certain processing conditions. The absence of Er peaks in the XRD spectrum indicates successful Er3+substitution for Zn+2, confirming its incorporation into the ZnO crystal lattice. This underscores the dopant concentrations are below the solubility limit. The incorporation of Er has shifted both ZnO (002) and (101) planes towards smaller 2-theta values, reflecting an increase in d-spacing. Conversely, for Yb addition, the 2-theta value of ZnO (002) and (101) planes maintains the value. This slight shift in2θvalues observed primarily for rare earth doping suggests the insertion of rare earth elements into the ZnO lattice.

XRD analysis for ZnO, Er-ZnO and Yb-ZnO thin film samples grown on microscope slide.

whereDrepresents the crystallite size,Kis the shape factor (0.9),λis the wavelength of the incident X-ray, andβis the peak broadening at half the maximum intensity (FWHM) in radians. It is found that average crystallite size is increasing with doping for the doped samples compared to undoped ZnO (see Table2), whereas the dislocation densityδdecreased with doping.

XRD analysis for undoped, and doped ZnO (Er, yb: 3 at%).

whereI(hkl) represents the measured relative intensity of the (hkl) plane, I0(hkl) is the standard intensity of the (hkl) plane extracted from the JCPDS file (00-036-1451), and n is the number of diffraction peaks.

The calculated structural parameters, such as peak positions, FWHM, the grain size, average crystallite sizes, dislocation density, lattice parameters (aandc), unit cell volume are listed in Table2.

As illustrated in Table2, it was found that the average crystallite sizes (D) of undoped, Er and Yb doped ZnO are estimated to be 26.75, 38.49, and 33.95 nm, respectively. Consequently, the dislocation density (δ) of undoped, Er and Yb doped ZnO were 16.4 × 10−4, 7.10 × 10−4and 15.90 × 10−4, respectively. Hence, Er doped ZnO (Er: 3 at%) film indicates high quality crystal growth and relatively large crystallite size with small crystal distortion compared to the undoped and Yb doped ZnO samples. Also, the values of lattice parameters (a,c) distinctly show that for Er doped the “a” parameter increase, while the “c” parameter decrease, indicating the good insertion of Er atoms in the substitutional Zn sites as mentioned above. For Yb-ZnO, the lattice parameters remained nearly unchanged compared with the undoped sample, supporting the hypothesis that most Yb3+ions formed a separate oxide phase. Below, the calculated values for strain, interplanar spacing and estimated film thickness of the undoped ZnO and Er-/Yb-doped ZnO thin films are tabulated in Table3.

XRD analysis for undoped and doped ZnO (Er, yb: 3 at%).

As shown in Table3, the crystal imperfection and distortion are reduced after doping and has minimum values for Er doped ZnO thin film compared to the undoped ZnO and Yb-doped ZnO thin films but the interplanar spacing maintained the same values for all samples.

Table4displays the crystal orientation of the investigated samples along the (002) plane for ZnO, Er-ZnO, and Yb-ZnO thin films.

XRD analysis of TC (hkl) for undoped and doped with Er and Yb (3 at%).

By comparing the relative intensities of each sample with the JCPDS data, it is evident that the preferred orientations of ZnO normal to the surface are more pronounced for the peak intensity of the (002) plane (Table4). The alterations in the intensity of the main peaks, specifically for the (100), (002), and (101) planes, signify distortion in the host ZnO lattice due to doping. The results derived from XRD spectra support the conclusion that Er has been successfully integrated into the ZnO lattice, while Yb-ZnO exhibited slightly lower TC values, consistent with disruption of texture due to the secondary Yb2O3phase.

The PL emission spectra emitted from the samples of undoped, and doped with Er and Yb ZnO thin films are shown in Fig.2. Under the same conditions in the range of 350–800nm, all PL spectra were obtained using He-Cd lasersource operating at 325nmexcitation wavelength.

As it is observed from Fig.2, the samples exhibit two distinct emission peaks: a strong UV emission band centered at approximately 380nmand a broad green emission band centered around 506nmfor all samples. The relative peak intensity ratio at 380nm(506nm), respectively, are 3.4 (4.25) and 0.96 (4.2) for Yb-ZnO and Er-ZnO. Notably, the undoped ZnO sample displays a relatively subdued green emission. The PL spectra offer insights into the defects in ZnO, where UV emission bands (around 380nm) typically stem from excitonic recombination near to the band edge, which involves the recombination of electrons and holes across the sample’s energy gap. Conversely, the origin of the visible emission bands are ascribed to diverse combinations of deep-level or trap-state emissions; i.e., the defect-related emissions are attributed to oxygen vacancies (Vₒ), zinc interstitials (Zni), or antisite defects (O_Zn) within the ZnO lattice. Also, it is evident that the Yb-doped ZnO sample exhibits superior near-band-edge emission and enhanced optical quality, while Er-doping moderately improves the PL characteristics. The green emission at approximately 506nmhas been previously linked to zinc interstitial imperfections in ZnO or quantum confinement phenomena. Intriguingly, the broad PL band spectra of the samples, centered within the range of 480–550nm, exemplify deep-level emissions due to oxygen vacancies within the ZnO framework and the positioning of Zn interstitial sites within the ZnO thin films.

which is equal to one for an ideal diode and typically exceeds unity in practice.

The forward bias I-V characteristics of Pd/Er-doped ZnO/n-Si and Pd/Yb-doped ZnO/n-Si Schottky contacts measured at room temperature are illustrated in Fig.3. The Schottky diode parameters including the ideality factor (n), Schottky barrier height (ϕb0) and saturation current (Is) were determined using the Eqs. (7)–(10) as shown in Fig.4and the results are presented in Table5.

Plots of Ln(I) versusVfor znO, Er-ZnO and Y-ZnO Schottky barrier diodes at room temperature.

Forward bias semi-log I-V characteristic of the Schottky barrier diodes on ZnO thin films.

I-V analysis for undoped and doped with Er and Yb (3 at%) ZnO thin films.

The variation between the experimentally obtained and theoretically calculatedb0values can be attributed to interface states, the Schottky effect8, the formation of inhomogeneities in the barrier height at the interface resulting in deviations from linearity in the I-V characteristics35. Hence, the I-V analysis provides a comprehensive examination of Schottky diodes based on ZnO, Er-ZnO, and Yb-ZnO thin films.

The saturation currents (Is) are lowest for Er-ZnO (1.03 × 10−10A) and Yb-ZnO (2.79 × 10−10A). This suggests reduced leakage current, indicating superior diode performance compared to undoped ZnO. In addition, the ideality factors (n) of the samples are: Undoped ZnO: 2.91 (far from ideal,n= 1), Er-ZnO: 2.27 and Yb-ZnO: 1.80 indicating doping improves diode behavior, with Yb-doped ZnO achieving the most ideal characteristics. Similarly, the Schottky barrier heights (ϕb0) for the samples are: ZnO: 0.58eV, Er-ZnO: 0.87eV, Yb-ZnO: 0.84eV, showing that doping significantly raisesϕb0, reducing leakage currents and enhancing rectification.

One of the essential diode parameters is the current rectifying ratio. This ratio signifies the absolute current values at specific absolute-equal negative and positive voltage (± V) pairs. It is determined using the formulaRR = I+V/I−V. The rectification ratio calculated at ± 2 V are 0.4 × 10² for ZnO, 2.1 × 10³ for Er-ZnO, and 1.4 × 104for Yb-ZnO indicating that Yb-doping achieves the best rectification, confirming improved diode performance.

The predominant current conduction mechanisms in the fabricated Schottky diode under forward bias and dark conditions were examined through SCLC (space charge limited current) analysis35,36. To conduct this analysis, the ln(I) versusVgraphs of the fabricated diodes were plotted under dark conditions, as shown in Fig.4.

Current transport mechanisms (SCLC Analysis):Low voltage(< 0.3 V) region shows recombination tunneling mechanism (1 < m < 2) which indicates defect-assisted transport. Intermediate voltage (0.3–0.5 V) region shows SCLC with traps (m > 2) that are observed in Er-ZnO and Yb-ZnO, confirming the presence of defect states. High voltage (> 0.5 V) region of SCLC without traps (m ≈ 2) indicates improved charge transport, especially for Yb-doped ZnO.

The semi-logarithmic representation of the I-V measurements obtained in the temperature range of 50–290 K at 40Kintervals are depicted in Figs.5and6, in which the leakage current and rectification ratio at bias voltage were calculated using the respective formulas in the temperature range from 50 to 290Kfor both types of diodes.

I-V plots of Schottky diodes on Er-doped ZnO thin films at different temperatures.

I-V plots of Schottky diodes on Yb-doped ZnO thin films at different temperatures.

These plots reveal a substantial temperature dependence of the Schottky barrier diodes, with the (I-V) characteristics exhibiting a pronounced sensitivity to temperature variations. The rectification is increased as the temperature is decreased, showcasing excellent rectifying behavior in the diodes, particularly at 50 K. The experimental values of barrier height and ideality factor were determined from intercepts and slopes of the forward bias ln(I) versus ln(V) plot at each temperature, respectively.

As depicted in Fig.7, it is evident that the diode on Er-doped ZnO thin films deviates from ideality, leading to the occurrence of current transport mechanisms as a generation-recombination current in the forward bias voltage range at temperatures between 50 and 170 K under low voltage bias (V < 0.4 V).

Current transport mechanism for Pd/Er-ZnO/n-Si/AuSb Schottky barrier diodes.

In the voltage of 0.6–0.8Vrange, the diode on Er-doped ZnO thin films exhibited generation-recombination once more at temperatures ranging from 50 to 210K, a phenomenon not observed in the diode on Yb-doped ZnO thin films. These deviations from ideality at low temperatures (50–210K) are attributed to the influence of alternative current transport processes such as the generation-recombination of carriers in the space charge region and electron tunneling through the barrier. At temperatures exceeding 210K, thermionic emission emerges as the predominant process.

Furthermore, From Fig.8it was observed that the diode on Yb-doped ZnO thin films displayed generation-recombination current at all temperatures under low forward bias voltage (V < 0.3 V). In the intermediate voltage range, thermionic emission seems to be the primary current transport mechanism across all temperatures. Notably, the presence of generation-recombination in both types of diodes can be linked to defects from impurities within the ZnO thin films bandgap. At high voltages, the diodes exhibited non-linearity, with series resistance dominating at all temperatures.

Current transport mechanism for Pd/Yb-ZnO/n-Si/AuSb Schottky barrier diodes.

In brief, (i) at high temperatures (T > 210 K), thermionic emission dominates the current transport mechanism, i.e., carriers gain enough energy to overcome the Schottky barrier, while (ii) at low temperatures (T < 210 K), generation-recombination and tunneling effects dominate, particularly in Er-ZnO, suggesting significant defect-related transport. Yb-ZnO shows less recombination-related conduction, further supporting its superior diode performance.

The plots of Schottky barrier height and ideality factor as a function of temperature for Pd/Er-doped ZnO/n-Si and Pd/Er-doped ZnO/n-Si Schottky contacts are presented in Figs.9and10, respectively. An increase in barrier heights and decrease in ideality factors with increasing temperature were observed from the I-V characteristics of Pd/Er-doped ZnO/n-Si and Pd/Er-doped ZnO/n-Si Schottky contacts. This trend indicates a significant temperature dependence of both parameters. As shown in Fig.9, in the Schottky barrier diode on Er-doped ZnO thin films, the ideality factor decreased with rising temperature but exhibited an increase at 290K. Likewise, Fig.10depicts the Yb-doped ZnO thin films, with the ideality factor sharply decreased as the temperature increase from 50Kto 90K, followed by a gradual decrease up to 170K. Beyond 170K, the ideality factor rise once more.

SBH and ideality factor plots of Er-ZnO thin films Schottky barrier diodes.

SBH and ideality factor plots of Yb-ZnO thin film Schottky barrier diodes.

Table6shows the Schottky barrier height (SBH) and ideality factor which are extracted from forward bias regions of the I-V characteristics. It is shown that the Schottky barrier height (SBH) increases with temperature, which means that carriers can overcome higher barriers at high temperature; whereas ideality factor (n) decreases with temperature which indicates more thermionic emission and fewer trap states at higher temperatures. Moreover, Yb-doped ZnO shows the lowest ideality factor at all temperatures, reinforcing its improved diode characteristics.

SBH and ideality factor for Er- and Yb-doped ZnO thin films at different temperatures.

With regard to barrier height inhomogeneity effects, there is a significant deviation (~ 1eV) ofϕb0from theoretical values. This deviation is consistent with prior reports attributing it to barrier inhomogeneities, surface states, and interfacial defects37,38. While both SCLC and thermionic emission processes are observed, some regions (especially at low temperatures) exhibit field emission or tunneling contributions. A comparison of the calculated parameters (n,ϕb0,RR) with other doped ZnO Schottky diodes would provide better context for performance improvement.

In summary, Yb-doped ZnO exhibits the best diode characteristics, with the lowest ideality factor (~ 1.80), highest Schottky barrier height (~ 0.84eV), and best rectification (~ 1.4 × 104). The results obtained shows that (i) ideality factor decreases with temperature, indicating reduced influence of recombination or tunneling, (ii) barrier height increases with temperature due to thermionic emission dominance, and (iii) series resistance, generally, inreases due to the introduction of defect states, in good agreement with10. Temperature dependence highlights a transition from defect-assisted conduction (low T) to thermionic emission (high T). Schottky barrier inhomogeneity and interfacial states significantly impact device performance, which could be further analyzed using Gaussian SBH distribution models.

The study explores how temperature and rare-earth doping (with Er and Yb) affect the electrical and optical properties of ZnO-based Schottky diodes. The XRD result shows Er doping caused a slight shift in the ZnO (002) and (101) peaks indicating lattice expansion, whereas Yb-doped films maintained the peak positions with a minor indication of Yb2O3presence. Furthermore, room temperature measurements of PL revealed strong ultraviolet emission with a peak around 380 nm, confirming the optical activity of the films. The measured current-voltage (I-V) characteristics indicate that all the investigated samples displayed good rectification behavior over a wide temperature range. It is shown that diodes based on Er and Yb-doped ZnO exhibited improved performance - with lower ideality factors and higher barrier heights compared to undoped ZnO devices. In fact the lowest ideality factor of 1.6 is observed in Er-doped samples at 300 K, while the highest barrier height of 0.81eVachieved in Yb-doped ZnO. With rising temperature, the ideality factor decreased while the Schottky barrier height increased, indicating more ideal thermionic transport, while the rectification ratio was highest at 50Kdue to reduced reverse leakage current. Yb-ZnO demonstrated the most ideal diode behavior, with a rectification ratio over 104. Incorporating Er and Yb into ZnO not only maintains the desired wurtzite structure but also tailors the optical and electrical properties of the films. The modifications can lead to devices with enhanced rectification and stability over a range of temperatures, potentially widening the scope of ZnO applications in optoelectronics. In general, the results demonstrate that doping ZnO with Er and Yb enhances the electrical performance of Schottky diodes. The improved diode characteristics and temperature-dependent behavior indicate that rare-earth doped ZnO is a promising material for optoelectronic applications, particularly where robust performance over varying temperatures is required.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

The authors gratefully acknowledge the Adama Science and Technology University for allowing us to use the Physics and Materials Science and Engineering Laboratories necessary for samples preparation and characterization.