Research is a key driver in improving the quality of care in health settings. The UK Government has published its strategy to increase research within the National Health Service (NHS) and to implement lessons learned from the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. We investigated the current research interest, culture, and capacity amongst staff in one medium-sized, regional Health Board in Scotland to determine how research activity may be increased and how attitudes to research may have changed following the recent pandemic.

This study was part of a two-phase evaluation with both quantitative and qualitative methods using an initial questionnaire (n= 503) and then semi-structured interviews with 28 staff recruited following completion of their questionnaire. Results from the first phase have been published; this paper presents the results of the second phase. The interview explored the perception of the research culture and capacity at an organisational, team and individual level. Topics included perceived barriers and facilitators for engaging in research activities and the impact of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic on changes in attitude to research within the NHS. Interviews were audio recorded, transcribed verbatim, and analysed using thematic analysis.

Respondents comprised 7 nurses/midwives, 6 doctors/dentists, 3 allied health professionals, 3 other therapeutic and 9 admin/support staff. All respondents identified similar facilitators and barriers to undertaking research, irrespective of their role or experience with research. Four key themes were: the influence of structural and professional differences, the need for protected time, access to resources, and increased visibility of research. Responses varied between staff grades; those with research embedded as part of their training and professional role expressed more accepting views to undertaking research. Issues identified were the provision of protected time, skills training, practical support from research facilitators working in clinical teams, active encouragement by managers, improved communication, and the adoption of a research strategy at Board level. Research activity declined during the pandemic, but respondents expressed an increased awareness of the importance of research as a priority in improving health outcomes during the pandemic.

The research interest and culture in our Health Board could be improved by addressing the four broad themes identified, thereby increasing research capacity in line with Government aspirations. The findings may have relevance for small to medium-sized Health Boards in the UK and elsewhere when responding to the call to increase their research profile.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12913-025-13074-0.

It is well recognised that patients experience better outcomes in healthcare settings that are more research-active [1–4]. Clinical research activity is therefore a key driver to improve the quality of patient care. The UK Government has recently published its ‘Vision for Research’ and ‘Implementation Plan’ that seeks to develop a research culture and increase research activity within the National Health Service (NHS) [5,6]. The Scottish Government is a key partner in implementing this UK-wide strategy that also seeks to build on the lessons from the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic [7]. Previous studies investigating attitudes of clinical staff to research have noted differences between medical, nursing and Allied Health Professionals (AHPs) in their research skill levels and confidence in undertaking research [8,9]. Approaches to increasing research activity in health care settings have identified, for example, the need for training [10], funding [11,12], protected time [8,13], the use of research facilitators [14–17] and links with academia [18,19]. A review of 36 papers describing models and frameworks of research capacity development (RCD) in health care settings also concluded that important components included mentorship, leadership, infrastructure, and working in collaboration across research networks, as well as those listed above [20].

The health service in Scotland comprises 14 Health Boards, of varying size and engagement in research. NHS Fife, in the South-East of Scotland, is one of the medium-sized Boards serving a population of 370,000 with a workforce of 8,500. The NHS Fife Research, Innovation and Knowledge department (RIK, formerly Research and Development, R&D) supports a small group of research active staff through a range of services including the provision of clinical research nurses, librarians, research advisers and administrative staff. The recent initiative by the UK Government seeks to encourage clinical staff, of all grades, to see research as part of their role [6,7]. At the time of this study, little was known about the research culture and research interest amongst the general workforce in NHS Fife. We were particularly interested in assessing how staff perceptions of the role, and importance of research in the NHS may have changed because of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.

We undertook a study of staff to investigate attitudes to research within the organisation. Information was collected in two phases, the first phase using an online, validated questionnaire that enquired into aspects of research at the organisational, team and individual levels. For the second phase, a subset of the staff who completed the online questionnaire and indicated their willingness to participate in a semi-structured interview were invited to take part in an interview to obtain more in-depth information relating to attitudes, barriers, and motivators to research. The results from the first phase of the study have been published [21]. This paper presents the results from the second phase where the aim was to explore in more depth the attitudes of staff, both active and non-active in research, and record their suggestions on improving the research culture and increasing research activity within our Health Board.

The aim of this phase of the study was to explore staff attitudes on the research culture and capacity within NHS Fife using semi-structured interviews. Key objectives were to: (1) describe the current perceptions of the research interest, capacity, and culture, (2) investigate barriers and motivators for research activity and (3) assess any change in staff attitudes to research following the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.

NHS Fife and Health and Social Care Partnership staff were recruited via the online survey [21] using a validated questionnaire [22]. The survey was advertised via the NHS Fife Communication Department’s weekly updates which were sent to all staff with an NHS Fife email address. Managers were also asked to encourage their staff to participate and promote the study within team meetings. A further advertisement appeared on staff computer desktop screens. Staff who wanted to engage with the study completed the online questionnaire. After completing it, respondents were invited to provide their NHS Fife email address if they were interested in taking part in the additional interview phase of the study. These participants were then contacted by an author (MP) to arrange a date and time for the interview. An additional snowball sampling method was utilised by contacting current research active and non-active staff and asking them to contact others who may be interested in participating in the interview.

Between December 2021 and February 2022 twenty-seven interviews were conducted by MP, a clinical psychologist assistant trained in qualitative methods, and one interview by FQ, a Professor of Health Care Research (PhD) experienced in qualitative methods. Interviews were conducted online using a video call viaMicrosoft™ Teamssoftware. The duration of each interview was approximately 30 min. Interviews were recorded using a digital recorder, theMicrosoft™ Teamstranscription service and then further transcribed verbatim to increase validity and reliability. Field notes were not taken. No respondents were re-interviewed and no transcripts were returned to the interviewees for addition or correction. Each respondent received a £20 gift voucher.

The semi-structured interviews utilised a topic and question guide to focus discussion (Additional File 1). The guide was constructed using the same principal domains as the online questionnaire [22], the research culture and capacity on an individual, team and organisational level. The guide was piloted on three independent healthcare professionals and revised according to feedback.

Interviews were transcribed verbatim by a professional transcribing service,Dictate2Us. All transcripts were anonymised. Data analysis followed Braun and Clarke’s 6-step guide to thematic analysis [23]: familiarising oneself with data, generation of initial codes, searching for themes, reviewing themes, defining, and naming themes, reporting on themes.

Interview transcripts were coded by MP manually usingMicrosoft™ Wordprocessor. Saturation was reached by the 21 st interview. An additional two qualitative researchers (FQ and FD) analysed a subset of 12 out of the 28 interview transcripts and generated themes in parallel, using the 6-step guide to thematic analysis. The 12 transcripts were chosen at random and the additional reviewers were blinded as to the respondent’s staff grade. The three researchers (MP, FQ and FD) then compared findings and reached a consensus on final themes.

The research project had NHS Fife Management approval. Approval from an NHS Ethics committee was not required under guidance from the Health Research Authority as respondents were NHS staff (www.hra-decisiontools.org.uk). However, the study was conducted in accordance with the principles written into the Declaration of Helsinki (June 1964). Informed consent was obtained using an information sheet (Additional File 2) and consent script (Additional File 3). Verbal consent was audio recorded at the beginning of each semi-structured interview and evidenced within the interview transcripts. Respondents were informed that they were free to withdraw at any time, for any reason and any published quotations would be anonymised.

The study is reported following the Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative Research (COREQ) [24] (Additional File 4). A reflexivity statement is provided in Additional File 5.

Fifty-seven individuals expressed an interest in taking part in the semi-structured interviews. Twenty-eight individuals were interviewed (18 female, 10 male) and the remainder either did not respond to the researcher’s request to arrange an interview (n= 25) or indicated they were too busy to participate (n= 4). Respondents included a mix of staff: 7 nursing/midwifery, 6 medical/dental, 3 allied health professionals, 3 other therapeutic and 9 admin/support staff. Some staff had research written into their job descriptions whilst others did not. Some staff who claimed not to undertake research, did take on activities that were associated with research. This non-recognition of what research entails was more apparent in those professions where staff are, in general, less active in undertaking personal research projects.

All the respondents identified similar facilitators and barriers to undertaking research activity within the organisation, irrespective of their role or experience with research. The degree that these factors affected the individual respondent varied according to their circumstances, but to a lesser or greater degree, all respondents identified four master themes: Protected Time, Accessing Resources, Structural and Professional Differences, and Research Visibility as factors influencing research activity. Within these broad themes, sub-themes were found to further highlight indicators of research facilitators and barriers amongst NHS staff (Table1).

We also asked respondents about their thoughts on how the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic had affected their perception of research. Individuals who had research as part of their professional role (primarily medical and psychology staff) had more accepting views to undertaking research than those job roles which have not traditionally been involved in the research process (all other respondents).

Although we identified themes affecting research capacity and capability, many of the themes did not have distinct boundaries and points raised by respondents were often relevant to more than a single theme.

The impact of time on research capacity was a re-occurring theme which had an important bearing on an individual’s consideration in undertaking research. This was often the first factor mentioned when discussing barriers to engaging in research and, evidently, was a key consideration by the respondents. Individuals who had protected time to do research valued this, enabling the individual to incorporate research activity into their work schedule.

R20 “in order to do anything productive from a research point of view, you’ve got to get something like the NES [NHS Education for Scotland] fellowship …and then you do get some ring-fenced time”.

When asked what could be done to facilitate the organisation’s research activity, individuals cited ringfenced time as a key consideration.

Additionally, it was considered that research would require staff working in their own time and that was not possible or desirable for some respondents.

R1 “…and then previously we had an employee who was doing some research initiated by himself and he was trying to do that within the lab time, and he did it on his own time, so it was less than perfect and less than ideal”.

It was noticeable there were professional disparities among staff accessing time for research activity. Staff in professions traditionally associated with undertaking research activity, such as medicine and psychology, were less likely to cite access to research time as a barrier when compared to other professions such as nursing where, traditionally, staff have not had research integrated into their role. This may be because some professions have research methods and training included in their discipline and professional training curriculum, and have a greater expectation that research time is built into their professional role.

R15 “I think it’s easier probably for medical staff to take part in research possibly because they’ve got protected study time, et cetera. I think it’s a lot harder for nursing staff to be involved”.

Access to and use of resources for research was highlighted as either a facilitator (access to) or barrier (absence of) when undertaking research. Research-active respondents were more aware of and more likely to have accessed available resources within the organisation, than those who were not research-active.

Respondents who acknowledged the need for resources, also recognised that the availability of support departments such as the NHS Fife RIK. They expressed positive views about their value.

Not everyone in the organisation was aware of the presence of these departments or found them accessible.

Additional educational resources were cited as a prerequisite to become research active.

Respondents were keen to have a research facilitator/mentor to help them with studies. There is a research advisor within the RIK department though this study suggests that it is not widely known throughout the organisation. Additionally, some individuals mentioned that having staff within their area who were dedicated to research would be a valued resource.

R15 “Whether there’s some way in each area you can have somebody who doesn’t necessarily carry out research but it could be that linked person with the research and development, so if anything came up, they could be the person to disseminate, you know, for dementia champions and all these things, and it might be that you want to have somebody who’s a research and quality improvement or something sort of champion in each area, and then they could be that link”.

One individual identified that without the support of others they would feel isolated undertaking research themselves, further illustrating the value of resources and a supportive environment around research building.

In addition to awareness of, and availability of resources to facilitate research, the use of these resources also needs to be acceptable to the potential researcher within the culture of the organisation and their team. Organisational support, was seen to act as a facilitator, or a barrier to research activity. To understand this impact on NHS Fife employees we asked respondents about the impact of culture on an individual, team, and organisational level. Although a positive culture of the clinical department towards research was seen to be beneficial, there were structural and professional differences within the organisation.

Managerial support was seen as crucial to developing an environment where research became an integral part of team culture and activities.

R15 “I think you have to have a manager, your direct manager has to be supportive and encouraging and make that part of their ethos whether it would be ward or team-based”.

Whereas a perceived obstructive, counter-culture of the organisation was seen as a barrier to research activity.

R11 “The thing that I think is most difficult is trying to get somewhere like the, well, the MDT [Multidisciplinary Team] on board. It can be quite difficult to even just get small changes and patient care made so in terms of, like, new evidence for things”.

The organisational support within NHS Fife was seen to have a strong impact on research activity. Some of the respondents who were research active within their role considered that the organisation could do more to build research into the staff role.

Clinical psychologists also had a positive attitude to research in the organisation.

Furthermore, research is integral to some trainee posts, normalising the activity within those groups.

However, when those healthcare staff outside of medicine, dentistry, and psychology (Nurses, Midwives, Allied Health Professions, Healthcare Scientists, and Pharmacy staff, NMAHPs) discussed the acceptability of research in their culture, they appeared less supported. An advanced nurse practitioner who acknowledged that“one of the pillars of practise is research and education”appeared less comfortable in support provided for them to undertake research generally.

Furthermore, staff who worked in non-patient facing support departments were likely to use research to inform practice, but did not consider their role would be to undertake the research themselves.

Unsurprisingly, a supportive manager was seen to make research more acceptable to NMAHPs.

Defining what is and is not research activity is subjective and may be reflective of the professional and personal culture of the individual involved. Staff familiar with identifying themselves as researchers were confident defining themselves as such, but nurses and others where research is not seen as part of their role appeared more hesitant to put themselves into that category, despite, as in some cases, having completed a postgraduate degree or having engaged in research within the organisation.

Many of the respondents reported a lack of visibility of ongoing research projects and activity, or research resources (including the RIK department) within the organisation. Many highlighted the need for better communication about research activities, and the dissemination of findings. Although it was difficult to measure the level of awareness of research activity within the organisation, comments made by many respondents suggested that research visibility was low amongst individuals who were not themselves research active.

Comments gave the impression that one needed to be actively doing research to be aware that it existed. This then became a barrier to other people in accepting that research activity was possible within the organisation. Some respondents were aware of the publicity about research distributed via the NHS Fife staff communication tool (‘Blink’) and in regular newsletters from the RIK department. But these were seen as passive, impersonal methods of communication that did not inspire staff to seek more information about ongoing research projects, or in opportunities to engage in research in the organisation.

A more proactive approach to communication, with personal interaction was suggested to increase communication between researchers, research departments and other staff.

R1 “It [communication] could definitely improve, for example and maybe it’s what I need to do. Maybe I need to call up R&D say ‘come and have, you know, come and look round, come and chat to us’. ‘Come and tell us what you do’ or coming up a TEAMs meeting or something, but I don’t feel it should be my job to do that”.

Furthermore, targeting the communication in a way that made the research more relevant to staff was seen as beneficial, especially when examples of how, or why research was undertaken.

R12 “It’s making the research team more visible about these are all the research projects that we’ve done, this is what we found, this is why your job is easier, this is why… this is the benefit for you, for all these projects. So once people see tangible benefits, I think they’re more likely to buy into the research in the first place”.

It was suggested that a ‘champion’ could also act as a visible way of communicating ongoing research to others in the organisation.

R15 “I was talking about having almost a link. If you got some people, whether it’d be a consultant or nurse, an OT [Occupational Therapist] or somebody in each team who can be that link, then they can bring these ideas to the home and encourage”.

Some staff described supporting research activity for others but not getting any feedback about the final conclusions. This lack of communication did not make the individuals feel valued or involved.

R1 “But then don’t know what happens after that, you know? And we don’t know if there’s anything published and we don’t know if anybody was acknowledged. Or so it is very much the Mushroom Syndrome”.

Communication on all forms of research is fundamental to embedding it into the culture of the organisation, and a positive endeavour for individuals. The respondents’ comments suggested that the organisation was not very active in highlighting research activity in a way that engaged the staff working within it. Although there were some processes to publicise research activity, these were not very engaging to staff who felt a more personal approach would likely to be more successful.

A specific enquiry was made into changes in staff perceptions on the importance of research arising from the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. During this period most respondents had become more aware of the value of research to improving healthcare to tackle the pandemic.

Some respondents spoke about how they would take research forward from the lessons learnt from the pandemic, including new areas to study.

R25 “So, you can adapt to the situation, learn lessons, and before it, planning, future planning for any similar events. I think, yeah, I think it’s vital to research, it’s vital going forward”.

This shows that putting clinical research in context, in this case relating to an emerging health issue, made it more relevant and accessible to staff, and more valued as a priority in the organisation.

Although there were many examples of a positive impact of SARS-CoV-2 on the research landscape, for a small number of respondents, the pandemic negatively impacted on the ability to engage with research. For some, the increased workload during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic made participation in research unfeasible.

R1 “it [COVID] is just the straw that broke the camel’s back. Our ability to support research is severely hampered by our staffing, uh status, and the requirements being placed on us”.

Additionally, the constantly evolving information that came out from the research into treating SARS-CoV-2 also felt overwhelming to the staff working during this time.

The principal study aim was to explore staff views about engaging in and supporting research in the Health Board, and to elicit suggestions as to how research activity could be enhanced. We also sought views on how the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic may have affected attitudes to research in the NHS. We sought to gain an insight into the attitude of all staff grades and professions, so we did not limit our sample to only certain professions, or to only research-active, or research-inactive personnel. Consequently, we obtained views from different staff roles, responsibilities, and research experience within the organisation to obtain a varied and comprehensive response base for analysis. Four overarching themes emerged from our analyses, namely, protected time, accessing resources, structural and professional differences, and research visibility (Table1). In addition, the impact of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic on research activity and on attitudes to research were explored.

We asked the respondents to consider the research culture and capacity in NHS Fife on an individual, team, and organisational level. The responses reflected those seen in previous studies in healthcare organisations. The lack of protected time being an almost universally mentioned barrier to investigator-initiated research activity, and protected research time facilitating activity is a theme echoed by other studies assessing research capability and capacity building [8,13,20]. Ring fenced research time provides one important resource to plan and undertake research, but it also provides a ‘legitimacy’ to the researcher to undertake the work. Medical staff and psychologists working in professions traditionally associated with research activity were less likely to cite the lack of access to research time as a barrier when compared to other professions such as nurses who have, traditionally, not had research as part of their role, or training. Initiatives to provide protected time within a clinical role have included funded fellowships, though these tend to be biassed towards medical applicants. Competition is intense and the success rate of applications from NMAHPs is poor [5].

Alongside providing time to do or support research there also needs to be other resources such as training, specialist advice and practical support, particularly with the associated bureaucracy. Some respondents acknowledged the help they had received through the RIK department whilst others were aware of its existence but were unaware of the services offered.

One resource to increase research activity widely mentioned by respondents, irrespective of their role within the organisation, was the availability of a research facilitator/mentor, or link person (different terms were used, but, essentially, respondents were referring to an individual whose role was to guide staff through the research process). Some felt this individual should be embedded within their department or team, others felt they should sit within their profession i.e. an AHP specific research facilitator. Research facilitators/mentors can have a positive effect on building capacity [14,16,17,20]. A qualitative study evaluating the provision of research training noted that trainees developed transferable skills including the ability to act as facilitators to other research interested staff in the organisation [25]. Research facilitators may be considered a resource in terms of ‘time’ by sharing some research tasks with the active researcher. The skills needed to be an effective research facilitator include experience in research design, project management, data analysis (quantitative and qualitative), report writing (grants, ethics), communication, the intricacies of clinical research and a recognition of their own limitations [17]. In addition to having a research skill set, effective facilitators need to be enthusiastic, approachable, and encouraging when engaging with staff.

Organisational culture in healthcare can be defined as ‘the shared ways of thinking, feeling, and behaving in healthcare organisations’ [26]. This culture has been described as existing in three layers: (1) Visible aspects, including structural features (infrastructure, estate) and established and accepted ways of working, (2) Shared ways of thinking, namely the values and beliefs that justify actions, and (3) Shared assumptions, the unspoken, unconscious expectations of staff within their professions. Additionally, due to the complexity of healthcare delivery, aspects of workplace culture may vary across the organisation, specific to individual professions or specialities, resulting in various subcultures that will have a different perspective on the research environment and the question of ‘culture.’ Staff in a profession that traditionally engaged with research, such as medical staff and psychologists (as in the UK), were comfortable with either undertaking research themselves, or encouraging colleagues to do it. They saw the value in research, had accessed resources and accepted research as the way for healthcare to develop. Research had a legitimacy in their role along with the more ‘traditional’ clinical work. Some of these staff still had problems getting the time or other resources (capacity), but were receptive to the culture of research in developing knowledge. In comparison, those NMAHP professions where research was not part of their remit or remuneration had less research activity and lacked confidence to be research active, or felt it was only for higher banded, senior staff. Often staff mentioned that they reviewed the literature adopting evidence-based practice to inform their clinical work, but did not develop this activity further. With workforce restructuring and extra responsibilities being placed on more senior staff, this may change the expectation of individuals and their subcultures to acknowledge their ‘legitimacy’ to undertake research.

An important aspect in developing a research culture is the support and active encouragement given by senior and middle managers, reflecting the adoption of a research strategy at Board level. This aspect has been commented on by others [27,28] and considered a critically important component. However, NHS Fife is medium-sized and is not a designated teaching/university board within the Scottish system. The Board receives a performance and activity-based allocation from the Scottish Government to fund the RIK department in covering the unmet costs of supporting commercial, non-commercial, and investigator-initiated research; it does not attract more substantial funding that the larger, designated teaching Boards receive. This may result in research and innovation being less of a priority for a Health Board without this designation.

Gaps in communication within the organisation were highlighted by some respondents despite the efforts made in disseminating regular newsletters by the RIK department, and monthly notices of papers published by NHS Fife staff by the library service. Some respondents were aware of these circulars but considered they were impersonal and not apparently relevant to their own clinical area. Other respondents were unaware of these circulars, raising the need to increase their visibility and penetration within the service. The importance of good communication as a component of an organisation’s research culture has been emphasised by others [13,20,29]. If staff are to be encouraged to become research active, the resources available and the impact of research on the individual, healthcare and the organisation should be visible to all who work within it. If this visibility is limited through inadequate communication there is a danger that research activity will mainly be restricted to people driven to do it by factors external to the organisation, such as professional requirements or prior experience gained in other organisations. Improvements in communication may be achieved by appointing ‘Research Champions’ within clinical teams, with the remit to increase the visibility of research across the organisation.

Some respondents were undertaking research but did not recognise it as such. Others considered they were undertaking research activities when searching the literature for evidence to inform changes in clinical practice. Additionally, clinical effectiveness activities were seen as ‘research’ rather than service improvement. It is difficult to objectively define ‘research activity.’ Brandenburg, 2024, did a scoping review of the literature to understand research engagement in medicine [30] concluding that ‘outcome measures were highly heterogenous, suggesting there is no agreed outcome measure for “research engagement”’. Friessen, 2017, also felt that healthcare organisations should provide education about what constitutes ‘research’ so that staff can recognise when they are doing it [31]. Being aware of what research is being undertaken in the organisation, how staff can support it, and what resources are available to start it, raises the profile of research within the context of the organisation and staff groups.

This study was conducted between December 2021 and February 2022. The SARS-CoV-2 virus started circulating in the UK early 2020, and the country entered a national lockdown in March 2020. Most restrictions were lifted mid-2021 with the final ones being removed by March 2022. Consequently, the study was undertaken within a timescale that the respondents would likely have recent memories of a time working in healthcare before, during and after the peak of the pandemic.

The pandemic affected all aspects of healthcare delivery and clinical research in the UK at the time. Within NHS Fife, recruitment to the majority of clinical trials was suspended, and the research teams opened urgent public health studies addressing the emerging pandemic. Research staff engaged with clinical teams in previously low research areas, promoting the value of clinical research to otherwise research naïve staff. Other staff volunteered as participants in a national study being hosted in NHS Fife, again promoting the value of research to previously research naïve staff. Clinical staff had questions about the best way to manage the pandemic, were presented with ever changing information about treating patients, and ultimately had to adapt to new ways of working, leading to many questioning previously held assumptions about healthcare practices. Furthermore, patients were more questioning of staff about their own healthcare, seeking answers and reassurance during this uncertain period. This upheaval and search for answers put research in the forefront of the response to the pandemic.

For most of the respondents the pandemic had increased their interest in research, either seeing the value of it in the organisation, or by giving them personal motivation to study an issue of importance. This illustrates that putting clinical research in context, in this case, relating to an emerging health issue, made it more relevant to staff. Furthermore, the resources and support offered by the NHS Fife RIK office to those wanting to engage in research were similar before and after the pandemic, so any changes in research culture after the pandemic were possibly due to intrinsic factors within individuals rather than a shift in the framework around research. However, there was little evidence from the respondents that the organisational culture had shifted towards research because of the pandemic, but the visibility of research had. It is important that staff feel able to engage with research by supporting it, contributing to it, and initiating it themselves, depending on their personal motivation and abilities. Whatever their level of interest, staff need resources and a supportive organisational culture to take this forward [20]. It is also important that this new awareness and enthusiasm for research, arising from a change in attitude following the pandemic, is nurtured within the organisation before it fades and staff become disillusioned, possibly reinforcing any previous negative attitudes that research is not something they can, or should engage with. To our knowledge the impact of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic on any change in attitudes of health care staff to research has yet to be reported; we were unable to find any published literature on the subject to compare our findings against.

We sought to obtain views across all staff groups and did not confine our sample to only those professions that traditionally engage in research. Many studies have looked at research culture in particular professional groups, but this study recruited across professional groups within the same organisation to enable us to make comparisons in attitudes of sub-groups. However, the respondents were self-selected which has the potential to skew the results to reflect the views of those who had an interest in research and were motivated to take part in the questionnaire survey, and interviews. We are aware that staff members who were not interested in research, or who had had previous negative experiences were less likely to take the time to participate in the study and provide information about their perspective of the culture of research within NHS Fife, and the impact of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. We believe our study may be the first to report on how attitudes to research amongst health care staff may have changed arising from their experience during the pandemic.

All but one of the interviews were conducted by one trained researcher though multiple, experienced researchers analysed the transcripts to increase the reliability of the identified themes and subthemes. Furthermore, we are confident that saturation was achieved. During our analysis we did not classify respondents as research active/inactive because this was difficult to objectively classify from the transcripts. Additionally, some respondents did not recognise they were undertaking research activities in their roles, whilst others confused literature searching, to inform ongoing evidence-based practice, as a research activity.

The findings from our interviews broadly concur with those from the questionnaire phase of the study [21], though additional aspects emerged from our in-depth investigation, including the apparent confusion amongst some of the respondents as to what activities constitutes ‘research’, and the need for improved communication to increase the visibility of research across the organisation. Overall, our findings suggest that to increase research activity in our Health Board we should focus on the following: (1) provide protected time and backfill for staff wishing to engage in research, (2) increase access to resources to support research-active staff, to include training, admin support to tackle the associated bureaucracy (ethics, protocol writing, applications for research fellowships), advice on study design, data analysis, and help in securing grant funding, particularly for pilot studies, (3) address the structural and professional differences within the organisation by adopting policies at Board level to promote research as a priority, recognising that different strategies will be needed covering different types of research (commercial, non-commercial, investigator-initiated, opportunities to benefit from intellectual property). Associated activities should look to increase links with academia and other potential external partners, to encourage managers of all grades to promote research as part of everyday practice within their clinical departments and to include research activity as part of the career pathway, particularly for those staff that have research included in their job description, (4) improve the visibility of research throughout the organisation by increasing penetration of the various newsletters and alerts currently circulated to provide details to staff of services available to help them engage in research, of current, newly established and completed research projects underway in the organisation, of opportunities to become more involved in projects, and of current publications by NHS Fife staff. Improvements in communication should also feature alerts to patients of ongoing projects and any opportunities to volunteer for a study.

Some NHS Fife staff undertake post-graduate courses some of which will involve completing a research study. It is particularly important to encourage them at an early stage to consult the RIK department and library to establish what resources are available to assist them in their project, including writing up their dissertation and any papers arising from their work. Staff that are successful in passing their course may consider becoming a ‘Research Facilitator/Mentor’ to work within their professional group or team to provide guidance to others in developing their own research career, and to promoting evidence-based practice by reviewing the medical literature.

It is anticipated that the results of this study will be used to assist in setting strategy, planning local initiatives, and assessing change in research capacity and culture indicators over time. The findings may have relevance for other small to medium-sized Health Boards in Scotland, and for other health providers in the UK and internationally that intend to respond to a call to increase their research profile.

We wish to record our gratitude to the respondents for agreeing to be interviewed. We also wish to acknowledge the help given in setting up the study by Dr Penny Trotter, Aileen Yell, Susan Kirkwood, and Dr Allyson Bailey.

Management approval was obtained from NHS Fife. The study protocol was reviewed and approved by internal staff in NHS Fife and by one external reviewer from NHS Forth Valley.

FQ and DC conceived and planned the study. MP, FQ and DC contributed to writing the protocol. MP interviewed all but one of the respondents; FQ interviewed one respondent. MP, FD and FQ analysed the interview transcripts. All authors were involved in preparing the final manuscript. The scientific quality of the research was peer-reviewed by the Sponsor (NHS Fife) and one external referee (Dr Allyson Bailey) from NHS Forth Valley Research and Development Office as part of the sponsorship application.

NHS Fife, Research, Innovation and Knowledge Department sponsored and funded the project.