Effective strategies are essential for early tuberculosis (TB) detection. Reliance on passive case detection, symptom screening and collection of sputum results in delayed or undiagnosed TB, contributing to on-going TB transmission. This study assessed the acceptability of in-home targeted universal TB testing (TUTT) using GeneXpert MTB/RIF Ultra at point-of-care (POC) during household contact investigations (HCIs) and the feasibility of using sputum and tongue swab specimens.

The TB Home Study sought to evaluate the predictive value of different specimen types for use as a household-level triage test for TB. Household contacts of people with TB residing in the Buffalo City Metro Health District (Eastern Cape Province, South Africa) who received in-home POC TUTT through the TB Home Study were asked to complete a post-test acceptability survey. The survey assessed the level of comfort, confidence in the test results and perceived appropriateness of in-home POC TUTT. A feasibility framework was used to assess the feasibility of using sputum and tongue swab specimens for testing.

Of the 325 eligible household contacts, 281/325 (86.5%) provided consent. Of those contacts, 278/281 (98.9%) provided a tongue swab, and 50/281 (17.8%) could expectorate sputum. All specimens were successfully prepared for immediate in-home testing. Of the 172 tongue swab-based tests performed, 169 (98.3%) produced a valid result, whereas 47 of 49 (95.9%) sputum-based tests had a valid result. An immediate tongue swab-based test result was available for 274/278 (98.6%) clients compared with 47/49 (95.9%) sputum-based test results. The mean in-home POC TUTT acceptability score (5=highly acceptable) was 4.2/5 (SD=0.4).

In-homePOC TUTT using sputum and tongue swab specimens was highly acceptable and feasible. Tongue swabs greatly increased the testing rates owing to the high sample collection yield. Combining sputum and tongue swabs for in-home POC testing offers a promising strategy to improve TB case detection and reduce diagnostic delays.

TB transmission among household contacts of people with tuberculosis (TB) is a public health concern.

The delivery of community-based diagnostic testing for TB is challenging, and the reliance on sputum continues to hamper universal testing and result in diagnostic delay.

A large diagnostic gap remains globally, with an estimated 2.7 million of all suspected TB cases never being tested for TB.

Molecular testing of tongue swabs has high specificity and moderate sensitivity relative to sputum testing.

This is the first study to assess the acceptability of universal in-home point-of-care TB testing of household contacts during household contact investigations.

This study assesses the feasibility of different specimen types for immediate in-home point-of-care TB testing, including tongue swabs and sputum, by evaluating metrics associated with sample collection yield, processing, testing and notification rate.

Household contacts perceived in-home targeted universal TB testing to be highly acceptable, prompting the need for further investigation into the cost-effectiveness of such strategies to improve early case detection.

The use of tongue swabs as an additional or alternative sample type to sputum could increase testing and improve early case detection.

Details regarding the HCI methods have been previously described.22Briefly, household and household contact information was obtained from people with microbiologically confirmed TB accessing services at collaborating public healthcare clinics. Contact investigation teams consisting of 2–3 trained lay community healthcare workers conducted up to three household visits to reach all household contacts listed. Household visits were conducted on weekdays between 8 am and 4 pm, during which the contact investigation team would conduct a household contact verification check, screen for study eligibility and introduce the study to all those present. Healthcare workers had to attend a 4-week training programme during which they were trained on the study protocol, research ethics and sample collection, preparation and testing. Household contacts were deemed eligible if they were (1) age ≥18 years, (2) not currently on TB treatment and (3) willing to provide informed consent. Study participation was voluntary, and no remuneration was provided. Once recruited into the study, participating household contacts were asked to respond to a series of survey questions and provide specimens for immediate in-home testing.

Details regarding the sample collection and testing have been previously reported.23,25Briefly, before sputum collection, community healthcare workers used Copan FLOQSwabs to collect tongue swab specimens from all study participants present at the time of the HCI. Study participants were instructed not to eat, drink, rinse their mouth or produce a sputum sample 30 min before swabbing and subsequent sputum collection as part of pre-testing requirements. Tongue swabs were pooled from up to three individuals for immediate in-home testing using a single Xpert Ultra cartridge. If a household had more than three household contacts, the additional swabs were pooled and tested in a separate reaction. Pool sizes could be three, two or, in some cases, a single swab. Sputum samples were collected from all study participants while the tongue swab test was being conducted. Participants who were unable to expectorate sputum were referred to a clinic for further clinical evaluation. Sputum samples were individually prepared and tested immediately at home using Xpert Ultra with the GX-Edge platform. Samples were placed into a total solution volume of 3 mL of 1 mL Prime Store Molecular Transport Media and 2 mL of Xpert sample buffer. From the approximately 3 mL volume solution, 2 mL was taken out for processing in an Xpert Ultra cartridge. Up to three GX-Edge platforms were used simultaneously, allowing for testing of multiple samples concurrently, each taking approximately 90 min per test. Participants were referred for TB treatment based on positive sputum results.

While Xpert testing was being conducted, a contact investigation team member collected basic socio-demographic and clinical history data from each participant. Descriptive statistics (median (IQR) for continuous variables and n [%] for categorical variables) were used to characterise distributions of study variables in the socio-demographic questionnaire (table 1). Data collected pre-testing and post-testing were analysed to assess the acceptability of in-home POC TUTT. Pre-test acceptability was assessed as the proportion of household contacts consenting to participate out of the eligible population to whom study participation was offered. Post-test acceptability was assessed using survey data collected following the conclusion of a household investigation. The development of the post-test acceptability survey was informed by the TFA framework and adapted specifically for this study.17This survey evaluated a respondent’s level of acceptability of a healthcare intervention across eight different constructs using a 5-point Likert scale (table 2). Responses to two constructs with negatively framed questions (burden and opportunity costs) were reverse-coded before calculating the mean scores to ensure interpretability and consistency with the other acceptability constructs. SD is reported to represent the dispersion of responses around the mean score for each acceptability construct.

POC TUTT, point-of-care targeted universal tuberculosis testing; TB, tuberculosis.

POC TUTT, point-of-care targeted unirversal tuberculosis testing.

Implementation outcomes associated with sample collection and testing of sputum and tongue swab samples were captured and used to assess the feasibility of different testing methods and included the (1) type of sample collected, (2) success of sample collection, (3) processing and preparation of sample for testing, (4) outcome of test and (5) referral outcome. The final feasibility assessment was guided by elements of the metrics to assess the feasibility of rapid POC technologies framework, which was designed to assess the feasibility of rapid POC technologies during proof-of-concept studies.18This framework was used to select and define four metrics (table 3) to be included in the current assessment: (1) sample collection rate, (2) test processing rate, (3) test success rate and (4) client notification rate. The performance of both sputum and tongue swab testing methods against each metric was calculated and reported.

The number of tests conducted is less than the number of samples collected, because samples were pooled into a single Xpert Ultra cartridge.

POC TUTT, point-of-care targeted universal tuberculosis testing.

This study was conducted according to the ethical principles set forth in the Declaration of Helsinki, ICH-GCP, European Directive 2001/20/EC, US Code of Federal Regulations Title 21, South African Good Clinical Practice Guidelines and other local regulatory requirements. The study protocol was approved by the University of Pretoria Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC 391/2021) and the Boston University Institutional Review Board (H-44118).

The study team engaged community advisory board mechanisms to ensure that household members of prospective study participants were approached in a manner that would not result in stigma. In addition, we collaborated with the Department of Health to streamline best practices for the delivery of all study-related activities, ensuring that these did not interfere with standard TB care and that effective linkage to care was maintained. Only individuals with a confirmed positive TB diagnosis were approached at clinics and introduced to the study. Permission was obtained from these individuals before initiating HCIs, thereby indirectly supporting potential study recruitment.

The study team prioritised the effective dissemination of findings by engaging key stakeholders at the Department of Health, participating healthcare clinics and community-based representatives. A workshop was held where study staff presented key findings, and attendees were given the opportunity to ask questions and provide feedback.

Figure 1provides a detailed summary of the number of household contacts listed, number of households reached and number of household contacts verified and screened for study eligibility. A total of 247 individuals with confirmed TB provided a household contact list with a combined total of 901 household contacts. The median household size was 3. Contact investigation teams conducted a total of 468 investigations, reaching 188 (76.1%) households and verifying the identification of a total of 68.5% (617/901) of all household contacts listed. Of 530 household contacts verified, 325 were eligible for enrolment.

All 281 participants completed the socio-demographics and clinical history questionnaire. The median age of the participants was 41 (IQR 27–55) years. The majority were black (87.5%, 246/281), 56.2% (158/281) were unemployed, and 89.3% (251/281) had a monthly income of less than R5,000 ($268). A quarter (21.7%, 61/281) had a previous bout of TB, and just less than one-fifth (16.0%, 45/281) were living with HIV (table 1). Almost a third of the participants (31.3%, 88/281) screened positive for TB using the WHO-recommended four-symptom screener.26Of those who screened positive for TB, 25% (22/88) were able to produce sputum compared with 14% (27/193) of those who screened negative.

Table 2lists each of the eight acceptability constructs measured, associated survey question and its mean score. The associated SD has been included and represents the variability of responses around the mean score for each acceptability construct. Of the 325 household contacts that met all the study eligibility criteria, 86.5% (281/325) provided informed consent, suggesting a high level of acceptability for in-home POC TUTT before testing. A total of 274 (97.5%) participants completed the post-test acceptability questionnaire. The mean score for overall acceptability of in-home POC TUTT across all eight acceptability constructs was 4.2 (SD=0.4), with 5 representing the highest level of acceptability. All constructs measuring a positive attitude towards in-home TB testing had mean scores >4. The two constructs measuring negative attitudes toward in-home TB testing (ie, burden and opportunity cost) had mean scores of 1.4 and 1.3, respectively, with one representing the least negative response. When given the option to choose between sputum or tongue swabs for future in-home TB testing, 231/274 (84.3%) chose tongue swabs.

Table 3lists and defines the four metrics used to assess the feasibility of delivering in-home POC TB testing and the associated performance of different testing methods. Tongue swab-based testing had a higher sample collection ratecompared with sputum-based testing. A total of 278 (98.9%) study participants could provide a tongue swab for testing. The three participants who were unable to provide a tongue swab for testing failed to comply with the pre-sample collection requirements. Only 17.8% (50/281) of participants were able to successfully expectorate a sputum sample for testing. Contact investigation teams successfully prepared all samples for immediate POC testing during an HCI, irrespective of the sample type or number of tongue swab samples pooled. Thetest processing ratewas consequently 100% for both specimen types. The test success ratefor tongue swab-based tests (98.6%, 274/278) was comparable to sputum (95.9%, 47/49). Two sputum-based and two tongue swab-based tests reported errors during testing.Table 4summarises the test failure rate and associated error codes. Both error codes are due to complications associated with the Xpert Ultra reagent. All participants with actionable test results were immediately notified at the time of the household investigation. Given the highertest success rate, tongue swab-based tests had a higherclient notification rate(98.6%), as 274 of the 278 participants received a valid in-home test result. Of the 49 participants able to provide a sputum, 47 (95.9%) received a valid, in-home test result. Among the various tongue swab-based testing methods, the pooling of three samples showed slightly better test and client notification rates compared with both two-sample pooling and individual tongue swab testing due to the absence of errors occurring during any of the 63 tests run using three tongue swabs.

Although our findings support the acceptability and feasibility of in-home POC TUTT, the accuracy of tongue swab testing for TB remains a concern. Variability in accuracy could increase the probability of false negatives, thereby contributing to increased risk of transmission, or alternatively, false positives, resulting in misdiagnosis, followed by unnecessary treatment exposure. The optimal number of swabs and approach necessary to optimise DNA recovery during processing remains under investigation.31Similarly, although the pooling of sputum samples has been shown to be efficient at reducing costs while producing highly accurate results, uncertainty remains whether the same would hold true when pooling tongue swabs.32Although the sensitivity of tongue swabs for TB diagnosis remains variable, the specificity seems notably high, yielding an overall favourable diagnostic effect.33The high specificity of tongue swabs combined with the high sample collection yield makes them highly valuable for confirmatory testing alongside other diagnostics methods. Furthermore, high specificity can assist with minimising false positives, thereby assessing an individual’s eligibility for TB preventive treatment.

The importance of our findings is supported by a growing recognition of the need for accurate tests that enable prompt linkage to care, are implementable at POC, by healthcare workers with minimal training and with results that are available in a single patient encounter. Consideration of the feasibility of collecting, processing and testing specimens outside of a traditional clinical setting is essential to estimating the true potential of using alternative sample types for TB testing during community-based active case finding. Despite the introduction of several new platforms, gaps in the current TB diagnostic pipeline remain.29Exploring the potential of new platforms, assays and testing methods that show promise for POC deployment across different use case scenarios plays an essential role in refining target product profiles.31Findings from this study can be used to inform new use case development as well as refine target product profiles aimed at delivering near-POC and POC TB testing.

This study had several limitations. The high level of pre-test acceptability of POC TB testing among household contacts might be an overestimation. The acceptability of TB testing might be higher among contacts of patients with TB compared with the general population due to increased perceived disease risk and awareness. Household contacts directly exposed to TB have a heightened understanding of the importance of early detection and treatment.9Furthermore, selection bias may account for the high post-test acceptability, as only household contacts who initially provided consent completed the post-test acceptability assessment. This analysis did not include a cost or cost-effectiveness analysis to estimate and compare the difference in cost and outcomes of each testing method. Pooling tongue swabs into a single Xpert Ultra cartridge aims to reduce the total number of cartridges required, often cited as a significant factor driving testing costs.14However, sputum remains the gold standard for TB testing due to its superior sensitivity over tongue swabs.27Future studies should explore the cost-effectiveness of these different testing methods to weigh potential cost savings with decreasing test accuracy, assessing the ‘financial feasibility’ and scalability of the proposed testing methods.15Testing was only offered to household contacts aged >18 years, even if approximately 12% of all suspected TB cases were reported as being children and young adolescents.1Effective TB diagnosis in children is hampered by several factors, including the paucibacillary nature of TB, its shared symptoms with other common childhood diseases and, most significantly, difficulties collecting samples for testing.35The collection of non-invasive samples, such as tongue swabs for TB screening among children, combined with the delivery of TB preventative treatment could have a significant public health effect. However, the low sensitivity of tongue swabs in children remains a major concern, limiting their use. Failing to optimise testing protocols that increase accuracy and prioritise children and adolescents in future studies will continue to stifle progress towards TB targets. No data were collected from the approximately 15% of household contacts who declined study participation. Evidence suggests that individuals who opt out of screening may be at higher risk for TB. Future studies should aim to further explore reasons for refusal, as it may hold valuable insights for intervention development. Lastly, study participants were required to adhere to strict pre-testing requirements, including no eating, drinking, mouth rinsing or producing a sputum sample before swab collection. The need for these precautions in ensuring optimal sample collection remains unclear and could well negatively affect the acceptability and feasibility of novel sample collection methods. The justification for such requirements should be further explored.

As novel platforms and diagnostics for decentralised molecular testing become more readily available, this study provides evidence to support their integration into existing strategies, including HCIs. Furthermore, these findings provide support for the expansion of in-home TB testing by minimally trained lay healthcare workers. The ability to integrate molecular POC testing into community-based strategies can reduce the workload of already overburdened laboratory and clinical facilities, improve client satisfaction and remove persistent barriers preventing equal access to services. In-home POC TUTT using either sputum or tongue swabs is highly acceptable and feasible. Rapid molecular TB testing with immediate result notification at POC reduces the burden placed on those at highest risk by offering testing services in a single consultation, improves access to testing and shows great potential for early case detection and result notification.