Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is characterized by repeated episodes of upper airway obstruction during sleep and leads to oxidative stress, systemic inflammation, and potentially accelerated telomere shortening. Studies comparing telomere length (TL) in individuals with and without OSA have obtained inconsistent results. This study compared TL across individuals without and with OSA of varying severity. We recruited 103 participants from a sleep clinic, all of whom underwent in-laboratory polysomnography and TL measurement. To assess TL, quantitative PCR was conducted for genomic DNA extracted from peripheral blood samples. Four participants were excluded because of sleep durations of < 4 h during polysomnography. The final analysis included 99 individuals (46 men and 53 women). Among these individuals, 13 did not have OSA; 28, 24, and 34 had mild OSA, moderate OSA, and severe OSA, respectively. Telomeres were significantly longer in individuals without OSA than in individuals with mild, moderate, and severe OSA (8.4 ± 5.1 kb, 5.7 ± 3.1 kb, 5.7 ± 2.2 kb, and 4.8 ± 2.6 kb, respectively;P= 0.009). Among individuals aged < 50 years, no significant difference was observed in TL between the non-OSA and OSA groups. However, among individuals aged ≥ 50 years, individuals without OSA had significantly longer telomeres than did individuals with moderate to severe OSA. Our findings indicate that telomere shortening was significantly more pronounced in patients with increasing OSA severity than in individuals without OSA. Nocturnal hypoxia–induced inflammation in patients with OSA may contribute to telomere shortening.

Sleep is essential for relieving stress, restoring energy, and maintaining overall health. Despite the importance of sleep, the prevalence of sleep disorders has been steadily increasing1–3. An epidemiological study involving an Asian population demonstrated that a sleep duration of 7 h per night is associated with the lowest rate of all-cause mortality4. However, in today’s fast-paced society, both the quantity and quality of sleep are often neglected5.

Sleep apnea, a severe sleep-related breathing disorder, involves disruption of normal breathing patterns during sleep. Among the various types of sleep apnea, obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is the most common. OSA is characterized by repetitive episodes of partial or complete obstruction of the upper airway during sleep, which leads to nocturnal hypoxia. This condition not only disrupts sleep but also causes inflammation6. The link between OSA and the risk of cardiovascular diseases is well-known7. Diagnosis and management of OSA is essential to mitigate its long-term effects on health7.

Telomeres, which are composed of repetitive TTAGGG sequences at chromosome ends, play vital roles in maintaining genomic stability and facilitating DNA repair8. With each cell division, a segment of the telomere—ranging from 25 to 200 base pairs—is lost9. This progressive shortening of telomeres is a hallmark of cellular senescence, which significantly contributes to organismal aging10. The shortening process is not solely a byproduct of cell division; it is also influenced by factors such as inflammation11,12, obesity13, and oxidative stress14, which can accelerate telomere attrition.

Accelerated telomere shortening can lead to earlier cellular aging and is associated with a higher risk of age-related diseases. Thus, telomere length (TL) is a critical biomarker of biological aging and overall health. TL can provide insights into the biological pathways underlying disorders that lead to cellular senescence15.

As telomeres shorten, they reach a critical length; this critical length serves as a checkpoint of the cell cycle, leading to cell cycle arrest. Cell cycle arrest may cause cells to enter a state of senescence or undergo apoptosis. Thus, TL is directly related to aging and cellular turnover.

Sleep disorders, including short sleep duration and OSA, are linked to inflammation, obesity, and cardiovascular diseases6,16. Short sleep duration has been associated with telomere shortening in men17. Boyer et al. discovered an association between oxygen desaturation index and TL in middle-aged men with untreated OSA18. However, they did not account for comorbidities. Telomere shortening is connected to hypertension, diabetes mellitus (DM), and cardiovascular diseases, all of which are prevalent in patients with OSA19. By contrast, Polonis et al. found no significant difference in TL between patients with and without OSA; however, after adjusting for age, sex, body mass index (BMI), hypertension, dyslipidemia, and depression, they observed significantly longer telomeres in patients with moderate-to-severe OSA than in patients without OSA19. Notably, while Polonis et al. clearly stated that their participants were naïve to OSA treatment, the potential effects of continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) therapy on TL should be acknowledged. CPAP therapy may increase TL by alleviating the pathophysiological stressors associated with OSA18–21.

Given the inconsistent findings on TL between patients with OSA and individuals without OSA in studies from Western countries, as well as the limited research on Asian populations, further investigation is needed to determine whether TL is associated with OSA status. Therefore, we conducted a cross-sectional study and measured TL in Taiwanese individuals without OSA and those with varying severities of OSA. We also explored the impact of OSA severity on TL across different age groups, specifically young adults and middle-aged to older adults.

This cross-sectional study investigated TL across individuals without and with OSA of varying severity. The study was performed with the approval of the Institutional Review Board of Tsaotun Psychiatric Center, Ministry of Health and Welfare (Approval No. 111010), Taiwan. All research was performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. In addition, we obtained informed consent from all participants.

This study pooled data from 103 participants who underwent full-night polysomnography (Nox A1 System with WristOx, Iceland) at Taichung Hospital between March 1 and December 31, 2022. Extracted DNA was available for 99 participants. OSA classification was conducted on the basis of the apnea–hypopnea index (AHI). Apneas and hypopneas were scored according to the criteria of either a complete cessation or a ≥ 50% reduction in airflow lasting at least 10 s, accompanied by a ≥ 3% decrease in oxygen saturation. Participants were divided into 4 groups: non-OSA (< 5 episodes per hour), mild OSA (between 5 and 15 episodes per hour), moderate OSA (between 15 and 30 episodes per hour), and severe OSA (≥ 30 episodes per hour). Participants were excluded if they had a sleep duration of < 4 h during the polysomnography examination, if they had central sleep apnea, or if they had active cancer. CPAP is the gold standard therapy for OSA; it delivers pressurized air to stabilize the upper airway during sleep22. Participants who used CPAP devices for > 4 h per night over at least 3 months were classified into the non-OSA group, regardless of their initial classification.

After participants provided their informed consent, whole blood samples (3 cc) were collected in collection tubes containing EDTA, and genomic DNA was extracted using Plus Blood Genomic DNA Purification Kits (DP023P, GeneMark Technology, Taiwan)23. Briefly, whole blood samples were mixed with PBS buffer (containing RNAse A, proteinase K solution, cell lysis solution, and binding/extraction solution) and incubated at 70 °C for 10 min. After incubation, the mixture was centrifuged at 13,000 × g for 5 min. The supernatant was collected, and 100% ethanol was added to the supernatant for the precipitation of DNA. Furthermore, centrifugation was conducted at 13,000 × g for 1 min. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was washed twice with PBS buffer. Finally, the eluted DNA was stored at − 20 °C until analysis.

All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 17.0 (SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). Between-group comparisons of continuous variables were performed using analyses of variance, with the Scheffé test applied for post hoc comparisons. Categorical variables, including demographics and comorbidities, were analyzed using the chi-square test. Analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was used to compare TL across the four OSA groups, controlling for continuous covariates such as age and BMI. Univariable regression analyses were conducted to evaluate the association between individual predictors and TL. Multivariable regression analyses were then performed to assess the relationship between multiple predictors and TL simultaneously. A 2-tailedPvalue of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

For this study, we recruited 103 participants from a sleep clinic, all of whom provided informed consent and underwent in-laboratory polysomnography. In total, 4 participants were excluded from the study due to an insufficient sleep duration (< 4 h) during the polysomnography examination. Thus, the final analysis included 99 participants (non-OSA group,n= 13; mild OSA group,n= 28; moderate OSA group,n= 24; and severe OSA group,n= 34). Among the participants, the mean age was 48.6 ± 15.2 years, and the mean BMI was 26.8 ± 5.7 kg/m2. The average SpO2nadir during sleep was 82.3% ± 8.7%, and the cumulative time of SpO2< 90% was 26.2 ± 52.9 min. The most common comorbidities were hypertension (37.3%) and hyperlipidemia (30.9%; Table1).

Demographic and polysomnographic characteristics, and comorbidity of the study participants.

BMI: body mass index; ESS: Epworth sleepiness scale; AHI: apnea hypopnea index; ODI3: oxygen desaturation index for ≥ 3% desaturation; SpO2: pulse oxygen saturation.

The proportion of men in each group increased with OSA severity (non-OSA: 15.4%, mild OSA: 28.6%, moderate OSA: 58.3%, and severe OSA: 64.7%,P= 0.002). The average age in each group significantly increased with OSA severity (non-OSA: 44.0 ± 19.0 years, mild OSA: 43.0 ± 14.7 years, moderate OSA: 50.1 ± 13.1 years, and severe OSA: 53.8 ± 14.0 years,P= 0.025). Individuals with moderate-to-severe OSA had noticeably higher BMI, neck circumference, and waist circumference than did those with mild OSA or without OSA. Moreover, individuals with moderate-to-severe OSA exhibited significantly higher AHI (non-OSA: 3.4 ± 0.9 events/h, mild OSA: 9.8 ± 2.5 events/h, moderate OSA: 22.2 ± 4.3 events/h, and severe OSA: 57.0 ± 23.9 events/h,P< 0.001) and lower SpO2nadir than did those with mild OSA or without OSA. TL was significantly longer in individuals without OSA than in those with OSA (non-OSA: 8.4 ± 5.1 kb, mild OSA: 6.0 ± 3.2 kb, moderate OSA: 5.8 ± 2.2 kb, and severe OSA: 4.8 ± 2.7 kb;P= 0.012; Table2).

Comparison of demographic and clinical characteristics among participants with different severities of OSA and those without OSA.

©Chi-square test; ANOVA test with post hoc using Scheffé method.

Table3shows a significantly higher proportion of moderate to severe OSA among middle-aged to older participants compared to younger participants. Correspondingly, the mean AHI was also significantly higher in the middle-aged to older group than in the younger group (37.3 ± 27.7 events/h vs. 26.3 ± 6.0 events/h,P= 0.006). The proportion of men was significantly greater in the middle-aged to older group (60.9% vs. 39.1%,P= 0.022). In addition, hypertension and coronary artery disease were more prevalent in the middle-aged to older group than in the younger group. However, the TL did not differ significantly between the two age groups.

Comparison of characteristics between young adults and middle-aged to older adults.

Chi-square test; ©independentttest; HTN: hypertension; DM: diabetes mellitus; CAD: coronary artery disease; FL: fatty liver; BMI: body mass index; AHI: apnea hypopnea index; TL: telomere length.

Figure1depicts the TL for individuals without OSA and those with OSA of differing severity. Telomeres were longer in individuals without OSA than in those with mild, moderate, or severe OSA. For individuals aged < 50 years, no significant difference was observed in TL between the non-OSA and OSA groups (Fig.2). However, among individuals aged ≥ 50 years, those without OSA had significantly longer telomeres than did individuals with OSA (non-OSA: 9.4 ± 6.7 kb, mild OSA: 7.3 ± 3.7 kb, moderate OSA: 4.9 ± 1.5 kb, and severe OSA: 3.8 ± 1.8 kb;P= 0.001; Fig.3).

In the overall study population, TL was significantly shorter with increasing severity of OSA, even after adjusting for age, BMI, sex, and comorbidities (Table4). Compared to individuals without OSA, those with mild OSA had significantly shorter telomeres (B = − 2.498,P= 0.021), as did those with moderate OSA (B = − 2.761,P= 0.024) and severe OSA (B = − 4.055,P= 0.002). Among participants aged < 50 years, no significant differences in TL were observed between those with and without OSA. However, in individuals aged ≥ 50 years, TL was significantly shorter in those with moderate (B = − 4.644,P= 0.024) and severe OSA (B = − 5.948,P= 0.002), compared to those without OSA, after controlling for the same covariates (Table5).

Factors associated with the telomere length for all participants.

R20.110; OSA4: obstructive sleep apnea classified 4 groups as non-OSA, mild OSA, moderate OSA, and severe OSA; BMI: body mass index; HTN: hypertension; DM: diabetes mellitus; CAD: coronary artery disease; FL: fatty liver.

Factors associated with the telomere length for participants aged ≥ 50 years.

R20.227; OSA4: obstructive sleep apnea classified 4 groups as non-OSA, mild OSA, moderate OSA, and severe OSA; BMI: body mass index; HTN: hypertension; DM: diabetes mellitus; CAD: coronary artery disease; FL: fatty liver.

This study is the first to evaluate the relationship between OSA severity and TL in an Asian population while simultaneously controlling for key factors such as age, BMI, SpO2nadir, and relevant comorbidities (i.e., hypertension, DM, hyperlipidemia, CAD, fatty liver, and asthma). Our findings revealed that individuals without OSA have longer telomeres than do those with increasing OSA severity (non-OSA: 8.4 ± 5.1 kb, mild OSA; 6.0 ± 3.2 kb, moderate OSA: 5.8 ± 2.2 kb, and severe OSA; 4.8 ± 2.7 kb;P= 0.012). These results are robust—OSA severity remained an independent risk factor for telomere shortening, even after controlling for potential confounders. The findings are consistent with those of studies in Western studies20,26,27.

Intermittent hypoxia and sleep fragmentation caused by OSA leads to oxidative stress, inflammation, endothelial dysfunction, and activation of the sympathetic nervous system28,29. Oxidative stress is defined as an imbalance between the production of reactive oxygen species and reactive nitrogen species and the antioxidant defense system, which results in the severe disruption of the redox homeostasis30. The accumulation of oxidative stress caused by reactive oxygen species affects key aspects of the aging process, contributing to physiological function impairment, an increased incidence of diseases, and a reduction in lifespan31. OSA may result in inflammation and the production of inflammatory markers such as interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-α32,33. Therefore, OSA-induced oxidative stress and inflammation may trigger cellular repair and replication processes, ultimately accelerating aging and telomere shortening.

Our study results indicated that men and older individuals are more susceptible to moderate-to-severe OSA. These findings align with those of other studies34,35. Additionally, BMI, neck circumference, and waist circumference were significantly associated with OSA severity. Epworth Sleepiness Scale scores did not significantly differ between participants without OSA and those with OSA. However, patients with moderate-to-severe OSA exhibited lower SpO2nadir and longer cumulative hypoxia time during sleep than did those with mild OSA or without OSA. Notably, moderate-to-severe OSA with lower SpO2nadir was strongly linked to telomere shortening18. OSA-induced hypoxia may accelerate telomere shortening through repeated cellular repair processes caused by systemic inflammation and oxidative stress, thereby increasing replicative senescence36,37.

After adjustment for age, sex, BMI, and medical comorbidities, the analysis revealed that TL was significantly inversely correlated with OSA severity. The absence of significant TL differences in individuals under the age of 50 may be attributable to the overriding influence of chronological aging on telomere dynamics. It is also possible that the relatively shorter duration of OSA or the presence of compensatory biological mechanisms in younger individuals mitigates its impact on telomere attrition. For younger adults (< 50 years old) with OSA, T cells may be highly activated, and in these adults, genetic variants and telomerase activation may play crucial roles in maintaining TL38,39. By contrast, for patients aged ≥ 50 years, those without OSA had longer telomeres than did those with moderate to severe OSA. Even after controlling for potential confounders, TL remained inversely correlated with OSA severity. Oxidative stress, inflammation, and increased leukocyte turnover may be critical factors contributing to accelerated biological aging and telomere shortening in patients with OSA.

Several limitations should be considered when interpreting the results of this study. First, this was a cross-sectional study; therefore, we could not establish causal relationships, even though a plausible pathogenesis exists. Second, we lacked information on the duration of OSA and the use of antioxidant supplements, which may have influenced the findings. Third, the relatively small sample size in each OSA severity group may have limited the generalizability of the study findings. Fourth, we classified 5 participants who had used CPAP devices for at least 3 months into the non-OSA group. Studies have indicated that CPAP therapy increases TL and may delay premature aging in patients with OSA by mitigating the pathophysiological triggers of OSA21. The exact duration of prior OSA exposure and its cumulative impact on TL remains unknown, which we acknowledge as a limitation of our study. Future research should include longitudinal follow-up of telomere length in treatment-naïve patients before and after CPAP therapy to better clarify the temporal dynamics of telomere recovery. Finally, the study participants were recruited from a sleep clinic, and therefore, the findings may not be generalizable to the broader population.

In conclusion, our study demonstrated that telomere shortening was significantly more pronounced in patients with varying OSA severity than in those without OSA. Nocturnal hypoxia–induced inflammation in patients with OSA may contribute to telomere shortening.