The impact of diabetes in pregnancy on offspring neurodevelopment is unclear. We investigate whether exposure to diabetes in utero is associated with developmental vulnerability or educational delay during primary school.

We used population-level pregnancy and birth data from 2009 to 2021 from Victoria, Australia, linked with standardized national assessments. Adjusting for a range of maternal and childhood covariates, we investigated whether diabetes in pregnancy was associated with an altered risk of developmental vulnerability compared with no diabetes in the first year of full-time school (ages 4–6 years), defined as below the tenth centile in two or more domains in the Australian Early Development Census (AEDC), and altered educational outcomes in grade 3 (ages 7–8 years), defined as the adjusted mean difference in overallzscore in the National Assessment Program – Literacy and Numeracy test (NAPLAN).

Our study comprised 177,898 children who had linked birth and AEDC data, and 115,231 with linked birth and NAPLAN data, including, respectively, 16,363 (9.2%) and 7,532 (6.5%) exposed to diabetes in pregnancy. Following adjusted analysis, diabetes in pregnancy was not associated with an altered risk of overall developmental vulnerability compared with no diabetes (adjusted relative risk 1.02 [95% CI 0.98, 1.07]). Diabetes was associated with a marginally higher overall NAPLANzscore, but below the prespecified threshold for clinical significance (adjusted mean difference 0.04 [95% CI 0.01, 0.07]).

Diabetes in pregnancy was not associated with overall developmental vulnerability or a clinically meaningful difference in educational outcomes. This should provide reassurance for patients and their treating clinicians.

Diabetes in pregnancy (preexisting type 1 or type 2, and gestational diabetes mellitus) is common, affecting an estimated 15% of women during pregnancy worldwide (1,2). Given the known impact of the intrauterine environment on childhood development (3), understanding the influence of common conditions like diabetes on offspring is critical. The hyperglycemic in utero environment associated with diabetes in pregnancy has implications for fetal brain development, including increased neuroinflammation and impaired synaptogenesis (4). This may clinically translate into increased developmental vulnerability in infancy and childhood (5–9).

There is some evidence to suggest that diabetes in pregnancy is associated with an increased risk of attention deficit hyperactivity and autism spectrum disorders in children, compared with offspring unexposed to maternal diabetes (5,6). However, the impact of maternal diabetes on childhood school performance is less clear (7–9). A 2019 meta-analysis found that maternal type 1 or 2 diabetes in pregnancy was associated with offspring IQ scores 3 points lower than diabetes-unexposed peers (five studies; 9,512 children), without any difference in school achievement (two studies; 69,266 children) (8). Many of the studies included were unadjusted or minimally adjusted for known variables that confound these associations, such as maternal education and socioeconomic status (10). Additionally, past studies examining the impact of gestational diabetes mellitus (rather than preexisting diabetes) on childhood outcomes have largely focused on preschool-age children, when developmental delays may not yet be apparent (3,11,12).

Population-wide studies considering outcomes throughout childhood with robust adjustment for confounders are needed to better characterize this relationship. In light of conflicting research findings, it is crucial to understand whether exposure to maternal diabetes has implications for offspring neurodevelopment and educational attainment.

The aim of this study was therefore to examine the relationship between maternal diabetes and offspring developmental vulnerability at age 4–6 years and educational achievement at age 7–8 years using standardized national assessments and population-level data.

All singleton children born between 2009 and 2020 in Victoria, Australia, with linked pregnancy and educational outcome data were included in this retrospective population-based cohort study. Statewide pregnancy, perinatal, and birth data were obtained from the Victorian Perinatal Data Collection (VPDC). It is a legal requirement in Victoria that every birth after 20 weeks’ gestation is registered with theVPDC, across all private and public hospitals and homebirths, irrespective of patient Medicare status (Australia’s universal health insurance scheme). Over 160 data points are collected for each birth, including maternal clinical and demographic characteristics, pregnancy and birth complications, and neonatal outcomes (13).

Diabetes diagnosis data were obtained from the National Diabetes Service Scheme (NDSS) with insulin prescriptions, including timing and frequency of scripts, sourced from the Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme to further validate diabetes diagnoses. These data were linked with childhood development and educational outcome data sourced from the Australian Early Development Census (AEDC) and the National Assessment Program – Literacy and Numeracy (NAPLAN).

A diagnosis of diabetes in pregnancy was identified via NDSS and/or VPDC. Women with preexisting diabetes (type 1 and type 2 diabetes) and gestational diabetes mellitus (diet and insulin-controlled) were included. NDSS is a national register of Australians with diabetes that confers subsidized access to diabetes products, such as glucose monitoring products and insulin syringes. It is the most comprehensive diabetes database in Australia, capturing 80–90% of Australians with preexisting diabetes and gestational diabetes mellitus, with each record validated by an authorized health professional (14). To ensure a comprehensive capture of diabetes in pregnancy, we also included women with gestational diabetes mellitus reported by VPDC, which has been shown to record diagnoses of gestational diabetes mellitus with 78% sensitivity and 100% specificity (15).

Children born with congenital anomalies (identified by ICD codes Q00–Q99) were excluded. Women with uncertain diabetes diagnoses were excluded, including those with unknown time of diabetes onset, those prescribed insulin without an NDSS or VPDC diagnosis of diabetes (because of uncertain diabetes type), and women with a recorded diagnosis of type 1 diabetes but without an insulin prescription during pregnancy or the 3 months preconception.

Developmental and educational outcomes were assessed using two nationwide outcome measures: AEDC and NAPLAN.

AEDC is an Australia-wide assessment of childhood development completed every 3 years in the first year of full-time school by each child’s schoolteacher (16), with data included from 2015, 2018, and 2021 cohorts. Children are typically 4–6 years old at the time of assessment. AEDC assesses five domains of child development: physical health and well-being, social competence, emotional maturity, language and cognitive skills (school-based), and communication skills and general knowledge. AEDC aims to identify developmental vulnerability, as defined by children scoring below the tenth centile across two or more of the five assessed domains. AEDC is a validated assessment tool (17) and is regularly evaluated to ensure effectiveness, quality, and governance (16). Developmental vulnerability as per AEDC is a significant predictor of student disengagement, and emotional and behavioral problems in later primary school (18). Children identified as developmentally vulnerable also perform 2 years behind in their reading and numeracy skills during the first year of high school (11–12 years old) (18) compared with their peers who were not identified as developmentally vulnerable on the AEDC.

NAPLAN is conducted annually across Australia and is a written test examining childhood educational aptitude in the domains of reading, spelling, writing, numeracy, and grammar and punctuation (19). Individual domain scores for each child are scaled in azscore based on year-specific mean and SD and compared against the national minimum standard. To assess global educational development, an “overall” NAPLAN score was calculated for each child as an average of the five domainzscores, in keeping with similar studies using NAPLAN data (20,21). NAPLAN has been internally validated (22) and is regularly independently audited to ensure adequate curriculum coverage, test quality, and acceptability (23).

A prespecified statistical analysis plan was agreed upon by all coauthors prior to the commencement of analysis (Supplementary Material). Analyses were performed using StataMP version 18 (24). Demographic and clinical characteristics were described by diabetes status (any diabetes, no diabetes) and also for subcohorts of diabetes (preexisting diabetes and gestational diabetes mellitus).

Missing covariate data were minimal (<10%) (Table 1), with multiple imputation by chained equations used where missingness was considered missing at random or missing completely at random. Women with uncertain diagnoses of diabetes were excluded from the analysis (Supplementary Fig. 1), and, accordingly, there were no missing exposure data. AEDC outcome data were missing for 5.1% of children, who had been flagged by their school as having special educational needs. These data were considered missing not at random, with results deterministically imputed as “vulnerable” across all developmental domains in AEDC, in keeping with similar previous research (21). A small number (1.8%) of children were exempt from sitting for NAPLAN because of underlying disability, and these outcome data were also considered missing not at random. These results were deterministically imputed to represent the lowest possible NAPLAN scores (overall and individual domainzscores of −4).

IQR, interquartile range; TAFE, technical and further education.1Hadlock centiles.

*Exact number has been rounded to the nearest five to maintain anonymity for individuals with missing data.

There were 0.6% of children with missing AEDC outcome data in one or more domains because of incomplete teacher assessments, and there were 2.4% of children with missing NAPLAN scores who were not exempt, for example, because of being absent on the day of testing. These missing outcome data were imputed alongside missing covariate data, in keeping with similar research (21). A sensitivity analysis was performed excluding children with incomplete outcome data, and those with special needs (AEDC) or with an exemption from testing (NAPLAN).

Across the AEDC and NAPLAN analyses, multiple imputation was combined with bootstrapping, with the number of bootstrapped samples set at 1,000, imputing two data sets for each bootstrapped sample (25). Distribution of imputed data was compared with that of nonimputed data across all variables to assess the adequacy of imputation (seeSupplementary Fig. 1for distribution of imputed NAPAN outcome data). The same proportion of children were identified as developmentally vulnerable across each of the five assessed domains pre- and postimputation in the AEDC cohort.

Following imputation and bootstrapping, the associations between maternal diabetes in pregnancy and childhood developmental vulnerability (AEDC) and educational outcomes (NAPLAN) were assessed systematically using inverse probability weighted regression adjustment (IPWRA).

IPWRA involves creation of a propensity score that includes covariates that predict the exposure, and an adjusted regression of the outcome. Relevant covariates were identified through prespecified directed acyclic graphs agreed upon a priori by our experienced multidisciplinary authorship team (Supplementary File 1). The propensity score model for both AEDC and NAPLAN analyses included maternal age at the time of pregnancy, maternal BMI, highest level of obtained maternal education, socioeconomic indexes for areas (SEIFA), and conception via artificial reproductive technology. To account for clustering of multiple births per woman, standard errors were adjusted using a unique maternal identifier. Covariates in the propensity score model were assessed for balance between exposure groups (Supplementary Table 1).

The outcome model included gestational age at birth (weeks and days), neonatal sex at birth, language background other than English, highest level of maternal education, SEIFA, child age at time of testing (AEDC) or child age on 1 January of test year (NAPLAN), and year of test. Year of test was included as a covariate because the distribution of vulnerability changes marginally across each AEDC assessment, and the NAPLAN test paper is different each year.

Population effect estimates were calculated using the BootImpute von Hippel method, described in further detail in the statistical analysis plan (Supplementary Material) (25).

In our primary analysis, we sought to determine whether diabetes in pregnancy was associated with an altered relative risk (of AEDC-defined developmental vulnerability, defined as children with scores below the tenth centile across two or more domains. Percentage risk differences were also presented. We then determined whether diabetes in pregnancy was associated with an altered relative risk of having an AEDC score below the tenth centile across each of the five individual developmental domains.

We evaluated whether diabetes in pregnancy was associated with a mean difference in overallzscore on grade 3 NAPLAN among diabetes-exposed children compared with diabetes-unexposed offspring. A threshold exceeding ±0.2 SD was predetermined as clinically significant, consistent with previously published definitions (21). The mean differences between thezscores of diabetes-exposed and -unexposed cohorts across each NAPLAN domain were also compared. Considering binary assessments of educational vulnerability, we finally calculated whether diabetes in pregnancy was associated with an altered relative risk and risk difference of scoring below the national minimum standard across each of the five examined domains.

Subgroup analyses were then performed to examine the impact of1) maternal gestational diabetes mellitus,2) preexisting (type 1 or 2) maternal diabetes, and3) any diabetes, excluding children with missing or incomplete outcome data.

Ethical approval was granted through the Mercy Health Ethics Committee (HREC 2020-048; Melbourne, Australia) and the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (2021/1/1175; Canberra, Australia). This research adheres to the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology guidelines (Supplementary Table 2).

There were 870,082 children born in Victoria, Australia, between 2009 and 2020 who were eligible for inclusion. Of these, 177,898 had birth data linked with AEDC data at school entry, and 115,231 had birth data linked with NAPLAN scores at grade 3 (Supplementary Fig. 2).

Among children with linked pregnancy and AEDC data, there were 16,363 children (9.2%) whose mothers had diabetes in pregnancy, including 15,100 (8.5%) with gestational diabetes mellitus, and 1,263 (0.7%) with preexisting type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Compared with no diabetes, a greater proportion of children exposed to maternal diabetes in pregnancy were born preterm (<37 weeks’ gestation) and had a language background other than English (Table 1). A greater proportion of women with diabetes in pregnancy were born outside of Australia, were diagnosed prepregnancy with polycystic ovary syndrome, and required assisted reproductive technology for conception, compared with the cohort with no diabetes. Women with diabetes in pregnancy less commonly smoked than those without diabetes. Demographic characteristics for children and women were otherwise similar between diabetes exposed and unexposed (Table 1). Clinical and demographic characteristics by diabetes status are described inSupplementary Table 3.

Developmental vulnerability on the AEDC was identified in 2,633 (16.1%) children exposed to maternal diabetes in pregnancy, compared with 22,030 (13.7%) unexposed. Diabetes in pregnancy was associated with an unadjusted increased risk of developmental vulnerability (relative risk [RR] 1.18 [95% CI 1.14, 1.22]); however this risk attenuated in the adjusted model (aRR 1.02 [95% CI 0.98, 1.07]) (Table 2). Diabetes in pregnancy was associated with a 9% increased adjusted risk of developmental vulnerability in the communication skills and general knowledge domain (aRR 1.09 [95% CI 1.03, 1.16]) but not across any of the other four assessed domains (Table 2).

*Adjusted outcomes used IPWRA, with a propensity score model, including maternal age at the time of pregnancy, maternal BMI, highest level of obtained maternal education, socioeconomic indexes for areas, and conception via artificial reproductive technology, and a regression model adjusting for gestational age at birth (weeks and days), neonatal sex at birth, language background other than English, highest level of maternal education, socioeconomic indexes for areas, child age at time of testing, and year of test.

In prespecified sensitivity analyses, neither gestational nor preexisting diabetes were independently associated with an altered risk of overall developmental vulnerability (gestational diabetes mellitus: aRR 1.02 [95% CI 0.98, 1.07]; preeexisting diabetes: aRR 0.99 [95% CI 0.76, 1.28]) (Supplementary Table 4). Excluding children flagged as special needs and those with incomplete AEDC results, there was no association between developmental vulnerability and in utero diabetes exposure (aRR 1.02 [95% CI 0.96, 1.08]).

Among the birth cohort with linked NAPLAN data, there were 7,532 (6.5%) women with diabetes in pregnancy, including 6,693 (5.8%) with gestational diabetes mellitus, and 839 (0.7%) with preexisting diabetes (Table 3). Similar differences in demographic and clinical characteristics between diabetes-exposed and -unexposed women and children were observed as for the AEDC cohort. Namely, a smaller proportion of women with diabetes smoked, but a greater proportion were born outside Australia, were diagnosed with polycystic ovary syndrome, and required assisted reproductive technology for conception. Similarly, a greater proportion of children born to mothers with diabetes were born preterm and spoke a language other than English at home, compared with no diabetes.

IQR, interquartile range; TAFE, technical and further education.1Hadlock centiles.

Children exposed to diabetes in pregnancy had slightly higher meanzscores than diabetes-unexposed infants (adjusted mean difference 0.04 [95% CI 0.01, 0.07]) (Table 4), although this difference is unlikely to be clinically meaningful and was below our prespecified level of clinical significance. Across individual domain outcomes, children exposed to diabetes in pregnancy had marginally higher meanzscores in the numeracy domain (adjusted mean difference 0.05 [95% CI 0.01, 0.08]) and writing domain (adjusted mean difference 0.05 [95% CI 0.01, 0.08]). Again, these differences are unlikely to be clinically meaningful.

*Adjusted outcomes used IPWRA with a propensity score model, including maternal age at the time of pregnancy, maternal BMI, highest level of obtained maternal education, socioeconomic indexes for areas, and conception via artificial reproductive technology, and a regression model adjusting for gestational age at birth (weeks and days), neonatal sex at birth, language background other than English, highest level of maternal education, socioeconomic indexes for areas, child age on 1 January of test year, and year of test.

Excluding children exempt from NAPLAN and those with incomplete NAPLAN results, the results were similar to the overall analysis (adjusted mean difference 0.04 [95% CI 0.02, 0.06]) (Supplementary Table 5).

Considering diabetes subtypes, gestational diabetes mellitus (n= 6,693) was associated with a higher overallzscore (adjusted mean difference 0.04 [95% CI 0.01, 0.07]) compared with no diabetes. Preexisting diabetes (n= 839) was not associated with a difference in overallzscores (adjusted mean difference 0.06 [95% CI −0.06, 0.18]) compared with no diabetes, although numbers were small.

Using statewide linked Victorian data, we found that diabetes in pregnancy was not associated with an altered risk of overall developmental vulnerability in the first year of full-time school, or with any clinically meaningful differences in educational outcomes across all literacy and numeracy domains by mid–primary school. These findings were not changed when considering gestational diabetes mellitus and preexisting (type 1 or 2) diabetes as independent exposures.

Prior research in this area is conflicting. A 2015 systematic review of small studies found that diabetes in pregnancy was associated with lower IQ scores in childhood (standard mean difference −0.78 [95% CI −1.42, −0.13]); seven studies; 5,755 offspring) (9). There was moderate heterogeneity between the seven included studies, however, with offspring outcomes reported for children between 1 and 12 years of age, and significant variation in the covariates used in adjustment models (9). Timing of assessment of childhood outcomes is critical, and the variability in the metric used and age at testing between studies can have a substantial impact on the findings and their interpretation.

Comparatively, population-level data from Denmark (n= 505,331) found that gestational diabetes mellitus was associated with a marginally lower grade point average score during school (adjusted mean difference −0.36 [95% CI −0.44, −0.29]), but the authors considered this finding not to be clinically significant (26). In a Swedish cohort study (n= 723,775), diabetes in pregnancy was associated with lower IQ scores in adolescence, but this was no longer observed following adjustment for within-family characteristics (27). These studies predominantly use birth data from pre-2000, with fewer than 1% of offspring exposed to diabetes in pregnancy in both cohorts. Our study similarly finds no relationship between diabetes in pregnancy and childhood development, but using a contemporary cohort, accounting for the almost 30-fold rise in the prevalence of gestational diabetes mellitus since this time (1).

In a 2025 systematic review and meta-analysis, Ye et al. (6) found that diabetes in pregnancy was associated with an increased risk of neuropsychiatric diagnoses, including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (aRR 1.30 [95% CI 1.24, 1.37]) and autism spectrum disorder (aRR 1.25 [95% CI 1.20, 1.31]). When restricting their analyses to include only studies with sibling-matched data, however, the relationship between diabetes and neuropsychiatric diagnoses was no longer observed. Comparatively, our analysis examined school-assessed developmental vulnerability and educational achievement as outcomes, with these assessments providing a holistic overview of childhood development rather than disability.

Our study uses over a decade of population-level data from Victoria, linking high-quality, regularly audited state and national databases (15,17,23). This is one of the largest studies in the area, providing the power needed to examine the impact of diabetes in pregnancy on childhood neurodevelopment. Unlike previous research, we were able to obtain longitudinal insights into the potential implications of this condition by examining outcomes for children at both school entry and mid–primary school.

Our study was limited by the lack of available data on glycemic control in pregnancy. Extant research demonstrates a continuous relationship between increasing hyperglycemia in pregnancy and childhood adiposity (28), and it is possible that childhood developmental outcomes are influenced by degree of glycemic control. The perinatal sequelae of diabetes in pregnancy are typically more severe among women with types 1 and 2 diabetes than those with gestational diabetes mellitus (29), perhaps as a consequence of differences in underlying glycemic control. However, in our cohort, we found that neither preexisting diabetes nor gestational diabetes mellitus were associated with differences in overall developmental vulnerability or educational outcomes compared with no diabetes. Of note, while the underlying pathophysiologies of type 1 and type 2 diabetes are distinctly different (30), we combined these groups because of small numbers. Future research could consider assessing developmental outcomes for children exposed to in utero type 1 diabetes compared with type 2, acknowledging the difficulty in recruiting the numbers needed to sufficiently power outcomes, even using population-level data.

In line with the International Association of the Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups (31), the diagnostic criteria for gestational diabetes mellitus were changed in Australia in 2014 to include women with lower plasma glucose levels on the glucose tolerance test (32). With NAPLAN data available until 2019, all children included in this linked cohort were born during or prior to 2014, when diagnostic criteria were more stringent. Comparatively, our AEDC cohort includes children born before and after the change in diagnostic criteria. This is why a smaller proportion of children with NAPLAN data were exposed to gestational diabetes mellitus compared with those with AEDC data (5.8% vs. 8.4%). It is reassuring that we found no association between diabetes and childhood development in either cohort. Subsequent research should determine whether the degree of glycemic control impacts offspring neurodevelopmental outcomes.

There are inherent limitations involved with using population-level data sets, including errors associated with data entry, and missing data. To address these, we optimized diagnostic accuracy by cross-checking diabetes diagnoses across two databases (NDSS and VPDC) and correlated these with insulin prescribing data from the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. Next, to address the small amount of missing data, we used multiple imputation for covariate data missing at random or missing completely at random, and deterministic imputation of outcome data was used when children were reported as having special educational needs. We performed sensitivity analyses excluding children with imputed outcome data, with no difference in observed outcomes. However, we were unable to account for children where birth and developmental outcomes were not able to be linked. These occurrences are due to families moving interstate or overseas prior to assessment, children in the initial cohort not yet reaching an age where they are eligible for assessment, or children being missed in the AEDC capture, with this assessment only performed once every 3 years. The population-level distribution of AEDC scores does not change significantly across assessments (16), so it is not expected that children starting school during a non-AEDC year will demonstrate differences in patterns of vulnerability compared with those starting full-time school in years where AEDC is performed.

To conclude, in this population-level study, diabetes in pregnancy was not associated with overall developmental vulnerability or a clinically meaningful difference in educational outcomes by mid–primary school. While these findings may provide reassurance for women with diabetes in pregnancy and their treating clinicians, it should be borne in mind that research in this area remains inconsistent, and that diabetes in pregnancy is associated with other long-term outcomes for the offspring that must also be taken into consideration.

This article contains supplementary material online athttps://doi.org/10.2337/figshare.29437616.

Acknowledgments.The authors are grateful to the Consultative Council on Obstetric and Paediatric Mortality and Morbidity (CCOPMM) for providing access to the data used for this project and for the assistance of the staff at Safer Care Victoria. The conclusions, findings, opinions and views or recommendations expressed in this paper are strictly those of the authors. They do not necessarily reflect those of CCOPMM.

This article uses data from the Australian Early Development Census (AEDC). The AEDC is funded by the Australian Government Department of Education, Skills and Employment. The findings and views reported are those of the author and should not be attributed to the Department or the Australian Government. The authors are grateful for the provision of data by the AEDC.

These data were additionally sourced from the National Diabetes Services Scheme (NDSS). The NDSS is an initiative of the Australian Government administered by Diabetes Australia.

The funders had no role in the design and conduct of the study; collection, management, analysis, or interpretation of the data; preparation, review, or approval of the manuscript; or decision to submit the manuscript for publication.

Prior Presentation.Results of this project were presented at the Australian Perinatal Epidemiology Update, Melbourne, Australia, 18 November 2024, and at the Perinatal Society of Australia and New Zealand Annual Scientific Meeting, Brisbane, Australia, 18 March 2025.

Handling Editors.The journal editors responsible for overseeing the review of the manuscript were Cheryl A.M. Anderson and Camille Elise Powe.

This research was funded by a Norman Beischer Medical Research Foundation Innovation Grant and a grant from the Australasian Diabetes in Pregnancy Society. H.G.G. was additionally supported by a National Health and Medical Research Council Postgraduate Research Scholarship and an Australian Government Research Training Program Scholarship. R.J.H., S.T., and A.C.L. are supported by National Health and Medical Research Council fellowship funding.