As one distinct origin of hematological malignancies, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) has caused a major public health problem. However, the molecular mechanisms that underlie this association have not been clearly elucidated. To improve this situation, it is urgent to explore disease-specific diagnostic biomarkers and mechanisms.

Three microarray datasets (GSE25638,GSE12195andGSE12453) were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database. The key genes in DLBCL patients were screened by differentially expression gene (DEG) and weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA). Functional enrichment analysis and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network construction were employed to reveal DLBCL-related pathogenic molecules and underlying mechanisms. Candidate biomarkers were screened using random forest (RF) analysis. A diagnostic nomogram and Kaplan-Meier (KM) survival analysis were constructed to predict the risk of patients. Single-sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA) was used for exploring immune cell infiltration in lymphoma. The validation of the hub genes expressions was confirmed by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) tests.

A total of 95 key genes were acquired from three datasets of DLBCL patients by DEG analysis and WGCNA. DEGs were significantly enriched in pathways associated with inflammatory response, biological process involved in interspecies interaction between organisms, C-X-C chemokine receptor binding as well as chemokine activity. This was determined by Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Gene Ontology (GO) analyses. Moreover, four hub genes (CXCL9, CCL18, C1QA and CTSC) were significantly screened from the three datasets using RF algorithms. They were closely correlated with the overall survival of DLBCL patients. The dysregulated infiltration of immune cells, including natural killer (NK) cells and T cells, were positively linked to the expression levels of the four hub genes. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) results were promising via the construction of a nomogram model. Additionally, the increased expression of the four key genes was further verified in DLBCL patients.

Four crucial hub genes (CXCL9, CCL18, C1QA and CTSC) that could predict the risk of DLBCL were systematically identified. In particular, CXCL9 may be the most important potential biomarker for the progression of DLBCL patients.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12865-025-00738-z.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is the most common subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL). It is an aggressive cancer accounting for 30-40% of NHL [1,2]. Gene expression profiling (GEP) analysis by microarray analysis revealed three molecular subtypes, namely germinal center B-cell (GCB)-like DLBCL, activated B-cell (ABC)-like DLBCL, and unclassified DLBCL [3,4]. These three DLBCL subtypes have different clinical and biological heterogeneities with varying responses to treatment and prognosis [5]. Nevertheless, it is impractical to generalize to clinical DLBCL patients due to the limited funding and availability of GEP technology. The Hans algorithm separates DLBCL into two subtypes: GCB-like DLBCL and non-GCB-like DLBCL [6], just as with the GEP classification. It has been shown that rituximab with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP) has a poor prognosis for non-GCB patients [7,8]. Genetic and functional genomic studies have revealed oncogenic driver pathways in DLBCL [9,10], which leads to the exploration of potential targets for the DLBCL treatment [11]. Understanding the immunological components of DLBCL has grown more crucial owing to the creation of immune-targeting treatments. The pathogenesis of DLBCL involves a complex interaction between tumor cells and the tumor microenvironment (TME). The TME of DLBCL is shaped by immune cells [12]. Many questions regarding the immunology of DLBCL, like the immune system and the underlying mechanisms of DLBCL development, remain unanswered.

This study was aimed at analyzing the prognostic role and immune infiltration of potential markers of DLBCL in DLBCL by bioinformatics analysis and elucidating possible mechanisms. The findings suggest that C-X-C motif chemokine 9 (CXCL9), chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 18 (CCL18), complement C1q subcomponent subunit A (C1QA) and cathepsin C (CTSC) are prognostic biomarkers and poor prognostic indicators in DLBCL patients. In summary, the present study provides evidence of the importance of four key genes (CXCL9, CCL18, C1QA and CTSC) in DLBCL development and progression and suggests that these genes may be novel biomarkers and new therapeutic targets for DLBCL.

The potential prognostic biomarkers of DLBCL were screened by bioinformatics analysis. The value of four key genes in DLBCL and their molecular mechanisms were examined, which provided a basis for future immunotherapy and precision medicine. Predictive performance was assessed by use of survival analysis and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analyses. To further understand the role of the TME in the pathogenesis of DLBCL patients, the relationship between immune cell subtypes and clinical prognosis in the DLBCL cohort was analyzed. In addition, the correlation between four key genes and the immune process in DLBCL were examined.

The study flowchart is shown in Fig.1. Three microarray datasets (GSE25638,GSE12195andGSE12453) were retrieved from the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO;https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) database. DatasetsGSE25638,GSE12195andGSE12453included data on 26 DLBCL patients and 13 controls, 73 DLBCL patients and 10 controls, and 11 DLBCL patients and 25 controls, respectively.

Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were calculated between disease and control groups via the “Limma” package in R software. For DLBCL, DEGs were identified using adjustedPvalue < 0.05 and |log2 FC|>1. Next, the DEG results for each group were presented using differential gene clustering with heatmaps and volcano maps. In the three plots, blue indicated low expression, and yellow indicated high expression.

The R package (R4.3.1) “clusterProfiler” performed an enrichment analysis of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) and Gene Ontology (GO) pathways for identifying the biological functions and signaling pathways of the shared genes. The shared genes were entered into the website (https://cn.string-db.org/) to create the data on protein interaction relationships. Then, the data were imported into the Cytoscape software for computation, prediction and visualization.

As one of the most popular algorithms for computing large volumes of data, WGCNA evaluates gene expression correlations and visualizes co-expression networks through clustering and modularization. The “WGCNA” package of the R language was used to create a co-expression network of the top 5,000 most variant genes. The results were determined using a trusted method known as median absolute deviation (MAD) [13]. Data were checked for the identification of outliers in samples by hierarchical clustering. No offending samples were observed in the DLBCL dataset (GSE25638) and no samples were removed. The “pickSoftThreshold” package function was utilized for screening out the optimal soft threshold. Through a topological overlap matrix (TOM) analysis, the adjacency matrix was clustered, and genes with similar expression patterns were classified into gene modules, namely module eigengenes (MEs). Moreover, the correlations between MEs and clinical traits were calculated via Pearson’s correlation test, and the strongest positive correlation was selected for further analysis.

Previous reviews reported that the prediction model of random forest (RF) prediction model showed better diagnostic efficiency than other models [14,15]. Therefore, the RF algorithm was chosen for the screening of variables in this study. These three DLBCL datasets were subjected to the RF machine learning algorithm, to further uncover potential biomarkers. A decision tree method was employed to determine the most important factors via RF analysis [16]. The RF model was developed from decision trees. RF can generate hundreds or even thousands of trees. The samples of each tree were extracted from the bags in a defined set by the Bootstrap method as training samples. The remaining data called out-of-bag data (OOB) were used as test samples. The principle of screening variables mainly involved ranking the importance of features according to the errors generated before and after the rearrangement of features. Based on the OOB test set, the prediction accuracy of original and randomly arranged features after permutation was compared to measure the importance of features. The characteristic genes of DLBCL could be identified by filtering the shared genes using this approach. To determine the optimal number of trees, an RF model with 500 trees on the discovery queue was established, and cross-validation errors were used. Next, the top 10 genes were sequenced in accordance with their significance, and their distributions were plotted. The outcome of each DLBCL dataset was determined by setting the significance threshold at 0.5 by using this algorithm. Key genes were selected from three DLBCL datasets. The intersection of the algorithm results from each dataset was taken.

The “rms” package was leveraged to construct the nomogram based on the four hub genes. The relative expression level of each gene corresponded to a score on the basis of the nomogram. ROC curves were generated and the area under the ROC curve (AUC) and 95% confidence interval (CI) were calculated, to evaluate the predictive value of four candidate biomarkers. ROC curve analysis was performed to determine whether the nomogram-based decision was conducive to the diagnosis of DLBCL. The bootstrap algorithm was used for validating the results on the external datasetGSE83632. The optimal AUC for predicting the risk of DLBCL was > 0.7.

Log-rank tests and Kaplan-Meier (KM) graphs were adopted to assess how the overall survival of groups differed from one another. These were plotted and analyzed in survminer and survival packages in R. The cutoffs of each survival curve for patient classification were given in figure legends. The survival package in R was used to carry out multivariate Cox regression, and the sex, tumor stage and grade of patients were taken into consideration.

For RNA samples from different tissue types, the infiltration scores of immune cell subpopulations in the TME were accessed using the single-sample gene set enrichment analysis (ssGSEA) algorithm [17]. The algorithm “ssGSEA” can convert the normalized gene expression matrix into the gene enrichment score matrix. The specific gene maps of human 28 immune cells came from a recent publication (Supplementary Table 2) [18]. The proportion of each immune cell in each sample was visualized from the barplot. A boxplot was used to compare the expression of differences for each immune cell between the two groups. The R package “corrplot” was utilized to construct a heatmap displaying the correlation of different immune cells in the pathogenesis of DLBCL. The correlations between characteristic genes and immune cell infiltration were also examined using the ssGSEA algorithm and constructed using the R package “ggcorrplot”.

In total, 13 samples were gathered from the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, including 13 DLBCL samples and five healthy controls. Ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) anticoagulant blood and FicollPaque density gradient centrifugation were employed to separate human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). TRIzol reagent was applied to extract total RNA from the PBMCs of DLBCL patients and healthy controls. The Prime ScriptTM RT Reagent Kit (TaKaRa, China) was used to create complementary deoxyribonucleic acid (cDNA) through reverse transcription. The internal reference was β-Actin. The SYBR Green PCR Kit (TaKaRa, China) was used for quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) as per the instructions of the manufacturer. Furthermore, the 2−△△CT method was employed to calculate relative expression. All reactions were repeated in triplicate. The primer sequences of target genes that are from the public website (https://www.origene.com/) are displayed in Supplementary Table 1.

The lymph node tissues of both DLBCL patients and healthy controls were gleaned from the Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine. A 3-mm-diameter core of the cancer tissue area was generated for constructing the tissue microarray (TMA). The brief steps for immunohistochemistry (IHC) were as follows: First, the slides made from the TMA were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated in ethanol, followed by the extraction of antigens for IHC tests with specific antibodies. Second, the slides were blocked with goat serum for 1 h and further stained with a diluted anti-human CXCL9 antibody (Abcam, ab290643) after washing. Then, 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) was used for staining tissues 24 h later. The IHC results of CXCL9 staining scores were semiquantified by a previously described immunoreactive scoring (IRS) system [19].

R software version 3.4.1 and the corresponding software packages were utilized for calculations and analyses. KM survival analysis and the log-rank test were conducted using the R language packages (survival, survminer, and ggplot2), to assess statistical significance across groups. ROC curve analysis was employed for evaluating the diagnostic value of predictive biomarkers through the “pROC” package in R. The Wilcoxon rank-sum test was applied to determine differences in gene expression levels or immune cell abundance between both groups.P< 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Allp-values were two-sided.

Data from the open NCBI GEO database were used to obtain the data file of the Series Matrix File forGSE25638,GSE12195andGSE12453for DLBCL, respectively (Table1). All data sets adopted the following criterion: adjustedPvalue < 0.05 and |log2 FC|>1. A total of 39 sets of transcriptome data encompassed 13 from normal samples and 26 from DLBCL samples inGSE25638. The DEGs between both groups of samples were identified using the Limma package. In total, 2,003 DEGs (including 1,642 up-regulated and 361 down-regulated genes) were identified in DLBCL (Fig.2A). In this cohort, DLBCL samples were observed to have more up-regulated genes and fewer down-regulated genes than normal ones. A total of 36 sets of transcriptome data included 25 from normal samples and 11 from DLBCL samples inGSE12453. In total, 411 DEGs (including 333 up-regulated and 78 down-regulated genes) were identified in DLBCL (Fig.2B). In this cohort, DLBCL samples were also found to have more up-regulated genes and fewer down-regulated genes than normal ones. However, 83 sets of transcriptome data included 10 from normal samples and 73 from DLBCL samples inGSE12195. In this cohort, little difference was noted between up-regulated (4,271 up-regulated genes) and down-regulated (4,672 down-regulated genes) genes in DLBCL samples compared with normal samples (Fig.2C). This may be related to the key factors of immune microenvironment status. Heatmap analysis showed that more DEGs were up-regulated in DLBCL (Fig.2D), which was consistent with the results in Fig.1A and B.

To further explore the key gene associations of DLBCL, WGCNA was performed to identify the most relevant gene modules and DEGs were analyzed. The principal component analysis (PCA) score plot showed significant differences between the disease and control groups in DLBCL (Fig.3A), which could be used for subsequent analysis. A suitable soft threshold β value meeting scale-free conditions was selected first (Figs.3B-C). The threshold β was set to 20 for the dataset (GSE25638) and the TOM matrix was used for identifying gene modules (Fig.3C). Then, the TOM matrix was converted from the adjacent matrix and turned into the dissimilarity topological overlap matrix (dissTOM, dissTOM = 1-TOM) for hierarchical clustering. Dynamic tree shearing clustered similarity genes in light of the topological overlap and divided them into a variety of modules (Fig.3D). Five gene modules were found, among which grey and turquoise modules had the strongest positive relationship with DLBCL (1,034 genes,R= 0.95/0.9,p= 3e-20/4e-15) (Fig.2D). On this basis, genes within the two sets of modules were compared with the upregulated intersection DEGs of the above-identifiedGSE12195andGSE12453. A total of 95 intersection genes were obtained (Fig.3E). These 95 genes were considered for our subsequent studies.

To reveal the potential pathogenic genes and underlying mechanisms in DLBCL, pathway analysis was conducted on the 95 shared genes from these three datasets. The findings revealed that genes related to DLBCL were primarily enriched in pathways such as inflammatory response, secretory granule and collagen binding (Fig.4A). These genes of DLBCL were mainly enriched in mineral absorption and pertussis (Fig.4B). GO analysis showed that biological process (BP) terms were significantly enriched in “inflammatory response”, “BP involved in interspecies interaction between organisms” and “defense response”. Moreover, “secretory granule”, “extracellular region” and “extracellular space” were enriched for cellular component (CC). The molecular function (MF) of DEGs was highly associated with “collagen binding”, “CXCR3 chemokine receptor binding” and “peptidase regulator binding” (Fig.4A). The KEGG analysis results demonstrated that the DLBCL shared genes were predominantly enriched in CXCR chemokine receptor binding and chemokine activity (Fig.4C). The top five pathways identified by GSEA were “circadian rhythm”, “phenylalanine metabolism”, “drug metabolism-cytochrome P450”, “taurine and hypotaurine metabolism” and “tyrosine metabolism” (Fig.4C). The tail five pathways were “biosynthesis of amino acids”, “cell cycle”, “DNA replication”, “primary immunodeficiency” and “proteasome” (Fig.4D). Meanwhile, GSEA also showed the main enrichment of these genes in CXCR chemokine receptor binding and chemokine activity (Fig.4E).

Then, the protein-protein interaction (PPI) showed the shared genes in the DLBCL dataset (Fig.4F). A PPI network was preliminarily constructed based on the 95 shared genes to select hub genes for DLBCL. After the elimination of DEGs with poor interaction, 68 genes were retained (Fig.4F).

Machine learning algorithms were used to further explore the diagnostic value of DEGs in DLBCL. Based on the above-mentioned 95 shared genes, learning approaches were employed for the three lymphoma datasets to confirm variables significantly associated with DLBCL. Gene importance was calculated by RF for DEGs. The 10 most important genes from the RF results for the three lymphoma datasets are presented in Figs.5A-C. Then, a subset of four overlapping hub genes (CXCL9, CCL18, C1QA and CTSC) were selected from RF machine learning algorithms for the three lymphoma datasets (Fig.5D).

Compared with the control, the predictive nomogram was constructed, whereby the relative expression of each gene corresponded to a score, and the total score was obtained by summing up the score of each gene (Supplementary Fig. 1A). ROC curve analysis showed the good predictive performance of each gene as follows (Supplementary Fig. 1B): CXCL9 (AUC: 1.000); CCL18 (AUC: 1.000); C1QA (AUC: 1.000) and CTSC (AUC: 1.000). The ROC analysis of the nomogram yielded an AUC of 1.000, which demonstrated a high predictive value for DLBCL. The same results are repeated in Supplementary Figure (Supplementary Fig. 2). To determine the performance of the screened markers, 1,000 bootstrap validations were performed on the external datasetGSE83632, and the average AUC was 0.839 (95%CI: 0.774–0.904) (Supplementary Fig. 3). This further proved the predictive efficacy of these four candidate genes. The nomogram established based on the overfitting model was verified by external validation (Area Under Curve: 0.839), showing decent prediction of discrimination, calibration and generalization. Furthermore, the prognostic predictive value of four hub genes in the two subgroups of DLBCL was analyzed. KM curves showed that the high-expression groups of CXCL9, CCL18, C1QA and CTSC had greatly shorter overall survival than their low-expression groups. A statistical difference was noticed (Fig.6A). The KM survival analysis of the two subtypes of DLBCL indicated that the GCB subgroup exhibited a prominent advantage of median survival time, whereas the non-GCB one presented a worse prognosis (Fig.6B).

DLBCL is characterized by a complex immune response. The abundance of immune cells in different groups was analyzed with ssGSEA in this study. In general, the barplot (Fig.7A) explicitly illustrated that the proportion of activated cluster of differentiation 8 (CD8) T cells, myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), central memory CD4 T cells and effector memory CD8 T cells were higher in DLBCL. Activated B cells, eosinophils, immature B cells and neutrophils were increased in DLBCL samples compared with control samples (Fig.7B). In contrast, B cells were correlated negatively with granulocytes. Moreover, an investigation was conducted on the relationship between biomarkers and immune cell contents. In DLBCL samples, natural killer (NK) and T cells were significantly positively correlated with four hub genes (Fig.8C). CXCL9 showed a significantly positive correlation with CD56brightNK cells and activated CD4 T cells and a significantly negative correlation with macrophages, immature B cells, neutrophils and eosinophils (Fig.8C). More than that, T cell subsets are also involved in the immune regulation of four key genes, such as regulatory T cells, T follicular helper cells and T helper 2 (Th2) cells. Immune function appears crucial for the development of DLBCL (Fig.7C).

The relative expression of four key genes was verified with qRT-PCR in DLBCL patients and healthy controls. The expression of CXCL9, CCL18, CTSC and C1QA (Figs.8A-D, respectively) exhibited a significant up-regulation in DLBCL patients compared with the control group (allP< 0.05), which was consistent with the bioinformatic analysis results. CXCL9 was the most significantly DEG among the four genes (P< 0.01) (Fig.8A). IHC analysis revealed that CXCL9 protein was highly expressed in DLBCL tissues, compared with that in the lymph node tissues of the healthy group (Fig.8E).

The Limma R package provides a comprehensive solution for the analysis of gene expression data [20]. In the current study, 222 DEGs were identified between DLBCL and control groups. WGCNA is a systematic biological technique for analyzing gene association patterns among samples. The most relevant correlation between phenotypes and gene modules can be calculated via the construction of a gene co-expression network and the determination of related gene clusters. Herein, 1,034 significant module genes of DLBCL were found. Limma analysis and WGCNA were applied to screen the gene clusters of shared and correlating genes in DLBCL. The intersection of DEGs regarding DLBCL (n= 222) and module genes regarding DLBCL (n= 1,034) yielded 95 common DLBCL-associated risk genes.

To illuminate the roles of these 95 DEGs in DLBCL, KEGG pathway and GO analysis were predominantly enriched in KEGG pathways including “mineral absorption”, “pertussis”, “lysosome”, “complement and coagulation cascades” and “fluid shear stress and atherosclerosis”, which suggested a correlation with immunoinflammatory responses. Confirmed as one of the most significantly enriched pathways in the proteome and phosphoproteome, mineral absorption is involved in the process of mammalian immunosuppression [21]. Pertussis and lysosome have also been associated with the dysfunction of immune response [22,23]. A previous study has confirmed that complement and coagulation cascades are one of the pathophysiological pathways in the pathogenesis of NHL related to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome [24]. Recent studies have further shown that the complement and coagulation cascade pathways play a key role in the anti-tumor effects of 10-hydroxy-2-decenoic acid (10-HAD), which indicates a potential therapeutic strategy for the treatment of lymphoma [25]. Significantly enriched GO terms associated with BP included “inflammatory response”, “immune response”, “defense response”, “immune system process”, which are well-established integral components of DLBCL pathogenesis [26,27]. Beyond that, the CC and MF analyses of DEGs were closely related to inflammatory, innate and adaptive immune responses. GSEA analysis signified that these shared DEGs were primarily enriched in CXCR chemokine receptor binding and chemokine activity. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that the correlation between these 95 DEGs and DLBCL pathogenesis.

The 95 DEGs in DLBCL were mapped to the PPI network for further exploration of their potential interplay, among which 68 DEGs were identified. The machine learning method (RF) was employed to identify four hub DEGs (CXCL9, CCL18, C1QA and CTSC). A nomogram was constructed and its predictive value for DLBCL in DLBCL patients was evaluated. First, four key immune-associated genes (CXCL9, CCL18, C1QA and CTSC) were identified for constructing the nomogram. Next, validation showing that the four hub genes had a good predictive value for DLBCL patients was conducted, which indicated their potential roles during the progression of DLBCL. The expression levels of four hub genes were significantly associated with the prognosis of DLBCL. The roles of four hub genes in the survival of patients with DLBCL were further investigated. KM survival curve showed that the increased messenger RNA (mRHA) levels of four hub genes were significantly associated with the poor prognosis of DLBCL patients (P< 0.05). Apart from that, a correlation was discovered between the genesis of DLBCL and the levels of the four hub genes. Linked to the prognosis of patients, a major factor in the categorization of DLBCL is not only a hot issue in the pathological mechanism of DLBCL, but also in the cell of origin. GCB-DLBCL originates from the germinal center (GC) stage, while nonGCB-DLBCL stems from the ABC/post-GC stage and has the worse prognosis. The potential of gene levels as a prognostic marker for subtype categorization is demonstrated by the discovery that the expression levels of four hub genes may further separate GCB-DLBCL/nonGCB-DLBCL into low-expression subgroups with favorable prognosis and high-expression ones with bad prognosis.

Current evidence suggests that CXCL9 is produced by lymphoma cells and can elicit cytotoxic responses via CXCR3, which promotes tissue necrosis and vascular damage by recruiting cytotoxic lymphocytes [28]. The findings align with earlier research indicating that CXCL9 is significantly expressed in DLBCL tissues and cell lines, and is strongly associated with patient survival and clinical progression [29]. Notably, Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-negative DLBCL does not secrete chemokines like CXCL9, which is in contrast to EBV-positive DLBCL patients [28]. It is speculated that CXCL9 promotes the progression of DLBCL and may get involved in the immune-modulatory mechanisms of DLBCL, which is in line with the results of our KM curve analysis. Another study reported that the pathological mechanism of combination therapy involving interleukin 15 (IL15) receptor agonists and chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell therapy (CART) in relapsed/refractory B malignancies triggers an increase in chemokines including CXCL9, which facilitates the trafficking of lymphocytes to tissues. This phenomenon is associated with a high durable response rate [30]. However, little is known about the actions and underlying mechanisms of CXCL9 in DLBCL. There is ongoing controversy regarding the association between CCL18 and the occurrence and severity of DLBCL [31,32]. It is widely accepted that the biological functions of CCL18 and its co-expressed genes play a significant role in cell migration, proliferation, and apoptosis [33]. Tumor-associated macrophages secrete some chemokines into the TME, particularly a substantial amount of CCL18. CCL18 is a key mechanism that underlies the immunosuppressive characteristics of the TME and cancer immune evasion [34]. It is essential to investigate the precise regulatory mechanisms of CCL18 in DLBCL, as chemokines can exert both anti- and pro-cancer effects within the TME. The C1QA gene encodes the A-chain polypeptide of the serum complement subcomponent C1q. Empirical evidence shows that C1QA is associated with the outcomes of treatment of DLBCL with rituximab. According to Jin et al., DLBCL patients with homozygous A -allele carriers of the geneC1qA[276]demonstrated better overall response, higher complete response and overall survival in receiving R-CHOP [35]. Of note, C1qA may originate from other non-tumor cells in DLBCL tissues. Blood monocytes and tumor-associated macrophages expressedC1qAas well and may exert an influence on tumor cells. More research is warranted to determine whether the exogenous C1qA protein levels are affected by rituximab. C1QA is derived from rituximab resistant DLBCL cells under rituximab stress and is regulated by methyltransferase-like 3‌‌ (METTL3) and YTH domain family protein 2 (YTHDF2)-mediated N6-methyladenosine (m6A) methylation [36]. Notably, C1QA may originate from other non-tumor cells in DLBCL tissues such as blood monocytes and tumor-associated macrophages [36]. Nonetheless, it is unclear whether rituximab influences exogenous C1QA protein levels. A lysosomal cysteine protease called cathepsin C (CTSC), which is commonly referred to as dipeptidylpeptidase I, is essential for the catalytic activation of several serine proteases [37]. In a conjoined gene study of non-Hodgkin B-cell lymphoma cell line KPU-UH1, novel conjoined genes like CTSC-RAB38, were detected and may serve as genetic biomarkers for lymphoma [38]. Recent research has reported that tumor-secreted protease CTSC promotes tumor metastasis by regulating the recruitment of neutrophils and the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) [39]. Validation by qRT-PCR showed that hub gene expression in DLBCL was statistically significant when compared to that of healthy controls, which aligned consistent with previous analyses. IHC tests further demonstrated that DLBCL had high levels of CXCL9 protein levels.

The proportion of immune cells has a huge impact on DLBCL. One study reported that a high percentage of programmed death 1 (PD1) + CD8 + and programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) + T cells in the TME predicts poor survival in DLBCL. Conversely, T cells exhibiting the high expression of the immunological checkpoint cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA4) were associated with a positive prognosis [40]. In this investigation, a substantial proportion of DLBCL cases were linked to activated T cells, NK cells, and macrophages. This aligns with previous single-cell sequencing results [41]. Additionally, it was found in this study that levels of immunosuppressive were elevated cells in DLBCL, including regulatory T (Treg) cells, MDSCs, and macrophages. It is hypothesized that both immune-promoting and immune-suppressive mechanisms play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of DLBCL. Subsequently, the relationships between the four identified genes (CXCL9, CCL18, C1QA and CTSC) and immune response were examined. The four hub genes were positively correlated with most immune-related cells types.

However, several limitations exist in the current manuscript. Firstly, this study relies on the bioinformatics analysis of public datasets, which may introduce inconsistencies in the results due to its retrospectiveness. Secondly, the nomogram results produced overfitting because of the limited sample size in our study. Thus, the accuracy of the results needs to be further validated in larger independent cohorts. Thirdly, additional molecular experiments are required to investigate the underlying mechanisms.

In summary, four co-hub genes: CXCL9, CCL18, C1QA, and CTSC, were identified through bioinformatics analyses including DEGs analysis and WGCNA, machine learning algorithms as well as GO and KEGG enrichment analyses. A nomogram model was developed to predict the risk of DLBCL. These four key genes, especially CXCL9, were highlighted for their prognostic value, which laid a foundation for the further exploration of potential candidate genes in DLBCL patients. In addition, significant differences were observed in the abundance of immune cells among DLBCL patients. The potential diagnostic and therapeutic implications of these immune cells and genes in DLBCL warrant further investigation.

We would like to thank the contributions of public databases such as the GEO to human medicine. Moreover, we sincerely appreciate the highly qualified native English speaking editors at American Journal Experts (AJE) for providing reputable English language editing service for our manuscript.

DC and SW designed the study. SW, XZ, SWu, CY and DC performed the data analysis. SWu, CY and DC participated in the collection and detection of clinical samples from patients and healthy controls. SW and DC prepared the figures and manuscript. In addition, HT, YS, ZX and DC critically revised the manuscript. All authors contributed to the manuscript and approved the submitted version.

This work was supported by the Key Research and Development Plan of Department of Science and Technology of Zhejiang Province (2024C03156), National Natural Science Foundation of China (81871709, 82270175, 82300213), Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province of China (2021J02040), National Key Clinical Specialty Discipline Construction Program (2021-76), Fujian Provincial Clinical Research Center for Hematological Malignancies (2020Y2006).