Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

Received 2025 Mar 17; Accepted 2025 Aug 8; Issue date 2025 Sep.

This is an open access article under the terms of thehttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

We read with great interest, “The Role of Patient‐ and Drug‐Related Factors in Oral Minoxidil and Pericardial Effusion: Analyses of Data From the United States Food and Drug Administration Adverse Event Reporting System” by Gupta et al., which investigated the incidence rates and factors associated with pericardial effusions reported during topical and oral minoxidil use [1]. The authors found an incidence rate of 1.27% and a dose‐independent relationship for pericardial effusions reported during oral minoxidil use [1]. For patients taking oral minoxidil for alopecia, we hope to broaden this conversation by discussing the possibility of underreporting of pericardial effusions and the utility of a refined approach to risk stratification and patient monitoring.

In resistant hypertension management, cardiologists and nephrologists have guidelines to direct oral minoxidil use. For example, when oral minoxidil is used for hypertension, the Food and Drug Administration and 2017 American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association guidelines recommend concomitant use of a loop diuretic and beta blocker to mitigate the risks of fluid retention and reflex tachycardia, respectively [2,9]. In patients with chronic kidney disease being treated with dialysis, nephrology guidelines for oral minoxidil use recommend increased volume status monitoring [3]. A new Delphi consensus statement lists a history of tachycardia or other arrhythmia, hypotension, renal impairment, and current use of hemodialysis as precautions for low‐dose oral minoxidil use in alopecia [10]. In our experience, demographics like older age and/or medication regimens with multiple anti‐hypertensives are also risk factors. Despite this Delphi consensus statement, there is still a need for standardized guidelines for cardiovascular risk assessment and standardized protocols for cardiovascular monitoring in the setting of oral minoxidil use for alopecia. In patients with preexisting risk factors for pericardial effusions, collaboration between specialties (i.e., dermatology, primary care, cardiology, nephrology) may be beneficial and enable screening for comorbidities such as coronary artery disease or hypertension. Furthermore, incorporating elements from existing cardiology and nephrology guidelines may enhance care for those with preexisting risk factors or comorbidities. Possible considerations may include B‐type natriuretic peptide screening for volume status and baseline and/or serial echocardiograms.

As the off‐label use of oral minoxidil for alopecia increases, a collaborative approach between specialties to stratify risk and guide therapeutic monitoring is of growing utility. In the absence of standardized monitoring, the likelihood of underreporting of pericardial effusions during oral minoxidil use is increased, particularly if the risk is dose‐independent. Physicians should be cognizant of this possibility and may consider performing enhanced monitoring and closer consideration of comorbidities when prescribing oral minoxidil. Further research should focus on examining a potential dose‐related risk threshold for side effects, identifying susceptible patient populations, and determining the utility of baseline screening and routine cardiovascular monitoring for high‐risk patients taking oral minoxidil for alopecia. Established protocols and standardized guidelines for oral minoxidil use could help minimize adverse events, while maximizing the efficacy of this therapy for alopecia. We commend Gupta et al. for their important contribution to the literature.