Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

Revised 2025 Aug 9; Received 2025 Jun 4; Accepted 2025 Aug 18; Collection date 2025 Sep.

This is an open access article under the terms of thehttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

In autopsy cases of prefrontal leucotomy, chronic axonal damage resulting from the procedure can lead to the accumulation of phosphorylated tau (p‐tau) in neurons, astrocytes, and cell processes, indicating a pathology similar to chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE).4Furthermore, it has been reported that this p‐tau accumulation may progress to connected regions via neuronal circuits over time.5However, to our knowledge, the long‐term impact of cingulotomy on the brain tissue has not yet been reported. We herein report an autopsy case of a patient with schizophrenia who underwent cingulotomy several decades earlier.

The male patient developed schizophrenia at approximately 15 years of age. He exhibited disorganized behavior, agitation, violent acts, refusal, silence, and autistic behavior. The patient underwent cingulotomy at 21 years of age. Postoperatively, his verbal communication improved, and his violent behavior gradually subsided. No significant behavioral problems were observed during middle age. However, in his 60 s, he developed progressive memory loss that interfered with daily life and was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease (AD). The patient ultimately died at 70 years of age due to aspiration pneumonia.

The whole brain weighed 1330 g. Macroscopic evaluation revealed tissue defects in the corpus callosum and the ACG (Figure1a,b). Microscopically, Klüver‐Barrera staining showed thinning of the interrupted cingulate gyrus and pallor of the surrounding myelin (Figure1c,e). The area of myelin pallor corresponded well with the white matter gliosis observed with Holzer staining (Figure1d,f). Anti‐phosphorylated neurofilament H‐positive neuronal soma was observed in the ACG (Figure1g,h) and was widely distributed across the medial and lateral frontal cortices (Figure1i), reflecting impairment of axonal transport.6Fragmented and thickened axons were present in the white matter of the surgical site (Figure1j).

Neuropathological findings. (a) Medial surface of the left cerebral hemisphere. (b) Coronal section of the left cerebrum. Arrowheads in (a, b) indicate tissue defects in the corpus callosum and anterior cingulate gyrus. No significant atrophy of the cerebrum was noted. The basal ganglia, brainstem, and cerebellum showed no remarkable changes. Myelin pallor is shown with Klüver‐Barrera staining (c, e), and gliosis in the white matter around the cingulate gyrus is demonstrated with Holzer staining (d, f). The rectangle in (d) indicates the area shown in (k). Anti‐phosphorylated neurofilament H (pNF‐H)‐positive neuronal soma (arrowhead) in the anterior cingulate gyrus (g, h) and the superior frontal gyrus (i), which was particularly strongly observed in the deeper cortical layers. (j) Fragmented and thickened axons with anti‐pNF‐H immunostaining in the white matter around the cingulate gyrus. Axonal spheroids were not observed. The accumulation of p‐tau is shown at the severed end of the anterior cingulate gyrus with anti‐p‐tau immunostaining (k, l, n). The accumulation of p‐tau is also shown in the region distant from the severed end, in cingulate gyrus (m, o). (n) and (o) indicates the p‐tau accumulation of neurons, which was observed particularly in cortical layers II and III. Scale bars: 3 cm (a, b), 10 mm (c, d), 200 μm (g, k), 100 μm (m) 50 μm (e, f, h, i, l), 20 μm (j, n, o). GM, gray matter; WM, white matter.

Moderate p‐tau accumulation, such as in NFTs or neuropil threads, was observed in the transentorhinal cortex, and mild accumulation was also found in the entorhinal cortex, hippocampal CA1 region, amygdala, occipitotemporal gyrus, locus coeruleus, and periaqueductal gray, corresponding to Braak stage III. However, there was no p‐tau accumulation in the prefrontal cortex and anterior thalamic nuclei, which are assumed to be regions connected to the ACG.8All p‐tau‐positive lesions, including the ACG, exhibited positivity for Gallyas‐Braak staining. Diffuse plaques corresponding to Thal Phase 1 were observed. Neuritic plaques were absent. “ABC score” for neuropathological change is low. Aging‐related tau astrogliopathy (ARTAG) was not observed. A few anti‐phosphorylated transactive response DNA‐binding protein 43‐kDa‐positive neurons have been detected in the entorhinal cortex. α‐Synuclein‐positive structures were absent.

A postmortem clinical record review confirmed that dementia in this case met the criteria for all‐cause dementia: the core clinical criteria outlined in the National Institute on Aging–Alzheimer's Association guidelines for the neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer's disease. In terms of clinicopathological correlations, the pathological substrate of incident neurocognitive decline could not be identified using current pathological classifications, including those for CTE and AD. This finding was consistent with a previous finding that a subset of patients with schizophrenia develop neurocognitive decline without coexisting dementia‐related pathology.9The cause of this discrepancy remains unknown.

The distribution of p‐tau accumulation observed in this case overlapped multiple regions that were anatomically connected to the ACG.8However, except for the abundance observed at the ACG transection site, the distribution was within the range expected for Braak stage III. Accordingly, although p‐tau at the site of ACG transection was assumed to result from cingulotomy, we found no evidence supporting the progression of p‐tau across brain regions via neuronal circuits.

Although there may be differences in p‐tau accumulation and its development among surgical techniques, the underlying factors remain unknown. The long‐term effects of psychosurgery on p‐tau accumulation are not well understood. In addition, there is insufficient systematic research on the long‐term cognitive changes following cingulotomy. Active and systematic research is needed as these psychosurgeries continue to be performed under certain conditions.

One limitation associated with our case report is that the cingulotomy procedure used was an older technique than that currently applied.