Boron nitride nanotubes (BNNTs) are a promising nanomaterial
due
to their remarkable optical and mechanical properties, chemical robustness,
and extended aspect ratios. Herein, we report the formation of strongly
biaxially aligned thin films of BNNTs using automated slow vacuum
filtration (SVF), as well as their cocomposites with single-wall carbon
nanotubes (SWCNTs). Pure BNNT SVF-generated films are found to differ
in optimization conditions from those identified previously for SWCNTs
but display similar improvements in alignment and uniformity with
advanced purification for nanotube length and homogeneity, with globally
aligned films observed. Mixed, cocomposite, biaxially aligned films
of BNNTs with SWCNTs are also described. Such films provide effective
and efficient hosting capabilities for unique morphologies of distributed
and individualized SWCNTs aligned by a wide-bandgap BNNT matrix. Concentrations
upward of 25% SWCNT mass fraction were found to reside within majority-BNNT
films without significantly disrupting the global composite structure;
the SWCNT fraction, in turn, enabled probing of both local and global
nematic alignment through their use as spectroscopic reporters. Leveraging
the thickness and alignment control provided by our SVF implementation,
both neat BNNT and composite films show great promise for advancing
novel photonic and other thin-film nanocomposite applications requiring
tailorable mechanical, thermal, optical, and electronic functionalities.

A dielemental homologue of the archetypical
carbon nanotube (CNT)
structures, boron nitride nanotubes (BNNTs) exhibit their own unique
and remarkable thermal, electrical, and optical properties that are
promising for technological applications including thermovoltaics,
optical resonators and chemical-resistant structures.−In particular, BNNT structures similar in diameter to single-wall
carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) or double-wall carbon nanotubes (DWCNTs)
are expected to enable unique photonic and electronic functionality
through their combination of robust mechanical and wide-bandgap electrical
properties. The wide bandgap of BNNTs in particular offers high optical
transparency in visible (vis) wavelengths and electrically insulating
behavior for applications,,,but results in reduced dimensionality relative to devices demonstrated
with hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN).

The native anisotropy of BNNTs naturally drives strong interest
for controlled assembly with a global uniaxial (one director axis),
biaxial (alignment in a plane toward a director axis), or otherwise
structured alignments. Liquid-phase processing methods for attaining
such structures are particularly desirable, however, directed alignment
via such methods is still challenging, with numerous aspects for controlling
the assembly behavior of BNNTs remaining poorly understood. Notable
advances include microscopic alignment observed by Kode et al. in
DNA-stabilized BNNT solutions; significant
degrees of BNNT alignment in cm-scale thin films by Simonsen Ginestra
et al. through shearing acid-stabilized BNNT dispersions; and achievement of uniform, vertically aligned
BNNT arrays and macroscopic structures by Acauan et al. using templated
growth on CNT forests.

To this landscape
of technologies, we contribute the formation
of biaxially aligned BNNT thin films, and eventually their cocomposites
with SWCNTs, through slow vacuum filtration (SVF). While no investigations
of SVF-based assembly have been previously reported for BNNTs, in
the past decade SVF has been developed into an effective process for
realizing high degrees of alignment in dimension-controlled SWCNT
thin films at scale. Although contributing
mechanisms are not fully understood,−and are beyond the scope of this
contribution to address, the similar sizes, aspect ratios, and dispersing
agents of BNNTs and SWCNTs imply a fruitful translation of SVF to
BNNT aligned film generation. There are critical milestones for accomplishing
this goal, however, including adapting of SVF protocols to BNNT filtration,
applying lessons about population homogeneity from SWCNT SVF for optimized
alignment, and to measure the achieved alignment in produced BNNT
films.

Several research groups have successfully demonstrated
formation
of biaxially aligned SWCNT films via SVF. In practical implementations,
SVF has produced films demonstrating large areas (several cm2) sufficiently aligned to exhibit highly polarized extinction and
photoemission, terahertz transduction, chiroptical phenomena, and
utility as a hyperbolic metamaterial.,−In both (BNNT and SWCNT) nanotube types, however, synthesis methods
still frequently yield polydisperse diameter and length distributions,
and can contain high impurity content and variations in morphology
at collection; these factors invariably affect the ordering precision
of resulting macroscopic assemblies.−Due to this reality,
separate research efforts have focused on liquid-phase refinement
and characterization of both nanotube nanomaterials, with particular
recent emphasis on BNNTs.,−Notably for SWCNTs, improved alignment in SVF has been shown after
purification, specifically for greater particle aspect ratios and
reduced length heterogeneity.,Similarly, greater
BNNT refinement was shown to increase liquid-crystalline assembly
behavior in superacid suspensions. In
this work, we demonstrate significant global alignment of neat BNNTs
achieved through optimized SVF, advancing the material refinement
and assembly pipeline to realize ever more functional thin-film assemblies.
It is worth repeating that no investigations of SVF-based assembly,
let alone detailed effects of nanotube length, composition, and film
dimensions, have been previously reported for BNNTs.

Realization
of aligned BNNT thin films unlocks a particularly exciting
potential to integrate and encapsulate other one-dimensional nanomaterials,
such as SWCNTs, as guests within mechanically robust and optically
transparent aligned composites. As BNNTs are wide bandgap semiconductors
with near-unity transmission of wavelengths from ≈ 210 nm into
the mid-infrared (IR), they comprise an ideal inert matrix for aligning
optically active materials in the visible or near-IR (NIR), while
also providing excellent specific mechanical properties (order of
GPa for radial and TPa for axial strengths, respectively,and thermal conductivity (tens to hundreds of W/m•K). Although hosting of guest molecules and/or nanoparticles
could be endohedral,e.g., dye molecules hosted within
the BNNT interior, as lattice replacements, or through interstitial
templating,−a particular motivation for our efforts is in realizing coaligned
composites of SWCNTs within a BNNT matrix as illustrated by the center
representational image inFigurea. Such composites are intriguing for optical cavity
and single photon emission applications because intra-SWCNT interactions
lead to electronic smearing and depopulation of direct-gap luminescent
excitonic transitions in purely SWCNT films. Controlled dilution and
templating of isolated SWCNTs within a passive BNNT matrix is expected
to reduce such effects, hypothetically leading to increased emission
intensity and reduced emission line widths. The availability of thin,
rigid, and highly transparent films containing aligned guest SWCNTs
should also ease feasibility of mechanical placement and device integration
for photonic applications. The contributions of this effort provide
the first implementations of such composites, demonstrating the effective
templating of SWCNTs over a significant range of loadings. Characterization
development to determine the alignment of both neat and cocomposite
films is addressed next.

Realization of nanotube thin films through aqueous-phase
dispersion,
refinement, and analytical slow vacuum filtration (SVF) metrology.
(a) Schematic representation of envisioned aligned BNNT/SWCNT composites
spanning the entire compositional range from a purely BNNT film (left)
to a purely SWCNT film (right). (b) Photograph of BNNT materials used
at different stages of processing, from synthesized nanotubes in “puffball”
form, to sonicated (US) aqueous dispersions with and without applied
centrifugation (spin), to a SVF-filtered thin film. (c) Schematic
representation of an automated SVF setup, wherein machine vision monitors
the fluid meniscus, and programmed pressure ramping allows flow rate
control. (d) Specific cake resistances (αcake) of
several SWCNT types and BNNTs, including effects of variation in degree
of refinement via centrifugation and length sorting. Greater BNNT
refinement increases αcakeinto the range of structurally
pristine, individualized SWCNTs, wherein smaller-diameter SWCNTs exhibited
the largest determined values. (e) Close-up of the BNNT film (on a
glass coverslip), showing the high degree of transparency in an ≈100
nm film, with a SWCNT film of equivalent thickness for comparison.
The background is black construction paper.

A challenging consequence of the wide bandgap and
optical transparency
of BNNTs is that it is difficult to characterize the microstructure
of their macroscopic assemblies by common quantitative spectroscopic
methods. SWCNTs, in contrast, are readily interrogated with a variety
of spectroscopies (e.g., Raman, UV/vis/NIR. linear dichroism (LD),
terahertz) by probing their intense, polarization-dependent, and spectrally
precise optical transitions. The strongly varying signal allows calculation
of commonly described alignment metrics such as the 2D nematic orientational
order parameter (S2D), capturing the angular distribution
of individual nanotubes around a common director, with high precision.,Accordingly, we were intrigued by and demonstrate incorporation
of SWCNTs templated within an aligned BNNT matrix for use as local
spectroscopically active reporters. Such characterization is captured
here through polarized micro-Raman spectroscopy on the sub-10 μm
to millimeter scale and LD on the ≈ 20 mm2scale,
providing a dramatic improvement in meso- and macroscale BNNT alignment
measurements. Moreover, evaluation of the thin-film structure over
multiple length scales by these methods reveals the effects of smaller
domains on the larger scales of observed global alignments and is
a metrological advance on its own merits.

The production of aligned BNNT
thin films and SWCNT-containing
cocomposites required a series of interdependent investigations and
technical milestones. We first extend and demonstrate general nanotube
alignment via SVF to a parent BNNT dispersion (and SWCNT batches)
used in this contribution and identify material-specific properties
and system-specific parameters that enable flow rate-based control
and rational optimization. After determining an optimized SVF flow
rate for the parent BNNT dispersion, photograph inFigureb, we do the same for refined
length-separated BNNT subpopulations (sorted from the parent) ranging
from 150 to 750 nm in average length; the typical diameters of the
BNNTs in these populations are between 2 to 6 nm, although with some
scatter and observation of larger diameter nanotubes. As we previously reported for SWCNTs, significant improvements to BNNT film morphology and alignment
are observed for these separated populations due to both absolute
nanotube length and length homogeneity effects. Lastly, the potential
for templating SWCNT alignment within BNNT films is explored as a
function of the guest (SWCNT) concentration, and we present metrological
advancements in using such SWCNTs as reporters for probing alignment
of the composite films.

Most successful demonstrations of SVF for
producing aligned SWCNT thin films share several key points: the use
of smooth polycarbonate track-etched membranes, a slow and constant
transmembrane fluid flux (≈ (0.5–3) mL/(hr•cm2)), and implementation of a final compacting “push”
step with an elevated flow rate.,,,Control of these factors are paired with surface
treatments to the walls of the filtration vessel to minimize disruptive
effects from the end stage of filtration, during which the dispersion-air
interface can otherwise cause effects such as meniscus combing as
it approaches the film and membrane surface.,A schematic of the SVF filtration apparatus is shown asFigurec. Arguably, the
most limiting and challenging of the aspects needed to control the
SVF process is flow control. In addition to maintaining an empirically
optimized balance of forces, any flow rate variation or greater prevalence
of hydrodynamic instabilities (e.g.,from fluctuations
in the applied pressure difference) are likely to disrupt the correlated
structure of the nanotube network accumulated near the membrane (also
referred to as the filtration cake).

whereμis the filtrate
viscosity,Rmis a membrane resistance
term, αcakedenotes specific cake resistance,Cis the initial nanoparticle dispersion concentration,
andv(t) is the time-dependent,
area-normalized retentate volume. While precisely determining permeate
flux is not a necessity for successful SWCNT alignment via SVF, it
allows precise determination of αcake, which broadly
reflects the emergent particle shape- and size-dependent compaction
behavior that occurs during filtration. As shown in Walker et al.,
knowledge of αcakeis also key to subsequent arbitrary
flux control during an automated SVF run.Figurec schematically
depicts our in-house automated filtration apparatus, wherein the filtrate
meniscus is monitored with machine vision, and a PID pressure control
is programmed to keep the total flow rate of the permeate constant.
Knowledge of αcake(Figured) for different nanomaterials makes the
pressure drop versus flow rate curve at any time predictable, and
thus enables improved alignment in produced films; photographs of
typical BNNT and SWCNT films are shown inFiguree.

The variation in αcakeamong nanotube materials
has heretofore not been systematically explored. As such, three distinct
nanotube populations of varying diameter (BNNTs, large-diameter electric
arc-discharge synthesized (EA) SWCNTs, and small-diameter cobalt–molybdenum-catalyst
(CoMoCAT) synthesized SWCNTs) were subjected to SVF filtrations at
constant applied pressure, fully determiningeqand allowing a solution for αcakein each case. Using centrifugation as a coarse method for BNNT refinement
(collecting the supernatant fraction), the effect of centrifugation
speed was also explored. The specific resistance values obtained are
reported inFigured. αcakefor coarsely refined BNNTs resided in a
range between 1014m/kg and 3 × 1015m/kg,
increasing monotonically with greater extents of centrifugation of
the sonicated-dispersed material. Purified, rate-zonally ultracentrifuged
SWCNTs exhibit greater values, with small-diameter SWCNTs approaching
1016m/kg.

Ultimately, cake resistance quantifies
the cumulative degree of
flow blockage from the bulk fluid to each membrane pore opening; for
populations exhibiting greater shape polydispersity (e.g., the BNNTs),
the magnitude of αcakeis expected to be more modest,
with refinement-related increases stemming from a more uniformly compacted
cake mass reducing the prevalence of lesser-resistance flow paths
from packing heterogeneity. Note that even our initial BNNTs underwent
significant chemical purification by the manufacturer and are of relatively
high chemical purity, i.e., BN in the form of BNNT rather than as
hBN or in elemental form. We interpret the observed increase in cake
resistance for centrifugation-only purified BNNT samples as primarily
representing morphological selection by the centrifugation, such as
the preferential removal of larger diameter BNNTs or less extended-rod
morphology objects (e.g., aggregates, large bundles,
h-BN flakes). Alternatively, in materials where shape uniformity is
already high (such as refined SWCNTs), αcakerelates
to an effective packing density, implying a dependence on packing
arrangement (i.e., random versus aligned) and nanotube diameter. These
determinations allow us to control permeate flux to within 10% of
a given target (≈ (0.05–0.25) mL/(hr•cm2), or ≈ (1 – 5) μL/(min•cm2)).

Figurea features
polarized optical microscopy (sample between crossed polarizers, see
Methods) of SVF films produced from the BNNT material with and without
refinement by centrifugation as described above. We find that SVF
of an aqueous BNNT dispersion, i.e., absent of further processing
aside from ultrasonication, yields films exhibiting little to no global
order. Instead, we observe a mosaic of elongated, nematically ordered
microscale domains, and an average transmitted light intensity that
varies insignificantly with sample rotation; these findings are reminiscent
of liquid-crystalline tactoids recently reported for BNNT suspensions. SVF of centrifuged dispersions in comparison
(at constant filtered mass, see Methods) yields a substantial increase
in global birefringent contrast (light intensity change with sample
rotation, described in more detail below) in assembled films, accompanied
by larger, more isotropic domain shapes. Evidently, BNNT refinement
is associated with joint increases in both mechanical flow resistance
and structural correlations within the thin-film nanotube ensembles.
Supporting this interpretation, atomic force microscopy (AFM) of the
centrifuged BNNT material (differential sedimentation) showed mild
narrowing of the length distribution with greater applied spin speed
(Figurec), and some
removal of larger aggregates and non-nanotube objects was discerned
(Figure S1). In the next section we extend
this observation to include findings of improved alignment for longer
length nanotube populations and for those with reduced heterogeneity.

Characterization
of thin-film assemblies of boron nitride nanotubes
(BNNTs) after various degrees of centrifugation-based refinement,
realized via SVF. (a) Cross-polarized optical microscopy images of
thin films filtered from two BNNT dispersions: one from an only sonicated
dispersion, and the second from its daughter dispersion after centrifugation,
with the extent denoted by multiples of the gravitational acceleration
constant, G (9.81 m/s2) (see Methods for details). Red
arrows in the top panels denote the rotation of the films for maximum
birefringence (vertical) and at 45° rotation. The film formed
from the centrifuged dispersion displays greater global alignment
and visually larger domains. (b) Average birefringent intensity of
thin films formed from BNNTs with varying extents of centrifugation
as a function of film rotation between crossed polarizers. The increasing
fractional modulation observed for films from centrifuged dispersions
indicates increased anisotropy. (c) Small-sample measurements of nanotube
lengths from each processed material population, obtained by AFM,
showing a mild narrowing of the length distribution with increasing
applied centrifugation.

Prior reports have separately determined that
nanotube length and hydrodynamic control are instrumental in achieving
global SWCNT alignment. For instance, Rust et al. found optimal alignment
at a flux of ≈ (1–1.5) mL/(hr•cm2)
using a length-narrowed fraction averaging nearly 1 μm in length;,Walker et al. arrived at an optimal flux of (1–1.5) mL/(hr•cm2) without length sorting; and
He et al. reported an acceptable range of (0.5–1.15) mL/(hr•cm2). Such an optimization window,
however, has not yet been established for BNNTs (or other nanotube
materials) in SVF. Using SWCNTs as a comparative benchmark, in this
section we probe the analogous nanotube length and liquid flux dependence
in achieved BNNT assembly. Length separation was achieved using a
recently demonstrated for BNNTs polymer depletion-based length separation
method (PDLS). In brief, coarsely refined
BNNTs (sonicated and centrifuged at 8 kG, with G ≈ 9.81 m/s2) were split into distinct length fractions by iterative steps
of precipitation with different concentrations of poly­(methacrylic
acid). Five distinct aliquots of length-separated BNNT populations
were prepared, denoted in this manuscript as B1–B5, with average
lengths of approximately 170 nm (B1) to 750 nm (B5) as determined
via AFM and cross-verified with analytical ultracentrifugation. For comparison and coassembly, arc-discharge
SWCNTs were also length fractionated by PDLS in a similar manner, resulting in fractions labeled A1-A5 and of
similar average lengths (seeTable S1for
full length details). For each population, the characteristic cake
resistance was determined as described above and used to enable SVF
of equivalent total masses at a nanotube-material specific constant
flux. The resulting films were characterized with polarized optical
microscopy; photographs and analysis of the films as a function of
the comprising nanotube length fractions are reported inFigure.

(a) Polarized imaging
and spectroscopy of thin nanotube films formed
from length-sorted fractions of neat BNNTs (B1 – B5 images)
and SWCNTs (A1 – A5 images) at controlled, constant, flow rate
conditions after transfer to glass substrates. Average lengths and
rotated sample positions are noted in each column and row, respectively.
Increased average contrast with rotation implies greater global alignment.
(b) Cross-polarized transmission microscopy of length-sorted BNNTs
(upper) and SWCNTs (lower), quantified with birefringent contrast
(ΔBR), and maximum birefringent intensity (IBR),
as defined in the main text. Excluding end fractions (1 and 5) to
rule out effects of aggregated and non-nanotube material, the greatest
degree of alignment at the chosen flow conditions are for B3 and A4.
(c) Linear dichroism (LD) of the same length-sorted SWCNT films measured
in transmission geometry at the maximum prominent semiconducting species
optical transition (S11≈ 1800 nm) as a function
of film rotation in the plane perpendicular to the polarized light
source. The films comprised of longer SWCNTs show a dramatic increase
in global alignment as demonstrated by the increased variation in
absorbance with rotation and the LD-obtained nematic order parameter
(S2D,LD).

InFigurea, the
representative photographs of the films (comprised of different BNNT
and SWCNT length fractions) at various orientations between the crossed
polarizers in the optical path contains significant information about
the shape and size of aligned domains and the overall degree of alignment
in the films. Important considerations for determining alignment within
a thin film are, however, both the properties of the aligned material
and the measurement method used to probe alignment. Optical methods
offer convenient, multiscale, characterization for highly anisotropic
objects such as nanotubes and liquid crystals. For BNNTs, their effective
transparency in the visible to NIR wavelengths limits the options
for ready optical characterization to birefringence (or nonoptical
microscopy methods); notably, although BNNTs have an absorbance peak
at ≈ 206 nm, the shortest wavelength for LD on a major commercial
spectrophotometer is ≈ 300 nm, and capabilities for sub 300
nm LD were not available to our group. Detailed optical characterization
information for all the source materials and selected samples is inFigure S2. For SWCNTs, in contrast, the presence
of strong intrinsic and anisotropic absorbance features across the
UV through NIR wavelengths enable the use of LD and polarized resonance
Raman spectroscopy in addition to birefringence measurements utilizing
their anisotropy in refractive index.

A versatile method used
to rapidly probe nanotube alignment is
birefringence, generally measured in a transmission geometry with
the sample located between two orthogonal (crossed) linear polarizers.
In this configuration, light should only be transmitted if the intervening
film causes rotation of the linear polarization state of incident
light. Dark films or regions indicate either a low degree of total
light rotation due to limited film anisotropy or direct registration
of high alignment with one polarizer; these scenarios are distinguishable
through rotation of the film. Bright films or regions indicate significant
optical rotation of the light by the film, signifying a high degree
of nanotube alignment at a given point. To quantify birefringence
of such samples we use the measurands IBR, which captures
the aggregate degree of local nematic order in each nanotube assembly,
and ΔBR, which directly reflects the absolute extent of global
alignment along a singular director; see Methods for details of IBRand ΔBR calculations. The probed area for the quantified
measurements was ≈ 0.2 mm2. A more quantitative
method to probe absolute alignment is LD, which measures the optical
extinction of various light polarizations within the film.

where α∥is the magnitude
of the polarized extinction along the perceived alignment director,
and α⊥is the extinction perpendicular to
it. Notably, this metric tends to be a lower bound on the true S2D, due to nonexcitonic background signal absorbance contributing
to the calculation.

BNNT birefringence intensity was maximized
in B3 and B4. In particular,
the striking uniformity and high contrast of B3 appears to be a novel
observation of BNNT alignment with SVF methods. Absolute birefringent
contrast also peaked in this region for SWCNTs, but global ordering
was more preserved in A5 relative to the same fraction in BNNTs. We
attribute this to a disrupting presence of ultralong, aggregated,
and defective objects likely present in the longest BNNT fractions
as it will sort with long BNNTs. Such objects were likely removed
in a rate-zonal ultracentrifugation (RZU) separation that was part
of the parent SWCNT dispersion preparation; RZU processing for extracting structurally pristine BNNTs may be
feasible but has yet to be developed as a refinement method for the
material.

To sample hydrodynamic effects on the SVF process
in a straightforward
manner we use fractions A4 and B3. This enables us to explore the
dependence of the achieved alignment on the permeate flux with the
greatest hypothesized contrast (alignment ability) while neglecting
potential confounding effects from precipitated aggregates and non-nanotube
material left by the length-separation process (i.e., fraction 5 samples).
Polarized microscopy images and quantification of the films are shown
as a function of the permeate flux for the BNNT fraction inFigure; the results for
the A4 SWCNTs are featured in theFigure S3. In line with prior literature, SWCNT assembly behavior was found
to be quite sensitive to the flux during SVF, reaching a local birefringence
optimum in the range of (1 to 1.5) mL/(hr•cm2).
Unlike the macroscopically continuous and uniform domain profile observed
at the optimal flux, SWCNT film morphologies at the sampled flux extrema
resulted in smaller (tens of microns) and more heterogeneous birefringent
domains. There were differences in the effects of the extrema in sampled
flow rates, however, in that a lesser flux still generated elongated
domains retaining some global order, while faster flow rates eventually
fully randomized the nematic domain orientation.

Probing the effects of
filtration flux on the multiscale structure
of BNNT thin films. (a) Birefringent contrast of BNNT nanotube films
formed from the B3 length-sorted BNNT fraction at varying flux, with
insets highlighting the structural differences at either end of the
studied range. (b) Polarized optical microscopy of nanotube thin films
(formed from BNNT/SCWNT fractions B3 and A4, respectively) formed
at fluxes optimized for the opposite nanotube type, showing that global
ordering and uniformity is viable over a broader flux range in BNNTs
relative to SWCNTs. The macroscopic nonuniformity in brightness in
the BNNT images stems from film thickness variation. (c) SEM micrographs
of the BNNT film surface from two extrema of the studied flux range,
showing mesoscopic differences in global BNNT ordering.

In contrast to SWCNTs, birefringence-determined
order in BNNT films
was found to be dramatically less sensitive to the magnitude of permeate
flux (specifically fraction B3). Shown inFigurea, the optimal flux was determined from the
maximum ΔBR to be ≈ 2.5 mL/(hr•cm2),
approximately twice that of SWCNTs, but displays a less than 50% reduction
from the maximum across the entire measured flux range. While the
difference in optimal flux may partially arise from differences in
average nanotube length (altering the interaction regime between convection
and rotational diffusion), similar trends appear in the observed morphology
when comparing to SWCNT films. Fluxes at both ends of the measured
range (i.e., above and below the optimum value) yielded smaller, marginally
less globally connected domains (Figurea insets). SEM imaging (Figureb) further elucidates structural
differences in the characteristic arrangement of BNNTs; while the
film assembled at slow flux appears more uniform overall, the alignment
is less prominently global and features smaller, discrete, and misoriented
domains, the majority of which happen to align along a significant
director as seen by birefringence. Conversely, despite its apparent
heterogeneity under SEM, the film assembled at the greatest flux adopts
an evidently preferred director that appears continuous at the 100-μm
scale in both optical and electron microscopy. Overall, the contrast
in flux sensitivity between CNTs and BNNTs is particularly evident
when swapping filtration flux for the two nanotube types, as featured
in the birefringence images inFigureb; the B3 fraction (BNNTs) appears to align readily
even at slower flux, while the extended, uniform nematic order observed
in the filtered A4 (CNTs) fraction is broken at the relatively elevated
fluxes optimized for BNNTs.

The above findings corroborate the
length dependence on SWCNT assembly
first reported by Rust et al. and more generally extend these phenomena
to BNNTs. In addition to validating earlier
work, this is notable because the nanotube length populations used
in this work were only separated into 5 fractions rather than the
≈ 12 fractions typical for size exclusion chromatography (SEC).,The fractions here thus were of higher polydispersity than those
used in Rust et al., although equivalent or finer resolution is achievable
via PDLS by applying more stages.,,We posit that the exact breadth of the length distributions
is less vital than removal of both length extremes from the parent
suspension in the daughter fractions; although often small in mass
fraction, those extrema significantly increase the overall polydispersity
and have specifically been reported to notably disrupt ordering in
other nanotube alignment methods. Simply
removing the tails would also advantageously allow use of a greater
portion of total refined nanotube mass in the SVF assembly. To examine
this postulate, we assembled SWCNT films by SVF after merely excluding
the short length tail of nanotubes from a parent dispersion population;
birefringence images comparing these films are reported inFigure S4. Although detailed study beyond the
scope of this contribution would be necessary to fully quantify the
improvement achieved by solely excluding the short tail, a visible
increase in the size and uniformity of aligned domains is observable
in the images.

In contrast, reasons for improved alignment
with increasing nanotube
length (L) are more tractable to assign, at least for nanotubes much
shorter than their persistence length (persistence lengths are ≈
10+ μm for the CoMoCat SWCNTs, increase to ≈ 40+ μm
for the EA-SWCNTs, and are up to 100+ μm for the BNNTs used
in this work). One simple idea is that, for the constant mass films
produced here, the number of particles needing to reach proper alignment
decreases linearly with L. Moreover, dipole-like interactions are
enhanced with L, and there is a greater per-particle penalty to misalignment.
Rod-like systems also exhibit concentration-dependent rheological
transitions that are highly length-dependent, scaling with L3.,,In SVF, this may be
particularly important in mediating the extent of structural rearrangement
and alignment during cake compaction up to the final fixation of particle
positions during the subsequent drying step.

Having demonstrated significant global
alignment of BNNTs via SVF, it becomes worthwhile to explore their
use and limitations in hosting guest molecules or nanoparticles, particularly
in templating the alignment of individualized SWCNTs within such a
wide-bandgap BNNT matrix. Although one eventual goal is to disperse
and align single species of SWCNTs (defined by the (n,m) index of their carbon lattice vector and typically
called “chirality”) within a BNNT film, to explore the
potential for such implementations we use the same nanotube length
populations described above. Explicitly, we chose the fractions exhibiting
the maximal global alignment while displaying minimal length polydispersity
(fractions A4 and B3); the average outer diameter of nanotubes in
these samples are ≈ 1.8 nm and 3.9 ± 2 nm, respectively.

To explore the effects of a cocomposite
SVF filtration we generated a series of films in which the BN/C mass
fraction was varied from 0 to 1. For all films, the loaded nanotube
mass was held constant at 8 μg, and SVF was conducted using
a constant flux of ≈ 3 mL/(hr•cm2). Importantly,
this flux targeted the optimal conditions determined above for BNNT
assembly, but was performed on mixed together volumes of the A4 and
B3 parent dispersions. Our expectation, due to the homogeneous mixing,
identical dispersing agent, and similar particle size scales and geometries
(and accordingly hydrodynamic interactions), is thus that the SWCNTs
and BNNTs should form cocomposites of coaligned structures as visually
represented inFigurea. All films, photographs of which are shown inFigurea, were approximately 30 nm
thick.

Structural and optical characterization of refined, aligned BNNT/SWCNT
composite thin films. (a) Photographs of composite films and (b) cross-polarized
microscopy of films transferred to glass substrates. Films display
an evolution of domain size, morphology, and orientation with increasing
SWCNT mass fraction, xCNT. (c) Birefringence measurands
as a function of xCNT. IBRand ΔBR report
a decrease in birefringent contrast while increasing in total birefringence
with xCNT, the latter is a result of greater SWCNT extinction
in the spectral wavelength range of the light source. (d) LD at the
maximum excitonic optical transition of the arc-discharge SWCNTs in
the NIR embedded in the aligned thin film composites. This value is
a macroscopic reporter of the overall global ordering of the SWCNTs
as templated by the BNNTs. While cross-polarized microscopy indicates
changes in domain morphology across moderate SWCNT compositions, the
degree of CNT alignment when measured at a macroscopic length scale
is nearly identical.

As described above, changes in domain morphology
and alignment
of the assembled composites were first characterized with cross-polarized
microscopy, with the results shown inFigureb. A key finding, seen in the similarity
of the 0 and 0.1 mass fraction sample images, is that a small fractional
SWCNT content does not appear to affect the morphology or alignment
of the dominantly BNNT film. However, introducing over 10% (mass basis)
of SWCNTs into the thin film composite begins to dramatically reduce
the birefringent contrast, with the decrease leveling off at a CNT
fraction of ≈ 40%. Inversely, the total birefringent intensity
increased due to the formation of local, ordered domains (remembering
that filtration was optimized for BNNTs) with greater visible-wavelength
extinction in the latter majority-SWCNT thin films.

While birefringence
microscopy is a powerful multiscale method
for assessing spatially dependent nematic character, deeper quantitative
analysis of the birefringence in the mixed films, in particular, is
hampered by the distribution of refractive indexes present, as fundamentally
as a material property it has different values and polydispersity
for the two materials (e.g., varying with BNNT diameter and SWCNT
(n,m)) and additionally dependence on the wavelength (s) of the light
source. Moreover, the lack of a simple, well-defined, and invariant
optical reference limits its quantitative precision in capturing orientational
distributions at all length scales. Unfortunately, unlike SWCNTs for
which film alignment can be quantified by LD or polarized Raman spectroscopy
as an alternative method, pure BNNT films lack the presence of feasibly
accessible optical transitions and thus the possibility of measurement
using LD or polarized resonant Raman spectroscopy. However, if we
posit that small fractions of SWCNTs are incorporated within a majority
BNNT film without affecting the organization, i.e., essentially as
tracers as illustrated inFigurea, including SWCNTs in the cocomposite SVF-produced
films solves this issue and makes additional characterization tractable.

Accordingly, a combination of LD and polarized Raman spectroscopy
was used to quantify orientational order for cocomposite SWCNT-BNNT
films at different length scale ranges from macro- to meso- to the
nanoscale. For the largest scale, LD was used to sample an area of
≈ 20 mm2(5 mm diameter circle). As shown inFigurec, despite the prominent
differences in birefringent contrast, three films spanning (2.5 –
25) % mass fraction of SWCNTs in the BNNT matrix exhibited nearly
identical polarization activity, in each case yielding an estimated
lower S2Dbound of 0.29, corresponding to an in-plane angular
distribution with a standard deviation of ± 42° around its
average global director. Surprisingly, the increase in observed heterogeneity
in local birefringent domain textures with SWCNT fraction is barely
reflected in the overall degree of order in the films. This observation
could hypothetically arise from several mechanisms, including phase
separation of nanotube materials, differential degrees of responsiveness
to the director by the two materials, an improved alignment in larger
domains to the global director offsetting the appearance of more domains,etc. Neither our birefringence measurements nor LD above
are sufficiently quantitative and sensitive at the length scales necessary
to be good probes for this mechanism, and phenomena such as compositional
nonuniformity become difficult to deconvolve without a precise, spatially
resolved, and self-consistent measurement. As such, we turn to another
spectroscopy enabled by the presence of SWCNTs in the composite.

Polarized Raman scattering microscopy (PRSM) is a powerful and
spatially precise method for quantitatively evaluating the orientation
of nanomaterials. SWCNTs lend particularly well to such study due
to their very strong optical transition resonance amplification of
Raman scattering, and the dominance of the optical modes along the
axis of the nanotube; the depolarized scattering intensity from SWCNTs
scales with cos4of the separation between the nanotube
axis and parallel (V) polarized illumination.,,Here we use PRSM to offer further complementary
insight on the fine structural detail of the thin film composites,
spatially mapping the local degree of nanotube alignment, and the
absolute orientation.Figureshows characterization by PRSM using the Raman scattering
(RS) of the SWCNT component inside several BNNT/SWCNT composites.Figurea presents a schematic
of the light path in the PRSM method andFigureb presents an example of RS from a moderately
well aligned position in the 10% composite film. The SWCNT subpopulation
in resonance at 632.8 nm excitation for this diameter of SWCNT are
metallic in nature, leading to a multipeak set of RS features in the
G-band region. Due to the anisotropy of SWCNTs, these features are
intense for along-axis (0°) illumination and weak for perpendicular
(90°) illumination (commonly referred to as the VV and HH positions).
The S2Destimate (lower bound), determined using just the
VV and HH values shown inFigureb from a representative spot is ≈ 0.81. Prior
spatially resolved Raman characterization of SWCNT films (as conducted
in Walker et al. and Rust et al.,measured the
local misalignment from a single reference vector using sets of VV,
VH, and HH polarizer positions for all points. While effective in
evaluating the presence of global unidirectional alignment, that methodology
only indirectly classified and evaluated the sample microstructure,
limiting further insight and informed iteration on the assembly process.

Detailed
characterization of nematic textures in aligned BNNT/SWCNT
composites, using SWCNTs as spectroscopic probes. (a) schematic of
the light path of the incoming excitation and collected Raman scattering
traveling through a rotatable waveplate to enable mapping of orientationally
specific Raman scattering. (b) Representative polarized Raman spectra
(λexc= 633 nm) of a metallic SWCNT-containing film
at VV (0°) and HH (90°) positions. (c) Angle-dependent Raman
scattering response quantified by peak area Avv(⊖),
(d) converted to a vector the magnitude of which is the local orientational
order parameter, S2D, forming part of an idealized vector
field mapped across a film surface. (e) Vector fields of composites
with varying SWCNT mass fraction (xCNT) across a 500 ×
500 μm square section of each sample, in roughly 12-μm
steps. Heat map intensity reflects the degree of coalignment of each
point with the aggregate global director (blue double-headed arrow,
top right inset, with aggregated macroscopic order parameter, S2D,agg). (f) Aggregate alignment statistics (S2D) and relative local orientations (β) collected from each individual
probed sample point (N= 900 per panel).

Applying the advanced PRSM method and making
measurements across
a grid of positions yields a vector field (depicted by red arrows
inFigured) combining
the information on the local director orientation and its scalar magnitude
of alignment (i.e., the S2Dvalue) at
each position. This is a richer, multiscale, 2-D representation of
the structural and nematic information that likens to the Oseen-Frank
formalism used in treating liquid crystalline systems. A downside of collecting data in this manner
is an increased acquisition time, as a sufficient number of angular
RS collections must be conducted, and a lower number of acquisitions
trades off certainty in the maximum local S2Dfor determination
of the mesoscale alignment direction (see Methods). Using all the
polarization angle resolved data, i.e., the data ofFigurec, for the same point as the
orthogonal spectra ofFigureb yields an S2Dvalue of 0.63, correcting for the
absence of a VH intensity in the above S2Dcalculation.
For simplicity, the macroscopic alignment metric, S2D,agg, is closely related to the average over all grid points, < S2D>; (full details in Methods below). To capture heterogeneities
within and across neighboring nematic domains, gridpoint resolution
and extent were chosen to probe across a large range of length scales,
namely (2 – 15) μm and (40 – 500 μm), respectively.
InFiguree we focus
on the alignment maps acquired over the largest probed sample areas
(with other scales featured inFigure S5).

The heat maps ofFiguree were acquired on the same BNNT-SWCNT composite films
containing
only (2.5 – 25) % SWCNTs by mass characterized inFigure. These maps provide
a multiscale summary of the salient structural features over 0.5 ×
0.5 mm2areas of each composite film: vector fields depicted
as determined inFigured are overlaid on a heat-map of the dot-product of each individual
vector with the aggregate director field. This simultaneously allows
probing of the alignment and shows the utility of SWCNTs to provide
sufficient polarization-dependent signal even at sparse loadings.
Results from a globally aligned SWCNT film (labeled as xCNT= 1.0*, asterisk denoting that this sample was not of the same lot)
are also featured as an alignment reference depicting an optimized
SVF process with SWCNTs. The inset at the top right corner of each
plot reports the global director orientation, as well as its magnitude
(the aggregate macroscopic S2Dvalue, S2D,agg) for each scanned area and a reference vertical arrow of S2D= 1. Finally, plotted in panel 6f are all mesoscopic orientations
relative to the average global director against the local S2Dvalue at each location. Step size (i.e., map resolution) was selected
to span a trade-off of throughput time and minimum domain size (which
was observed to be ≈ 10 μm in neat BNNT films) such that
a single film may be measured over 4 to 8 h.

Notably, with such
maps, we are now able to discern competing mesoscopic
effects and reconcile these with previously observed, compositionally
varying nematic textures. For example, while the mean local S2D(0.51 to 0.6) moderately increased with SWCNT fraction from
0.025 to 0.25, the S2Dvariance and mosaic spread also
increased, detracting from directional alignment on both macro- and
microscopic scales. Given the inherent diameter and length mismatch
of the BNNT and SWCNT nanotubes, it is not surprising that enriching
the minority nanotube fraction would disrupt correlated order. These
trends are also quite evident in the progressively more diffuse scatter
of the computed local S2Dand orientational information
as depicted inFiguref. Nonetheless, in the low-SWCNT limit, the overall alignment state
over these macroscopic areas was fairly constant and similarly consistent
with the lower S2Dbounds reported via LD. This leads us
to conclude that films of BNNTs are highly amenable to alignment,
and in addition to neat films can enable the creation of cocomposites
with hosted SWCNTs and other anisotropic entities, to address a multitude
of application venues.

We have surveyed the feasibility
of global BNNT alignment by automated
SVF. Alignment extent was mediated by nanotube length in a similar
fashion to SWCNTs, resulting in significant ordering with either nanotube
type. Achieving this ordering with broad length partitions sets less
stringent tolerances on the length dispersity required and highlights
the importance of excluding gross material impurities and short nanotubes
from nanotube dispersions. Further, mixed composites showed promising
ability to coalign. We report the characterization of neat BNNT alignment,
in turn interrogating impacts of assembly parameters and multiscale
structure of aligned nanotube thin film composites. Being bidisperse
rodlike systems, BNNT/CNT composites were accordingly shown by our
Raman-based methods to exhibit more diverse phase behavior and disorder
relative to neat CNTs, nonetheless showing promising ability to coalign.
Our observations set an elevated lower bound for the ordering achievable
with SVF-based methods; improvements by surface modifications,,greater material refinement,,and a more detailed
mechanistic understanding of assembly will further advance state-of-the-art
fidelity. A particular next step of importance is likely adding diameter
control to the BNNT length-separated
populations to improve SVF optimization and uniformity in potential
geometric packing. The material processing and metrological methods
detailed herein position the field to more usefully apply assembled
nanotube materials toward quantum-photonic, plasmonic, electronic,
and structural applications.

Certain equipment, instruments, software, or
materials, commercial
or noncommercial, are identified in this paper in order to specify
the experimental procedure adequately. Such identification is not
intended to imply recommendation or endorsement of any product or
service by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),
nor is it intended to imply that the materials or equipment identified
are necessarily the best available for the purpose.

Length sorting for nanotubes
was conducted as described in Shapturenka et al. Parent arc-discharge SWCNT soot and dry synthesized BNNTs
also originated from the same respective material lots (Carbon Solutions,
P2 grade lot A011, and BNNT, LLC, batch BNNT B, Lot Y5B01220211B).
Concentrated nanotube suspensions were bath-sonicated for 30 s prior
to dilution. All aqueous parent nanotube dispersions were uniformly
stabilized with 10.0 g/L sodium deoxycholate (DOC, Sigma-Aldrich BioXtra)
in H2O. Parent dispersions were diluted to produce the
working dispersions, typically 3 mL of 0.3 g/L aqueous DOC with either
4 or 8 μg of nanotube mass.

Filtrations were conducted
through Whatman Nuclepore polycarbonate, polyvinylpyrrolidone-coated,
track-etched membranes (80 nm pore diameter) in a Millipore filtration
assembly connected to house vacuum and a PID-controlled parallelized
pressure line via a digitally driven solenoid bleed-off valve. Applied
pressures were in the range of 2 to 5000 Pa below atmospheric pressure.
Permeate flux was calculated from a trace of meniscus height measured
over time, tracked by machine vision of the dispersion fluid column
against a uniform background. Filtration recipes were run within 10%
of target flow rate, taking membrane and specific cake resistances
into account with a programmed pressure ramp determined via Darcy’s
law. More details can be found in theSupporting Informationand Walker et al.

Filtered films were transferred to glass
coverslips for polarized microscopy and absorbance measurements, and
to silicon wafer pieces for Raman scattering. Once dried, membranes
were adhered to substrate surfaces with water, film side down, and
left to dry completely. Chloroform was progressively introduced dropwise
on top of the adhered membranes to prevent membrane buckling and detachment,
then rinsed further and soaked in a chloroform bath for 10 min. These
were then allowed to air-dry, washed in ethanol and water, and dried
with pressurized air.

POM of transferred
films was conducted on an Olympus BX51 microscope in a static cross-polarized
configuration, with rotation stage position determining the relative
film-polarizer orientation. Maximum IBRwas calculated
as the mean pixel intensity from the sample/stage orientation yielding
the brightest POM image. Imaging conditions (constant camera exposure
time, brightness/contrast values, and zero gain) were consistent within
each length-, composition-, and flux-dependent series, and were varied
among different sample series to maximize the total dynamic range
of brightness values within the RGB channel space. Birefringent contrast
(ΔBR) was calculated as 1 – IBR,45°/IBR,0°, with 0° arbitrarily denoting an azimuthal
sample position yielding the brightest birefringence, and a rotation
of 45° away from that position, respectively).

Polarized absorbance
was measured with a PerkinElmer Lambda 950 in a transmission geometry,
with a Glan-Taylor polarizer crystal in a motorized rotation mount,
filtering a deuterium-halogen UV–vis-NIR illumination source
(≈ 3 × 1.5 mm diameter spot size). The detection range
was (350 – 2000) nm.

σ was numerically obtained by
minimizing mean-squared error between the generated angle distribution
and the distribution captured by the ABC coefficients and converted
to a local S2Dparameter. The aggregate nematic order parameter,
S2D,agg, was calculated by summing all distributions, renormalizing,
and integrating over the resulting distribution.

The authors thank Dr. Catherine Cooksey for access
to and assistance with LD measurements, Dr. Maria Muñoz for
assistance with Raman scattering measurements, and Dr. Jeffrey R.
Simpson for useful discussions. P.S. acknowledges funding support
from the National Academies Postdoctoral Research Fellowship.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.5c00022.

Conceptualization:
P.S., J.A.F. Methodology: P.S., J.A.F. Investigation: P.S., T.A.,
F.M.A., A.R.H., J.A.F. Visualization: P.S. Supervision: A.R.H., J.A.F.
Writing original draft: P.S., J.A.F. Writing review and editing: All.
CRediT:Pavel Shapturenkaconceptualization, formal analysis,
investigation, writing - original draft, writing - review & editing;Tehseen Adelinvestigation, writing - review & editing;Frank M. Abelinvestigation, writing - review & editing;Angela R. Hight Walkerformal analysis, investigation, writing
- review & editing;Jeffrey A Faganconceptualization,
formal analysis, investigation, methodology, supervision, writing
- review & editing.

This effort was
funded through internal National Institute of Standards and Technologies
(NIST) funding. P.S. acknowledges funding support from the National
Academies Postdoctoral Research Fellowship.

Certain equipment, instruments,
software, or materials, commercial or noncommercial, are identified
in this paper in order to specify the experimental procedure adequately.
Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement
of any product or service by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST), nor is it intended to imply that the materials
or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the
purpose.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.