Anthracyclines are effective cytotoxic drugs that contribute to improved survival in breast cancer [1]. Despite its efficacy, the clinical use of anthracycline is limited due to the deleterious cardiac side effects, frequently described as cancer therapy–related cardiac dysfunction (CTRCD) [2]. The overall prevalence of CTRCD varies from 11.1 to 27.6% [3–5]. As the incidence of CTRCD is dose-dependent, the earlier the detection and prediction, the more opportunities of clinical intervention and better prognosis.

Echocardiography is the cornerstone for cardiac imaging in patients with chemotherapy, with advantages of wide availability, good repeatability, and free from radiation exposure [6]. Speckle tracking echocardiography (STE) has been used in the non-invasive evaluation of cardiac mechanics and function [7]. There is robust literature demonstrating the prognostics value of global longitudinal strain (GLS) in patients treated with anthracyclines [8,9]. The GLS-defined strategy for initiation of heart failure therapy during cancer treatment has shown better preservation of cardiac function compared with the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF)-defined strategy [10]. However, GLS is limited by its load dependency, and the cardiac impairment induced by anthracyclines could involve the whole heart [11]. Therefore, other STE parameters, such as left atrial (LA) strain, right ventricular (RV) strain and myocardial work (MW) indices may also be used to identify CTRCD [7]. The integrative changes of the above STE parameters during cancer therapy have not been studied yet.

The objectives of present study were: (1) to describe the longitudinal changes of GLS, left atrial (LA) strains, right heart strains and MW indices by integrative STE examinations during the anthracyclines therapies in breast cancer patients; and (2) to identify the potential strain biomarkers for the early detection and prediction of CTRCD.

Consecutive patients with pathologically confirmed human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) - negative breast cancer at Tangdu hospital were enrolled in the study between November 2020 and September 2023. All patients received 8 cycles of AC-T therapy (the first 4 cycles: cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2; doxorubicin 60 mg/m2every 21 days; the latter 4 cycles: Paclitaxel 600 mg/m2every 21 days). Exclusion criteria were: Age < 18 or > 65 years, myocarditis, hypertension with systolic blood pressure of ≥ 140 mm Hg and/or diastolic pressure of ≥ 90 mm Hg, prior exposure to anthracyclines, and/or history of active or prior cardiac diseases. Each patient underwent echocardiographic examinations before anthracycline chemotherapy (T0), after the completion of every cycle of anthracycline chemotherapy (T1-T4), and three months after anthracycline chemotherapy (T5). The study was approved by the institutional research ethics board at Tangdu hospital, and all patients signed written informed consent.

Patients underwent transthoracic echocardiographic examinations at 6 timepoints over 8 months (pre-anthracycline; 1, 2, 3 and 4 cycles after anthracycline therapy; and 3 months post anthracycline completion). The integrative STE were performed by experienced sonographers using a GE system (Vivid E95, GE Healthcare) and M5S transducer (3.5 MHz) as per current guidelines [12]. Briefly, apical 4-, 3-, and 2-chamber views of LV were obtained for LV strain and MW measurements [13], apical 4-chamber views of the LA for LA strain measurements [14], RV-focused apical 4-chamber views for RV strain measurements [15]. All above views were recorded for 5 consecutive cardiac cycles. The blood pressures for MW estimation were measured using an automated blood pressure cuff just before the echocardiography examination. Post-processing was performed by experienced echocardiographers blinded to all other data using the vendor-specific automated software (EchoPAC 203, GE Healthcare) according to the corresponding technical recommendations. All strain measurements used end-diastole as zero reference points. The absolute values of all strain measurements are reported. As such, lower strain values correspond to worse function.

The derived parameters were as follows: (1) GLS; (2) global work index (GWI), global constructive work (GCW), global wasted work (GWW), global work efficiency (GWE); (3) LA reservoir strain (LASr), conduit strain (LAScd), contraction strain (LASct), LA empty fraction (LAEF); (4) RV free wall longitudinal strain (RVFWLS), RV four-chamber longitudinal strain (RV4CLS).

A relative reduction greater than 15% in GLS from baseline or severer cardiac impairments according to current joint guidelines at any point during follow-up was defined as CTRCD [7].

Continuous variables were summarized as mean ± SD and categorical variables as percentages. Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests were used to evaluate the normality of data. To visualize the longitudinal data, we assessed and quantified the overall time trends of LA, LV, RV and MW indices by CTRCD status using generalized estimating equations (GEEs) with independent working correlation [16]. Corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI) andPvalues were calculated using the estimators. Possible predictors (changes over time in echocardiographic parameters) of GLS-defined CTRCD were analyzed by univariate logistic regression; odds ratio and 95% CI were calculated. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were obtained, and the cutoff points with the greatest sensitivity and specificity were selected according to Youden’s index. Area under the ROC curve (AUC) was calculated to determine the discriminative ability of various echocardiographic parameters between patients with and without GLS-defined CTRCD. SPSS version 26 software (SPSS Inc., Chicago, Illinois) were used for data processing.Pvalue of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Of the 115 patients consented, 83 patients with complete follow-up data were included in the final analysis (all women, mean age: 50.6 ± 9.8 years). Thirty-two patients were excluded due to: absent at the required follow-up examination (n= 14), or image quality not good enough for all analyses (n= 18). None of the patients received other cardiotoxic therapy, radiation therapy, or cardioprotective medications during or before the study period, none developed signs or symptoms of heart failure. The mean baseline LVEF was 63.1% ± 5.0% and twenty-five (30.1%) patients developed GLS defined CTRCD. There were no differences in demographics, clinical characteristics and conventional echocardiographic parameters at baseline between patients with and without CTRCD (Table1).

Echocardiographic parameters at baseline and after chemotherapy are shown in Table2. LVEF did not show significant changes from T0 to T5. Compared with T0, a statistically significant change in GLS was detected at T1 (19.1 ± 3.7% vs. 19.8 ± 3.4%,P< 0.05). As to MW indices, statistically significant changes in GWI were detected from T1 to T4 in comparisons with T0 (T1: 1819 ± 255 mmHg%, T2:1830 ± 289 mmHg%, T3: 1827 ± 294 mmHg%, T4: 1913 ± 294 mmHg%, vs. T0: 1981 ± 283 mmHg%, allP< 0.05). Similarly, statistically significant deteriorations in GCW were observed at from T1 to T5 in comparisons with T0 (T1: 2039 ± 359 mmHg%, T2: 1965 ± 352 mmHg%, T3: 2025 ± 301 mmHg%, T4: 2093 ± 288 mmHg%, T5: 2083 ± 259 mmHg%, vs. T0: 2195 ± 349 mmHg%, allP< 0.05). GWW was significantly increased only at T5 (P< 0.05), suggestive of a late change. GWE was not significantly different across T0 to T5.

For LA strain parameters, statistically significant changes in LASr were detected from T1 to T4 in comparisons with T0 (T1: 38.7 ± 8.4%, T2: 38.3 ± 7.1%, T3: 38.8 ± 7.9%, T4: 39.7 ± 7.6%, vs. T0: 42.6 ± 8.2%, allP< 0.05). Similarly, significant reductions in LAScd were observed from T1 to T3 (T1: 26.1 ± 7.9%, T2: 26.0 ± 7.7%, T3: 26.5 ± 7.7%, vs. T0: 29.2 ± 7.9%, allP< 0.05). In additional, statistically significant strain abnormalities in LAEF was observed from T2 to T4 (T2: 47.3 ± 7.0%, T3: 47.3 ± 6.9%, T4: 47.3 ± 7.8%, vs. T0: 49.8 ± 7.0%, allP< 0.05). RVFWLS and RV4CLS did not show significant changes from T0 to T5.

The trajectories of LVEF between patients with and without CTRCD were not significantly different. The trajectories of GLS were significantly different (P< 0.001) between groups with nadir reached at T1 (Fig.1). For MW indices, the trajectories of GWI, and GCW were significantly different (P< 0.001 andP= 0.004, respectively) between patients with and without CTRCD with nadir reached at T1. There was no statistically significant difference in the trajectories of GWW and GWE between patients with and without CTRCD. For LA strain parameters, the trajectories of LASr, LAScd and LAEF were significantly different (P< 0.001,P= 0.003 andP= 0.010, respectively) between patients with and without CTRCD with nadir reached at T1 (LASr and LAScd) or T4 (LAEF) into anthracycline therapy. There was no statistically significant difference in the trajectories of LASct between patients with and without CTRCD.

Based on the above analyses, GLS, LASr, LAEF, GWI and GCW were identified as potential indicators for CTRCD during the treatment. By further logistic regression analysis, the relative reduction of GLS, LASr and GWI between T0 and T1 were associated with subsequent GLS-defined CTRCD (P< 0.001,P< 0.001 andP= 0.009, respectively) (Table3). However, LAEF and GCW were not significant predictors of GLS-defined CTRCD.

As shown in the ROC curve analysis (Fig.2; Table4), a relative decrease in GLS of > 1.9% (sensitivity: 76%; specificity: 83%; AUC: 0.827;P< 0.001), a relative decrease in LASr of > 6.5% (sensitivity: 72%; specificity: 85%; AUC: 0.811;P< 0.001) and a relative decrease in GWI of > 121 mmHg% (sensitivity: 80%; specificity: 66%; AUC: 0.750;P< 0.001) at T1 were able to discriminate between patients with and without GLS-defined CTRCD, respectively. The combination of GWI and LASr leaded to an increase of AUC to 0.832. When GLS, LASr and GWI were combined, the sensitivity increased to 84%, the specificity increased to 91%, and the AUC increased to 0.897.

In present study, integrative changes in STE during anthracycline based chemotherapy in breast cancer were described in detail. Compared with pre-anthracycline stage, GLS, LASr, LAScd, GWI, GCW were impaired very early just after one cycle treatment. Changes in GLS, LASr, and GWI individually were associated with GLS-defined CTRCD. The combined use of GLS, LASr, and GWI could improve the ability to predict GLS-defined CTRCD (Graphical Abstract).

Anthracyclines are among the most effective and widely used anticancer drugs, but unfortunately their broad-spectrum cytotoxicity can affect not just the tumors, but also other metabolically active cells such as cardiomyocytes, thus leading to cardiomyopathy [17]. However, until a threshold point is reached, patients may have no obvious cardiac symptoms for a long time after chemotherapy [18]. Therefore, regular follow-up of chemotherapy patients with myocardial deformation parameters might be helpful for early diagnosis of myocardial damage and protective intervention [19]. We examined the survivors at 6 timepoints over 8 months (pre-anthracycline; 1, 2, 3 and 4 cycles after anthracycline therapy; and 3 months post anthracycline completion), which could help us with the early detection of CTRCD.

A relative decrease in LVEF of > 10% or a value of LVEF of < 50% post-chemotherapy were defined CTRCD in initial studies [20]. However, the accuracy and sensitivity of LVEF in determining early myocardial injury is limited [10]. By the time that LVEF values have decreased, cardiac injury has reached a stage which cannot be completely reversed [18]. In this study, we defined CTRCD as in the 2022 guidelines that a relative reduction greater than 15% in GLS compared with baseline or severer cardiac impairments at any point during follow-up [7]. We found that significant declines in GLS were observed at T1 and GLS was different between patients with and without CTRCD in trajectories analysis. A previous study also determined that an early decrease in GLS from baseline to 3 months among breast cancer patients with chemotherapy was an independent predictor of CTRCD development at 6 months [21].

Myocardial work indices are echocardiographic parameters obtained from left ventricular pressure-strain loops [13], which have the potential to overcome the load-dependency limitations of GLS and improve quantification of the myocardial performance and energy consumption [11]. In our research, it is confirmed that changes in GWI were associated with subsequent CTRCD, which is consistent with previous reports [22]. It was suggested that GWI had diagnosis value of early-stage CTRCD. The tendency for changes in GWW may be related to the increase wall stress in the myocardium against a higher afterload [23]. However, GWE and GWW remains statistically unchanged in the early stages of GLS-defined CTRCD as shown by the trajectory analysis.

Anthracycline induced CTRCD is manifested by progressive and mostly irreversible impairment of left ventricular diastolic function (LVDD), followed by systolic dysfunction [24], accompanied by cardiac arrhythmias, low electrocardiographic QRS voltage and an increase in cardiac troponin levels. LA strain is a sensitive marker particularly of early LVDD, and LASr function decreases in a unidirectional fashion as LVDD progresses [25]. The addition of LA strain was able to classify patients with preserved LVEF into varied grades of LVDD [26]. In a recent study about the atrial strain and CTRCD, LASr was shown to be significantly reduced after the early treatment [27]. Similarly, both the LASr and LAScd were reduced just after the first cycle of anthracycline treatment in present study. Moreover, the trajectories of LASr, LAScd and LAEF were significantly different between patients with and without CTRCD, and LASr was further identified as a significant predictor of early stage of CTRCD.

The recent expert consensus statement on the multimodality imaging of adult patients receiving cancer therapy recommends monitoring RV function during cancer therapy [7]. Previous study has suggested that changes in RV function and size, including in 3D echocardiography derived RV strain and volume, occur after anthracycline-based chemotherapy [28]. However, the present RV strain data demonstrated that both RVFWLS and RV4CLS were no significantly changed in any point during follow-up compared with baseline values. The main reason for the discrepancy may attribute to the difference in diseases of included patients. Previous reports have suggested that cardiac infiltration of lymphoma and acute lymphoblastic leukemia per se was considered as the cause of myocardial dysfunction without treatment [29,30]. In addition, the anthracycline-induced right ventricular cardiotoxicity in hematologic malignancy reported by Zhao et al. used a RV definition of cardiotoxicity (a > 10% relative reduction in RVEF or a relative reduction of > 5% to an absolute value of < 45%), which is different from present study. Moreover, the image acquisition and analyses were based on 3D echocardiographic data, rather than our 2D strain derived parameters. Considering the structural complexity of the right ventricle, 3D echocardiography might provide additional valuable information than 2D images. Collectively, the monitoring of RV function during cancer therapy in breast cancer is still of great clinical interest for in further studies.

Although the individual changes of GLS, LASr, and GWI could already be used to separate the patients with and without subsequent CTRCD during the follow-up, the integrative combination of these parameters was more effective for the prediction of GLS-defined CTRCD. Our findings suggested that the cardiac injure induced by anthracyclines was not only manifested as the left ventricular motion impairment (GLS), but also the myocardial energy consumption (MW indices) and left atrial function (LASr). It was highlighted that the integrative STE could give more diagnostic and predictive information for CTRCD than single parameters. As the myocardial work can only be determined by GE machines currently, the integrative STE protocol could only be performed in GE system for now. The training needs are mainly about the 2D left ventricular and atrial views, the time burden is close to conventional transthoracic echocardiography examinations with the widely use of automated strain algorithms. With the development of myocardial work software by neutral and independent third-party, the integrative STE protocol will be more feasible in routine clinical practice.

There are several limitations in this study that should be acknowledged. First, the single-center design and lack of ethnic diversity limit the generalizability of present findings, future studies with multi-centers and diverse ethnicities are needed for external validation. Second, it also remains to be further verified whether our results could apply to older adults and male patients. The older age (> 65 years) is an identified risk factor associated with CTRCD, and related with significantly reduced baseline strains as reported by previous studies [31–33], the inclusion of old patients may introduce potential confounding factors for analysis. In addition, the majority of older females were unable to fulfil the explorative requirements of comprehensive strain analyses as present study due to the non-satisfied image quality in some echocardiographic views. As the integrative echocardiographic strategy is developed now, the requirements of image views are reduced, which facilitates the broader application. In present study, we focused on the breast cancer, thus all the included patients are females, studies of other diseases treated with anthracyclines could help explore the effectiveness of the developed strategy. Third, the good reproducibility of included STE parameters has been verified by many studies in various populations, therefore, we did not repeat the intra- and inter-observer reproducibility tests for STE parameters. Last but not least, this study is lack of long follow-up results. As stated in the position paper by ESC, early effects occur within the first year of anthracycline treatment, while late effect manifest themselves after several years [34]. Future studies with long-term follow-up observations could provide useful evidence for the clinical relevance of the proposed integrated strategy.

In women receiving anthracyclines therapy for HER2–negative breast cancer, reduced GLS, LA strains and MW indices just after one cycle therapy were significantly associated with CTRCD. The integrative use of echocardiographic GLS, LASr and GWI may be a reliable approach for early diagnosis and prediction of CTRCD, which may allow for more objective decision-making regarding chemotherapy monitoring.

For their encouragement, support, and research assistance, I would like to thank the following individuals who have contributed substantially to the completion of this work (Shujia Peng, Lin Yang, Ping Yang, Yanming Dong, Bo Qiu).