TheC. elegansCSR-1encodes an essential Argonaute protein that binds to 22 nucleotide small guide RNA to regulate germline gene expression. Recent characterization of the twoCSR-1isoforms (a and b) have demonstrated tissue-specific expression and functions. Here, we found that loss of function to thecsr-1aisoform has minimal effect on lifespan while a mutant with deletion to bothcsr-1aandcsr-1bisoforms shows a significant decrease in lifespan. Furthermore, we found that single copy expression of a slicing inactive variant ofcsr-1fails to rescue the shortened lifespan. Overall, the data here provide new information on the requirement of isoform and domain-specific contribution ofCSR-1toC. eleganslifespan.

(a)Schematic ofcsr-1transcript illustrating the two isoforms and the PIWI domain. The location of nucleotide deletions in the mutants used is illustrated along with amino acids mutated within the PIWI region of the single copycsr-1SINtranscript. Thecsr-1sequence and domain information were retrieved from WormBase (Sternberget al.2024). Lifespan analysis of(b)csr-1(tm892)and(c)csr-1a(cmp135)relative toN2wildtype.(d)Lifespan analysis ofC. elegansexpressing a single copy ofcsr-1WTorcsr-1SINvariant after feeding with empty vector (EV) orcsr-1(RNAi). Thecsr-1(RNAi) targets a region within exon 6 ofcsr-1bthat is re-encoded in the single copy transcript to permit only knockdown of the endogenouscsr-1transcript. The log-rank test was used to test for statistical significance of the lifespan assay, *P<0.05, ** P<0.01, and ***P<0.001. Three independent trials were performed for the lifespan assay with Trial 2 shown for all graphs. Statistics for all trials are presented inExtended Data 1.

TheC. elegansCSR-1(ChromosomeSegregation andRNAi deficient) encodes an essential Argonaute protein that binds to small guide RNA antisense to thousands of germline enriched transcripts to regulate gene expression (Claycomb et al.2009; Cecere et al.2014). Recently, we showed thatcsr-1is required for the 3' processing of small nuclear RNA (snRNA) transcripts inC. elegans, adding to the repertoire of cellular processes regulated by this Argonaute, which also positively processes histone mRNA 3' tail (Avgousti et al. 2012; Wedeles et al. 2013; Waddell and Wu 2024). A pair of studies have recently identified two isoforms ofcsr-1that exhibit distinct tissue and temporal-specific expression patterns (Nguyen and Phillips 2021; Charlesworth et al. 2021). In our study, we show that loss ofcsr-1adoes not influence snRNA processing, but a mutation that deletes bothcsr-1aandcsr-1bisoforms led to an increase in misprocessed snRNA characterized by 3' cleavage failure and transcriptional read-through. Single copy rescue of catalytically inactivecsr-1balso fails to rescue snRNA misprocessing caused bycsr-1depletion, implicating the requirement of the b isoform and its slicing activity for snRNA processing.

Loss of snRNA processing through knockdown or mutations to its principal regulator, the Integrator complex, shortens the lifespan ofC. elegansandDrosophila(Tepe et al. 2023; Waddell and Wu 2024). To explore howcsr-1influences lifespan, we performed lifespan analysis usingcsr-1isoform mutants and catalytically inactive variants. Thecsr-1(tm892)mutant carries a 400 bp deletion generated by TMP/UV mutagenesis that renders bothcsr-1aandcsr-1bnull (Figure 1a). In thecsr-1(tm892)mutant, lifespan was drastically reduced by 29.3% compared to theN2wildtype (Figure 1b). Thecsr-1a(cmp135)mutant contains a 20 bp deletion generated by CRSIPR edit that abolishes the start codon and the first seven amino acids ofcsr-1abut does not affectcsr-1b(Figure 1a) (Nguyen and Phillips 2021). Loss ofcsr-1aled to a small (5%) but statistically significant decrease in lifespan compared to theN2wildtype (Figure 1d). A recent study has also shown that loss ofcsr-1ahas little to no effect on lifespan ofC. elegansmales (Rao et al. 2025). This data suggests thatcsr-1bmay play a more prominent role in lifespan regulation compared tocsr-1a, though we cannot rule out that the shortened lifespan of thecsr-1(tm892)mutant is caused by the loss of both isoforms.

Next, we investigated the requirement of theCSR-1catalytic activity in lifespan regulation. We fedC. elegansstrains expressing either a single copy of wildtype (csr-1bWT) orslicinginactive (csr-1bSIN) variant ofcsr-1transcript empty vector (EV) orcsr-1RNAi and measured lifespan. We used acsr-1RNAi clone
that targets 420 bp within exon 6 ofcsr-1b(or exon 7 ofcsr-1a), a region that is re-encoded in the single copy insertion variants to confer RNAi resistance. This strategy allows RNAi knockdown of the endogenouscsr-1transcript to test the effect of the single copy variants that are unaffected by the RNAi (Gerson-Gurwitz et al.2016; Waddell and Wu 2024). We found thatcsr-1bWTshowed a 10% decrease in lifespan when fed thecsr-1RNAi whilecsr-1SINshowed a 25% decrease in lifespan compared to their respective EV fed control (Figure 1d). The moderate lifespan decreases in thecsr-1bWTstrain suggest that single copy rescue is not sufficient to compensate for the depletion of endogenouscsr-1caused by RNAi. However, the 25% lifespan decrease in thecsr-1bSINstrain suggests that the shortened lifespan is exacerbated when rescued with the slicing inactive variant ofcsr-1b(Figure 1d).This data suggests that the slicing activity ofcsr-1bis required for a normal lifespan.

In conclusion, the analysis performed here provides new information on the isoform and catalytic specific requirements ofcsr-1onC. eleganslifespan. Given that loss ofCSR-1or its slicer activity leads to the upregulation of specific CSR-1 targets, resulting in embryonic lethality and sterility (Gerson-Gurwitz et al. 2016; Quarato et al. 2021; Singh et al. 2021), the observed effect of thecsr-1phenotype on lifespan is likely due to pleiotropic factors, including developmental germline defects or altered stress responses.

C. eleganswere cultured at 20°C using standard conditions described by described by (Brenner 1974). Strains used in this study are found in the Reagents table. For the lifespan assay, worms were synchronized using the hypochlorite treatment and grown on NGM agar plates containing 50 mg/mL carbenicillin and 100 mg/mLof isopropyl β-D-thiogalactopyranoside seeded with empty vector (L4440) orcsr-1RNAi expressingHT115(DE3)E. coli. Worms were manually transferred to new plates each day during the reproductive window for progeny separation and monitored every other day for death by gentle prodding with a sterilized platinum pick. Worms were considered dead if they did not respond to the prodding and were censored if they exhibited protruding gonad or vulva. N = 3 independent trials were performed for all lifespan studies, with the number of animals scored for each condition and statistics presented in Extended Data 1.

Genomic DNA fromN2wildtype worms were used to generate a 420 bp DNA fragment ofcsr-1within exon 6 flanked withattB cloning sites using primers listed in Reagents with Q5 High-Fidelity DNA polymerase. Gateway cloning was performed to first insert the template into pDONR221 followed by recombination into the pGC31 RNAi destination vector (Voutev and Hubbard 2008). The constructedcsr-1RNAi clone was verified by Sanger sequencing and transformed intoHT115(DE3)E. coli.

The GraphPad Prism software (V8.4.3) was used to generate graphical data, with analysis of lifespan data performed using the log-rank test with OASIS2 (https://sbi.postech.ac.kr/oasis2/) (Han et al.2016).

ltSi242 [csr-1p::csr-1(re-encoded; D606A, D681A: isoform b numbering) +Cbr-unc-119(+)] II.

Forward primer to amplifycsr-1exon 6 for RNAi. Uppercase indicateattB1sequence, lower case indicatecsr-1primer binding sequence.

Reverse primer to amplifycsr-1exon 6 for RNAi. Uppercase indicateattB2sequence, lower case indicatecsr-1primer binding sequence.

Some strains were provided by theCaenorhabditisGenetic Centre (University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN) which is supported by the NIH Office of Research Infrastructure Program (P40 OD010440). We thank Dr. Carolyn M. Phillips (University of Southern California) for generously sharing the USC1258csr-1a(cmp135)worm strain.