Areca catechuflowers are an important component of traditional Chinese medicine for the treatment of various diseases. Studies on its secondary metabolites have largely focused on pyridine alkaloids yet a high-resolution metabolic profile of another important nutrient and coenzyme, the B vitamins, remains lacking. Here, we analyzed the levels of eight B vitamins in the inflorescence ofA. catechuby targeted metabolomics. Our results showed that pantothenic acid and riboflavin were the predominant B vitamins, and that different B vitamins exhibited tissue-specific expression patterns within the various parts of the inflorescence. Furthermore, panoramic expression profiles of genes related to B vitamin biosynthesis in the inflorescence were mapped. Notably, we characterized a key rate-limiting enzyme in the thiamine biosynthesis pathway, the thiazole synthase (AcTHI1), that plays a crucial role in regulating thiamine biosynthesis. Additionally, integrated transcriptomic and targeted metabolomic analyses revealed hub transcription factors, including AcNAC73, AcMYB61, and AcARF9, that are associated with the regulation of pantothenic acid and thiamine metabolism. Taken together, our results lay a foundation for understanding the regulation of B vitamin metabolism during the development ofA. catechuinflorescence and provide a theoretical basis for the development of the medicinal and nutritional potential of the plant.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12864-025-11965-4.

B vitamins are a class of structurally diverse, water-soluble compounds that play various important biological functions, including energy metabolism, nerve conduction, and DNA synthesis [1–3]. Furthermore, B vitamins are involved in the metabolism of carbohydrates, fats, and proteins, helping in the release of energy stored in food. For example, the vitamin B1 thiamine participates in the metabolism of glucose as a coenzyme, and the vitamin B2 riboflavin participates in redox reactions in mitochondria to promote energy production [4,5]. Deficiencies of these vitamins can lead to the development of various health problems, such as heart disease (thiamine deficiency), chapped skin, inflammation (riboflavin deficiency), mental depression (niacin deficiency), nervous system problems (pyridoxine deficiency), and other diseases [5,6]. B vitamins are indispensable substances in human metabolism but they cannot be synthesized in the human body, so an adequate supply can be obtained through dietary intake [1].

B vitamins are not only vital to human health but also essential for plant development and adaptation to environmental changes [7,8]. For example, thiamine does not only function as coenzyme in the metabolism of carbohydrates and amino acids but is also shown to be involved in plant’s response to abiotic stress and photoperiod, with drought and salt stress stimulating its accumulation [9–11]. Riboflavin participates in the redox reactions and energy metabolism in plants as a coenzyme, helping the plants cope with various stresses. In the pyridoxine biosynthetic pathway, many metabolism-related genes have been found to respond to salt stress, including the downregulation ofSOS4that encodes a pyridoxal kinase [12]. Moreover, heat and cold stress can also impact the expression of B vitamin biosynthetic genes, suggesting that temperature may affect the accumulation of B vitamins [10,13]. In addition, pyridoxine can increase the plant tolerance to photooxidation and high light stress [14].

The metabolism of plant B vitamins has been extensively studied. In a recent study, the content of B vitamins in 26 commonly consumed vegetables was measured [15]. In different black bean varieties, the contents and compositions of several major B vitamins including thiamine, flavin adenine dinucleotide, and riboflavin, vary greatly among the varieties [16]. In addition, the analysis of B vitamin biosynthesis is becoming more and more complete. For instance, theAtTHICgene encoding a key rate-limiting enzyme in vitamin B1 metabolism was identified inArabidopsis[17]. In maize, the overexpression of DHFS, the rate-limiting enzyme in folic acid biosynthesis, significantly increases the folic acid content [18]. Similarly, the overexpression of GTP cyclohydrolase I (GTP), the first reactive enzyme in the folic acid biosynthesis pathway, significantly increases the folic acid content in tomatoes, Mexican common bean, and potatoes [19,20]. The characterization of the key genes involved in B vitamin metabolic pathways have laid a foundation for further analysis of the mechanisms underlying the metabolic regulation of B vitamins in plants.

Areca catechuL. belongs to the palm family and is widely cultivated in tropical areas. Our previous study found that areca nuts contain abundant secondary metabolites especially trigonelline, arecoline, and other pyridine alkaloids, which have important economic and medicinal values. Previous studies have reported a variety of alkaloids in areca flowers but limited studies on the flower’s B vitamin content have been conducted. In particular, the content and distribution of B vitamins in areca inflorescence have not been analyzed. WhileA. catechuis primarily known for its psychoactive and medicinal properties, the understanding of B vitamin metabolism in the areca inflorescence could contribute to the development of a flower-based traditional Chinese medicine. In addition, the identification and analysis of the B vitamins in areca inflorescences can add value to the plant by expanding its marketability as health care products, and can promote the development of areca industry in the green and sustainable direction.

Here, the contents of eight B vitamins in the inflorescence of areca were analyzed using targeted metabolomics, and the expression profiles of genes related to B vitamin metabolism were generated by RNA-seq analysis. Furthermore, the hub genes related to B vitamin metabolism were mined through weighted gene co-expression network analysis (WGCNA). The findings of this study contribute in filling the research gap in B vitamin metabolism especially in the inflorescence context, providing a basis for future additional applications of areca flowers.

Tissues from different parts of areca inflorescence were collected from Hainan University, Danzhou Campus (DanZhou City, Hainan Province). The permission to collect plant samples was obtained from the Agricultural Research, Education and Extension Organization of China. The specimens were stored at the Hainan Normal University (deposition number: hnu-zgz0056). The plant samples were identified by the corresponding author, Dr. Guangzhen Zhou.

The inflorescence samples at two developmental stages were collected in the Danzhou campus of Hainan University. Stage 1 is the early stage of inflorescence development, when the male and female flowers have just completed differentiation. Stage 2 is the phase of flower development and maturation. The part at the base of the inflorescence that bears the male flowers (P1), the part bearing the female flowers at the top of the inflorescence (P3), and the part of the inflorescence that bears neither male nor female flowers (P2) were sampled for RNA-sequencing and targeted detection of B vitamin content. For each tissue, three independent biological replicates were collected. To ensure the integrity of RNA preservation and the accuracy of subsequent data analysis, the tissues were immediately flash frozen and stored at −80℃.

The eight B vitamins were detected from the freeze-dried areca inflorescence samples by Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) following the methods and parameters of Kivrak et al. [21]. The chromatographic column used was Acquity UPLC BEH C18 (1.7 μm, 2.1 × 100 mm) [Agilent]. The mobile phase used consisted of water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A) and methyl alcohol (solvent B) and was degassed by sonication. The gradient program was run as follows: 99% solvent A: 1% solvent B, 0 to 2 min; 45% solvent A: 55% solvent B, 2 to 6 min; 45% solvent A: 55% solvent B, 6 to 10 min; 99% solvent A: 1% solvent B. The flow rate is 0.3 mL/min, the column temperature is 40℃, and the sample temperature is 4℃.

Total RNA from the areca inflorescence was extracted according to the instructions of the Tiangen Plant RNA Extraction Kit [TIANGEN Biotechnology Company, Beijing, China]. The quality of RNA samples was assessed using a meticulous evaluation protocol. The RNA sequencing methods followed the procedures outlined in our previous study [22].

We employed the co-expression networks by WGCNA. These networks were then visualized using Cytoscape software (version 1.7.2). Undetectable genes or those with relatively low expression levels (FPKM < 1) were excluded from the analysis. The parameters for constructing the WGCNA were set as follows: Weighted network (unsigned), hierarchical clustering tree using the Dynamic Hybrid Tree Cut algorithm, power parameter set to 6, minimum module size of 30, and minimum height for merging modules set to 0.25. Module eigengenes (ME) were computed for each module, and module correlation was assessed based on these ME values.

The cDNA sequence ofAcTHI1was inserted into pCAMBIA1300 vector at the XbaI/SpeI restriction sites, resulting in the creation of pCAMBIA1300-AcTHI1expression vector controlled by a 35 S promoter. The primers used for gene cloning were: AcTHI1-1300F_GCTCTAGAATGGCGTCCATGGCCACGACCCTCG; and AcTHI1-1300R_GGACTAGTAGCATCGACGACATCCCCACCGTCC.

The plasmid construct (pCAMBIA1300-AcTHI1) was introduced into the GV3101 strain ofAgrobacterium tumefacienswhich was used to transform theA. thaliana thi1mutant using the floral dip method. Homozygous transgenic lines forAcTHI1were screened from the T3 generation for further analysis.

Data are expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD) of three independent biological replicates. Statistical significance was assessed by an unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test (***,P< 0.001; **,P< 0.01; *,P< 0.05). All analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism 9.0 (GraphPad Software, USA).

To reveal whether the accumulation pattern of B vitamins is related to inflorescence development, we performed targeted metabolomics analysis on the three different parts of the inflorescences at two developmental stages. Stage 1 is the early stage of inflorescence development, when the male and female flowers have just completed differentiation. Stage 2 is the phase of male and female flower development and maturation (Fig.1a). The relative amounts of thiamine (vitB1), riboflavin (vitB2), nicotinamide (vitB3), nicotinic acid (vitB3), pantothenic acid (vitB5), pyridoxine (vitB6), biotin (vitB7), and folic acid (vitB9) in the three inflorescence parts of the two inflorescence stages were determined (Fig.1b). We observed a consistent distribution of B vitamins across the three parts of the inflorescence, with riboflavin and pantothenic acid as the predominant ones across all analyzed samples (Fig.1b). Notably, compared with the inflorescences in the stage 1, the proportion of nicotinic acid in P1, P2, and P3 in the stage 2 increased significantly (Fig.1b). In both stages, nicotinic acid content is lower in P1 and P3 in reference to P2 (Fig.1c). Furthermore, the distributions of B vitamins between the two stages of inflorescence development show distinct patterns in different parts. Specifically, thiamine content was significantly higher in P1 than in P2 and P3 (Fig.1c). In stage 2, riboflavin, nicotinamide, nicotinic acid, pantothenic acid, and biotin exhibited higher concentrations in P2 compared to P1 and P3. However, riboflavin and nicotinic acid both exhibited the same observation in both stage 1 and stage 2. Additionally, folic acid levels increased progressively during stage 1 of inflorescence development, with P1 showing significantly higher level than P2 and P3 during stage 2. In both stages, pyridoxine exhibited higher concentrations in P3 compared to P1 and P2 (Fig.1c).

We further explored the relationships among the different B vitamins (Fig.1d; Table S1). The analysis revealed significant positive correlations between thiamine and folic acid, and significant negative correlations of thiamine with nicotinic acid and with nicotinamide. Moreover, riboflavin and nicotinamide showed significant positive correlations with nicotinic acid and pantothenic acid. There was a significant positive correlation between niacin and pantothenic acid, biotin and niacin, and biotin and pantothenic acid. Conversely, folic acid showed significant negative correlations with nicotinamide, nicotinic acid, and pantothenic acid; thiamine correlated negatively with both nicotinic acid and nicotinamide. Additionally, nicotinic acid was significantly and negatively correlated with pyridoxine (Fig.1d). We also compared the fold-change difference in B vitamin contents between inflorescence stages and different parts. The content of niacin (nicotinic acid) in S2P2 was 7.38 times that in S2P3, and the nicotinamide content in S1P1 was significantly increased 4.86 times compared to S2P1 (Fig.1d). Furthermore, to determine how much a certain metabolite contributes to sample classification, we obtained the Variable Importance in Projection (VIP) values for the different comparison groups (Fig.1d). Based on VIP values, we further identified B vitamins that were significantly different among the comparison groups. Notably, the VIP value of pantothenic acid in all of the comparison groups except the S2P1-vs-S2P3 group was greater than 1, suggesting that it may play an important role in inflorescence development as a key metabolite (Fig.1d).

We conducted transcriptome sequencing analysis across the three inflorescence parts (P1–P3) of two developmental stages. A total of 18 libraries were prepared and filtered, resulting in 622,636,230 clean reads. The quality assessment indicated that over 94.04% of bases had a Q30 score (Table S2). Furthermore, principal component analysis (PCA) indicated that we obtained high quality RNA-seq data, and the samples had satisfactory stability and repeatability (Fig.2a). Transcriptome analysis revealed a total of 29,189 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) across nine comparisons between the transcriptomes taken from distinct parts of the inflorescence in two developmental stages (Fig.2b).

Comparing the different inflorescence parts at the same developmental stage demonstrated tissue-specific variation in terms of DEGs. At stage 1, the number of DEGs identified was 2785 (1672 upregulated, 1113 downregulated) in S1P1-vs-S1P2, 3596 (2196 upregulated, 1400 downregulated) in S1P1-vs-S1P3, and 334 (212 upregulated, 122 downregulated) in S1P2-vs-S1P3. At stage 2, DEGs amounted to 3788 (1633 upregulated, 2155 downregulated) in S2P1-vs-S2P2, 3227 (1582 upregulated, 1645 downregulated) in S2P1-vs-S2P3, and 2066 (1432 upregulated, 634 downregulated) in S2P2-vs-S2P3. Comparison of two developmental stages for each specific part of the inflorescence showed developmental-specific variation, which identified 5188 DEGs (3046 upregulated, 2142 downregulated) in S1P1-vs-S2P1, 4434 DEGs (2267 upregulated, 2167 downregulated) in S1P2-vs-S2P2, and 3771 DEGs (2061 upregulated, 1710 downregulated) in S1P3-vs-S2P3. These findings highlight the significant transcriptional differences that underlie the biological processes in areca inflorescence development, some of which may explain the regulation of B vitamins biosynthesis (Fig.2b).

To determine the functional attributes of the DEGs identified, KEGG enrichment analysis was performed. In the S1P1-vs-S1P2 group, DEGs were notably enriched for pathways such as plant hormone signal transduction, MAPK signaling, and betalain biosynthesis (Fig.2c; Table S3). In the S1P1-vs-S1P3 group, enrichment was remarkable for plant hormone signal transduction, MAPK signaling, and flavonoid biosynthesis (Fig.2d; Table S4). Meanwhile, the top three enriched pathways in the S1P2-vs-S1P3 group included photosynthesis-antenna proteins, plant hormone signal transduction, and cutin, suberin, and wax biosynthesis (Fig.2e; Table S5). Similarly, both the S2P1-vs-S2P2 and S2P1-vs-S2P3 comparisons showed significant enrichment in pathways such as flavonoid biosynthesis, plant hormone signal transduction and cutin, suberin, and wax biosynthesis (Fig.2f-g; Table S6; Table S7). Notably, the cutin, suberin, and wax biosynthesis stood out as the most enriched pathway in the DEGs of the S2P2-vs-S2P3 group (Fig.2h; Table S8). These results provide insights into the functional significance of the identified DEGs between the two developmental stages and among tissue types in the inflorescence of areca plants.

To delve deeper into the molecular mechanisms influencing B vitamin metabolism during inflorescence development, common DEGs among different tissue parts at the same developmental stage were identified. Our analysis identified 99 common DEGs in developmental stage 1 and 285 in developmental stage 2 (Fig.3a and b). Among these common DEGs, a total of 22 genes were identified to encode for transcription factors (TFs), some of which might be specifically involved in the regulation of B vitamin metabolism. To demonstrate this, we analyzed the correlation between the transcription factors and the B vitamins and selected the most significant correlations (p-value < 0.05; cor-value: top 10) (Fig.3c; Table S8). Notably, the expression profiles of select TFs exhibited marked differences across the various parts and developmental stages of the inflorescence. For example,OFPwas specifically highly expressed in S2P1, whileLFYwas specifically highly expressed in S1P1 (Fig.3c). On the other hand,OFP,MYB35,NAC25,NAC36,EDF2, andKAN2may be involved in the accumulation of riboflavin, andMYB84may be related to the regulation of nicotinic acid metabolism (more information was shown in Table S8).

Based on literature, we examined multiple B vitamin biosynthetic pathways, identified the genes involved, and mapped their expression profiles based on our transcriptome analysis of areca inflorescence (Fig.4). Notably, within the vitB1 biosynthesis pathway, we identified the thiazole synthase coding gene (THI1) in three copies. Expression analysis revealed high levels ofTHI1in floral tissues P1 and P3, correlating with elevated thiamine content in these tissues (Fig.4). Additionally, we identified a total of 23 genes related to vitB2 biosynthesis and eight genes related to vitB3 biosynthesis. We identified the key rate-limiting enzyme nicotinamidase (NIC) in nicotinic acid biosynthesis, which is present in four copies in areca inflorescence, withAC08G060170showing significantly higher expression than the otherNICgenes (Fig.4). Furthermore, a gene encoding 3-methyl-2-oxobutanoate hydroxymethyl transferase (KPHMT) in the vitB5 biosynthetic pathway and a pyridoxine 5’-phosphate oxidase coding gene (PPOX) in the vitB6 biosynthetic pathway exhibited consistently high expression across all the tested samples. Structural genes associated with vitamin B7 and B9 biosynthesis were also identified as shown in Fig.4. Among them, a gene encoding 7,8-diaminopelargonic acid aminotransferase (BIO1) in the vitB7 biosynthetic pathway and a gene encoding aminodeoxychorismatelyase (ADCL) were highly expressed in the inflorescence (Fig.4). These gene expression profiles provide a basis for the mining of candidate genes related to the biosynthesis of B vitamins.

Thiamine not only participate in photosynthesis and energy metabolism in plants but also promotes plant growth, development, and resistance to pathogens [10]– [11]. In our study, we identified a gene encoding thiazole synthase (THI1) in the areca genome. To explore the biological role ofAcTHI1, we utilized a T-DNA insertion mutant ofAtthi1(Salk_057052C) obtained from AraShare (https://www.arashare.cn/index/). Subsequently, we cloned the coding sequence ofAcTHI1into a pCAMBIA-plasmid, and introduced it into the genome of theAtthi1mutant viaAgrobacterium-mediated transformation. The qPCR results showed thatAcTHI1was significantly and highly expressed in transgenicArabidopsislines (Figure S1). Thethi1mutant exhibited developmental abnormalities while the complemented linethi1:AcTHI1exhibited normal growth comparable to the wild type (Fig.5a and b). We also quantified the thiamine content using LC-MS/MS in theArabidopsiswild type,thi1mutant, and complemented line. Higher thiamine level was observed in theAcTHI1-complemented line compared to the wild type and thethi1mutant (Fig.5c). In addition, the expression pattern of thiamine biosynthesis-related genes in WT,thi1mutant, and the transgenicArabidopsislines were identified (Figure S2). The results showed that the gene expression levels ofAtTH1,AtTHI1andAtTHICwere significantly reduced in thethi1mutant compared with the wild-type, while those ofAtTH1andAtTHI1in the complemented lines were significantly higher than those in thethi1mutant and wild type. Furthermore, there was no significant difference in the gene expression levels ofAtTMPamong all tested samples (Figure S2).

To gain further insight into the regulation of the B vitamin content changes throughout areca inflorescence development, we utilized WGCNA to explore the co-expression networks of DEGs. Eight distinct modules of co-expressed genes were determined (Fig.6a; Figure S2) which were subsequently correlated with the various B vitamins quantified in the areca inflorescence (Fig.6b). The enrichment of genes for the MEyellow module was involved in nicotinamide, nicotinic acid, and pantothenic acid, which preferentially accumulated in S2P2. Among the gene modules, two demonstrated a notably strong positive correlation with specific traits (r> 0.8,p< 0.01): the turquoise-thiamine module (r= 0.85,p= 8e-6) and the yellow-pantothenate module (r= 0.8,p= 6e-5) (Fig.6b). These results indicated that genes in these two modules (MEturquoise and MEyellow) were mainly associated with the changes in the contents of the two B vitamins (thiamine and pantothenic acid, respectively) during areca inflorescence development.

B vitamins are among the most important components contributing to the characteristic secondary metabolite of areca. To identify hub genes associated with B vitamin metabolism, we constructed regulatory networks specific for B vitamin metabolism from the ‘MEturquoise-thiamine’ and ‘MEyellow-pantothenate’ modules. We identified 765 genes in the ‘MEturquoise-thiamine’ module and 676 genes in the ‘MEyellow-pantothenate’ module (Table S9). Additionally, we analyzed the expression patterns of genes in each module across the tested inflorescence variables. The genes of the ‘MEturquoise’ module exhibited the highest expression in the S2P1 sample, while those of the ‘MEyellow’ module showed the highest expression in the S2P2 sample (Fig.6c and d). This expression pattern correlates with the high content of thiamine in S2P1 and pantothenic acid in S2P2 samples (Fig.1c). In addition, correlation analysis indicated that most genes accurately represented the essential features of either the ‘MEturquoise’ or ‘MEyellow’ module (Fig.6e and f). The expression patterns of other module-related genes were shown in Figure S3. Moreover, KEGG enrichment analysis revealed the top 10 enriched pathways. In the ‘MEturquoise-thiamine’ module, the flavonoid biosynthesis, ABC transporters, and other pathways were significantly enriched (Fig.6g; Table S10). In the ‘MEyellow-pantothenate’ module, the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway was the most enriched (Fig.6h; Table S11). Moreover, GO enrichment analysis showed enrichment of metabolic process class in both the ‘MEturquoise-thiamine’ (b) and the ‘MEyellow-pantothenate’ (Figure S5; Table S13) modules.

To further reveal the transcriptional regulatory mechanism of thiamine and pantothenic acid accumulation, we employed WGCNA analysis to construct regulatory networks for thiamine- and riboflavin-related TFs (Fig.6i and j). Within the ‘MEturquoise-thiamine’ module, we established a gene co-expression network using the top 1000 weight values, identifying 10 hub TFs with significant weight values, includingAcWRKY19a(AC04G002790),AcARF9(AC05G008060), andAcAMS(AC15G101520), among others (Fig.6i; Table S14). Moreover, we obtained the gene expression profiles of these hub TF genes, many of which were highly expressed in S2P1, particularly forAcAMS(AC15G101520),AcMYB80(AC10G025580), andAcARE9(AC05G008060), consistent with the elevated thiamine content observed in S2P1 compared to other tissues (Figure S6; Table S15). Meanwhile, we identified 10 key TF genes within the pantothenate-related regulatory network, such asMYB61(AC08G001120),AcBEL1(AC15G098070), andAcNAC73(AC14G012660) (Fig.6j). These TFs exhibited significantly higher expression levels in S2P2 compared to other tissues, suggesting that they may play a role in regulating pantothenic acid metabolism in S2P2 (Figure S8; Table S15).

Additionally, we calculated the module kME values for genes contained in the turquoise and yellow modules (Table S16). Genes with kME values greater than 0.9 in co-expression networks are considered hub genes and may be involved in specific biological processes. In our results, a total of 511 and 413 hub genes with high kME values were found in ‘MEturquoise’ and ‘MEyellow’ modules, respectively (Table S16). Further investigation found that the hub genes in the ‘MEturquoise’ module were notably enriched in pathways such as flavonoid biosynthesis, and cutin, suberin, and wax biosynthesis, among others (Table S17). Additionally, among these hub genes, a total of 37 and 41 hub TFs were identified in‘MEturquoise’ and ‘MEyellow’ modules, includingMYB,bHLH,NAC, and other family genes (Table S18). In brief, these findings present a comprehensive set of highly significant hub genes linked to B vitamin metabolism, shedding light on their potential regulatory mechanisms and biological functions.

B vitamins usually act as catalysts, coenzymes, or components of coenzymes, and play a major role in maintaining normal metabolism, cell differentiation, energy conversion, and growth [23]. B vitamin deficiencies in the human body often lead to nutrient deficiency diseases, such as beriberi (vitamin B1, thiamine), pellagra (vitamin B3, niacin), dermatitis, and neurological conditions (vitamin B6, pyridoxal), cardiovascular disease and impaired fetal neural tube development (vitamin B9, folate) [5,24]. Furthermore, B vitamins play crucial roles in various aspects of plant growth and development, extending beyond their metabolic functions, including energy metabolism, morphological construction, stress resistance, and immune regulation. Therefore, more and more plant B vitamins are being studied for their content, distribution, synthesis, and regulation.

Recently, a study found that there is a large variation in B vitamins among lentil genotypes and tissue types. Tissue-specific analysis of lentil seeds showed that vitamins B1 and B3 predominate in the cotyledons, while vitamins B2, B5, B6, and B9 are most abundant in the seed coat [24]. In addition, one study found that chickpea has the highest folate content followed by common bean, lentil, and pea, suggesting significant differences in folate levels between species [25]. In our results, the eight B vitamins showed different accumulation patterns in different parts of the areca inflorescence, with pantothenic acid being the most abundant. The correlation between the content levels of various B vitamins in the areca inflorescence suggests potential interdependencies or regulatory crosstalk among them, i.e., changes in the levels of one B vitamin could influence the levels of the others, either positively or negatively.

Given the significance of B vitamins in various metabolic pathways, understanding their biosynthesis in plants is pivotal. Identifying the enzymes involved in this process can facilitate the enrichment of recombinant plant tissues with these vitamins, potentially enhancing human nutrition [26]. In recent years, there has been increasing identification of genes encoding essential enzymes involved in B vitamin biosynthesis [5]. For instance, within the thiamine biosynthesis pathway, pyrimidine synthase (THIC), thiazole synthase (THI1), and thiamine phosphate synthase (THI) have been extensively researched as critical enzymes. The corresponding genes encoding these enzymes inArabidopsishave been sequentially identified [17,27]– [28]. Notably, our study identified the thiazole synthase (THI1) inA. catechu, a key rate-limiting enzyme in the thiamine biosynthesis pathway. The thiamine content in thethi1:AcTHI1complementation lines was significantly higher compared with both the mutantthi1and the wild-type plants. Furthermore, two enzymes associated with vitamins B2 and B6 metabolism, namely phosphatase AtPyrP2 and pyridoxal 5’-phosphate phosphatase, were recently identified [29].

Given the significance of B vitamins in various metabolic pathways, understanding their biosynthesis in plants is pivotal. Identifying the enzymes involved in this process can facilitate the enrichment of recombinant plant tissues with these vitamins, potentially enhancing human nutrition [26]. In recent years, there has been increasing identification of genes encoding essential enzymes involved in B vitamin biosynthesis [5]. For instance, within the thiamine synthesis pathway, pyrimidine synthase (THIC), thiazole synthase (THI1), and thiamine phosphate synthase (THI) have been extensively researched as critical enzymes. The corresponding genes encoding these enzymes inArabidopsishave been sequentially identified [17,27]– [28]. Notably, our study identified the thiazole synthase (THI1) inA. catechu, a key rate-limiting enzyme in the riboflavin biosynthesis pathway. The thiamine content in thethi1:AcTHI1complementation lines was significantly higher compared with both the mutantthi1and wild-type plants. Furthermore, two enzymes associated with vitamin B2 and B6 metabolism, namely phosphatase AtPyrP2 and pyridoxal 5’-phosphate phosphatase, were recently identified [29].

In our analysis of the transcriptomes of different parts of theA. catechuinflorescence, we have generated comprehensive expression profiles of genes related to the B vitamin metabolism. In different parts of the inflorescence,AcTHI1exhibited significantly higher expression levels compared to other genes in the thiamine biosynthetic pathway. In addition, this gene and its homolog show specific high expression in the male (P1) and female (P3) flowers. This differential expression suggests thatAcTHI1may play a specialized or dominant role in the regulation of thiamine biosynthesis in these specific floral tissues, which may be required for processes such as pollen development in male flowers or seed development in female flowers. Our results from heterologous expression suggested thatAcTHI1might promote the accumulation of thiamine. However, inAcTHI1-overexpressingA. thalianalines, the expression of endogenous genes related to thiamine biosynthesis was altered compared to the wild type. InAcTHI1-overexpressingA. thalianalines, the expression level ofAtTHI1was increased, while that ofAtTHICwas decreased (Figure S2). Although changes in the endogenous gene expression might also affect thiamine accumulation, we believe that the heterologous overexpression of the gene had a more significant effect on the accumulation of metabolites compared with the alteration of endogenous gene expression. However, the function ofAcTHI1still needs to be further verified through in vitro enzyme activity analysis in future work. Furthermore, the multi-copy gene structure ofAcTHI1could also imply that it is highly adaptive, with multiple copies potentially allowing for a more robust response to varying metabolic demands during floral development. For riboflavin, nicotinamide, nicotinic acid, pantothenate, and biotin, their biosynthesis-related genes did not show tissue-specific high expression in the non-floral organ tissue of the inflorescence (S2P2) though their contents were highest in the same tissue, indicating that other factors (e.g., enzyme activity or stability and potential feedback loops) may be regulating the biosynthesis and accumulation of these vitamins. In addition,KPHMTin the pantothenate biosynthesis pathway andPPOXin the pyridoxine biosynthesis pathway exhibited consistently high expression in areca inflorescence samples, suggesting that these genes may be subject to specific regulatory mechanisms to ensure that the synthesis of pantothenate and pyridoxine can be effectively carried out in the various tissues of the inflorescence.

Great progress has been made in the analysis of B vitamin biosynthetic pathways. Recently, a transcriptional regulatory mechanism of pyridoxine has been reported, PYRIDOXINE BIOSYNTHESIS1 (PDX1), as an important regulatory factor, affects the biosynthesis of pyridoxine by regulating the expression of multiple pyridoxine biosynthesis-related genes [31,32]. In addition, previous studies have found that introducing theArabidopsis AtPDX1.1andAtPDX2genes into rice can significantly increase the pyridoxine content [33]. Here, the gene expression profile of areca inflorescence showed that the expression level ofAcPDXgene in early inflorescence (stage 1) was significantly higher than that in late inflorescence (stage 2), especially in flower organs. Furthermore, the distribution pattern of pyridoxine in floral organs is consistent with the expression pattern ofAcPDXin floral organs, suggesting that this gene plays a key role in the pyridoxine biosynthesis in the areca inflorescence. Meanwhile, research studies onAcPDXand its application in areca will improve the potential genetic resources for breeding the plant varieties.

The process of vitamin biosynthesis is usually regulated by a variety of transcription factors within the cell. In rice, a gene regulating thiamine biosynthesis,OsTH1(THIAMIN REQUIRING1), has been characterized; mutation of this gene causes thiamine deficiency that leads to leaf wilting and death of rice seedlings [34]. Furthermore, a recent study has found thatWx(LOC_Os06g04200, a gene regulating rice cooking quality) andGluA2(LOC_Os10g26060, a gene affecting the grain protein content) may promote the accumulation of thiamine in rice by expanding the storage space of thiamine [35]. Here, several key TF genes that may regulate thiamine and pantothenate metabolism were identified based on co-expression network, such asbHLH10,ARE9, andAcAMSwhose expression were more active in S2P1 and S2P2. Such preferential expression may reflect the genes’ role in responding to metabolic demands, highlighting their potential as regulatory hubs in maintaining vitamin homeostasis. In general, the composition and levels of different B vitamins in areca inflorescence are significantly influenced by their specific locations in the inflorescence. The identification of candidate transcription factors and structural genes associated with biosynthetic pathways will be instrumental in advancing our elucidation of the accumulation and regulation of B vitamins in areca flowers. This groundwork is crucial for the exploration of high-value compounds inA. catechuflowers.

This study detected diverse B vitamins at various tissues and developmental stages through UPLC-MS/MS-based metabolomics approach and comprehensively mapped the expression patterns of genes related to B vitamins biosynthesis inA. catechuinflorescence. Furthermore, key transcription factors that might regulate the accumulation of thiamine and pantothenic acid in areca inflorescence were identified by co-expression network analysis. The findings altogether shed some light on the regulatory mechanism of B vitamin biosynthesis inA. catechuinflorescence, consequently showcasing the potential utility of the plant as a nutritional source.

We thank BMKCloud (www.biocloud.net) for gene expression and KEGG enrichment analysis assistance in this manuscript.

W.J. conceived and designed this project. W.J. and X.L. performed the analyses. W.L., J.Y., P.L., and M.X. participated in data analyses and validation. W.J. and X.L. carried out the experimental study and wrote the draft manuscrip. G.Z. financially support, checked and supervised this project. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

This project was supported by the Education Department of Hainan Province, project number: Hnky2024-23. And the Hainan Normal University Talent Research Start-up Fund Project Funding (HSZK-KYQD-202421).