Ca2+-ATPases in the plasma membrane extrude Ca2+ions from the cytosol to the extracellular space thereby terminating Ca2+-signals and controlling Ca2+-homeostasis in any type of cell. Recently, these Ca2+-pumps have been identified as protein complexes of the transporting subunits PMCAs1-4 and the single-span membrane proteins Neuroplastin (NPTN) or Basigin that are obligatory for efficient trafficking of the pump complexes to the surface membrane. Quantitative investigation of the pumping velocity controlling the time course of Ca2+-signals, however, has remained unresolved. Here we show, using Ca2+-activated K+channels as fast native reporters of intracellular Ca2+concentration(s) together with membrane-tethered fluorescent Ca2+-indicators, that under cellular conditions PMCA2-NPTN complexes can clear Ca2+in the low millisecond-range. Computational modeling exploiting EM-derived densities of Ca2+-source(s) and Ca2+-transporters in freeze-fracture replicas translated these fast kinetics into transport rates for individual PMCA2-NPTN pumps of more than 5000 cycles/s. Direct comparison with the Na+/Ca2+-exchanger NCX2, an alternate-access transporter with established cycling rates in the kHz range, indicated similar efficiencies in Ca2+-transport. Our results establish PMCA2-NPTN complexes, the most abundant Ca2+-clearing tool in the mammalian brain, as transporters with unanticipated high cycling rates and demonstrate that under cellular conditions ATPases may operate in the kHz-range.

Ca2 + -ATPases in the plasma membrane extrude Ca2+ ions from the cytosol to the extracellular space and thus terminate Ca2 + -signals and control Ca2 + -homeostasis. Here, Constantin et al. show that these pumps operate at rates of more than 5000 cycles/s.

The calcium (Ca2+) transporting ATPases of the plasma membrane (PMCAs) are P-type ATPases or pumps that are expressed in virtually any type of cell where they extrude Ca2+from the cytosol to the extracellular space using ATP as an energy source1–3. This extrusion is crucial for the termination of Ca2+-signals, transient increases in intracellular Ca2+concentration ([Ca2+]i) that are used to precisely control a variety of fundamental cellular processes, including vesicle release, enzymatic activity, excitability, contraction, and motility4–6.

Molecularly, native PMCAs have recently been identified as heteromeric complexes of the ATPase subunits PMCAs1–4 and the single-span membrane proteins Neuroplastin (NPTN) or Basigin (BASI) that co-assemble with the PMCA subunits in the ER and are required for stability and proper trafficking of the Ca2+-pump complexes7–10.

In neurons, genetic or pharmacological ablation of the PMCA-mediated transport demonstrated that Ca2+extrusion occurs within tens of milliseconds or faster suggesting that individual Ca2+-pumps operate with rapid transport rates in the cellular context10–12. As yet, however, determination of these transport rates has been hampered by technical limitations precluding accurate assessment of both transport activity and number of active Ca2+-pumps involved.

Here, we use time-resolved monitoring of Ca2+-transport and changes in [Ca2+]iin intact cells together with EM-based protein counting in the plasma membrane to show that individual PMCA2-NPTN complexes operate at cycle-rates in the kHz-range and thus enable Ca2+-signaling with millisecond precision.

The Ca2+-pump activity of PMCAs critically depends on intact cellular boundaries, in particular sufficient supply of ATP and physiological levels of phospholipids (including PIP2(phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate)) in the plasma membrane13–15. In fact, our structural analysis of PMCA2-NPTN complexes by cryo-EM identified a PIP2molecule that is inserted into a pocket close to the Ca2+-passageway and that is obligatory for the transport function of the pump complex (Fig.1a16). For investigating the Ca2+-transport in PMCA-NPTN complexes we, therefore, turned to heterologous expression in CHO cells, an epithelial line established for analysis of membrane proteins with phospholipid-dependence17–21. To reliably determine transport function in intact cells, we chose to monitor intracellular Ca2+([Ca2+]i, rather than ATP-consumption or pH-changes resulting from the Ca2+−2H+countertransport) using co-expressed BK-type Ca2+-activated K+channels (BKCa, homomeric BKα, see Methods) as native sensors. These channels sense apparent [Ca2+]iin the physiological range (0.1–10 µM22) at the plasma membrane and convert changes in [Ca2+]iinto changes in channel gating (and K+currents) with ms-resolution (Supplementary Fig.122–24). Importantly, BKCachannels do not interfere with [Ca2+]ias they do not effectively act as buffers (due to their low number, in contrast to soluble (fluorescent)-indicators that depend on stoichiometric Ca2+binding).

aSurface-illustration (space-filling mode) of the PMCA2-NPTN complex with bound PIP2as determined in cryo-EM analyses16.bSteady-state activation curves of BKCachannels recorded in whole-cell mode with 10 µM free Ca2+in the patch-pipette (insets) from CHO(ΔPMCA2)-cells in the absence (squares and line in black, 8 cells) and presence of heterologously expressed PMCA2-NPTN complexes (squares and line in red, 11 cells). Activation curves recorded with 1 µM and 0.1 µM free Ca2+in the patch-pipette were added for calibration. Lines are result of a Boltzmann function fitted to the data (mean ± SEM). Note the large pump-mediated shift of the activation curve indicating a reduction of [Ca2+]ifrom pipette-delivered 10 µM (dark grey) to values below 0.1 µM (light grey).cRepresentative BKCa-mediated outward K+currents recorded with the indicated voltage-protocol in cultured CHO cells in response to a 0.8 ms Ca2+influx through voltage-gated Cav2.2 channels in the presence of either 10 mM EGTA (trace in blue) or 0.1 mM EGTA in the absence (control, black trace) or presence of PMCA2-NPTN complexes (trace in red). Note the rapid current decay with 10 mM EGTA and with PMCA2-NPTN at 0.1 mM EGTA as a cytoplasmic buffer.dCurrent traces (in the framed box in (c)) at an expanded time scale, the decay phase approximated with a mono-exponential function with indicated time constant (τ). Currents were scaled to the maximum prior to the Ca2+influx pulse.eRepresentative fluorescence traces recorded in 10-12 experiments with identical conditions as in (c), but with the membrane-tethered fluorescent Ca2+-indicator Lck-GCaMP6s used for monitoring changes in [Ca2+]i(left insets). Gray line is the result of a mono-exponential fitted to the decay phase of the traces with PMCA2-NPTN and 10 EGTA. Right inset: Fluorescent signals (at the framed box) at an expanded time scale.fRepresentative BKCa-currents recorded in response to 1, 2 and 5 Ca2+influx pulses applied at 500 Hz (voltage protocol in inset) to CHO cells as in (a).gPlot summarizing the time constants of the current decay determined in experiments as in (f); squares represent mean ± SEM of the indicated number of cells.

Three types of experiments were used to analyze PMCA2-NPTN-mediated Ca2+-transport in distinct cellular settings, with the first set investigating extrusion of Ca2+ions against a high concentration of 10 µM free Ca2+constantly infused into the cell by the de-facto unlimited reservoir of a whole-cell patch pipette (Fig.1b, left inset). The BKCaactivation curves recorded under these steady-state conditions in the absence (control) and presence of the pump complexes were largely different: PMCA2-NPTN fueled by 2.5 mM ATP (through the patch pipette) induced an extensive right-shift of the activation curve compared to control, placing it slightly below the calibration curve determined with 0.1 µM free Ca2+and thus indicating a pump-mediated decrease in [Ca2+]iat the plasma membrane of more than 2 orders of magnitude (Fig.1b, right inset).

In a second set of experiments, the pumps were challenged with a 0.8 ms-‘[Ca2+]i-step’ generated by a voltage-commanded Ca2+influx through stably expressed N-type voltage-gated Ca2+(Cav2.2) channels (see Methods). In CHO cells perfused with 0.1 mM EGTA, the equivalent of cytoplasmic Ca2+-buffering in most CNS neurons25, such an action potential-like Ca2+influx resulted in a lasting increase in [Ca2+]ireflected by activation of persistent (slowly decaying) BKCa-mediated outward K+currents (Fig.1c, control trace). In contrast, when EGTA (in the perfusing pipette solution) was increased to 10 mM, BKCa-currents activated by the same brief Ca2+influx displayed a rapid decay (Fig.1c, d, traces in blue) with time constants (τdecay) of ∼8 ms (mean ± SEM: 8.4 ± 0.6 ms, n = 9, Fig.1g). This τdecayperfectly matched the time constant of channel deactivation (at 50 mV, Supplementary Fig.1a) indicating complete absorption of the incoming Ca2+ions by EGTA-buffering within less than a millisecond23. Surprisingly, Ca2+-triggered BKCa-currents with very similar decay kinetics could also be recorded at low intracellular EGTA of 0.1 mM upon co-expression of PMCA2-NPTN complexes (Fig.1c, d, traces in red). The respective value for τdecaywas ∼13 ms (mean ± SEM: 13.2 ± 1.2 ms, n = 10, Fig.1g) indicative of pump-mediated removal of Ca2+at a speed resembling that by buffering with 10 mM EGTA. These conclusions were further corroborated by measuring the [Ca2+]itransients in the same step experiments with the membrane-tethered Lck-GCaMP6 (Supplementary Fig.2, Methods26,27;) replacing BKCachannels as Ca2+-indicators: The Ca2+-triggered fluorescence signal, after an initial increase (Fig.1e, right panel), displayed complete decay with both 10 mM EGTA (in the cytoplasm) or PMCA2-NPTN co-expression (at low intracellular EGTA of 0.1 mM), but persisted and declined slowly under control conditions with 0.1 mM EGTA in the cytoplasm (Fig.1e). The respective τdecayof ∼740 ms determined with 10 mM EGTA and PMCA2-NPTN co-expression closely matched the dissociation-time measured for Ca2+ions from GCaMP6s in stopped-flow fluorimetry with one ms-mixing26, supporting the fast Ca2+-clearing determined with BKCachannels before (Fig.1c, d).

In a third set of experiments, Ca2+extrusion by either PMCA2-NPTN (at 0.1 mM EGTA) or 10 mM EGTA was further probed in experiments where two or five 0.8 ms-pulses of Ca2+influx were elicited at a frequency of 500 Hz. These additional Ca2+pulses interrupted by 2 ms non-influx intervals (Fig.1f, upper inset) led to an increased [Ca2+]ias reflected by the concomitant increase of the BKCa-current maxima. The subsequent Ca2+-clearing, however, appeared only slightly prolonged in either case (Fig.1f, Supplementary Fig.3). The latter is indicated by the respective increase in τdecay(from 8.4 to 12.4 ms (10 EGTA), and from 13.2 to 18.5 ms (PMCA2-NPTN); Fig.1f, g; Supplementary Fig.3b). Interestingly, [Ca2+]idid not prominently increase with the number of Ca2+pulses, pointing to sufficient supply of Ca2+-free EGTA and to fast extrusion of Ca2+by the pump complexes during the 2-ms non-influx intervals, respectively.

Together, the results of all three sets of experiments unequivocally indicated that PMCA2-NPTN complexes can terminate increased [Ca2+]iin the ms-range as already noticed in some neurons10–12, and raised the fundamental question whether this fast Ca2+extrusion may be due to fast transport of individual pump complexes or rather result from a high-density expression in the plasma membrane combined with slow pumping activity.

In pursuit of this question, we next used immunogold electron-microscopy (immuno-EM) on SDS-digested freeze-fracture replicas (SDS-FRL) of brain neurons and CHO cells, as well as quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) on membrane fractions from various tissues. Labelling with a PMCA-specific antibody (PMCApan, see Methods) at saturating concentration showed that PMCAs1-4 are distinctly distributed over the surface membrane of different brain neurons. Thus, on dendrites of cerebellar Purkinje cells the density of PMCAs amounted to ∼250 µm2(equivalent to more than 10% of all intra-membraneous particles), while roughly 50 PMCAs/µm2were found in the active zone of parallel fiber varicosities (or pre-synaptic terminals) of the granule cell-to-Purkinje-cell synapses (Fig.2a, upper panel). Application of the PMCApanantibody to freeze-fracture replicas from CHO cells expressing PMCA2-NPTN complexes indicated a density of ∼55 pump complexes per µm2exceeding the endogenous levels of PMCAs in these epithelial cells by more than ten-fold (Fig.2a, lower panel). In the same CHO cells the density of stably expressed Cav2.2 channels stained with a target-specific Cav2.2 antibody (Methods) exhibited a mean value of ∼52/µm2(Fig.2a, lower panel) thus demonstrating about equal amounts for both, Ca2+-source and Ca2+-transporter, in our testing system (Fig.1). Noteworthy, the majority of the Cav2.2 immuno-particles appeared in clusters (of up to 10 proteins), while the PMCA-particles were more homogenously distributed; preferred co-clustering between both Cav2.2 and PMCA2-NPTN was not observed.

aUpper panel: Left, Electron micrographs showing distribution of immunogold particles for Cav2.1 channels (6 nm-gold particles) and PMCA1-4 proteins (12 nm-gold particles) on dendritic shafts of Purkinje cells (den) and in presynaptic varicosities (var) of granule cells in the cerebellum. Dashed line demarks the active zone (az); arrowheads depict clusters of Cav2.1 channels. Scale bars represent 200 nm. Right: Graph denoting the density of PMCAs1-4 in Purkinje cell dendrites and granule cell varicosities (bars are mean ± SEM of the 19 dendrites and 37 varicosities shown). Lower panel: Left, Distribution of Cav2.2 channels (6 nm-gold particles) and PMCA2 protein (12 nm-gold particles) on the plasma membrane of CHO cells that stably express Cav2.2 (α1, β1, α2δ1) and that were transiently transfected with PMCA2 and NPTN. Inset: The framed box on the left at expanded scale. Scale bars represent 200 nm. Right: Graph summarizing surface density for the indicated proteins; values are mean ± SEM of 10 (Cav2.2, PMCA2) and 12 (endo) cells, respectively. Statistical testing between groups of data are indicated by horizontal bars, three stars denote p-values < 0.001, Mann-Whitney U-test (two-sided), n.s. is not significant (exact p-values were 0.0000001 (dendrite vs varicosity), 0.00076 (PMCA-NPTN vs PMCA(endo)).bMolecular abundance of the Ca2+-transporting proteins PMCAs1-4, NCXs1-3 and SERCAs1-3 determined by quantitative mass spectrometry in membrane fractions from pooled whole mouse brains. Bars denote mean values of the duplicate experiments shown. Amounts determined for alpha subunits 1-3 of the Na/K-ATPase were added for comparison. Note that PMCAs are the most abundant Ca2+-transporting system in the brain. n.d. no detected.cMolecular abundance of all transporting subunits of the Ca2+-pumps in plasma membrane and membrane of the sarco-/endoplasmic reticulum, as well as of the Na+/Ca2+-exchanger in the distinct tissues/organs indicated (skel. is skeletal). Abundance scaling is logarithmic; all protein amounts were determined in equivalent amounts of membrane(s). Note that PMCA pumps outnumber the exchangers in all tissues except heart and kidney (inset), and that the brain is the only organ where the amounts of PMCAs exceed that of the SERCAs.

In addition, we assessed the amounts of Ca2+-transport systems in brain and other tissues of adult mice by quantitative MS on integral membrane fractions (28,29, Methods). These analyses unraveled PMCAs as the most abundant Ca2+-transporters in the brain exceeding both the Na+/Ca2+-exchangers (NCX) and the Ca2+-pumps of the endo/sarcoplasmic reticulum (SERCA) by several-fold and indicated that PMCA2 exhibits highest expression among the four PMCA proteins (Fig.2b, Supplementary Fig.4). Conversely, PMCA-pumps are largely outnumbered (more than five-fold) in brain membranes by the Na/K-ATPase, another P-type ATPase in the plasma membrane (Fig.2b, right panel). Interestingly, the observed excess of PMCAs over both NCX and SERCA is a unique feature of the brain (forebrain and cerebellum), while in all other tissues analyzed, SERCA is the most abundant Ca2+-transport system. In these tissues PMCA dominated over NCX in the surface membrane, except for heart and kidney where the PMCA-to-NCX ratio was slightly less than one (values of 0.75 and 0.95, respectively; Fig.2c, inset).

With the precise data acquired on [Ca2+]idynamics and BKCa-gating (Fig.1), as well as on densities of PMCA2-NPTN complexes and Cav2.2 channels in the plasma membrane of CHO cells (Fig.2), we next turned to computational modeling for determining the rates of Ca2+-transport in individual pump complexes. For realistic representation of the experimental conditions, the following procedures were applied: (1) BKCa-gating was described by the response of a well-established 10-state model30whose transition rates were calibrated by machine-learning procedures using experimental data with defined variations in [Ca2+]iand transmembrane voltage as an input (Methods, Supplementary Tables1-3, Supplementary Fig.5a, b23,); (2) spatio-temporal profiles for [Ca2+]iwere determined in a three-dimensional diffusion model (of a spherical cell) without and with Ca2+efflux mediated by transport of the (homogenously distributed) PMCA2-NPTN pumps at defined density (50 µm2), but variable cycling rates (Fig.3a, inset); (3) Ca2+influx was either stationary through a single reservoir (pipette) or transient (0.8 ms) through a density-defined number of Cav channels (50 µm2) providing an experimentally determined mean number of Ca2+ions (equations and parameters used are detailed in Methods and Supplementary Tables1-3).

aComputed activation curves of BKCachannels (using the stationary model, Supplementary Table2) determined with 10 µM free Ca2+delivered through the patch-pipette in the absence (line in black) and presence of PMCA2-NPTN operating at the indicated rates (colored lines). The computed activation for 0.1 µM [Ca2+]i(line in gay), and the experimentally determined activation curves for [Ca2+]iof 10 µM and 0.1 µM (dashed lines) are indicated. Inset: [Ca2+]iprofiles obtained with constant Ca2+influx (10 µM) from the pipette and Ca2+outflux mediated by PMCA complexes transporting at rates of 50 and 5000 cycles/s; color-coding of [Ca2+]ias indicated. Note close overlay between computed and experimental data for pipette-set [Ca2+]iof 10 µM and 0.1 µM (calibration), and of computed curves for [Ca2+]iof 10 µM with PMCA2-NPTN operating at transport rates of 5−10.000 cycles/s with experimental curves recorded with pipette-set [Ca2+]iof 0.1 µM.bComputed responses of BKCachannels (using the non-stationary model, Supplementary Table3) to pulsed increases in [Ca2+]ieither with PMCA2-NPTN operating at the indicated rates (dashed lines in yellow/orange) or with 10 mM EGTA as a cytoplasmic buffer (dashed lines in blue). BKCa-currents experimentally determined with either 10 mM EGTA or PMCA2-NPTN are indicated as lines in red and blue, respectively. Black trace is the model response to a homogenous increase of [Ca2+]ifrom 0.1 to 10 µM in the absence of PMCA pumps.

In a first step, we recapitulated the pump-mediated shift in activation curves (Fig.1b) by computing the response of the calibrated BKCamodel to [Ca2+]iprofiles obtained with constant Ca2+influx (10 µM) from the pipette and increasing cycle rates for the PMCA complexes. As illustrated in Fig.3a, the resulting BKCaresponse(s) perfectly matched the experimentally determined calibration curves ([Ca2+]iof 10 and 0.1 µM in the absence of pumps, dashed lines in Fig.3a), and showed that increasing cycle rates of the Ca2+-pumps shifted BKCaactivation towards positive membrane potentials (Fig.3). Interestingly, the experimentally observed shift generated by PMCA2-NPTN required the pumps to operate at rates of ≥5.000/s (Fig.3a). Currently assumed pump rates of 50 s31failed to produce a visible shift of the activation curve.

In a second step, we modelled the BKCacurrent-transients recorded upon the pulsed increases in [Ca2+]iin the presence of either high buffer concentrations or PMCA complexes (Fig.3b, traces in blue and red, respectively). In these calculations, [Ca2+]iat the end of the 0.8 ms-influx pulse was 10 µM, a minimal value to account for the observed rapid onset of the Ca2+-activated BKCacurrents23, while the resting [Ca2+]iwas set to 0.1 µM. The response determined with 10 mM EGTA as a cytoplasmic Ca2+-buffer (with known kinetics32) was used for validation of the model’s performance. As illustrated in Fig.3b, the experimentally determined current traces were closely approximated by the responses of the BKCamodel when [Ca2+]iwas removed either by EGTA (dashed line in blue) or by PMCA2-NPTN operating at a rate of ∼20.000 s (dashed line in orange). Lower transport rates failed to match the experimental traces with respect to both peak-current (time to amplitude maximum) and decay kinetics of the current traces (Fig.3b, dashed traces in yellow; Supplementary Fig.5c).

Together, our modelling data strongly suggest that native Ca2+-pumps transport their substrate with rates in the kHz-range, very similar to what was previously reported for native and heterologously expressed NCX-type Ca2+-transport proteins33.

We, therefore, thought to probe this prediction by direct comparison between both types of transporters in an identical experimental setting. We recapitulated the experiments in Fig.1b, cwith NCX2, the most abundant NCX isoform of the rodent brain (Fig.2b), replacing PMCA2-NPTN complexes. With NCX2 present in the plasma membrane, the steady-state activation curve of BKCachannels measured with a [Ca2+]pipof 10 µM was shifted to the right indicating that NCX2 decreased [Ca2+]iunderneath the plasma membrane into the sub-micromolar range similar to the activity of PMCA2-NPTN, albeit somewhat less effective (Fig.4a). Subsequent probing of the speed of Ca2+extrusion by NCX2 with short Ca2+influx pulses as in Fig.1cshowed that the exchanger promoted a rapid decay of the BKCa-currents with values for τdecayof ∼26 ms (mean ± SEM: 26.2 ± 2.3 ms,n= 19). This two-fold slowing of the Ca2+-clearing compared to that by PMCA2-NPTN is in line with the about two-fold lower density of the NCX2 protein found by immuno-EM in freeze-fractures of the plasma membrane of the respective CHO cells (Fig.4b). And, as a consequence of this slower Ca2+-clearing, high-frequency application of several voltage-commanded Ca2+influx pulses led to a more prominent increase in the amplitude and the time-to-peak interval of the BKCa-currents, as well as in the time constants of their decay (τdecayincreased from 26.1 to 48.2 ms) compared to PMCA2-NPTN-mediated Ca2+removal in our test system (Fig.4c, d). These results provided independent evidence that under cellular conditions PMCA2-NPTN complexes are able to transport Ca2+with turnover rates at least in the range of 5000/s, a value previously determined for NCX in giant cell-attached patches from cardiomyocytes33.

aActivation curve of BKCachannels recorded in whole-cell mode with 10 µM free Ca2+in the patch pipette (inset) is distinctly shifted to the right by co-expression of either PMC2-NPTN (red symbols, 12 cells) or NCX2 (green symbols, 14 cells). Activation curves determined in experiments with the indicated [Ca2+]iin the pipette are given as calibration for nominal intracellular Ca2+concentrations (data from10). Lines are result of a Boltzmann function fitted to the data (mean ± SEM). Note the large shift of the activation curve indicating a reduction of [Ca2+]ifrom pipette-delivered 10 µM (dark grey) to values around 0.1 µM (light grey) by both Ca2+-transporters.bElectron micrograph showing distribution of immunogold particles for NCX2 transiently expressed in CHO cells and bar graph (mean ± SEM of the 13 cells shown) denoting surface density of the NCX2 protein. Data for PMCA2 from Fig.2awere added for comparison.cRepresentative BKCa-currents recorded with 0.1 mM EGTA as a cytoplasmic buffer in response to 1, 2, and 5 Ca2+influx pulses as in Fig.1fin CHO cells expressing Cav2.2 and NCX2. The current-response to 5 pulses obtained with PMCA2-NPTN from Fig.1f(trace in grey) was added for comparison. Inset: BKCa-currents recorded upon a single 0.8 ms Ca2+influx pulse with NCX2 or PMCA2-NPTN. Note slightly faster decay of the BKCa-currents in the presence of PMCA2-NPTN complexes.dPlot summarizing the time constants of the current decay determined in experiments as in (c); squares represent mean ± SEM of the indicated number of cells; data for PMCA2-NPTN were added for comparison.

Our work demonstrates that under cellular conditions PMCA2-NPTN complexes are able to remove increased intracellular Ca2+with both high efficiency (against large high-concentration reservoirs) and high speed (within ms-windows). These transport characteristics are based on the pumps’ ability to operate in the kHz-range ( > 5000 cycles/s, Fig.3) and thus at cycling rates similar to those previously reported for NCX2, an alternate access-type transporter for Ca2+. Direct comparison of both transporter types in identical experiments emphasized their similar Ca2+-transport capabilities.

For detailed investigation of the transport properties of PMCA pumps we set up experimental conditions that guaranteed maximal activity and its precise determination (in individual cells): (i) co-expression of NPTN promoted reliable and robust expression of PMCA pumps in the plasma membrane9,10, (ii) saturating physiological levels for both the phospholipid PIP2and ATP were maintained throughout the experiments, (iii) [Ca]iand its pump-mediated changes were monitored with BKCachannels, a native Ca2+-sensor operating in the physiologically-relevant [Ca2+]i-range with ms-precision and, importantly, without interfering with [Ca2+]i(in contrast to soluble fluorescence-based reporter systems acting as additional Ca2+-buffers), and (iv) the number of PMCA pumps was determined by immuno-EM in freeze-fracture configuration that enables immediate and selective counting of specifically labelled target proteins in the membrane34. For labelling with an extended dynamic range as displayed by the PMCApanantibody (about three orders of magnitude, Fig.2a), the protein counting obtained by this technique is highly accurate and reliable (as shown for ion channels28,35,36), in contrast to indirect approaches providing rather rough estimates on protein densities/numbers in membranes31,37,38.

The cycling rates in the kHz-range that were finally determined in computational modelling with the acquired experimental data as input are profoundly different from values of about 50–100/s that were estimated from transport-experiments with erythrocyte ghosts, or lipid vesicles containing endogenous or purified/reconstituted PMCA protein31. The reasons for these differences are most likely buried in the experimental settings and approaches used including detergent-mediated dissociation of PMCA and NPTN/BASI subunits7,10, erroneous data on transporter densities, and, most importantly, insufficient supply of PIP2in the vesicle or ghost preparations. As indicated by structure-function analyses, PIP2-binding is obligatory for the transport activity of PMCA pumps16. Conversely, transport at high cycling rates could be well observed in intact erythrocytes: While different in settings and dimensions, the measured transport-associated ATP-consumption is compatible with the kHz-rates derived in our experiments (60 mmoles/hl39versus ∼120 mmoles/hl calculated with a turnover rate of 5000/s and an estimated PMCA-density of 6/µm2).

The finding of PMCA2-NPTN-mediated Ca2+extrusion occurring in the ms-range has fundamental implications for both the amplitude and the time course of Ca2+-signaling (or increased [Ca2+]i) in virtually any type of cell. In CNS neurons, where fast pump-mediated Ca2+-clearing is well known11,12,40and where PMCA-NPTN is the most abundant Ca2+-clearing device (Fig.2b, c), rapid termination of increased [Ca2+]iand prevention of Ca2+accumulation is prerequisite for reliable and timely accurate neurotransmission in both dendrites and synapses10,11,40–42. In synapses, PMCA-NPTN complexes are expected to act in concert with cytoplasmic Ca2+-buffers to effectively promote synchronous over asynchronous vesicle release even at high frequency transmission (100 to more than 1000 Hz)25,43,44. For this purpose, the increases in [Ca2+]ifueled by action potential-triggered activation of Cav channels must be rapidly cleared. Explicitly, the about 200 Ca2+ions delivered by any Cav2 channel per millisecond must be effectively extruded (to prevent buffer saturation), with PMCA pumps contributing at a rate of 10 Ca2+ions/ms based on a cycling rate of 10 kHz (Figs.1f,3).

To what extent the fast Ca2+extrusion by PMCA-NPTN participates in other signaling processes in the CNS, as well as in other Ca2+-driven second-messenger reactions should be (re)-investigated in detail, best by acute removal of all Ca2+-ATPases in the plasma membrane as can be achieved by knock-out/down of their obligatory auxiliary subunits NPTN and BASI10. Moreover, it appears worthwhile to investigate the relation between NCX and PMCA-NPTN, as both transport systems are able to drive fast reduction of activity-induced increases in [Ca2+]ito resting levels of about 100 nM (Figs.1,4).

Ethical approval was provided by Regierungspräsidium Freiburg (Germany).

CHO cells (in wildtype form) and CHO cells stably expressing Cav2.2 channels (Cav2.2α1; Cavβ1, α2δ1 subunits) were transiently transfected with cDNAs having the following GenBank (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank) accession numbers:Q08460(BKCa),NM_001036684.3(PMCA2),NM_009145.2(Neuroplastin),NM_078619.1(NCX2). The fusion proteins of PMCA2 or NCX2 with green fluorescent protein as well as Neuroplastin with red fluorescence protein were prepared and verified by sequencing. Cells were incubated at 37 °C and 5% CO2and measured 2 to 4 days after transfection. Lck-GCamp6s (addgene #52924) was subcloned into the eukaryotic expression vector pN1-CMV, verified by sequencing and used for transfection using the standard lipofectamine 2000 protocol; recordings were done 30–36 h after transfection.

Whole-cell patch clamp recordings were performed at room temperature using a HEKA EPC 10 amplifier. Currents were low-pass-filtered at 3–10 kHz and sampled at 20 kHz. Leak currents were subtracted with a P/4 protocol at a holding potential of −90 mV. Serial resistance was 50–70% compensated using the internal compensation circuitry. The standard extracellular solution contained (in mM): KCl 5.8; NaCl 144; MgCl20.9; CaCl21.3; NaH2PO40.7; D-Glucose 5.6, and HEPES 10 (pH 7.4). Recording pipettes pulled from quartz glass had resistances of 2–3.5 MΩ when filled with internal solution.

For recordings of BKCa-currents in unmodified CHO cells intracellular solution contained (in mM): KCl 139.5, MgCl23.5, DiBrBAPTA 2, HEPES 5, Na2ATP 2.5, Na3GTP 0.1 (pH 7.3); CaCl2was added to obtain the following free [Ca2+]pip: 100 nM, 1 μM, 10 μM and 50 μM.

WEBMAXC STANDARD [https://somapp.ucdmc.ucdavis.edu/pharmacology/ /bers/maxchelator/webmaxc/webmaxcS.htm] was used for calculation of the appropriate amount of calcium to be added to the internal solution; final free Ca2+concentrations were checked with a Ca2+-sensitive electrode (World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, USA). Steady-state activation of BKCachannels at distinct [Ca2+]iwas determined using test pulses ranging from −80 to +200 mV (in 10 mV increments), followed by a repolarization step to 0 or −50 mV. Conductance–voltage relations were determined from tail current amplitudes measured 0.5 ms after repolarization to the fixed membrane potential and normalized to maximum. Data were fitted with a Boltzmann function g/gmax= gmax/(1+exp((Vh-Vm)/k)), where Vhis voltage required for half maximal activation and k is the slope factor.

BKCa-currents in CHO cells stably expressing Cav2.2 channels were recorded using internal solution containing (in mM): KCl 127.5; MgCl23.5; HEPES 5; Na2ATP 2.5; Na3GTP 0.1 and K2EGTA 0.1 oder 10 (pH 7.3). For determination of PMCA-mediated Ca2+-clearance via the deactivation time course of BKCachannels a previously established voltage-protocol23was used. Briefly, a depolarizing voltage-step (from −90 to 70 mV) activated Cav2.2 (and a minor portion of BKCa) channels without inducing Ca2+influx (due to the lack of driving force); Ca2+influx was triggered by a 0.8 ms voltage-step to −60 mV. The resulting increase in [Ca2+]iactivated BKCachannels and thus triggered transient (in the presence of PMCA and NPTN) or long-lasting (control) K+currents that were measured at a potential of 70 mV. The current decay was fitted with a mono-exponential function yielding values for the respective time constant (τdecay). For the multiple calcium influx protocol (Fig.1c, Fig.4c) 2 or 5 repolarization pulses to −60 mV at 2 ms intervals (500 Hz) were applied between the pre- and the test-pulse. Data analysis and fitting was done using Igor Pro9 (WaveMetrics).

All chemicals except DiBrBAPTA (Alfa Aesar) were purchased from Sigma.

CHO cells were recorded in the whole-cell voltage-clamp mode using a EPC10 amplifier (Heka, Germany) under control of Pulse 8.5 (HEKA Electronic). Patch-pipettes had a resistance of 2–4 MΩ when filled with the intracellular solution described above. Cells with an average access resistance of 3–12 MΩ, with 50–75% resistance compensation and <20pA leak-current were used for analysis. Current signals were low-pass filtered at 2.9 kHz (four pole Bessel filter EPC10) and digitized at 50 kHz. Ca2+signals were recorded simultaneously. Lck-GCaMP6s fluorescence was acquired with an Evolve EMCCD camera (Visitron, Germany) using a Zeiss Plan Apochromat 40x oil immersion objective (NA 1.3) on a Axiovert200 microscope (Zeiss). Fluorescent images were captured at 100 Hz with custom written macros in VisiView (Visitron, Germany), processed offline using ImageJ 1.43 software and Igor Pro5. Background was deducted by subtracting the F0image (average of three pre-stimulus images) from all subsequent images (ΔFn= Fn-F0). Regions of interest of identical size (10×10 pixels) were placed over the plasma-membrane reacting to the electrical stimulation and fluorescence changes were tracked throughout the stack.

For determination of the density of Cav2.2, PMCA2 and NCX2 protein(s) in CHO cells the SDS-FRL technique was used as previously described45with some modifications. CHO cells constitutively expressing Cav2.2 were transiently transfected with the aforementioned plasmids (coding for PMCA2-GFP, NPTN-RFP, NCX2-GFP) or an empty vector with Jet-PEI transfection reagent according to the manufacture’s instruction. After 2 days of incubation, cells were rinsed with 25 mM phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Roth, Germany) in PBS for 10 min. Cells were harvested by scraping, pelleted by centrifugation (500g, 5 min); cell pellets were sandwiched between copper carriers for high-pressure freezing (HPM100, Leica, Austria). Frozen pellets were then fractured into two parts at −120 °C and the fractured facets were coated with carbon (5 nm), platinum-carbon (2 nm) and an additional layer of carbon (20 nm) in a freeze-fracture replica machine (ACE900, Leica). Replicas were digested at 60 °C in a solution containing 2.5 % SDS and 20% sucrose diluted in 15 mM Tris buffer (pH 8.3) for 48 h followed by 37 °C for 20 h. The replicas were washed in washing buffer comprising 0.05 % bovine serum albumin (BSA, Roth, Germany) and 0.1% Tween20 (Tw20, Roth, Germany) in 50 mM Tris-buffered saline (TBS) and then blocked in a solution containing 5% BSA and 0.1% Tween20 in TBS at room temperature (RT) for 1 h. Subsequently, replicas were incubated at 15 °C two overnights (O/Ns) in the following mixtures of primary antibodies in a solution containing 1% BSA and 0.1% Tween20 made up in TBS: (i) PMCApan (5F10, mouse /Ms/, 1:3000, Invitrogen, Cat. MA3-914) and Cav2.2 (rabbit, 1.67 µg/ml, Synaptic Systems, Cat. 152303) or (ii) NCX2 (SLC8A2, 0.5 µg/ml, Alomone, Cat. ANX-012). Replicas were washed in washing buffer then reacted with 6 nm (Rb) or 12 nm (Ms or Rb) gold particle-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:60, Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, PA) at 15 °C overnight.

Immunogold labeling of replicas was performed as previously described46. Adult mice (n= 3; Charles River, Germany) were narcotized with isoflurane then anesthetized with pentobarbital (80 mg/kg). Cerebelli were removed and immersed into a fixative containing 2% paraformaldehyde and 15% saturated picric acid in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB) for 4 h at 4 °C. Cerebellar slices (100 µm) were cut on a vibrotome (VT 1000, Leica) and cryoprotected with 30% glycerol in 0.1 M PB O/N at 4 °C and then frozen by the high pressure freezing machine. Frozen samples were placed onto double replica tables then fractured at −140 °C and coated by deposition with carbon (5 nm), platinum (2 nm) and carbon (18 nm) in a freeze-fracture replica device (BAF 060 BAL-TEC, Liechtenstein). Replicas were digested at 80 °C for 18 h in a solution containing 2.5 % SDS and 20 % sucrose diluted in 15 mM TB. They were washed in 50 mM TBS containing 0.05% BSA and 0.1% Tween20 and then incubated in a blocking solution. Subsequently, replicas were incubated in the mixture of the following primary antibodies: anti-PMCA1-4 (PMCApan, Mouse, 1:3000, Invitrogen, Cat.# M;A3-914) and anti-Cav2.1 (Guinea pig, Gp, 5 μg/mL47,) prepared in 50 mM TBS containing 1% BSA and 0.1% Tween20 at RT. After washing them in TBS they were reacted with a mixture of 5 nm (Gp) and 10 nm (Ms) gold particle-conjugated secondary antibodies (1:50, BioCell Research Laboratories, Cardiff, UK) at 15 °C overnight.

Finally, replicas were washed in TBS followed by distilled water, mounted on Formvar-coated 100 mesh grids, and analyzed with transmission electron microscopes (CM100, Philips or Zeiss LEO 906 E). All antibodies targeted intracellular epitopes of proteins, immunoreactivity was therefore observed on the protoplasmic face (P-face) of the plasma membrane. The density of immuno-particles labeling protein(s) of interest was calculated by dividing the absolute number of gold particles by the surface area of CHO cells, dendritic shafts of Purkinje cells, and varicosities of parallel fibers. Data are given as individual data points and mean values ± SEM. Statistical significance was assessed by the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U-test.

Tissues from adult mice were freshly collected and snap-frozen before they were subjected to a simple total membrane isolation protocol29. 1 mg of membrane suspension was then extracted with 1 ml 100 mM Na2CO3(pH 11) to reduce sample complexity. After ultracentrifugation, the pellets were solubilized with 100 µl ComplexioLyte91 (CL-91, Logopharm GmbH, Germany) and aliquots run on a short SDS-PAGE gel. After silver staining, the gel lanes were excised and subjected to standard tryptic in-gel digestion. Extracted and dried peptides were then dissolved in 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and loaded onto a precolumn (C18 PepMap100 (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm; particle size 5 µm, Thermo Scientific, Germany) for 5 min at 20 µL/min with 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid using a split-free UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Bound peptides were then eluted with an aqueous-organic gradient (eluent A: 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid; eluent B: 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile): 5 min 3% B, 120 min from 3% B to 30% B, 20 min from 30% B to 50% B, 10 min from 50% B to 99% B, 5 min 99% B, 5 min from 99% B to 3% B, 15 min 3% B (flow rate 300 nl/min). Eluted peptides were separated in a PicoTip™ emitter (75 µm i.d.) manually packed 23.5 cm with ReproSil-Pur 120 ODS-3 (C18; particle size 3 µm; Dr. Maisch HPLC, Germany) and electrosprayed (2.3 kV; transfer capillary temperature 300 °C; funnel RF level 45.0) in positive ion mode into a LTQ Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany) with the instrument settings described in ref.29.

For each dataset, a peak list was extracted from fragment ion spectra using the “msconvert.exe” tool (part of ProteoWizard; http:// proteowizard.sourceforge.net/; v3.0.11098; Mascot generic format with filter options “peakPicking true 1-” and “threshold count 500 most-intense”) and the precursor m/z values were shifted by the median m/z offset of all peptides assigned to proteins in a preliminary database search with 50 ppm peptide mass tolerance. Corrected peak lists were searched with Mascot 2.6.2 (Matrix Science, UK) against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (mouse, rat and human entries). Acetyl (Protein N-term), Carbamidomethyl (C), Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Glu->pyro-Glu (N-term E), Oxidation (M), Phospho (S, T, Y), and Propionamide (C) were chosen as variable modifications, peptide and fragment mass tolerance were set to ±5 ppm and ±20 mmu, respectively. One missed tryptic cleavage was allowed. The expect value cut-off for peptide assignment was set to 0.5. Related identified proteins (subset or species homologs) were grouped using the name of the predominant member. Proteins either representing exogenous contaminations (e.g., keratins, trypsin, IgG chains) or identified by only one specific peptide were not considered.

Label-free quantification of proteins was carried out following the principles and procedures described in refs.48–50. Peptide signal intensities (peak volumes, PVs) from FT full scans were determined and offline mass calibrated using MaxQuant v1.6.3.3 (https://www.maxquant.org). Peptide PV elution times in evaluated datasets were pairwise aligned using LOESS regression (reference times were dynamically calculated from the median peptide elution times over all aligned datasets). PVs were then assigned to peptides based on their m/z and elution time obtained either directly from MS/MS-based identification or indirectly (i.e., from identifications in parallel datasets) using in-house developed software (matching tolerances of ±2 ppm and ±1 min). The obtained matrix of protein-specific peptide intensities / run was then subjected to consistency-based evaluation and used for weighted fitting to a global reference49. Molecular abundances of proteins (Fig.2Aand Supplementary Fig.2) were estimated using the abundancenormspec measure48.

Synaptosome-enriched membranes were prepared from whole mouse brain51, solubilized with CL-47 (Logopharm GmbH, Germany; 1 ml/mg membrane protein, protease inhibitors added), and resolved on a preparative scale blue native polyacrylamide gradient (BN-PAGE) gel as described50. The section of interest was excised from the gel lane, embedded and cryo-sliced (stepsize 0,33 mm) as detailed in ref.52. In-gel tryptic digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis were performed as follows: Peptides were dissolved in 0.5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid and loaded onto a precolumn (C18 PepMap100 (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm; particle size 5 µm, Thermo Scientific, Germany) for 5 min at 20 µL/min with 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid using a split-free UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Bound peptides were then eluted with an aqueous-organic gradient (eluent A: 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid; eluent B: 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile): 5 min 3% B, 120 min from 3% B to 30% B, 20 min from 30% B to 50% B, 10 min from 50% B to 99% B, 5 min 99% B, 5 min from 99% B to 3% B, 10 min 3% B (flow rate 300 nl/min). Eluted peptides were separated in a SilicaTip™ emitter (75 µm i.d.) manually packed 23.5 cm with ReproSil-Pur 120 ODS-3 (C18; particle size 3 µm; Dr. Maisch HPLC, Germany) and electrosprayed (2.3 kV; transfer capillary temperature 300 °C; funnel RF level 45.0) in positive ion mode into a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany). Full MS scan range was 370–1700 m/z with a target value of 3*106ions at a nominal resolution of 240,000. Each precursor scan was followed by up to 15 data-dependent MS/MS fragmentation spectra with a target value of 105ions (min. 8*103ITmax= 200 ms), isolation window 1.0 m/z, resolution of 15,000. Isotopes and charge states +1, >+8 were skipped, dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s.

LC-MS (PV) data were extracted and assigned to peptides as described above and then further processed following the steps outlined in ref.52: Slice-to-slice sample variations in peptide recovery and ionization efficiency of the LC-MS setup were corrected for by calculating the median PV offset of each slice from its predecessor and subsequent PV rescaling of each dataset by the median of all offset values inside a window of ±20 slices. Resulting PV data for each protein were filtered for outliers and false-positive assignments as identified by a correlation-based consistency check. Protein abundance distribution profiles were calculated from the resulting PV matrix by fitting the data to a globally determined abundancenormspec reference for each individual protein. Slice numbers were finally converted to apparent complex molecular weights by linear regression (log10(MW) versus slice number of the respective protein profile peak maximum) of the marker protein complexes (from the mitochondrial oxidative respiratory chain) described by Schägger and Pfeiffer53.

BKCa-currents in response to voltage-changes at constant [Ca2+]i(activation curves under steady-state conditions as in Fig.1b), as well as to time-dependent changes in [Ca2+]iat constant voltage(s) ([Ca2+]ipulse-experiments as in Fig.1c) were modelled in a spherical 3D-reaction-diffusion model with dimensions of an average CHO cell (‘model cell’) equipped with PMCA-NPTN complexes and Cav channels at the experimentally derived densities; 30% of the intracellular volume represents freely diffusible space, while 70% are inaccessible to free diffusion (all values and parameters summarized in Supplementary Table1).

andj→leakis a constant Ca2+leak current. In Eq.2,ϕPMCAdenotes the cycle rate of the PMCA pumps,ρPMCAis their experimentally determined density of 50/µm2(Fig.2) andf(c)describes the concentration dependence of PMCA transport-activity;f(c)is a Hill-function of the local Ca2+concentrationcat the membrane with values for c1/2and Hill-coefficient of 0.43 µM and 2, respectively54. Settingj→leak=j→PMCA(c0)fixed the net flux of Ca2+to zero at the resting Ca2+concentrationc0of 0.1 µM. For determination of spatial [Ca2+]iprofiles in the diffusion-accessible intracellular volume under steady-state conditions with [Ca2+]pipetteof 10 µM and variable values forϕPMCA, the stationary diffusion equation with boundary conditions (Eqs.1,2) was numerically solved using FreeFEM + +55(Fig.3a).

wherej→CaVis Cav2-mediated Ca2+current (during the 0.8 voltage-pulse),j→PMCAandj→leakare as in Eqs.1,2.j→CaVis experimentally determined average number of Ca2+ions entering the cell during the 0.8 ms-pulse (1.2 ∙ 106/ 0.8 ms) divided by the cell surface (300 µm2), and zero otherwise. The accessible intracellular volume (30% of total) resulted in a [Ca2+]iat the end of the 0.8 ms-influx pulse of around 10 µM, a minimal value to account for the observed rapid onset of the Ca2+-activated BKCacurrents23.

For determination of the spatio-temporal evolution of [Ca2+]ifollowing the 0.8 ms-influx pulse with or without buffer, with variable values forϕPMCA, the above formulated reaction diffusion problem (Eqs.3–5) was numerically solved using FreeFEM + +.

For theoretical approximation of measured BKCa-currents (Figs.1,4) we used a previously established model for BKCachannel gating30. Briefly, this model comprises a total of 10 distinct states, five open (O0-4) and five closed (C0-4) states, and four binding sites for Ca2+ions (occupancy designated 0-4). Transitions between states Oiand Ci(i = 0,…, 4) are voltage-dependent, while transitions between states Oiand Oi+1and Ciand Ci+1(i = 0,…, 3) are dependent on [Ca2+]i(Supplementary Tables2,3).

KCiand KOiare the dissociation constants for Ca2+binding to closed and open states of the BKCachannels, respectively.

This gating model was calibrated with experimentally determined BKCa-activation curves (as in Fig.1b) for [Ca2+]ivalues of 0.1, 1, 10, 50 µM10via an optimization routine56. The respective values obtained for L(0), Q and the reaction constants KCiand KOi(detailed in Supplementary Table2) were finally used together with the spatial intracellular [Ca2+]iprofiles,cx→, to calculate the open probabilityPopenc(x→)of the channels distributed over the entire surface of the model cell. Averages of thesePopenc(x→)provided the activation curves under steady-state conditions with a fixed [Ca2+]pipetteof 10 µM and variable values forϕPMCA(Fig.3a).

The extended model was calibrated with experimental data previously obtained on BKCachannels exposed to sub-millisecond switches of [Ca2+]iunder constant membrane potential conditions (23; Supplementary Fig.5); the respective values for Q and the reaction constants fitting the experimental data best are summarized in Supplementary Table3.

Again, these parameters were used together with the time-dependent intracellular [Ca2+]iprofiles,cx→,t, to compute the time course ofPopentthat provided the response(s) of the BKCa-model to the 0.8 ms-pulses of [Ca2+]Iunder defined values ofϕPMCA(Fig.3b, Supplementary Fig.5c).

All statistical details are indicated in the figure legends. Data are given as mean ± SEM throughout the manuscript and are analyzed as detailed in the Method section. Significance was assessed by the non-parametric Mann-Whitney U-test, significance levels are indicated (***, **, * forpvalues < 0.001, 0.01, 0.05, respectively; n.s. is not significant).

Further information on research design is available in theNature Portfolio Reporting Summarylinked to this article.

We thank V. Flockerzi, G. Zolles and S. Raunser for intense discussions and critical reading of the manuscript, S. Boudkkazi for help with functional recordings, A. Haupt for help with bioinformatics and N. Wernet for assistance with EM work. This work was supported by grants of the DFG to B.F. (TRR152, project ID 23928380; Fa 332/17-1; Fa 332/19-1; SFB 1453, project ID 431984000), to H.R. (SFB 1027, project ID 200049484) and to A.K. (FOR 2143).