Phytoplankton-derived dissolved organic carbon (DOC) is a major pathway for atmospheric CO2transfer to long-lived oceanic DOC reservoirs. Yet, current models rarely accounted for its molecular and taxonomic heterogeneity across growth seasons. Here, using ultra-high-resolution mass spectrometry (FT-ICR MS), we characterized DOC molecular signatures across diverse algal taxa. Recalcitrant DOC accounted for over 10% of their total organic carbon in all algal groups, highlighting a widespread and previously underappreciated trait. Additionally, we integrated these signatures with satellite-derived, taxon-resolved chlorophyll-a concentrations to develop machine learning models for predicting overall surficial DOC concentrations. Including taxon-specific carbon allocation markedly improved model performance (R2= 0.92 and 0.80 for the growth and decline phases, respectively), substantially outperforming models without such data (R2= 0.69 and 0.46). Furthermore, leveraging these optimized models, we generated a global marine DOC dataset and found that diatoms explained up to 63.8% of the variance in surface DOC. We further showed that algal recalcitrant DOC production was significantly higher during growth than decline seasons globally. These findings offer insights into how bloom duration and climate-driven shifts in phytoplankton composition reshape oceanic DOC dynamics.

Zhe Lu et al. reveal that phytoplankton taxa and seasonal changes shape ocean surficial carbon. Machine learning and satellite data show that diatoms dominate surface DOC, with more recalcitrant DOC produced during growth than decline seasons.

Phytoplankton are primary contributors to oceanic dissolved organic carbon (DOC) pool, which stores ~662 Pg of carbon, more than the combined carbon of Earth’s marine and terrestrial biospheres1,2. This pool serves as a crucial metabolic exchange in the global carbon cycle3. Over 95% of the oceanic DOC pool consists of recalcitrant DOC (RDOC)4, much of which originates either directly from sustained phytoplankton production or indirectly through microbial transformation. Phytoplankton can directly secrete small amounts of RDOC5, which escapes the microbial loop and decomposes slowly enough to persist and circulate with currents for thousands of years6. In contrast, the majority of phytoplankton-derived DOC is bioavailable DOC (BDOC) and is rapidly consumed by microheterotrophs, fueling the microbial carbon pump7, with <0.4% ultimately entering the RDOC pool8. These observations highlight that the chemical characteristics of phytoplankton-derived DOC, particularly the balance between RDOC and BDOC, fundamentally shape its fate in the ocean. Therefore, characterizing the molecular composition and transformation pathways of phytoplankton-derived DOC is essential for accurately assessing and predicting its contribution to the marine carbon sink.

Phytoplankton growth is seasonal9,10, with mass proliferation typically occurring during growing seasons, driven by enhanced light availability, nutrient upwelling, and favorable temperatures11. In contrast, growth slows or declines during the decline phase12. This seasonal growth cycle determines two distinct pathways through which phytoplankton contribute to oceanic DOC: during rapid growth, extracellular DOC secretion dominates13; after cell senescence and lysis, a large portion of intracellular DOC is released into waters14. Consequently, these seasonal fluctuations of phytoplankton communities have significant impacts on the marine carbon cycle. Given the widespread increase in phytoplankton blooms and the extension of bloom periods15,16, changes in the phytoplankton growth cycle will inevitably influence the dynamic variation of oceanic DOC. This variation introduces considerable uncertainty into projections of marine primary production and the global carbon cycle17,18. However, the regulation of oceanic DOC by the phytoplankton growth cycle has not been fully explored. Accurate characterization of phytoplankton DOC components across growth stages is key to reduce uncertainty in carbon cycle projections.

Among the intrinsic characteristics of phytoplankton, taxonomic differences also significantly influence their contribution to the oceanic DOC pool. First, different taxa vary in how they allocate carbon between particulate organic carbon (POC) and DOC varies, depending on traits such as cell size and the thickness of extracellular polymeric substance layer19. This partitioning has been widely incorporated into marine biogeochemical models20, including functional group models21,22, and is considered a key factor in estimating DOC production by phytoplankton23. However, traditional bulk POC analyses may inadvertently include certain DOC components, like the intracellular DOC (DOCin) and cell-wall-bound extracellular DOC (b-DOCex)24,25. DOCinandb-DOCexare not truly particulate in nature but are instead loosely associated with or retained within algal cells. During algal senescence and sinking, these two DOC components are gradually released as extracellular soluble DOC (s-DOCex)26, rather than remaining in the POC pool over the long term. Consequently, including these components in POC measurements underestimates the actual DOC fraction, introducing bias into estimates of phytoplankton-derived DOC pool. Second, the DOC pool itself is composed of chemically and functionally distinct carbon forms, such as BDOC and RDOC27,28. The ratio of BDOC to RDOC, determine the mineralization and storage fate of phytoplankton-derived DOC, ultimately regulating how phytoplankton shapes oceanic DOC pool27,29. However, the mechanistic separation and accurate molecular characterization of DOC fractions across different phytoplankton taxa remain insufficiently explored.

Here we asked whether the molecular characteristics of DOC vary with phytoplankton taxa and growth stages, and whether these variations can be used to assess the contributions of different phytoplankton groups to the oceanic DOC pool on a global scale. In this study, we first employed a combination of preservative treatment, separation, and filtration to mechanically isolate three distinct DOC fractions (includingb-DOCex, DOCin,s-DOCex) and POC from phytoplankton. Using this approach, we classified DOC and POC from 12 axenic monoclonal strains across 6 major phytoplankton phyla. While these DOC fractions cannot be directly categorized as BDOC or RDOC based on their physical separation alone, we then characterized their chemical properties using Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Mass Spectrometry (FT-ICR MS). This technique enables ultrahigh-resolution profiling of organic compounds and allows us to identify molecular signatures typically associated with BDOC (e.g., lipids, proteins, and carbohydrate-like compounds)2,30and RDOC (e.g., carboxyl-rich alicyclic molecules, CRAM)31. CRAM, long-lived marine RDOC, is known for its structural stability and resistance to microbial degradation32. Subsequently, to upscale these laboratory findings to a global scale, we integrated monthly datasets on taxon-specific chlorophyll-a33and global oceanic DOC observations34from 2002 to 2022, incorporating geographic coordinates, sampling dates, and depths. Using these datasets, we applied machine learning to develop models that integrate our measured taxon-specific carbon parameters, enabling accurate predictions of global oceanic DOC distribution patterns. We further examined taxon-specific contributions to the marine DOC pool across different growth seasons. Our study will improve model projections needed to resolve the contribution of phytoplankton to current and projected future changes in the oceanic DOC pool.

The growth stage had no significant effect on total organic carbon content (indicated by a percentage of dry biomass or chlorophyll content) (TableS1,p= 0.4 orp= 0.19). However, the carbon partitioning process was significantly influenced, where allp-values were <0.05 (TableS2). During the growth phase, each studied algal species allocated more carbon tob-DOCex(Fig.1c), with the average content of this DOC fraction accounting for 47.24 ± 5.08% of the total organic carbon (TOC), significantly higher than the 10.84 ± 4.18% observed during the decline phase (Fig.1d,p< 0.01, TableS2). In contrast, during the decline phase, a larger proportion of TOC was allocated to DOCinand POC (Fig.1d,p< 0.01, TableS2). Notably, significant differences in POC content (% of TOC) were observed across phyla (p< 0.05, TableS2), with Bacillariophyta, Chlorophyta, and Cyanobacteria contributing the highest proportions, averaging around 40%, significantly higher than that of Chrysophyte in the decline phase (p< 0.05, TableS2and Fig.S1). Based on global taxon-specific chlorophyll-a concentrations, there were no significant differences in phytoplankton-derived TOC concentrations (mg C L-1) across growth stages (p= 0.07, Fig.1e,f), the contribution of individual phylum to each carbon fraction varied significantly (p< 0.01). Bacillariophyta contributed 0.72 mg C L-1(58.5% of 1.23 mg TOC L-1) during the growth stage and 0.34 mg C L-1(43.6% of 0.78 mg TOC L-1) during the decline stage (Fig.1e,f), representing the highest contribution among all phytoplankton taxonomic groups. Detailed data for each carbon fraction are available in DataS1.

a,balgal cultivation image and the method for distinguishing phytoplankton-derived organic carbon fractions, including extracellular soluble DOC (s-DOCex), bound extracellular DOC, intracellular DOC (DOCin), and particulate organic carbon (POC); (c) taxon-specific carbon partitioning characteristics (proportion of each organic carbon fraction relative to total organic carbon (TOC)) across various growth stages; (d) average proportion of each organic carbon fraction (% of TOC) of all the studied algal species in two growth stages; (e,f) contribution of different phytoplankton taxa to each organic carbon fraction in the growth (e) and decline (f) phases. Microalgae and cell lysis icons were created in BioRender. Chul, L. (2025)https://BioRender.com/7xxvyrl.

The FT-ICR MS profiles for each DOC fraction (proportions of protein-like, carbohydrate-like, lipid-like, CRAM, and other compounds) had no significant differences among different phytoplankton taxa (p> 0.05). However, those in the DOCinfraction exhibited highly significant variability across growth stages (Fig.2a,p< 0.05 for CRAM,p< 0.01 for protein- and lipid-like compounds, TableS3), while extracellular fractions such ass-DOCexandb-DOCexshowed no significant differences (p> 0.05, TableS3). For DOCinfraction, the content of intracellular protein-like compound during the growth phase was significantly higher than in the decline phase (p< 0.01), while the lipid-like compound content in the decline phase was markedly higher than in the growth phase (p< 0.01, TableS3). Regardless of phylum or growth stage,s-DOCexcontained roughly 20% each of lipid-like, protein-like compounds, and CRAM, with carbohydrates accounting for 4.3%. In contrast,b-DOCexhad a slightly higher fatty acid content (c. 30%) and a lower CRAM proportion (c. 10%) (Fig.2a).

aFT-ICR MS profiles (i.e., the proportion of protein-like, carbohydrate-like, fatty acid-like, carboxyl-rich alicyclic molecules (CRAM), and other compounds) of each dissolved organic carbon (DOC) fraction (includings-DOCex,b-DOCex, and DOCin, respectively) within each phytoplankton phylum during two growth stages; (b) The percentages of theoretical contributing pathways of phytoplankton-derived carbon to the ocean carbon sink during two distinct growth stages and their stage-specific differences, including bioavailable dissolved organic carbon (BDOC, that can be transformed into refractory organic carbon by microbes), CRAM (directly produced by algae, and contributing to RDOC (recalcitrant DOC) pool), POC (particulate organic carbon contributing to carbon sinks via sedimentation), and other DOCs;c: the inter-phyla differences in the percentage of these pathways in each growth stage tested by analysis of variance models;dande: the CRAM content (mg mg-1Chl-a) of each phylum during two distinct growth stages. Data were presented as means ± standard deviations. Microalgae icons were created in BioRender. Chul, L. (2025)https://BioRender.com/7xxvyrl.

The proportion of CRAM (carboxyl-rich alicyclic molecules) varied across different DOC fractions, with the highest proportion ins-DOCex(23.02%), followed byb-DOCex(11.19%) and DOCin(3.0%) (Fig.2a). Notably, phytoplankton’s ability to produce CRAM displayed both growth stage-specific and taxon-specific differences. During the growth phase, the overall CRAM accounting for TOC is 10.6%, which was significantly higher than the 7.38% observed during the decline phase (p< 0.05, Fig.2b). Furthermore, CRAM production also varied significantly among phylum (Fig.2c), with Bacillariophyta and Chlorophyta exhibiting a markedly higher CRAM production capacity compared to other phytoplankton phylum (p< 0.05, Fig.2d ande, TableS4, see DataS2for details). Among all molecular features, CRAM was the only compound that clearly distinguished Bacillariophyta from other phytoplankton groups in PCA space (Fig.S2–3), highlighting its strong taxonomic specificity.

Incorporating taxon-specific carbon partitioning coefficients significantly improved the predictive performance of our machine learning models for oceanic surface DOC concentration. We first established baseline models treating phytoplankton Chl-aas a single undifferentiated variable. Using environmental predictors (latitude, depth, temperature, total Chl-a, and DOC (mg mg-1Chl-a)), the optimal models with spatial cross-validation were both random forest (RF) for the growth season for the decline season (TableS5). TheR2values of the two RF models were 0.61 and 0.53, respectively, during the growth season and decline season (Fig.3a, b). Next, we incorporated phytoplankton taxonomic groupings (six major phyla) along with their taxon-specific carbon partitioning coefficients. This refinement led to substantial improvement in model performance. The updated models achievedR2values of 0.90 and 0.82 for the growth season (Fig.3c) and decline season (Fig.3d), respectively. We evaluated the uncertainty of these two updated models separately. We found that, whether introducing ±10% perturbations in the input phytoplankton group abundances or in the taxon-specific CRAM productivity, the resulting changes in predicted DOC concentrations did not exceed 0.15% (TablesS6–8). Using this model, we further predicted taxon-specific CRAM contributions in global surface waters. Notably, Bacillariophyta and Chlorophyta exhibit significantly higher CRAM content (μmol C L-1) than other phyla (p< 0.01, Fig.S4).

a,bFit between predicted data from models without carbon partitioning parameters and observed data ((a) growth season; (b) decline season); (c,d) Fit between predicted data from models with carbon partitioning parameters and observed data ((c) growth season; (d) decline season). Our models integrated phytoplankton taxon-specific chlorophyll-a concentrations and CRAM parameters obtained in this study.

According to the models before and after optimization, the highest concentrations of global ocean DOC during both the growing and declining seasons appeared in tropical regions (Fig.4a–d; see DataS3andS4for details). However, the DOC concentrations predicted by the optimized model in the tropical regions were slightly lower than those predicted by the unoptimized model (Fig.4e, f). The predicted global ocean CRAM concentration during the growth season was significantly higher than that during the decline season (p< 0.01, Fig.4g). Ranking the importance of all predictors revealed that during the growth season, temperature, latitude, and Bacillariophyta-Chl-aconcentration were the top three factors influencing DOC variability (Fig.S5a), while during the decline season, temperature, Bacillariophyta, and latitude were the key predictors (Fig.S5b). Analyzing the relative importance of each phytoplankton phylum on DOC dynamics, Bacillariophyta accounted for over 50% of the explained variability in both seasons (Fig.4h). Further examining the impact of these factors on DOC, we found that the effect of Bacillariophyta on DOC was positive during both the growth and decline phases, but the positive effect was significantly stronger during the growth phase (Fig.S6, with a slope of 0.64 during the growth phase compared to 0.57 during the decline phase,p< 0.01). In contrast, the correlations of other phytoplankton Chl-awith DOC shifted: while Bacillariophyta maintained a positive correlation across seasons, other phyla transitioned from a negative correlation in the growth season to a positive correlation in the decline season (Figs.S7–8).

a,bDOC prediction based on model1 (growth season) and 2 (decline season); (c,d) DOC prediction based on model3 (growth season) and 4 (decline season); The observed in-situ DOC data are superimposed as reference points in these panels. The global ocean surficial DOC distribution maps in these panels were created with the R packages rnaturalearth and rnaturalearthdata.e,fthe latitudinal DOC distribution (growth season, (e) decline season, (f,g). the predicted phytoplankton-derived carboxyl-rich alicyclic molecules (CRAM) concentration during two growing seasons. Data were presented as means ± standard deviations.hthe relative contribution of the six phytoplankton phylum to the variance of marine DOC concentration during two growing seasons.

During photosynthetic carbon assimilation, the majority of fixed carbon is incorporated into POC and DOCin, supporting the synthesis of structural and functional components35. A portion of this fixed carbon may also be released extracellularly as DOCex, either through active exudation, passive leakage, or cellular senescence and lysis36. Together, these processes shape the dynamic partitioning between POC and DOC in phytoplankton. We observed significant taxonomic differences in this carbon partitioning pattern, consistent with previous findings that larger-celled taxa tend to allocate a greater proportion of their carbon to POC37. However, carbon partitioning among specific DOC subcomponents, such as DOCin,s-DOCex, andb-DOCex, remain poorly understood. Our study addresses this gap by showing that, although DOC sub-fraction allocation varies less among algal phyla than overall POC-DOC partitioning, notable ecological heterogeneity persists at the species level. For example,Phaeocystissp., a bloom-forming species, exhibited a remarkably high proportion ofb-DOCex(~20%), exceeding that of other algal taxa (<13%). This is due to its abundant mucilaginous layer adhering to the cell surface38. This highb-DOCexlevel likely enhances vertical export by facilitating aggregation and sinking, thereby promoting POC transport to the deep ocean while reducing DOC residence time in surface waters39,40. Thus, phylum-level variation in thequantityof fixed carbon allocation may shift with community composition, ultimately reshaping carbon fluxes of phytoplankton and its contribution to the marine carbon sink.

Beyond these quantitative differences, we further demonstrate that phylum-level differences in thequalityof carbon compounds also play a pivotal role in modulating carbon sink efficiency. FT-ICR MS analysis revealed compositional differences in DOC fractions across taxa, with CRAMs exhibiting strong phylum-level specificity (Fig.S3). These compounds were consistently enriched in thes-DOCexfraction, accounting for ~20% of this fraction during the growth phase and decreasing to 10% in the decline phase. CRAMs, characterized by aromatic compounds with fatty ring structures in algal-derived DOC33, may serve as photoprotective agents, mitigating ultraviolet-induced oxidative stress in high-light oceanic environments41. Their active release during rapid cell proliferation suggests a role in forming an aromatic-rich extracellular matrix for cellular protection. This is supported by field observations of CRAM accumulation in surface waters during phytoplankton blooms42. Notably, diatoms showed particularly high CRAM production capacity, which may underpin their ecological success and global distribution43–46. Biogeochemically, CRAMs are highly refractory32and sustained release by diatoms may not only enhance their stress tolerance but also contribution to the long-term stabilization of surface DOC pools47,48.

The physiological state of phytoplankton varies across different growth phases and significantly influences the carbon partitioning between POC and DOC fractions. This dynamic carbon allocation is a key physiological response that supports cellular proliferation49. During rapid cell division, phytoplankton exhibit traits such as increased division rates and reduced cell sizes50. This smaller-cell-size trait during the growth phase contributes to lower proportions of POC and DOCincompared to the decline stage. Besides the carbon partitioning between POC and DOC, the seasonal growth cycle also drives shifts in the distribution of DOC fractions, highlighting distinct patterns among DOCin,b-DOCex, ands-DOCex. The proportion of bothb-DOCexands-DOCexrelative to TOC decreases throughout cell cycle, particularly withb-DOCexdropping from 47.2% (growth stage) to 10.8% (decline stage). During proliferation, phytoplankton release ~50% of their carbon into the DOCexfraction, a finding consistent with previous studies4,23. These findings indicate that an extended growth phase of phytoplankton likely decrease POC and DOCinproportions, potentially weakening the carbon sequestration capacity of the biological pump by reducing the amount of POC sinking to the seafloor.

Moreover, chemical changes during the growth cycle greatly influence oceanic DOC pool formation. For example, during the rapid growth phase, the amount of CRAMs (~20% of DOCex) released by phytoplankton into seawater is much higher than during the decline phase. Future frequent and extended phytoplankton blooms15,51likely prolonged growth phases. It is expected to increase the direct production of algae-derived CRAMs, further expanding the surface DOC pool in the ocean. Additionally, during the growth phase, phytoplankton synthesize large amounts of nitrogen- and phosphorus-rich proteins and deoxyribonucleic acid. This coincides with the recent work of macromolecular allocation in the ocean, in which a higher growth environment supports higher protein52,53. These nitrogen- and phosphorus-rich carbon sources, preferred by microbes18, are mostly released intos-DOCexandb-DOCex(Fig.2). This observation suggests that the microbial carbon pump’s efficiency inevitably increases, greatly promoting the synthesis of RDOC in the seawater, which further expands the surface DOC pool. Collectively, this “growth season shuffle-driven oceanic DOC pool variation” may become a key mechanism for future changes in predicting oceanic carbon sink capacity.

Our study refines the understanding of phytoplankton-driven DOC dynamics by extending prior research that predominantly focused on carbon partitioning between POC and DOC21–23. While previous studies have highlighted the significant contribution of algae to the DOC pool, primarily in the form of BDOC54,55, our findings reveal a more nuanced picture. We quantified the specific proportions of BDOC and RDOC in algal-derived DOC across different growth phases. For example, BDOC accounted for 52.8% of the algal-derived DOC fraction during the growth phase and 67.0% during the decline phase, while RDOC made up 15.3% during the growth phase and 10.8% during decline (Fig.2b). Notably, the proportion of algal-derived RDOC exceeded levels reported in some previous studies56,57. This discrepancy likely arises from our use of axenic monoclonal algal strains, which allowed us to effectively differentiate algae-derived DOC from bacterial sources. In nature, phytoplankton and bacteria often form tight associations5,58,59, where algae-secreted BDOC is rapidly taken up and converted in situ into RDOC60, with bacterial and algal RDOC sharing similar characteristics61. Indeed, the capacity of phytoplankton to produce RDOC can be traced back to their evolutionary origins. Eukaryotic phytoplankton evolved through primary and secondary endosymbiotic events involving prokaryotic cyanobacteria62,63, acquiring CRAM-synthesis genes from both their endosymbiotic ancestors and marine bacteria via horizontal gene transfer64. A recent study onSynechococcusdemonstrated its capacity to secrete RDOC in axenic cultures, with RDOC making up 26% of the DOC pool after over 100 day incubation5. Expanding upon previous DOC characterizations using FT-ICR MS, our study suggests that phytoplankton should be explicitly considered as key players in RDOC production within the microbial carbon pump mode4,60.

To further quantify phytoplankton-driven DOC dynamics, we developed season-specific predictive models incorporating taxon-specific carbon partitioning parameters. These models produced DOC dynamics that closely matched observed values, significantly improving the predictive accuracy of global ocean carbon cycle models (Fig.3). A comparison of the surface DOC distributions predicted by the models before and after optimization reveals that the optimized model estimates lower DOC concentrations in the equatorial region (Fig.4). Previous study showed that diatoms (the major RDOC-producing phytoplankton phylum) were less abundant in tropical regions compared to other climatic zones33. Therefore, treating all phytoplankton as a single, homogeneous group while ignoring taxon-specific differences in carbon sources may result in locally overestimated DOC concentrations and fail to accurately capture DOC dynamics. This likely explains why the inclusion of taxon-specific carbon allocation parameters led to improved model performance.

Importantly, the RF models with taxon-specific carbon partitioning parameters remained robust under spatial cross-validation (R2= 0.90 and 0.82, respectively, in growing and decline seasons). Sensitivity tests showed high stability, with ±10% perturbations in any single phytoplankton group resulting in less than ±0.15% change in predicted DOC globally (TablesS6-8). Totally, by integrating taxon-specific carbon allocation coefficients into ocean DOC modeling, our study significantly enhances the predictive accuracy of global ocean DOC models, thereby enabling more robust assessments of the role of phytoplankton in the ocean carbon sink20. Model validation confirms that RDOC release is more pronounced during the growth season than the decline phase (Fig.4g). While a phytoplankton bloom includes both growth and decay phases, it is speculated that the duration of blooms likely effectively extend the growth season15,51, largely enhancing cumulative RDOC release. Accordingly, our model projects future expansion of ocean DOC stocks (Fig.S9).

This projection may appear to differ from studies predicting a decline in global phytoplankton productivity under climate warming16. However, this highlights the importance of our model, which captures taxon-specific DOC production dynamics. Our results suggest that total productivity alone is insufficient to explain DOC changes; rather, the composition and carbon allocation traits of phytoplankton communities are key. Hence, even if overall productivity declines, an increase in high-RDOC-producing groups or extended growth periods could likely lead to DOC accumulation. Globally, different phytoplankton groups contribute differently to the DOC pool. Diatoms show a positive correlation with DOC accumulation, whereas other algal groups exhibit a negative correlation during the growth phase (Figs.S7–8). Although the production of RDOC is relatively high during the growth season (Fig.4g), concurrent microbial degradation can limit DOC accumulation2. In contrast, during the declining season, lower bacterial activity65allows even limited RDOC production to result in net accumulation. Diatoms likely contribute positively in both phases due to their high RDOC production (Fig.2d, e) and dominance in biomass. These findings underscore the crucial role of community composition in regulating DOC dynamics, and the importance of monitoring phytoplankton shifts for understanding long-term carbon sequestration66.

Twelve axenic monoclonal phytoplankton strains representing six major phyla, Bacillariophyta, Chlorophyta, Cyanobacteria, Chrysophyta, Haptophyta, and Dinoflagellata were selected for incubation experiments. Cultures were grown from July to September 2024 at the South China Botanical Garden under semi-controlled greenhouse conditions (25 ± 0.5 °C, 12:12 h light-dark cycle, 50 μmol photons m−2s−1). Cultures were initiated at optical density of the algal culture at 680 nm (OD680 nm) = 0.01 (~70 μg chlorophyll-a L−1) in modified Erdschreiber’s medium (without soil extract), and growth was monitored every 3 days via spectrophotometry. Samples representing both the exponential (growth) and decline phases were collected for analysis. The decline phase was defined as the period during which cell densities decreased continuously after reaching the stationary phase (Fig.S10a). Three DOC fractions, extracellular soluble DOC (s-DOCex), extracellular bound DOC (b-DOCex), intracellular DOC (DOCin), were separated from POC fraction and analyzed using FT-ICR MS for molecular characterization. Full strain list, detailed culture conditions, and etc. are provided inSupplementary Methods.

We developed a sequential protocol to isolate three operationally defined DOC fractions from algal cultures:s-DOCex,b-DOCex, and DOCin, along with POC (Fig.S10a). After centrifugation (2,500 x g), the supernatant was collected ass-DOCex. The pellet was resuspended, treated with formaldehyde and NaOH, and the resulting supernatant was collected asb-DOCex. Remaining pellets were filtered and used to quantify DOCinand POC. DOC concentrations (s-DOCexandb-DOCex) were measured using a TOC analyzer (Shimadzu TOC-VCPH/CPN), while POC and DOCinwere determined via elemental analysis (Elementar Vario MAX Cube). DOCinwas calculated from lysed algal material not treated with NaOH-formaldehyde, and POC was obtained by subtracting DOCinfrom the sum of POC and DOCin. All fractions were acidified, filtered, and stored in pre-combusted glass vials for further FT-ICR MS characterization. Detailed separation procedures, reagents, and instrumentation are provided inSupplementary Methods.

DOC fraction samples (s-DOCex,b-DOCex, and DOCin) were processed for molecular analysis using solid-phase extraction (SPE) with PPL cartridges, following standard protocols (Fig.S10b). Filtrates were acidified (pH 2) and passed through pre-conditioned SPE columns to concentrate DOC. Extracted samples were adjusted to ~20 mg L-1and analyzed using a 7 T FT-ICR-MS (Bruker SolariX) equipped with negative-mode electrospray ionization. Mass spectra were collected across 150–2000 Da, with internal calibration achieving mass accuracy <0.06 ppm. Only peaks with signal-to-noise ratios >4 were retained for molecular formula assignment31. The full analytical procedures can be found in the Supplementary Methods.

Assigned molecular formulas were categorized into compound classes (e.g., CRAM, lipid-, protein-, and carbohydrate-like) based on established elemental ratio thresholds. The classification criteria are detailed inSupplementary Methods.

The data used in this study were derived from two datasets (Fig.S10c). The first dataset covers the past two decades (2002–2022, hereafter referred to as PhytoData, 10.1111/gcb.1676633,) and includes monthly satellite data on major global phytoplankton taxonomic groups (i.e., Bacillariophyta, Dinoflagellate, Haptophytes, Chlorophyta, Chrysophyte, Cyanobacteria). The second dataset is a global oceanic DOC observation dataset (hereafter referred to as DOCData34, ncei.noaa.gov/data/oceans/ncei/ocads/data/0227166). This dataset contains 94,324 DOC measurements collected between 1994 and 2020, spanning all ocean basins from 230 cruises across the global ocean. The DOCData were divided into growth and decline seasons according to seasonal growth curves and latitude (Fig.S11). We first matched in-situ DOCData with monthly satellite-derived PhytoData. Then, we then grouped the monthly-matched data into two seasons: a growth season (January to April in the Northern Hemisphere, July to October in the Southern Hemisphere) and a decline season (September to December in the Northern Hemisphere, March to June in the Southern Hemisphere). Based on the seasonal sub-DOCData, we retained DOC samples with concentrations greater than zero and sampling depths shallower than 5 meters (CTD pressure < 567). This depth threshold was chosen to ensure consistency with the satellite-derived PhytoData, which represent surface-layer conditions due to the limited penetration depth of ocean color remote sensing. As the phytoplankton community observed by PhytoData predominantly resides within the upper euphotic zone, using near-surface DOC samples allows for meaningful comparisons. As result, growth and decline sub-DOCData contained 745 and 639 complete records, respectively, with each record containing information on the date, location (latitude and longitude), CTD pressure, temperature, salinity, and DOC concentration. Next, we applied spatial matching (with data points having a latitude-longitude difference of <0.1 considered as the same station) and temporal matching based on months to merge the PhytoData and sub-DOCData, creating separate datasets for the growth and decline seasons. Notably, most DOC samples in our dataset were collected along 230 cruises rather than from isolated stations. This trajectory-based sampling design ensures high spatial continuity, thereby reducing spatial mismatch errors when applying a 0.1° matching window. In addition, as shown in the global distribution map (Fig.S12), most of the matched data points are in open-ocean regions, where spatial variability is relatively low. Each of these final datasets includes phytoplankton taxonomic chlorophyll concentration, DOC concentrations, sampling dates, and locations (latitude and longitude). For missing data, we used a random forest-based imputation approach. Finally, the obtained taxon-specific carbon partitioning coefficients were assigned to these two separate datasets for the growth and decline seasons.

Here, we assigned the CRAM production capacity ((CRAM, μmol C · μg-1) Chl-a) to each phytoplankton taxon based on the FT-ICR MS-based characteristics in this study. In each training cycle, 70% of data were randomly selected for training and the remaining 30% were allocated for testing and validation. To evaluate the predictive performance of machine learning models while accounting for spatial autocorrelation, we employed spatial cross-validation using theblockCVpackage. Specifically, we constructed spatial blocks by converting the data into a spatial object, projecting it to WGS84, and applying the spatialBlock() function with a 500 km range and five folds (k= 5). This approach ensured that geographically distinct regions were used for training and testing in each iteration, thereby preventing overestimation of model performance due to spatial clustering. During each training cycle, a spatially disjoint subset of blocks was used for training while the remaining blocks served as the validation set. Model training was implemented using thecaretpackage, with five-fold spatial cross-validation defined in the trainControl() function, and predictions were saved for performance evaluation. To assess model performance, we used a suite of evaluation metrics, including RMSE, MAE, andR-squared (R²). We further compared the performance of spatial block CV against random partitioning (70:30 split). These metrics provide a comprehensive assessment of the predictive accuracy of each model by comparing predicted values against observed values. Based on the model performance, the best model was selected and used to assess the importance of various predictor variables. We further evaluate the impact of different variables on predicted DOC concentrations through robust regression analyses.

To investigate global marine DOC patterns across different seasons, we first integrated PhytoData and sea surface temperature (SST,https://oceancolor.gsfc.nasa.gov/l3/68,) dataset. For both PhytoData and SST datasets, mean values for each seasonal period (growth and decline seasons) were calculated. Seasonal averages of phytoplankton data and SST were spatially matched by coordinates. Non-overlapping data points were excluded from further analysis. The combined dataset, containing mean SST and phytoplankton taxon-specific chlorophyll-a concentration, such as Bacillariophyta, Dinoflagellate, and Cyanobacteria, etc. was divided into two groups, growth seasons (338,289 records) and decline seasons (352,039 records). These two seasonal combined datasets were used to predict the DOC concentration based on the best models, respectively, for the growth and decline seasons. To evaluate the robustness of our global DOC predictions to uncertainties in satellite-derived phytoplankton taxonomic inputs, we conducted a one-at-a-time (OAT) global sensitivity analysis (see Supplementary file for detailed). The predicted DOC concentration was subsequently visualized over a global map of oceans (Fig.S10d).

All data analyses and visualizations were performed in theRenvironment (v4.2.0, R Development Core Team, 2021), unless otherwise specified. Means and standard deviations were shown in all Figures and tables. We used a two-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) model to evaluate the effects of phylum and growth stages, as well as their interaction, on the response variable, such as the proportions of POC,s-DOCex,b-DOCex, DOCin(%TOC). Tukey’s HSD post-hoc test was applied for pairwise comparisons between the different groups using themultcomppackage. We used Kruskal-Wallis test to assess whether there were significant differences in the FT-ICR MS-based characteristics across different phytoplankton phyla during two distinct growth stages. Dunn’s post-hoc test with Bonferroni correction was performed to identify which pairs of phyla were significantly different, or stage-specific differences in the FT-ICR MS-based characteristics across phyla, using thedplyrandFSApackages. A Wilcoxon test is used to compare predicted DOC concentrations between growth and decline seasons.

To visualize the proportion of DOC fractions for each species, heatmap plots were generated with thepheatmappackage69. The average DOC content (%TOC) was illustrated by box plots with theggplot2package. The contributions of different phytoplankton phyla to each DOC fraction and POC fraction during the growth and decline stages were visually represented with chord diagrams using thetidyverseandcirclizepackages. The FT-ICR MS-based characteristics (carbohydrates, protein, CRAM, lipids, and others) for each DOC fractions categorized by growth stage were indicated with polar heatmaps using thepsychandreshape2packages. To perform the imputation, themissRangerfunction was applied, which utilizes a random forest algorithm to predict and fill in missing values based on the relationships between observed data points. A random seed (set.seed(123)) was set to ensure reproducibility of the imputation process. ThevarImpfunction from thecaretpackage was used to extract the importance scores of the features, and a bar plot was generated to visualize the feature importance using theggplot2package. When drawing the global map of predicted DOC concentration, we applied spatial interpolation using theakimapackage to generate smoother surface predictions of DOC.

Financial support has been given by National Key R&D Program of China (2023YFF1304505, 2023YFE0113102, Z.L and F.M.W), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (32301398 (Z.L), 42471067 (F.M.W)), Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2023A15150109460, 2024A1515030067, Z.L), CAS Project for Young Scientists in Basic Research (YSBR-037, F.M.W), Alliance of National and International Science Organizations for the Belt and Road Regions (ANSO-CR-KP-2022-11, F.M.W), Key-Area Research and Development Program of Guangdong Province (2022B1111230001, F.M.W), Guangdong Science and Technology Plan Project (2023B1212060046, F.M.W), the MOST Ocean Negative Carbon Emissions project (F.M.W), Strategic Topics Grant Project funded by the Research Grants Consul of Hong Kong (STG2/P-604/25-R, Z.L, F.M.W, H.B.L), and Southern Marine Science and Engineering Guangdong Laboratory (Zhuhai) (SML2024SP022, SML2024SP002, F.M.W). We especially thank Prof. Dr. Hans W Paerl (Institute of Marine Sciences), The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and Prof. Dr. Steeve Comeau (Laboratoire d’Océanographie de Villefranche, Sorbonne Université, France) for their insightful comments and careful revisions. We acknowledge NASA Ocean Biology Distributed Active Archive Center (OB.DAAC) for the use of data.