Eating disorders (ED) impact caregivers' lives, affecting their mental health and the entire family system. Caregivers often tend to accommodate ED behaviors, structuring family life around ED pathology. Both high levels of accommodating behaviors and low caregiver skills were associated with poor patient outcomes, thereby fostering the maintenance of the ED pathology. The current study's objectives were to translate the AESED and CASK scales into Italian and assess both self‐report instruments' psychometric properties.

We enrolled 167 caregivers of ED outpatients who approached the Regional Center for Eating Disorders (ED) at the University Hospital of Verona. A battery of self‐report instruments was administered two times 1 week apart.

Data analysis highlighted an internal structure based on 5 factors for the AESED and confirmed the 6‐factor internal structure of CASK. The AESED subscales' internal consistency ranged from 0.74 to 0.86, while CASK's internal consistency ranged from 0.62 to 0.80. For both the AESED and CASK subscales, the test‐retest reliability was satisfactory.

The results demonstrated adequate psychometric properties of the Italian versions of the AESED and CASK scales, which are useful for assessing the accommodation and enabling behaviors and skills of caregivers of ED patients in the Italian context.

Eating disorders (EDs) are severe mental disorders associated with a high risk of mortality, impairment of quality of life, and a high economic burden (van Hoeken and Hoek2020). EDs significantly impact caregivers' lives, affecting their mental health and the whole family system (Surgenor et al.2022; Fox et al.2015; Anastasiadou et al.2014). Particularly, the illness state of the patient may elicit mixed emotional reactions in caregivers, who reported high levels of anxiety, depression, and psychological distress (Anastasiadou et al.2014). This emotional profile was associated with a high perceived burden and low caregiving efficacy in family members (Treasure et al.2020).

It has been observed that family members have an adaptation process; therefore, caregivers tend to accommodate ED behaviors, such as adapting themselves to ED rules and ignoring the negative consequences of ED behaviors, thereby enabling the illness (Treasure et al.2020; Anastasiadou et al.2016; Fox et al.2015). Accommodating actions are intended to alleviate anger, anxiety and powerlessness or provide reassurance, thus structuring family life around the ED pathology (Anderson et al.2021; Treasure et al.2020). Moreover, accommodation and enabling behaviors have been found to be associated with caregiver's burden and distress (Zinser et al.2022; Wagner et al.2020), personal history of ED, caring for someone with anorexia nervosa (AN), and being the primary caregiver (Stefanini et al.2019). These behaviors are therefore considered maintenance factors for ED symptoms (Schmidt and Treasure2006; Treasure et al.2020).

Caregiver's accommodation and enabling behaviors in the ED field were investigated through the use of theAccommodation and Enabling Scale for Eating Disorders(AESED), a self‐report instrument originally developed by Sepulveda et al. (2009) and subsequently employed extensively in several studies (Kumar et al.2024). Previous exploratory factor analyses identified an internal structure of AESED based on five factors. Unlike the original model (Sepulveda et al.2009), some validation studies have suggested different AESED models by deleting some items (Hibbs et al.2014) or moving them to other factors based on the authors' clinical judgment or the best statistical model fit (Lempesi et al.2024; Quiles Marcos et al.2016) (Table B.1 in Supporting InformationS2: Appendix B lists the models that literature has proposed). However, the majority of studies that clinically employed AESED have relied upon the original model proposed by Sepulveda et al. (2009), or they have just used a total score (Kumar et al.2024) to measure the overall tendency to engage in accommodation and enabling behaviors. The original British version of the instrument showed a good internal consistency (Cronbach's alpha values range: 0.77–0.92) (Sepulveda et al.2009) and an initial convergent validity with the caregivers' depression and anxiety scores and the negative appraisal of caregiving. These findings have also been confirmed by subsequent validation studies in Spanish and Greek language (Lempesi et al.2024; Quiles Marcos et al.2016) (Cronbach's alpha values range: 0.81–0.89 for the Spanish version (Quiles Marcos et al.2016) and 0.78–0.93 for the Greek version (Lempesi et al.2024).

Previous research showed that poor patient outcomes were associated with high levels of accommodation and enabling behaviors and low caregiver skills (Salerno et al.2016; Anderson et al.2021). The cognitive interpersonal maintenance model (Schmidt and Treasure2006; Treasure et al.2020) highlights that family members frequently exhibit similar cognitive and interpersonal vulnerabilities as ED patients (Treasure and Schmidt2013), which accentuate their propensity to respond dysfunctionally to ED symptoms. Thus, enhancing core cognitive and emotional skills of caregivers through skill‐training programs is a critical stage in the recovery process from ED.

Core skills of caregivers of ED patients have been assessed by employing theCaregiver Skills(CASK) scale (Hibbs et al.2015), a self‐report instrument originally developed to assess outcomes of a psychoeducational and skill‐training program (Rhind et al.2014). Hibbs et al. (2015) in the original study found a factorial structure based on six factors, and subsequent validation studies (Vintró‐Alcaraz et al.2018; Zeiler et al.2021) confirmed the model (see Supporting InformationS2: Table B.1 in Appendix B). Many studies also considered a total score as an index of overall caregiver skills, despite the discrepancy among studies in how calculating it (Hibbs et al.2015; Vintró‐Alcaraz et al.2018; Zeiler et al.2021). The original version of CASK showed satisfactory internal consistency (Cronbach's alpha values range: 0.71–0.92), sensitivity to change after a skills training program (Hibbs et al.2015), and initial convergent validity. Particularly, specific CASK subscales (i.e., ‘self‐care’ and ‘emotional intelligence’ subscales) showed weak to moderate negative correlations with the caregiver's general health, distress, and levels of accommodation and enabling behaviors (Hibbs et al.2015). Subsequent validation studies also found satisfactory Cronbach's alpha values from 0.73 to 0.94 for the German version (Zeiler et al.2021) and from 0.70 to 0.75 for the Spanish version (Vintró‐Alcaraz et al.2018); All CASK subscales showed significant weak to moderate negative correlations with the levels of psychological distress, depression, and anxiety (Zeiler et al.2021).

To the best of our knowledge, the AESED and CASK scales have not been translated into Italian and validated yet. although preliminary validation studies have already been carried out in Greece for AESED, Germany for CASK, and Spain for both (Quiles Marcos et al.2016; Lempesi et al.2024; Zeiler et al.2021; Vintró‐Alcaraz et al.2018). Therefore, the objectives of the current study are: (1) to translate and adapt AESED and CASK into Italian; (2) to examine the psychometric properties of AESED and CASK scales in the Italian setting, as follows.

To test the reliability of AESED and CASK's scores (i.e., internal‐consistency coefficients and test‐retest coefficients). According to previous validation studies, we hypothesized satisfactory internal consistency coefficients for both AESED and CASK scales' scores. Since it was the first study to assess the test‐retest reliability coefficients, we took an exploratory approach without any expected hypothesis.

To evaluate evidence based on relations to other variables. Based on previous validation studies of AESED (Sepulveda et al.2009; Quiles Marcos et al.2016) and CASK (Hibbs et al.2015; Zeiler et al.2021), we hypothesized that AESED subscale scores positively correlated with scores of negative appraisal of caregiving and levels of anxiety and depression, whereas the CASK subscale scores showed a weak to moderate negative correlation with levels of anxiety, depression, general health, psychological distress, and accommodation and enabling behaviors.

The current study was conducted in the Regional Center for Eating Disorders at the University Hospital of Verona, where ED patients receive outpatient care. The intervention for caregivers consisted of the ‘Experienced Carers Helping Others’(ECHO) psychoeducational program (Rhind et al.2014). The study's inclusion criteria were the following: being the caregiver of an ED outpatient (i.e., the term ‘caregiver’ indicates someone living with or actively involved in the patient's care, who may also be a recipient of care that indirectly may affect the patient's recovery); being at least 18 years old; ECHO program's attendance. 167 ED outpatients' caregivers (60% women) entered the study. The mean age of the caregivers was 51.7 years old (SD = 7.10). 138 (83%) were the primary caregivers. Out of the total number of caregivers, 158 (95%) were parents, 7 (4%) were spouses or partners, and 2 (1%) were sons or daughters. 146 caregivers were currently living with the patient. ED patients ranged from 14 to 59 years old, and the average age was 19.8 (SD = 6.9; Median = 18). Based on clinical notes, 75 (67%) patients had a diagnosis of AN, 20 (18%) patients had a diagnosis of Bulimia Nervosa (BN), 4 (3.6%) patients had a diagnosis of Binge Eating Disorder (BED), and 13 (12%) patients had a diagnosis of Other Specified Feeding or Eating Disorder (OSFED). The ED diagnosis was made by a specialized clinical team, after a careful multidisciplinary assessment. Patients' clinical symptoms as described by their caregivers included extreme underweight (46%), excessive physical activity (35%), vomiting (19%), binge‐eating (23%), eating in secret (17%), stealing food or money for binges (4%), and severe overweight (2%). All socio‐demographic and clinical data are described in Supporting InformationS2: Table B.3. (Appendix B).

During initial outpatient visits, clinicians usually offered caregivers participation in the ECHO program. Exclusion occurred due to clinical reasons: being a caregiver of a patient with Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder (ARFID) or other nutritional disorders, caregiver unfitness for group intervention (i.e., due to the caregiver's ED diagnosis or need for individualized support), or caregiver refusal. The ECHO program is typically attended by 50%–64% of caregivers of new ED patients taken in charge yearly. Based on purposive sampling, study participation was offered only to those attending ECHO, who were informed by clinicians before the program started (i.e., during initial organizational contacts) and provided written consent. In the first half hour of the initial ECHO session, two psychologists administered questionnaires (see section ‘Measures’ and Table1). The study was conducted in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki, and was approved by the local Ethics Committee (n. protocol 49,303 of 11 October 2017).

Description of validated self‐report tools considered in the current study.

Items are rated on a 4‐point likert scale. High scores indicate high levels of anxiety and depression.

For both subscales a cut‐off of 1 has been used as indicative of the mood disorder, according to the Sepulveda's procedure (Sepulveda et al.2009).

It evaluates a wide range of aspects related to the caregiving experience of carers of individuals with severe mental illness.

It is composed of 66 items categorized into 8 negative subscales (difficult behaviors, negative symptoms, stigma, problems with services, effects on family, need to backup, dependency, and loss) and two positive subscales (positive personal experiences and good relationship with the patient). Two high order factors have been found (i.e., ECI‐negative and ECI‐ positive). The internal consistency of the Italian version is good, with Cronbach's alpha values ranging from 0.71 to 0.86 (Tarricone et al.2006). In the current study, the ECI‐negative scale showed an alpha value of 0.94. The Cronbach's alpha for the 8 negative subscales ranged from 0.63 (stigma) to 0.85 (difficult behaviors).

All caregivers completed a sheet that included questions about the caregiver (i.e., age, gender, ethnicity, occupational status, marital status, education level, family history of EDs, and psychiatric familiarity), questions about the ED patient (i.e., age, gender, ED diagnosis, ED behaviors, and other risky behaviors), and questions about the caregiving experience (i.e., relationship with the ED individual and the amount of time spent with him/her).

AESED is a self‐administered questionnaire (Sepulveda et al.2009) that evaluates the accommodation and enabling behaviors exhibited by caregivers of ED individuals. It is characterized by 33 items, rated on a 5‐point Likert scale (ranging from 0 to 4) and grouped into five subscales: Avoidance and Modifying routine (AMR), composed of 10 items (range 0–40); Reassurance Seeking (RS), composed of 8 items (range 0–32); Meal Ritual (MR), composed of 7 items (range: 0–28); Control of Family (CF), composed of 4 items (range: 0–16), and Turning a Blind Eye (TBE), composed of 4 items (range: 0–16). A total score is calculated by summing all the items (range: 0–132). The authors suggest invalidating a questionnaire when the number of missing responses is three or more (Sepulveda et al.2009). High scores mean high levels of accommodation and enabling behaviors.

CASK is a self‐report scale (Hibbs et al.2015), consists of 27 items that assess a range of caregiving skills relevant in caring for the patient with an ED. Items are rated on a visual analogue scale from 0 (low skill) to 100 (high skill). Items are divided into six subscales: Bigger Picture (BP) (7 items), Self‐care (SC) (4 items), Biting‐Your‐Tongue (BYT) (3 items), Insight and Acceptance (IA) (3 items), Emotional Intelligence (EI) (5 items), and Frustration Tolerance (FT) (5 items). According to previous studies (Zeiler et al.2021; Vintró‐Alcaraz et al.2018), overall scale and subscales scores were calculated as mean scores of items; this preserves the original item‐scale (0–100) and results in an easier interpretation from a clinical point of view: low (0–10), moderate (20–40), high (50–80) and excellent (90–100) (Vintró‐Alcaraz et al.2018). A questionnaire is considered valid if at least 14 items are compiled (more than half the number of items).

According to theParallel Blind Technique(Werner and Campbell1970), CASK and AESED were translated into Italian (forward translation) by two independent Italian mother tongue translators with excellent knowledge of the English language. Subsequently, the Italian versions were translated again into English by an English mother tongue psychologist who knew Italian but had no knowledge about the instruments (back translation). Original versions and back‐translated versions were compared, and items with substantial differences between the two versions were modified. According to theRandom Probe Technique(Schuman1966), the instruments were first administered to a group of 20 caregivers, who were subsequently interviewed in order to determine the underlying reasons for their questionnaire responses. Items that were difficult to comprehend or contained discrepancies were reformulated (see Table B.2 for additional details about items modified during the translation process and Supporting InformationS1: Appendix A for the Italian version of instruments). Table1describes other validated self‐report instruments used in the current study.

Preliminary analyses of each item and its relationship with the global score were performed: skewness and kurtosis tests of the frequency distribution to check the violations of the normality assumption, the potential presence of ceiling or floor effects (when > 50% or > 25%, respectively for Likert and visual analogue scale, of subjects scored at the lowest or highest extremes), and the item‐rest correlation. Items with excess kurtosis (> 3.0), after checking their poor link to global score (< 0.30), were removed as their scarce contribution.

The multidimensionality of the questionnaires, as observed in the original studies indicating five factors for the AESED and six for the CASK structure, was investigated by exploratory (EFA) and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA), respectively, accounting for the ordinal or continuous nature of the data. In more detail, we considered the 10‐point Likert scale of CASK as continuous, while the short number of categories (5‐point Likert scale) of AESED, as well as their skewed distributions, supported the choice to handle data as ordinal, following Rhemtulla et al. (2012).

Ordinal EFA was based on the following strategy: the polychoric formula for the correlation matrix, the unweighted least squares (ULS) estimator as an extraction method to robust estimates (Li2016), Kaiser (eigenvalue > 1) and scree plot elbow criteria to choose the optimal number of factors, and varimax rotation. The Kaiser–Meyer–Oklin (KMO) measure of sampling adequacy and Barlett's test of sphericity are reported for assessing suitability of the data for factorial analysis.

CFA, by using the Maximum Likelihood (ML) approach together with Satorra‐Bentler's adjustment to account for minor distributional misspecification (Satorra and Bentler1988), was applied on continuous data closed to symmetric distributions. The goodness‐of‐fit indices are reported, paying attention to the suggested cut‐score: Standardized Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR) and Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA) < 0.08, Comparative Fit Index (CFI) and Tucker‐Lewis Index (TLI) > 0.90, chi‐square test. The suggestions of McNeish and Wolf (2023), who proposed a set of different cut‐off for and Kline (2023), who stresses the importance of exploring the residual correlation matrix and the test of exact model fit based on the Correlation Root Mean Squared Residual (CRMR), were followed to account for the small sample size.

The internal consistency was assessed by using McDonald's omega coefficients, since it is robust to the number of items composing the scale; values ranging from 0.70 to 0.95 were considered good (Hayes and Coutts2020).

The test‐retest reliability was measured by using Lin's Concordance Correlation Coefficient (CCC), as it evaluates the absolute agreement. Like Pearson'sr, it ranges from −1 to 1, and it should be interpreted close to other correlation coefficients (values ≥ 0.60 are considered as good, and values close to one indicate perfect agreement) (Akoglu2018; Cicchetti1994).

Pearson bivariate correlations were calculated to assess validity evidence based on relations between AESED and CASK scores and ECI‐negative scale scores, HADS, GHQ‐12, and DASS‐21 scores.

Stata 18 [StataCorp2023], with the “omegacoef” [Shaw2021], was used for exploring the main descriptives and psychometric properties; the package “lavaan” (Rosseel2012) and “psych” (Revelle2025) of R environment for calculating the factor analyses.

Respondents showed good compliance: 17 AESED and 1 CASK questionnaires were excluded due to missingness criteria. Of the 150 valid AESED questionnaires, 130 (87%) were completely filled out. The item nonresponse rates were very low (range: 0%–2%): 19 items showed completed responses, and only item 24 missed 3 responses, meaning that the item formulation was clear and the questionnaire was well accepted by the respondents. The detailed description of Table B.4 confirms the violation of the normality assumption in most parts of the items. It shows the presence of a notable floor effect (frequency rate > 50%) in 11 items: 10, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20, 21, 22 and 23. The item‐rest correlations focused the attention on 7 items (10, 11, 12, 20, 21, 22 and 23) with low values (< 0.30).

The exploration of CASK questionnaires showed that 148 (90%) responders completely filled out their questionnaire, and the item nonresponse rates were less than 4.8%. Table B.5 (see Supporting InformationS2: Appendix B) shows a detailed description of the items, specifically, moderate ceiling effects were attributable to items 10 and 20, with 42% and 29% of choices at the upper end. The item rest correlations varied from 0.19 to 0.68, indicating good consistency with the exception of item 5.

Table2shows exploratory factor analysis on a subset of 29 items, after excluding those that showed high values of kurtosis (> 3.0). Kaiser's criteria (eigenvalues > 1) suggested a number of factors of 7; while the elbow criterion of the Scree Plot suggests retaining 5 factors (see Figure1). Both Bartlett's test of sphericity (χ2 (406) = 200.70,p< 0.001) and KMO measure (overall index = 0.81; range of 0.52–0.92 for single items) were adequate. The model, generated by the retention of 5 factors, can explain 56% of the overall variance, split in 16%, 13%, 10%, 9% and 8%. After the rotation, the model shows good values of commonalities (> 0.40) for 24 items, no cross‐loading items, with the exception of item 33, and factor loading values (> 0.40) targeting specific factors. Given the theoretical framework (i.e., several clinical studies had employed a total score), the single‐factor solution was examined, but analysis revealed that it only accounted for 28.3% of the variance.

Note:Factor loading values in bold represent the highest loading for each item on a specific factor, with values greater than 0.40.

The loadings of items 32 and 33 were weak for all factors (< 0.40). But as their content, from a clinical perspective, investigates a relevant facet of the construct of interest, and previous studies (Sepulveda et al.2009; Quiles Marcos et al.2016; Lempesi et al.2024) agree in assigning these items to the “AMR” factor, we opted to move them to the factor “AMR”, as suggested by Costello and Osborne (2005), who indicate to combine the data and theory perspective to design the optimal model.

The five subscales' scores are characterized by skewness indices ranging from −0.48 for “CF” to 1.32 for “TBE” and kurtosis indices ranging from 2.18 to 4.08, which confirm the asymmetric distribution of the scales (± 2 and ± 3 for distributive normality). The scales showed moderate dispersion, as the value of each standard deviation is less than its mean value, except “TBE”, which is characterized by high‐variance distribution (ratio of standard deviation to mean = 0.73/0.94).

An exploration between AESED scales' scores shows Person'srcorrelations ranging from − 0.06 (between CF and TBE) to 0.55 (between AMR and CF), supporting the assumption of weak to moderate correlations among the five dimensions.

CFA was performed to assess the goodness of fit of the CASK six factors model proposed by Hibbs et al. (2015) within the data of the Italian sample of caregivers (Table3for detailed estimations), showing acceptable fit measured by the following indices: X2(309) = 435.98,p< 0.001; SRMR = 0.061; RMSEA = 0.050 (CI = 0.040–0.060); CFI = 0.92; TLI = 0.91; CRMR = 0.063 (p> 0.05). The correlation between residuals showed values lower than 0.22, suggesting an acceptable model fit despite of the small size of the sample. The six subscales' scores are characterized by skewness and kurtosis indices ranging within the symmetry intervals (± 0.5 and ± 3 for distributive normality). Item 5 showed low factor loading (confirming the low item rest correlation abovementioned); therefore, CFA was also performed on a set of 26 items (without item 5), showing the following indices: X2(284) = 417.12,p< 0.001; SRMR = 0.061; RMSEA = 0.054 (CI = 0.043–0.064); CFI = 0.91; TLI = 0.90. CFA on a one‐factor solution has also been tested, showing the following findings: X2(334) = 583.58,p< 0.001; SRMR = 0.070; RMSEA = 0.077 (CI = 0.066–0.086); CFI = 0.83; TLI = 0.82.

Weak to moderate correlations between CASK scales' scores were found: Person'srranged from 0.39 (between BYT and EI) to 0.67 (between BP and FT).

Internal consistency was measured for both AESED and CASK scores using McDonald's omega, which are listed in Table B.6 (Supporting InformationS2: Appendix B). Regarding the AESED, omega values sound good for the subscale scores, ranging from 0.74 (MR) to 0.86 (AMR); whereas, CASK subscale scores' omega values ranged from 0.62 (IA) to 0.85 (BP).

The test‐retest reliability was measured on data gathered two successive times a week apart by using Lin's CCC for subscale scores. The temporal stability is good for the subscale scores, varying from 0.67 (TBE) to 0.80 (AMR). CASK questionnaire resulted in a Lin's CCC ranging from 0.63 (BP, BYT and IA) to 0.76 (EI) for the subscale scores.

Table4shows the correlation matrix between AESED and CASK subscale scores and the current study's other scales' scores. ECI‐negative correlated with AESED‐AMR (r= 0.55), CASK‐SC (−0.52), and CASK‐EI (r= −0.40). DASS‐21‐Depression correlated with CASK‐SC (r= −0.45), CASK‐IA (r= −0.43), CASK‐EI (r= −0.42); DASS‐21‐Stress correlated with AESED‐AMR (r= 0.42), (CASK‐SC (r= −0.43), CASK‐EI (r= −0.44), CASK‐FT (r= −0.40). HADS‐Depression correlated with AESED‐AMR (r= 0.43) and CASK‐SC (r= −0.46); HADS‐Anxiety correlated with AESED‐AMR (r= 0.45) and CASK‐SC (r= −0.48). AESED‐AMR correlated with CASK‐SC (r= −0.41) (see Supporting InformationS2: Table B.7 in the Appendix B).

Validity evidence based on relations to other variables of AESED and CASK: Pearson correlations.

Note:Bolded Pearson’s r values indicate correlations ≥ |0.40|.

The main objective of the present work was to examine the psychometric properties of AESED and CASK scales, previously designed to assess the accommodating and enabling behaviors and the caregivers' skills, in an Italian sample of caregivers of outpatients with an ED diagnosis.

The investigation of the internal structure of AESED in the current study sample identified a final set of 29 items grouped into five factors, consistent with previous validation studies. Nevertheless, differently from Sepulveda et al. (2009), our model proposed to include item 17 “Do any family members have to accommodate to the exercise routine of the relative with an ED?’ and item 18 ‘Do any family members have to accommodate to your relative's checking their body shape or weight?” in the “AMR” factor, because their Italian translated version more closely matched the component related to caregiver's routine changes. Four items (10, 12, 15, and 21) were excluded due to high kurtosis, suggesting an absence of variability, which did not enable them to be informative for capturing the construct of interest. In accordance with this finding, Lempesi et al. (2024) had already noted that the average scores of these items were close to the lower value on the Likert scale.

The current study brought to light a lack of consensus regarding the internal structure of AESED: previous studies have proposed distinct models, where the selection of items for each factor has been driven by both statistical data analysis and clinical perspective. The proposed model for the Italian setting is no exception to this. The inconsistency among models may be explained by different features of the samples among studies and cross‐cultural peculiarities linked to the caregiver role and perceived caregiving burden (Anastasiadou et al.2014). Further studies will be required to investigate the association between caregiver's accommodation and caregiver burden, measured by the Caregiver Burden Inventory (CBI) (Bertelli et al.2022) in Italy.

The results supported the multidimensional nature of the instrument, indicating distinct facets of the construct ‘accommodation and enabling behaviors’, as originally shown by Sepulveda et al. (2009). This led us to suggest that AESED should mostly be used in clinical settings to find out which component of the accommodating or enabling behavior is more prevalent rather than the overall tendency to engage in accommodating and enabling behaviors. In the research field, on the other hand, a total score might be useful to see how accommodating and enabling behaviors changed before and after the intervention.

The internal consistency of the AESED subscale scores ranged from adequate to good, in line with prior studies (Lempesi et al.2024; Quiles Marcos et al.2016; Sepulveda et al.2009). As far as we are aware, this is the first study to investigate the test‐retest reliability coefficients of the AESED scores, which was good for AESED subscale scores, with the “TBE” subscale score having the lowest value.

Overall, the “TBE” subscale seems to be the most problematic one across the validation studies, as well as in the current study (Sepulveda et al.2009; Quiles Marcos et al.2016; Lempesi et al.2024). As already suggested by the authors of the original version (Sepulveda et al.2009), this might be because this subscale reflects the caregiver's tendency to ignore unacceptable behaviors, which is more common in families with a relative having a BN diagnosis, whereas the samples considered in the current study and the other previous validation studies were composed, most of all, by patients with a diagnosis of AN.

Regarding validity evidence based on relations to other variables, the findings were broadly consistent with previous research (Sepulveda et al.2009; Quiles Marcos et al.2016), indicating weak to moderate correlations between AESED subscales and other validated tools. We hypothesized that this might be because, before starting the ECHO program, accommodating and enabling behaviors were not perceived by the caregivers as dysfunctional strategies linked to their psychological distress.

The six‐factor model of the CASK scale, originally proposed by Hibbs et al. (2015), has been substantially validated in previous studies (Zeiler et al.2021; Vintró‐Alcaraz et al.2018). In line with these findings, the present study provided preliminary evidence of the model in an Italian sample of caregivers. Subscales showed weak to moderate correlations with each other, suggesting the independence of each subscale from the others. The low factor loading of item five on factor “FT” could be due to the item content (i.e.,Avoid getting drawn into arguments about the eating disorder with___?). We supposed that the Italian caregivers did not always interpret the Italian translation of the sentence “getting drawn into arguments” as having an emotional valence (e.g. like a quarrel). The current findings highlighted that single‐factor solution did not fit the data, suggesting the multidimensionality of the construct. This poses some concerns when using a total score. The internal consistency coefficients ranged from adequate to good for the majority of subscales scores, except “SC” and “IA” scores with a slightly lower omega value. Test‐retest reliability coefficients for the CASK subscale scores were found to be good.

Similarly to the original validation study (Hibbs et al.2015) and the German validation study (Zeiler et al.2021), certain CASK subscale scores, especially “SC” scores, showed moderate negative correlations with the scores of measures of psychological distress, anxiety, depression and negative appraisal of caregiving experience. This is consistent with studies highlighting the relationships between psychological issues and caregiver's perceived self‐efficacy (Treasure et al.2020).

Vintro‐Alcaraz and colleagues (2018) provided a score interpretation for the application of the tool within the daily clinical practice, suggesting that a score higher than 40 indicates high caregiver skills. This is particularly relevant for the clinical application of the instrument, given that assessing caregiver's skills allows for a broader view of contextual factors which maintain the ED illness.

The study showed the following limitations: first, the study's sample size was small; hence, our findings only offered preliminary evidence of AESED and CASK validation in the Italian context, which still required confirmation in studies with larger samples. Second, we only used self‐report instruments that can be subject to social desirability and recall bias. Therefore, future studies should include observational tools and semi‐structured interviews to evaluate caregiver's behaviors. The majority of our sample consisted of caregivers of patients with AN. Nonetheless, this limits the capacity to assess the psychometric properties of specific subscales more commonly associated with bulimic symptoms, such as the 'TBE' subscale and to conduct known groups analysis according to the diagnosis. Future research should include more patients with an ED diagnosis other than AN to analyze caregivers' behaviors across ED diagnoses. Further studies should collect data regarding patients' psychiatric comorbidity and caregivers' psychiatric diagnoses, evaluating their impact on caregivers' reactions to ED. Furthermore, given the young age of most patients, most of the caregivers were parents. Future research needs to include various caregiver types. The recruitment of the caregivers has occurred at a single clinical site and only among those who attended the ECHO program, which limited the result generalizability. However, enrolling a more selective sample allowed for a more homogeneous group (e.g., inclusion of only caregivers without an ED diagnosis). Therefore, further research would be advisable to use multisite sampling and include caregivers regardless of the intervention received. Finally, after the ECHO intervention, we did not test the CASK and AESED's sensitivity to change. This can be examined in future studies, which should also include longitudinal investigation on which family and patient factors may be associated with changes in caregiver's skills, as well as accommodating and enabling behaviors.

The current research found that the scores of the Italian versions of the AESED and CASK scales are reliable and their interpretation is valid to assess the accommodating and enabling behaviors and skills of caregivers of ED patients. The employment of these instruments enables the testing of caregiver reactions to ED pathology in the Italian context, which were previously recognized as maintaining variables of ED according to the cognitive interpersonal maintenance model (Schmidt and Treasure2006; Treasure et al.2020). These tools may be useful for monitoring family‐based interventions‐the gold‐standard therapies for ED young patients (National Guideline Alliance2017)‐and enable future research on the impact of these interventions in Italy. Given cross‐cultural variation in caregiving (Anastasiadou et al.2014), our findings highlighted the need for cultural adaptation of these instruments. Therefore, the score interpretation requires considering cultural peculiarities, especially with non‐native families. Future studies should examine cross‐cultural differences in caregivers' responses to ED and identify key individual and family factors linked to changes in accommodation and skills over time.