This study aimed to evaluate the implementation and impact of the ‘Pick of the Crop’ (POTC) program. POTC is a whole‐school nutrition program aimed at increasing opportunities for primary school students in Queensland to learn about and eat more vegetables and fruit (VF).

A mixed‐methods evaluation was undertaken that included analysis of school action plans, Most Signficant Change interviews and surveys with school champions, as well as focus groups with regional coordinators and programme managers. Data sources explored access to VF within the school and the perceived knowledge, skills, attitudes, and behaviour of staff and students regarding VF consumption. Quantitative data were analysed using descriptive statistics, and qualitative data were inductively coded and thematically analysed. Sources of data were triangulated to cross‐validate key themes identified from interviews, focus groups, surveys and action plans.

A total of 63 schools participated in the POTC evaluation. School staff reported high acceptability of POTC within schools for the first 2 years of its implementation. School staff considered the program feasible with the support of regional coordinators, strong curriculum links, networks with the community, and local leadership. Respondents from schools in their first and second year of implementation reported an increase in student knowledge, skills, and attitudes towards VF consumption. Schools in their second year of implementation reported higher levels of VF consumption among students, with some improvement to school policies, food culture and school networks.

POTC demonstrates an acceptable and feasible model that has potential for increasing consumption of VF among primary school students. Further research is required to determine long‐term program efficacy with a larger sample size.

School‐based nutrition programs should consider incorporating the capacity for flexibility within program structures, whereby schools determine context‐specific priorities and the specific activities to be implemented. Recruiting dedicated regional coordinators is also important to ensure support is available to meet the individual needs of schools.

Establishing healthy behaviours, such as having a balanced diet, is crucial in early years to reduce the risk of non‐communicable diseases in adolescence and adulthood. A nutritious diet with adequate vegetables and fruit intake can lower the risk of developing obesity, chronic diseases such as cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus, and help to maintain a good quality of life [1,2]. The Australian Dietary Guidelines provide age‐ and sex‐specific recommendations for fruit and vegetable intake. In 2022, most children met fruit recommendations (71% of 4–8 year‐olds and 65% of 9–11 year‐olds), but very few met vegetable recommendations (2%–3%) [3]. Only 1.5% of 4–8 year‐olds and 2.6% of 9–11 year‐olds met both, down from 3.8% and 5.1% in 2017–18 [3,4]. Children in regional and remote areas have lower fruit and vegetable consumption than their metropolitan peers [5].

Schools offer a unique opportunity for children to learn about, access, and consume vegetables and fruit. This is due to the extended period of time that children spend in the school setting as well as the opportunity to learn from peers and teaching staff. School‐based food and nutrition programmes that are multi‐component in design and can flexibly meet the unique needs of schools are more effective in improving dietary habits [6,7]. Experiential learning strategies are associated with the greatest impact on reducing energy intake, increasing vegetable and fruit intake and its preference, and increasing nutritional knowledge [8]. Cross‐curricular approaches are also helpful in reducing sugar consumption [8,9]. Successful programmes use an array of strategies that involve school gardens, food provision, taste‐testing, cooking classes, or a combination, and are more likely to be successful with parental involvement [10].

It is crucial, however, that school‐based interventions consider the context in which they are to be implemented and the broader systems that can influence their implementation [11]. The context, which includes the school setting, staff, ethos and sociodemographic factors, can impact intervention fidelity and effectiveness, and when ignored, can result in poor intervention adherence and sustainability [11]. Examples of programs that have demonstrated flexibility and adaptation to local contexts and needs include the PASSPORT project [11] (a physical activity portfolio intervention that maximises the use of elements that can be adapted to be school‐specific), Project Energise [12] (a whole‐school nutrition and physical activity program that utilises a community‐based approach and has been implemented for over 10 years) and SWITCH [13] (a capacity‐building program where schools are provided with training on school wellness and given the autonomy to implement program components in a school‐specific manner). However, programs such as these that aim to take a less prescriptive approach and enable locally designed activities that are self‐determined by the school are limited in the extant literature and, to our knowledge, Pick of the Crop (POTC) is the first initiative in Australia that adopts such an approach [14]. This paper contributes further insight by reporting on the evaluation of POTC in Queensland, Australia.

POTC is a whole‐school healthy eating initiative developed by Health and Wellbeing Queensland (HWQld), Queensland's dedicated prevention agency, and delivered in partnership with locally based organisations. POTC aims to increase opportunities for primary school students at government‐funded schools in Queensland to learn about and eat more vegetables and fruit. POTC offers a flexible model for implementation, whereby each school nominates a designated 'programme champion' and develops a tailored action plan that addresses one or more of the five components: (1) farmer and food connections; (2) teaching and learning programmes; (3) vegetables and fruit at schools; (4) healthy school environments; and (5) parent connections. The POTC action plan is developed and implemented with the assistance of a regional coordinator who works with POTC schools in their region during the school year. This includes face‐to‐face meetings, online support, termly newsletters, organising events, or making connections with other stakeholders. Additionally, POTC schools have access to grant funding (up to $7000 AUD over 2 years), resources via the POTC website, and a closed Facebook group to support the implementation of their POTC action plan.

A mixed methods approach was used to undertake a process and outcome evaluation to determine feasibility, acceptability, implementation, and early indicators of impact of POTC in schools across the period of 2021–2022. The evaluation plan was co‐developed between [The University of Queensland’s Institute for Social Science Research, Health and Wellbeing Queensland, and POTC regional coordinators] in alignment with the Queensland Government Program Evaluation Guidelines [15]. The evaluation was underpinned by a program logic that provides a high‐level overview of the program's activities, and the impacts (immediate outcomes) and outcomes they are intended to influence (see FileS1). The program logic was designed to capture change across the whole‐school system by addressing policies (incorporating healthy eating objectives within school plans and policies); practices (supporting school practices that provide opportunities for students to learn about and consume vegetables and fruit); networks (improving connections between schools and the agricultural sector); and mindsets (improving attitudes towards vegetable and fruit initiatives and embedding nutrition within the curriculum). Ethics approval was obtained from (Griffith University Human Research Ethics Committee [GU Ref No: 2020/888] and was ratified by The University of Queensland’s Human Research Ethics Committee [2022/HE000716]). The evaluation also received approval from (the Queensland Department of Education [Ref. 550/27/2400]).

A total of 101 schools across three regions of Queensland (Bowen and Burdekin; Bundaberg and Wide Bay; and Logan) were approached by HWQld to participate in POTC, and 68 schools enrolled in POTC in 2021 and 2022. Four schools who joined in 2021 ceased to continue with POTC in 2022, but were included in the evaluation. The three regions were chosen according to their level of socio‐educational disadvantage and existing strong ties with the agricultural sector. According to the Index of Community Socio‐Educational Advantage (ICSEA), the average percentile for schools in each of the selected regions was below the 50th percentile in Australia (Bowen and Burdekin = 17th; Bundaberg and Wide Bay = 24th; Logan = 34th), indicating that participating schools were relatively disadvantaged compared with other schools across Australia. The highest percentage of students in POTC schools across the three regions were categorised as being in the most educationally disadvantaged distribution quartile.

In 2021, 31 schools in Queensland were eligible to participate in the evaluation, while 57 schools were eligible to participate in 2022 (POTC schools with a completed action plan). In accordance with the Queensland Department of Education research policy, permission was first sought from the principal of each school before inviting school staff to participate in the evaluation.

Various data were collected to inform the evaluation of POTC (see Table1).

Staff from schools in their first year of implementation (in 2021) were invited to participate in semi‐structured interviews that explored implementation enablers and barriers and also incorporated the Most Significant Change (MSC) method to explore early impacts [16]. The MSC process involved asking participants to list any changes that eventuated from implementing POTC and then asking ‘Out of all the changes that occurred, what do you think was the most important change?’ This question was followed by, ‘Why was this change important for you and your school?’ Data were collected by [AC], an experienced qualitative researcher and interviewer. Although new to the MSC method, AC thoroughly reviewed published guidance and followed the study protocol. Key notes from all interviews were recorded and later summarised into textual stories. Each story was sent to the participant for verification to ensure it accurately reflected their interview. MSC story transcripts were subsequently analysed by LF through thematic analysis [17]. Inductive coding of manuscripts was conducted on NVivo, which led to the development of preliminary themes and finalising the main themes through an iterative process.

Schools were required to complete action plans detailing their intended activities for each year of implementation. This paper reports on findings from the action plans collected from schools participating in 2022 (schools in their first and second year of implementation). Using NVivo software, the 2022 school action plans from 37 schools participating in POTC were descriptively analysed by ZN by coding extracts of the plans according to a coding framework made up of the main sections of the plan, with ‘barriers’, ‘enablers’, ‘budget’, and ‘planned actions’ being parent codes while additional child codes were created inductively to categorise interesting and recurring themes within the parent codes. This analytical approach was useful for highlighting common themes within the data, as well as unique responses. School action plans were also analysed in comparison to open‐ended survey questions (described below) to highlight any differences between the schools' planned and accomplished actions.

The 2022 POTC Implementation and Impacts Survey provided quantitative and qualitative data on how POTC was implemented by schools in their first year of implementation, and any perceived barriers and enablers to program implementation across the five components of POTC (see FileS2). The survey also collected data on the immediate impacts of POTC. The POTC Implementation and Impacts Survey was circulated among school representatives in term 3 and 4 of 2022.

In term 3 and 4 of 2022, representatives from schools in their second year of implementation completed the POTC Implementation, Impacts, and Outcomes Survey. This survey replicated the items included in the POTC Implementation and Impacts survey, but also contained items that provided additional data on intermediate outcome indicators as these schools were further progressed in implementation of POTC (see FileS3). The survey took approximately 25–35 min to complete.

Survey data were analysed descriptively using tables and charts to facilitate the presentation of key findings. For those items that asked respondents to retrospectively rate their status on particular impacts and outcomes before POTC (Year 1 schools) or 12 months ago (Year 2 schools), comparisons with the current rating were made. Quantitative data were analysed using SPSS software. Responses to open‐ended survey questions were coded using NVivo to ascertain patterns of recurring themes and unique responses.

Two focus groups were conducted with (1) regional coordinators (2 facilitators) and (2) POTC program managers (1 facilitator). The focus groups explored the participants' shared experiences and group interpretation of how the program was implemented in 2022; the nature and scale of support that was provided; and how the support varied across schools, regions, and stages of implementation. The focus group sessions were recorded and transcribed or summarised. The focus group transcripts were analysed through thematic analysis, whereby LF used inductive coding for units of meaning, which led to the development of preliminary themes that were iteratively developed into final themes [17].

The multiple sources of data that were collected were triangulated to cross‐validate key themes that emerged from interviews, focus groups, surveys, and action plans. The converging of data sources helped to validate findings through the integration of quantitative and qualitative evidence. To interpret analytical findings, a clear audit trail was maintained and referred to, which involved documenting recruitment data, data collection, and methods of analysis (such as the use of codebooks and notes on methodological decisions).

An overview of the number of schools included in the evaluation can be seen in Table1. In the first year, 25 schools consented to participate in the evaluation, but only 24 were eligible for semi‐structured interviews due to staff changes at one school with no POTC experience. In 2022, 38 schools participated (16 in their first year, 22 in their second). One second‐year school, which did not complete an action plan, was still invited to participate. Thirty‐seven action plans were therefore submitted in 2022.

Findings were derived from data collected from eight MSC interviews with school staff (from eight schools) in 2021, 59 survey responses were completed by school staff in 2022, and focus groups with three regional coordinators and two program managers in 2022. The 2022 surveys had a response rate of 67% of schools, with 16 schools (25 responses) in their first year of implementation having completed the surveys and 22 schools (34 responses) in their second year.

A total of 307 activities were reported by 38 schools (in their first and second year of program implementation) across the five components of POTC (refer to FileS4). For ‘farmer and food connections’ (n= 39), activities ranged from educational excursions to local farms to more specific activities such as establishing a ‘bush tucker’ garden with input from Indigenous Elders. To address ‘teaching and learning programs’ (n= 72), schools incorporated nutrition‐based programs into the curriculum such as the Oz Harvest FEAST program [18]; professional development for staff; and food tastings for students. The implementation of ‘vegetables and fruit at schools’ (n= 82) included vegetable and fruit breaks during class time, offering fruit platters at celebration days, and taking school produce home. ‘Healthy school environments’ (n= 55) involved the establishment of vegetable and fruit gardens and tuckshops providing healthy snacks. ‘Parent connections’ (n= 59) involved parental engagement through disseminating information via social media, school newsletters and information sheets, whilst also encouraging their participation in cooking workshops and volunteering with the school kitchen garden.

It was reported by interviewees that the delivery of POTC components needed to be flexible, convenient, and compatible within school systems to accommodate diverse school contexts, including school demographics and local features (e.g., infrastructure, resources, values).

It was more likely for the program to be sustained if they saw the value in having the program embedded within their school's culture and priorities.

Support from regional coordinators was an essential human resource and enabler of successful implementation and scale‐up.

Having support from local leadership, particularly from the school Principal, was deemed crucial in driving the implementation of activities forwards and determining if POTC was to be a priority activity.

Participants identified that effective engagement and communication with students, teachers, staff, parents, and parent and community associations were key enablers of success. Networking the school to community actors, such as growers associations, and having wider support from the farming sector and local government was key.

Having a branding and media presence with implementation partners, and communication material (such as signage, newsletters, recipes, Facebook group) were also highlighted as valuable assets by school staff and were perceived to increase receptivity to the program.

It was identified from the focus groups that teachers needed resources and support to know how to best integrate POTC within the curriculum, which was more easily done through STEM and helped to decrease any burden associated with time. Interviews highlighted that integrating POTC across the school curriculum was crucial to the sustainability of the program and for improving vegetable and fruit knowledge and attitudes.

Interview participants expressed the need for funding and resources to effectively implement components of POTC. Focus group participants also expressed a need for incentives when funding ceases, to maintain resource‐intensive components such as the maintenance of vegetable and fruit gardens and paying for excursion buses.

First and second year schools used funding from HWQld; however, if schools wanted to supplement the funding to implement desired program components, then some school champions looked for alternative funding sources from either local community grants (to pay for cooking utensils, composting systems and fruit trees) or internal income generation (selling vegetable and fruit boxes or recipe booklets for families).

Other resources were also sought from local organisations and businesses which supported implementation. Resources that were obtained included materials for school vegetable and fruit gardens (such as soil, seedlings, composting farms), the provision of vegetables and fruit for healthy snack breaks, and human resources to provide educational talks, run activities with students, and to have students attend excursions.

There were various barriers that were identified that hindered the program's implementation. Barriers either related to the readiness for implementation, the culture of a school, or the lack of supportive structures and resources.

When a school was resistant to change and lacked support from staff or school leadership, that was deemed as a significant barrier to implementation.

If the program was not well integrated within existing structures and was viewed to be time or resource intensive, it competed with school priorities and agendas.

Additional barriers that were identified from the focus groups in implementing POTC were as follows: change in regional coordinators created a gap in support to schools; the COVID‐19 pandemic; schools' staffing shortages which decreased engagement; and a lack of time to implement the program (typically when clear curriculum links were not drawn).

Teachers reported improved changes across a range of indicators of vegetable and fruit availability, and students' knowledge and attitudes, after the implementation of POTC (see Figure1and FileS5). Opportunities for students to learn about and consume vegetables and fruit at school were sustained (improvement from 29% to 80% respondents rating facilities as good or excellent), including through improved availability of locally produced vegetables and fruit in their tuckshop (improvement from 27% to 66% rating good or excellent) and sustained use of the school garden in Year 2 schools (improvement from 16% to 79% of respondents rating good or excellent). However, some schools reported limited student understanding of vegetables and fruit that are produced in their local area (29% of respondents rating it as very poor or poor). There were improvements to student knowledge (96% reporting somewhat or much better), understanding (80% reporting somewhat or much better) and attitudes towards vegetables and fruit (88% reporting somewhat or much better). Teachers also reported improvements to their knowledge of food and nutrition (55% before versus 80% after POTC reporting good or excellent knowledge). Teachers were more confident in delivering food and nutrition‐based lessons (37% before versus 63% after POTC rating good or excellent), and incorporating it into other subject areas (24% respondents reported POTC to have a major influence and 72% some influence). Importantly, across almost all survey items, the percentage of positive responses was higher among schools in their second year of implementation (see Figure2as an example).

School staff perceptions of current opportunities to consume vegetables and fruit by schools' year of implementation.

All school staff interviewees reported the advantages and positive changes observed through the implementation of the program. The changes observed related mostly to the positive impact that it had on the students, which included: an increased understanding of healthy eating; an increase in willingness to try new foods (particularly vegetables and fruit); skill development such as cooking skills; and changes to the home food environment.

The focus groups also identified that it took considerable time for regional coordinators to build trust and rapport with school staff; however, it was a crucial step not to be missed and resulted in a change in school attitude towards the program.

The students were reported as being actively involved in the program and would partake in autonomous behaviour, most commonly observed when attending to school gardens. When students were involved in growing vegetables and fruit, and observed their growth over time, while tending to it and being able to harvest it, school staff associated this with a feeling of accomplishment, ownership of their work, and a stronger sense of connection to their community.

The POTC evaluation aimed to explore whether the program is acceptable and feasible to implement, and whether it is effective in bringing about changes that enhance the accessibility of, and consumption of, vegetables and fruit within school environments and among staff and students. The findings suggest that POTC is well‐accepted by schools, is feasible to implement through a diverse range of activities across its focus areas, and that the program addressed the precedents to vegetable and fruit consumption. Based on teacher perspectives, this included an increase in student and school staff knowledge on vegetables and fruit; improved attitudes with students being more willing to try vegetables and fruit; and improved opportunities to consume vegetables and fruit through enabling accessibility and availability.

The findings highlighted the crucial role of regional coordinators and local school champions to drive the implementation of the program and to support schools based on their current capacity and priorities. The geography and demographics of Queensland, Australia, are diverse, expansive and unique. It is pertinent that regional coordinators provide ongoing support to schools and to offer connections to community partners and local grant opportunities, whilst considering the sensitivities and needs of community groups. The findings have implications for how regional coordinators are employed and deployed. This finding is corroborated by Rush and colleagues, whereby for Project Energise, the ‘Energizers’ were viewed as being vital for supporting their 6–12 schools within a specified region [12]. It was recommended that ‘Energizers’ live near or within the geographical region in which they served to be viewed as being well‐integrated within community life [12]. They had secure employment from the District Health Board since the program was part of their operating budget and funding renewal was part of the annual cycle. School champions were found to drive implementation at the school level. A qualitative study by Skovgaard et al. [19] found program champions to help with identifying coordination, promotion, and management of support functions as key implementation responsibilities. Program champions were found to be central agents in the implementation of programs that address the whole‐school environment. To enhance the sustainability of the program, the nature of the role and model of support of POTC coordinators and champions should be explored further, especially as scale‐up involves greater coverage of Queensland regions.

The provision of funding and resources was also found to be critical to the implementation of POTC, particularly those components that were more resource intensive, such as establishing and maintaining vegetable and fruit gardens. Based on the qualitative findings, when schools wanted to supplement the provided funds, school champions (with the support of regional coordinators) explored alternative sources of funding and resource provision from the local community (partnerships with local organisations and key actors). This is corroborated by a systematic review that found that strong relationships between a program and its community are crucial, involving stakeholders from a variety of sectors, in addition to securing long‐term, stable funding from multiple and diverse sources to promote program sustainability [20]. Schools are expected to be autonomous; however, when funding ceases, sustainability is impeded, which adds to the complexity of schools already experiencing disadvantage, which is most POTC schools. The literature suggests that using a community empowerment model that considers capacity building of program implementers and of the implementation setting can assist with sustainability and resource mobilisation. This can involve individuals, groups, and communities raising resources from within, including human resources, local leadership, financial assistance, local knowledge, food and equipment [21]. An empowerment model can further engage priority populations to take ownership of their health and wellbeing and to promote program sustainability [22].

A strong advantage of POTC is the in‐built capacity for flexibility and tailoring to the individual needs of schools. Specifically, schools are able to implement activities that will most benefit their school context. Such an approach recognises that complex interventions are inherently shaped by their context, and local adaptation (e.g., schools in disadvantaged or regional contexts) is often essential for effectiveness [11]. The less prescriptive, self‐determined nature of program components allowed schools to be more resilient to external influences such as weather crisis, resource shortages, and the COVID‐19 pandemic. The findings support POTC as being a program that targets change across the whole‐school environment and supports a systems‐based approach. This is consistent with the World Health Organization's health promoting schools (HPS) framework, which also promotes a flexible and dynamic approach, acting as a scaffold that enables progressive implementation of whole‐school programs [23]. These global standards encourage schools to have a strengthened capacity to be healthy settings for living, learning, and working through a multi‐level system of governance and mutually reinforcing actions across all facets of school operation [23]. HPS reflects a whole‐school approach with interconnected elements that includes addressing the curriculum, environments, healthy school policies, school and community partnerships, and policies [24]. Such a system is one that, through intentional and adaptable actions, can institutionalise health promotion within the functions of the education system [24,25]. The advantage of the flexible POTC model is that whilst it can benefit the diverse needs of schools, it has the potential to move from a dynamic and intensive level of implementation support to a more static support model from the health promotion agency as the program becomes further established [26].

However, the flexibility of POTC presents challenges for synthesising insights across schools and identifying which specific activities are most effective. It has been suggested that program elements can be categorised as ‘essential’ and ‘peripheral’, enabling local tailoring within a broader framework [11]. This approach supports contextually sensitive implementation while maintaining alignment with the overall outcomes of interest. In this study, our focus was on feasibility, implementability, and initial outcomes at the whole‐of‐initiative level, rather than on the effectiveness of individual activities. Stepped‐wedge designs have been proposed as a robust experimental approach to estimate overall effectiveness while also exploring school context factors, as schools can serve as their own control groups [11].

A prominent theme was the compatibility of POTC with existing educational priorities. Participants noted that food and nutrition education could be embedded in the curriculum, though some staff required concrete examples. POTC also aligned with schools' holistic approaches to student wellbeing. Another important finding was centred around the impact on students, especially with regards to creating equitable opportunities for students from disadvantaged backgrounds to access fresh vegetables and fruit. The Queensland Department of Education recognises that excellence cannot be attained unless there is equity, and released the ‘Equity and excellence’ strategy in 2022, with a focus on student wellbeing and engagement [27]. However, this strategy did not incorporate advocacy of food security, nutrition education, food provision, or food literacy despite the literature strongly supporting optimal nutrition to improve behaviour, increase attendance and to have happier, more attentive students [28,29,30].

The POTC evaluation has several strengths. This is the first study to evaluate the acceptability, feasibility and early impacts of the POTC program. Multiple data sources across qualitative and quantitative methods allowed for the triangulation of data that indicate changes that are likely to be a result of the program. The data collected will further be used to inform improvements to the program and its implementation process.

This pragmatic evaluation has several limitations. Due to the rapid timelines for design and implementation, the rollout schedule of the intervention, and the need to minimise burden on school staff, it was not feasible to implement a pre‐post control group or a quasi‐experimental/RCT design. Consequently, it is difficult to make causal inferences from the quantitative data. Our surveys used a retrospective pretest‐posttest approach, which is recognised as a valid method that reduces response‐shift bias and is useful when sample sizes are too small to detect program effects [31,32]. We acknowledge that this approach relies on participants' subjective recall and self‐assessment, which may introduce recall or social desirability bias. To mitigate this, surveys were anonymous, neutrally worded, and placed the before‐and‐after items in separate sections of the survey. Further to this, member checking was not conducted for the focus groups. In addition, no quantitative data on student dietary intake were collected; the sample was relatively small (precluding inferential statistical analysis), and the perspectives of students and parents were not included. Future evaluations of POTC would benefit from incorporating these perspectives to strengthen the evidence base.

The findings of this evaluation underscore the importance of the support of regional coordinators who are essential for the onboarding and recruitment of new schools. POTC offers an optimised model for implementation at government‐funded schools for primary levels. However, hybrid models of support need to be considered as scale‐up occurs; gradually adapting the support provided to each school as the initiative is implemented over several years. The flexible and adaptable nature of POTC is one that other program developers should consider, since it can act as a scaffold for schools to tailor to their unique needs and individually develop plans to address the key areas of action across the whole school food environment. To further support schools on embedding nutrition within the curriculum, toolkits and resources inclusive of sample lesson plans for STEM‐based subjects are recommended. It is recommended that future research investigates the factors required for the sustainability of POTC and whether community empowerment models will benefit the program, especially if funding ceases. Furthermore, future research should explore the simultaneous benefits of vegetable and fruit gardens to mental health, learning, and classroom engagement, in addition to vegetable and fruit promotion.

This study showed that POTC was feasible and acceptable, with potential to improve students’ knowledge, attitudes, and access to vegetables and fruit in schools, based on teacher perspectives. The regional coordinators and program champions were found to be vital human resources for encouraging and sustaining school engagement in a feasible manner. Additionally, the compatibility of the program with the schools' culture and values is important for the acceptability of the program. POTC offers a successful and flexible model for schools which, alongside its alignment with the education curriculum and key statewide and national public health policies [33,34,35], may promote the longer‐term implementation of the program. Further research is required to determine program sustainability, especially if external funding is to be reduced or ceased, and long‐term impacts of vegetable and fruit consumption at school and at home.