Accurate estimation of the evaporation is of great significance for the management of limited agricultural water resources. However, developing highly accurate and universal data- driven models using time-series analysis methods to achieve precise evaporation estimation remains a challenging. Specifically, integrating meta-heuristic algorithms, ensemble deep learning models, and data preprocessing techniques for evaporation prediction is notably scarce. The aim of this paper was to employ time series analysis methods to develop data-driven model with high accuracy and universality to realize accurate estimation of evaporation. To achieve this purpose, the Convolutional neural network (CNN) was integrated with Bidirectional long short-term memory network (BiLSTM) as main estimating module, and the Sparrow search algorithm (SSA) was employed to search the optimal hyperparameters of CNN-BiLSTM. To overcome the drawback that directly using measured evaporation time series to predict evaporation may lead to large error, the Variational mode decomposition (VMD) was used to extract multiscale traits of evaporation time series, and Whale optimization algorithm (WOA) was adopted to find the optimal parameters of VMD, and a novel hybrid deep learning model WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM was proposed to estimate the evaporation in the Linze County, China. The estimating performance was evaluated by using the statistical accuracy metrics, including R2, the mean squared error (MSE), the mean absolute error (MAE), the root mean squared error (RMSE), and the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE). The results show that the Sample entropy (SEn) remains 0.0832 when the optimal values ofandof VMD are 6 and 0.1773, suggesting that VMD optimized by using WOA effectively overcomes the subjectivity in traditional VMD parameter setting and realizes amplitude-dependent feature extraction of evaporation time series in the study area. In addition, the model performance of CNN-SSA-BiLSTM can be significantly improved by coupling CNN-SSA-BiLSTM with WOA-VMD, and the hybrid model WOA-VMD-SSA-CNN-BiLSTM with MSE = 0.1258, RMSE = 0.3547, MAE = 0.2833, and MAPE = 6.17% in testing stage is superior than other hybrid models and ensemble models, which could be highly recommended for estimating evaporation in study area.

Evaporation plays an important component for understanding the globe hydrological cycle1, accurate estimating the evaporation provide important basis for agricultural water resources management1,2, especially in arid area, where the sustainable development of agriculture and the restoration of degraded ecosystems depend on the management and utilization of limited water resources3. However, using measurement methods (e.g., Class A pan, E-601evaporator) to obtain the long-term evaporation is a costly and tedious task in the field, and applying the parametric methods such as energy-budget, water balance method, Priestley-Taylor method, Hargreaves method, etc., to estimate the evaporation is severely limited in case the key parameters are unavailable in arid areas lacking meteorological observation4,5. Therefore, constructing the data-driven models with less information, good robustness, and high accuracy to achieve accurate estimation of evaporation is highly desirable.

Machine learning (ML) techniques offer a promising solution to this problem by leveraging the power of advanced algorithms and large datasets6–11, which can learn the complex relationships between the available meteorological variables and evaporation or evapotranspiration (ET), and used to achieve accurate estimations of ET or evaporation in different bioclimatic zones even if some of the key meteorological parameters are missing or of poor quality11–14.

As the ML models have the advantages of high precision, low cost, short time, no need for any assumptions, ML models were widely employed to estimate evaporation or ET with incomplete meteorological parameters. Through a systematic analysis of the literature on estimating ET or evaporation by using ML models with limited meteorological parameters, it can be found that the main research idea or the modeling methods can be generally divided into the following two categories: 1) Estimation of ET or evaporation based on ML models with incomplete meteorological parameters; 2) Estimation of ET or evaporation based on time series analysis methods. Table1shows the abbreviation and full name used in this paper.

Literature retrieval shows that Kumar et al. first adopted ANN to estimate the ET of grasslands in Davis, California, USA, and compared the estimation results with the P-M formula12. The conclusions show that the weighted standard error of ANN was smaller than that of the P-M formula. As a fundamental ML model, ANN has the advantage of good nonlinear fitting can achieve accurate estimations of ET in different regions with incomplete meteorological parameters, and shows better adaptability than physical-based models5,7. However, ANN has the defects of being prone to oscillation and slow convergence speed. With the proposal of other ML models, including GRNN, SVM, ELM, RBFNN, ANFIS, SOM, M5T, RF, etc., scholars have applied these models to estimate ET or evaporation and obtained more accurate calculation results in different research regions8–14. For example, Mohammad et al. compared the performance of M5T, RF, GBRT, and XGBoost in estimating the ET of farmlands in Khuzestan, southwestern Iran, and drew conclude that RF outperformed other proposed models8. Malik et al. used RBFNN, SOM, and MLR to estimate the monthly evaporation in the Pantnagar region of India15.The results show that both RBFNN and SOM have higher estimation accuracies than MLR and the traditional ET estimation method, and there was little difference in the estimation accuracies between RBFNN and SOM. Chen et al. used SVM to estimate the daily ET in regions lacking observed solar radiation in China. Proved that SVM outperformed physical models and other shallow ML models16. The above research results all indicate that under the condition of lacking necessary meteorological parameters, using shallow ML models can achieve accurate estimations of ET or evaporation, and the best ML models suitable for estimating evaporation or ET in different regions are different8,15,16.

With the development of artificial intelligence, deep learning models such as CNN, GRU, BiGRU, TCN, LSTM, BiLSTM, etc. have been employed to estimate ET, and the model performance was compared with shallow ML models17–22. The results indicate that deep learning models can achieve accurate estimations of ET with higher calculation accuracy than shallow ML models with limited meteorological parameters. In this regard, Yin et al. used the BiLSTM model to predict the daily reference crop ET22. The results indicate that the model performance of BiLSTM was the best among the proposed models if the input variables were sunshine hours, and the minimum and maximum temperature. Roy et al. compared the model performance of LSTM, BiLSTM, SVM, and M5T23. The results show that Bi-LSTM was significantly better than other models in estimating daily reference ET. Chen et al. adopted LSTM, DNN, TCN, SVM, and physical based models to estimate the daily reference crop ET in the Northeast Plain of China24. The conclusions show that LSTM, TCN, and DNN have better estimation performance than SVM and physical-based models.

As deep learning models also cannot automatically adjust the hyperparameters, combining deep learning models with heuristic algorithms to obtain more accurate estimation results is an effective strategy, where heuristic algorithms are used to optimize the parameters of deep learning models. For example, Fu and Li adopted the GWO to find the optimal parameters of SVM and LSTM, and used the Kendall—τ correlation coefficient to identify the main influencing factors of the evaporation, and proposed hybrid model to estimate the monthly evaporation in the southeastern edge of the Tengger Desert5. The results show that Kendall-τ-GWO-LSTM is more suitable than Kendall-τ-GWO–SVM to estimate evaporation. Farzad et al. used three algorithms (ABC, HOA, and MPA) to optimize the hyperparameters of LSTM to estimate the water surface evaporation of Dez Reservoir in Khuzestan Province, Iran18. The results show that the hybrid model LSTM-MPA is more suitable for predicting reservoir evaporation than the single LSTM model and other hybrid models.

Recently, with the deepening application of deep learning technology in the hydrological field, an increasing number of scholars have focused on model integration strategies to achieve accurate estimation of ET or evaporation. By organically combining different single deep learning models to propose ensemble model, researchers have successfully achieved high-precision ET estimation under incomplete data conditions. For instance, Ferreira and Cunha developed an ensemble model TCN-LSTM by integrating LSTM with TCN to predict 7-day ahead ET, demonstrating that the TCN-LSTM framework outperformed single ML models11. Similarly, Dong et al. proposed an ensemble deep learning model CNN-BiLSTM with multi-head attention mechanisms for ET prediction, systematically evaluating its performance against standalone and composite deep learning models20. The result show that the ensemble model CNN-BiLSTM-Attention outperformed the single DL models. Paul et al. employed three DL models (CNN, GRU, LSTM) and one ensemble model (CNN-GRU) to predict daily ET at the Rangpur station in Bangladesh25. The result indicated that ensemble model CNN-GRU outperformed than other models during both training and testing stages.

Literature review shows that the time series analysis modeling method can still be used to estimate ET or evaporation with high estimation accuracy. In this regard, Landeras et al. used the ARIMA and ANN respectively to estimate the reference crop ET in the Basque region in northern Spain26. The result indicates that ANN has better nonlinear fitting performance than ARIMA. Ashrafzadeh et al. adopted SARIMA, SVM, and GMDH respectively to estimate the monthly reference crop ET at four meteorological stations (Anzali, Rasht, Astara, Manjil) on the Guilan Plain in northern Iran, and the results calculated by the P-M method selected as the benchmark to test the estimation results of each proposed model27. The results showed that at the two meteorological stations of Anzali and Rasht, the SARIMA model had better estimation performance than GMDH and SVM, while at the two stations of Astara and Manjil, GMDH and SVM had the highest estimation accuracy. Lucas et al. explored the application of CNN in the estimation of the reference ET, and used three different structures of CNN to predict the reference ET sequence on a daily time scale28. The results confirmed that CNN was superior to SARIMA and Seasonal Naive models. Nourani et al.29used various methods such as SVM, ANFIS, ANN, and MLR respectively to predict the reference crop ET in Iraq, Northern Cyprus, and Turkey, and then used two linear integration methods (simple average and weighted average) respectively to promote the estimation performance and reliability of ML models29. The results showed that the SVM, ANFIS, and ANN have better model performance than MLR, and the integrated model constructed by the weighted average method could increase the computing accuracy of individual ML models by 60%, 33%, and 24% respectively.

Since the collected ET time series contains a high degree of nonlinearity and irregularity, the computing accuracy will inevitably decline if directly using ML models to predict ET or evaporation based on the collected time series6,7,10. Therefore, integrating ML models with data preprocessing techniques such as VMD6, EEMD6,7,10, DWT7,9, etc., and heuristic algorithms to construct hybrid models to achieve accurate estimation of ET or evaporation is an effective strategy.

In this regard, Pammar and Deka combined DWT with SVM to construct the hybrid model DWT-SVM, and applied it to the prediction of the daily evaporation at the Bajpe and Bangalore observation stations in Karnataka, India7.Rezaie-Balf et al. combined EEMD with SVM and M5T respectively to predict the monthly evaporation at the Siirt Station and Diyarbakir Station in Turkey. The results showed that EEMD-SVM was outperformed than EEMD-M5T10. The results showed that the prediction accuracy of the hybrid model DWT-SVM was significantly improved. Kisi and Alizamir used a similar modeling method to predict the daily evaporation in Ankara and Kirikkale in Turkey, and compared the estimating performance of DWT-ELM and DWT-ANN30. The results showed that DWT-ELM was superior to DWT-ANN. Fu et al. used DWT, EEMD, and VMD respectively to extract the main characteristics of monthly ET time series, adopted GWO to optimize SVM, and took hybrid model VMD-GWO-SVM as the main module to predict ET in the artificial sand-binding vegetation belt on the southeastern edge of the Tengger Desert6. The results showed that the hybrid model VMD-GWO-SVM outperformed other models. And then, Fu and Li compared the model performance of VMD-WOA-LSTM and VMD-GWO-SVM to predict the monthly ET in the same study area, and found that VMD-WOA-LSTM was superior to VMD-GWO-SVM31.Compared with estimating ET based on ML models with multivariate input variables, the time series analysis method has the advantage of not needing to input other meteorological variables, and only relying on the inherent variation characteristics of the historical time series of ET or evaporation7,10,27,31,31,32.

(1) The parameter setting of VMD has subjectivity.

It is well known that the number of modes K and the penalty parameter α need to be set in advance in the process of VMD6. However, the setting of these two parameters is subjective in previous studies, that is, the heuristic algorithms was not employed to find the optimal parameters of VMD, leading over-decomposition (or under-decomposition) and band information loss (or information redundancy).

(2) The parameters of ensemble deep learning models need to be optimized.

The strategy of integrating multiple deep learning models to construct the ensemble deep learning model effectively utilizes the advantages of individual deep learning models and achieves relatively accurate estimation results20,23,25Whereas, current research has not optimized the parameters of the ensemble deep learning model using heuristic algorithms, which leads to estimation accuracy remaining to be further improved, and the generalization ability of the model also needs enhancement.

(3) Integrating Meta-heuristic algorithms, ensemble deep learning models and VMD for evaporation prediction remains to be carried out.

Literature review shows that the research on constructing a hybrid model by coupling integrated deep learning models with heuristic algorithms and VMD for ET or evaporation estimation remains to be carried out32,33. Therefore, using time series analysis method to develop data-driven models with high accuracy and universality to achieve accurate estimation of evaporation remains a challenge. In particular, the exploration of ensemble deep-learning models that integrate data preprocessing techniques and meta-heuristic algorithms for forecasting evaporation is rather limited.

For the first time, this study organically combines the ensemble deep-learning models, VMD, and meta-heuristic algorithms to fill the research gaps. To achieve this goal, firstly, the CNN was combined with the BiLSTM to formulate the ensemble model CNN-BiLSTM as the primary estimation module because the CNN architecture can extract the intrinsic features of data through convolution operations in the convolutional layer, and the BiLSTM can effectively tackle the long-term dependence issue. By integrating the CNN into the BiLSTM model, we can fully leverage the strengths of each neural network model, thereby enhancing the estimation accuracy. Secondly, the SSA34was applied to search the optimal hyperparameters of the CNN-BiLSTM to effectively enhance the model’s prediction accuracy and generalization ability. Thirdly, considering the drawback that direct use of the measured evaporation time-series for evaporation prediction may lead to significant errors, VMD was employed to extract the multiscale characteristics of the evaporation time series, and the WOA35was adopted to determine the optimal parameters of VMD. Through these steps, the hybrid model WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM was proposed to predict the evaporation in this study. To demonstrate the superiority of the proposed model, the model performance was compared with that of WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiGRU, WOA-VMD-CNN-GRU, WOA-VMD-CNN-LSTM, CNN-BiLSTM, CNN-BiGRU, CNN-LSTM, CNN-GRU, BiGRU, BiLSTM, CNN, GRU, and LSTM.

The strategy of integrating multiple deep learning models (CNN-GRU\BiGRU\LSTM\BiLSTM) to construct an ensemble deep learning model fully leverages the unique advantages of individual deep learning models, that is, the spatial feature extraction capability of CNNs and the temporal dependency modeling capability of RNNs are organically integrated to form a more complementary prediction framework.

The number of neurons, the learning rate, and the regularization parameter of CNN-BiLSTM were optimized by using the SSA.

The proposed hybrid models can simultaneously handle parameter optimization, data preprocessing, and the integration of multiple deep-learning models, which could be strongly advocated for calculating evaporation in study area.

The study was conducted in Linze County (38°57’–39°42’N, 99°51ʹ–100°30ʹE), located in the middle of Hexi Corridor of Gansu, China (Fig.1). The county covers an area of 2729 square kilometers, with an area of 34 thousand hectares of cultivated land, that is, the arable land alone accounts for 12% of the county area. The main disastrous weather is strong wind, sandstorm, drought, low temperature freezing damage, dry hot air, local rainstorm, and frost, etc. The climate belongs to the continental temperate arid category, having an average temperature of 7.6℃ and an annual precipitation of 118.4 mm, and more than 65% of the rainfall occurs from July to September, annual evaporation of 1830.4 mm, and average altitude of 1380–2278 m. Therefore, accurate evaporation prediction can provide a necessary reference for the rational exploitation of water resources, the sustainable development of local agriculture, and the restoration of degraded ecosystems.

The geographical of the study area. (Using ArcGIS v. 10.8 software; Powered by ESRI “Environmental Systems Research Institute”, www. esri. com).

In this study, the daily evaporation was measured from April 1 to October 30, 2015–2022. Table2displays the statistical features of the daily evaporation time series of the investigated region.

The numerical features of the daily evaporation time series.

whereanddenote the probability thatandmatchandpoints with tolerance, respectively.

Otherwise, the WOA algorithm performs the local search35.

where,denotes the maximal number of iterations,andare random variables,,is the alarm value ,andis the safety threshold. If, indicating that the search area is safety, the producer gets into the expansive search mode; Otherwise, all sparrows need leave the current search area.

whereandrepresent the optimal and the worst location, respectively., wherestands for a matrix ofwith every element randomly allotted as 1or -1.

Here,represents the present global optimal solution,is a stochastic variable for regulating the step size,functioning as the step size control parameter, is likewise a random variable in.anddenote the current global best and worst optimal fitness values,is a positive number.

The standard CNN architecture is made up of the input layer, the convolutional layer, the activation function layer, the pooling layer, and the output layer19,38,39. Its core is to convolve the input data with the convolution kernel with different weights in the convolution layer, so as to support the extraction of the underlying features of the data.

whereis the offset term, andis the weight item. The outcome of the second pooling is. The output feature vector after two convolution pools can be expressed as.

where,,andindicate the weight matrix, bias vectors, and the information state, respectively.andare the outputs of LSTM.

BiLSTM is a special LSTM structure, which combines forward and reverse LSTM to enhance the processing ability of time series information23,40. The forward LSTM layer processes the information in the natural order of the time series, and the reverse LSTM layer works backward to capture the potential impact of earlier information in the sequence on the current point. In this way, BiLSTM can integrate the positive and negative information at each time point, so that more accurate prediction outcomes can be obtained. This structure has shown excellent performance in time series prediction. Figure2shows the structure of BiLSTM and the cellular mechanism of LSTM.

In the present investigation, the intrinsic traits were extracted from the daily evaporation time series by using VMD. Because the parametersanddetermine the output of VMD, and these two parameters need to be preset. To overcome the drawback of over-decomposition (or under-decomposition) with too big(or too small) and band information loss (or information redundancy) with too big(or too small) , and WOA was used to optimizeand, where the SEn was employed as fitness function. Figure3shows the process diagram of WOA-VMD.

Step1: Determine the population number of whales, the maximum number of iterations T, the range ofand, randomly initialize the positions of each whale in the search space, where each whale represents a pair of parameters (,).

Step 2: For each whale’s position (,), decompose the evaporation time series into K intrinsic mode functions (IMFs).

Step 3: Calculate the SEn for each IMF obtained from the VMD decomposition, define the fitness function as the average SEn of all IMFs, a lower SEn value indicates better decomposition quality.

Step 4: Update the position of each whale using the WOA’s mathematical model, which includes encircling prey, bubble-net attacking, and searching for prey.

Step 5: Repeat steps 2–4 until the maximum number of iterations T is reached or the fitness function converges.

Step 6: Identify the whale with the best fitness value, and its corresponding parameters (,) are the optimized VMD parameters.

Step7: Use the optimized parameters (,) to perform the final VMD decomposition on the evaporation time series.

Since CNN can effectively extract local characteristics of time series, but it cannot discover the long dependence problem in time series data; BiLSTM can simultaneously extract deep temporal features of time series through both positive and negative directions, which successfully solve the long dependence problem that CNN cannot handle. Thus, ensemble model CNN-BiLSTM was proposed by coupling CNN with BiLSTM, and employed to estimate the evaporation. Furthermore, SSA was employed to optimize the learning rate, the number of neurons, and regularization parameters of CNN-BiLSTM. It should be noted that the WOA optimized VMD is denoted as WOA-VMD, SSA optimized CNN-BiLSTM is denoted as SSA-CNN-BiLSTM, and SSA-CNN-BiLSTM hybridized with WOA-VMD is denoted as WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM. Figure4shows the diagram of WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM.

Data Preprocessing module: The evaporation time series was decomposed by using WOA-VMD, and the IMFs were normalized by using Min–Max scaling method, and split each IMF into training, validation, and testing sets, then feed into CNN. In this study, sevenfold cross-validation serves as a robust technique in machine learning to evaluate a model’s generalization ability and reliability. Its core function is to partition the dataset into seven non-overlapping subsets of similar size. In each iteration, six subsets are used for training, while the remaining one is employed for testing. This process repeats seven times, ensuring every subset acts as the test set once. By averaging the performance metrics across these seven rounds, it mitigates the impact of random data splits, reducing variance in evaluation results.

CNN module: CNN layer extract local features and spatial patterns from the input data through convolution operations and pooling operations. In CNN architectures, convolution and pooling layers alternate to form a hierarchical pipeline, this collaborative mechanism enables CNNs to efficiently transform raw input data into discriminative features.

BiLSTM module: BiLSTM capture bidirectional temporal dependencies using both past and future context, and the output Layer generate predictions based on the features extracted by the CNN and BiLSTM layers, the generalization ability of the proposed model was validated by using the testing dataset.

SSA optimization module: SSA was used to find the optimal parameters, including the learning rate, the number of neurons, and the regularization parameter, where root mean squared error (RMSE) was selected as the fitness function, and the predator–prey mechanism was employed to simulate the behavior of sparrow populations, including foraging, vigilance, and predator avoidance. The positions of sparrow agents were updated in the parameter space based on fitness values.

Output module: The result processing module integrates predictions from each Intrinsic Mode Function (IMF) component with a fully connected layer. It first generates independent predictions for each IMF through corresponding sub-networks, where each sub-network consists of CNN and BiLSTM layers to capture multi-scale features. The fully connected layer then processes the high-level features extracted by these sub-networks, converting them into individual IMF predictions. Finally, the module obtains the final prediction by summing up these IMF predictions. This approach combines the feature extraction capabilities of CNNs, the temporal modeling strengths of BiLSTMs, and the global optimization ability of the Sparrow Search Algorithm to improve the accuracy and robustness of time-series prediction models.

To illustrate the prominent of WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM, the hybrid models, including WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiGRU, WOA-VMD-CNN-GRU, WOA-VMD-CNN-LSTM, CNN-BiLSTM, CNN-BiGRU, CNN-LSTM, CNN-GRU, BiGRU, BiLSTM, CNN, GRU, and LSTM were also used to predict the daily evaporation. The modeling process of those hybrid models bear resemblance to that of the WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM. The MATLAB software (R2023a, Math Works, USA) was used to perform all numerical simulation processes.

As mentioned above, the WOA was adopted to optimize the parametersandof VMD, the range ofandwere[3, 10] and [100, 2500] , respectively. The added white noise, and the time step of the dual ascent. The maximum iterations and the number of search agents of WOA were 40 and 25.

In the estimating processes of SSA-CNN-BiLSTM, the number of sparrows that are aware of the danger is 0.2, the number of maximum iterations and the number of search agents of SSA is 10 and 30, respectively. The range of the learning rate, the regularization parameters, and the number of neurons were [1e-10, 1e-2], [0.001, 0.01], and [10, 200], respectively. Table3shows the main parameters included in each component, along with their functions, value ranges, and tuning methods.

The functions, value ranges, and tuning methods of parameters included in each component.

In this study, the daily evaporation time series measured from April 1 to October 30, 2015–2021 was used as the training set, and the remaining data served as the testing set. To enhance the reliability and generalization ability of the model evaluation, six-fold cross-validation was employed. Specifically, the training set (2015–2021 data) was divided into six non-overlapping subsets of approximately equal size. In each iteration of the cross-validation process, one subset was selected as the validation set, and the remaining five subsets were combined as the training data to train the model. This process was repeated six times, ensuring that each subset acted as the validation set exactly once. By averaging the performance metrics RMSE across these six iterations, the impact of random data partitioning on the model evaluation was mitigated, reducing the variance in the results. This approach allowed for a more robust assessment of the model’s performance during the training phase, ensuring that the optimized hyperparameters and model structure were not overly dependent on a specific data partition, thereby enhancing the credibility of the subsequent testing phase results.

whereandare the monitored and calculated daily evaporation at the time,andare the corresponding mean values, respectively.

Among the above indicators, MSE, RMSE, MAE, and MAPE describe the deviation between the observed and estimated, the smaller of these evaluation metrics indicating the better model performance, R2is generally used to analyze the model’s operating efficiency, the value of R2close to 1 demonstrate that the estimated result approximates the real value.

In this study, VMD was employed to elicit the innate features of evaporation time series, and WOA was used to determine the optimal parameters of VMD. Figure5shows the variation trend of fitness function SEn with the number of iterations and the decomposition results of the VMD with optimaland. As shown in Fig.5, the SEn decreases rapidly as the iterations time increases, when the iterations reached 20, the objective function remains 0.0832. Correspondingly, the optimal values ofandof VMD are 6 and 0.1773, the evaporation time series was separated into 6 IMFs with different amplitudes, those IMFs were feed back to the ensemble deep learning models to estimate evaporation.

The evolution curve and the decomposition results of WOA-VMD.

Figure6shows the estimating results of WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiGRU, WOA-VMD-CNN-LSTM, and WOA-VMD-CNN-GRU. It should be noted that the optimal parameters for the WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM model are as follows: the learning rate is set to 0.001, the number of neurons is 152, and the regularization parameter is. Table4shows the minimum/maximum ranges of each hyperparameter during tuning and their optimal values determined via the tuning process. As mentioned above, the ensemble models (CNN-BiLSTM, CNN-BiGRU, CNN-GRU, and CNN-LSTM) and single deep learning models (BiGRU, BiLSTM, CNN, LSTM, and GRU) were also separately employed to predict the daily evaporation in study area, Fig.7shows the estimating results of the ensemble deep learning models, and Fig.8shows the forecasting results of single deep learning models since the deep learning models with higher hierarchical structure, which can extract the features of time series more effectively and obtain more accurate estimation results than the shallow ML mode.

The predicted results of hybrid models. (A) The predicted results of WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM; (B) The predicted results of WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM; (C) The predicted results of WOA-VMD-CNN-BiGRU; (D) The predicted results of WOA-VMD-CNN-LSTM;(E) The predicted results of WOA-VMD-CNN-GRU.

All hyperparameters were tuned using sixfold cross-validation on the training dataset (2015–2021), with validation RMSE (for CNN-BiLSTM) or Sample Entropy (for VMD) as the objective function.Optimal values were selected based on the lowest testing error, ensuring generalization to unseen data (2022).

The predicted results of ensemble deep learning models. (A) The predicted results of CNN-BiLSTM; (B)The predicted results of CNN-BiGRU; (C) The predicted results of CNN-LSTM; (D) The predicted results of CNN-GRU.

The predicted results of single deep learning models. (A) The predicted results of BiLSTM; (B) The predicted results of BiGRU; (C) The predicted results of CNN; (D) The predicted results of LSTM; (E) The predicted results of GRU.

As shown in Fig.8, BiLSTM and BiGRU outperform CNN, LSTM, and GRU, but still show larger errors in extreme months (e.g., April). This gap underscores the necessity of ensemble learning (Fig.7) and decomposition-optimization (Fig.6) to handle complex patterns. Figure7shows that CNN-BiLSTM outperforms CNN-BiGRU and CNN-LSTM, with smaller deviations in May and October. This confirms that BiLSTM better captures reverse temporal dependencies (e.g., post-peak evaporation decline) than unidirectional LSTM or GRU. Figure6demonstrates that the forecasting results of the hybrid model WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM shows the closest alignment with observed values, especially during peak evaporation (July–August). Compared to WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM and WOA-VMD-CNN-BiGRU, it reduces overestimation in June and underestimation in September, highlighting the benefit of SSA optimization.

To visually display the efficiency of the proposed models in estimating evaporation, the scatter diagrams of the estimated and observed evaporation in the testing stage are shown in Fig.9. As illustrated in Fig.9, the range of the linear regression coefficient between the estimated and observed results is [0.7874,0.9459], and each P-value fails to reach 0.0001, indicating that all the proposed models could be used to estimate the daily evaporation. In addition, the higher R2value suggesting that the model matches the data effectively and has strong explanatory power, Fig.9shows that the R2values of the proposed models ranged from 0.8755 to 0.9772, and the R2values of WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiGRU, WOA-VMD-CNN-LSTM, and WOA-VMD-CNN-GRU are 0.9772, 0.9771,0.9723,0.9674, and 0.9026, respectively, which significantly greater than that of other models, indicating that those hybrid models have high estimation accuracy; Relatively speaking, the R2values of WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM is the maximum among that of the hybrid models WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiGRU, WOA-VMD-CNN-LSTM, and WOA-VMD-CNN-GRU, suggesting that WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM has the best estimating performance.

Scatter plots of the estimated and observed evaporation of the proposed models.

The model performance was also evaluated using statistical accuracy metrics (MSE, RMSE, MAE, and MAPE), with results summarized in Table5. As shown in Table5, ensemble deep learning models (e.g., CNN-BiLSTM, CNN-BiGRU), which combine CNN for spatial feature extraction and recurrent layers (BiLSTM/ BiGRU/ LSTM/ GRU) for sequential dependency modeling, significantly outperformed single deep learning models (e.g., CNN, LSTM, and GRU) in prediction accuracy. During training, ensemble models exhibited a 32.7% average reduction in MSE compared to single models. For example, CNN-BiGRU (MSE = 0.5348) reduced MSE by 4% relative to single CNN (0.5565) and by 29.8% relative to single GRU (0.7625). The MAPE was 1.2% lower on average, with CNN-BiGRU (7.73%) achieving reductions of 0.36% and 1.34% versus BiGRU (8.09%) and LSTM (9.07%), respectively. In testing stage, the performance gap widened, ensemble models showed a 27.5% average MSE reduction. CNN-BiLSTM (MSE = 0.5730) outperformed single CNN (0.5994, 4.4% reduction) and single GRU (0.7995, 28.3% reduction). The MAPE was 0.9% lower on average, with CNN-BiLSTM (12.29%) surpassing BiLSTM (12.67%, 0.38% reduction) and LSTM (13.06%, 0.77% reduction). Notably, CNN-BiLSTM was the top-performing ensemble model, with both training (MAPE = 8.20%) and testing (MAPE = 12.29%) accuracy exceeding other ensemble variants (e.g., CNN-GRU, CNN-LSTM), highlighting the stability of bidirectional LSTM in sequential modeling.

The model error in the training and testing stages.

Table5shows that integrating WOA-VMD with ensemble models CNN-SSA-BiLSTM, CNN-BiLSTM, CNN-GRU, CNN-LSTM, and CNN-BiGRU further improved performance by optimizing parameters and decomposing input signals, the MAPE was 43.1% lower on average, with WOA-VMD-CNN-LSTM (4.35%) achieving a 45.2% reduction versus CNN-LSTM (7.94%). Improvements persisted versus their baseline ensembles in testing stage, the MAPE dropped 44.2% on average, with WOA-VMD-CNN-LSTM (7.76%) outperforming CNN-LSTM (12.67%, 39.6% reduction). The exception was WOA-VMD-CNN-GRU (testing MAPE = 12.26%), which showed only a 3.5% reduction versus CNN-GRU (12.71%), likely due to GRU’s sensitivity to noise.

The conclusion can be obtained from Table5that the hybrid model WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM achieved the highest accuracy among the proposed hybrid models. In training stage, its MAPE 3.86% lower than WOA-VMD-CNN-GRU. In testing stage, its MAPE (6.17%) outperformed other hybrid models by 12.6–20.5%. This model’s across-the-board lowest metrics validate the synergistic benefit of multi-algorithm optimization, enhancing generalization and reducing overfitting. Furthermore, Table5shows that the evaluation indicators of WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM and WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM are all smaller than that of WOA-VMD-CNN-BiGRU and WOA-VMD-CNN-LSTM, indicating that WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM and WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM can be employed as the optimal models to estimate the evaporation in the study area. Compared with WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM model is superior than WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM with MSE = 0.1258, RMSE = 0.3547, MAE = 0.2833 and MAPE = 6.17% in the testing stage, indicating that WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM is the best choice to estimate evaporation among the proposed models.

Accurate estimation of ET or evaporation is crucial for water resource management in arid regions1,2,26,31,41. On the one hand, accurate ET or evaporation estimation provides precise guidance for irrigation water use and helping to avoid water waste. By precisely calculating farmland ET, scientific irrigation schedules can be formulated to achieve precision irrigation and improve irrigation water use efficiency41,42. On the other hand, it facilitates the rational allocation of water resources in reservoirs, lakes, and other water bodies15,16,21,25,43. Understanding evaporation losses in water areas allows this factor to be fully accounted for in water resource planning, ensuring the sustainable utilization of water resources18,19,31,41.

Data preprocessing is critical for enhancing time series prediction accuracy. In previous studies, Rezaie-Balf et al. used EEMD to process evaporation time series, which could separate some non-linear features but suffered from mode mixing, leading to redundant information in the decomposed IMFs10. Pammar and Deka applied DWT for signal decomposition, but its effectiveness relied on subjective selection of wavelet bases, often resulting in feature loss in complex evaporation sequences7. As VMD is a more robust data preprocessing method than DWT and EEMD6,31, and widely applied to the extraction of effective features from nonlinear and non-stationary time series6,37, but mode aliasing still existed, which causes cross-interference between the decomposed modes and makes it difficult to accurately separate each real IMF component.

To address these limitations, this study innovatively combines the WOA with VMD, optimizing VMD’s key parameters (K = 6, α = 0.1773) using SEn as the fitness function. This reduces SEn to 0.0832, significantly lower than unoptimized VMD (SEn≈0.15–0.2027), which indicates that WOA-VMD achieves more precise multi-scale feature separation of evaporation sequences, effectively avoiding mode mixing and information redundancy, and provides purer input features for subsequent models—an important prerequisite for the improved prediction accuracy in this study.

Figure5shows the fitness function decreasing rapidly and stabilizing at 0.0832 after 20 iterations, with corresponding optimal parameters K = 6 and α = 0.1773. This curve demonstrates two key strengths of WOA: (1) Fast convergence (stabilizing within 20 iterations) ensures computational efficiency, making the model practical for real-world applications. (2) The plateau in SEn confirms that the optimal parameters are found, eliminating subjective parameter setting in traditional VMD. This stability directly supports the high quality of IMF decomposition in Fig.5, as low SEn indicates more regular, less noisy IMFs. Figure5displays 6 IMFs decomposed from the evaporation series, each representing distinct temporal scales: IMF1–2 (high frequency) captures short-term fluctuations; IMF3–4 (medium frequency) reflects seasonal transitions; IMF5–6 (low frequency) represents long-term trends. This multi-scale decomposition allows the subsequent CNN-BiLSTM model to focus on specific patterns: CNN excels at modeling high-frequency IMFs (local spikes), while BiLSTM better captures low-frequency trends (temporal dependencies). The clear separation of scales explains why integrating WOA-VMD with deep learning reduces error (Table5).

Hybrid frameworks combining signal decomposition, optimization algorithms, and deep learning have become a research focus in recent years. Fu and Li proposed the GWO-VMD-LSTM model, which adopted a similar framework but used only a single LSTM as the predictor and lacked adaptive optimization of VMD parameters, resulting in a test set MAPE of 9.2% in arid regions31. Farzad et al. proposed the hybrid model LSTM-MPA by using MPA to optimize LSTM, but omitted a spatial feature extraction module, leading to insufficient capture of local mutations in evaporation sequences (test set MAE = 0.41)18. Ensemble deep learning models enhance prediction performance by fusing advantages of different networks. Ferreira and Cunha proposed the TCN-LSTM model, using a TCN to capture local features and LSTM to handle temporal dependencies. However, it lacked adaptive optimization of hyperparameters, leading to overfitting in complex evaporation scenarios in arid regions11. Dong et al. developed a CNN-BiLSTM-attention model, introducing an attention mechanism to enhance weights of key features but omitted the parameters optimization, , which leads to estimation accuracy remaining to be further improved, and the generalization ability of the model also needs enhancement20.

In this study, the optimized VMD was employed to decompose the daily evaporation time series into different IMFs with different amplitudes (Fig.5), and those IMFs have relatively stable subsequence containing several different frequency scales. The IMFs were separate estimated by using the CNN-GRU, CNN-BiGRU, CNN-LSTM, CNN-BiLSTM, BiGRU, BiLSTM, CNN, LSTM, and GRU, and the final estimation results show that this modeling method, i.e., the deep learning models integrating with the data preprocessing method and meta-heuristic algorithm, can effectively improve the estimation accuracy.

As demonstrated in Fig.8, the deep learning models such as GRU, CNN, and LSTM can be used to estimate the daily evaporation and obtain relatively accurate estimation results. In comparison to GRU, CNN, and LSTM, BiLSTM and BiGRU are capable of simultaneously incorporating both forward and backward information at each time step, which enables BiLSTM and BiGRU to achieve more accurate estimation results than that of GRU, CNN, and LSTM. As depicted in Fig.8, the estimating results of BiLSTM and BiGRU are more precise than those of GRU, CNN, and LSTM. Moreover, the systematic over-estimation and under-estimation issues have been partially mitigated. However, there are obvious overestimates and underestimates in the results of these models.

The deficiencies of an individual deep learning model can be surmounted through the integration of several deep learning models. As shown in Fig.7, the deviations between the estimating results of CNN-BiLSTM, CNN-LSTM, CNN-GRU, and CNN-BiGRU and the observed values have been significantly reduced. Compared with the single deep-learning models of GRU, CNN, LSTM, BiLSTM, and BiGRU (Fig.8), the forecasting accuracy of has been effectively improved, the changing trends of most prediction results of CNN-BiLSTM, CNN-LSTM, CNN-GRU, and CNN-BiGRU are consistent with those of the observed values, suggesting that integrating two deep-learning models can give full play to their respective advantages and achieve accurate prediction of evaporation. In addition, Fig.7shows that the prediction result of CNN-BiLSTM has the smallest deviation from the observed values among the ensemble models of CNN-BiLSTM, CNN-LSTM, CNN-GRU, and CNN-BiGRU, indicating that CNN-BiLSTM has the highest prediction accuracy. However, the estimating results of CNN-BiLSTM still exist underestimated or overestimated phenomenon, especially at extreme values (Fig.7). Therefore, there is a need to further enhance the estimation accuracy.

Combing the ensemble deep learning models with data preprocess technique and meta-heuristic algorithms is an effective strategy to further improve the model performance. As illustrated in Fig.6, the hybrid models WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiGRU, WOA-VMD-CNN-LSTM, and WOA-VMD-CNN-GRU show excellent estimation performance, the bulk of estimated values were commensurate with the observed evaporation data; Compared with CNN-LSTM, CNN-GRU, CNN-BiLSTM, and CNN-BiGRU (Fig.7), the estimating accuracy of those hybrid models has been significantly improved, suggesting that the ensemble models by coupling two deep learning models with data preprocesses and meta-heuristic algorithms is an effective way to obtain more accurate estimating results.

Compared to existing studies, the innovations of this research are: (1) proposing a WOA-optimized VMD adaptive decomposition strategy to improve feature extraction accuracy; (2) constructing a CNN-BiLSTM-SSA ensemble model to fuse spatio-temporal features and optimize hyperparameters; (3) forming a full-process “decomposition-optimization-prediction” framework, balancing accuracy and applicability in daily evaporation prediction in arid regions. Future work could further validate the model in different climatic zones and explore coupling with physical process models to enhance the physical interpretability of predictions.

Scatter plots quantify the linear correlation between predictions and observations (Fig.9), it reveals that the forecasting results of the hybrid model WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM shows the tightest cluster around the 1:1 line (R2= 0.9772), indicating minimal systematic bias. In contrast, single models like GRU and LSTM have more scattered points (R2= 0.8755–0.8977), with underestimation of high evaporation values. This visualization complements Table5, proving that the proposed model not only reduces error metrics but also strengthens the linear relationship between predictions and reality.

To visually characterize the multi-dimensional performance disparities among the models developed in this study, the radar charts in training and testing stages (Fig.10) are presented using MSE, RMSE, MAE, and MAPE in Table5as the four coordinate axes. Each model is represented by a polygon, where the vertex positions reflect the model’s quantitative values for each respective metric. This graphical approach enables a comprehensive comparison of model performance across all error indicators simultaneously, with the shape and size of each polygon intuitively illustrating the trade-offs and strengths of different architectures in minimizing prediction errors.

Radar diagrams exhibit the performances of proposed models.

Figure10shows that the MSE, RMSE, MAE, and MAPE of CNN-GRU, CNN-BiGRU, CNN-LSTM, and CNN-BiLSTM are all less than that of BiGRU, BiLSTM, CNN, LSTM, and GRU, indicating that the hybrid models that integrates two deep learning models has better estimation performance than a single deep learning model, and the computing accuracy can be effectively improved by taking advantages of different deep learning models. However, the nonlinear and seasonal traits in the collected evaporation time series generally taking on significantly affection in the estimation process, the calculation accuracy of the CNN-GRU, CNN-BiGRU, CNN-LSTM, and CNN-BiLSTM models can be further enhanced through the utilization of data pre-processing technique. Compared with CNN-GRU, CNN-BiGRU, CNN-LSTM, and CNN-BiLSTM, the evaluation metrics of WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiGRU, WOA-VMD-CNN-LSTM, and WOA-VMD-CNN-GRU show a downward trend to varying degrees (Table5), suggesting that the model performance of CNN-GRU, CNN-BiGRU, CNN-LSTM, and CNN-BiLSTM can be significantly improved by coupling those models with WOA-VMD, that is, the hybrid models WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiGRU, WOA-VMD-CNN-LSTM, and WOA-VMD-CNN-GRU have better estimating performance than that of CNN-GRU, CNN-LSTM, CNN-BiGRU, and CNN-BiLSTM models.

Compared with WOA-VMD-CNN-GRU, the evaluation metrics (MSE, RMSE, MAE, MAPE) of WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM, WOA-VMD-CNN-BiGRU, and WOA-VMD-CNN-LSTM are all lower in both training and testing stages (Table5) suggesting that these hybrid models exhibit superior performance in estimating daily evaporation in the study area. Further analysis of Table5reveals that the hybrid model WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM achieves the highest prediction accuracy among all models, demonstrating optimal performance in estimating evaporation within the study region. This indicates that the integrated framework—combining multi-algorithm optimization (WOA, SSA), signal decomposition (VMD), and ensemble deep learning model (CNN-BiLSTM)—significantly enhances prediction precision through hierarchical feature extraction and parameter tuning, enabling reliable and accurate evaporation modeling in the study area.

In data-scarce arid regions, model dependence on input data is crucial. Kisi and Heddam constructed heuristic regression models using only temperature data9, reducing data requirements but achieving low prediction accuracy (test set R2= 0.78). Dong et al. proposed the hybrid model CNN-BiLSTM-attention model to estimate ET, which relied on multiple meteorological variables (e.g., sunshine duration, wind speed), limiting its applicability in arid regions with scarce observational data20.

The CNN-BiLSTM ensemble model in this study extracts local spatial features via CNN’s convolutional operations and captures long-range dependencies using BiLSTM’s bidirectional temporal modeling, improving accuracy by over 50% compared to single LSTM (test set RMSE = 0.8873) or CNN (RMSE = 0.7946). Importantly, optimizing hyperparameters (learning rate = 0.001, number of neurons = 152) via the SSA further reduces overfitting risk, resulting in greater stability in the test set (MSE = 0.1258) compared to unoptimized CNN-BiLSTM (MSE = 0.5730), validating the critical role of hyperparameter optimization for ensemble models.

The WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM framework in this study enhances performance through three-level collaboration: WOA-VMD for precise feature decomposition, CNN-BiLSTM for fusing spatio-temporal features, and SSA for hyperparameter optimization. Compared to the aforementioned studies, this framework performs better in daily evaporation prediction in arid regions: the test set MAPE = 6.17%, a 33% reduction compared to GWO-VMD-LSTM. Additionally, its prediction bias (MAE = 0.2833) for extreme evaporation events (e.g., summer heatwaves) is significantly smaller than that of similar models, demonstrating the effectiveness of multi-module collaboration.

In summary, this study models evaporation based on intrinsic characteristics of its time series, requiring no additional meteorological data. High-precision predictions (R2= 0.9772) are achieved solely through the inherent patterns of historical sequences, making it more suitable for data-scarce arid regions than multi-variable-dependent models. This feature expands the model’s application prospects in hydrologically data-poor areas.

Accurate estimation of daily evaporation is critical for water resource management and agricultural sustainability in arid regions. This study developed a novel hybrid model, WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM, by integrating data preprocessing, meta-heuristic optimization, and ensemble deep learning, and systematically evaluated its performance in Linze County, a typical arid area in northwest China. The key findings and conclusions are as follows: Firstly, the proposed WOA-VMD-CNN-SSA-BiLSTM model achieved the highest accuracy in daily evaporation prediction among all tested models, with optimal statistical metrics in the testing phase (MSE = 0.1258, RMSE = 0.3547, MAE = 0.2833, and MAPE = 6.17%), demonstrating its ability to reliably capture the complex nonlinear and non-stationary characteristics of evaporation time series in arid regions. Secondly, the multi-level optimization and integration showed high efficacy, the WOA-optimized VMD effectively addressed the subjectivity in traditional VMD parameter settings, decomposing evaporation series into 6 IMFs with optimal parameters (K = 6, α = 0.1773) and minimized sample entropy (SEn = 0.0832) for amplitude-dependent feature extraction; meanwhile, the SSA-optimized CNN-BiLSTM ensemble model synergistically leveraged CNN’s local feature extraction and BiLSTM’s bidirectional temporal dependency modeling, with SSA optimization of hyperparameters reduceing overfitting and improving stability, outperforming unoptimized ensemble models (e.g., CNN-BiLSTM, CNN-LSTM) , single deep learning models (e.g., LSTM, BiGRU), , and other hybrid models (e.g., WOA-VMD-CNN-BiLSTM), confirming the synergistic benefits of integrating data preprocessing, optimization algorithms, and deep learning. Finally, unlike physical models or multi-variable-dependent machine learning models, the proposed model relies solely on historical evaporation time series without needing additional meteorological data (e.g., solar radiation, wind speed), making it highly suitable for arid regions with limited observational data and providing a robust tool for supporting irrigation scheduling and water resource management.

The research was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Gansu Province (No. 23JRRM734), the Scientific Foundation for Doctors of Longdong University (No. XYBYZK2305), Qingyang City joint fund project (No. QY-STK-2024A-068), and Gansu Province Colleges and Universities Young Doctoral Scholars Support Program (No. 2024QB-122).