Myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) antibody–associated disease (MOGAD) international panel criteria have been recently proposed to guide MOGAD diagnosis. The aim of this study was to evaluate the criteria performance and assess the discrepancies in their application in the clinical practice in an Italian multicenter cohort and to discuss some challenging aspects.

We applied the 2023 MOGAD criteria to patients who tested MOG-Abs positive on cell-based assays and were retrospectively recruited from 29 centers. Detailed clinical and paraclinical data were collected. Patients were classified as true positive/negative (TP/TN) in case of concordance between MOGAD criteria application and enrolling center final diagnosis, as false positive (FP) when MOGAD criteria were fulfilled but final diagnosis was different from MOGAD, and as false negative (FN) when MOGAD criteria were not fulfilled and final diagnosis of MOGAD was confirmed. Central revision of FN and FP cases was performed.

We included 214 patients (median age at onset 38.2 years [interquartile range 25.2–50.7], 60.3% female, 23 pediatric patients). Of these, 168 (78.5%) were classified as TP, 9 (4.2%) as FP, 23 (10.7%) as FN, and 14 (6.5%) as TN. The sensitivity of MOGAD criteria was 87.96% (CI 82.5%–92.2%), specificity 60.9% (CI 38.5%–80.3%), positive predictive value 94.9% (CI 91.8%–96.9%), negative predictive value 37.8% (CI 26.7%–50.2%), and accuracy 85.1% (CI 79.6%–89.5%). In 11 of 32 revised cases, available information did not allow a proper diagnosis. Independent revision changed the diagnosis in 17 of 21 remaining cases, increasing the performance of the MOGAD criteria. Of note, in 3 cases, diagnostic criteria were satisfied only at follow-up. The sensitivity and specificity after independent revision were 98.9% (CI 96%–99.9%) and 91.7% (CI 73%–98.9%), respectively. Moreover, 29 of 214 patients (13.6%) had 1 or more asymptomatic radiologic supportive features, and in 50% (3/6) of FP cases, independent revision did not confirm the presence of supportive features. Patients with clear positive serum titer or CSF-only MOG-Abs were those who received more commonly a MOGAD diagnosis.

MOGAD criteria demonstrate a good performance across different centers; however, controversial cases might benefit from collegial discussion and reassessment of MOGAD criteria during the follow-up. Main challenges include availability of proper radiologic data and interpretation of radiologic supportive features.

Subsequent studies have validated these criteria on different cohorts, finding a good specificity and sensitivity overall.17,18However, variability in applying the MOGAD diagnostic criteria, which may provide important insights into their use in routine clinical practice, has not been specifically investigated.

The aim of this study was to evaluate the real-life performance of the proposed MOGAD diagnostic criteria in an Italian multicenter cohort of MOG-Abs–positive patients and to highlight the challenges and discrepancies in their application.

Patients with positive serum or CSF MOG-Abs results obtained from January 1, 2014, to December 31, 2024, were retrospectively included from 29 Italian centers. The 2023 MOGAD criteria were applied to each case by different neurologists at each participating center. Four groups were identified: true positive ([TP]: MOGAD criteria fulfilled, final diagnosis of MOGAD provided by the enrolling center), true negative ([TN]: MOGAD criteria not fulfilled, final diagnosis different from MOGAD), FP (MOGAD criteria fulfilled, final diagnosis different from MOGAD), and false negative ([FN]: MOGAD criteria not fulfilled, final diagnosis of MOGAD confirmed). Clinical records and MRI scans of FN and FP cases were independently revised by 3 neurologists with experience in MOGAD (S.C., E.S., and S.M.) to evaluate potential discrepancies in the criteria application and to verify the exclusion of better diagnosis, including MS. Consensus was reached after discussion in case of disagreement.

The study was part of the research protocol approved by the Ethics Committees of the enrolling centers: BIOB-NEU-DNA-2014 and prog. 1052CESC Verona-Rovigo approved by the Ethics Committee of Verona University Hospital (Italy); protocol n. 16601_oss, approved by Area Vasta Centro—Regione Toscana (Florence, Italy); project code: 0020308/23 approved on April 14, 2023 by the Institutional Review Board of the IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia.

MOG-Abs testing was performed using live CBAs in 5 laboratories (Verona, Pavia, Florence, Bologna, Orbassano) and fixed CBAs in 8 local laboratories (Modena, Firenze, Siena, Udine, Padova, Siena, Roma, Milano). Clear positive serum MOG-Abs titers were defined according to the proposed diagnostic criteria.16For samples tested with fixed CBAs, a clear positive result was defined as a titer of ≥1:100. For live CBAs, clear positive samples had an antibody titer that was at least twice the threshold considered positive by the referring laboratory.

Clinical and paraclinical data were retrospectively collected in a dedicated database by the referring physician from each involved center. Information included the following: (1) demographic data (sex and age at onset, being adult-onset defined as age 18 years and older); (2) dates of disease onset; (3) antibody testing information (date of sampling and type of MOG-Abs assay performed, MOG Abs titers in serum and CSF, AQP4-Abs testing results); (4) clinical phenotype at onset; (5) CSF data (protein concentration, cell count, oligoclonal bands); (6) presence of supportive criteria for MOGAD diagnosis16; (7) final diagnosis reported by the referring center. Only in patients who were labeled as FN and FP, additional data such as details of relapses (if any) and MRI records for re-evaluation including axial MRI sequences for the spinal cord and orbital sequences for the optic nerve were requested.

For descriptive statistics, quantitative variables are expressed as median (interquartile ranges [IQRs]) or mean (SD) and categorical variables as percentages. Group comparisons were assessed using nonparametric tests (χ2and Mann-Whitney tests), as appropriate.

Sensitivity was calculated as the percentage of patients who met the 2023 criteria and had definite MOGAD as determined by referring physicians (sensitivity = TP/TP + FN) with 95% CI. Specificity was calculated as the percentage of patients who did not meet the 2023 criteria and had FP MOG-Abs according to the treating physicians (specificity = TN/FP + TN) with 95% CI.

Positive predictive value (PPV) of the criteria was calculated as the percentage of true positive divided by total positive (TP/TP + FP) with 95% CI. Negative predictive value (NPV) was calculated as the percentage of true negative divided by total negative (TN/TN + FN) with 95% CI. Accuracy was calculated as the proportion of TP and TN in the whole tested cohort (TP + TN/TP + TN + FP + FN).

Anonymized data not published within this article will be made available by request from any qualified investigator.

A total of 214 patients were included. The median age at onset was 38.2 (IQR 25.2–50.7) years, and 129 (60.3%) were female (Table 1). 23 patients (10.7%) were children (median age at onset 12.4 years [IQR 6.4–14.4], 13%–56.5% female).

Abbreviations: ADEM = acute disseminated encephalomyelitis; IQR = interquartile range; MOG = myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein.

Live CBA was the most common assay used for MOG-Abs detection (n = 170, 79.4% of total cohort; n = 18, 78.4% of the pediatric cohort). CSF was tested in 84 patients (39.3%): of these, 39 (46.4%) were positive in serum only, 32 (42.9%) were positive in both serum and CSF, and 9 (10.7%) were positive in CSF only.

Of the whole cohort, 89 patients (41.6%) had serum clear positive titers, 86 (40.2%) had serum low-positive titers, 30 (14%) had an unknown titer, and 9 (4.2%) were CSF-only positive MOG-Abs. Among the pediatric cohort, most patients (12/23, 52.2%) had a clear positive MOG-Abs result while 11 of 23 (47.8%) had unknown/low-positive titer. CSF was tested in 12 pediatric patients and resulted positive in 9 of 12 patients while we did not observe any isolated CSF positivity in this cohort.

Optic neuritis was the predominant phenotype at disease presentation (n = 106, 49.5%), followed by myelitis (n = 79, 36.9%), brainstem or cerebellar deficit (n = 22, 10.3%), ADEM (n = 15, 7%), cerebral monofocal/polyfocal deficit (n = 12, 5.6%), and cortical encephalitis (n = 9, 4.2%). A multifocal clinical presentation was reported in 26 patients (12.2%), including 9 patients with a concomitant myelitis and optic neuritis and 7 patients with brainstem/cerebellar deficit in association with myelitis. In the pediatric cohort, the clinical presentation at onset was ON in 10 patients (43.5%), ADEM in 7 (30%), myelitis in 4 (17.4%), cortical encephalitis in 3 (13%), cerebral monofocal/polyfocal deficit in 1 (4.3%), and vomiting and seizure in 1 (4.3%). Of note, 3 patients presented a multifocal presentation (1 optic neuritis associated with myelitis, 1 ADEM associated with optic neuritis, 1 ADEM with a concomitant cortical encephalitis).

In CSF-only positive patients, the most common clinical presentation was myelitis (n = 8%, 88.9%) while 1 patient had a bilateral optic neuritis.

Detailed clinical presentation classified according to MOG-Abs positivity is provided inTable 1.

Supportive criteria were present in 155 of 214 patients (72.4%), in particular in 65 of 89 patients with a clear positive result (73%) and in 90 of 125 patients with serum unknown/low-positive MOG-Abs titer or isolated CSF MOG-Abs positivity (72%).

Final diagnoses provided by the referring centers were MOGAD in 191 patients (89.3%), MS in 13 (6.1%), and other inflammatory diseases in 10 (4.7%). When applying MOGAD diagnostic criteria according to the final diagnosis, 168 patients (78.5%) were classified as TP, 9 (4.2%) as FP, 23 (10.7%) as FN, and 14 (6.5%) as TN. Accordingly, MOGAD criteria had a sensitivity of 87.96% (CI 82.5%–92.2%) and a specificity of 60.9% (CI 38.5%–80.3%). The PPV was 94.9% (CI 91.8%–96.9%), NPV was 37.8% (CI 26.7%–50.2%), and accuracy was 85.1% (CI 79.6%–89.5%).

As per the study protocol, FP and FN cases (n = 32) were independently reviewed to reassess the diagnosis of MOGAD, as shown inFigure 1. Representative neuroimaging findings of this subgroup are illustrated inFigure 2.

MOGAD = myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibody–associated disease.

Case 1: T2/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR)-weighted sequences showed diffuse, symmetrical, supratentorial white matter hyperintensity (A and B), hypointense in T1-weighted sequences with no contrast enhancement (C). Case 2: Diffuse and symmetrical white matter hyperintensity involving supratentorial (D) and infratentorial regions (E) is shown in T2/FLAIR-weighted sequences. Follow-up brain MRI performed 4 months later showed an almost complete lesion resolution (F). Case 3: Brain MRI revealed an ill-defined T2/FLAIR hyperintense lesion located in the midbrain (G) with associated gadolinium enhancement (H). MOG-Abs = MOG antibodies.

In 11 of 32 cases (34.4%), clinical/radiologic information was believed to be insufficient to establish a definite diagnosis. Of note, in 5 cases, MRI scans were not available for review; 4 patients with ON did not undergo orbital MRI; and 2 patients with myelitis did not undergo axial MRI. Two patients fulfilled MOGAD diagnostic criteria only at relapse and an additional one at follow-up (i.e., MOG-Abs with unknown titer at onset and clearly positive at follow-up, therefore reclassified as TP). After excluding patients with insufficient information, the final diagnosis was changed after central revision in 17 of 21 (81%). In particular, 8 cases (5 FP and 3 FN) were reclassified as TP and 9 (2 FP and 7 FN) were reclassified as TN (eTable 1).

Therefore, 177 of 214 patients (82.7%) were considered as TP, 2 of 214 (0.9%) as FP, 2 of 214 (0.9%) as FN, 22 of 214 (10.3%) as TN, and 11 of 214 (5.1%) as unclassified for insufficient clinical/radiologic information. After revision, MOGAD diagnostic criteria had a sensitivity of 98.9% (CI 96%–99.9%) and a specificity of 91.7% (CI 73%–98.9%). The PPV of MOGAD diagnostic criteria after central revision was 98.9% (CI 95.9%–99.7%) and the NPV was 91.7% (CI 73.4%–99.5%), with an accuracy of 98% (CI 95%–99.5%).

MOGAD diagnosis was more common in patients with clear positive MOG-Abs (85/89, 95.5%) and in isolated CSF positive patients (8/9, 88.9%) than in low-positive ones (n = 61/86, 70.9%,p< 0.001).

Final diagnosis of MOGAD, TP, TN, FN, and FP did not differ significantly according to the type of assay used (live vs fixed CBA, MOGAD diagnosisp= 0.852, TPp= 0.998, TNp= 0.530, FNp= 0.484, and FPp= 0.485, respectively).

When including only patients tested in both matrix (i.e., serum and CSF, n = 84), serum/CSF status did not influence final diagnosis/classification (only seropositive patients vs serum and CSF positive patients vs CSF-only positive patients: MOGAD diagnosisp= 0.459, TPp =0.494, TNp= 0.331, FNp= 0.883 and FPp= 0.558).

Of note, 3 patients with a clear positive MOG-Abs titer in the live CBA did not receive a final diagnosis of MOGAD (1 with MS, 1 with herpes simplex virus encephalitis, 1 with leukopathy of unknown etiology, Case 1), and 1 patient with longitudinally extended transverse myelitis tested positive for both low-titer MOG-Abs and AQP4-Abs, therefore, was classified as TN.

Moreover, 29 of 214 patients had 1 or more asymptomatic radiologic supportive features (i.e., 20 patients presented with multiple ill-defined T2 hyperintense lesions in supratentorial and infratentorial white matter; 8 had ill-defined lesion involving the pons, middle cerebellar peduncle, or medulla; 2 presented with cortical lesions; 2 had deep gray matter involvement; and 6 presented with radiologic supportive features for myelitis).

Among these, 4 of 29 patients did not have any radiologic supportive feature for the presenting clinical symptoms despite clear positive MOG-Abs and were, therefore, diagnosed as MOGAD and considered TP. One patient with low MOG-Abs titer was diagnosed as MS (TN).

Supportive clinical/radiologic features were reported in 6 patients (4 with low MOG-Abs titer, 1 with unknown titer, and 1 with high MOG-Abs titer) who received a final diagnosis different from MOGAD, including MS, but in 50% of cases, these were not confirmed at independent revision.

The final diagnosis was MOGAD in 22 of 23 pediatric patients. One patient with serum high-titer MOG-Abs and paired CSF positivity presenting with nausea, vomiting, and seizures received a final diagnosis of herpetic encephalitis. Supportive criteria were present in 22 of 23 patients (95.7%). The sensitivity and specificity of MOGAD criteria applied in the pediatric cohort were 100% (CI 85%–100%) and 100% (CI 21%–100%), respectively.

Among patients with CSF-only positive MOG-Abs, 8 of 9 (88.9%) met the supportive criteria and received a final diagnosis of MOGAD. However, 1 patient, initially diagnosed with MOGAD but lacking supportive criteria, had insufficient records for clinical review.

Challenges encountered when applying MOGAD diagnostic criteria are presented further in illustrative clinical cases.

An adult patient presented to the emergency unit with sudden onset of hypoesthesia affecting the second and third branches of the left trigeminal nerve. Two weeks after, symptoms worsened, affecting the contralateral side. Neurologic examination was otherwise unremarkable. The patient reported no relevant medical history, and routine laboratory analyses were within normal limits.

Brain MRI revealed diffuse supratentorial leukodystrophy, which appeared hypointense on T1-weighted images without gadolinium enhancement (Figure 2). CSF analysis was normal, with the exception of a single CSF band detected through isoelectric focusing. A comprehensive vascular workup including echocardiography, carotid duplex ultrasonography, Holter electrocardiography, and thrombophilia screening yielded negative results.

Testing for MOG-Abs using a live cell-based assay was clearly positive in serum but negative in CSF. Given MOG-Abs positivity and the absence of other identifiable causes, the patient was treated with IV methylprednisolone (1 g daily for 5 days). However, no clinical improvement was observed. MOG-Abs were retested 4 times over the following year, consistently yielding clear positive results. Follow-up brain MRI scans performed 1 and 2 years after symptom onset were stable.

While the presence of clear positive MOG-Abs with a core clinical feature (i.e., brainstem deficit) fulfills MOGAD diagnostic criteria, the overall clinical presentation, lack of response to corticosteroids, and disease course are atypical. Given these discrepancies, this case was classified as FP.

We previously reported the case of an adult patient who was hospitalized for pneumonia and acute kidney failure and afterward developed subacute consciousness decline requiring orotracheal intubation.19Neurologic examination revealed a comatose state with no response to painful stimuli and right-sided pyramidal signs. Brain MRI showed diffuse T2/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) leukodystrophy-like hyperintense lesions in both the supratentorial and infratentorial white matter, including the brainstem (Figure 2). EEG demonstrated generalized theta and delta slowing without epileptic abnormalities. CSF analysis revealed mild pleocytosis (10 cells/mm3).

A comprehensive evaluation for CNS infections, autoimmune and paraneoplastic encephalitis, metabolic encephalopathy, and uremic hemolytic syndrome was unremarkable, except for the detection of serum low-titer MOG-Abs using a live CBA. Based on these findings, the patient was treated with high-dose IV steroids, followed by oral tapering, leading to significant improvement. During clinical examination, a skin lesion on the right hemithorax was noted, raising suspicion of malignancy. A biopsy was performed, and histologic analysis confirmed a locally invasive melanoma. Four months later, the patient was asymptomatic with a normal neurologic examination. MOG-Abs titer decreased, and follow-up MRI demonstrated near-complete resolution of previously detected lesions. After 2 years, no relapse occurred.

This patient had serum low-titer MOG-Abs and a clinical presentation compatible with ADEM, but the radiologic profile was atypical for MOGAD. The involvement of the white matter was widespread and symmetrical, not consistent with multifocal T2 bright lesions, which represent the supportive radiologic feature for this core clinical MOGAD presentation. However, the clinical and radiologic evolution and the prompt response to corticosteroids support MOGAD diagnosis, suggesting in this case a FN result.

An adult patient presented to the emergency department with subacute onset of generalized weakness and dysarthria. Medical history was notable only for diabetes. Neurologic examination showed dysarthria and was otherwise unremarkable. Routine laboratory tests were normal. Brain MRI revealed a 5-mm T2 hyperintense lesion in the midbrain, with postgadolinium enhancement (Figure 2). CSF analysis was negative. The live MOG-Abs CBA was clearly positive in serum with paired CSF positivity. The patient was treated with methylprednisolone 1 g for 5 days, followed by short steroid tapering due to diabetes. After treatment, clinical symptoms fully recovered, and a follow-up MRI scan 1 year later showed partial lesion resolution.

The patient had a core clinical feature (brainstem deficit) with a lesion located in the midbrain, which did not fulfill MOGAD supportive features. However, because this patient had a clear positive MOG-Abs result, no additional supportive criteria were needed for MOGAD diagnosis.

In this study, we evaluated the performance of the 2023 MOGAD diagnostic criteria in a multicenter cohort of MOG-Abs–positive patients and explored the discrepancies in their application in challenging cases.

In particular, we observed the following: (1) an independent case-based revision can improve the performance of the MOGAD diagnostic criteria, in particular in more challenging presentations; (2) the main challenging aspects in the application of the MOGAD criteria are the availability of adequate MRI data and the interpretation of radiologic findings; (3) patients with MOGAD can sometimes satisfy diagnostic criteria only at follow-up; (4) patients with serum high-titer or CSF-only MOG-Abs are those who receive more commonly a MOGAD diagnosis.

Our study confirms that MOGAD diagnostic criteria perform well in clinical practice.17,18,20-24Similar to other studies, we observed that the performance is better in the pediatric population, which shows more commonly supportive features.18However, sensitivity/specificity and accuracy were similar to those previously reported only when challenging cases (FNs and FPs) were independently re-evaluated, thus suggesting that misinterpretation of criteria might occur. This underlines the relevance of discussing challenging cases, as the illustrative ones reported here, and the importance of reassessing MOGAD criteria during subsequent relapses and of obtaining appropriate neuroimaging including spinal cord axial sequences and dedicated imaging of the optic nerve.

Indeed, a critical point in the application of the MOGAD criteria is the availability of adequate radiologic imaging/sequences and the interpretation of radiologic supportive features, which can hinder the correct evaluation of supportive criteria.

Finally, as illustrated in Case 3 and already reported,26,27midbrain involvement can occur in patients with MOGAD, even in isolation, although this feature is not included among the supportive criteria. Incorporating this location and valuing radiologic lesion evolution over time might further increase diagnostic sensitivity and could be considered for future iterations of diagnostic criteria.

Similar to other studies,20,21we observed that few patients satisfy the diagnostic criteria only at follow-up. This observation suggests re-evaluating patients who do not fulfill the criteria at first analysis over the follow-up, particularly in cases with remote attacks or inadequate information.

Finally, although diagnoses different than MOGAD can occur with clear positive results, we confirm, in line with the correlation of MOG-Abs titers with their PPV, that they are more frequent when low-positive MOG-Abs results are encountered.11,13,21Of note, similar to clear positive cases, CSF-only positive patients were usually properly diagnosed with MOGAD. Although MOG-Abs CSF testing is still debated, our data reinforce the utility of this analysis in clinical practice.

Our study has limitations related to the retrospective design, including selection bias, incomplete data collection, and the lack of standardized imaging protocols, and the main inclusion of adult patients. In addition, only cases showing discrepancy between clinical evaluation and criteria application were centrally revised, partially limiting the accuracy of our results. Of note, we observed in our cohort a high frequency of clear positive results and most samples were tested with live CBAs, which are not broadly available worldwide; these findings may have influenced criteria interpretation and may hinder the reproducibility of our findings in different cohorts.23Unintentional selection and referral bias may have also influenced cohort characteristics and results.

In addition, independent clinical case revision was applied only to FP and FN cases and not systematically, although typical clinical manifestations of MOGAD are more easily recognized in clinical practice than atypical ones. Finally, similar to previous studies,18the performance of MOGAD diagnostic criteria was evaluated using clinicians' assessment as the gold standard, despite its susceptibility to subjective biases and interpretation.

Nevertheless, our data provide robust examination of the performance of the MOGAD proposed criteria in clinical practice and provide some relevant issues that need to be further evaluated in prospective studies and potentially considered in future MOGAD criteria revision.