Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

Corresponding Author: Leonard Jack, Jr, PhD, MSc, Editor in Chief, Preventing Chronic Disease, Office of the Director, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 4770 Buford Hwy, MS S107-8, Atlanta, GA 30341 (ljj0@cdc.gov).

Preventing Chronic Disease is a publication of the U.S. Government. This publication is in the public domain and is therefore without copyright. All text from this work may be reprinted freely. Use of these materials should be properly cited.

Preventing Chronic Disease(PCD) celebrates 14 years of providing students ranging from high schoolers to postdoctoral fellows with opportunities to develop their scientific writing and publication skills. Our Student Paper Contest (1) gives them the opportunity to serve as first and corresponding author on articles submitted to the journal for peer review. The contest has generated hundreds of submissions from around the world from students supported by their mentors to address an array of public health challenges. Student articles describe current and emerging public health challenges that include rural health, emergency preparedness, communicable disease, expansion of the capacity of future public health experts, strategies to prevent and reduce the impact of chronic disease, data modernization, and beyond.

Over the years, PCD has taken proactive steps to create an environment that encourages students to develop their scientific writing skills. Hundreds of students have received extensive, thoughtful feedback, regardless of whether their papers were accepted for publication. Hence, we would like to congratulate every student who submitted a paper to the journal, this year and in all previous years, regardless of our acceptance decision. By submitting papers to PCD for consideration, students are positioned for future success through the intentional and consistent mentoring and extensive feedback they receive from faculty advisors, mentors, and professors, and the journal’s associate editors, editorial board members, and peer reviewers. We thank these volunteer experts for working alongside the journal to position all students for optimal growth and success.