Oral comprehension difficulties are prevalent amongst preschool children with language needs and are related to academic, social and emotional outcomes. Speech and language therapists (SLTs) frequently deliver comprehension intervention to preschool children, but the influences on their clinical decisions are unknown. Understanding these influences and how chosen interventions align with models of evidence‐based practice (EBP), particularly in an area where research evidence is sparse, is crucial to developing effective intervention and supporting the implementation of research to practice.

To investigate SLTs’ perspectives on the delivery of intervention to preschool children with oral comprehension difficulties and to examine these in the context of models of EBP.

Semi‐structured interviewing gathered the perspectives of 14 UK‐based SLTs, representing a range of years of experience, work settings and employment models (NHS and independent). Data were analysed using reflexive thematic analysis.

The overarching theme ‘Flexibility and Constraint’ described a complex and challenging process whereby SLTs respond to sometimes conflicting influences from external drivers, the needs of the child and adults around them, perspectives on who has responsibility for effecting change, and their own perceptions of clinical autonomy.

SLTs’ practice aligns with components of EBP, but the need to be flexible and responsive to individual circumstances is frequently in conflict with constraints affecting the ability to deliver individualised intervention. Implications include how individual SLTs and speech and language therapy services promote the ways in which they are evidence‐based practitioners and advocate for their specialist role in supporting preschool children with oral comprehension difficulties.

This study describes a very wide variety of practices, with some elements aligning with the principles of EBP and others deviating from them. The lack of time and resources is a common constraint that affects the ability to deliver individualised intervention and therapy which reflects up‐to‐date research in this area.

Perspectives on clinical autonomy and the need to advocate for the specialist role of the SLT have far‐reaching implications. These include how therapy for individual children with oral comprehension difficulties is planned and delivered, how speech and language therapy services are structured, and how the profession as a whole advocates for its role with preschool children experiencing comprehension difficulties.

Oral comprehension difficulties can involve problems understanding single words, sentences and/or discourse and are often a key feature of language disorder, whereby difficulties with spoken language significantly impact an individual's everyday functioning (Bishop et al.2017). Children with language disorder may be diagnosed with developmental language disorder (DLD) when language difficulties exist without additional conditions, or language disorder associated with X, where X is a known biomedical aetiology, such as autism or intellectual disability. Language disorder is relatively common, affecting 9.92% of children at school entry (Norbury et al.2016), equating to up to three children per class. DLD can have significant impacts on educational outcomes, career prospects, participation and wellbeing (Botting et al.2016; Conti‐Ramsden et al.2018), and severity of comprehension impairment is associated with long‐term prognosis (Clark et al.2007; LaParo et al.2004).

Oral comprehension difficulties in children under 5 years of age are frequently the target of speech and language therapy/pathology (henceforth speech and language therapy) intervention within services to preschool children (using the UK definition of ‘preschool’ as children under the age of 5 years).Child Talk, a detailed and large‐scale investigation of clinical practice in the United Kingdom (Roulstone et al.2015), found that 89% of speech and language therapists (SLTs) surveyed regarded intervention for comprehension as ‘essential’ to their practice with preschool children with developmental speech and language disorders. SLTs reported using a wide range of activities and approaches (41 in total) to address comprehension, which varied from addressing the impairment using structured adult‐led tasks to supporting the child's understanding of the environment using visual support systems. One implication of this range is difficulty developing practice guidelines, which in turn can challenge the implementation of evidence‐based practice (EBP) (Morgan et al.2019).

Models describing the process of EBP have been critiqued by a range of researchers examining clinical decision‐making in speech and language therapy. Dollaghan's often‐cited three‐part model, whilst stating the importance of factors relating to the practitioner and their client, has been criticised for an over‐emphasis on research evidence in a profession where research can fail to represent the complexities of intervention for individuals with communication disorders (McCurtin et al.2019). Furthermore, researchers have argued that the research evidence that is available is often under‐represented in decision‐making. Factors taking precedence are often the clinician's knowledge and experience, characteristics of the client and their needs, or pragmatic considerations such as the availability of resources (Forsythe et al.2021; McCurtin and Clifford2015).

Such pragmatic considerations are captured within a further component of EBP: contextual evidence. Initially used in nursing (Thompson et al.2002), this component is an integral part of Hoffman and colleagues’ contemporary model of EBP for health professions (Hoffmann et al.2024). Applied to speech and language therapy, Law (2019) calls this component ‘other drivers’ and describes how it encompasses factors such as service funding, the overall culture of an organisation, the influence of significant practitioners, and physical access to services due to geography. Whilst these areas are included within models of EBP, it is noteworthy that such considerations may not always be consistent with best practice. For example, there may be a negative impact of organisational culture, and individuals may be denied services or struggle to access them due to geographical location.

Considering the research evidence for oral comprehension interventions for preschool children, some studies suggest that intervention can be effective (Tarvainen et al.2020), but there are few studies that reflect typical clinical caseloads (Shobbrook et al.2024). Knowledge of the theory underpinning interventions can contribute to EBP (McCurtin et al.2019), and this knowledge may be particularly important where the research evidence is sparse. Law et al. (2008) examined the clinical decision‐making of SLTs working with children 5 to 11 years old with severe oral comprehension impairments. They found that theory was used very infrequently, and when theories were described, they tended to be translational, in the sense that they derived from intervention programmes developed to target a particular deficit, rather than theories of language development or impairment. Similarly, theChild Talkreport described above stated that there was no unified theory of therapy underpinning SLTs’ decisions for preschool children with speech and language impairment. Many therapists described decisions based upon hierarchical models of language development, such as the so‐called ‘communication pyramid,’ that are unsupported by empirical research and have been critiqued in existing studies of practice (Morgan et al.2019).

Descriptions of research thus far have focused upon studies of intervention approaches selected by SLTs and their rationales for these decisions. Other studies have taken a different, but complementary angle by investigating SLTs’ perspectives on intervention. Marshall et al. (2007) reported that SLTs working with preschool children with language difficulties commonly viewed their role as providing a facilitative communicative environment for the child. This involved working with families and education settings and was reported by SLTs to have varying levels of success. The perceived importance of the partnership between parents/caregivers and the SLT has been described by other studies (Davies et al.2019; Klatte et al.2019; Klatte and Roulstone2016), where parental engagement was considered central to the success of an intervention. Despite this, SLTs reported that engaging parents was one of the most challenging aspects of intervention with preschool children, and that organisational constraints sometimes prevented the flexibility necessary to adapt practice to individual families' needs.

There have been no studies that specifically explore SLTs’ practice for preschool children with oral comprehension difficulties in depth, despite the prevalence of these needs, the relationship between comprehension and prognosis, and the long‐term consequences of language disorder. The wide number of approaches used in practice versus the small, but growing body of research makes it vital that we understand the factors influencing SLTs’ selection of certain approaches over others. Doing so will support the implementation of research to practice and will enable future research to address areas of concern for practitioners. Examining decision‐making processes can also provide information about how the principles of EBP may be reflected in SLTs’ working lives. Understanding the factors that drive clinical decisions is thus crucial to both developing and delivering the best intervention.

This study followed a qualitative research design. Semi‐structured interviews were used to collect the data, as they allowed the researchers to probe participants’ perspectives in depth whilst maintaining focus on the topic. Ethical approval was granted by the UCL Departmental Ethics Committee (LCD‐2021‐06). Participants were recruited over two phases in February 2022 and June 2023 through professional networks of author K.S., social media (Twitter/X) and emails sent to the Association of SLTs in Independent Practice and relevant Royal College of Speech and Language Therapists (RCSLT) Clinical Excellence Networks. Inclusion criteria were that participants were registered SLTs working in the United Kingdom with preschool children.

There were 37 expressions of interest from registered SLTs, 20 of whom agreed to participate and returned a signed copy of the consent form and demographic information. A purposive sampling method was used to select 14 participants representing a range of geographical locations in England, years of experience (1 to 32 years) and employment (independent and NHS) (see Table1). Participants comprised 13 females and one male; there were no participants from Wales, Scotland or Northern Ireland. Interview duration was an average of 48 min, 18 s (range 38:01–57:33).

An interview guide was drafted by authors K.S., R.M. and S.Y. and piloted with two SLTs. This consisted of 12 open questions and a series of probes to elicit further information if necessary. Pilot interviews showed that the guide was effective in eliciting information to address the research question. Minor amendments were made to the wording of three questions/probes, and the order of two questions was reversed to facilitate a more logical flow to the interview. SeeAppendixfor the final interview guide. Interviews were conducted over two time periods which aligned with co‐authors’ research schedules: April and May 2022 (interviewers R.M. and S.Y.; interviewees 1 to 6) and June and July 2023 (interviewer K.S.; interviewees 7 to 14).

Interviews were conducted online via MS Teams and recorded and saved to an encrypted secure drive in accordance with university data management procedures. Transcripts generated by MS Teams were checked and amended following guidelines described by Braun and Clarke (2013). Participants were assigned a pseudonym, and all places and services mentioned were anonymised.

K.S. analysed the data using reflexive thematic analysis (RTA) (Braun and Clarke2006,2022). K.S. is an SLT with more than 20 years’ clinical experience with children with language difficulties. RTA was appropriate for two reasons: it recognises the values and experience the researcher brings to the process of enquiry and analysis, and it is particularly suited to research attempting to understand people's experiences, views and perspectives.

Data analysis followed a six‐phase process: (1) dataset familiarisation; (2) data coding; (3) initial theme generation; (4) theme development and review; (5) theme refining, defining and naming; and (6) writing up, with the understanding that rather than being strictly linear, this process is recursive and involves moving forward and backwards between phases. Analysis was both inductive, capturing and describing meanings from participants’ experiences and perspectives, and deductive, drawing upon the knowledge and experience of the main researcher and research team, and current (limited) literature. Codes were semantically‐orientated in the early stages of analysis and became more latent and fewer in number in successive rounds, as engagement with the dataset and discussions with co‐authors led to a deeper understanding of the data. This method led to the creation of both inductive and deductive themes and subthemes.

Reflexivity was ensured throughout the process in several ways. Prior to the analysis, K.S. conducted a written reflection of her personal, functional and disciplinary reflexivity and reflexivity around the topic of intervention for preschool children with oral comprehension difficulties (Braun and Clarke2022). This acknowledged existing assumptions and how they had shaped and informed the research. During the analysis, thoughts about the data and reflections on the overall process were noted in a reflexive research journal. Different methods of interacting with the dataset (working from paper and electronic transcripts during coding; drawing and updating mind maps when developing and refining themes and writing up) and working from different physical locations facilitated the focus necessary for sensitive and deep engagement with the data. Throughout the process, discussions with a colleague highly experienced in RTA but not involved in the research, and with W.B. and S.B., allowed K.S. to reflect on her position as a researcher and clinician and gain greater depth of understanding.

Analysis identified four subthemes:External drivers, Every child is different, Agents of changeandMy response to challenges.External driversandAgents of changewere derived primarily deductively;Every child is different, andMy response to challengesfrom inductive analysis. The subthemes are united under the overarching themeFlexibilityversus Constraint(see Figure1). Flexibility refers to responding and adapting to circumstances related to the child, family and practice context, whilst constraint describes the challenges and limitations participants experience in their work. A description of each subtheme is presented below, with quotes from the transcripts written in italics to preserve the voice of the participants and distinguish them from the narrative. Intervention approaches named by the participants are in bold and listed in TableS1(Supplementary Material).

This subtheme describes how decision‐making is informed or influenced by factors external to the child, family and/or environment. These factors are theories of language development and impairment, research evidence, and service pathways and standardised intervention packages, which are often influenced by capacity and resource.

Other participants expressed the view that improvements in comprehension and expression are mutually supportive, and that rather than being a foundation for later language work, work on play can simultaneously lead to ‘benefits across a whole range of domains’ (P2).

Alternative perspectives involving consideration of the child's communication needs within their environment are described inEvery child is different.

Research evidence contributed to participants’ intervention decisions, and the phrase ‘evidence base’ was widely used in this context. When probed, participants described research findings from peer‐reviewed intervention studies and systematic reviews, and articles inBulletin, the UK SLT professional magazine. Participants also saw the evidence base as comprising resources developed from research findings, such as professional guidance and ‘toolkits’ for assessment and intervention.

Intervention packages specified the details of intervention, such as ‘who does it and when, and how often it happens’ (P5), as well as the approaches to be used.

In some cases, service pathways were influenced by a tiered model of provision, where only those meeting a ‘threshold of needing specialist level support’ (P9) receive intervention from an SLT. Such children were identified through the presence of risk factors and indicators of an ongoing language and/or communication difficulty or had an existing diagnosis of DLD.

Whilst SLTs in both independent and NHS services reported, at least to some extent, the use of standardised pathways and packages, participants working within the NHS often described being ‘told’ to follow certain procedures or reported that these had been ‘decided’ by somebody else. This suggests a lack of autonomy in decision‐making which is explored further withinMy Response to Challenges.

This subtheme describes the child at the centre of decision‐making and includes effects of the physical and social environment on planning and delivery of intervention.

Agents of changedescribes perspectives on the role of the SLT and people around the child: parents and carers, nursery/preschool teachers and support staff. Divergent views were expressed within this theme, highlighting differences in the way that participants saw their own and others’ roles in effecting change in the child's communication.

To this end, participants described the importance of teamwork, involving shared decision‐making based upon mutual understanding, negotiation and compromise. Participants felt that the success of working with others depended upon a good knowledge of the child, family and setting, and that regular and frequent contact with the same SLT was important for forming relationships and establishing trust.

This subtheme presents descriptions of how participants respond to constraints and other challenges. It includes reflections and actions in response to the difficult aspects of clinical decision‐making and perspectives of their own autonomy in the face of such difficulties.

The challenges of time and resources resulted in participants often feeling‘frustrated’ by the service they deliver or had delivered in the past. Commonly expressed views were that children with language difficulties were not seen early enough, intervention delivered by others was not followed up frequently enough, and direct intervention from an SLT was either not available or not given in sufficient quantity or regularity. Participants 1 and 2 working in independent settings, by contrast, used the word ‘luxury’ to describe the time they had to work with children and families, acknowledging that this was not the norm.

Participants described delivering intervention as something they enjoyed. Delivering therapy made them ‘happy’ (P11), was ‘exciting’ (P9) and was a part of the job that ‘I love’ (P10). These positive feelings were related to the belief that direct intervention was effective; that in delivering therapy and seeing the progress made by children and their families, they were doing something that made a difference.

This study set out to explore the factors that influence SLTs’ clinical decision‐making for preschool children with oral comprehension difficulties. The overall theme ofFlexibility versus Constraintand subthemes suggest that decision‐making in this context is a complex and challenging process whereby clinicians negotiate a path through conflicting and sometimes contradictory influences from external drivers, the needs of the child and the adults around them, and perspectives on who has the ultimate responsibility for effecting change in the child's communication. In doing so, participants described varying responses to these challenges, providing insights into how they regard their clinical autonomy and, ultimately, how they engage in EBP. The findings of this study contribute to knowledge regarding how SLTs interpret and use the principles of EBP, and support research describing the precedence of context (Forsythe et al.2021; McCurtin and Clifford2015) and the challenges of offering flexible, child‐led services (Klatte and Roulstone2016).

A central tension identified through the analysis is the provision of flexible and individualised intervention, where goals, approaches and delivery are tailored to each child and family, versus the use of pathways and standardised intervention packages, developed in response to the constraints imposed by lack of resources, most commonly time. Whilst some participants described providing flexible and responsive intervention, for others, resource limitations resulted in difficulties delivering intervention at the timeliness, intensity or duration they felt was required, or that matched the dosage used within research studies. One participant gave the lack of time as the reason for not addressing oral comprehension at all. These findings are significant when considered alongside the 89% of SLTs reporting that comprehension interventions are essential to their practice (Roulstone et al.2015).

Models of service delivery that are based on blocks of time or numbers of sessions are not supported by evidence and do not represent best practice… Speech and language therapy advice must address the child or young person's assessed needs rather than the availability of resources.

The frustrations, worries and impact on the enjoyment of work when SLTs were not able to deliver intervention are highly significant when considered alongside the relationship between job satisfaction and retention. At the time of writing, there is a reported vacancy rate of 25% in children's services across England (RCSLT2024a), an alarming amount considering the estimated 1.9 million children in the United Kingdom with speech, language and communication needs (Speech and Language UK n.d.). Results from this study corroborate findings in other areas of speech and language therapy practice that lack of time to deliver services impacts job satisfaction and therefore may have a role in the current staffing crisis (Hutchins et al.2010).

Given the shortage of SLTs, it is understandable that services have adapted to use SLTs’ time and skills for the training and development of others (Law et al.2017,2002). However, for some participants in this study, this approach risks devaluing their specialist contribution. The implied assertion that ‘anybody can do speech therapy’ fails to take into account SLTs’ specialist knowledge and skills, and the value SLTs place upon professional‐led intervention (Pring et al.2012). Of particular interest is the view that the profession itself bears some responsibility for this position, and there is a need for SLTs to fight to demonstrate their contribution to supporting children with oral comprehension difficulties.

How do SLTs respond to these challenges? Variations were found in this study: participants who went along with services they did not agree with, those who rallied against them, and those who made the changes they could within the constraints of the system. These differing responses reflect varying perspectives on clinical autonomy. Clinical (or professional) autonomy is an individual's participation in decision‐making and their ability to influence working practices and has been found to be related to satisfaction in the workplace and therefore the recruitment and retention of a skilled workforce (Pursio et al.2021). Taking active steps to encourage SLTs to exercise their clinical autonomy may therefore have an impact on workforce retention.

The finding in this study that some participants deliver services with which they disagree or are uncomfortable suggests that they do not always exercise this personal responsibility and supports the view expressed by Gallagher (2015) that SLTs may have ‘lost touch’ with their clinical autonomy (57). Making clinical decisions on the basis of ‘the rules’ set by others also has implications on the overall practice of EBP, given that this is an active process requiring ‘reflection and critical thinking’ (McCracken and Marsh2008, 301).

Viewing participants’ perspectives of intervention through the lens of EBP showed a great variety in how its components are reflected in clinical practice with preschool children with comprehension difficulties. Some elements of practice closely aligned with EBP principles, whilst others deviated from what may be considered best practice.

It is noteworthy that when asked about the ‘evidence base,’ participants interpreted this solely in terms of research evidence, and many felt that their use of evidence was lacking due to limitations of time. Despite this, approaches used did often reflect relevant research, such as the use of parent‐based interventions (Roberts and Kaiser2011), prioritising the child's participation in their communication environment (Baylor and Darling‐White2020) and using indicators of DLD to prioritise children for direct intervention (Bishop et al.2016).

The influence of theory was another area where practice deviated from the best available evidence. Similarly to previous studies (Law et al.2008; Morgan et al.2019), participants referred to translational theories, hierarchical systems of development and the perspective that certain skills are prerequisites for comprehension. These assertions are unsupported by research and have been discussed in a variety of publications. The RCSLT Clinical Guidelines in Augmentative and Alternative Communication (RCSLT2024b) urge caution if adopting a hierarchical view of symbolic representation, citing research indicating that it fails to take clients’ individual skills and circumstances into account. The lack of research evidence for the ‘pyramid’ view of communication development was discussed in a peer‐reviewed article (Morgan et al.2019) and the RCSLTBulletin(Morgan and Dipper2018), widely read by its 20 000 SLT members. It is possible, therefore, that a consequence of the lack of time to engage with research causes a continuation of beliefs that have been long since questioned within the profession.

Pragmatic considerations were hugely influential for the participants in this study, and many of these aligned with the contextual factors described within models of EBP. Again, there were both positive and negative influences: some participants describing the positive influence of their workplace context and culture, and others describing how the wider context of their work constrained the delivery of best practice. An aspect unexplored by this study is the impact these differences have upon outcomes for preschool children with oral comprehension difficulties, an important area for future research.

Influences on decision‐making described in this study map to each component of EBP, providing evidence that participants do engage in EBP in their intervention for preschool children with oral comprehension difficulties. However, this knowledge was not explicit, as participants did not interpret consideration of child‐ and family‐based factors and their own experience and expertise as elements of being an evidence‐based practitioner. ‘Fighting our case’ could therefore begin with the explicit assertion of the variety of ways in which SLTs are evidence‐based practitioners.

This study highlights the role of individual responsibility in clinical decision‐making and describes where this may be lacking in practice for preschool children with oral comprehension difficulties. The finding that some participants are delivering services they believe to be contrary to best practice suggests that an additional way of ‘fighting our case’ could involve regaining the clinical autonomy and critical judgement that is central to EBP and the practice of speech and language therapy more widely.

Identifying and describing the constraints arising from the workplace context highlights that individual responsibility is not the only issue. This study adds to research (Braithwaite et al.2018; Selin et al.2022) showing that SLTs operate within complex systems where beliefs and decisions are often influenced by the conditions and culture of their workplace. Making changes to individual decisions, therefore, involves addressing all parts of this complex system (Selin et al.2022). ‘Fighting our case’ is therefore also an organisational concern. It is vital to create an environment where the specialist contribution of speech and language therapy is recognised and where SLTs can deliver effective and impactful services to children with oral comprehension difficulties.

This study described the experiences of 14 individuals drawn from a range of locations in England, years of experience and employment settings. As such, viewpoints may not be representative of all SLTs working with this population. However, participants were selected to represent as closely as possible the distribution of the UK SLT workforce. The presence of one male was in line with the disproportionate representation of females, and the greater number of participants working in NHS versus independent settings reflects workforce trends across the United Kingdom (HCPC2021). Furthermore, the process of RTA enabled an identification of shared meanings in the data, and steps taken to ensure reflexivity and a robust approach to data preparation and analysis ensured the validity of the results.

With thanks to Dr Ruth Nightingale for her insightful comments during early stages of data analysis and the SLTs who generously gave their time.

Funding: The work undertaken in this paper is the result of the first author's PhD research and has not been funded by any external source.