Postoperative length of hospital stay (PLOS) is an important indicator of surgical quality. Prolonged PLOS (PPLOS) escalates treatment costs and delays the transition from surgery to adjuvant chemotherapy. Additionally, PPLOS can negatively affect long-term prognosis. The predictive factors for PPLOS, particularly following highly advanced hepatobiliary-pancreatic surgery (HBPS), remains insufficiently studied. In this study, we defined PPLOS as a PLOS exceeding the 75th percentile of the cohort and aimed to identify perioperative predictors of PPLOS following highly advanced HBPS.

This single-center retrospective study included 737 patients who underwent highly advanced HBPS at Gifu University Hospital, Japan, between January 2010 and December 2023. Perioperative predictive factors associated with PPLOS were analyzed in patients with severe postoperative complications within 30 days of surgery (n= 181; Clavien–Dindo classification grades III or IV) using univariate and multivariate analyses.

Among the included patients, 45 experienced PPLOS, with the 75th percentile of PLOS being 53 days. Univariate analysis identified intra-abdominal abscess, pancreatic fistula, postoperative bleeding, hepatic failure, unplanned intubation, C-reactive protein to albumin ratio (CAR) on postoperative day (POD)3, and neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR) on POD3 as significantly correlated with PPLOS. Multivariate analysis revealed that CAR on POD3 > 5.0 was the only independent predictor for PPLOS (odds ratio, 3.22; 95% confidence interval, 1.11–10.17;p= 0.03).

PLOS was significantly prolonged in patients undergoing highly advanced HBPS who developed severe postoperative complications, regardless of surgery type (hepatobiliary or pancreatic). Among these patients, an elevated CAR on POD3 emerged as an early independent predictor of PPLOS. These findings highlight the significance of early postoperative monitoring and intervention based on CAR to reduce the risk of PPLOS following highly advanced HBPS and thus, minimize severity of postoperative complications.

Postoperative length of hospital stay (PLOS) is a crucial factor in the efficient planning and management of hospital resources and may serve as an indicator of both the quality of patient care and overall healthcare costs. In surgical patients, PLOS is particularly important for evaluating surgical quality and perioperative management.

PLOS following gastroenterological surgery is influenced by various factors, including patient age, smoking status, American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) classification, preoperative anemia, nutritional status, comorbidities, surgical approach, operative time, intraoperative blood loss, blood transfusion, and postoperative complications [1–8]. Among these, the occurrence of postoperative complications, especially severe complications requiring intensive, invasive treatment, has a direct impact on PLOS. Highly advanced hepatobiliary-pancreatic surgery (HBPS) carries a higher risk of such complications compared to general gastroenterological procedures, often resulting in prolonged PLOS (PPLOS).

According to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology (version 1.2024) [9], adjuvant therapy should ideally commence within 12 weeks following surgery in patients who have adequately recovered. PPLOS is one of the contributing factors for delayed initiation of adjuvant therapy, which is associated with poorer outcomes [10–12]. Despite its clinical relevance, predictive factors for PPLOS, particularly following HBPS, remain insufficiently explored. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to identify perioperative (preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative) predictive factors associated with PPLOS in patients who developed severe postoperative complications following highly advanced HBPS.

This single-center retrospective study included 737 consecutive patients who underwent highly advanced HBPS between January 2010 and December 2023 at the Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Gifu University Hospital—a training institution certified by the Japanese Society of Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery (JSHBPS). All procedures were performed by experienced surgeons certified by the JSHBPS.

The study was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the Ethics Committee of Gifu University (approval number: 2023–018). The requirement for informed consent was waived due to the retrospective design of the study.

The primary outcome of this study was PPLOS in patients who developed severe postoperative complications following highly advanced HBPS. PPLOS was defined as a postoperative length of stay exceeding the 75th percentile of the cohort [13]. Based on this definition, patients were classified into two groups: those with PPLOS and those without.

Severe postoperative complications were defined as complications occurring within 30 days of surgery and classified as grade ≥ III according to the Clavien–Dindo (CD) classification. Cases involving postoperative death (CD grade V) were excluded, as the study focused on PPLOS as the primary outcome.

Preoperative, intraoperative, and postoperative variables were analyzed in this study. Preoperative variables included patient characteristics such as age, sex, body mass index (BMI), ASA physical status classification, smoking status, history of abdominal surgery and history of preoperative chemotherapy. Preoperative nutritional indices included the prognostic nutritional index (PNI) and the controlling nutritional status (CONUT) score. PNI calculated as: [10 × albumin (g/dL) + 0.005 × absolute lymphocyte count (per mm3)]. CONUT score is based on serum albumin, total lymphocyte count, and total cholesterol levels. The total CONUT score was used to categorize patients into four levels of nutritional status: 0–1 (normal nutrition); 2–4 (mildly abnormal); 5–8 (moderately abnormal); and 9–12 (severely abnormal nutrition). Preoperative inflammatory markers included C-reactive protein to albumin ratio (CAR), neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio (NLR), and platelet to lymphocyte ratio (PLR). Patient comorbidities were assessed using the Charlson Comorbidity Index and classified by type. Intraoperative variables included the type of surgery (hepatobiliary or pancreatic surgery), presence of concomitant vascular resection, operation time, intraoperative blood loss, blood transfusion, and intra- and postoperative albumin infusion. Postoperative variables included the date of complication diagnosis and postoperative inflammatory markers measured on postoperative days (POD) 1 and 3.

Highly advanced HBPS include complex hepatobiliary procedures such as hepatic trisectionectomy, hemihepatectomy, hepatic sectionectomy (excluding lateral sectionectomy), hepatic segmentectomy (excepting segment 4), and hepatectomy (more than segment 4a and 5 resection) with extrahepatic bile duct resection. Additional procedures include extrahepatic bile duct resection for congenital biliary dilatation, and hepatopancreatectomy. Pancreatic procedures categorized as highly advanced HBPS include total pancreatectomy, pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD), distal pancreatectomy (DP) with lymph node dissection, and middle pancreatectomy.

Postoperative management was performed at the discretion of the attending surgeons.

Hospital discharge decisions were also made by the attending surgeons based on the criteria of our hospital. These included: (i) a stable general condition, (ii) the vital signs within normal limits, (iii) absence of abnormal findings on abdominal examination, (iv) laboratory test results that were normal or near normal, (v) a well-healed surgical incision without evidence of infection, and (vi) the patient’s ability to manage blood glucose levels effectively with demonstrated stability.

Continuous and categorical variables are presented as median (ranges) values and frequencies (percentages), respectively. Fisher’s exact test was used to compare categorical variables between the PPLOS and non-PPLOS groups, and the Mann–WhitneyUtest was applied for continuous variables. The Steel–Dwass test was employed to assess the correlation between the presence and severity of postoperative complications and PLOS. Youden’s index was used to determine the optimal cut-off values for sensitivity and specificity in the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) analysis. Variables with ap-value ≤ 0.10 in univariate analysis were included in the multivariate logistic regression model. A two-sidedp-value < 0.05 was statistically significant. All statistical analyses were performed using JMP software (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA).

Highly advanced HBPS was performed in 737 cases, comprising 370 (50.2%) hepatobiliary and 367 (49.8%) pancreatic surgeries. Postoperative complications occurred in 367 (49.8%) patients, while the remaining 370 patients (50.2%) experienced no postoperative complications. Based on the CD classification, 43 patients (5.8%) experienced grade I complications that resolved without treatment, and 134 (18.2%) had CD grade II complications requiring antibiotic therapy. Severe complications occurred in 168 patients (22.8%) with grade III complications requiring radiologic intervention or reoperation, and 13 (1.8%) and 9 (1.2%) with grade IV and V complications, respectively. For the present analysis, 181 patients (24.6%) who experienced at least one severe complication (CD grade III and IV), excluding those with postoperative deaths, were included in the evaluation of risk factors associated with PPLOS (Fig.1).

The median PLOS for all patients was 20 days (range, 5–162). Among the patients without postoperative complications, the median PLOS was 13 days (range, 5–46), compared to 24 days (range, 8–59 in those with non-severe complications (CD grade < III), and 40 days (range, 9–162) in those with severe complications (CD grade ≥ III) (Table1). PLOS was significantly prolonged depending on the presence and severity of postoperative complications (p< 0.001).

A significant prolongation of PLOS due to postoperative complications was observed in both hepatobiliary and pancreatic surgeries (p< 0.001) (Fig.2).

Among all patients with severe postoperative complications, pancreatic fistula was most frequent, occurring in 45.9% of cases. Pancreatic fistula was also the most frequent severe complication in both the PPLOS and non-PPLOS groups (62.2% and 40.4%, respectively).

In addition, the PPLOS group had significantly higher frequencies of several severe complications, including intra-abdominal abscesses (p= 0.048), pancreatic fistula (p= 0.01), postoperative bleeding (p= 0.04), hepatic failure (p= 0.01), and unplanned intubation (p= 0.02), compared to the non-PPLOS group (Table2).

Patients in the PPLOS group had a significantly higher BMI (p= 0.016), higher CONUTS (p= 0.02), and elevated CAR on POD3 (p< 0.02) compared to those in the non-PPLOS group (Table3). Additionally, there was a notable trend toward longer operative time (p= 0.06) and higher NLR on POD3 (p= 0.054) in the PPLOS group.

In the univariate analysis, PPLOS in patients with severe postoperative complications following highly advanced HBPS was significantly associated with intra-abdominal abscess (p= 0.048), pancreatic fistula (p= 0.01), postoperative bleeding (p= 0.04), hepatic failure (p= 0.01), unplanned intubation (p= 0.02), CAR on POD3 > 5.0 (p< 0.01), and NLR on POD3 > 20.0 (p< 0.01). In addition, BMI > 24 kg/m2(p= 0.09), CONUT > 5 (p= 0.09), and operative time > 420 min (p= 0.10) showed a significant trend.

Finally, in the multivariate analysis, only CAR on POD3 > 5.0 was identified as an independent predictive factor for PPLOS (odds ratio [OR], 5.25; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.28–27.69;p= 0.02) (Table4.).

In this study, we investigated perioperative predictive factors for PPLOS following highly advanced HBPS. Our findings revealed significant correlations between postoperative complications and extended PLOS after highly advanced HBPS in this patient population. Specifically, we observed that: i) the occurrence of postoperative complications significantly prolonged PLOS, ii) the severity of complications was directly associated with longer PLOS, and iii) these associations were consistently observed in both hepatobiliary and pancreatic surgeries. In addition, we identified postoperative inflammatory markers, especially CAR on POD3 as independent early predictive factors for PPLOS in patients with severe postoperative complications after highly advanced HBPS. Thus, in this study we have shown that early therapeutic intervention based on postoperative CAR may prevent PPLOS due to severe postoperative complications. In contrast, no significant correlation was observed between PPLOS and preoperative or intraoperative variables in multivariate analysis. In a previous study, we investigated predictive factors for postoperative mortality after advanced HBPS and reported significant associations with comorbid liver disease, intraoperative blood loss, intraoperative blood transfusion, postoperative bleeding, and postoperative organ failure [14]. Although we hypothesized that predictive factors for PPLOS would overlap with those for postoperative mortality, our findings suggest that this cannot be generalized. Previous large-scale database studies have reported similar results [15], suggesting the importance of focusing on strategies to reduce PLOS in addition to preventing postoperative mortality.

While previous studies have reported significant correlation between systemic inflammation and postoperative complications [16], our study is a valuable study to establish a relationship between elevated postoperative CAR and the incidence of PPLOS in patients undergoing highly advanced HBPS. CAR has emerged as a novel inflammatory marker and is increasingly recognized as a prognostic indicator not only in inflammatory conditions but also in various malignancies [17,18]. Given that serum albumin levels decrease in response to systemic inflammation, and that hypoalbuminemia is associated with the severity of inflammation [19,20], CAR serves as a composite marker that reflects intensity of the acute-phase inflammation while accounting for individual variability. Notably, our study demonstrated an association between postoperative CAR and severe postoperative complications. Recently, Sakamoto et al. [21] also reported that CAR on POD3 is a reliable predictive marker of clinically relevant postoperative pancreatic fistula (CR-POPF) after pancreaticoduodenectomy. Their reported cut-off value for CR-POPF prediction (CAR = 7.4), based on ROC analysis, is comparable to the cut-off identified in the present study (CAR = 5.0). Our study analyzed the correlation between PPLOS and types of postoperative severe complications. The results showed that intra-abdominal abscesses, pancreatic fistula, postoperative bleeding, hepatic failure, and unplanned intubation were significantly more frequent in the PPLOS group. Among these, pancreatic fistula was the most frequent severe complication, highlighting its clinical importance complication in context of highly advanced HBPS. The strong predictive value of CAR observed in this study may be partially explained by its correlation with the occurrence of pancreatic fistulas. These results suggest that early therapeutic intervention guided by elevated postoperative CAR may help reduce PLOS, particularly in patients undergoing pancreatic surgery. Potential strategies include: (i) early diagnosis through proactive imaging, (ii) timely replacement of diagnostic drains with therapeutic drains, and (iii) prompt bacterial culture testing to guide effective antibiotic therapy.

One concern regarding the use of CAR as a predictive marker is the potential influence of intra- and postoperative albumin infusion, which may lead to an underestimation of CAR values. Albumin administration could theoretically mask the true extent of systemic inflammation by artificially elevating serum albumin levels. However, in this study, no significant difference was observed in postoperative CAR values between patients who received albumin infusion and those who did not. This finding supports the reliability and robustness of CAR as an accurate predictor of PPLOS, even in the context of albumin supplementation. However, the phenomenon that an elevated CAR on POD3 is a risk factor for PPLOS was newly demonstrated in this study, the specific underlying mechanism has not yet been elucidated.

This study has some limitations. First, the single-center, retrospective study design may have resulted in selection bias and issues related to multiplicity in the statistical analyses. A multicenter study with a larger number of patients is required to validate and generalize the findings with greater precision. However, it is important to note that multicenter studies can be influenced by institutional variations in discharge criteria. Therefore, our study on PPLOS at a single institution with a well-established medical infrastructure and standardized surgical indications may be of particular value. Second, although we measured CAR on POD1 and 3, the optimal time for measurement and the most appropriate cut-off value remain unclear. These limitations should be considered when evaluating the outcomes.

PLOS following highly advanced HBPS was significantly associated with the presence and severity of postoperative complications. In patients with serious postoperative complications, postoperative inflammatory markers, particularly the CAR on POD3, emerged as early predictive indicator of PPLOS. These findings emphasizes the need for early and effective postoperative management based on CAR values, in mitigating the progression of severe complications, which can result in shorter PLOS following highly advanced HBPS.

The authors thank the medical staff of the Department of Gastroenterological Surgery at Gifu University Hospital for their participation in this study. We could not have completed this study without their diligence or support. We would also like to thank Editage (www.editage.jp) for English language editing.

Masahiro Fukada conceived the study concept, planned the study design as the principal investigator, interpreted the results, and drafted the manuscript. Nobuhisa Matsuhashi revised the manuscript, added intellectual content, and provided critical advice. Masahiro Fukada, Noriki Mitui, Takeshi Horaguchi, Itaru Yasufuku, Yuta Sato, Jesse Yu Tajima, Sigeru Kiyama, Yoshihiro Tanaka, Katsutoshi Murase, and Nobuhisa Matsuhashi obtained the data, provided critical comments to improve the manuscript, and approved its final submission. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.