Currently, inteins
are some of the most popular multifunctional
tools in the fields of molecular biology and biotechnology. In this
study, we used the surface analysis method to identify the sites of
intermolecular interactions between the N and C-parts of the Ssp DnaE
intein. The obtained results were used to determine the key amino
acids that define the binding energy and type of contact between intein
subunits.In silicosubstitution of five neutral
amino acids in the C-part of Ssp DnaE with methionine was validated
by using oligomutagenesis of a previously assembled plasmid, which
was then used forin vitrotests with HEK293 cells.
GFP reconstruction assays were used to estimate changes in trans-splicing
efficiency using quantitative metrics such as the number of GFP+ cells
and median fluorescence intensity as well as qualitative metrics such
as microphotography and fluorescence curve analysis using live-cell
microscopy. The results of thein vitrotests revealed
significantly decreased splicing efficiency in four out of six mutant
variants, with no significant differences in the other two cases.
Additionally, we performed metadynamics modeling to explain how these
mutations affect the molecular mechanisms of intein-intein interactions.
Finally, we found a positive correlation between the structural and
free energy changes in the local minima distribution and the decrease
in splicing efficiency in the I151M and A162M+A165M cases. The resulting
method was used with control mutations that had an experimentally
confirmed positive (A168H) or negative (T198A) effect on the splicing
reaction. In summary, we propose a method of free energy surface analysis
in collective variables for quick and visual evaluation of mutation
effects. This approach could be applied for the development of new
biotechnological and gene therapy products to overcome AAV capacity
limitations.

Inteins have become a popular and multifunctional
tool in modern
molecular biology, facilitating various modifications in protein
engineering. This technology has been
primarily applied in high-efficiency protein purification and the
assembly of large protein complexes. Split
inteins represent a class of supporting proteins that perform trans-splicing
reactions with external proteins bothin vitroandin vivo. The trans-splicing
mechanism enables the joining of cleaved protein segments, which are
fused with intein domains and encoded by separate DNA sequences, into
a single functional protein.

This separate expression resolves
several important biotechnological
problems, such as assembling of toxic proteins for cell producents
in the form of two inactive prespliced parts, separate delivery of genetic material to overcome the packaging
capacity of viral particles,in
vivomodification of receptors, antibody assembly, etc.

In translational
medicine, the application of split inteins is
justified by the perspective of creating new enhanced treatments based
on a system of double recombinant adeno-associated viruses (AAV),
which can increase the packaging capacity of gene therapy drugs. This approach has significantly expanded the
treatment options for effective compensation of mutations in genes
encoding dystrophin protein (cDNA ofDMDgene -14
kb), Usherin (cDNA ofUSH2Agene -18.9 kb), factor
VIII of blood coagulation (cDNA ofF8gene 7 kb),
and approximately a thousand other mutations related to large human
genes. In addition to the separate delivery
of genetic material for the replacement therapy of large genes, inteins have been used in gene editing, particularly in the assembly of adenine−or cytosine−base editors (ABE, CBE) and prime editors−(PE). Current
trends in the application of inteins in gene therapy are presented
schematically inFigure.

Illustration of intein trans-splicing technology for treating inherited
diseases caused by mutations in large genes. Target large genes (MYO7A, ABCA4, EYS, etc.) are highlighted in italics with
the approximate size of protein-coding DNA.

To enhance the efficiency of protein assembly in
the above-mentioned
applications, researchers are exploring approaches to increase the
yield of protein trans-splicing reactions by modifying natural intein
sequences.,Key trends in this field include
the minimization of intein sequence, detailed
analysis of the structure and properties of the entire molecule and mutagenesis of individual amino acids that
directly affect the trans-splicing reaction.

Advances
in structural biology methods, along with the development
of molecular modeling techniques, have enabled significantly more
comprehensive and detailed investigations into the structural and
functional properties of biomolecules. An outstanding example of such
research is the study by Stevens and colleagues, in which a synthetic consensus intein (Cfa) was engineered.
Artificially constructed Cfa has 3-fold higher kinetics of the splicing
reaction than the natural Npu DnaE intein. This enhanced activity
was attributed to itsde novodesign, which incorporated
“fast” functional domains derived from high-performance
natural inteins of the DnaE group. A similar approach involving point
mutations around the active center was used in the work by Eryilmaz
et al.

The most extensively studied
split intein Ssp DnaE was selected
for the analysis. This intein catalyzes the trans-splicing of α-subunit
of DNA polymerase III across bacterial, archaeal and eukaryotic systems. Members of the DnaE intein group exhibit rapid
trans-splicing kinetics, efficiently reconstructing protein complexes
within seconds to minutes. These features make them useful tools
for protein engineering. However, Ssp DnaE has been identified as
one of the slowest inteins from the DnaE group, with a half-reaction
time of 35 min in comparison to 63 s for Npu DnaE. Nevertheless, the number of experimentally evaluated structures
for Ssp DnaE (RCSB PDB ID:1ZD7, 1ZDE, 4GIG, and 3NZM) is considerably higher than
that for other proteins in this group. This fact establishes a substantial
background for the application of molecular modeling methods to predict
the properties of modified inteins. The combination of these factors
enables the application of rational design to identify mutagenesis
points and incorporate mutations that enhance the efficiency of the
trans-splicing reaction in comparison with the original Ssp DnaE pair.

The development and validation of reliable methods that would enable
the modification of inteins to increase trans-splicing efficiency
were set as the primary goals for this research. Ssp DnaE was used
as an accessible example for modeling and experimental testing. The
molecular surface of the intein Ssp DnaE was analyzed with the surface
accessible to the solvent (SASA) method to identify potential mutation
sites, which were incorporated into the intein nucleotide sequence.
The preliminary effects of these mutations were estimated by calculating
the free energy changes in affinity and stability. Following experimental
validation, a retrospective analysis of molecular dynamics simulations
was completed in order to explain the structural and energetic basis
of the observed outcomes. The approach developed in this work can
be used to modify any other intein for specific purposes.

For computational
modeling of protein–protein
interactions, the resolved structures of the intein Ssp DnaE (PDB
ID:1ZDE) and
the GFP protein (PDB ID:5B61, chain D) were extracted from the PDB. Before the calculations, each model was prepared
using the Protein PrepWizard module of the Schrödinger Suite
2022-4 software package. During the preparation
process, water molecules were removed from the model, and the X-ray
structure analysis errors were corrected using the following steps:
bonding types between atoms were restored, missing hydrogen atoms
and amino acids were added, charges were corrected, and protonation
was adjusted. After preparation, the geometry of the protein structures
was optimized using restrained minimization (Prime, Schrödinger
Suite 2022-4). The following minimization
settings were used: solvation model, VSGB; force field model, OPLS4; optimization method, LBFGS, with five iterations
and 65 steps within one iteration. Quality control of the protein
structure was performed using a Ramachandran plot.

Molecular dynamics
simulations were
performed with the Desmond program to evaluate protein stability in
the solvent. The OPLS4 force field was employed for all calculations,
with the following system parameters: an orthorhombic simulation box,
a 15 Å buffer zone from the protein surface, and the TIP3P water
model as the solvent. The aqueous solvent was designed to mimic physiological
conditions (0.15 M NaCl). The system charge was neutralized by adding
Na+or Cl–counterions. Simulation parameters:
preliminary relaxation of the system was performed using a hybrid
steepest descent method (15 steps) and LBFGS algorithm (2000 steps)
with constraints on the dissolved component of the system, followed
by energy minimization without constraints for another 2000 steps.
Then, a series of short molecular dynamics simulations were performed
for 12 ps in the NVT ensemble at 10 K and in the NPT ensemble at 10
K, with and without constraints on non-hydrogen atoms. A subsequent
series of short molecular dynamics simulations of the system (24 ps)
at 300 K in the NPT ensemble with and without constraints on non-hydrogen
atoms. Main simulation: 100 ns, system integration every 2 ps, frame
recording every 10 ps, temperature: 310 K, NPT ensemble. Monitored
parameters: RMSD and elements of the protein’s secondary structure.
Stability violations of the protein were assessed by analyzing regions
with disrupted folding and abrupt changes in the RMSD magnitude.

The reconstructed and
stable model of the original intein and its complex with fused GFP
was used for protein–protein docking with the PIPER algorithm.

A smaller protein, C-part of Ssp DnaE,
was used as an interactant to reduce computational complexity during
docking without specific constraints, such as repulsive or attractive
potentials of amino acid groups in the presence of specific protein–protein
recognition. In the docking results, 70,000 orientations were obtained,
and the top 70 energetically favorable solutions were selected by
clustering analysis.

Key selection criteria included pose score
(an analogue of binding
energy in molecular docking, considering the interaction energy of
contacting amino acids, kcal/mol) and pose energy (the energy of the
entire protein–protein complex, accounting for potential strain
that may arise outside the interface of the protein–protein
interaction, kcal/mol).

Analysis
of the molecular
surface of intein was used to identify the primary and secondary amino
acids that form the protein–protein interface. For surface
analysis, the intein with parts of GFP was split into two separate
chains. The “heavier” fragment with the N-part of the
intein was used in the calculations. The method was based on calculating
the molecular surface accessible to the solvent (SASA) and projecting
the potentials of free energy (ΔG) of non-bonded
interactions between atoms. The lipophilicity characteristics and
electrostatic potentials were calculated, and the reactive amino acids
were identified based on the solvent accessibility of their side chains.

The resulting molecular structures
were used to investigate the effects of mutagenesis on the conformation
of the studied proteins. The method of molecular metadynamics was
used to evaluate changes in the free energy of the system (ΔG) and to associate its values with conformational rearrangements
in the coordinates of the selected collective variables (CVs).

The following parameters were used for the metadynamic calculations:
all investigated protein models were placed in an orthorhombic region
with a buffer distance of 15 Å from the protein surface. A molecular
system simulating a physiological solution (0.15 M NaCl) based on
the TIP3P water model was used as the solvent. The charge of the proteins
was neutralized by the addition of appropriate counterions (Na+and Cl–). The OPLS4 force field was used
for the calculations.

The centroids of the amino acid groups
were chosen to represent
the center of mass of the most stable elements of the protein structure.
The sequence between centroids is labile and undergoes conformational
changes during the splicing process. Therefore, the analysis of free
energy surfaces revealed changes in the geometry of intein during
the splicing reaction.

The total simulation time for metadynamics
was 200 ns with frame
recording at 10 ps and energy recording at 2 ps. The temperature was
310 K, pressure was 1 atm (1.013 bar), biasing potential was 0.03
kcal/mol, and potential input interval was 0.09 ps. Ensemble - NPT,
with mandatory preliminary relaxation of the entire system, was used.

Basic plasmids for this study were
obtained during our previous work. Mutagenesis
of Ssp DnaE C was performed during the PCR with the Tersus Plus PCR
kit (PK221, Evrogen, Russia) and primers containing intein nucleotide
sequences with single or double mutations (Table S1). A typical PCR contained 4 μL of 5× Tersus Red
buffer, 0.5 μL of 10 mM dNTP mix, 0.5 μL of 50× Tersus
polymerase mix, 2 μL of 10 pM oligonucleotide mix, 12 μL
of dH2O, and 1 μL of DNA template. The following
amplification protocol was used for the PCR on a T100 thermal cycler
(1861096, BioRad, United States): initial denaturation at 95 °C
for 5 min, followed by 30 cycles of denaturation at 95 °C for
10 s, annealing at 60 °C for 20 s, and extension at 72 °C
for 30–60 s, depending on the size of the PCR product. The
amplified PCR products were purified with the CleanUp Mini Kit (BC023L,
Evrogen, Russia) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Purified constructs were cloned viaBamHI andHindIII sites into the pAAV-CMV-MCS expression vector from
the AAV5 CMV Expression System Kit (VPK-410-SER5, Cell Biolabs, United
States). Positive bacterial clones were verified by PCR and Sanger
sequencing (ABI 3500, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., United States).

The adherent HEK293 cell line
(85120602, ECACC, 2024) and cationic polymer polyethylenimine PEI-MAX
(24765, Polysciences Inc., United States) were used for transfection.
The transfection mixture was prepared according to the following protocol:
2.5 μg PEI (PEI/DNA molar ratio of 5:1) was dissolved in high
glucose DMEM (D5648, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) and mixed with 0.25 μg
of each plasmid of inten’s pair (0.5 μg of total pDNA
per well). After 12 min of incubation for the generation of the PEI–DNA
complex, the transfection mixture was added to 2×105trypsinized adherent cells in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS (S181H-500,
Biowest, France). The suspension was gently mixed, and the transfected
cells were seeded in a 48-well plate in three biological replicates
per sample. After 24 h, the medium containing the transfection reagents
was replaced with 0.4 mL of fresh DMEM containing 5% FBS for a further
48-h incubation.

Fluorescence
microscopy scanning
and analysis were performed with IncuCyte S3 (Sartorius AG, Germany).
The instrument was programmed with a scanning schedule of every 2
h in two optical channels (brightfield and green). The instrument’s
built-in software was used for qualitative and quantitative analysis
of fluorescence for each scan (number of GFP+ objects per image) and
in the dynamics of fluorescence accumulation.

After 48 h of incubation, cells were
trypsinized for flow cytometry analysis. For sample preparation, the
cells were washed twice with 500 μL of PBS and then resuspended
in 250 μL chilled FACS buffer (1× PBS, 5% FBS, 1 mM EDTA).
Data were collected using a CytoFlex B2-R2-V0 flow cytometer (A00-1-1102,
Beckman Coulter, United States) and analyzed with CytExpert v1.2 software
to detect GFP+ live cells. Live cells were gated based on the population
distribution by FSC-A and SSC-A. Single cells were gated based on
population distribution using the FSC-A/FSC-H plot, and the percentage
of GFP+ cells was determined by comparison with autofluorescence of
negative control cells without plasmid transfection. Further statistical
analyses for normality of sample distribution and confidence intervals
for rejection of the null hypothesis were performed using GraphPad
Prism 9.3.1 (one-way ANOVA with Sidak’s test for multiple comparisons).
Results are presented as the mean ± standard deviation of 3 biological
replicates. Confidence intervals are as follows: significant (*)p-value <0.05, (**)p-value <0.01,
(***)p-value <0.001, (****)p-value <0.0001; nonsignificant (ns)p-value >0.05.

The consensus model
of intein annealed with GFP split at 69 amino acids was constructed
from resolved structures of Ssp DnaE intein precursor (1ZDE) and GFP
(chain D in model 5B61). The selection of the trans-splicing site
for GFP disruption was previously experimentally confirmed and discussed
in our previous study.

The stability
of the resulting intein model with GFP was checked by using molecular
dynamics. The calculations have confirmed the asymptotic nature of
the RMSD curve (Figure), indicating that the protein was stable and did not undergo any
significant structural changes.

Graph of root-mean-square deviation (RMSD)
changes during 200 ns
of molecular dynamics simulation with the GFP-intein resulting model.
The asymptotic curve of the RMSD has confirmed the stability of the
resulting intein model.

Protein–protein
docking was used to verify the ability of
the obtained composite structure to restore the original intein complex.
Initially, the Ssp DnaE intein model (PDB ID1ZDE) was manually divided
into N and C-terminal parts based on the amino acid sequence from
the Intein Database.

Subsequently,
limited minimization of the protein structure was
performed to relax the side chains from conformational changes induced
by the interactant and normalize the hydrogen bonding network. The
separated parts of the intein were subjected to protein–protein
docking (Figure).
The evaluation function metrics and clustering indicated that the
most energetically favorable configuration corresponds to the original
protein–protein complex (cluster size = 183, pose score = −773.41
kcal/mol, pose energy = −2887.77 kcal/mol). Thus, protein–protein
docking confirmed that the constructed Ssp DnaE intein was restored
to the original protein–protein complex (FigureA, B).

Reconstructed protein models: (A) original
intein complex from
1ZDE structure; (B) the result of protein–protein docking evaluation
of N- and C-terminal parts of Ssp DnaE intein; (C) complex of intein
fused with GFP split at 69/70 amino acid; (D) the resulting consensus
model after protein–protein docking of N and C-terminal parts
of intein Ssp DnaE fused with GFP.

Similarly, protein–protein docking was performed
with an
identical protocol to obtain a model of the intein fused with GFP
split into two parts. The results of the calculations are listed inTable. Variant 2 was selected
as the best solution in the protein–protein docking result,
with the highest similarity to the original protein–protein
complex (FigureC,D).
Other variants also reproduce the original complex, but with lower
clusterization resolution.

The calculations
at this stage confirmed the thermodynamic stability
of the obtained construct. Models with errors would either be energetically
unfavorable or produce incorrect conformations.

In the next
stage, an analysis of the active surface in the intein structure was
performed to identify the major and minor amino acids involved in
the formation of the protein–protein complex. Initially, the
N/C intein fused with GFP was separated into two distinct chains.
A larger fragment containing the N-part of the intein was used for
further molecular surface analysis.

For the selected structure,
the molecular surface was calculated and mapped for potential non-bonded
interactions, which were divided into three general types: lipophilic,
positive electrostatic, and negative electrostatic. The maximum possible
intermolecular interaction potential (analogous to the Gibbs free
energy in kcal/mol) was calculated for each amino acid forming the
surface segment. This calculation considers the available molecular
surface area of the amino acid side chain and classifies it as lipophilic,
polar, or charged.

Contact
type: rednegative
electrostatic potential; bluepositive electrostatic potential;
and greenlipophilic.

The pool of possible point mutations was determined
by the values
of the potential intermolecular interactions. For example, A162 was
estimated to be optimal for the replacement of alanine (a lipophilic
amino acid) with a polar or more accessible side-chain amino acid
with a negative charge localization. The complete panel of possible
point mutations is listed inTable.

The number of mutations
was limited to only single and double simultaneous
mutations by exponentially increasing the complexity of the calculations.
Initially, the mutation effect was predicted by changing the Gibbs
free energy in affinity (ΔΔG) and stability
(ΔStability) parameters within the protein–protein complex.
In addition, conformational rearrangements of amino acids induced
by the introduced mutation were calculated within 7 Å around
the mutated amino acids. Mutant models were selected by optimal combination
of ΔΔGand Δstability parameters
and selected variants are listed inTable.

Experimental results
after transfection
of HEK293 were compared with the calculations of free energy changes
in affinity and stability.

Six selected mutations
(Table) with the
highest changes in ΔΔGand Δstability
parameters were used for the gene-engineering plasmid modification.
Original plasmids for estimation of changes in the trans-splicing
efficiency by yield of the intein-mediated GFP reconstruction were
obtained in a previous article. Mutagenesis
primers (Table S1) were used for overlapping
PCR to modify the nucleotide sequences corresponding to the selected
amino acids.

Six mutant Ssp DnaE C fragments were obtained by
PCR and used for cloning. Non-modified pairs of the Ssp DnaE-N/C-GFP
plasmids were used to compare the effects of Ssp DnaE-C modifications.
pGFP plasmid was used to compare the direct expression of full-length
GFP with intein-mediated reconstruction of GFP divided at 69/70 split
site. Untransfected HEK293 cells were used as a negative control for
cytometry gating of GFP+ cells by values of measured autofluorescence.
The resulting experimental data are presented inTableandFigure.

Experimental validation of the predicted mutagenesis
effect on
trans-splicing efficiency in combination of SspN-GFP and versions
of SspC-GFP (short name on plot SSP N+C): (A) fluorescence microphotographs
of 48 h post-transfected HEK293 cells captured by the IncuCyte S3
with parameters: six images per well with 10× magnification and
300 ms of GFP exposure. (B) Flow cytometry analysis of GFP+ cells
population, (C) flow cytometry analysis of MFI values normalized to
the fluorescence of the Ssp N+C sample in 10-base logarithmic scale,
(D) enlarged version of MFI values normalized to the fluorescence
of the Ssp N+C sample, (E) kinetic curves of green objects per image
accumulation from cells during 24 h incubation in IncuCyte S3. (*)p-value <0.05, (**)p-value <0.01,
(***)p-value <0.001, and­(****)p-value <0.0001.

The samples were arranged
by the percentage of GFP+ cells and MFI
(Table). The A165M
sample with simultaneous positive changes in stability (Δstability)
and negative changes in affinity (ΔΔG) had slightly higher %GFP+ and MFI values compared to the original
pair Ssp N+C. Otherwise, simultaneous changes in affinity and stability
resulted in a 20% decrease in efficiency for the double mutation A162F
+ A165M and a 35% decrease for A162M + A165M. The difference between
the experimental results and calculations based on energy changes
with the SASA method indicated that a different approach should be
used to predict the effect of mutations at the calculation stage.
Fluorescence analysis of micrographs (FigureA) demonstrated that the single mutation
I151M and double mutation A162M + A165M resulted in a significant
decrease in trans-splicing efficiency. Notably, single mutations at
the same positions, A162M and A165M, led to the opposite effect, which
is clearly illustrated inFigureB–C. Kinetic curve analysis (FigureE) was used to cluster samples
into two groups with amplitude similar to that of the original pair
(SspN+SspC, A162M, and A165M) and decreased amplitude in all other
samples.

The population analysis of GFP+ cells (FigureB) was used to cluster the
samples more precisely
into three groups: the group with insignificant efficiency changes
in samples A162M and A165M, the group with significant efficiency
decrease up to 20% in samples A162F + A165M and F159M, and the group
with efficiency decrease of more than 30% in A162M + A165M and I151M.
MFI analysis with fluorescence normalized to SspN+SspC was plotted
on a 10-base logarithmic scale (FigureC). Intergroup differences between Ssp N+C, A162M,
and A165 M were not significant. Significant differences were estimated
in the samples A162F+A165M, F159M, and I151M within 10 fold change
of magnitude from the control. A higher level of significance was
obtained in samples A162F + A165M, and the intensity was the same
as that of the negative control. Additional subplot (FigureD) with fluorescence normalized
to Ssp N+C was plotted without a logarithmic scale for a more detailed
estimation. Despite the absence of significant differences, a positive
effect of the A165M mutation and a negative effect of the A162M mutation
were observed.

Summary analysis of the experimental data revealed
a negative effect
for mutations in I151M, F159M, A162M + A165M, and A162F + A165M and
a neutral or slightly positive effect for A162M and A165M. These results
were used to analyze protein–protein interactions with molecular
metadynamic modeling.

The method of molecular metadynamics was
used to analyze and explain
the experimental results obtained in terms of molecular dynamics.
This method was used as an alternative to predict the effects of mutagenesis
by analyzing the free energy changes in the system in terms of selected
collective variables. The I151M and A165M mutations were used to explain
the role of single mutations at different structural points of intein.
Mutations A165M and A162M + A165M were used to explain the negative
effects of double mutations with methionines close to each other.
The selected mutations demonstrated a contrast effect on trans-splicing
efficiency and could be used for a better understanding of intein’s
structural features.

Free energy surfaces were evaluated for
selected mutations in the coordinates of the collective variables
(Figure). The obtained
surfaces could explain mutations effects by the rearrangement of local
energy minima, which determine the lability and flexibility of intein
molecules and kinetics of the splicing process. For instance, the
partitioning of free energy into multiple oriented minima indicates
changes in molecular interactions (FiguresA,C).In vitrotests in
the case of A165M did not show a significant change in efficiency
with the cell assay; therefore, other methods should be employed for
further investigation. Otherwise, the free energy concentration at
a single major minimum was correlated with a decrease in splicing
efficiency (FiguresB,D). This common trend has introduced a new insight for the primary
prediction approach to estimate the mutagenesis effect on trans-splicing
by the analysis of local free energy distribution and estimation of
energy barrier height between them.

Free energy surfaces obtained from 200
ns metadynamic calculations
of Ssp DnaE intein fused with GFP: (A) without mutations, (B) double
A162M+A165M mutation, (C) single A165M mutation, and (D) single I151M
mutation. Local minima of free energy are numbered in circles, and
colors represent the energy value. Individual images with fitted axes
are placed onFigures S1–S4.

The obtained metadynamic analysis results (Table S2–S5)were used to illustrate the
energy distribution
with surfaces (Figure). Similar scales of collective variable coordinates enable the estimation
of the clockwise and anticlockwise directions of the free energy distribution.
A borderline was placed on plots between points (0;15) and (40;8)
in CV1–CV2 coordinates to separate minima in the left corner
with coordinates that describe the interaction of C-part centroids
with the N-terminal part centroids. This visual implementation enables
quick estimation of the most probable effect of mutations on splicing
efficiency changes. A detailed explanation of each mutation effect
will be discussed further.

Primarily, the A165M mutation with
a clockwise free energy distribution
has a positive effect on the splicing reaction. Additionally, A165M
was characterized by an increased number of local minima shifted to
the right by the CV1 coordinates with a decreased height of the energy
barrier compared to the original intein. The most evident rearrangement
occurred by shifting the barrier value from +18.75 kcal/mol between
1 and 2 points in the non-mutated intein to +10.93 kcal/mol between
3 and 4 points in A165M (Table S3). This
fact has made energy clusterization more distinguishable by coordinates
and allowed us to draw a line on plots that defines the direction
of the energy distribution. The decrease in the energy barrier, along
with the increasing value of the common free energy (12.71 kcal/mol),
has enabled the expansion of energetically permissible intein conformations.
The summary effect of the A165M mutation can be characterized as an
increase in conformational mobility with a higher number of energy
minima and lower energy barriers, resulting in reaction-competent
states with lower energy transfer costs.

Secondly, mutations
with negative effects, I151M and A162M + A165M,
were characterized by an anticlockwise energy distribution. In the
case of the double mutation A162M + A165M, the number of minima has
increased from four in the original structure to six. This rearrangement
of the minima increases the conformational mobility of the molecules.
However, the double mutations A162M + A165M and A165M had almost equal
numbers of minima, but most of them were placed on the left side of
the CV1 coordinate. The inhibitory effect of the second methionine
mutation was indicated by the minima concentration at the position
of the initial state, with the higher barrier between 1 and 2 points
in A165M with+4.24 kcal/mol (Table S3)
and A162M + A165M with +10.96 kcal/mol (Table S4).

This fact has increased cost of energy transfer,
and collapsed
intein's viable conformations. In addition, structural analysis
has
revealed evidence of changes in the profile of hydrophobic contacts
within the intein core around amino acids A/L189, A/V194, A/I195,
and A/P144 (Figure S7).

A similar
effect was observed for the I151M mutation. Additional
hydrophobic contacts became available with A/I137/147, A/V159, and
B/F159 due to the longer chain length (5.51Å M vs 3.87Å
I). Essentially, the I151M mutation has stimulated hydrophobic contacts
between chains A and B of the intein while maintaining contacts with
B/L153 (Figure S8). This region has originally
formed a “leucine zipper” that was stabilized with an
I151M mutation. The conformational mobility remained original with
the same number of minima, mostly at the initial positions. Suddenly,
the mutation has caused a decrease in each energy barrier with a simultaneous
increase in the depth of each minimum.

In summary, the I151M
mutation has a dual effect. On the one hand,
energy barriers were significantly lower than those in other cases,
and conformations were available for expansions and transitions. The
concentration of free energy in the four deep minima and the formation
of additional hydrophobic contacts made all conformations energetically
unfavorable for the molecular system. The resulting overstabilization
of the hydrophobic core of the intein molecule makes trans-splicing
energetically unaffordable.

These examples have demonstrated
that free energy analysis could
indirectly highlight the structural anomalies caused by important
conformational changes, which should be additionally observed to accept
the final decision regarding the predicted mutation effect.

The results
from the previous section were applied to the metadynamic analysis
for two control mutations, whose effects had been previously experimentally
estimated.

Mutation T198A completely blocked the trans-splicing
reaction and mutation A168H increased
molecular stability and splicing efficiency.,These facts were used to incorporate these mutations into the obtained
model of GFP fused with intein Ssp DnaE. The results of the metadynamic
simulation for this model are illustrated (Figure).

Free energy surfaces obtained from 200 ns metadynamic
calculations
of DnaE-fused Ssp intein with GFP: (A) without mutations, (B) T198A
mutation, and (C) A168H mutation. Local minima of free energy are
numbered in circles, and colors represent energy value. Individual
images with fitted axes are placed onFigures S5–S6.

The simulation results
have supported the experimental data in
the context of the free energy and structural changes in the model.
The threonine-alanine replacement has disrupted the hydrogen bond
network between D200 and Q182, where T198 was acting as a bridge,
realizing transient contacts (Figures S9 and S10). From the position of energy changes, the T198A mutation forms
deep energy minima 1 (Figure) with a high energy barrier for transitions to local minima
2 and 3 (Table S6). At the same time, the
free energy of the system is even lower than that of intein without
mutations (Figure,Table S2).

In the structure without
mutations, there are 4 energy minima,
while with the T198A mutation, the fourth minimum disappears from
the initial coordinates.

As a result, we observe the formation
of a deep energy minimum
at point 1, with a high energy barrier for the transition to local
minima 2 and 3.

The opposite effect was observed for the A168H
mutation. Surface
analysis (FigureC)
revealed an increase in the number of energy minima from the original
four to nine with a shift of the CV1 coordinates, which improved the
mobility of the molecule. The energy barriers in this case were reduced
to almost zero between minima 4 and 5, and between minima 5 and 6
(Table S7). In addition, an overall increase
of free energy (+11.13 kcal/mol) made the intein system more flexible
and labile. This positive effect should provide active sites for the
splicing reaction and increase its efficiency. Structural changes
after the A168H mutation with the formation of π–cation
contacts with A/R202 and hydrogen bonds with B/D171 and B/N 158. These
intermolecular interactions have stabilized the core with a powerful
source of intramolecular contacts during conformational rearrangement
along the splicing reaction (Figure S11).

In summary, the results obtained with the metadynamic simulation
were validated by experiments in this study and additionally tested
with control mutations. The results in the previous section were confirmed,
and the combination of metadynamics and structural analysis could
be used as a predictive tool for further modification of the intein
structure using point mutations.

This
study was done as a continuation of our previous research. The development and validation of a site-directed
mutagenesis method were the primary goals of this study. The obtained
metadynamic method of analysis could be used for the estimation of
mutagenesis of any inteins with correction to structure analysis.

The implementation of a metadynamic analysis to estimate the
mutagenic
effect is a key feature of this study. Previously, this method has
been used to estimate the inhibitory effect of molecules and the impact of each amino acid in exteins. Free energy distribution analysis in collective
variables was performed in inteins to predict the possible initial
confirmation for the first time. In previous studies, RMSD trajectories,
covariance matrices of backbone Cα atom motion, and principal component analysis on Cα coordinates were used to describe the effect of mutations
implemented with the molecular dynamics method. The implemented method
was double-checked with new and control mutations, which made this
approach more reliable than the primary estimation of changes in stability
and affinity.

New mutation points were obtained from the active
surface analysis
of protein models, which has been widely used to analyze protein–ligand
or protein–protein interactions. This approach was also used for the first time in intein mutagenesis.
Geometric structure analysis with Ramachandran plots was alternatively
used to identify structural features that could significantly change
the splicing yield.

Experimental
screening of amino acids with more favorable chemical
properties is the most common method of directed mutagenesis. The structural analysis of the static and dynamic
changes supported the experimental data with more detailed information
on intermolecular mechanics.,Notably, all listed
chemical methods of intein rational modification were able to perform
single precise mutations in the conservative and catalytic domains
to significantly change the trans-splicing efficiency.

“Irrational”
methods of intein modification have
also been used with computational methods in genetics. Consensus analysis
of the amino acid sequence with annotation of functional domains has
enabled simultaneous manipulations with multiple mutations. Cfa intein
was assembled with the fast domain of DnaE inteins after alignment
and annotation of 73 sequences. The resulting intein has demonstrated
3 times faster kinetics than NpuDnaE, which has the highest yield
and kinetics in the natural intein group. The major drawback of this modification method was revealed in the
experimental application of Cfa for trans-splicing reconstruction
of large protein complexes. Suddenly,
the yield of target protein splicing was significantly higher for
NpuDnaE intein than for Cfa and Ssp DnaE. This unexpected result was
obtained as a consequence of the uncovered features of the artificial
intein, which has individual structural features at the protein level.
However, structural analysis and targeted precise modifications of
the C-part of the Cfa intein have already been performed to increase
the yield in the case of protein purification.

Implemented point modification of the C-part of Ssp
DnaE has mostly
decreased the yield of the trans-splicing reaction but has also revealed
structural features. A series of single-point mutations with changes
from neural amino acids to methionine in different domains of intein
could be used to better understand the role of individual residues
in the structure of intein. The general trend emerged from the observation
that trans-splicing efficiency decreases in the direction from the
peripheral catalytic part to the intein’s core with the mutations
A165M, A162M, F159M, and I151M. In the peripheral part at A165 and
A162, the efficiency changes slightly in the percentage of GFP+ cells.
This flexible domain was bound by F159 with a significant decrease
in dozens of percent of GFP+ cells. The core domain with I151 could
be identified with a drastic decrease in GFP+ cells, similar to the
negative control. This fact was additionally explained by the analysis
of the structural changes in each case. For instance, I151M has formed
an increased number of lipophilic contacts in the core with N- and
C-parts, which has increased the absolute energy minimum and overstabilized
the C-part molecule.

The same negative effect was obtained with
the control T198A mutation
in the case of destabilization of the N-part. This mutation was associated
with the most conserved tyrosine located in the catalytic and geometrical
centers of the N-part of the intein. Two mutations in this core position
with opposite effects were tested after extraction of intein structural
features based on Ramachandran plot analysis. T198S mutation demonstrated a neutral effect on splicing with insignificant
changes in geometry, whereas T198A destabilized the structure and
completely blocked the response. These experimental data were supported
by the calculations in this study. The docking results illustrated
that amino acid Y198 formed a bridging bond between D200 and Q182
in the initial state of intein. Replacement of tyrosine with alanine
has disrupted these hydrogen bonds and destabilized the molecule at
the core of the N-part of the intein. Free energy surface analysis
reflected these structural changes with a decreased number of energy
minima and an increased height of the energy barriers. Similar results
were obtained in the case of I151M. The conclusion regarding the negative
influence of increased energy barriers on the splicing reaction is
consistent with previous research.

Unexpected results were obtained from the analysis of experimental
data with the double mutations A162F + A165M and A162M + A165M. Firstly,
these results have disproved the primary method of prediction of mutation
effects based on energy changes with affinity (−ΔΔG) and stability (ΔStability) parameters. Secondly,
structural analysis replaced this stage after the discovery of a significant
decrease in splicing efficiency in the case of simulated double methionine
mutations in A162M + A165M. Notably, similar single mutations at similar
positions in the cases of A162M and A165M did not demonstrate such
effects. This fact suggests that double methionines have formed contact
with each other, but structural analysis has demonstrated only destabilization
of the C-part with the extensive form of each methionine molecule.
Moreover, surface analysis has allowed a visual comparison of A162M
+ A165M with A165M and has outlined the effect of A162M in changing
the number of lipophilic contacts with the same number of energy minima.
Additionally, the formation of lipophilic contacts has shifted the
coordinates of the minima to the CV2 axes and increased the height
of the energy barriers. In summary, the overall mobility of the molecule
has been increased, but structural changes have prevented reactions
from favorable splicing interactions.

In the case of the experimentally
neutral effect of the A165M mutation,
both metadynamics and structural analysis have investigated mostly
the positive effects of alanine to methionine substitution. The map
of lipophilic contacts between the N- and C-portions was modified
by the formation of lipophilic contacts with F203, I195, L223,/189
and disruption of a quartet between A/A197, A/I195/213, and B/L161.
The location of the mutation at the boundary between two structured
regions (β-sheets transitioning into loops) has affected the
conformational rearrangement due to steric constraints that change
the mechanics of the conformational transition. The immediate proximity
of the mutations to the peripheral catalytic center at the end of
the C-part of the intein has provided a positive effect in the case
of A168H. The substitution of alanine with histidine has created
powerful π-cationic interactions between arginine at position
202 and hydrogen bonds between histidine and aspartic acid at position
158 and aspartic acid at position 171. These interactions have stabilized
the intein core during conformational rearrangement for splicing.
Metadynamic calculations have revealed the formation of additional
energy minima with low energy barriers, which made the molecular system
more conformationally labile and promoted an efficient trans-splicing
reaction. In both cases A165M and A168H, the replacement of alanine
with structurally more extended amino acids has formed additional
contacts that have stabilized the catalytic C-part center and further
accelerated the cyclization of aspartate in the trans-splicing reaction.

Stabilization of inteins has been used “as the simplest
approach for rational engineering of proteins”. Other chemical approaches have been used for
the targeted deletion of several amino acids by NMR analysis to increase
the cleavage of the N-part to promote the trans-splicing reaction. Another modification method based on NMR analysis
was used to enable the splicing reaction in a 2 M NaCl solution by
replacing positively charged amino acids with neutral ones. Biological approaches have also been used to
find genetically variable domains by screening all 20 amino acids
with oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis. As a result, dozens of DNA libraries must be tested experimentally
with random results, mostly without any chemical explanation.

The most effective biological approach is the discovery of new
shorter natural inteins from the results of genomic data analysis.
For instance, gp41 intein was discovered as a result of massive metagenomic
data analysis and currently has the faster kinetics than Npu DnaE
by 10 times. However, its resolved structure
was only recently obtained and its features
have not yet been fully studied. In particular, the discovery of new
inteins did not stop the search for modifications and mutations of
newly discovered molecules. This problem
and the method of solution have already been discussed in the study
of increasing reaction yields, which
is particularly important in protein purification. Therefore, the development of new approaches for rational
mutagenesis of inteins, optimized for each specific purposes, would
also be relevant for the discovery of new inteins. The method of metadynamic
simulation would significantly accelerate the process of hypothesis
testing.

In this discussion, the most relevant
methods of intein modification
were listed. The main trend was outlined in the discovery of new short
inteins and the modification of their structures. The most common
modification was identified as stabilization of the C-terminal catalytic
site of inteins to accelerate cyclization in the splicing reaction.
Other findings were also obtained from the experimental data.

First, the application of active site analysis should be modified
with corrections for genetic analysis of conserved and variable positions.
Interactant estimation should be used for further selection of amino
acids, but the selection method should be modified with structural
analysis. Domain functional analysis should be used to estimate the
parameters that would be optimized for a particular purposes. For
instance, in the case of trans-splicing efficiency, optimization of
the C-terminal catalytic site should be stabilized, and analysis of
energy changes in Δstability was applicable. In other cases,
this method was not applicable due to the structural features.

Second, molecular metadynamics methods were used to predict the
mutation effects. The main feature of this method was revealed with
the analysis of free energy surfaces in collective variables, which
could indicate significant structural rearrangements by coordinates
and the type of minima allocation and grouping. The concentration
of minima in a cluster with high values of energy and barriers has
indicated structural changes that could reduce conformational lability.
Otherwise, the widespread distribution of an increased number of minima
with lower energy barriers indicated structural changes that could
increase the mobility and conformational lability of molecules.

Third, most of the methionine mutations have destabilized the structure
of inteins, with the exception of A165M. Any replacement in the core
structure of inteins could significantly change the structure and
completely block splicing in the case of I151 M and T198A. The dual
effect of the extended structure of methionine molecule was revealed
in the case of double mutations A162M + A165M with destabilization
of the intein C core structure, and in the case of single A165M mutation,
methionine has stabilized the C-part catalytic center. A similar effect
of histidine extension structure was obtained in the case of A168H.

These new insights into the modification of intein Ssp DnaE could
be further used for the structural analysis of intein N and C core
interactions. Additional experimental evidence for the modification
of the intein C-part to stabilize the catalytic center could be used
to obtain new optimized intein pairs. The combination of computational
methods for the analysis of the structure and dynamics of intein interactions
would significantly accelerate the development of improved versions
of intein-mediated trans-splicing systems.

This methodology
could be used in many biotechnology applications,
such as protein assembly and purification, as a basis for visualizing
protein–protein interactions, and as a technology for advanced
gene therapy. For instance, in our next research, we will use the
obtained results as improved solutions to overcome the limitations
of AAV packaging with optimized trans-splicing efficiency. These findings
could assist in the discovery of new approaches to create more efficient
transgene delivery systems and genome editing systems.

We gratefully
acknowledge the Oligosynthesis group of the
Laboratory Complex Resource Center of the Center for Genetics and
Life Sciences (Dmitry Yakshin, Ekaterina Cherkasova, Anna Cherentaeva)
for oligonucleotide synthesis, the Sequencing group of the Laboratory
Complex Resource Center of the Center for Genetics and Life Sciences
(Elena Kolosova, Elena Dolgova) for sequencing of all constructs,
and the Resource Center of Cell Technology of the Center for Genetics
and Life Sciences for assistance with cell culturing and manuscript
review & editing.

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.5c00091.

M.O.S., A.N.B., and M.A.G. contributed equally
to this work. M.O.S.‡:
data curation, formal analysis, investigation, software, visualization,
and writing–original draft. A.N.B.: conceptualization, data
curation, formal analysis, investigation, methodology, supervision,
and writing–original draft. M.A.G.‡: conceptualization,
data curation, formal analysis, investigation, methodology, software,
visualization, and writing–original draft. Y.B.P.: conceptualization,
formal analysis, project administration, supervision, and writing–review
and editing. S.A.C.: conceptualization, formal analysis, methodology,
and writing–review and editing. A.V.K.: conceptualization,
formal analysis, funding acquisition, project administration, resources,
supervision, and writing–review and editing. CRediT:Matvei O Sabantsevdata curation, formal analysis, investigation,
software, visualization, writing - original draft;Andrew N
Brovinconceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, investigation,
methodology, supervision, writing - original draft;Maxim A
Gureevconceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, investigation,
methodology, software, visualization, writing - original draft;Yuri B Porozovconceptualization, formal analysis, project
administration, supervision, writing - review & editing;Sergey A Chuvpiloconceptualization, formal analysis, methodology,
writing - review & editing;Alexander V Karabelskyconceptualization, formal analysis, funding acquisition, project
administration, resources, supervision, writing - review & editing.

The
author(s)
declare that financial support was received for the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article. This research was funded by the
Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation,
Agreement No 075-10-2025-017 from the 27.02.2025 project (GTH-RND-2011).

The
authors
declare no competing financial interest.