An intact 5‐year‐old female mixed breed dog was presented in an emaciated condition to a veterinary teaching hospital. Unfortunately, the stray dog died before undergoing further examinations, including cytology and imaging tests. Multiple masses were seen in the inguinal and abdominal pairs of mammary glands and subcutaneous tissue. Necropsy of the case revealed no masses in the external genitalia and other tissues and organs. Tissue samples were taken from the masses for histopathology and immunohistochemistry. Histopathological examination of the mammary masses showed rows and cords of round to ovoid neoplastic cells with large round to polyhedral nuclei containing a single nucleolus. Three to five mitotic figures per high‐power field were observed. Immunohistochemical staining of the mass for vimentin revealed strong cytoplasmic positivity. Intense and moderate immunoreactivities for Ki‐67 and c‐Myc were detected in the cells. The neoplastic cells were negative for cytokeratin, S‐100 and CD20 markers, but were weakly positive for CD3, p53 and CD68. The findings achieved from histopathology and immunohistochemistry established a diagnosis of disseminated transmissible venereal tumour (TVT) in the mammary glands of a mixed‐breed dog. This case highlighted that TVT should be considered as a differential diagnosis for extragenital masses or mammary gland tumours in dogs, particularly in regions with a high prevalence of stray dogs.

An intact 5‐year‐old female dog was presented with multiple masses in the mammary glands. Histological examination of the masses showed round to ovoid neoplastic cells with large round to polyhedral nuclei and three to five mitotic figures (arrows). Immunohistochemical staining revealed intense immunoreactivity to vimentin (neoplastic cells in the blood vessel) and Ki‐67, moderate reactivity to c‐Myc, and no reaction for cytokeratin, S‐100, and CD20 markers, confirming a diagnosis of disseminated transmissible venereal tumour.

Mammary tumours are one of the most commonly occurring tumours in intact adult female dogs and older neutered female dogs (Gupta and Sood2012; Pastor et al.2018). Transmissible venereal tumours (TVTs), also known as infective venereal tumours, transmissible venereal sarcomas, venereal granulomas, Sticker's sarcomas and transmissible lymphosarcoma are transplantable tumours that primarily occur in the genitalia of stray dogs (Chikweto et al.2013; Kucukbekir et al.2021). TVTs most commonly occur between the ages of 2 and 8 years, and the incidence of TVTs is generally lower in dogs older than 10 years (Pastor et al.2018; Chikweto et al.2013; Kucukbekir et al.2021). It has been reported that TVTs most commonly occur in tropical and subtropical regions with numerous stray dog populations (Kucukbekir et al.2021; Park et al.2006; Alkan et al.2017). There is some variation in reported prevalence based on gender, with most studies reporting a higher prevalence of TVT in females (Kucukbekir et al.2021; Nazer et al.2023). However, other reports do not show a sex predilection (Costa et al.2023; Schectman et al.2022). Regarding breed, Costa et al. (2023) found a higher incidence of TVTs in mixed‐breed dogs. As the name implies, the primary and most commonly affected sites are external genital organs (Gupta and Sood2012; Alkan et al.2017; Rezaei et al.2016). Less commonly, in the absence of pre‐existing genital lesions, this contagious tumour may be found on the extragenital sites in contact with the genitalia of an affected dog because of sexual contact, sniffing, scratching or licking (Schectman et al.2022; Rezaei et al.2016). Approximately 5–17% of TVT cases metastasises through hematogenous or lymphatic routes (Günay Ucmak et al.2019). There are limited reported cases of canine TVT in the mammary glands in the veterinary literature (Gupta and Sood2012; Park et al.2006; Alkan et al.2017; Nazer et al.2023; Horta et al.2014; Nogueira et al.2020). The present report describes a relatively rare case of disseminated TVT in the mammary glands of a female mixed‐breed dog and its histopathological and immunohistochemical (IHC) features.

An intact female mixed‐breed dog, approximately 5‐year‐old, was brought to the veterinary teaching hospital at the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine following a car accident. The dog was a stray, and no prior medical history was available. Unfortunately, the nondescript dog died before clinical examination, cytology and subsequent imaging tests. On visual examination, the dog displayed signs of malnutrition, poor body condition and multiple masses in the mammary glands. Necropsy was immediately performed for teaching purposes in the Pathology Department, and multiple masses were seen in the mammary glands and subcutaneous tissue as the most notable finding (Figure1). The masses were distributed across several mammary glands, including the inguinal with the caudal and cranial abdominal pairs, while the thoracic pairs were not affected. These nodular masses protruding from the mammary glands were freely movable, with a pink–grey colour. Unfortunately, the precise size of each individual nodule was not determined. However, the masses varied in size, ranging from 2 to 5 cm in diameter. No ulceration was observed on the surface of the skin overlying the tumours. On the cut surface, the multilobulated masses appeared solid with a granular texture. No abnormalities were observed in the external genitalia, and no masses were found during the macroscopic examination of other organs. The regional lymph nodes, including the inguinal and axillary lymph nodes, were examined grossly but did not appear enlarged, oedematous or abnormal; therefore, tissue samples from these lymph nodes were not collected for further examination. The initial diagnosis was a mammary gland tumour based on the location of the masses, and thus, cytology was not performed before necropsy. The tissue samples from the masses were collected and fixed in a 10% neutral buffered formalin solution. Thin sections (5 µm) of the tissues were taken from the paraffin blocks and processed for histopathology. They were stained with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) dyes and examined under a light microscope (Olympus, Japan) equipped with a digital camera. The mitotic index, which indicates the rate of cell division, was calculated as the number of mitotic figures/10 high‐power fields (HPF) of the H&E‐stained slides (Romansik et al.2007).

(a) Multiple tumour masses in the inguinal and abdominal mammary glands of a mixed‐breed dog. (b) The granular appearance of the tumour on the cut surface (arrow).

IHC staining was performed using a panel of antibodies using the avidin–biotin complex (ABC) method (Table1). The 5‐µm sections were deparaffinised, rehydrated with graded alcohols, and subjected to antigen retrieval using citrate buffer (pH 6.0) in a microwave oven for 20 min. In the next step, endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked using 3% H2O2for 10 min. The sections were then incubated with primary antibodies, including vimentin (a marker showing cells of mesenchymal origin), cytokeratin (CK, a marker showing cells of epithelial origin), S‐100 protein (a marker for melanomas), CD3 (a marker for T lymphocytes), CD20 (a marker for B lymphocytes), CD68 (a marker for macrophages), Ki‐67 (a marker for cell proliferation), c‐Myc (a marker for cell proliferation) and p53 (a marker for apoptosis) (all antibodies from Master Diagnostica, Granada, Spain) overnight at 4°C (Table1). It should be noted that the specific primary antibodies were replaced with phosphate‐buffered solution (PBS) in the tissue sections used as negative controls (Gupta and Sood2012). Next, the sections were incubated with biotinylated secondary antibodies and subsequently with streptavidin‐peroxidase complex, according to the manufacturer's instructions. Finally, 3,3′‐diaminobenzidine (DAB) was used as the chromogen, and counter‐staining was done with haematoxylin. The IHC findings were evaluated using a semi‐quantitative scoring system based on the intensity of staining and the percentage of positive cells (the staining distribution). The staining intensity or the strength of the signal was scored as no signal (−), weak signal (+), moderate signal (++) or strong signal (+++). The staining distribution was scored ranging from 0 to 4: 0% (0), less than 10% (1), 10%–30% (2), 31%–60% (3), and over 61% (4) of cells staining positive (Gupta and Sood2012). Finally, the staining index was calculated by multiplying the staining intensity and distribution scores (0–12) (Gupta and Sood2012).

Characteristics of antibodies used for the immunohistochemical technique.

Histopathological examination revealed that the masses were composed of loose sheets, rows and cords of neoplastic cells that were relatively uniform in size and round to ovoid in shape. The cords or densely packed cells were separated by thin fibrous connective tissue strands in the tumour mass. The neoplastic cells had moderate amounts of light amphophilic to clear, sometimes vacuolated, cytoplasm with indistinct cell margins. The nuclei of the cells were mostly large, hyperchromatic, round to polyhedral, with a single nucleolus located centrally and surrounded by marginated chromatin (Figure2a). The cells exhibited a large ratio of nucleus to cytoplasm, with mild nuclear pleomorphism. The neoplastic cells had cytoplasmic projections that were stuck to the surface, giving the tumour its characteristic ‘sticker cell’ appearance, which is also known as TVT. Although cytological examination was not performed for this case, the neoplastic cells seemed to show predominantly lymphocytic patterns based on morphology in H&E‐stained histopathological slides.

(a) Photomicrograph showing the arrangement of neoplastic cells in a cord‐like fashion separated by thin connective tissue strands. The neoplastic cells have large, round to oval nuclei, prominent nucleolus and mitotic figures (arrows) (×400 magnification, 100 µm scale; H&E stain). (b) There are necrosis (N) and haemorrhage (asterisk) in the tumour tissue (T) (×100 magnification, 400 µm scale; H&E stain). (c, d) The mammary ducts are seen among the neoplastic cells (arrowheads) (×100 magnification, 400 µm scale; ×400 magnification, 100 µm scale; H&E stain). H&E, haematoxylin and eosin.

The mitotic index was relatively high, with three to five mitotic figures observed per HPF (Figure2a). Variable numbers of mononuclear inflammatory cells, including lymphocytes, plasma cells and macrophages, infiltrated the tumour. Necrosis and haemorrhage were also observed in the tumour tissue (Figure2b). Some mammary ducts lined by a simple cuboidal epithelium were seen among the neoplastic cells (Figure2c,d). Interestingly, there were some neoplastic cells in the blood vessels of the tumour tissue (Figure3a). Based on the histopathological features, a diagnosis of TVT was strongly suggested.

Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for vimentin, indicating an intense intracytoplasmic immunoreactivity of the neoplastic cells to this marker. The neoplastic cells in the blood vessel in the tumour tissue (arrow) (a). Numerous neoplastic cells are immunoreactive to Ki‐67 (b), while moderate reactivity to c‐Myc is seen in about 20% cells (c). Small numbers of the neoplastic cells show reactivity to p53 (d) and CD68 (e) markers. A weak immunoreactivity to CD3 in a few cells, which represents tumour‐infiltrating lymphocytes (f). ×200 magnification, 200 µm scale; streptavidin‐biotin peroxidase method, Chromogen 3,3′‐diaminobenzidine (DAB), counter‐staining with Harris haematoxylin.

To determine the origin of the neoplastic cells, IHC analysis was conducted using antibodies against vimentin, S‐100, CK, Ki‐67, c‐Myc, p53, CD3, CD20 and CD68 markers (Table1). Over 90% of neoplastic cells showed intense cytoplasmic immunostaining for vimentin (staining index = 12), indicating a mesenchymal origin of the tumour (Figure3a). The neoplastic cells were negative for CK and S‐100 markers (staining index = 0). Strong nuclear immunoreaction to Ki‐67 was detected in about 60%–70% cells (Figure3b) (staining index = 12), while moderate immunoreactivity of c‐Myc was seen in approximately 20% cells (Figure3c) (staining index = 6). Weak reactivity to p53 was detected in small numbers of the neoplastic cells (staining index = 2) (Figure3d), and there was moderate immunostaining to CD68 in < 10% of cells (staining index = 3) (Figure3e). Regarding the markers used for lymphocytic cells, no immunoreactivity to CD20 was seen in the neoplastic cells (staining index = 0), and moderate immunoreactivity of CD3 was detected in < 10% of cells (staining index = 3) (Figure3f).

The histopathological features observed in the present case were consistent with those in both genital and extragenital canine TVTs documented in earlier studies (Gupta and Sood2012; Kucukbekir et al.2021). Histopathology alone is challenging to differentiate TVT from other round cell tumours such as lymphoma, histiocytoma, amelanotic melanoma and undifferentiated carcinomas (Hendrick2017; Shokrpoor et al.2024; Laissaoui et al.2024; Karakurt et al.2020; Grandi et al.2022; Yamada and Komohara2024). Therefore, IHC staining for various markers is helpful in establishing a definitive diagnosis. The negative reactivity to CD20 and weak immunoreactivity to CD3, which are markers for B and T lymphocytes, respectively, differentiated TVT from lymphomas (Gupta and Sood2012; Shokrpoor et al.2024; Laissaoui et al.2024; Karakurt et al.2020; Grandi et al.2022). Moreover, the negative staining for S‐100 protein ruled out the possibility of amelanotic melanoma (Gupta and Sood2012; Hendrick2017; Shokrpoor et al.2024; Laissaoui et al.2024; Karakurt et al.2020). CD68 is one of the most sensitive markers for monocyte/macrophage lineage and histiocytic neoplasms (Laissaoui et al.2024). Weak immunoreaction of the cells for CD68 ruled out histiocytic neoplasms, which express this marker (Yamada and Komohara2024). CKs are proteins present in the cytoplasm of all epithelial cell tumours, while vimentin is a protein found in the cytoskeleton of mesenchymal cells (Hendrick2017; Shokrpoor et al.2024; Laissaoui et al.2024; Karakurt et al.2020; Grandi et al.2022; Yamada and Komohara2024). Therefore, vimentin expression can be useful in distinguishing between epithelial and mesenchymal tumours (Hendrick2017; Karakurt et al.2020). In the present report, the neoplastic cells showed a strong positivity for vimentin and were negative for CK, indicating the non‐epithelial origin of TVT. Therefore, negative immunostaining of CK by the neoplastic cells ruled out the possibility of undifferentiated carcinomas (Gupta and Sood2012; Hendrick2017; Shokrpoor et al.2024; Laissaoui et al.2024; Karakurt et al.2020). Consistent with our findings, several earlier studies have shown that the neoplastic cells in TVTs show strong immunoreactivity to vimentin and confirmed the mesenchymal origin of TVT (Gupta and Sood2012; Park et al.2006; Shokrpoor et al.2024; Laissaoui et al.2024; Karakurt et al.2020; Grandi et al.2022; Yamada and Komohara2024; Ball and Hoddinott2024).

Canine TVTs can initially grow rapidly and then remain static for a period, eventually undergoing spontaneous regression after several months. Regression is associated with an increase in tumour‐infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), increased apoptotic tumour cells and fibrosis (Ugochukwu et al.2020). In the present case, the tumour appeared to be in a progressive growth stage, as there was minimal involvement of TILs (as indicated by weak CD3 immunoreactivity) and a high number of mitotic figures (as indicated with an intense nuclear reactivity to Ki‐67). TVTs can be classified into three phases based on the developmental stage: progression, initial regression and final regression (Kucukbekir et al.2021; Ugochukwu et al.2020). The progression phase is characterised by round cells arranged diffusely, a delicate stroma, relatively many mitotic figures with few TILs, while the stable or stationary phase comprises cells transitioning from round cells to spindle‐shaped fibroblasts with higher mitotic figures (Ugochukwu et al.2020).

We performed IHC staining of the tumour tissue sections for progression markers, including Ki‐67 and c‐Myc (Lima et al.2016). Ki‐67 is expressed in G1, S, G2, and mitosis (not G0cells) of the cell cycles. Compared to proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), Ki‐67 is superior in evaluating the proliferation index (Gupta and Sood2012; Lima et al.2016). Similar to our report, nuclear immunostaining of Ki‐67 has been previously reported in canine TVTs (Gupta and Sood2012; Lima et al.2016). Although c‐Myc is involved in cell proliferation, its aberrant expression has been reported to cause apoptosis and regulate cell growth. In the present report, moderate immunoreactivity of c‐Myc was detected. P53, a crucial tumour suppressor gene with a short half‐life of about 20 min, plays a key role in controlling cell growth and apoptosis. Similar to the study performed by Gupta and Sood (2012), we reported a weak reactivity to p53, probably due to its low levels within the cells and tissue p53 mutations reported in TVT cases (Gupta and Sood2012). The results obtained from the IHC staining for proliferation markers could confirm the above‐mentioned histopathological features of the tumour in the progressive growth phase.

To diagnose canine TVTs, a cytological exam has been suggested. Numerous studies have employed this method to diagnose TVTs, categorising neoplastic cells morphologically as lymphocytic, plasmacytic or mixed types (Amaral et al.2004; Amaral et al.2007; Greatti et al.2004; Fonseca et al.2012). Although a cytological exam was impossible due to the dog's death before the examination, microscopic analysis of the H&E‐stained tumour sections revealed a mostly lymphocytic pattern in the neoplastic cells. Nonetheless, histopathology and immunocytochemistry indicated the tumour cells were neither B nor T lymphocytes; only a small number of T‐lymphocytes infiltrated the tumour. Reports indicate plasmacytic TVT is more common in southeastern Brazil (Amaral et al.2004), while the southern region shows a predominance of lymphocytic TVT (Amaral et al.2007). Previous research has indicated plasmacytic TVTs exhibit larger nucleoli, intense Ki‐67 immunoreactivity, higher metastasis rates and greater aggressiveness compared to lymphocytic TVTs (Amaral et al.2004; Amaral et al.2007; Greatti et al.2004; Fonseca et al.2012). Furthermore, the plasmocytic pattern has shown significantly lower sensitivity to chemotherapy than lymphocytic or mixed patterns (Amaral et al.2004; Amaral et al.2007; Greatti et al.2004; Fonseca et al.2012). However, the intense Ki‐67 and moderate c‐Myc immunoreactivity with the presence of tumour cells in the blood vessels, may suggest aggressive behaviour of the tumour in our study.

Amaral et al. (2007) found that the lymphocytic type occurred in 82.76% of genital tumours, compared to 62.65% for the plasmacytic type. In contrast to 41% of the plasmacytic type, only 10.3% of the lymphocytic type showed non‐primary masses. They showed that genital masses showed more lymphocytic cells than extragenital and primary masses, while plasmacytic cells were more common in non‐primary and extragenital tumours, indicating higher malignancy (Amaral et al.2007). Gross examination showed no regional lymph node involvement or distant metastasis in the present case report.

TVTs can arise from extragenital sites such as the nasal cavity, subcutaneous tissue, oral cavity, pharynx, rectum, abdominal cavity, uterine and conjunctival mucosa (Milo and Snead2014; Park et al.2006; Nazer et al.2023; Ugochukwu et al.2020; Ferreira et al.2000; Chikweto et al.2013; Bendas et al.2022) For instance, Champour et al. (2015) reported a diffuse cutaneous TVT in the progressive phase in the ear pinna, limbs, flank, abdomen, groin and interdigital regions of a castrated male terrier dog. In the literature, small numbers of TVT cases have been reported in the mammary glands (Gupta and Sood2012; Park et al.2006; Alkan et al.2017; Nazer et al.2023; Horta et al.2014; Nogueira et al.2020). Tumour transfer to the mammary glands could have occurred by touching the mammary lobes close to the vulva/vagina during animal mating. If such a situation occurs, the vagina/vulva might have undergone regression. Alternatively, considering the absence of external ulcerating lesions, the hematogenous or lymphatic route of transmission may be a probable cause. In rare cases, TVTs can spread to different organs, including the lungs, ovaries, uterus, liver, spleen, peritoneum, brain, eye, nasal cavity and mammary glands, possibly through the bloodstream or lymphatic system (Alkan et al.2017; Günay Ucmak et al.2019; Ugochukwu et al.2020; Chikweto et al.2013; Ganguly et al.2016). Laporte et al. (2016) described a case of TVT in a young (8‐month‐old) female dog with metastasis to the skin and gingiva. In the present report, some neoplastic cells were seen in the blood vessels, which were suspected to be the cause of the transmission and dissemination of the tumour between the mammary lobes.

It is important to note that TVTs can develop even in acyclic female dogs, and the risk of disseminated metastases should be considered (Laporte et al.2016). If the TVT masses do not regress over a prolonged period, it may indicate severe immunosuppression in the female dog (Park et al.2006). Likewise, the dog in the present report was in an emaciated condition, and the tumour was in the progressing growth phase.

This case report has some limitations. First, no cytological exam was performed because the dog died and was sent to the Pathology Department for an educational necropsy. Second, imaging tests like radiography and CT scans were not done because the dog died before the examination. This case, however, underwent histopathological and IHC examinations to confirm canine TVT.

In conclusion, analysing the expression of tumour markers through immunohistochemistry in paraffin‐embedded tissue samples is an important supplementary tool for distinguishing TVTs from other round‐cell tumours. This technique helps routine histopathological examination determine the origin of the tumour. The findings of this report highlight the importance of considering TVT as a potential differential diagnosis for extragenital masses and mammary tumours in dogs, particularly in regions where TVT is common. Neutering affected dogs may be a beneficial approach to eradicate this contagious tumour.