Multiple wasp stings that induce acute kidney injury (AKI) pose a significant threat to human health. This review focuses on the roles and mechanisms of inflammation in wasp sting-induced AKI. Relevant clinical studies, although limited in scope, have reported elevated levels of various inflammatory mediators in patients. These increased inflammatory mediators serve as indicators of inflammation and are potential predictors of wasp sting-induced AKI. However, clinical research is impeded by factors such as inconsistent patient baselines and lack of standardization for the use of wasp venom. To further explore the mechanisms, animal and cellular models have been developed to mimic the clinical manifestations. Basic studies have confirmed that inflammation plays a crucial role in such injuries. Importantly, mitochondrial DNA release and the cyclic GMP-AMP synthase-stimulator of interferon genes (STING) signaling axis have been identified as key regulators of the inflammatory response in wasp sting-induced AKI. These studies on inflammation present potential targets for therapeutic interventions, and plasma exchange has been proven effective. Overall, this review provides in-depth insights into the mechanisms and basis of therapeutic strategies for the treatment of wasp sting-induced AKI pathogenesis.

Multiple wasp stings are a serious problem in the remote mountains of East, South, and Southeast Asia, and pose a significant threat to human health [1,2]. Wasp populations are rising due to global climate change, with reports of stings now emerging in America and Europe [3,4]. The wasp venom contains a wide variety of biologically active constituents, including proteins (antigen 5), enzymes (hyaluronidase and phospholipase A), bioactive peptides (mastoparan and wasp kinin), and amines (histamine) [5]. As a highly vascularized and excretory organ, the kidney is susceptible to the detrimental effects of wasp venom and/or pathogenic factors secondary to the wasp sting. Mastoparan and phospholipase A in wasp venom not only directly act on renal tubule epithelial cell membranes and cause renal damage, but also contribute to the rhabdomyolysis by attacking the muscle cell membrane and disrupting its integrity [5,6]. The roles of wasp venom in kidney injury have already been elaborated in our previous review [2] and are not within the scope of this article. The earliest clinical study on wasp stings by Xie et al. demonstrated that acute kidney injury (AKI) was a prominent clinical manifestation of wasp stings [7]. Subsequent studies reported that the incidence of AKI after wasp stings was 30–50% [2]. Further studies have indicated that AKI is an independent risk factor for death in patients stung by wasps [7,8]. A few clinical studies have indicated that acute tubular necrosis is a typical pathological manifestation in patients with wasp sting-induced AKI [8]. A small number of patients have acute interstitial nephritis as pathological changes in kidney due to anaphylactic response [2]. In recent years, more attention has been focused on AKI caused by wasp stings, and related studies are rapidly increasing, ranging from clinical retrospective studies and case reports on clinical manifestations to basic research (animal and cellular experiments) on pathogenesis. The pathogenesis of AKI induced by wasp stings is currently being explored further.

Previous clinical and basic research studies have identified that mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) released into the cytosol, which activates the cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS)-stimulator of interferon genes (STING) signaling pathway-mediated inflammatory response, is an important pathophysiological process of AKI and plays a crucial role in the progression of various types of AKI, including ischemia/reperfusion injury-induced, septic, and cisplatin-induced AKI [9–13]. Furthermore, growing evidence from animal studies and clinical experience has demonstrated that inflammation is closely related to the occurrence and development of wasp sting-induced AKI. However, the role of released mtDNA and the cGAS-STING signaling pathway in wasp sting-induced AKI has recently been unveiled in 2023 [14]. These studies improve our understanding of the pathophysiological mechanisms of AKI induced by wasp stings and provide new therapeutic interventions. Therefore, the aim of this review was to summarize recent advances related to inflammatory responses and to provide a new perspective on the mechanisms of wasp sting-induced AKI.

Wasp stings mainly occur in rural areas of developing countries with relatively weak healthcare systems. Therefore, most clinical publications on wasp stings and inflammatory mediators are case reports or small retrospective studies with a limited number of patients. Table1summarizes clinical studies related to wasp stings and inflammatory mediators. This summary does not include case reports or very small case series (studies that enrolled fewer than 10 patients). Xie et al. and Zhang et al. began studying the relationship between wasp stings and inflammatory mediators about a decade ago [7,15]. Both studies found the level of serum inflammatory mediators (Interleukin-6, IL6, leukocytes and neutrophils) were elevated in patients stung by wasps, indicating the involvement of inflammatory mediators in organ damage after wasp sting [7,15]. Several important findings have been reported by studies listed in Table1. The blood leukocyte count was investigated by most wasp sting-related clinical studies, and elevated leukocyte counts were used as markers to reflect the degree of inflammation after the wasp sting. This is primarily because most patients stung by wasps undergo routine blood tests upon hospital admission, and blood leukocyte counts were included in those tests. In addition to blood leukocytes, we and other researchers have reported that other inflammatory mediators in blood and/or urine such as neutrophils, C-reactive protein (CRP), IL-1, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-17, Interferon-γ (IFN-γ), procalcitonin (PCT), and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) were elevated in patients stung by wasps [7,8,15–29]. Moreover, the systemic inflammatory response index (SIRI) was found to be raised in patients stung by wasps [29]. These results indicate that systemic inflammation is prevalent in patients stung by wasps.

Because the kidney is one of the main target organs of wasp venom, nearly half of the wasp sting-related clinical studies in Table1evaluated the levels of inflammatory mediators in patients with wasp sting-induced AKI. Blood leukocytes are also the most commonly examined inflammatory mediators, for the same reasons as those discussed above. These clinical studies indicated that wasp-sting patients who developed AKI had higher levels of blood inflammatory mediators, including leukocytes, CRP, IL-1β, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL-17, IFN-γ, PTC, TNF-α, and urinary monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), compared to those without AKI. These results suggest a close association between inflammation and the development of wasp sting-induced AKI. These studies also found the presence of SIRI and high levels of blood leukocytes, PCT, and urinary MCP-1 at admission were independent risk factors for wasp sting-induced AKI. As serum creatinine may not reflect tubular injury and have imperfect sensitivity in diagnosis of AKI [30], these inflammatory mediators may serve as early predictors of wasp sting-induced AKI [8,28,31]. In addition, Ou et al. conducted ribonucleic acid sequencing of the blood of two wasp-sting patients with AKI and reported highly expressed pro-inflammatory responses, including the activation of leukocytes and neutrophilic degranulation [32]. Taken together, levels of inflammatory mediators are generally high in patients with wasp sting-induced AKI, and inflammatory responses are not only involved in the development of AKI after wasp sting, but can also be used as predictors for wasp sting-induced AKI. The inflammatory response can be considered a breakthrough in the study of AKI caused by wasp stings. This inflammatory storm leads to a hyperinflammatory response, which contributes to AKI [33]. Therefore, it is important to reduce the excessive release of inflammatory mediators and restore immune homeostasis in patients with wasp sting-induced AKI. Nevertheless, there are several limitations to current clinical studies; the specific reasons are listed as Table2. For those reasons, these clinical studies have poor comparability, making it difficult to investigate the specific mechanism of inflammatory responses in AKI after a wasp sting. A large-scale, international, multicenter prospective study and related clinical database are crucial for future clinical studies. Non-invasive biomarkers such as liquid biopsy may be used as complementary diagnostic tools instead of renal biopsy. For example, urinary kidney injury molecule-1, tissue inhibitor metalloproteinase-2 * insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 7 were Food and Drug Administration approved as biomarkers to detect tubular injury [34] and may have potential to assess renal injury in patients with wasp sting-induced AKI. However, further basic research is required to clarify these potential mechanisms.

Basic research also provides insights into clinical issues. To further investigate the pathogenesis of the inflammatory response, we successfully established an animal model in 2022 that mimicked the clinical manifestations of AKI induced by multiple wasp sting [40]. This animal model not only exhibited impaired renal function (manifested by increased serum creatinine and urea nitrogen levels) but also led to the development of rhabdomyolysis (presented as an increase in creatine kinase and myoglobin levels) [40]. The typical renal pathological change in an animal model of wasp sting-induced AKI was acute tubular necrosis [40], immunohistochemistry confirmed that myoglobin was deposited in the lumen of renal tubules [41], which are consistent with the observations of other previous studies on renal biopsy specimens collected from the patients with wasp sting-induced AKI [42,43]. These results indicate that the pathological features observed in patients with wasp sting-induced AKI can be reliably reproduced in our animal models. The successful establishment of this animal model laid the foundation for further investigation into the inflammatory response mechanism during wasp sting-induced AKI. Using the animal model, we conducted transcriptomic analyses and found that the levels of inflammatory mediators, such as IL-1β, IL-6, MCP-1, were significantly increased in the kidneys [44]. Pathway analysis revealed that the inflammatory response pathway was the most significantly enriched pathway in wasp sting-induced AKI [44]. These findings demonstrate that inflammation plays an important role in the pathogenesis of AKI induced by the wasp sting in animal model, which is consistent with the results of a previous clinical study.

In addition, another wasp sting-induced AKI animal model was successfully established in 2023 by directly injecting PLA2 (a main component of wasp venom) into mice via the tail vein [45]. Through this PLA2-injected animal model, Tang et al. found that the expression levels of inflammatory and downstream inflammatory mediators, including IL-6 and TNF-α, were upregulated [45]. Furthermore, our group found that the PLA2 inhibitor, varespladib, significantly improved pathological changes in renal tissues and alleviated inflammation in a wasp sting-induced AKI animal model [44], suggesting that the inflammatory response could be triggered by PLA2. Both studies suggest that PLA2, a component of wasp venom, may be a key initiating factor that promoted kidney inflammation under stimulation of wasp stings. However, the relationship between wasp venom and inflammatory mediators requires further investigation.

HK2 cells, which are human proximal tubular epithelial cells immortalized by their transduction with human papilloma virus 16 E6/E7 genes [46], were treated with myoglobin to establish a wasp sting-induced AKI cellular model [14,47,48]. Renal proximal tubular cells were selected for the following reasons: in both clinical studies and animal experiments, the renal tubule, particularly the proximal tubule, was the main damaged part in wasp sting-induced AKI, which primarily manifests as acute tubular necrosis, a bare basement membrane and eosinophilic hyaline casts [40,49]. No significant impairment of the glomerulus, distal tubules, or collecting duct was observed (in either humans or experimental animal models). Therefore, proximal tubular epithelial cells were selected as in vitro model for further studies. HK2 cells respond in an identical manner as primary cultures of human proximal tubular cells, making them a good model for studying proximal tubular cell biology [46]. Therefore, HK2 cells were used to establish an in vitro wasp sting-induced AKI model to further elucidate the pathogenesis of AKI inflammation.

Our metabolomic and proteomic analyses indicated that markers of rhabdomyolysis, including carbonic anhydrase 3, myosin light chain 3, and LDH, were increased in patients with wasp sting-induced AKI compared to those without AKI [50]. These rhabdomyolysis markers were integrated into a regulatory network with the phospholipid metabolism products in the wasp sting-induced AKI group. Hence, rhabdomyolysis has been reported to play a key role in the physiological and pathological processes of AKI caused by wasp sting [50]. Previous research also indicated that wasp sting-induced AKI is more closely related to rhabdomyolysis compared with snakebite-induced AKI [51]. Moreover, our recent animal study showed that myoglobin is one of the most upregulated genes in wasp sting-induced AKI [52]. The length of wasp stinger (2.67 ± 0.38 mm) is similar to the thickness of human skin (2–2.5 mm) [53,54], making wasp sting similar to a subcutaneous injection in clinical settings. Moreover, wasp venom is more likely to act directly on muscle rather than blood. In addition, no commercial wasp venom antibodies suitable for immunofluorescent staining or western blotting are available, thus limiting the quantity of wasp venom that can directly act on renal tubular epithelial cells. However, myoglobin deposition in renal tubular epithelial cells has been directly observed via immunohistochemistry of kidney sections in human renal biopsy tissue and animal models [41,55], and blocking the myoglobin reabsorption receptor could mitigate kidney injury caused by wasp stings [41]. Collectively, we provide evidence that myoglobin, rather than wasp venom, plays a major role in wasp sting-induced AKI. Additionally, wasp venom is a complex mixture of various components [5]. As wasp venom components are too numerous and complex to control their effect on HK2 cells, there are no commercially available ingredients for wasp venom, such as PLA2 (currently only commercially available is PLA2 from bee venom, which is dissimilar to the PLA2 from wasp venom). Therefore, myoglobin, rather than wasp venom, was selected to culture HK2 cells as an in vitro model of AKI induced by wasp stings for subsequent studies. We also recommend using “wasp sting-induced AKI” instead of “wasp venom-induced AKI” to better reflect the diseases with multiple mechanisms involved in pathogenesis. Purifying the exact fraction and antibody of wasp venom will provide a tool to reveal the direct injury of renal tubular effects.

A previous study suggested that mitochondria are the primary target of rhabdomyolysis in renal tubular cells and that myoglobin can cause mitochondrial dysfunction and damage in renal tubular cells [56,57]. In the kidneys of wasp-sting AKI model, mitochondria exhibited abnormal morphology (mitochondrial fragmentation, swelling, blurry mitochondrial cristae, and decreased TOM 20 on mitochondrial outer membrane), reduced mitochondrial membrane potential, and decreased ATP levels (indicative of mitochondrial dysfunction) [47,48]. In addition, mitochondrial reactive oxygen species levels increased in the renal cortex, and the expression of renal mitochondrial genes decreased in the wasp sting-induced AKI model [14,47,48,58]. These results indicated severe renal mitochondrial impairment in wasp sting-induced AKI.

mtDNA is a circular, double-stranded DNA molecule. Under normal conditions, mtDNA directly binds to mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) to maintain stability and ensure that mtDNA resides exclusively within the mitochondrial matrix [59]. When the kidneys are exacerbated by adverse external factors, a reduction in membrane potential and/or damage to mitochondrial membrane integrity results in mtDNA fragmentation and causes the release of mtDNA into the cytosol [60,61]. During several types of AKI (renal ischemia/reperfusion injury, sepsis, and nephrotoxins-induced AKI), mitochondrial impairment reportedly causes the mtDNA to release from the mitochondrial matrix, facilitating renal inflammation and the development and progression of AKI [12,62].

In our previous research, we observed augmented expression of mtDNA in urine and/or reduced mtDNA levels in renal tissue among mouse models and patients [14,47,48], suggesting that mtDNA escapes from the mitochondria during wasp sting-induced AKI. We further explored the definite mechanism by which mtDNA is released from mitochondria into the cytosol during wasp sting-induced AKI [47,48]. The opening of B-cell lymphoma 2 (BCL2)-associated X (BAX) pores is critical for the escape of mtDNA from mitochondria [63,64]. In healthy cells, BAX is retained in its inactive form in the cytoplasm. Upon apoptotic stimulation, BAX translocates from the cytosol to the outer membrane of mitochondria where it oligomerizes to form BAX pores. These pores enhance the mitochondrial membrane permeability and induce herniation of the inner mitochondrial membrane. This process facilitates the escaping of mtDNA into the cytosol, ultimately activating downstream inflammatory responses [65,66]. In our recent study of wasp sting-induced AKI, we observed BAX translocation and pore opening. Inhibition of BAX pore opening in wasp sting-induced AKI could prevent mtDNA release and renal injury [47]. Except for mtDNA, cytochrome c, an intermediate of apoptosis, was also released into cytoplasm after opening of BAX pores in a wasp sting-induced AKI model [47]. Apart from BAX pores, mPTP pores also play a role in cisplatin induced AKI [67]. However, whether mPTP pores play a role in the release of mtDNA during wasp sting-induced AKI is less well-established.

Mitochondrial fission has been identified as an upstream signal for BAX pore opening [68]. Dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1) is the core protein involved in mitochondrial fission, and high-level expression of DRP1 is a marker of excessive mitochondrial fission [69]. In our study on wasp sting-induced AKI, increased expression of DRP1 was observed in the kidney, suggesting that mitochondrial fission was aggravated during wasp sting-induced AKI [48]. Prior research has demonstrated that the inhibition of DRP1 can significantly improve the process of diabetic nephropathy, ischemia/reperfusion injury-induced AKI, and renal fibrosis, suggesting that DRP1 may serve as a therapeutic target [70–72]. In addition, decreased expression of TFAM in a wasp sting-induced AKI model was observed in our previous study [58], indicating decreased mtDNA stability. With the exception of DRP1 activation, decreased TFAM expression may also contribute to mtDNA release from mitochondria. However, the expression of TFAM was unchanged in cisplatin-induced AKI; the specific mechanism about this contradictory finding remains unclear and warrants further study [9].

Many studies have suggested that mtDNA escapes into the cytosol and induces inflammation through the cGAS-STING signaling pathway [73]. cGAS-STING signaling plays a critical role in kidney inflammation in various types of AKI [12,62]. Our recent study found increased cGAS and STING expression in the kidneys and HK2 cells using a wasp sting-induced AKI model, suggesting cGAS-STING signaling activation during wasp sting-induced AKI. Knockdown or knockout of STING ameliorated inflammation by decreasing inflammatory mediators IFN-α, IFN-β, IL-6 and MCP-1 expression and macrophage infiltration in the kidneys. Moreover, knockdown or knockout of STING attenuated wasp sting-induced renal injury (improved renal pathology and reduced serum creatinine levels) and programmed cell death of renal tubular epithelial cells both in vivo and in vitro [14]. These data demonstrated that expelled mtDNA into the cytosol activated the cGAS-STING signaling pathway and initiated ensuing inflammation in wasp sting induced-AKI [9,11,14]. Considering the well-established role of rhabdomyolysis in wasp sting-induced AKI, it is plausible that a substantial amount of circulating mtDNA originates from damaged skeletal muscle cells. A previous study suggested that circulating mtDNA (mtDNA in blood or urine) could also stimulate the cGAS-STING signaling pathway to mediate AKI [23]. Whether the transfer of circulating mtDNA to renal tubular cells triggers cGAS-STING pathway-mediated inflammation in kidney remains unknown, but they may be associated with the aid of mtDNA-enriched extracellular vesicles [74].

Recent studies have shown that STING activates TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1)- and NOD-like receptor protein 3 (NLRP3)-mediated inflammation in wasp sting-induced AKI [14,75]. STING-TBK1-IRF3/P65 signaling axis can be activated by the mtDNA leaking into the cytosol, and then can mediate the recruitment of macrophages, increase inflammatory mediators (IFN-α, IFN-β, IL-6, MCP-1), and activate necroptosis and apoptosis of renal tubular epithelial cells in AKI associated with wasp sting. Notably, Knockout or suppression of STING inhibits the downstream TBK1-IRF3/P65 signaling axis and the expression of inflammatory mediators, consequently ameliorating wasp sting-induced renal injury, inflammation, and programmed cell death [14]. On the other hand, STING plays a crucial role in activating NLRP3-caspase 1 mediated inflammation [75]. A recent study on STING-knockout mice showed decreased expression of NLRP3 after AKI induced by wasp stings, which further supports the idea that NLRP3 is controlled by STING in wasp sting-induced AKI [20,75]. Treatment with an NLRP3 inhibitor reversed the renal damage induced by wasp stings and attenuated pathological injury, pyroptosis related inflammatory mediators (IL-1β and IL-18), and pyroptosis [76]. Because NLRP3 and caspase 1 were also components of PANoptosome, and STING plays a role in the regulation of PANoptosis [77–79], PANoptosis may occur in wasp sting-induced AKI; however, it needs further research. In brief, the final effect of mtDNA-cGAS-STING-mediated inflammation in wasp sting-induced AKI was induced as renal tubular cell apoptosis, necroptosis, pyroptosis, and probably PANoptosis.

In conclusion, the mechanism by which the mtDNA-cGAS-STING-TBK1/NLRP3 signaling axis regulates the AKI inflammatory response after wasp sting runs roughly as follows (Fig.1): upon receiving the wasp sting, mitochondrial fission is increased and the stability of mtDNA decreases; BAX undergoes conformational changes and translocates from the cytoplasm to the outer mitochondrial membrane to form BAX pores in that membrane, allowing mtDNA to escape from the mitochondria and release into the cytoplasm. Cytoplasmic mtDNA is then recognized by cGAS, increasing the expression of inflammatory mediators through the STING–TBK1/NLRP3 signaling axis, which in turn promotes AKI progression.

Research on relevant inflammatory signaling pathways and mediators is needed to identify new therapeutic treatments, such as CytoSorb, plasma exchange, cGAS-STING-targeting drugs, and glucocorticoids, to inhibit inflammation. CytoSorb was designed to remove circulating inflammatory mediators by hemoadsorption and may theoretically be used to treat AKI induced by wasp stings. However, its high cost, uncertain clinical efficacy, unclear optimal timing to start treatment, lack of mortality benefit, and lack of market approval in some countries, including China, restrict CytoSorb use. Plasma exchange has been used to treat wasp sting-induced AKI since 1988, and its therapeutic effects have been proven. Plasma exchange could result in a more rapid and better recovery of kidney function in wasp-sting patients with AKI and decrease the mortality rate of patients severely stung by the wasps compared to those who do not undergo plasma exchange [15,39,80]. This is mainly because myoglobin, most wasp venom, and inflammatory mediators are large-molecular-weight molecules that cannot be cleared through dialysis or hemofiltration. However, these large-molecular-weight pathogenic molecules can be removed by plasma exchange. Our and other previous studies have confirmed that plasma exchange can reduce the levels of inflammatory mediators and myoglobin in patients with wasp sting-induced AKI [15,16]. Thus, plasma exchange represents a potentially effective therapeutic option for wasp sting-induced AKI. However, plasma exchange induces hypersensitivity, causes infection, and requires special equipment and plasma. Therefore, the application of specific therapeutic drugs for wasp sting-induced AKI is of great importance in clinical practice. cGAS-STING-targeting drugs have reached the point of clinical experimentation in cancer immunotherapy including solid tumors, lymphoma, and head and neck cancer [81,82]. These targeting drugs of cGAS-STING are expected to be used as a potential strategy for the treatment of wasp sting-induced AKI. The main side effect of cGAS-STING-targeting drugs is increased risk of infections, considering the crucial role of STING in fighting against pathogens and infections. Some components in wasp venom (PLA, hyaluronidase, and antigen 5) could induce type I or type III hypersensitivity reactions [2,4]. Glucocorticoids have anti-allergic effects, thus providing a theoretical basis for their application in the treatment of wasp-sting patients. Since 1983, systemic glucocorticoids have been used to treat wasp sting-induced anaphylaxis [83] and are still widely used today [84]. Glucocorticoids exert anti-inflammatory and anti-allergic effects. However, the therapeutic effect of glucocorticoids on acute interstitial nephritis lacks clear evidence from large-scale randomized controlled trials and lack of standardized treatment regimens. Glucocorticoids may increase the risk of peptic ulcers, gastrointestinal bleeding, and infections. It is uncertain whether glucocorticoids are effective in treating wasp sting-induced AKI through the regulation of inflammation. Therefore, the use of glucocorticoids to treat wasp sting-induced AKI needs be explored further.

This review summarizes the inflammatory responses related to AKI after wasp stings reported in recent years and further improves our understanding of the pathophysiological mechanism of wasp sting-induced AKI. This study aimed to suggest novel therapeutic interventions for AKI associated with wasp stings to reduce mortality. The mtDNA-cGAS-STING inflammatory signaling pathway is a novel avenue for further investigation of the pathogenesis of AKI caused by wasp stings. This inflammatory signaling pathway may be therapeutic and has potential clinical translational value in wasp sting-induced AKI.