Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a highly morbid malignancy that is a leading cause of death in patients with cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis B. Liver transplantation is considered a curative therapy for HCC, with 5-year survival rates exceeding 75%. Current allocation policy in the US restricts transplant to patients with early HCC, and priority for transplant is granted after 6 months on the waitlist, thus patients often require therapies for cancer control while awaiting liver transplantation. The most commonly applied therapies for HCC in patients awaiting liver transplantation are locoregional therapies, including ablative, radiation, and arterial based therapies. Using these therapies patient can be effectively bridged or downstaged to liver transplantation, however there are risks of progressive liver decompensation with locoregional therapies in patients with portal hypertension. There are emerging data for the use of immune checkpoint inhibitor-based immunotherapies in the treatment of HCC. While there has been concern for rejection with the administration of immunotherapy prior to liver transplantation, early data suggest that the risk can be minimized with sufficient washout time prior to liver transplantation. Herein we aim to review management strategies for patients with HCC awaiting liver transplantation.

Primary liver cancer is one of the major indications for considering liver transplantation. In this review, we outline the patients who can be selected for liver transplant and strategies to effectively keep patients on the waitlist while they are awaiting a liver transplant.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the 4thleading cause of cancer death worldwide and a major cause of mortality in patients with compensated cirrhosis [1]. Approximately 80–90% of patients with HCC have underlying cirrhosis or chronic liver disease from hepatitis B, which are the main risk factors for HCC development and can serve as a competing risk of mortality in these patients [2,3]. The prognosis for HCC patients is closely linked to the stage at diagnosis, which incorporates tumor burden, functional status, and liver function, as outlined in the Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) staging system [4]. Five-year survival in patients with early-stage disease can be as high as 70%, whereas it is less than 20% in patients with late-stage disease [4]. The high survival in early-stage HCC is largely due to eligibility for potentially curative therapies, including surgical resection, thermal ablation, and liver transplantation (LT). While surgical and ablative therapies can be effective in local tumor control, LT offers the added benefit of removal of the diseased liver, decreasing the risk of HCC recurrence and morbidity and mortality from underlying chronic liver disease [5]. LT has been traditionally offered for early-stage HCC; however, recent advances in locoregional (LRT) and systemic therapies have allowed patients with more advanced HCC to undergo LT [6–8]. Current rules for LT in patients with HCC in the United States require a 6 month waiting period on the waiting list prior to patients being granted a model of end-stage liver disease (MELD) exception score, therefore, waitlist management of HCC to maintain patients within transplant criteria, is also essential and has become increasingly complex [9].

This review aims to summarize current principles in patient selection for LT in HCC, focusing on the latest developments for downstaging, bridging therapies, and waitlist management.

Determination of LT candidacy for patients with HCC is largely designed to minimize the risk of post-LT HCC recurrence while also maintaining access to transplantation. Multiple selection criteria based on tumor burden have been proposed for LT eligibility (Table 1).

Examples of hepatocellular carcinoma transplant criteria. UCSF: University of California san francisco; AFP: alpha fetoprotein; UNOS-DS: United network of organ Sharing-Down staging.

The Milan Criteria (MC) have been the most widely used and validated criteria for selecting patients for LT. MC criteria include a patient with one tumor ≥2 cm or ≤5 cm in diameter, or up to 3 tumors ≥1 or≤3 cm in diameter, without evidence of vascular invasion or extrahepatic disease [10]. In the original study defining the MC, 4-year post-transplant survival and recurrence-free survival was 75% and 83% respectively, with these outcomes subsequently validated in thousands of patients undergoing LT [6].

However, due to the restrictive nature of MC, numerous alternative criteria have been proposed to expand the number of patients that would be eligible for LT. Alternative criteria generally expand the tumor burden for LT or incorporate markers of tumor biology, such as serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) or tumor biopsy findings. One such set of criteria, the University of California San Francisco (UCSF) criteria expands tumor burden limits for LT, and includes patients that have 1 tumor less than 6.5 cm or up to three tumors less than 4.5 cm in size, a total tumor diameter of < = 8 cm, no vascular invasion, and no extrahepatic metastasis [11]. An example of the integration of tumor biology into selection is the extended Toronto criteria [12]. Patients are considered for LT regardless of tumor size or number, provided they do not have any extrahepatic disease or macrovascular invasion, and a biopsy of the dominant lesion shows no evidence of poordifferentiation. Patients transplanted under these criteria had a 5-year survival rate of 68%, which, although acceptable, was lower than seen in patients within MC (76%). AFP levels also play a role in patient selection, as AFP values correlate with risk of microvascular invasion and post-LT recurrence [13,14]. Current Organ Procurement and Transplantation Network (OPTN) guidelines exclude patients with AFP levels > 1000 ng/mL or >500 ng/mL if the value was previously >1000 ng/mL [15]. Novel biomarkers have been tested in HCC, with a single center study showing the AFP-L3 and des-gamma-carboxy prothrombin (DCP) can provide additional benefit over AFP alone in prognosticating waitlist dropout due to HCC progression and post-LT HCC recurrence. These data are promising, but require larger scale validation prior to being integrated into transplant selection criteria [16,17].

Given the current waitlist dynamics in many centers worldwide and the widespread availability of locoregional therapies for HCC treatment, there remains a question of whether patients with extended criteria should be routinely downstaged to within MC while on the waiting list, as tumor response to LRT is a strong predictor of recurrence-free survival after LT [18]. However, locoregional therapies may compromise liver function and potentially increase the risk of waitlist dropout [19]. Consideration of LT in patients with extended criteria HCC should likely be limited to situations where safe downstaging with locoregional therapy is not feasible due to compromised liver function.

Therefore, despite the evidence suggesting acceptable outcomes with expanded criteria, patients with HCC in the US are only eligible for a MELD exception for LT if they are within MC. When patients present beyond MC, they can be downstaged to within MC using locoregional or systemic therapy. Standardized downstaging criteria, called the UNOS-DS criteria, mirror the UCSF criteria. Patient meeting these criteria can receive a standard MELD exception once they are downstaged to MC, whereas downstaged patients who initially present beyond UNOS-DS criteria can be granted exceptions on a case-by-case basis after review by the UNOS National Review Board [8,20]. Downstaging patients to within MC using locoregional therapies is successful in over 80% of patients [8]. Rates of post-LT HCC recurrence and graft survival have been shown to be equivalent between patients transplanted within MC and UNOS-DS criteria [7]. Patients meeting these criteria have a 3-year survival and recurrence rates of 83.1% and 7.9%, respectively [7]. Patients with more advanced tumor burden but without extrahepatic disease can also be downstaged; however, this is often less successful with downstaging rates of 69%. Notably these patients had similar post-LT outcomes to those who met UNOS-DS criteria [7,21]. The XXL trial randomized 45 patients beyond MC to LT vs usual care. Patients who underwent LT after downstaging had significantly improved 5-year overall survival compared to those who did not undergo LT (77.5% vs 31.2%;p= 0.035) [22]. Algorithms for waitlist management based on initial tumor burden are outlined inFigure 1a–c.

Flow chart for management of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma prior to liver transplantation, a) within Milan criteria; b) beyond Milan criteria but beyond UNOS-DS criteria; c) beyond UNOS-DS criteria without extrahepatic disease. HCC – hepatocellular carcinoma; UNOS- United Network of Organ Sharing; DS: Downstaging; LRT: locoregional therapy; MELD: Model of end stage liver disease.

In addition to oncologic management, patients with HCC typically have underlying chronic liver disease or cirrhosis, and effective management of cirrhosis and its complications is essential to maintaining waitlist eligibility. This includes providing adequate nutritional counseling and physical therapy to prevent frailty and sarcopenia, which can lead to waitlist dropout [3,23,24].

Bridging or downstaging patients with HCC for LT can be achieved through a variety of modalities, including locoregional therapies (thermal ablation, transarterial therapies, and external radiation) and systemic therapies, or a multimodal approach [25]. All decisions regarding bridging and downstaging should be made in the setting of a multidisciplinary liver tumor board, which has been shown to improve patient outcomes [26]. The goals of bridging are to prevent disease progression while awaiting LT and to serve as a test of tumor biology. Response to therapy is a proxy for reduced risk of waitlist dropout, improved pathological response on explant, and decreased risk of recurrence after LT [27,28]. Factors associated with the risk of transplant waitlist dropout include: larger tumor size, number of tumors, lack of complete response after locoregional therapy, and AFP > 20 ng/ml post-treatment [29]. Notably, the benefits of bridging therapies for patients listed within MC have not been evaluated prospectively. The Recent data suggest that bridging therapies may not provide a survival benefit or result in a reduction in post-LT recurrence for patients listed for LT with HCC [30]. On the other hand, several studies have shown that complete pathological necrosis prior to LT with LRTs can lead to improvements in post-LT outcomes [31]. Biases in the existing literature limit any conclusions as to the benefits of bridging therapy prior to LT.

TACE involves embolizing the hepatic artery branch supplying the tumor(s) while delivering local chemotherapy, typically doxorubicin or irinotecan, into the tumor vasculature. TACE can be performed with lipiodol (conventional TACE) or with drug eluting beads (DEB-TACE) and can be administered in a lobar or super-selective manner. Data suggest a selective approach yields the highest rates of tumor control [33,34]. The most common complication of TACE is post-embolization syndrome - a constellation of symptoms including: fever, fatigue, abdominal pain, and leukocytosis, largely resulting from tumor necrosis. Less common complications include: liver infarcts, ischemic biliopathy, cholecystitis, systemic embolism, and liver failure [34].

TACE may not benefit patients with bilobar multifocal disease, macrovascular invasion, tumors involving >50% of the liver parenchyma, AFP levels >400 ng/mL, or decompensated cirrhosis [35]. While TACE can be administered repeatedly, the need for more than three treatments is considered TACE-refractoriness, typically reflecting poor tumor biology. Repeated TACE increases the risk of hepatic decompensation and liver-related mortality [36,37].

Several studies have shown that TACE is an effective means of keeping patients within Milan criteria while awaiting LT, with the caveat that TACE can lead to worsening hepatic decompensation and dropout in a small percentage of patients [38,39]. Pre-LT TACE has not been associated with increased risk of artierial complication in the post-LT setting, despite its embolic nature [40]. TACE has also been shown to be effective in downstaging patients who are outside of MC, with equivalent results to transarterial radioembolization in achieving downstaging [7].

From 2003 to 2018 in the United States (US), transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) was the most frequently applied therapy, however, recent trends have shown that transarterial radioembolization (TARE) has become the most common means of bridging or downstaging patients [32].

TARE involves targeted delivery of microspheres loaded with a radioactive Yttrium-90 with the goal of delivering high dose radiation to the tumor bed. Depending on tumor burden, TARE is typically administered using a lobar approach with a conventional radiation dose, or a segmental/lobar approach with a high ablative dose. The latter has been associated with high rates of complete pathological necrosis [41–43]. Complications of TARE include: off-target radiation effects (e.g., radiation pneumonitis), and radiation-induced liver disease, which may lead to hepatic decompensation [43].

The TRACE trial reported longer time to progression (17.1 vs. 9.5 months) and overall survival (30.2 vs. 15.6 months) for Y90 TARE compared to DEB-TACE in patients with BCLC stage A or B HCC [44]. The LEGACY study demonstrated that high-dose personalized dosimetry results in high rates of complete response in patients with early-stage HCC[41]. The MERITS-LT consortium, a prospective multi-regional study from the US, analyzed the rates of successful downstaging to within MC with embolization treatments (TACE and TARE). No significant differences were found between TACE and TARE for successful downstaging (>80%), with both achieving similar 2-year post transplant survival of 95% [7].

SBRT delivers fractionated, focused external radiation to destroy target tissue minimizing damage to surrounding structures [45]. Because of less adjacent organ injury, SBRT can treat lesions in challenging locations (e.g., diaphram), and can be used in patients with borderline liver function [46,47]. Retrospective cohort studies have shown that SBRT has superior local tumor control than both thermal ablation and TACE in retrospective analyses [48,49]. A recent prospective randomized trial showed that SBRT achieved superior local progression free survival when compared to radiofrequency ablation (hazard ratio [HR], 0.45 [95% CI, 0.24 to 0.87]) [50], In the setting of LT, SBRT achieves comparable outcomes to other LRT modalities, with similar dropout rates and post-LT outcomes [39].

Common complications of SBRT include: fatigue, nausea, and radiotherapy-induced liver disease (particularly in patients with a Child-Pugh score ≥ 8); however, significant toxicities seem to be rare, especially with the adoption of adaptive radiation dosing protocols [47,51,52]. There are limited data to support the routine use of SBRT in downstaging. However, one small single-center study demonstrated that SBRT can effectively downstage patients prior to LT [53].

Ablative therapies for HCC include microwave/radiofrequency ablation, cryoablation, and histotripsy. Thermal ablation is typically reserved for tumors less than 3–4 cm in size, isolated from critical structures such as the diaphragm, heart, or major vessels [54]. Histotripsy can treat tumors up to 5 cm in diameter; however long-term outcomes data are lacking and its role in the setting of LT remains unstudied [55]. Outcomes after thermal ablation of small HCCs (≤ 3 cm) is excellent, with 5-year survival rates in excess of 70%, which was comparable to surgical resection in a randomized control trial [56].

Adverse events associated with thermal ablation are rare, but include bleeding, vascular thrombosis, pseudoaneurysm formation, biliary stenosis, cholecystitis, abscess formation, and tumor seeding.

Thermal ablative techniques are widely accepted modalities to bridge patients to LT. A 10-year intention to treat analysis of 121 patients receiving radiofrequency ablation showed that waitlist dropout occurred in 7.4% of patients, recurrence after transplantation occurred in 5.6% of patients. The post-transplantation intention to treat overall survival and recurrence-free survival rates at 5 years were 63.5% and 41.2% and at 10 years of 37.7% and 89.5% [57]. In a comparative analysis of patients with HCC within MC who received radiofrequency ablation versus those patients that did not while on the waitlist, patients who received radiofrequency ablation had significantly lower rates of dropout from the waitlist while experiencing no documented adverse effects from treatment that impacted waitlist status [58].

With numerous recent approvals and widespread use of checkpoint inhibitor-based regimens for treating unresectable HCC, there is growing acceptance of use of systemic therapies in the LT setting [59]. Recent OPTN guidance allows patients to receive systemic therapy prior to transplantation as an acceptable strategy of bridging or downstaging. Neoadjuvant immunotherapy in a surgical setting is associated with major pathological responses in one-third of patients while improving post-resection recurrence-free survival [60]. However, in LT setting, we lack consensus on the optimal timing of immunotherapy relative to transplant to avoid rejection and graft loss[61,62].

Although we currently lack controlled prospective trials in this setting, multiple case series and meta-analyses have examined post-LT outcomes in the setting of checkpoint inhibitor therapy. In a series of 9 patients with HCC treated with nivolumab prior to LT, 1 patient had an episode of rejection in the post-LT setting while the other 8 had no significant adverse events [63]. A patient-level meta-analysis of 91 patients with received LT after immunotherapy reported 24 (26.4%) patients experienced post-LT rejection, 9 (9.9%) patients had HCC recurrence, and 9 (9.9%) died in follow-up [64]. Overall survival was not associated with allograft rejection, and the median immune checkpoint inhibitor washout period prior to transplant for patients with low rejection risk was 94 days. While these data support the safety of immune checkpoint inhibitors in the pre-LT setting with an appropriate washout period, the intention of ICI therapy was unclear in these patients (systemic treatment for advanced HCC vs intentional bridging/downstaging).

To address this gap, several prospective studies on the efficacy of immunotherapy in bridging to LT are underway (Table 2). ImmunoXXL (NCT:NCT05879328) is evaluating patients with HCC beyond AFP-adjusted up-to-seven criteria without extrahepatic disease or portal vein tumor thrombus. Enrolled patients will receive 3 or more cycles of atezolizumab and bevacizumab and must have a sustained downstaging of more than three months before being considered for transplant, with assessment of several post-LT outcomes, including rejection and recurrence [59]. The MERITS-LT prospective protocol is also evaluating the use of immunotherapy to bridge patients after successful downstaging by LRT if residual or recurrent disease is present while listed [59]. One of the main challenges of routine use of immunotherapy prior to LT is the unpredictability of organ availability end ensuring a sufficient checkpoint inhibitor washout period. Timed living donation may be ideal for these patients, otherwise, centers must balance the risk of post-LT rejection versus tumor progression while awaiting LT in patients receiving immunotherapy.

Ongoing studies on HCC and transplantation; SBRT: stereotactic body radiation therapy; TACE: transarterial chemoembolization; UCSF: University of California san francisco.

Two of the primary metrics for patients with HCC being considered for LT includes minimizing risk of waitlist dropout and risk of HCC recurrence post-LT. Given the suboptimal response rates in some patients receiving both LRT and systemic therapy alone, the combination of locoregional therapy and immune checkpoint inhibitor-based immunotherapies are being evaluated in patients with intermediate-stage HCC. The promise of longer progression free survival and higher rates of major pathological response through the administration of immunotherapy with locoregional therapy has made this approach an active area of investigation.

The largest phase 3 studies combining TACE plus immunotherapy include the EMERALD-1 and the LEAP-012. EMERALD-1 studied the combination of TACE plus durvalumab and bevacizumab in patients with intermediate stage HCC, with results meeting the primary endpoint of progression-free survival benefit (15 months vs 8.2 months in placebo plus TACE arm; HR 0.77 [95% CI 0.61–0.98]) [65]. LEAP-012 studied the combination of pembrolizumab and lenvatinib combined with TACE and the combination had a significantly longer median progression-free survival compared to TACE plus placebo (14.6 months vs 10.0 months; HR: 0.66 [95% CI 0·51–0·84]) compared with TACE alone [66]. Adverse events were manageable in both trials, but there were several patients with grade 5 toxicities in the study drug arms of both trials. Furthermore, the data are not yet mature for overall survival outcomes. The utility of these combined modalities remains unclear in the context of LT and more data is necessary.

The combination of hepatic arterial infusion therapy plus systemic therapy has been shown to improve outcomes in patients with advanced HCC, however, we lack data role of this approach in patients awaiting LT[67]. Furthermore, hepatic arterial pumps may increase the perioperative LT risk due to hepatic arterial injury [68]. There are several ongoing phase 3 and earlier phase studies combining other locoregional therapies with immunotherapy combinations [69].

HCC is a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide, and while a small minority of patients ultimately receive an LT, LT provides superior long-term outcomes compared to other available therapies. To optimize patient outcomes, patient selection and stewardship while awaiting LT is essential. Locoregional therapies are currently the most commonly used treatments to bridge or downstage patients to LT and have shown excellent success in eligible patients. Recent data on immunotherapy prior to LT is a promising strategy to complement current strategies and may allow the expansion of eligibility for LT.

There have been several developments in the treatment of HCC, including novel applications of current systemic therapies in combination with locoregional therapies, novel combinations of systemic therapies, and systemic therapies targeting alternate anti-tumor pathways. As data for systemic therapies for HCC mature, integration of these treatments into bridging or downstaging protocols prior to LT will be necessary. Specifically, the regimen type, timing/duration, and patient selection will require further data to be routinely integrated into current algorithms prior to LT. Ongoing prospective trials, such as ImmunoXXL, will help better define these parameters for the use of immunotherapy prior to LT. The current data on post-LT outcomes in the setting of immunotherapy appears promising, however, we require further evidence on the benefits and potential risks of immunotherapy regimens, particularly as alternate immune pathways are targeted.

Antoine Robert: Writing original draft; Thomas Hunold: Writing review and editing; Neehar Parikh: Conceptualization, Writing review and editing.

Neehar Parikh serves as a consultant for Exact Sciences, AstraZeneca, and Sirtex, and has served on advisory boards of Genentech, Eisai, Bayer, Exelixis, Wako/Fujifilm and has received research funding from Bayer, Exact Sciences, Genentech, and Glycotest.

The authors have no other relevant affiliations or financial involvement with any organization or entity with a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart from those disclosed.

No writing assistance was utilized in the production of this manuscript.