How gut symbionts contribute to host adaptation remains largely elusive. Studying co-diversified honeybees and gut bacteria across climates, we found cold-adapted species (Apis mellifera,A. cerana) exhibit enhanced genomic capacity for glucose, pyruvate, lipid and glucuronate production versus tropical species. Metagenomics revealedGilliamellaas the most enriched gut bacterium in cold-adapted bees. Germ-free honeybees inoculated with theGilliamellafromA. ceranashowed increased activity, body temperature and fat storage upon cold exposure. Saccharide metabolomics demonstrated higher hindgut glucose levels inGilliamella-colonizedA. melliferaversus germ-free bees, and inA. ceranaversus three sympatric tropical species. AlthoughGilliamellacan hydrolyze β-glucan into glucose, cultural experiments suggest it preferentially degrades glucuronate to pyruvate. In turn, monocolonized bees upregulated hindgut glucose/pyruvate utilization while increasing glucuronate provision, suggesting nutritional complementarity.Gilliamella’s transporter genes predominantly target ascorbate (a glucuronate derivative), which is elevated in inoculated hindguts. Accordingly,Gilliamellaconverts ascorbate to D-xylulose-5P (promoting lipogenesis), while showing reduced growth on glucuronate/ascorbate versus glucose, potentially minimizing glucose competition with hosts. We revealed a highly coordinated host-symbiont metabolic synergy enhancing host energy acquisition for cold adaptation.

Given the crucial roles of gut symbionts in host health1and adaptation2, study of the underlying host-symbiont interactions has become a central focus in evolutionary and ecological research3,4. These interactions are highly context-dependent5, necessitating further studies to identify overarching principles. While short-term host-symbiont interaction dynamics at individual and population levels have been extensively examined across taxa5, understanding their long-term development trajectories during host adaptation and speciation remains challenging. Nevertheless, environmental adaptation offers a powerful framework for examining how natural selection has shaped the host and its interactions with symbionts. Stable mutualistic relationships can enhance host fitness over generations, making them highly heritable6. Co-divergence and host-specificity are fundamental for interactions to maintain over generations5, potentially driving host speciation through adaptive divergence6,7. In this context,Apishoneybees can serve as an excellent model for investigating the long-term development of host-gut symbiont interaction.

Among extantApisspecies (Fig.1A), only the western (A. mellifera) and eastern (A. cerana) honeybees have successfully expanded their natural habitats to temperate regions (Fig.1B), becoming essential pollinators worldwide8. Earlier diverged dwarf honeybees (A. andreniformis,A. florea) and giant honeybees (A. dorsata,A. laboriosa) are confined in (sub)tropical areas (Fig.1B). In contrast to these tropical honeybees,A. melliferaandA. ceranaboth exhibit a higher capacity for heat production9(Fig.1A), yet the underlying physiological mechanisms remain unclear. In the context of cold adaptation, various animals10–12and gut bacteria13–15have shown genomic traits that might improve thermogenesis. However, existing research has primarily focused on either the host or the bacteria, while the combined contributions of this symbiotic system remain poorly characterized.

ASchematic diagram of the honeybee phylogeny. The six species studied in the present work are shown with photos. Four of them have been examined previously9, characterized by varied capacities in heat production (numbers represent heat production per mass, W/kg).BNative distributions of honeybee species. The same honeybee species is marked in Panels (A,B) using the same color code. YN Yunnan Province, China; JL Jilin Province, China.

Honeybees are well-established models for gut microbiome research, harboring core bacterial genera such asGilliamella,Snodgrassella,Lactobacillus, andBifidobacteriumin the hindgut16. These bacteria have codiversified with honeybees for 80 million years17and play vital roles in host health16. However, their contributions to honeybee adaptation remain underexplored. Previous investigations based on metagenomics have shown that the gut bacterial communities are host-specific among different honeybees17,18. WhileLactobacillusandBifidobacteriumare prevalent across varied honeybees (albeit differ at the abundance level), other bacteria show distinct host patterns:Snodgrassellais absent fromA. dorsataandA. florea;Gilliamellais lacking in dwarf bees; andDysgonomonasandSaeziaare confined toA. dorsata. However, how variations in gut community structures and the enrichment of specific bacterial members affect the host remains unclear. Gut microbiota and metabolite changes have been associated with thermogenesis in mammals, such asAkkermansiain mice19and propionate in gerbils20. We therefore asked whether some honeybee gut bacteria might have contributed to host cold adaptation during independent northward expansions ofA. melliferaandA. cerana.

By comparing both hosts and symbionts of cold-adapted honeybees to their closely related tropical relatives, we aim to understand how natural forces, such as temperature, act on the “holobiont”, including the host and its microbiota. The honeybee gut microbiota plays a crucial role in dietary saccharide digestion21–23. Notably, the core bacterial membersGilliamellaandBifidobacteriumhydrolyze pectin and hemicellulose. Therefore, we hypothesize that carbohydrate metabolic interplay is critical for energy utilization in heat production. To investigate whether the underlying cold adaptation mechanisms may involve host-symbiont interactions, we analyzed the gut microbiome, bacterial genomes, and host genomes for sixApisspecies, including two cold-adapted and four tropical species. Additionally, we conducted in vitro and in vivo experiments to assess the impact of gut bacteria on thermogenesis and identified beneficial metabolites exchanged between the symbiotic partners. Our results revealed that colonization by the gut bacteriumGilliamellasignificantly promotes honeybee lipogenesis and thermogenesis, uncovering a metabolic synergy between the host and the symbiont. Cold-resistant honeybees exhibit enhanced abilities for lipogenesis and the acquisition of glucose and pyruvate, while increasing the provisioning of glucuronate and ascorbate toGilliamellaas a carbon source. In turn,Gilliamellahydrolyzes pollen-derived β-glucan into glucose and converts glucuronate and galacturonate into pyruvate. Surprisingly,Gilliamellasupplies the host with key energy substrates, glucose and pyruvate, while sustaining restrained growth via degrading glucuronate and ascorbate. By investigating host-symbiont interactions from the perspectives of both parties, we gain deeper insights into how this symbiosis facilitates adaptation to challenging environments.

We performed metagenome shotgun sequencing on the two cold-resistant honeybees (A. mellifera&A. cerana) and four tropical honeybees (dwarf honeybeesA. andreniformis,A. florea, and giant honeybeesA. dorsata,A. laboriosa). A total of 70 samples from 168 bee hindguts were obtained from Jilin and Yunnan Provinces, China (Fig.1B, Fig.2A, Fig.S1a, Supplementary Data1) and used to investigate the characteristic gut microbiota of cold-adapted honeybees. The gut microbiota composition confidently divided the six honeybee species into three distinct groups (partial least squares test: Q2Y = 0.783), in line with their phylogenetic relationships (Fig.2A, Fig.S1b, c). To test whether the gut microbiota composition is influenced by cold climate, independent of host phylogeny, we need to identify which bacterial members are associated with cold tolerance. Core bacteria,Gilliamella,Apibacter,Frischella,Bartonella, andSnodgrassellahave contributed mainly to the partition and clustering of the cold-adapted bee group (Fig.2A). Among these,Gilliamellawas barely detected in dwarf bees (Fig.S1b), whereas it was most significantly enriched (Fig.2B) in the cold-resistant bees, despite typically occurring in the giant honeybees. In contrast, the gram-positive bacteriaLactobacillusandBifidobacteriumpredominated in the gut of dwarf honeybees, while Gammaproteobacteria and Bacteroidota, such asDysgonomonasandApibacter, outcompeted others in giant honeybees.

APrincipal component analysis of gut bacteriome showing bacteria most strongly separating different bees.BSignificantly enriched gut bacteria identified in the three honeybee subgenera. LDA: linear discriminant analysis.CApis ceranaworkers with (Gc) or without (GF)Gilliamellacolonization were subject to thermo imaging after cold exposure (10 °C) for 30 min. AV, average temperature for the framed area; HS and CS denote the highest and lowest temperatures for the entire area, respectively.DThe same sets of bees were measured for abdominal temperature after 4 h cold exposure, using a thermocouple (the needle-like instrument touching the bee’s abdomen, as shown in the right photograph of the middle insert). Acer,A. cerana; Amel,A. mellifera; Ador,A. dorsata; Alab,A. laboriosa; Aand,A. andreniformis; Aflo,A. florea.

To determine the potential impact ofGilliamellaon honeybees’ cold resistance, we comparedA. ceranaworkers monocolonized byGilliamellato germ-free controls, measuring their cold tolerance at 10 °C. On day 8 post-inoculation, as detected by colony-forming unit (CFU) count, theGilliamellastrain B3835 stably colonized the bee hindguts at densities of 107–108cells per gut (Fig.S1d). When exposed to the cold condition for 30 min,Gilliamella-colonized groups remained active, while the germ-free groups became immobilized (Supplementary Movie1). The bees sustained a higher body temperature when colonized withGilliamella(as measured by thermal imaging, Fig.2C). This difference remained significant after four hours of cold exposure as examined by the abdominal temperatures using a thermocouple (Fig.2D). In contrast, the colonization of aLactobacillusstrain isolated fromA. andreniformisdid not improveA. melliferathermogenesis (Fig.S1e), indicating that not all honeybee gut bacteria can enhance host cold-tolerance. These results indicate thatGilliamellaincreased heat production in the host, thereby enhancing cold tolerance.

To evaluate the capacity ofGilliamellain its potential contribution to host thermogenesis, we inspected 149Gilliamellagenomes, as well as 17Lactobacillusand 28Bifidobacteriumgenomes (Fig.3A, Fig.S2,3, Supplementary Data1). Among all core gut bacteria derived from western honeybees,Gilliamellawas experimentally shown to be superior in producing pyruvate and cross-feedSnodgrassella24. Hence, we explored the underlying metabolic pathways producing energy substrates required by thermogenesis, such as pyruvate25. Our results showed that besides glycolysis, allGilliamellastrains derived from cold-adapted honeybees can produce pyruvate via two dedicated metabolic modules that degrade glucuronate or galacturonate (Fig.3A, B). NoLactobacillusorBifidobacteriumstrain encodes the full glucuronate degradation module, and only a fewBifidobacteriumstrains possess the galacturonate degradation module (Fig.S3), highlightingGilliamella’s metabolic features in pyruvate production.

AMaximum-likelihood phylogeny ofGilliamellastrains, annotated with the number of genes involved in carbohydrate metabolism: enzymes involved in degradation modules of glucuronate (M00061), galacturonate (M00631), and ascorbate (M00550); proteins transporting only glucose, glucose and maltose, or multiple sugars including glucose; primary hydrolases targeting polysaccharides. Circle and triangle sizes indicate gene copy number.BSchematic metabolic pathways inferred fromGilliamellaand honeybee genomes. TheGilliamella-generated substrates can be potentially utilized by the host in lipogenesis. G3P glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, LCFAs long-chain fatty acids, ELOVL6 elongation of very long chain fatty acids protein 6, ChREBP carbohydrate-responsive element binding protein, PRPP 5-phosphoribosyl diphosphate.CGene clusters involved in polysaccharide deconstruction and further utilization generating pyruvate in the strainGilliamellaB3835.DDifferential growth ofGilliamellaon varied carbon sources demonstrates its preference for glucuronate, resulting in lower cell density. TheGilliamellaB3835 strain was cultured in Brain Heart Infusion (BHI) broth (minus glucose) supplemented with 1, 10 or 20 mM of glucose, glucuronate, or ascorbate, respectively. Data are presented as means ± SD.

Galacturonate is a backbone unit of pectin, where glucuronate is occasionally found as a side chain unit26,27.Gilliamellacan hydrolyze refractory polysaccharides, especially pectin from pollen walls, releasing sugars as energy sources26,28. Our results unraveled prevalent gene clusters in theGilliamellagenome that contain modules responsible for polysaccharide degradation and subsequent monosaccharide transport and catabolism. For instance, in strain B3835 fromA. cerana(Fig.3C), genes for galacturonate and glucuronate degradation are located close to genes encoding pectin-degrading enzymes GH2829and GH3130, while the transporters and catabolic enzymes for galactose are adjacent to β-D-galactofuranosidase GH43_3. Intriguingly, a pyruvate dehydrogenase complex repressor (pdhR) is encoded nearby, suggesting that downstream pyruvate catabolism can be suppressed. These enzymes are organized into carbohydrate-active enzyme gene clusters (CGCs)31, members of which are typically co-expressed32, enabling efficient stepwise conversion of polysaccharides into energy substrates.

In addition to pectin, we found thatGilliamellacan also hydrolyze β-glucan, which is another abundant polysaccharide component of the pollen coat (Fig.3A). The backbone of hemicellulose β-glucan is glucose27, which could serve as a direct energy resource forGilliamella. However, to utilize glucose as a routine energy supply,Gilliamellawould require glucose-specific transporters, which we found surprisingly missing in their genomes. Almost allGilliamellastrains possess only one gene copy (mostly genecrr) to transport multiple sugars, including glucose (Fig.3A, Supplementary Data1). Alternatively, because bacteria secrete hydrolases for saccharification,Gilliamellais expected to release a considerable amount of glucose into the hindgut, which could become accessible to the host for lipogenesis33,34and thermogenesis34,35. Complementary to their limited glucose uptake,Gilliamellastrains possess numerous genes for utilizing alternative saccharides, such as galactitol, fructose, mannose, and β-glucoside (Fig.S2). Particularly, most transporter genes target ascorbate.Gilliamellaencodes an intact ascorbate degradation module generating D-xylulose-5P, which is lacking in mostLactobacillusstrains and allBifidobacteriumstrains (Fig.3A, B, Fig.S3). D-xylulose-5P can be converted to energy and 5-phosphoribosyl diphosphate (PRPP), a key nucleotide precursor, via the pentose phosphate pathway. Therefore,Gilliamellais capable of utilizing a diverse range of alternative saccharide substrates in the gut.

To assess the growth performance ofGilliamellaon different carbohydrate sources, we simultaneously culturedGilliamellausing a Brain Heart Infusion (BHI) broth without glucose, supplemented with glucuronate, ascorbate, or glucose (Fig.3D). Compared to glucose and ascorbate, glucuronate-fed cultures evidently entered the log phase earlier, demonstrating a preference for glucuronate, thus validating our prediction based on genomics. Intriguingly, when supplied with equal molar amounts of carbon, glucuronate and ascorbate yielded cultures that plateaued at lower OD600values than glucose, indicating a lower proliferation on these substrates. These decreased cell densities are expected to consume less carbon sources, potentially alleviating competition with both the host and other gut microbes. Additionally, 10 mM glucuronate or ascorbate at 10 mM supported higher growth than 20 mM, indicating thatGilliamellathrives at moderate substrate concentrations.

To investigate the impact ofGilliamellaenrichment on gut microbiome function, we quantified the relative abundance of carbohydrate metabolic pathways and their bacterial contribution in the gut metagenomes of sixApishoneybees. Our results showed that the abundance of genes encoding transporters capable of glucose uptake was negatively correlated withGilliamella’s abundance, but positively correlated with that ofLactobacillusandBifidobacterium(Fig.4A). Our genome analyses (Fig.3A, Supplementary Data1) showed that mostGilliamellastrains lack dedicated glucose transporters (e.g.,glcU,ptsG) and instead carry onlycrr, which transports a broad range of sugars. Consistently, our metagenomic data reveal thatglcU,ptsG, and the multiple sugar transportermsmXare rarely encoded byGilliamella(Fig.4A), with the maltose/glucose transportermalXfound in strains derived from giant honeybees and a few western honeybees. In contrast,ptsGandmsmXare common inBifidobacterium, and especially abundant inLactobacillusfrom dwarf honeybees, reflecting their robust glucose-uptake capacity. Hence, our findings from bacterial strain genomes and gut metagenomics both suggest that the enrichment ofGilliamellacorresponds to a reduced overall capacity for glucose uptake within the gut microbiota of cold-adapted honeybees.

AThe gene abundance of glucose transporters in gut metagenomes contributed by varied bacteria. The y-axis is the gene abundance of transporters capable of glucose uptake. Pearson correlation coefficient (R) andPvalue (p) are annotated.Gilliamellararely encodes glucose transporters, especially glucose-specific transporters (glucUandptsG), across all metagenome samples (upper panel). And its abundance is negatively associated with the abundance of all glucose transporters in metagenomes (lower panel). The abundance comparison of genes encoded by three gut bacteria in the (B) degradation module of glucuronate, galacturonate and ascorbate, and (C) PRPP production from D-xylulose-5P showsGilliamella’s superior degradation capacity in alternative carbon sources whereas lower consumption of D-xylulose-5P. ns: no significant difference, **Pvalue < 0.01, ****Pvalue < 0.0001 by Mann–Whitney U test (B–D). Each dot denotes one gut metagenome sample.DGlucose proportions across gut tissues in four sympatric honeybees,A. cerana(Acer),A. dorsata(Ador),A. andreniformis(Aand) andA. florea(Aflo), examined by saccharide metabolomics show significantly more glucose in Acer rectums. Two-way ANOVA and Tukey test were used for the comparison. Data are presented as means ± SD.

With regards to carbohydrate metabolism,Gilliamellaallocates more genes for pentose and glucuronate interconversions thanLactobacillusandBifidobacterium(Fig.S4a), specifically for the degradation modules of glucuronate, galacturonate, ascorbate and pectin (Fig.4B, Fig.S4b). This leads to enhanced production of pyruvate and D-xylulose-5P. Meanwhile,Gilliamellaencodes fewer genes that convert D-xylulose-5P to D-ribose-5P and the downstream PRPP (Fig.4C, Fig.S4c).

To test whether enrichedGilliamellain gut microbiome affects the availability of hindgut glucose for honeybee hosts, we applied saccharide metabolomics across the gastrointestinal tract of various honeybee species (Fig.4D, Supplementary Data2). In particular, four sympatric honeybees were included to alleviate the potential bias of sugar ingestion derived from diverged floral diversity. Among these, workers of three tropical honeybees,A. dorsata,A. floreaandA. andreniformis, and the cold-adaptedA. cerana, were collected in their natural range of close geographic proximity in Jinuo Co., Yunnan Province, China (Fig.S1a). The diets of the four honeybee species showed no significant variations in glucose proportion, as demonstrated in beebread and honey samples retrieved from their colonies (Fig.S5a, Supplementary Data2). The glucose content also showed a similar level in both the midguts and ileums among honeybees, but was significantly elevated in the rectum ofA. cerana(Fig.4D). But, no evident difference was found between cold-adaptedA. ceranaand three tropical honeybees for other mono- or disaccharides (Fig.S5b). Therefore, these results suggest that the enrichment ofGilliamellais associated with enhanced glucose availability in the hindgut.

To further verify the influence ofGilliamellaon hindgut glucose content, monocolonization was performed and compared to germ-free bees. Glucose content in the hindguts ofGilliamella-colonized bees is significantly higher at both 48 h and 7 days after inoculation (Fig.5A). Host glucose absorption typically occurs in the midgut via a concentration-dependent process, where glycogen synthesized in gut epithelium cells creates concentration gradients, thus facilitating glucose uptake36,37. However, little is understood about glucose absorption in the hindgut. We examined the ileum and rectum and found a considerable amount of glycogen in epithelial cells stained purple, as in the midgut (Fig.5B), indicating potential for glucose absorption.Gilliamellainoculation up-regulated genes for glucose and pyruvate transport and catabolism (Fig.5C), as well as pathways in carbohydrate metabolism (e.g., the tricarboxylic acid cycle) and lipid synthesis (Fig.S6a, Supplementary Data1). Hence, based on evidence from both cell morphology and gene expression, we infer that honeybee hosts can utilize glucose and pyruvate generated byGilliamellain the hindgut. We further found that the genes involved in the synthesis and secretion of glucuronate are also up-regulated (Fig.5C, Supplementary Data1) in theGilliamella-colonized group. These data suggest the host may secrete glucuronate to fuelGilliamella, since the bacterium prefers the glucuronate degradation pathway to produce pyruvate. In turn, this cross-feeding would benefit the host by providing additional pyruvate.

AGlucose contents inA. melliferahindguts colonized byGilliamella(Gc) versus germ-free ones (GF), showing significant glucose increase following bacterial inoculation.BThe glycogen synthesized in gut cells was stained purple using Periodic-Acid Schiff (PAS) staining, suggesting that the hindgut can absorb glucose like the midgut.CThe up-regulated genes in Gc versus GF indicate potential cross-feeding between the host andGilliamella.DEnzymes involved in glucose, pyruvate, lipid, and glucuronate productions contain more gene copies in cold-adapted honeybees.EMaximum-likelihood tree based on theELOVL6gene sequences with motifs annotated, suggesting historical gene duplication in cold-adapted honeybees and bumblebees.FGilliamellainoculation resulted in significantly elevated abdominal triacylglycerol (TAG) on day 10 post-inoculation.GHistological comparison showsGilliamellacolonization affects host lipid storage. HE (hematoxylin and eosin), PAS, and ORO (Oil Red O) were used for cell, glycogen, and lipid staining, respectively. Black arrows indicate multilocular lipid droplets in Gc bees; red arrows indicate unilocular droplets in GF bees.HHindgut ascorbate is significantly increased inA. melliferaandA. cerana48 h afterGilliamellainoculation.

To explore potential mutualistic cross-feeding between host and symbiont and their synergy toward thermogenesis, we inspected the featured genomic contents of the cold-adapted honeybees, with a focus on functions involved in fuel synthesis for thermogenesis, including glucuronate, pyruvate, glucose, and lipid. The comparative genomic analyses (Fig.5D, Supplementary Data1) included genomes of six honeybees and two bumblebees that are also adapted to temperate climates. We found thatA. melliferaandA. ceranagenerally possess more genes for synthesizing glucose, pyruvate, and lipids than their tropical relatives, albeit they differ in details. For example,A. melliferapossesses more genes for transporting trehalose, which can be hydrolyzed into two glucose molecules, whileA. ceranahas more genes for degrading maltose and sucrose into glucose. Similarly,A. melliferapossesses more genes for converting UDP-galactose to UDP-glucose, whileA. ceranahas more genes for converting serine and lactate to pyruvate. Notably, cold-adapted bees generally encode more copies of the long-chain fatty acid elongation protein ELOVL6 (K10203), a key protein involved in lipid synthesis, as seen with potential historical gene duplication in bothA. melliferaandA. cerana, and the bumblebeeB. terrestris(Fig.5D, E). Different from those in the bumblebee,ELOVL6homologs remain relatively conservative across all six honeybee species, with one identical homolog shared by all, and the other two vary at the sequence level but identical motifs (with one exception of a shortened protein inA. mellifera) (Fig.5E). One of the derivedELOVL6homologs was only shared betweenA. melliferaandA. cerana, showing small but consistent sequence differences between species. In contrast, no relevant protein showed higher gene copy numbers in the genomes of tropical honeybees when compared with cold-adapted honeybees. In mammals, glucose and pyruvate are required to synthesize lipids33, and these three energy substances mediate thermogenesis35,38,39. We hypothesize that honeybees andGilliamellaco-work to facilitate cold-tolerance through improving host lipogenesis.

Triacylglycerol (TAG) stored in the fat body was measured to test the impact ofGilliamellacolonization on host lipogenesis.Gilliamella-colonized bees demonstrated significantly higher TAG accumulation than the germ-free hosts (Fig.5F).Gilliamellacolonization also resulted in increased fat body cells (Fig.S6b), forming a cell layer surrounding the inner side of the abdomen’s exoskeleton. On the contrary, only a few fat body cells were sporadically observed throughout the entire section of the germ-free abdomen. The presence of lipid droplets was confirmed using oil red O staining (Fig.5G). In mammals, the white adipose tissue (WAT) stores fat as unilocular lipid droplets, while the brown adipose tissue (BAT) harbors multilocular lipid droplets characterized by highly condensed mitochondria for efficient thermogenesis25. Intriguingly, we observed multilocular lipid droplets in theGilliamella-colonized bees resembling mammalian brown adipose tissue BAT, and unilocular lipid droplets similar to mammalian WAT in the germ-free bees. In addition, the fat cell nuclei of theGilliamella-colonized bees were distorted and pressed by fat globules (Fig.5G), indicating extensive fat accumulation40. Furthermore, theGilliamella-colonized bees also contain more glycogen than the germ-free bees (Fig.5G).

Like the two bumblebees,A. mellifera,A. ceranaandA. dorsatahave more glucuronosyltransferase genes (K00699, Fig.5D) than other honeybees. Glucuronosyltransferase, shared by the glucuronate pathway and the ascorbate biosynthesis module, catalyzes glucuronate generation (Fig.5D). Intriguingly, the accumulation of glucuronate is toxic to the honeybees41. Thus, its downstream transformation into ascorbate or D-xylulose-5P is necessary. Because it is difficult to distinguish glucuronate from galacturonate using regular gas chromatography-mass spectrometry gut metabolomics42, the significantly increased galacturonate reported previously inGilliamellacolonized guts43might have included the glucuronate produced by the honeybee host. Thus, we alternatively detected its downstream metabolite ascorbate. We found that the hindgut ascorbate content is significantly higher in theGilliamella-colonized bees than in the germ-free bees (Fig.5H).

In this study, we showed that gut symbiontGilliamellaassists host lipogenesis and thermogenesis and engages in a synergistic interaction with honeybees to orchestrate carbohydrate metabolism (Fig.6). Concomitant with elevated lipogenesis and increased levels of glucose, pyruvate, and glucuronate in cold-adapted honeybees,Gilliamellaefficiently converts pollen polysaccharides and host-derived glucuronate into glucose and pyruvate. Moreover,Gilliamella’s preference for glucuronate (over glucose) enables the bacterium to liberate extra glucose and pyruvate for its host. Additionally, honeybees andGilliamellamight exchange ascorbate and jointly elevate D-xylulose-5P levels to drive thermogenic fat synthesis44.

Codes 1–10 denote enzymes shown in Fig.5D. Dashed lines present putative metabolic flows. Vc ascorbate, Xu5P D-xylulose-5P.

Although gut microbiota has been suggested to be associated with cold tolerance in bumblebees and soldier flies15,45, the underlying mechanism remains unclear. Our study uncovers thatGilliamellaenrichment in cold-adapted honeybees is associated with increased glucose and pyruvate in hindguts. Strikingly,Gilliamellarestrains its own growth by favoring non-glucose substrates, thereby lowering per-cell and total sugar consumption and reducing competition with the host. Specifically,Gilliamellagenomes encode pectinase gene clusters and adjacent genes for glucuronate and galacturonate catabolism, highlighting their specialization for utilizing pollen-derived polysaccharides and their breakdown products. This gene organization suggests coordinated expression32, enabling efficient carbohydrate metabolism, and reinforcing niche specificity, which benefits both the symbiont and the host.Gilliamellaalso possesses a robust genetic capacity in degrading ascorbate into D-xylulose-5P, but lacks substantial genes converting D-xylulose-5P to PRPP, a nucleotide precursor46. This explains the limited growth ofGilliamellawhen feeding on ascorbate and its precursor, glucuronate. Together, these traits elevate D-xylulose-5P, activating the carbohydrate-responsive element binding protein (ChREBP) and further enhancing lipogenesis44. In summary, by providing fuels for host lipogenesis,Gilliamellapromotes honeybee cold-tolerance via improving host carbohydrate metabolism. The synergistic interaction betweenGilliamellaand cold-adapted honeybees may have been favored by selection during host range expansion to temperate regions, resulting in elevatedGilliamellaabundance in the host gut.

Our study highlights the importance of glucose, pyruvate and lipids in honeybee cold resistance, echoing findings in mammals. Winter bees exhibit increased fat body cell numbers, lipid stores, and mitochondrial abundance47, which reflects a key feature of mammalian BAT47. Our findings in honeybee lipid morphology and the report on beige-like fat in cold-adapted chickens48suggest that BAT thermogenesis may not be confined to mammals. Indeed, fat burning has been recently associated with thermogenesis in beetles, nematodes, and flies49, highlighting the importance of thermogenic fat in cold resistance for invertebrates. We also detected higher copy numbers of the ELOVL6 gene in bothA. melliferaandA. cerana, which could boost the synthesis of unsaturated long-chain fatty acids. Unsaturated lipids confer greater cold tolerance than saturated lipids in mice50. These lipids are also commonly stockpiled by overwintering insects51,52. ELOVL6 incorporates oleic acid into phospholipids and alleviates membrane rigidity under cold exposure53. Most importantly, ELOVL6 regulates the thermogenic capacity of BAT in mammals54. In addition to evidence in lipid morphology, we observed increased levels of glucose34,35,55and pyruvate38, both of which are key prerequisite substrates for lipogenesis and thermogenesis, further supporting the presence of thermogenic fat in honeybees. Finally, these enhancements for lipogenesis and thermogenesis are found in bothA. melliferaandA. cerana, suggesting convergent cold-adaptation strategies between these honeybees.

The most striking finding of the present study is the evidence that suggests an elaborate host-gut bacterium synergy in carbohydrate metabolism. While honeybees provide pollen polysaccharides, glucuronate, and ascorbate toGilliamella, whose degradation generates glucose, pyruvate, and D-xylulose-5P, and in turn benefits the host. In principle,Gilliamellacould have relied on glucose derived from β-glucan as its energy source, but instead, it preferentially utilizes galacturonate from pectin and glucuronate from hosts. The glucuronate and galacturonate degradation modules share three enzymes; both are capable of producing pyruvate in only five steps, potentially enabling efficient pyruvate generation inGilliamella. However, core gut bacteriaLactobacillusandBifidobacteriumlack this capability. This is likely whyGilliamellacan produce the most pyruvate and cross-feed other symbionts24. WhileGilliamellasacrifices glucose utilization to limit self-proliferation, hosts paradoxically sustain glucuronate production, despite its inherent toxicity to honeybees41. In the presence ofGilliamella, honeybees produce ascorbate from glucuronate and secrete it into the hindgut, whereGilliamellaconsumes glucuronate and ascorbate, thus preventing glucuronate accumulation. AlthoughGilliamellacannot synthesize ascorbate, it encodes most transporters for ascorbate, suggesting adaptation to host-derived metabolites. And its reduced growth yields on glucuronate or ascorbate imply that hosts may regulate symbiont density by providing particular metabolites56. Taken together, honeybees andGilliamellacoordinate nutrient exchange to achieve mutual benefits. These reciprocal metabolic exchanges balance cooperation and competition, reflecting a win-win strategy in host-symbiont interactions.

By comparing hosts and their gut symbionts across closely relatedApisspecies, we show how host-symbiont metabolic interaction has been potentially shaped by natural selection.A. melliferaandA. ceranahave converged on a similar host-symbiont synergy when facing shared environmental challenges during independent expansion to temperate regions. Our study focuses on one core symbiont, but we acknowledge the broader ecological context, whereGilliamella’s function may intersect with other bacterial interactions and host pathways, as a critical avenue for future research. Our framework can be extended to study the long-term symbiosis by including various symbionts and bee hosts17,18,57. Bumblebee genomes encode more copies of ELOVL6 than honeybees, indicating a substantial lipogenesis enhancement on the host side. In contrast, bumblebee-derivedGilliamella22andLactobacillus58lack extensive genes for saccharide utilization, highlighting a different host-microbe interaction that warrants investigation. We note that natural selection acted on honeybees and their gut bacteria within a pre-existing symbiosis, in which core bacterial taxa were already associated with bees before theApislineage emerged. Core bee gut bacteria (e.g.,Gilliamella) were acquired early in the social bee evolution17but developed subsequent adaptation apparently in a host-specific manner58. This evolutionary history indicates that the retention ofGilliamellacannot be attributed solely to cold adaptation. While our data reveal a highly synergistic carbohydrate metabolism between cold-adapted honeybees and their symbioticGilliamella, whether this reflects true co-evolution59remains uncertain. Addressing this question would require testing whetherGilliamellahas undergone host-specific evolutionary changes in response to cold selection pressure. Notably, manyGilliamellastrains from bumblebees lack the degradation module for glucuronate and ascorbate, while most published genomes of honeybee-derivedGilliamellaencode intact modules (Fig.3A), indicating functional divergence associated with the social bee lineage. However, due to the limited isolates from the tropical honeybees, comparative analyses between tropical and cold-adapted strains remain insufficient. Future isolation and genome sequencing ofGilliamellastrains for diverseApishosts will be essential to test for functional shifts associated with the host adaptation and to explore the potential for host-symbiont coevolution.Gilliamellais also prevalent in giant honeybees, yet its role in host adaptation remains to be investigated. We also note that the core bacteriumLactobacillus, which, although not enriched in cold-resistant honeybees, is one of the predominant bacteria, especially abundant inA. mellifera60,61. Whether and to what extent different gut bacteria and strains assist bee hosts in lipogenesis and thermogenesis deserves further study. Another core symbiont,Bartonella, is also enriched in cold-adaptedA. mellifera, becoming remarkably abundant in the overwintering phase62. Seasonal gut microbiota turnover likely reflects the drastic reduction in pollen consumption by winter honeybees62, whereBartonellapotentially provides amino acids to the host63. Thus, distinct gut symbionts support honeybee hosts through diverse, complementary metabolic mechanisms, collectively enhancing holobiont resilience to environmental challenges. Our study highlighted the significance of host-symbiont interaction in the cold acclimation of the holobiont, providing insights into the long-term interaction development between honeybees and gut bacteria64.

Biogeographical data for honeybees’ native distribution were downloaded from the Global Biodiversity Information Facility (https://www.gbif.org/).

For metagenome sequencing, we used 168 hindguts from sixApishoneybee species, including dwarf honeybees (A. andreniformisn= 39,A. florean= 46) and giant honeybees (A. dorsatan= 24,A. laboriosan= 36) from Yunnan Province, China, as well as eastern (A. ceranan= 14) and western (A. melliferan= 9) honeybees from Yunnan and Jilin Province, China (Supplementary Data1, Fig.S1a, b).

For saccharide metabolomics, different bee gut segments, honey and bee bread were collected (Supplementary Data2) from four sympatric honeybee species, including cold-resistant eastern honeybees (A. cerana) and tropical species (A. andreniformis,A. florea,A. dorsata) at two sites (Mengla, Jinuo) in Yunnan (Fig.S1a). To quantify saccharides in honeybee guts, midguts, ileums and rectums were dissected and stored at -80°C for examination. To assess dietary differences, 2–50 g bee bread and 10 mL honey were collected from each colony and stored at –20 °C.

Total DNA from each hindgut sample was obtained using CTAB buffer and phenol/chloroform/isoamyl alcohol (25:24:1, pH 8.0) as previously described65. DNA from individual and pooled samples (Supplementary Data1) was used for sequencing. A total of 70 samples were prepared for library construction (350 bp insert size) and total DNA shotgun sequencing (150 bp paired-end) using an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 platform, generating approximately 10 Gb of data per sample. Low-quality reads were filtered using fastp66(version 0.13.1, -q 20 -u 10). Metagenomes were de novo assembled using MEGAHIT67(version 1.1.2, -m 0.6 –k-list 31,51,71, –no-mercy). Contigs >500 bp were taxonomically assigned using DIAMOND68(version 0.9.22, blastx -f 102 -k 1 -e 1e-3) against the NCBI nr database. Genes were predicted using MetaGeneMark69. Assemblies were assigned taxonomically when >70% of genes matched a bacterial taxon. Unclassified assemblies were further compared to NCBI bacterial genomes (blastn, -evalue 1e-5) as previously described65. Reads were mapped onto the assemblies and genes using SOAPaligner70(version 2.21, -M 4 -l 30 -r 1 -v 6 -m 200), and the sequencing coverage and depth were summarized using the soap.coverage script (version 2.7.7,https://github.com/aquaskyline/SOAPcoverage) to calculate the bacterial abundances via multiplication. Assemblies with >90% read coverage were retained. Gut community clustering was performed using R packageveganandropls. Functional annotation of genes was conducted with KofamKOALA71with the e-value < 0.001. KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) ortholog abundances were calculated as the sum of annotated gene abundances. LEfSe (29) was used to identify symbionts enriched in different bee groups. Pearson correlations between the abundance of bacteria and functions were evaluated and visualized using the R packageggpubr. Gene copy numbers of KEGG orthologs for specific metabolic pathways inGilliamella,LactobacillusandBifidobacteriumwere compared using Mann–Whitney U test and visualized withggplot2andggpubr.

Beebread samples were dried at 37 °C and then homogenized with liquid nitrogen. Gut samples added with 100 μL of sterile pure water were homogenized using a handheld tissue grinder (TGrinder, TIANGEN, Beijing) with disposable plastic grinding pestles at 6000 rpm for about 5 s. The analysis of carbohydrates was performed using a Thermo Scientific Dionex ICS-5000+ ion chromatography system equipped with a CarboPac PA10 analytical column (4 × 250 mm) and a Dionex CarboPac PA10 guard column (4 × 50 mm). The eluents comprised phase A (ultrapure water) and phase D (200 mM NaOH). The gradient program was set as follows: 0–19 min (91% A + 9% D), 19–21 min linear gradient to 0% A + 100% D, 21–31 min isocratic 100% D, 31–32 min return to 91% A + 9% D, and 32–40 min equilibration under initial conditions (91% A + 9% D), with a constant flow rate of 1.0 mL/min. Prior to analysis, the column was equilibrated with a sodium acetate-containing solution (phase C) for 60 min to ensure system stability. The column temperature was maintained at 30 °C, and the injection volume was 10 μL. Detection was achieved using a pulsed amperometric detector (PAD) with a gold working electrode and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode. The applied “Carbo Quad” waveform included four potentials: +0.10 V (0.4 s, with integration period enabled in the first 0.2 s to enhance sensitivity), –2.00 V (0.02 s), +0.60 V (0.01 s), and –0.10 V (0.07 s). Data were acquired at 2 Hz with auto-zero enabled, and signals were recorded from both ED_1 (raw current) and ED_1_Total (integrated charge). Saccharide concentrations were converted to molarity for further relative abundance calculation of molecules and statistical analysis using theaovfunction in R.

The genomes ofGilliamella,LactobacillusandBifidobacteriumderived from honeybees and bumblebees were retrieved from NCBI (Supplementary Data1). Genes were predicted using MetaGeneMark69. Orthologs were identified using OrthoFinder72for phylogenetic analysis. Functional annotation was performed with KEGG database (28) and dbCAN2 database73for polysaccharide hydrolysis. Visualization was done with tvBOT74.

Aliquots (OD600= 0.1) ofGilliamellastrain B3835 were inoculated simultaneously in BHI broth without glucose, supplemented with glucose, glucuronate, or ascorbate at 1 mM, 10 mM, or 20 mM concentrations. They were cultured anaerobically in 24-well plates at 35 °C. OD600was measured every 4 h initially and every 12 h at the plateau phase.

Eastern and western honeybee colonies for transplantation experiments were obtained from local beekeepers. Melanistic pupae were transferred from colony cells to sterile plastic cup cages and reared at 35 °C.GilliamellaB3835 was cultured in BHI medium at 35 °C within an incubator with 5% CO2. ALactobacillusstrainB24606was isolated fromA. andreniformisusing De Man-Rogosa-Sharpe (MRS) agar under the same incubation conditions and subsequently cultured for transplantation assays. For each monocolonization, bacteria were resuspended in (Phosphate Buffer Saline) PBS (OD600> 1) and blended with sterile pollen and sugar syrup (fructose: glucose, 6:4). A portion of 200 μL of inoculation syrup was pipetted onto bees’ bodies that could be ingested by companions immediately. The rest was provided to the bees ad libitum in cages for 24 h. PBS without bacteria was mixed with pollen and sugar syrup and used for the germ-free group. The remaining inoculation syrup was plated onto BHI, MRS agar for culture to examine alive inoculated bacteria and potential contamination from environmental bacteria. Sterile sugar syrup and bee pollen were used to feed honeybees after inoculation.

To explore the metabolite exchange induced byGilliamellainoculation, glucose and ascorbate were examined using kits (S0201S, Beyotime; AKVI005M-SY10S, boxbio) after 48 h. On day 8, hindguts were homogenized for colony-forming unit plating. Colony PCR of 16S rDNA (27 F/1492 R primers) and Sanger sequencing were performed to confirm the successful colonization of B3835. To assess the impact ofGilliamellaon saccharide metabolism, hindguts were also dissected for saccharide metabolomics.

To evaluate the impact ofGilliamellacolonization on host lipogenesis, TAG stored in the abdomen (gastrointestinal tract being removed) was quantified using a commercial kit (A110-1-1, Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute) on day 10. For histological analysis of lipids stored in the fat body and glycogen in gut cells, abdomens were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, dehydrated with ethanol, infiltrated with xylene, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned at 4 μm75. Sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) or Periodic-Acid Schiff (PAS). For the frozen section, 30% sucrose was used for dehydration and optimal cutting temperature compound for embedding. Frozen sections (10 μm) were stained with Oil Red O (ORO) stain.

On day 10 post-inoculation, GF and monocolonized bees (A. ceranabyGilliamellaB3835,A. melliferabyLactobacillusB24606) were exposed at 10 °C for 30 min, and their movements and temperatures were recorded using a thermal imager (testo 890) to assess their hardiness. After four hours of cold exposure, all bees could not move when abdominal temperatures were measured by a K-type thermocouple (KAIPUSEN) to assess thermogenesis.

To compare host gene expression with or withoutGilliamellacolonization, the Datasets S2 and S5 from our previous study76were used to investigate whether the host provides metabolites toGilliamellaand benefits in turn from bacterial-generated glucose and pyruvate in the hindgut. Differentially expressed genes were subjected to functional investigation and pathway enrichment analysis using Fisher’s Exact Test in R packagestats.

Genomes of five honeybees and two bumblebees were retrieved from NCBI (GCF_003254395.2, GCA_001442555.1, GCA_000184785.2, GCA_000469605.1, GCA_014066325.1, GCF_910591885.1, GCF_024542735.1), and theA. andreniformisgenome was newly generated (Xiao et al. under revision, BioProject PRJNA1178865). Protein sequences were functionally annotated using KofamScan71, and gene copy numbers for carbohydrate metabolism and lipid synthesis pathways were compared across species (Supplementary Data1). Protein sequences ofELOVL6were aligned by MUSCLE77, and further used for tree construction by FastTree78. Motif searching was performed by MEME (https://meme-suite.org/meme/tools/meme).

No specific permits were required for this work or sampling. No endangered or protected species were involved in this study.

We thank Prof. Hao Zheng from China Agricultural University for providing metagenome data ofA. mellifera. We thank Prof. Zhengwei Wang, Mr. Qibi Wang, and Ping Gao from Xishuangbanna Tropical Botanical Garden, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Mr. Yongfei Pan and Peng Pan for their help in sample collection from giant- and dwarf honeybee colonies. We thank Sanya Institute of China Agricultural University for providing essential infrastructure and instruments. We thank Mr. Jack Liu from Testo Instruments International Trading (Shanghai) Co. Ltd. for his guidance on the use of the thermal imager. Particularly, Min is deeply grateful to her daughter Amy, whose unconditional love and support has been a constant source of strength and inspiration. This work was funded by the Program of the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2023YFD2201804) to X.Z. and S.L., Program from the Sanya Institute of China Agricultural University (No.SYND-2021-30) and the 2115 Talent Development Program of China Agricultural University to X.Z., the National Natural Science Foundation of China (32470455) and program from Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (2023IOZ0104 and 2024IOZ0108) to S.L., and the Research Development Fund (RDF-23-01-067) from Xi'an Jiaotong-Liverpool University to M.T.