To analyze cognitive function, sleep characteristics and the relationship in older adults with insomnia and anxiety. A total of 99 participants were included in this study, including 50 patients with simple insomnia and 49 patients with insomnia combined with anxiety. General demographic information was collected and the degree of cognitive function was assessed using the Montreal Cognitive Assessment Scale (Moca) and the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Scale (PSQI). All patients were monitored by polysomnography, and polysomnography monitoring parameters were collected. General demographic data, Moca, PSQI and polysomnography monitoring indicators were compared between the two groups. The correlation between cognitive scores and polysomnography monitoring parameters of patients with insomnia and anxiety was analyzed. There was no significant difference in the general demographic information between the two groups (P> 0.05). The total MoCA score and MoCA memory score of patients with insomnia accompanied by anxiety were significantly lower than those with insomnia alone, while their PSQI scores were significantly higher. The wake time after sleep (WASO) monitored by polysomnography was significantly longer than that in patients with simple insomnia disorder, and the duration of N3 and N3% were significantly shorter than that in patients with simple sleep disorder, with statistical significance (P< 0.05). Executive function was positively correlated with N3 duration and N3%, naming function was negatively correlated with N1 duration and N1%, and memory was negatively correlated with wake time after sleep (WASO) in insomnia patients with anxiety, (P< 0.05). Cognitive function and polysomnography sleep were worse in older adults with insomnia and anxiety. Decreased N3 sleep, increased N1 sleep, and increased WASO may be potential biological markers of cognitive decline in older adults with insomnia and anxiety.

As we all know, insomnia has long been a worldwide public health problem and is one of the most common diseases in the world1. Sleep problems are common among older adults2. It has been reported that the prevalence of sleep disorders in the global older adults is about 30–40%3,4In China, the incidence of sleep disorders in the older adults over 60 years old is about 35.9%5.Insomnia will not only significantly increase the prevalence of diseases such as depression, diabetes and hypertension6, but also reduce the quality of life of the older adults. At the same time, it can show different degrees of cognitive impairment and is a high risk factor for Alzheimer’s disease7.

With the increase of age, the physiological sleep requirement of most normal older adults decreases, and the sleep structure also changes, mainly manifested as the decrease of total sleep time and slow-wave (deepest) sleep, the decrease of sleep efficiency and the increase of light sleep8. Research on the relationship between sleep and mood has shown that the specific neurotransmitter mechanisms behind sleep-wake regulation, such as the adenosinergic system, are correlated with anxiety9. The adenosine system promotes sleep by inducing sleep pressure.

Sleep disorders are often associated with anxiety10and are a significant risk factor for anxiety disorders11. The relationship between insomnia and anxiety is complex, as anxiety not only affects sleep quality but may also exacerbate cognitive impairment12. Specifically, anxiety contributes to cognitive impairment by affecting attention, memory, and executive function, and its influence may be even more pronounced in individuals with insomnia. This makes the comparison between insomnia patients with and without anxiety particularly important, as anxiety likely interacts with insomnia to intensify cognitive deficits. The cognitive impairment observed in patients with anxiety, such as decreased attention and memory, is related to the decline of their executive function13.

Therefore, we hypothesize that individuals with insomnia and anxiety in the older adults may have poorer cognitive performance, but there are currently few reports on their cognitive function and sleep characteristics. This study aims to analyze the differences in cognitive function and sleep characteristics between older adults with insomnia and anxiety and those with simple insomnia, and further analyze the correlation between sleep structure and cognitive function. It helps clinicians to intervene early and identify potential biomarkers for early detection of cognitive vulnerability in older adults with insomnia and anxiety.

The study was carried out in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration. Informed consent has been obtained from all participants and/or their legal guardians. They were told that the study was voluntary and could be terminated at any time. This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Hangzhou Seventh People’s Hospital, Mental Health Center of Zhejiang University Medical School (Ethics approval number: 2021-025).

This study included 99 patients with chronic insomnia who were hospitalized in the geriatric Sleep Department of Hangzhou Seventh People’s Hospital from September 2021 to January 2024, all of whom completed PSG examination. All participants were electively admitted for diagnostic PSG assessment of chronic insomnia, without acute psychiatric/medical comorbidities.

Inclusion criteria:1consistent with the diagnostic criteria for chronic insomnia of the International Classification of Sleep Disorders, Third Edition (ICSD-3) [19];2Age ≥ 60 years old;3functional sensory capacity:. visual acuity ≥ 20/50, pure-tone audiometry threshold ≤ 40 dB and Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) language subscore ≥ 2/3. Exclusion criteria:1insomnia caused by major mental illness or psychoactive substance;2intellectual disabilities (MoCA score < 18) or other diseases affecting cognitive function;3Taking medications that affect cognition or sleep;4Those who cannot complete the scale due to objective condition.

After admission, all participants completed polysomnimetric sleep monitoring. The Pittsburgh Sleep Index Scale (PSQI), Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAMA) and Montreal Cognitive Assessment Scale (MoCa) were used to assess the patients’ sleep quality, anxiety and cognitive function. According to sleep disorder treatment guidelines, participants received “Zolpidem 10 mg/ day or eszopiclone 3 mg/ day.” Pharmacological treatment was initiated following PSG completion. No hypnotics were used during the 72 h preceding sleep monitoring. According to the score of Hamilton anxiety Scale, the patients were divided into two groups, namely the insomnia group (HAMA score < 14 points) and the insomnia group with anxiety (HAMA score ≥ 14 points).

A self-designed questionnaire was used, which mainly included gender, age, disease course, education level, BMI, smoking history (defined as smoking more than one cigarette per day for at least six months), alcohol consumption history (defined as drinking more than once in the past month), hypertension history and diabetes history.

The PSQI consists of self-rating questions and sleep companion rating questions, with a total of 19 items across 7 factors, and scores are based solely on the self-rating questions14. The total score was 21 points, 0–4 points indicated no insomnia; 5 to 9 are classified as mild insomnia; 10–14 divided into moderate insomnia; 15–21 is classified as severe insomnia15,16. The standard Chinese version (simplified) of PSQI was used in this study, translated and validated by Liu Xianchen et al.17.

Contains 14 entries in total. According to the data provided by the China Scale collaboration group: the total score ≥ 29 points may be severe anxiety; ≥21 points, there must be obvious anxiety; ≥14 points, definitely have anxiety; ≥7 score, may have anxiety; < 7, no symptoms of anxiety18.

The MoCa scale19is used to rapidly screen for cognitive impairment. This study adopts the Beijing revision. MoCa consists of seven cognitive domains: executive function, naming, memory, attention, language, abstraction, and orientation. The total score is 30 points, and the total score will increase by 1 point when the years of education are less than 6; The total score is proportional to cognitive function. The higher the score, the better cognitive function.

All participants were monitored with polysomnography system (NS-100 A) and data were collected uniformly. PSG sleep records include six EEG leads (International 10–20 system: F3-A2, F4-C1, C3-A2, C4-A1, O1-A2, O2-A1), two eye leads (ROC-A1, roc-a2), nasal and oral airflow thermistors, and other components. Continuous recording of chest and abdomen moving strain gauge and finger pulse oximeter. The guided sleep monitoring instrument is installed by professionally trained personnel, and the signal is input to the polyguide physiological recorder, which will be all recorded and played back the next day and automatically analyzed and processed, and then checked and corrected by the polyguide sleep monitoring technician. The American Sleep Research Institute Manual for the Interpretation of Sleep and Related Events - Rules, Terms and Technical Specifications, version 2.4, is used as the interpretation standard13. The outcome measures included: total sleep time (TST), total wake time (TWT), sleep latency (SOL), wake time after sleep (WASO), sleep efficiency (SE), duration of phase N1, duration of phase N2, duration of phase N3, duration of REM, and the percentage of duration of each phase in total sleep time. According to the AASM Sleep and Related Events Scoring Manual Version 2.4: Rules, Terms, and Technical Specifications20.

SPSS 21.0 statistical software was used for statistical analysis of the data. The statistical data of the two groups of patients were expressed as mean ± standard deviation for data meeting normal distribution, and were compared between groups by t test; data not meeting normal distribution were described statistically by median (Inter quartile spacing), and inter-group comparison was performed by non-parametric test. Gender, smoking history, drinking history, hypertension history and diabetes history were represented by the number of cases and 100%. Chi-square test was used.Spearmanrank correlation was used to analyze the correlation between cognitive function and sleep structure in patients with insomnia and anxiety.P< 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

According to whether the patients were accompanied by anxiety, they were divided into two groups: simple insomnia group 50 cases, insomnia combined with anxiety group 49 cases. There was no significant difference in the general demographic characteristics between the two groups (P> 0.05), and the results were shown in Table1.

Comparison of the general demographics of patients with insomnia alone and insomnia with anxiety.

As shown in Table2, the total MoCa score and memory score of patients with insomnia and anxiety were significantly lower than those of patients with insomnia alone, with statistical significance (P< 0.05).

Comparison of cognitive function in patients with insomnia alone and insomnia with anxiety.

The statistical data of the two groups of patients were expressed as median (Inter quartile spacing).

Results as shown in Table3, the total score of PSQI and the score of hypnotic drug use factor in patients with insomnia and anxiety were significantly higher than those in patients with insomnia alone, with statistical significance (P< 0.05).

Comparison of subjective sleep quality between patients with insomnia alone and patients with insomnia and anxiety.

The statistical data of the two groups of patients were expressed as mean median (Inter quartile spacing).

As shown in Table4, WASO of insomnia patients with anxiety was significantly longer than that of patients with simple insomnia, and N3 duration and N3% were significantly shorter than that of patients with simple insomnia, with statistical significance (P< 0.05).

Comparison of sleep structure between patients with insomnia alone and patients with insomnia combined with anxiety.

The statistical data of the two groups of patients were expressed as median (Inter quartile spacing).

As shown in Table5, executive function was positively correlated with N3 duration and N3% in patients with insomnia and anxiety. The naming function was negatively correlated with N1 duration and N1%. Memory was negatively correlated with wakefulness after sleep (P< 0.05).

Correlation analysis between cognitive function and sleep structure in patients with insomnia and anxiety.

Stage 1 duration (N1) represents the absolute time (minutes) spent in slow-wave sleep during the recording period. Stage 1% (N1%) is calculated as: N1% = (Stage 1 duration / Total Sleep Time) × 100.

With the intensification of global aging, various health problems of the older adults have attracted wide attention, and the importance of sleep for the overall health of the older adults have been increasingly recognized21. Sleep is not only a key biological behavior to maintain the immune and endocrine functions of the body, but also plays a crucial role in emotional and cognitive behavior22Both insomnia and anxiety will increase the risk of cognitive dysfunction, and the decline of cognitive function will limit the daily activities of the older adults and bring huge economic burden to the family and society23.Therefore, actively assess the sleep characteristics and cognitive level of patients with insomnia and anxiety, understand the relationship between sleep characteristics and cognition, and carry out targeted intervention by identifying their sleep characteristics.

The comparison of the general demographic characteristics and cognitive level of the two groups of patients showed that there was no significant difference in the general demographic characteristics of the two groups of patients, but there was a significant difference in cognitive function. Consistent with our hypothesis, patients with insomnia combined with anxiety showed worse cognitive level, which was significantly lower in the total score of MoCa and memory dimension than patients with insomnia alone.

Previous research results on anxiety and cognitive function are inconsistent24. Some studies believe that the degree of anxiety is negatively correlated with cognitive function in the older adults, and the problem processing speed of patients with high level of anxiety decreases significantly25. Some studies have found that anxiety can bring benefits to certain cognitive dimensions26. Our research results show that anxiety has a negative impact on cognitive function, especially on memory function, which is consistent with previous research findings that anxiety can damage working memory function27. The possible reason is that worrying during anxiety will interfere with working memory28, making it difficult to make necessary cognitive adjustments13. People with anxiety focus on negative thoughts and the task in front of them, have difficulty moving events from one topic to another, and have low cognitive flexibility. In addition, the abnormal concentrations of amyloid-β42 and tau protein in the cerebrospinal fluid of anxious patients24. the production and aggregation of Aβcan reduce the activity of neural pathway signals that have neuroprotective effects and improve learning and memory ability29.Therefore, older adults with insomnia and anxiety will show worse cognitive function.

Previous studies have found that the higher the anxiety level, the more serious the sleep disorder8. We also observed this phenomenon when comparing sleep quality between the two groups. The total score of PSQI and hypnotic drug use in patients with insomnia combined with anxiety were significantly higher than that in patients with insomnia alone. Anxiety is a complex emotional and psychological reaction, primarily characterized by excessive worry about the future and panic. Compared to patients with simple insomnia, those with anxiety often pay more attention to their sleep difficulties and worry about the potential adverse consequences of insomnia. As a result, they may be more inclined to seek medication to help promote sleep recovery. This is consistent with previous findings of higher rates of sleep medication use in older patients with anxiety30. However, it is important to note that the use of hypnotic drugs, especially benzodiazepines and Z-drugs, should be approached with caution, particularly in the older adults, due to the associated side effects. These medications should be prescribed for the shortest duration possible and under careful consideration of the risks and benefits.

In addition, the study found that the cognitive activity before bed is very common in patients with anxiety, about 51.1% of patients with anxiety-related disorders have a wrong assessment of subjective sleep and will underestimate their sleep time. The sleep monitoring results of the two groups of patients showed that the WASO of insomnia patients with anxiety was significantly longer than that of insomnia patients alone, and the duration of N3 and N3% were significantly shorter than that of insomnia patients alone, and there was no significant difference in other sleep structural characteristics.

Compared with healthy people in the past, the total sleep time of anxious patients decreased, but our study did not find any difference in the total sleep time of the two groups, which may be related to the difference in the study object. With the disturbance of sleep-wake cycle, the efficiency of the circadian rhythm mechanism in older adults with insomnia decreased, and their sleep time changed31. Studies on patients with anxiety-related disorders have found that decreased sleep depth, especially decreased sleep continuity, may be a key pathological change in anxiety-related diseases32. The extension of wake time after falling asleep will further lead to the reduction of N3 duration and N3% in patients, which is different from patients with simple insomnia disorder, and more targeted intervention is needed in clinical patients with insomnia and anxiety.

Correlation analysis of cognitive function and sleep characteristics of patients with insomnia and anxiety showed that executive function was positively correlated with N3 duration and N3%. Memory was negatively correlated with wakefulness after sleep. Confirming that sleep structure is closely related to cognitive function, previous studies have found that the decline of N3 sleep will significantly reduce executive function33. N3 sleep, also known as slow wave sleep or deep non-REM sleep, is associated with increased metabolism in the prefrontal cortex and plays a crucial role in restoring body and brain functions including language and processing speed. Selective disruption of N3 sleep can affect brain plasticity and impair learning skills34–36.Inreased N3 sleep enhnces the response to active learning and drives cognitive processes, particularly in terms of executive function37. In addition, previous studies have also found that N3 sleep is an important stage of memory consolidation38, but our study was surprised to find that N3 sleep has no correlation with memory domain. This result may be attributed to the older adults in this study, and it has been reported that aging will weaken the correlation between episodic memory and N3 sleep.In addition, the memory function was negatively correlated with the wake time after falling asleep, indicating that the longer the wake time after falling asleep, the worse the memory. Previous studies have found that the brain converts short-term memory into long-term memory during N338. The reason for the inconsistent results may be that slow wave sleep promotes the restoration of connections between brain cells that are disrupted during arousal39,40.

The naming function was negatively correlated with the duration of N1 phase and N1%. This suggests that too much light sleep can significantly affect naming function. Previous studies have shown that slow wave sleep in patients with cognitive impairment is significantly reduced41, while light sleep in N1 phase is relatively increased, and the decline in naming function is often a common symptom of cognitive impairment42, so the decline in naming function is closely related to N1 phase sleep. Decreased N3 sleep, increased N1 sleep, and increased WASO may be potential biological markers of cognitive decline in patients with insomnia and anxiety. This suggests that clinicians should pay attention to the assessment of cognitive function for patients with insomnia and anxiety, and the choice of drugs should be more targeted according to the characteristics of the sleep structure of patients, so as to prevent cognitive function decline in older adults with insomnia and anxiety.

The current study focused on the difference of sleep structure and its relationship with cognitive function in patients with insomnia and anxiety compared with patients with insomnia alone, and failed to further compare with healthy controls. Second, the sample size of the study is small, future studies with larger sample sizes are needed to increase the robustness of the findings. Third, although our sleep monitoring devices have been as comfortable as possible for patients to wear and do not cause subjective discomfort, they still cannot completely avoid the first-night effect. Additionally, although mood symptomsand obstructive sleep apneamay influence outcomes, we did not collected these data in this study. Furthermore, while the findings from a single-night PSG provide valuable insights, they may not accurately capture the true sleep characteristics of participants in their usual environment.

In summary, the cognitive function of older adults with insomnia and anxiety appears poorer than those with insomnia alone. Preliminary analyses suggest executive function may be closely related to N3 sleep, naming function to N1 sleep, and memory function to WASO. These observed patterns indicate that decreased N3 sleep, increased N1 sleep, and increased WASO may represent potential biological markers warranting further investigation for cognitive decline in this population. However, the strength of these associations requires validation in larger studies addressing methodological limitations.

The authors thank the medical staff who assisted with the study.