There is a paucity of data regarding the long-term outcomes of research intercalation during under-graduate medical studies, and the long-term academic effects it can have for such students. This study aimed to investigate the associations with longer-term academic success for students who undertook a BMedSc(Hons) degree intercalated within a medical degree.

The study used a matched cohort design. Cases were medical students who completed a BMedSc(Hons) degree at our institution between 1995 and 2006; controls were matched for gender and graduation year. Our primary outcome was the association of completing a BMedSc(Hons) with three academic success variables: quantity of post-graduation peer-reviewed publications, completion of higher academic degrees, and attainment of faculty/academic positions post-graduation.

We found that students completing a BMedSc(Hons) were more than seven times as likely to have at least one peer-reviewed journal publication post-graduation compared with matched controls (77.7% vs. 37.2%, OR 7.3 (CI: 3.13–13.17.21),P< 0.001). They were also more likely to have a greater number of publications (n= 577 vs.n= 140), more likely to complete a higher academic degree (18.1% vs. 6.4%, OR 3.2 (CI: 1.17–8.74),P= 0.023) including a PhD (13.8% vs. 1.1%, OR 13.0 (CI: 1.70-99.38),P= 0.013), but they were not significantly more likely to attain a faculty position (17% vs. 11.7%, OR 1.6 (CI: 0.67–3.59),P= 0.301).

Medical students completing a research degree go on to have successful academic careers. We hypothesize that building research networks early in a student’s career is associated with their ability to participate in research in the future, although attaining faculty/academic positions may be influenced by other factors.

Persons with medical degrees (MD, MBChB, MBBS) who carry out research as their primary professional activity are fundamental to the practice of medicine due to their unique viewpoint, being both a physician and a scientist. In this paper we refer to them as clinician-scientists [1]. They can bridge clinical insights from the ‘bench-to-bedside’ or from that of the clinical laboratory to their patients [1,2]. In addition, clinician-scientists are well placed to catalyze multidisciplinary collaboration, being able to bring together other clinician-scientists, PhD scientists, and non-scientist physicians [2]. Their value is not to be understated, and within the context of the recent COVID-19 pandemic, these professionals have been vital in developing strategies surrounding the pathophysiology of the disease as well as treatment and prophylaxis [2].

Despite the significant contributions to medical science afforded by these clinician-scientists, it has also been demonstrated worldwide that this population is declining [1,3,4]. In response to this, medical schools have implemented various research training opportunities including intercalated research degrees (programs which allow medical students to briefly suspend their normal training to pursue a focused research topic) [4–6].

The benefits of early student exposure to research should not be under-estimated. Studies have shown that students perform better in medical school [7,8], and are more likely to remain active in research pursuits than students not exposed to research [8–11]. These pathways have also been shown to address the decreasing clinician-scientist shortage by effectively training students to grow into this role [7,12,13]. Finally, for students who did decide to intercalate, the majority of these students found the degree worthwhile [14,15].

Although the benefits of research are unequivocal, there is a paucity of data regarding the long-term outcomes of research intercalation and the effects it can have. Prior research has suggested that only 32.7% of theses resulting from an intercalated degree resulted in a publication, and there are no prior studies with appropriate controls that examined the long-term impact of intercalation on involvement in research [16]. Given the physician-scientist shortage [1,3,4], it is imperative to identify whether an intercalated research degree leads to a sustained development of clinician-scientists.

The University of Otago (New Zealand) offers a six-year Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery (MBChB) program, structured into two phases: Early Learning in Medicine (years 2–3), and Advanced Learning in Medicine (years 4–6). Entry to the MBChB program primarily follows the successful completion of a competitive first-year Health Sciences program; other less common routes of entry are the Graduate and Alternative categories. Assessment during the MBChB degree is achieved via a Pass/Fail(/Distinction) scoring system.

For MBChB students who are keen to pursue a formalized research opportunity, the BMedSc(Hons) program offers a full-time year of research in a field of medical science outside the medical degree [16,17]. Offered only to medical students who have completed three or more years of their MBChB degree, this degree can be pursued either after their third year (which is the more common option), or after their fifth year. In order to be awarded the degree, the student must submit a thesis on their research topic [16,17].

This study aims to fill specific gaps in knowledge by investigating the association of undertaking a BMedSc(Hons) intercalated degree with long-term academic success. We defined long-term academic success by examining three main outcomes obtained after medical school graduation: the quantity of peer-reviewed journal publications, completion of other higher academic degrees, and attainment of faculty/academic positions.

The study used a matched cohort design (with cases and controls) in order to assess the long-term impact of completing a BMedSc(Hons) degree on outcomes that could be used as markers of future academic success.

Our primary outcomes were three markers of academic success: number of post-graduation peer-reviewed publications, completion of higher academic degrees, and attainment of faculty/academic positions post-graduation. We defined higher academic degrees as any post-graduate qualification obtained following medical school graduation, including Masters and above, and their equivalents.

Information about the completed BMedSc(Hons) theses from the University of Otago was obtained from the University’s electronic research archive [18], with the Faculty of Medicine also being contacted for additional theses that were not archived. The time-period of inclusion in this study was theses completed between 1995 and 2006. The latter date was chosen to allow time between graduation and completion of vocational/specialist training, with a minimum follow-up period after graduation of 9 years. The date of graduation from medical school was determined from publicly available New Zealand graduate database [19]. These cases were then matched with controls identified from the same database, who had the same gender and graduation year, in a 1:1 ratio using a random number generator (Microsoft Excel for Microsoft 2019, Version 1808, Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA, USA).

In December 2019, we identified publications resulting from BMedSc(Hons) projects as well as publications resulting from other non-BMedSc(Hons) projects, for both cases and controls, using standardized search criteria conducted on MEDLINE®(National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, MD, USA) and Google Scholar®(Google LLC, Menlo Park, CA, USA) databases (last name and first initials with or without other identifiers such as country affiliation ‘New Zealand’) [5]. BMedSc(Hons)-related publications were identified as such if they were co-authored by the student and the content was consistent with the thesis abstract. The New Zealand graduate database19and publicly available Australian, New Zealand, and international registers of doctors were searched for current clinical scope of practice or specialist registration. A detailed description of the methods used is described elsewhere [5].

According to the New Zealand national ethical standards, ethical approval was not required for this study, as it relied solely on publicly accessible data from open-access sources. The authors did not reach out to individuals to gather additional information for the study.

The collected data were inputted into a pre-designed Excel spreadsheet and analyzed through the use of descriptive statistics. Continuous variables were compared using the Mann-Whitney U test. Predictors of post-graduation publications including the effects of completing a BMedSc(Hons), odds ratios and confidence intervals for the different variables were calculated through the use of conditional logistic regression analysis. An alpha value of < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. The Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) software for Windows Version 27.0.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA) was used to analyze the data.

We identified a total of 99 medical students who successfully completed the intercalated BMedSc(Hons) degree over the study period (1995–2006). Outcome data related to higher academic degrees and faculty positions for five BMedSc(Hons) students (3 females and 2 males) could not be ascertained, and thus were excluded from the analysis. Of the remaining 94 graduates (1995–2006), 55 (58.5%) were male, and 36 (38.3%) had published their BMedSc (Hons) projects. The median follow-up time from graduation was 14.4 years (range, 8–22 years).

Over two-thirds of BMedSc(Hons) graduates (n= 73, 77.7%) had published at least one publication post-graduation compared with 35 (37.2%) controls (odds ratio [OR] 7.3, 95% confidence interval [CI] 3.13–17.21,p< 0.001; see Table1). BMedSc(Hons) graduates produced significantly higher number of publications compared with matched controls (n= 577, median 2, mean 6.14, range 0–75 vs.n= 140, median 0, mean 1.49, range 0–14,p< 0.001).

BMedSc(Hons) graduates were significantly more likely to obtain higher academic degrees following graduation compared with the controls (18.1% (n= 17) vs. 6.4% (n= 6), OR 3.2, 95% CI 1.17–8.74,p= 0.023), including PhD degree (13.8% vs. 1.1%, OR 13, 95% CI 1.70–99.38,p= 0.013). Of the cases, 13.8% (n= 13) had completed a PhD or equivalent (MD research degree), 6.4% (n= 6) had completed a Master’s degree. Of the controls, only 1 (1.1%) had completed a PhD or equivalent, and 4 (4.3%) had a Master’s degree.

BMedSc(Hons) graduates were not more likely to attain faculty positions post-graduation compared with controls (17% vs. 11.7%, OR 1.56, 95% CI 0.67–3.59,p= 0.301). There were 16 faculty positions attained by BMedSc(Hons) graduates: 1 associate professor, 9 honorary/senior lecturers, and 6 research fellows or junior academic staff. Of the 11 faculty roles held by controls, 6 were honorary/senior lecturers, 5 were research fellow/junior academic staff but none held a professorial position.

This study has uniquely examined the effect of intercalation on medium-to-long-term outcomes of academic success among Otago medical graduates in New Zealand. We found that students completing a BMedSc(Hons) were more than seven times as likely to have at least one peer-reviewed publication post-graduation compared with matched controls. They were also more likely to have a greater number of overall publications, and to complete a higher academic degree, including a PhD; however, they were not significantly more likely to attain a faculty position.

Previous studies have suggested that medical students’ general participation in research is associated with both short- and long- term scientific productivity, and with an increased completion of higher academic degrees [1,9,14,20]. Other studies found research intercalation to promote tangible research output (e.g., conference presentations, peer-reviewed publications, and research grant funding), seeking post-graduate qualifications, and continued involvement in research after graduation [16,20–22]. However, these reports [16,21,22] were limited by their retrospective nature, self-reported outcomes, and lack of an appropriate control group.

Using a matched-cohort design, our findings confirm the significantly positive impact of research intercalation on medium- and long- term academic success andinvolvementin research. This observed association could be attributed to students having the opportunity to be exposed to research at an earlier stage or even to research at all, which then contributes to students pursuing the research path. In addition, we hypothesize that building research networks contributes to students being able to easily participate in research in the future. Within the University of Otago curriculum, there is currently no prescribed research component to the MBChB degree, which means that the only exposure that students have to research includes elective (voluntary) summer studentship projects, and intercalated research degrees. As such, the BMedSc(Hons) provides an invaluable opportunity for students to experience research, which is otherwise ordinarily unavailable. For these students, we would expect there to be a greater research output compared with controls. In addition, students who are interested in a research career are more likely to undertake future research degrees, as these degrees are likely to be required in the pursuit of career advancement or for faculty positions. However, it must be noted that these are associations, and not indicative of causality. An alternative explanation to our findings is a case of “reverse causality”; students with an interest in research and academia actively choose to apply for the BMedSc(Hone) degree since it is a research-oriented endeavor. Additionally, those with the ability to complete such a program are likely more inclined toward academic work.

In the present study, we found completion of BMedSc(Hons) not to be associated with a greater likelihood of attaining a faculty position, which is contrary to previous findings [8,20]. This could be attributed to regional differences and requirements associated with attaining a faculty position. For example, at the University of Otago, it is not always required to have a higher academic degree to attain a faculty position, and another post-graduate qualification such as a clinical specialty/college fellowship may be sufficient [23]. Factors other than research, such as networking and inter-personal skills, may play a greater role in attaining faculty positions which may explain the discrepancies seen among the studies that have examined this.

This study has far-reaching implications for medical schools and the designers of under-graduate medical curricula in New Zealand and elsewhere. Our findings demonstrate how intercalated degrees provide an option to develop the clinician-scientists of the future and engender long-term engagement in research.

Previous research has demonstrated that, despite the BMedSc(Hons) program being an effective method of developing interest and fostering involvement in research careers, students’ interest in intercalated research degrees remains low [17,24,25]. We, therefore, suggest that increasing awareness of such career research track is vital in encouraging uptake of this program, and thus, helping develop the clinician-scientist workforce of tomorrow.

This study possesses several notable strengths. To our knowledge, it is the largest study of its kind, analyzing more than 10 years of intercalated BMedSc(Hons) cohorts with a long follow-up period. This extended follow-up allowed intercalating students to progress significantly in their careers, enabling an investigation into long-term academic success. In addition, the use of a matched-cohort design strengthened the study by controlling for some potentially confounding factors. However, it is important to note that not all potential influences were matched (e.g., age, ethnicity, prior research degrees completed before matriculation into medical school). The study employed a standardized search strategy using MEDLINE to identify prior publications and academic degrees, ensuring accuracy in the determination of outcomes. While it is possible that some data may have been missed, this is unlikely to have significantly impacted the results, given that MEDLINE is one of the most widely used biomedical bibliometric databases.

The findings of this study are based on a single intercalation program from the University of Otago in New Zealand. Whilst similar structures of medical/research degrees commonly exist in other Commonwealth Countries (e.g., UK and Australia), the results may not be generalizable to other countries with differing degree structures and programs. Nonetheless, this study makes an important contribution to the literature by demonstrating the benefits of undergraduate research intercalation within the unique cultural context of New Zealand.

We found that completing a BMedSc(Hons) degree was associated with a higher number of post-graduation peer-reviewed publications, and completion of higher academic/research degrees. Intercalating did not influence the attainment of faculty positions, although more BMedSc(Hons) graduates held higher level academic ranks compared with controls. This study suggests that the BMedSc(Hons) plays an important role in stimulating medical students’ interest and future involvement in research and academic careers. Further work should focus on understanding what motivates students to enroll in the BMedSc(Hons) program.