This nonrandomized clinical intervention study was designed as a prospective, multicenter group comparison to evaluate the efficacy of a risk assessment and mitigation program to control bovine digital dermatitis (BDD). The program was implemented over a 1-year period on 9 intervention (INT) farms and 10 control (CTR) farms. Mainstays of the program derived from results of a previous BDD risk factor analysis. All farms were visited monthly to assess within-herd BDD prevalences to perform risk assessments and to treat BDD lesions with salicylic acid paste. Bulk milk samples were collected every 4 months. Diagnosis of BDD was based on visual inspection (clinical scoring) of the feet. Risk-associated management practices were identified on each farm, and management changes expected to prevent further introduction or spread of BDD within INT farms were suggested and agreed upon with farmers of the INT farms. Lesional biopsies were taken from a subset of cows of the INT group before and 2 months after treatment for histopathological and molecular biological examination to confirm histological and bacteriological cure in addition to clinical cure. The initial BDD prevalences for the INT and CTR farms averaged 39.8% (IQR 16.2) and 41.0% (IQR 12.4) for overall BDD lesions, 25.9% (IQR 10.8) and 26.2% (IQR 14.5) for active BDD lesions, and 22.1% (IQR 6.9) and 23.7% (IQR 22.3) for chronic BDD lesions, respectively. After 1 year of implementation, overall BDD prevalences were reduced to 14.1% (IQR 8.2) on INT farms but remained at 41.6% (IQR 10.8) on CTR farms. A significant decline in bulk milk anti-Treponemaantibodies over the 1-year period was found in INT as compared to CTR farms. Considering the results of the histopathological examination, of 16S metagenomic sequencing and of the Fluorescencein situhybridization as indicators for healing, 6/7 (85.7%) selected lesions were cured 2 months post completion of treatment. The results of this study show that the described BDD control measures can markedly reduce the within-herd prevalence of BDD. The proposed procedure might provide the basis for a nationwide BDD mitigation program that could be of importance also beyond national borders.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-12093-5.

Bovine digital dermatitis (BDD) is an infectious disease of the foot skin which in its active phase is typically characterized by ulcerative painful lesions on the rear feet between the bulbs. BDD has become a major problem in nearly all countries with intensive dairy production, due to its contagious nature and poor treatment response1–3. Prevalences have been reported to be as high as 91% at the herd-level and 41% at the cow-level4–8. Affected animals may show lameness with resulting reduced food intake, milk yield, and fertility as well as increased culling rates, making BDD an important ruminant welfare issue with substantial economic implications6,9–12. Diagnosis of BDD is usually based on clinical scoring by visual inspection of the feet using the Mortellaro (M)-scoring system by Döpfer et al. (1997)13, amended by Berry et al. (2012)14. Lesions with an ulcerative character (i.e. M1, M2, M4.1) are referred to as active stages, whereas M3 and M4 lesions are commonly grouped as chronic stages15. Healed skin after a pre-existing lesion is referred to as M514. In addition to clinical scoring, assessment of anti-Treponemaantibodies in bulk milk samples via indirect ELISA might be a useful tool for herd screening since the occurrence of M2 stages is consistently associated with seroconversion16–18.

Even though the precise pathogenesis of BDD remains unclear and it is considered a multifactorial disease, there is strong evidence forTreponemaspp. to be the central etiological agents19–21. Current treatment strategies primarily aim at limiting bacterial infection by topical or systemic application of antibiotics. Lincomycin and oxy- as well as chlortetracycline were successfully used in the past in the treatment of BDD, but the public opinion towards prudent use of antibiotics increases22(Commission Notice – Guidelines for the prudent use of antimicrobials in veterinary medicine), mainly due to the increasing prevalence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria in human and veterinary medicine contexts23.

Salicylic acid (SA) has keratolytic, hyperemic, anti-inflammatory, and antimicrobial effects, which might facilitate the elimination of bacteria in deeper layers of the epidermis and promote epidermal repair by intensified desquamation. Its clinical efficacy in the treatment of BDD is well investigated24–27. In Switzerland and Germany, a commercially available paste formulation that combines SA with methyl salicylate is approved for treating hyperkeratotic skin disorders in cattle, horses, and sheep with a 1-day withdrawal period for meat and milk in cattle26.

Ample research has been performed over the past years to understand the epidemiology of BDD and to identify specific control measures enabling the reduction of BDD incidences within farms over time. This helped to develop a 5-point plan for disease control that was published as conference presentation in 201728. Pedersen (2019)29described a control program on a dairy herd encompassing 3 mainstays that focused on immediate treatment of active lesions, prevention, and ongoing monitoring. However, multicenter controlled studies about the effect on BDD prevalences at herd-level after the implementation of specific control measures are missing. In addition to the required visual inspection after successful treatment, assessing the absence ofTreponemaspp. in deeper epidermal layers is crucial when evaluating the true effect of such a control program, since chronic lesions are associated with the presence of pathogens still being present in the skin13.

Our objective was to evaluate the efficacy of a risk assessment and mitigation program (RAMP) over the course of 1 year in Swiss dairy farms focusing on treatment of affected animals and considering aspects of internal and external biosecurity. The effectiveness of BDD control was assessed by clinical prevalence monitoring and by determining the course of bulk milk antibodies over time.

We hypothesized that (i) the herd-level reduction of overall BDD lesions (OL), active lesions (AL), and chronic lesions (CL) within 1 year after the first implementation of this mitigation program will be significantly higher (≥ 50%) in intervention (INT) farms as compared to farms where no interventions have been mandated by the research group [i.e. control (CTR) farms], and (ii) INT farms will show a decline in bulk milk anti-Treponemaantibodies over the 1-year period compared to CTR farms. Additionally, we aimed to explore whether clinical healing (i.e. M5) is also accompanied by histological as well as bacteriological cure.

No significant differences between INT and CTR farms were observed at the beginning of the study regarding herd characteristics, such as herd size and apparent BDD prevalence (Table1). Holstein Friesian was the predominant breed (INT, CTR: 86.3%, 92.4%); remaining breeds encompassed Brown Swiss, Swiss Fleckvieh, Simmental, Montbéliarde, and Jersey. In total, 9 INT and 10 CTR farms were included in the final analysis. Three INT farms had to be excluded due to a lack of compliance when implementing the recommended mitigation measures. Furthermore, 2 CTR were disqualified since there was a marked change in their BDD management during the study period. Supplementary Table1displays the reasons for exclusion in more detail.

1An animal was deemed affected by overall lesions if there was any clinical sign of bovine digital dermatitis (BDD) lesion present in ≥ 1 foot.

2An animal was deemed affected by active lesions if it showed any clinical sign of at least 1 active lesion in ≥ 1 foot, regardless of the simultaneous occurrence of any chronic lesion.

3An animal was deemed affected by chronic lesions if it showed clinical signs of at least 1 chronic lesion in ≥ 1 foot, regardless of the simultaneous occurrence of active lesions.

The courses of apparent within-herd BDD prevalences at the cow-level for OL, AL, and CL assessed in the trimming chute are displayed in Fig.1. Table2shows the results of regression analysis. A significant difference between INT and CTR farms was observed over time. Implementation of control measures significantly reduced the occurrence of both OL and AL between t0–t1and t1–t2in INT as compared to CTR farms. Furthermore, there was a slight but non-significant reduction of CL within INT as compared to CTR farms between timepoints t1–t2. Monthly prevalence data collected between t0, t1and t2by the farmers or examiners of the research group in the milking parlor or when cows were restrained in head locks are shown in Supplementary Fig.1. Prevalence courses between the claw trimmings were analyzed by descriptive statistics.

Apparent prevalence courses of bovine digital dermatitis (BDD) at cow-level over time during the 1-year study period:(A)overall BDD prevalence (OL);(B)prevalence of active lesions (AL);(C)prevalence of chronic lesions (CL).1Timepoint t0= 1 st claw trimming; t1= 2nd claw trimming; t2= 3rd claw trimming.2An animal was deemed affected by OL if there was any clinical sign of BDD lesion present in ≥ 1 foot.3An animal was deemed affected by AL if it showed any clinical sign of at least 1 AL in ≥ 1 foot, regardless of the simultaneous occurrence of any CL.4An animal was deemed affected by CL if it showed clinical signs of at least 1 CL in ≥ 1 foot, regardless of the simultaneous occurrence of AL. blue = control farms; green = intervention farms; shades are showing the probability of observed data calculated by Kernel density estimation.

Results of mixed effects regression analysis on the apparent prevalences of overall bovine digital dermatitis lesion prevalence, prevalence of active lesions, and prevalence of chronic lesions at the cow-level (nINT= 507;nCTR= 484).

1An animal was deemed affected by overall lesions if there was any clinical sign of bovine digital dermatitis lesion present in ≥ 1 foot.

2An animal was deemed affected by active lesions if it showed any clinical sign of at least 1 active lesion in ≥ 1 foot, regardless of the simultaneous occurrence of any chronic lesion.

3An animal was deemed affected by chronic lesions if it showed clinical signs of at least 1 chronic lesion in ≥ 1 foot, regardless of the simultaneous occurrence of active lesions.

Bulk milk antibody courses are displayed in Fig.2. Table3shows the results of linear regression analysis. We observed a significant difference between both groups over the 1-year observation period, when bulk milk samples were collected with an interval of 4 months. While there was a slight, but significantly (P= 0.044) higher decline in antibody titers expressed as sample to positive (S/P) ratio within INT compared to CTR farms between month 0 and month 4, the declines from month 4 to month 8 and from month 8 to month 12 were highly significantly (P≤ 0.001) higher in INT as compared to CTR farms.

Course of bulk milk anti-Treponemaantibodies over the 1-year study period in intervention (n= 9) and control farms (n= 10).1Month after beginning of the study: t0= month 0; t1= month 4; t2= month 8; t3= month 12.2Sample to positive ratio. blue = control farms; green = intervention farms; shades are showing the probability of observed data calculated by Kernel density estimation.

Results of linear regression analysis on anti-Treponemaantibody titer course of bulk milk samples, collected every 4 months over the 1-year study period in intervention (n= 9) and control farms (n= 10).

1Month after beginning of the study: t0= month 0; t1= month 4; t2= month 8; t3= month 12.

Histopathological and 16S metagenomic findings are shown in Table4. Figure3displays the findings in a M2 lesion biopsy before treatment, investigated by hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stain, Warthin-Starry (WS) stain, and Fluorescencein situhybridization (FISH). A total of 33 lesional biopsies from 18 randomly selected cows (pre- and posttreatment) were available for histopathological examination, as 2 biopsies had to be discarded due to incomplete sampling and one cow revealed a recurrent M2 lesion 2 months after the end of the treatment (posttreatment; i.e. M5) where the second biopsy was not performed. The 16S metagenomic sequencing was conducted in 16/33 lesional biopsies, since this technique has not been available from the beginning of the study and because of poor DNA quality of 2 biopsies. All pretreatment biopsies were macroscopically characterized as being classic active ulcerative stages with corresponding, histopathological changes of moderate to severe perivascular, chronic, lymphoplasmacytic dermatitis. With the high-throughput sequencing (HTS) approach,Treponema (T.) medium,T. pedis,T. phagedenis, andT. denticolawere detected.

Results of histopathological as well as molecular biological investigations of biopsy samples collected pre- and posttreatment from a subset of cows of intervention farms to evaluate treatment success and BDD-associated pathogens.

1Fluorescencein situhybridization; Cy3 labeled forTreponema (T.)spp.

2Pre = pretreatment; post = posttreatment at 2 months after clinical cure.

3Chronic dermatitis was scored as follows: 0 = no histological changes; 1 = mild, perivascular, chronic, lymphoplasmacytic dermatitis; 2 = moderate perivascular, chronic, lymphoplasmacytic dermatitis; 3 = severe, perivascular, chronic, lymphoplasmacytic dermatitis; keratolysis was scored as follows: 0 = none; 1 = focal; 2 = multifocal; 3 = diffuse31,32.

4Ulceration was scored as follows: 0 = none; 1 = present31.

5Amount of spirochetes detected by Warthin-Starry stain was scored as follows: 0 = no visible spirochetes; 1 = minimal amount; 2 = moderate amount; 3 = high amount31.

6Samples yielding < 10,000 reads were declared as not usable due to insufficient DNA quality.

7Hybridization signal forTreponemaspp. detected by FISH was scored as follows: 0 = no hybridization; 1 = sparse hybridization; 2 = moderate hybridization; 3 = strong hybridization32.

n.a. = not applicable (i.e. no clinical cure); n.p. = analysis not performed since methodology was not available until the middle of the study; n.u. = not usable.

Histopathological appearance and findings of Fluorescencein situhybridization (FISH) in a bovine digital dermatitis lesion biopsy graded as M2 according to Döpfer et al. 199713:(A)keratolysis with ulceration of the epidermis (hematoxylin and eosin stain, magnification 20x);(B)high abundance (asterisk) of spirochetes within deeper layers of the epidermis (Warthin-Starry stain, magnification 40x);(C)deep infiltration ofTreponemassp. into the epidermis visualized by FISH (Cy3 labeled, magnification 40x). Arrowheads indicate spiral-shaped bacteria in (B) and (C).

When combining histopathological findings and results of FISH as prerequisites for healing, in 6/9 (66.7%) cows we did not observe histopathological alterations 2 months posttreatment. Considering results of the histopathological examination, the 16S metagenomics and FISH as prerequisites for healing, 6/7 (85.7%) cows were healed 2 months posttreatment. The mean relative abundance of bacterial genera assessed in biopsies collected before and after treatment is shown in Fig.4.Treponemaspp. was the most prevalent genus detected in pretreatment samples (24.4%). After clinical cure, the proportion ofTreponemaspp. decreased to 0.5% with a simultaneous increase of bacterial diversity. The diversity in the composition of bacterial genera tested within overall pretreatment samples was numerically lower compared to the diversity within overall posttreatment samples (i.e. alpha diversity; Shannon’s index pretreatment, posttreatment: 0.88, 2.15). Furthermore, we observed a moderate difference in the composition of bacterial genera between overall pretreatment and posttreatment samples (i.e. beta diversity; Bray–Curtis dissimilarity: 0.58)30.

Relative abundance of bacterial genera determined by 16S rRNA gene metagenomic sequencing.Treponemawas the most prevalent genus detected in pretreatment biopsy samples (A; total no. of reads = 20,723). After clinical cure, an increased diversity of bacterial genera with simultaneous reduction ofTreponemaspp. was observed (B; total no. of reads = 15,341). The number of total reads reflects the varying quantity of 16S rRNA in the samples.

We were able to markedly reduce prevalences of OL and AL in intervention farms within 1 year by implementing farm-specific control measures targeting internal and external biosecurity and effective treatment of occurring acute lesions compared to a monitored control group. Lack of histopathological findings and bacteriological detection ofTreponemaspp. were observed in most treated animals. However, eradication of the disease at the herd-level was not achieved. The assessment of bulk milk antibody courses was shown to be a useful additional tool for monitoring the efficacy of this program. Since BDD within-herd prevalences of both study groups were quite equal at the beginning of the trial, the significant reduction in the occurrence of BDD over time can be attributed to our intervention measures. To our knowledge, this is the first multicenter controlled study investigating the efficacy of a RAMP for BDD in dairy cattle.

The implemented measures were based on a risk assessment strategy that was developed based on previously published literature, discussion within the research group and the opinion of external experts in the field28,33,34. The mitigation measures for the intervention farms were grouped into “mandatory” and “voluntary” based on feasibility, dictated by the farm management characteristics. Therefore, culling of recurrently infected animals and prevention of overcrowding were considered voluntary mitigation measures. The installation of a footbath was not implemented on any of the farms. Therefore, it was replaced by topical application of claw disinfectants, as an adequate alternative to footbathing35. The present study does not allow to evaluate the effect of individual measures, since all farms included in the final analyses had to comply with a list of several measures.

Combining the results of prevalence assessment by clinical scoring with serological analyses is a new approach when evaluating the efficacy of a RAMP in buiatrics. It might enhance the level of evidence regarding disease surveillance. Clinical scoring of animals restrained in the trimming chute is considered the gold standard of BDD diagnosis, because this is the most sensitive of the clinical methods36. Consequently, only prevalence data collected during the biannual claw trimmings were included in our final analyses. To monitor the occurrence of BDD cases in a regular monthly manner over the 1-year study period, we used a modified scoring method according to Cramer et al. (2018)36to minimize the amount of labor. Pre-washed feet were examined using a flashlight by walking through the pen when animals were restrained in the headlocks. Assessment of the bodyweight distribution and thorough inspection of animals showing abnormal hind-limb position with approx. 50 to 100 cm between the observer and the cow allowed to identify most active lesions that are crucial in disease transmission15. Therefore, the pen walk described can be recommended for the monitoring of such a RAMP.

Previous studies showed the usefulness of an indirect ELISA using bulk milk samples as an additional tool to diagnose BDD at the herd-level18. In the current study, the ELISA was conducted as described by Holzhauer et al. (2023)17to primarily assess the presence of IgG anti-Treponemaantibodies, revealing a solid test performance with a sensitivity of ~ 80% and a specificity of 100%. Our results are in line with the observations of Gomez et al. (2014)16who found significantly lower antibody titers in treated animals that had suffered from M2 lesions compared to levels of those cows that did not undergo any treatment after an average of 220 days. The analysis of antibody titers in bulk milk, therefore, seems to be a useful option for the continuous surveillance of disease progress and the monitoring of BDD control programs. However, so far industry standard categories for high, medium and low prevalences of AL based on bulk milk antibody titers have not been published to the authors’ knowledge.

All biopsy samples were evaluated by both hematoxylin and eosin (HE) and Warthin-Starry (WS) staining. Since WS staining is rather unspecific for the detection of treponemes within deeper layers of the epidermis, additional analytical methods for the detection thereof are necessary. As described by Alsaaod et al. (2022)26the combination of different molecular methods enhances both sensitivity and specificity when assessing bacteriological lesion cure. In this study, the FISH was targeted atTreponemaspp., which did not allow to identify the bacteria at species-level. Therefore, we supplemented this method by full-length 16S rRNA gene high-throughput sequencing (HTS) and bioinformatics analysis. It only was performed in biopsies of 8 cows since HTS was available not earlier than from the middle of this study. Although the number of samples does not allow to perform statistically robust analyses, it might provide insights into the nature of bacterial compositions before and after treatment.

Sequencing of the full-length 16S rRNA gene produces reads ~ 1,400 base pairs, compared to much shorter sequences when targeting the variable gene regions (V3 and V4) commonly used Sanger sequencing or short-read HTS. Analysis of full-length 16S sequences results in increased taxonomic resolution and accuracy37. In addition, HTS based 16S metagenomics allows a quantitative assessment of bacterial communities, includingTreponemaspp., in a given sample. For HTS, there is no defined threshold number of reads required to consider a sample positive. Therefore, we focused on the comparison of the read number pretreatment vs. posttreatment. BDD-related treponemes can also be found as part of the microbiome in biopsy samples of clinically healthy skin38probably due to environmental contamination. To differentiate between infection and colonization, histopathology and molecular methods were combined to assess the epidermal invasion depth of the treponemes. A reliable sign of infection is the invasion of treponemes into deeper layers of the epidermis39. Differentiating between new and latent, re-activated BDD infections remains challenging. In the present study, we decided to sample M2-affected animals 2 months after clinical lesion cure which allows to detect recurrence within this period, since a potential recurrence seems important within the scope of BDD control. Many aspects of both the pathogenesis and immunology of BDD remain unclear until now, including the possibility of intracellular invasion by the pathogens rather than purely extracellular presence. A possible infection of phagocytes with resulting escape of the bacteria from cellular immunity could be one explanation for the high rates of recurrence. The depth of tissue biopsies may thus not always be sufficient to detect treponemes.

The use of SA-based topical treatment represents a change towards a non-antibiotic alternative that addresses both infectious and inflammatory aspects of BDD. This approach aligns with the increasing emphasis on reducing antibiotic use in livestock management22.

We were not able to significantly reduce CL, due to the necessary discontinuation of lesion treatment upon the occurrence of exacerbations. As chronic lesions might reactivate, omission of CL treatment may have markedly contributed to incomplete elimination of BDD at the herd-level.

The application of stringent inclusion criteria followed by a previous sample size calculation ensured robust results. Clinical prevalence data collected during routine herd claw trimmings were used as primary outcomes for the final analyses. Routine herd claw trimmings were defined as at least 80% of the herd being examined and trimmed31. This allows for the highest accuracy in data collection. The implementation of a multicenter study design enhanced the external generalizability of the findings while increasing the variability of the dataset. However, it has to be emphasized that herd sizes in Switzerland are small compared to other countries. This might impair the uncritical transfer of our observations to large-scale farms. Because of a selective dropout of INT farms that were not willing to implement the given mitigation measures or of CTR farms that substantially changed their BDD management, the risk of attrition bias must be considered. Since the inclusion of eligible study herds and their assignment to the respective study group (i.e. CTR vs. INT) were based on farmer’s preference, the present trial required a nonrandomized study design. This represents a potential risk for the occurrence of selection bias. Interobserver variability was tried to be kept low, involving only 2 observers that had to achieve an acceptable agreement of 80% at the beginning of the study.

The RAMP for control of BDD described in this paper was able to significantly reduce the prevalence of OL and AL. Success strongly depends on the farmer’s compliance with the suggested control measures. It must be highlighted that disease control is time-consuming and labor-intensive and must be balanced against the costs. Further studies are necessary to investigate economic aspects accompanying such a RAMP including potentially enhanced animal health and milk/meet production as well as decreased treatment costs and culling rates. Although the study conducted by Pedersen (2019)29revealed similar results by implementing some related measures as we did, the present multicenter controlled study indicates for the first time that a marked reduction in BDD prevalences at the farm-level can be achieved within 1 year by implementation of the described control measures. Future research should focus on the genetics that were shown to have a significant impact on the cow’s risk for infection40–42. Therefore, exclusion from breeding of repeatedly affected or therapy-resistant cows seems to be crucial. Genomic selection towards amelioration of foot health is increasingly and successfully used in different countries such as Canada, United Kingdom, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Finland, and Germany3,43–45. In Switzerland, genetic indices for BDD are recently available for Holstein Friesian, Braunvieh (Brown Swiss as well as Original Brown), Swiss Fleckvieh, and Simmental cattle (unpublished data). Searching for appropriate treatments of M4 lesions requires further research and is of substantial importance for effective disease control. Even if standard industry categories for anti-Treponemaantibody titers in bulk milk are not yet established, screening of bulk milk serology can be a useful tool to complement clinical prevalence assessment. The suggested measures might potentially provide the basis for a nationwide BDD control program that could be of importance also beyond national borders.

Reporting of this study is conducted according to the “Transparent Reporting of Evaluations with Nonrandomized Designs (TREND)” guidelines46. All methods were approved by the ethical committee of the veterinary office of the canton of Bern, Switzerland (national no. 34587; cantonal no. BE26/2022) and performed in compliance with the “Animal Research: Reporting In Vivo Experiments (ARRIVE)” guidelines 2.047.

We designed this nonrandomized clinical intervention study as a prospective multicenter group comparison (INT vs. CTR) to investigate the efficacy of a BDD control program. Sample size was calculated assuming a base-level BDD within-herd prevalence of 0.35 and a reduction of ≥ 50% in INT as effect size, with α = 0.05 and β = 0.8 in a 2-sided test, an intra class correlation coefficient for the herd effect of 0.1, and an expected average herd size of 25 animals. This resulted in a required minimum of 475 analyzable animals in each group.

Within a government-cofunded project to improve claw health in Switzerland (“Healthy claws – the foundation for the future”), data about the occurrence of disorders of the digits is continuously collected by professional claw trimmers via a digital recording software application, as described by Strauss et al. 202148. Using these data, a list of farms revealing a BDD within-herd prevalence of ≥ 20% during the most previous claw trim, having a herd size of at least 20 lactating dairy cows, and performing a biannual preventive claw trimming of the entire herd was created. Eligible farms received a phone call with a short outline of the study and an invitation to participate. If they agreed, a pre-visit was conducted to explain the content of the project and asking for serving as a CTR or INT farm. Allocation to the groups was based on herd owners/managers’ preference and requirements set towards CTR compared to INT farms. They had to sign a contract agreeing to adhere to the recommended control measures described below (i.e. INT farms) or maintain their general management as usual (i.e. CTR farms). At the end of the study, the first author decided whether farmers or herd managers complied sufficiently with the intent of the program. Figure5provides an overview of the study design, conducted measures, and timepoints of data collection.

Study design: Timepoints of interventions, data and sample collection.1Modified according to Cramer et al. (2018)36with prior washing of cow’s feet.2Regular and immediate treatment of BDD lesions until clinical cure as key component. BDD = bovine digital dermatitis; BM = bulk milk; CTR = control farms; INT = intervention farms.

Minimization of manure exposure of the herd by adaption of a higher scraping frequency up to 8 times per day.

The aforementioned measures had to be newly introduced at entrance into the study on INT farms, or those measures already implemented had to be continued. Furthermore, it was recommended to voluntarily avoid over-crowding and to eliminate animals revealing recurrent BDD lesions despite initial clinical cure.

The project started in August of 2022 and was completed in March of 2024. The beginning of the 1-year study period was the first routine claw trimming (t0) in all cases. Farms of the INT group were closely assisted by the research group with implementing the measures mentioned above via regular farm visits with an interval of at least one month. At each visit, all cows were scored for any BDD lesion by the research group when they were fixed in headlocks. Scoring was performed according to Cramer et al. (2018)36with prior washing of animals’ feet.

Animals identified to suffer from any BDD lesion were treated without any delay at weekly intervals until clinical cure using 660 mg/g SA and 7.7 mg methyl salicylate paste (Novaderma ad us. vet., Streuli Tiergesundheit AG, Uznach, Switzerland), applied at a thickness of ~ 0.5 cm. The clinically healthy skin surrounding the lesion was protected from the keratolytic effect of SA by application of a thick coating of Milker’s fat cream (Eutra Tetina, Interlac, Puidoux, Switzerland)26. Feet were multi-layer bandaged including a water-repellent wound pad (Wundpolster, ITIN + HOCH GmbH, Liestal, Switzerland), cotton wool (Kistler Watte, Covetrus AG, Lyssach, Switzerland), cohesive tape (Cohesive bandages, Covetrus BV, Cuijk, The Netherlands), and water-resistant tape (tesa® Gewebeband, Covetrus AG, Lyssach, Switzerland). Visit frequency after the first and second routine claw trimming was once per week to support the farmer with bandage changes. Since exacerbations became apparent as described above in the majority of M4 lesions (50/56 distributed over all INT farms) after treatment, application of SA bandages to this lesion stage was stopped. Those lesions that aggravated were treated with povidone iodine ointment (Vetisept® ad us. vet., Dr. E. Graeub AG, Bern, Switzerland) under bandage to prevent complications like interdigital phlegmon. However, complete clinical cure could not be achieved in most of these cases. M3 lesions were treated throughout the study. Farms serving as CTR also received regular visits once a month, summing up to a total of 13 visits per farm. During these visits data were collected, and farmers were repeatedly inquired for potential changes in their BDD management. They received financial compensation after the end of the study.

On both INT and CTR farms, BDD within-herd prevalences were determined at the cow-level during biannual, routine claw trimmings in the trimming chute by 2 examiners of the research group (AF, JW) and in between once a month when cows were restrained in headlocks or exited the milking parlor by the research group or farmers as follows: (i) animals were deemed affected by BDD in general if they revealed clinical signs of any BDD lesion stage in ≥ 1 foot; (ii) animals showing clinical signs of at least one AL (i.e. M1, M2, M4.1) in ≥ 1 foot were deemed affected for the assessment of active lesion prevalences, regardless of the potential occurrence of chronic lesions; (iii) cows with clinical signs of at least one chronic lesion (i.e. M3, M4) in ≥ 1 foot were considered as chronically affected, even if they suffered simultaneously from any active lesion.

Since 2 different examiners (AF, JW) collected prevalence data at the claw trimmings, a raw agreement of ≥ 80% had to be achieved taking interobserver reliability into consideration. For this purpose, all examiners assessed M-stages of one herd during the claw trimming in a blinded setting at the beginning of the study according to the scoring system described by Döpfer et al. (1997)13, modified by Berry et al. (2012)14. All data were transferred to Microsoft Excel (Office 2013, Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA/USA).

Bulk milk samples were obtained every 4 months on both INT and CTR farms to investigate antibody courses over the 1-year observation period. All samples were collected using bronopol as preservative (10-ml milk sampling tubes, Suisselab AG Zollikofen, Zollikofen, Switzerland) and stored at − 20 °C until analysis. They were sent to the Royal GD Animal Health Laboratory (Deventer, The Netherlands) for processing and analysis.

Biopsies of M2 lesions were taken before treatment and 2 months after clinical cure only in cases of M5 in a subsample of cows of INT farms (2 lesions per farm via stratified random sampling). BDD lesions were cleaned thoroughly with water and dried off with paper towels, followed by topical disinfection as described by Alsaaod et al. (2022)26. The foot was anesthetized using 2 different techniques depending on the localization of the lesion. If lesions were present within the interdigital cleft, a 2-point nerve block (20 mL of 2% lidocaine hydrochloride; Lidocain 2% Streuli ad us. vet., Streuli Tiergesundheit AG, Uznach, Switzerland) was applied52. In cases where lesions were located abaxially, an intravenous regional analgesia (Antalovsky block) was performed using the same medication as mentioned above53. Sampling and sample processing were done according to Alsaaod et al. (2022)26. In brief, 4-mm punch biopsies were taken and divided into 2 equal parts. One half was placed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for a maximum of 40 days until processing for histopathological examination. The other half was stored in an Eppendorf tube at − 20˚C until use for DNA extraction.

Biopsy samples were routinely processed, paraffin-embedded and 4 μm slides were prepared. All sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE)54and the Warthin-Starry stain (WS)55. Histopathological scoring of sections was conducted according to Read & Walker (1998)31and adapted by Klitgaard et al. (2011)32to evaluate the presence and severity of epidermal ulceration, keratolysis, acanthosis, epidermal as well as dermal changes, and bacterial colonization. Signs for treponeme-associated dermatitis include (i) focally circumscribed hyperplastic epidermis with or without parakeratotic proliferation, (ii) loss of stratum granulosum, (iii) present inflammatory response within the dermis. Keratolysis was assessed using the following score: 0 = none; 1 = focal; 2 = multifocal; 3 = diffuse. Chronic dermatitis was scored as follows: 0 = no visible changes; 1 = mild, perivascular, chronic, lymphoplasmacytic dermatitis; 2 = moderate, perivascular, chronic, lymphoplasmacytic dermatitis; 3 = severe, perivascular, chronic, lymphoplasmacytic dermatitis. The abundance of spirochetes evaluated by WS was classified as: 0 = nonvisible; 1 = minimal amount; 2 = moderate amount, 3 = high amount of spirochetes. For imaging, the Leica DMRB microscope was used (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany).

FISH analysis was done as previously described by Alsaaod et al. (2022)56. The following oligonucleotide probe forTreponemaspp. was used for FISH analysis: 5’-CAGAAACYCGCCTTCGCC-3’ (known as the S-S-TrepGenus-725 probe). In brief, hybridization was performed at 45 °C for 14 h with 100 µl of hybridization buffer. The final probe concentration was set to 5 ng/µl. After hybridization, the slides were washed with buffer, rinsed in water, dried, and mounted in Vectashield (Vector Laboratories Inc., Burlingame, CA/USA) for fluorescence microscopy. The probe was 5’ labeled with the isothiocyanate derivative Cyanine3 (Cy3; Eurofins MWG Operon, Ebersberg, Germany). To visualize the targeted fluorescent labeled proteins, an Axioimager M1 microscope was used. Images were obtained using an AxioCam MRm version 3 FireWire monochrome camera and AxioVision software, version 4.5 (Carl Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany).

DNA was extracted from skin biopsies using the Maxwell RSC DNA System (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI/USA). The starting DNA was assessed for quantity, quality and purity using a Qubit 4.0 fluorometer (Qubit dsDNA HS Assay kit;Q32851, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA/USA) and the Advanced Analytical FEMTO Pulse instrument (Genomic DNA 165 kb Kit; FP-1002-0275, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA/USA). Thereafter, the PCR amplification of bacterial full-length 16S rRNA genes (V1—V9 regions) was done according to the PN 101-599-700 procedure and checklist document from PacBio (London, United Kingdom) using primers.

5’-GCATC/barcode/AGRGTTYGATYMTGGCTCAG-3’ (known as the 27 F primer) and 5’-GCATC/barcode/RGYTACCTTGTTACGACTT-3’ (known as the 1492R primer). The barcodes are composed of 16 nt. The barcoded amplicons were pooled equi-volume, and a single-molecule real-time sequencing (SMRT) bell library was generated using the SMRTbell prep kit 3.0 procedure and checklist document PN 102-359-000 from PacBio.

SMRT sequencing was performed on the Sequel IIe instrument (PacBio) with the Sequel Sequencing kit 3.0, using a SMRT Cells 8 M with 2 h pre-extension followed by a 10 h movie time. Thereafter, the Circular Consensus Sequencing (CCS) generation was performed on the Sequel IIe to generate highly accurate single molecule reads (HiFi reads) and the barcode demultiplexing workflow was run in SMRT Link v11.1. All steps were performed at the Next Generation Sequencing Platform, University of Bern, Switzerland. HiFi reads were quality filtered with a cut-off set at Q20 and scaled to 10,000 reads per sample. The reads were then classified into bacterial taxa with the pb-16S-nf workflow (https://github.com/PacificBiosciences/HiFi-16S-workflow). Read counts per bacterial genus were extracted for samples before (pretreatment) and after (posttreatment). Only genera with total reads counts > 100 were further analyzed. Data were curated in Microsoft Excel (Office 2013, Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA/USA) and Fig.4was generated by GraphPad Prism 10 (GraphPad, Boston, MA/USA). To estimate the diversity of bacterial genera within pre- and posttreatment samples (i.e. alpha diversity), Shannon’s index was used combining richness and eveness of each genus. Compositional differences in bacterial genera between pre- and posttreatment samples were measured by calculating the Bray–Curtis dissimilarity (i.e. beta diversity)30.

Statistical analyses were performed using SPSS Statistics 25 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY/USA) and R software (R: A language and environment for statistical computing, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria,https://www.r-project.org/). Categorical variables were described by frequency distributions, and continuous data were summarized by the mean ± standard deviation (SD) or median and range. Normal distribution was checked using histograms and the Shapiro-Wilk test.

Differences of characteristics between INT and CTR farms at the beginning of the study were tested using the Mann-Whitney U test, Chi-square test or Student’s t test, depending on how data were distributed and scaled.

To analyze the association between the occurrence of BDD at the cow-level as binary outcome at t0, t1, and t2(i.e. biannual claw trimmings during the 1-year study period) and group (INT vs. CTR), mixed logistic regression models accounting for clustering at the herd-level and for repeated measures on the same animal were computed using the lme4 package in R. Three separate models were built for OL, AL, and CL, considering the following factors as fixed: timepoint (t0, t1, t2), group (INT vs. CTR), interaction timepoint × group, and breed. The individual cow was the experimental unit.

To evaluate the association between bulk milk antibody titers (i.e. S/P values) as metric outcome at t0, t1, t2, and t3and group (INT vs. CTR), a mixed linear regression model was calculated, considering antibody titer of the farm as experimental unit, and accounting for repeated measures from the same farm. Timepoint, group and the interaction timepoint × group were set as explanatory variables. The predicted values were obtained from the models using fitted values with best linear unbiased estimates. Assumptions for this model were checked by normality test, Levene’s test and plots of residuals.

The goodness of model fit was assessed using the Akaike information criterion and by visual evaluation of residuals57. The level of significance was set atP≤ 0.05.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

We thank the Next Generation Sequencing Platform of the University of Bern for performing the high-throughput sequencing experiments and the Institute of Genetics of the Vetsuisse Faculty of the University of Bern for DNA extraction.