Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis is a rare autosomal recessive lipid storage disorder involving bile acid biosynthesis. Reduced mitochondrial cytochrome P450 enzyme activity leads to abnormal lipid accumulation in various tissues, especially tendons, lenses, and the central and peripheral nervous systems. This condition manifests with systemic symptoms such as neurological disorders, atherosclerosis, tendon xanthomas, and cataracts. Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis typically presents in individuals with homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in theCYP27A1gene because of its autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. However, the phenotypic expression in heterozygous carriers remains uncertain.

We report a 53-year-old Japanese man who was clinically diagnosed with familial hypercholesterolemia. He presented with marked Achilles tendon xanthomas and refractory hyper-low-density-lipoprotein cholesterolemia. Initiation of intensified lipid-lowering therapy, including inclisiran, resulted in improvement of hyper-low-density-lipoprotein cholesterolemia. Genetic testing revealed heterozygous mutations inCYP27A1(p.Arg405Gln) andapolipoprotein B(APOB) (p.Pro955Ser). He had no neurological symptoms, cataracts, or other features suggestive of cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis without Achilles tendon xanthomas.

This case highlights a rare presentation of a potentialCYP27A1heterozygous mutation-related phenotype. TheAPOB(p.Pro955Ser) variant is associated with reduced low-density-lipoprotein receptor activity, contributing to hyper-low-density-lipoprotein cholesterolemia and Achilles tendon xanthomas. However, this patient’s Achilles tendon xanthoma was thicker than those reported in previous cases withAPOB(p.Pro955Ser) gene mutations, suggesting a potential contribution from theCYP27A1mutation. Although the patient did not exhibit elevated serum cholestanol levels or other cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis features, the marked Achilles tendon thickening raises the possibility that the combination of a heterozygousCYP27A1gene mutation and anAPOBgene mutation contributed to the condition.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13256-025-05481-y.

Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX) is a rare autosomal recessive lipid storage disorder involving bile acid biosynthesis. It results from mutations in theCYP27A1gene, causing a deficiency of the mitochondrial cytochrome P450 enzyme, sterol 27-hydroxylase [1]. Reduced enzyme activity leads to abnormal lipid accumulation in various tissues, especially tendons, lenses, and the central and peripheral nervous systems. This condition manifests with systemic symptoms such as neurological disorders, atherosclerosis, tendon xanthomas, and cataracts [2]. CTX typically presents in individuals with homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in theCYP27A1gene because of its autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. However, the phenotypic expression in heterozygous carriers remains uncertain. In this paper, we report the case of a patient with heterozygousCYP27A1gene mutation presenting with significant Achilles tendon xanthoma (ATX).

A 53-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital for further evaluation of hyper-low-density lipoprotein (hyper-LDL) cholesterolemia. He had been diagnosed with hyper-LDL cholesterol since at least the age of 20 years, but he had not sought medical attention. At the age of 52 years, a health checkup revealed liver dysfunction (i.e., aspartate aminotransferase, 31 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 49 U/L; alkaline phosphatase, 64 U/L; and gamma-glutamyltransferase, 159 U/L) and hyper-LDL cholesterolemia (246 mg/dL). These findings prompted him to visit a local medical doctor. He was diagnosed with a fatty liver and began LDL cholesterol-lowering therapy (i.e., rosuvastatin [10 mg] and ezetimibe [10 mg]). Despite these treatments, his LDL cholesterol levels remained at approximately 140 mg/dL. Owing to the presence of refractory hyper-LDL cholesterolemia, familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) was suspected. He was referred to our hospital for further evaluation. He had no family history of premature coronary artery disease (CAD), although his mother, son, and daughter had been diagnosed with dyslipidemia (Fig.1).

Laboratory tests revealed the following lipid profile: total cholesterol level was 213 mg/dL; LDL cholesterol level, 137 mg/dL; high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol level, 41 mg/dL; and triglyceride level, 213 mg/dL. We evaluated the ATX with soft X-ray radiography and ultrasonography. His Achilles tendons were markedly thickened on both sides, measuring 14.9 mm on X-ray imaging (Fig.2A) and 13.3 mm on ultrasound imaging (Figs.2B and C). Carotid ultrasonography showed an increased maximum intimamedia thickness of 1.9 mm in the common carotid artery and a carotid plaque score of 7.5. Coronary computed tomography angiography revealed mild stenosis with small calcifications in all coronary arteries, including moderate stenosis in the left anterior descending artery (Figs.3A, B, and C). The lesion was evaluated for ischemia, but the results were negative.

He met the diagnostic criteria for FH, established by the Japan Atherosclerosis Society, such as high LDL cholesterol levels (i.e., untreated LDL cholesterol level ≥ 180 mg/dL) and ATX (i.e., thickness > 8 mm in men, on the basis of soft X-ray radiography, or thickness > 6 mm, on the basis of ultrasonography) [3]. We initiated further treatment, with the aim of achieving an LDL cholesterol level < 70 mg/dL, on the basis of the secondary prevention guidelines for patients with FH in Japan. We administered the maximum dose of statins (e.g., rosuvastatin, 20 mg) and ezetimibe. However, the reduction in the LDL cholesterol level was inadequate. In addition, we administered inclisiran (twice yearly, 300 mg), which decreased the LDL cholesterol level to approximately 50 mg/dL. We also performed genetic tests to investigate the background of this situation.

A heterozygous mutation inCYP27A1(p.Arg405Gln), which is causative for CTX, was identified. Furthermore, a heterozygous mutation in apolipoprotein B (APOB) (p.Pro955Ser) was detected. Although this heterozygous mutation inAPOBis not a causative variant of the FH gene, it contributes to elevated LDL cholesterol levels [3]. We suggested a further examination of xanthomas and genetic testing for his mother and daughter, but they declined.

The patient had no neurological symptoms, cataracts, or other features suggestive of CTX. His serum cholestanol level was within the normal range (2.1 μg/mL), thereby excluding a diagnosis of CTX, on the basis of the established criteria.

In Japan, the cause of hyper-LDL cholesterolemia is often FH (affecting 1/200–500 individuals). FH is an autosomal hereditary disease involving markedly increased serum LDL cholesterol levels; the formation of xanthomas, including those causing Achilles tendon thickening; and early-onset CAD [3]. Genetic testing is not required for a diagnosis. However, identifying pathogenic mutations in genes involved in LDL metabolism, such as the LDL receptor, along with hyper-LDL cholesterolemia, is regarded as a definitive diagnosis. Heterozygous FH can also result from pathogenic mutations inAPOBor gain-of-function mutations in proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9), both of which are essential regulators of LDL metabolism. Genetic mutations responsible for heterozygous FH are detected in 60–80% of patients clinically diagnosed with the condition [4].

CTX is a disorder that causes atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease and needs to be differentiated from FH. CTX is an autosomal recessive hereditary disease diagnosed from symptoms such as tendon xanthomas, typically Achilles tendon xanthomas; reduced intelligence; ataxia; speech impediments; cataracts; cerebellar symptoms; and high blood cholestanol levels [2].

In this patient, we identified a heterozygous mutation in theCYP27A1gene (p.Arg405Gln), which is the causative gene for CTX, and a heterozygous mutation in theAPOBgene (p.Pro955Ser), which is not a causative gene for FH.

Two key points need to be discussed in this case: (1) whether the heterozygous mutation inCYP27A1contributed to the development of ATX and (2) whether the unidentified causative genes of FH contributed to this patient’s condition.

CTX is an autosomal recessive disorder that typically manifests only in individuals with homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in theCYP27A1gene. The phenotypic expression of heterozygous mutations remains unclear. Similarly to CTX, phenotypic manifestations of heterozygous variants have also been reported in familial sitosterolemia, an autosomal recessive disorder. Carriers of heterozygous mutations in the ATP-binding cassette transporter G5 or G8 genes have been shown to exhibit significantly higher sitosterol and LDL cholesterol levels compared with noncarriers and have an increased risk of coronary artery disease [5]. These findings suggest that heterozygous carriers of mutations in theCYP27A1gene, which is responsible for CTX, may likewise exhibit phenotypic manifestations.

This patient exhibited significant ATX, a characteristic feature of CTX, but did not show elevated serum cholestanol levels or other specific findings typically associated with CTX. In addition, a heterozygous mutation in theAPOBgene (p.Pro955Ser) was detected, which is characteristic of East Asian populations. This mutation reportedly reduces LDL receptor activity, thereby impairing LDL uptake and contributing to elevated LDL cholesterol levels. The impact of this mutation on hyper-LDL cholesterolemia has been reported recently in a study involving Japanese individuals clinically diagnosed with FH, which suggested that this genetic abnormality may have contributed to this patient’s condition. In the study, the Achilles tendon thickening in patients with theAPOB(p.Pro955Ser) variant was reported as 10.6 ± 2.7 mm [6]. However, our patient had marked thickening of 14.9 mm, which is a characteristic finding of CTX. This finding suggested the involvement of the heterozygousCYP27A1gene mutation in this patient. In addition to the mutation in theAPOBgene (p.Pro955Ser), age, environmental factors such as diet, or other genetic factors contribute to the severity of or variability in the FH phenotype [6]. The contribution of the combination of a heterozygousCYP27A1gene mutation and anAPOBgene mutation to the development of significant ATX is worth considering. More information could have been obtained if an evaluation of ATX and genetic testing had been performed on his family, who had been diagnosed with dyslipidemia. However, they declined the tests.

This patient was clinically diagnosed as having FH. It may represent a case of FH with an unidentified causative gene, although the marked Achilles tendon thickening raises the possibility that the combination of a heterozygousCYP27A1gene mutation and anAPOBgene mutation contributed to the condition. Owing to its rarity, this case is reported as an unusual presentation of a potentialCYP27A1heterozygous mutation-related phenotype.