Extracellular vesicles
(EVs) are nanosized particles that are associated
with various physiological and pathological functions. They play a
key role in intercell communication and are used as transport vehicles
for various cell components. In human milk, EVs are believed to be
important for the development of acquired immunity. State-of-the-art
analysis methods are not able to provide label-free chemical information
at the single-vesicle level. We introduce a protocol to profile the
structure and composition of individual EVs with the help of atomic
force microscopy infrared spectroscopy (AFM-IR), a nanoscale chemical
imaging technique. The protocol includes the immobilization of EVs
onto a silicon surface functionalized with anti-CD9 antibodies via
microcontact printing. AFM-IR measurements of immobilized EVs provide
size information and mid-infrared spectra at subvesicle spatial resolution.
The received spectra compare favorably to bulk reference spectra.
A key part of our protocol is a technique to acquire spectral information
about a large number of EVs through hyperspectral imaging combined
with image processing to correct for image drift and select individual
vesicles.

It has been previously shown that atomic force microscopy
infrared
(AFM-IR) is capable of acquiring mid-IR spectra of individual EVs
and can thus provide label-free chemical information at the single
EV level. AFM-IR is a hyphenation technique
of atomic force microscopy and infrared spectroscopy, which enables
the acquisition of infrared spectra at nanoscale (≈20 nm) spatial
resolution, i.e., far below the diffraction limit of optical mid-IR
microscopy.,In AFM-IR, the sample is placed
in a scanning probe microscope and illuminated with a pulsed, tunable
infrared light. Parts of the sample that absorb the incident radiation
will heat and expand. The transient thermal expansion induces oscillations
in the cantilever. It has been shown that the amplitude of these oscillations
is proportional to local infrared absorption. This work goes beyond the demonstration of feasibility of AFM-IR
EV analysis by Kim et al. in three key
steps: (1) by using tapping mode AFM-IR instead of contact mode, fragile
vesicles can be measured repeatedly, (2)
by performing hyperspectral imaging rather than single-point spectroscopy,
a large number of vesicles can be analyzed in a time efficient manner
and spectral information can be localized within vesicles, and (3)
through selective immobilization of EVs instead of drop-casting from
solution.

The immobilization is based on microcontact-printed
anti-CD9 antibodies
on a silicon substrate. These antibodies capture EVs, which are known
to present CD9 antigens on their surface. This step removes the coffee ring effect that is typically seen
in drop-casting deposition techniques, which leads to crowding of
vesicles at the edge of the droplet and thus makes it hard to find
isolated EVs in the AFM image. Furthermore, affinity capture allows
us to wash away vesicles and other particles in the solution that
do not express the CD9 antigen, relaxing the requirement for EV purification
before deposition. A schematic representation of the microcontact-printed
anti-CD9 antibody immobilization method is illustrated inFigure.

Schematic depiction of
EV capturing and analysis. EVs are captured
on a functionalized Si surface through antibody–antigen interaction.
EVs are measured using an AFM-IR system in the top-illumination geometry.

Due to the very high spatial resolution of AFM
(nanometer scale),
small ambient temperature changes and piezo actuator creep, among
others, introduce noticeable image translation and distortion. This
thermal drift describes the unwanted movement of the AFM cantilever
tip relative to the sample due to the AFM components reacting to changes
of temperature. Strategies to reduce
thermal drift are hardware improvements, scanning algorithms, or image
reconstruction algorithms. For instance,
a thermal drift-corrected cantilever, where a high-resolution silicon probe is attached to a soft silicon
nitride (SiN) cantilever, is used to minimize temperature fluctuations.
Alternatively, a thermostatic control system is applied to maintain
a stable temperature. Additionally to
these hardware solutions, techniques such as local circular scanning
(LCS), where local scans are used to
accurately measure the amount of drift to adjust the AFM tip, or cross-diagonal
scanning combined with adaptive filtering, can be used. Another feasible strategy would be to divide the AFM
image into multiple sections and perform local scans to compensate
for the drift. In the scope of this article,
we apply an approach based on scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT)
to topography images to correct the drift in AFM-IR images. This is
a key enabling step in using AFM-IR for hyperspectral imaging.

This study was
conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki,
and the protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee for Biomedical
Research of the Health Research Institute La Fe (Valencia, Spain;
approval number 2019–289–1). A volunteer donor was enrolled
at the Human Milk Bank of the University and Polytechnic Hospital
La Fe (Valencia, Spain) after signing an informed consent form. HM
was collected following the instructions of the hospital staff using
an electric breast milk pump. A 25 mL HM aliquot from full expression
was set aside and immediately centrifuged twice at 3000gfor 10 min at room temperature for cream, cell, and platelet removal.
The defatted milk was transferred to a dry tube. Tubes were placed
in a freezer at −80 °C for storage. HMEVs were isolated
as described elsewhere by a multistep ultracentrifugation protocol. Here, the defatted milk was again centrifuged
at 3000gfor 10 min to remove remaining milk fat
and milk fat globules. The supernatant was then transferred into a
25 mL polycarbonate bottle for ultracentrifugation. After ultracentrifugation
at 30,000 rpm for 2h at 4 °C, the HMEVs were retrieved as a pellet.
In the final pellet, total protein (BCA-assay) and particle count
(nanoparticle tracking analysis (NTA)) were determined. The protein
concentration was 4.73 μg μL–1, and
the number of particles was 6.49 × 108± 0.376
× 108mL–1with a particle size
of 209.7 nm ± 7 nm. In the end, the pellet was reconstituted
in 200 μL of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and stored at −80
°C until analysis.

The preparation
of substrates followed the protocol by Lindner et al. and Schütz et al. Briefly,
silicon substrates (CrysTec, thickness 0.525 mm,
specific resistance >3000 Ωcm Orientation (100)) were plasma
cleaned and then covered by 100 μL of AnteoBindBiosensor liquid
for 45 min. The AnteoBind liquid was then cast off, and the substrate
was rinsed with 5 mL of Milli-Q water using a pipet. AnteoBind forms
a thin (a few nanometers) film on the silicon substrate which is able
to immobilize proteins through coordination bonds. Next, 30 μL of a 20 μg mL–1Anti-CD9 solution (Sigma-Aldrich, Anti-CD9 antibody produced in
rabbit, 1 μg mL–1in buffered aqueous solution)
was incubated onto a PDMS-stamp. The PDMS-stamp had 3 μm circles
spaced 3 μm apart in a 0.25 cm2area for microcontact
printing. The stamp was rinsed with 2 mL of Milli-Q water using a
pipet, dried with pressurized air, and then placed onto the prepared
silicon substrate for 15 min. After removal of the stamp and further
rinsing with 5 mL Milli-Q water, the pattern was backfilled with 100
μL 20 μg mL–1bovine serum albumin (BSA)
in PBS.

A stick-on incubation
chamber (Grace Bio-Laboratories, FlexWellIncubation Chambers, 3.5
mL × 3.5 mL Wells, 1.8 mL Depth 25 mL × 75 mL OD, Black
Silicone - Adhesive One Side) was placed on the silicon substrate.
50 μL of the EV sample solutions, diluted in PBS at a ratio
of 1:10, were pipetted into these chambers. The substrates, including
the EV solution, were incubated for 24 h at around 7 °C. Then,
the incubation chambers were removed, and the substrates were rinsed
with approximately 5 mL of Milli-Q water using a pipet and air-dried
before the AFM-IR measurement.

AFM-IR measurements
were performed using a commercial AFM-IR system (nano-IR 3s, Bruker)
coupled to an external cavity quantum cascade laser (EC-QCL) array
(MIRcat-QT, Daylight Solutions). The measured spectra covered a range
from 910 to 1950 cm–1at a spectral resolution of
1 cm–1. The cantilevers used were gold-coated and
had a nominal first free resonance at 300 ± 100 kHz and a spring
constant between 20 and 75 N m–1(Tap300GB-G, BudgetSensors).
AFM-IR measurements were carried out in tapping mode. The cantilever was driven at its second resonance frequency
(f2= 1500 kHz), and the AFM-IR signal
was demodulated at the first resonance frequency (f1≈ 250 kHz) with a digital lock-in amplifier (MFLI,
Zurich Instruments). The laser source worked on a duty cycle of up
to 20% and emitted laser pulses up to 500 mW. The laser power was
adjusted between 14.75 and 100% of the original power with metal mesh
attenuators. The whole instrument was purged with dry air generated
by an adsorbent dry air generator. Spectra were collected in triplicates
using a power of up to 63.65%. AFM-IR imaging was done measuring 1000
horizontal and 512 vertical lines for an image size between 1.5 μm
× 1.5 μm to 2.6 μm × 2.6 μm using a scan
rate of 0.15 Hz, a laser attenuation of 63.65%, a set point of 6.3
V, and a driving strength of 1.21%.

To counteract the
lateral drift and distortion between single-wavelength AFM-IR images,
image alignment was employed. Since AFM-IR provides a topography image
together with each infrared absorption image, we can use the sample
topography for alignment: SIFT was used to detect similar features
in the topography images to align the infrared absorption images accordingly
in a subsequent step. SIFT recognizes features even when they are
shifted, scaled, or rotated and thus
allows to also correct for rotation and skew of images.

Recorded AFM-IR
spectra were averaged by location and smoothed using an Eiler’s
smoother. To correct for sample drift
during acquisition, a topography image was recorded after every third
spectrum. These images were then used to correct the images using
the same alignment procedure as described inSection. This scheme works only
if the thermal drift is small compared to the resolution of AFM-IR
within the time it takes to record spectra and reference images (Figure S1). Within the acquisition time of 10
s for one spectrum, a drift of less than 5 nm is expected.

A supervised classification
algorithm was used to distinguish substrate (background) and sample
pixels in the chemical images. Tapping mode phase information and
height information were recorded with each AFM-IR image. Training
sets of pixels belonging to either substrate or EVs were selected
manually. These pixels were used to establish a linear discriminant
analysis (LDA) classifier. This classifier was then used to identify
the background and EV pixels for further analysis. Non-negative matrix
factorization (NMF) was applied to EV pixels in combined absorption
images to find trends in the chemical composition of EVs.

All
of the data processing steps were performed using Python version 3.10.6.
SIFT was used in the implementation of scikit-image version 0.22.0,
and LDA and NMF were used in the implementation of scikit-learn version
1.3.1.

A common strategy
in AFM-IR analysis of a new sample type is to
first identify the structure and areas of interest via topography
imaging and then collect a few exploratory AFM-IR point spectra at
selected locations. Here, we first scanned a 5 μm × 5 μm
area containing a 3 μm diameter anti-CD9 functionalized circle.
A large EV (diameter ≈ 300 nm) was selected, and point spectra
were collected. These spectra were found to exhibit the same absorption
bands as reference spectra from bulk EVs collected by Ramos et al. (seeFigurea). The spectra are dominated by the 1737 cm–1band, which is associated with the saturated CO stretch
vibration of lipids.,Bonds located at 1392 and 1451
cm–1are associated with CH2bending
of lipidic acyl chains and COO- symmetric stretch, respectively.,The 1392 cm–1band maximum is slightly shifted
from the 1402 cm–1position described by Ramos-Garcia
et al., but this shift is negligible
compared to the overall width of the band. The most important bands
for the characterization of EVs are the bands associated with the
amide I vibration, originating from the CO of the protein-peptide
backbone, and amide II, which is dominated
by the N–H bending vibrations of the peptide groups and the
C–N stretching vibrations. In
this case, we can see small broad bands around 1646 cm–1and around 1542 cm–1, which can be associated
with amide I and amide II, respectively.,The relative intensities of the CO and amide I and II bands
differ markedly from those observed in the bulk spectra. We interpret
this as an effect of laser focusing and pointing present in AFM-IR.
Specifically, the normalization of the AFM-IR signal is done via the
total laser intensity, while the AFM-IR amplitude is proportional
to the local intensity and thus depends on the size and position of
the laser spot at different wavelengths. This effect can also be observed
at 1520 and 1685 cm–1, where the baseline shows
a jump because the instrument switches from one laser chip to another.
It should also be pointed out that the analyzed vesicle here has a
height of around 25 nm, and the lipid bilayer has a thickness of 5
to 8 nm. Thus, while the depth sensitivity
of AFM-IR has recently been described, the thickness is small enough that spectra represent a full vesicle
not just the outer layers.

Point spectra at different locations within
an EV. Mean cluster
AFM-IR spectra of EVs (a) compared well to a bulk FTIR spectrum of
EVs (red). AFM-IR spectra are all averages of three spectra taken
at the same location and smoothed using an Eiler’s smoother
(seeS2). Color of spectra (seeS2) corresponds to the color of the approximate
sampling position markers in the AFM topography image (b).

A summary of band assignments is provided inTable. In general, a large
difference
in relative
intensities was found at different locations (seeFiguresa andS2), indicating that a single vesicle shows a high compositional
heterogeneity at the spatial resolution of AFM-IR. It should be noted
that the substrate did not show a significant AFM-IR signal beyond
a single band at 1260 cm–1, which can be assigned
to (Si) vibrations of the substrate or cantilever (seeFigure S3).

The chemical heterogeneity within a single
EV was also apparent
in AFM-IR images (seeFigure) recorded at wavenumbers corresponding to a series of absorption
bands of intense spectral features inFigurea: 1392, 1542, 1620, 1646, and 1737 cm–1. Here, the intensity distributions differ depending
on the absorption band. It should be noted that while large trends
within the signal distributions exist, some of the strongly absorbing
areas are only a few tens of nanometers in size. It should be noted
that the AFM-IR signal amplitude is affected by the stiffness of the
mechanical contact and other factors, such as whether the cantilever is driven at the center of the resonance
or slightly off resonance. The tapping
phase and tapping IR phase images corresponding to the chemical images
inFigure(seeFigure S4) show that the phase changes across
the large vesicle, indicating a change in mechanical contact stiffness
and/or resonance frequency of the cantilever. Thus, even though the
signal at the upper side of the vesicle is lower than at the lower
side, this does not indicate a change in absorption. A similar ”half-moon
effect” has also been observed in spherical structures by other
researchers.

Raw AFM-IR maps of EVs
taken at (a) 1392 cm–1, (b) 1620 cm–1, (c) 1646 cm–1, and (d) 1737 cm–1. The images show high location
dependence of the AFM-IR signal within the EV, marked by the arrows,
and large differences in distribution at different wavenumbers. The
corresponding topography image is found inFigureb.

This chemical heterogeneity poses a problem when
using single-point
spectra for the characterization of chemical differences between different
EVs: in order to accurately capture the composition of a single EV,
a spectral grid at the spatial resolution of AFM-IR, i.e., 10 to 20
nm, would be required. This not only would make the analysis of a
single EV forbiddingly cumbersome but would also cause issues of positioning
errors: as AFM exhibits a slow thermal drift in position (typically
in the range of nanometers per minute), taking a larger number of
single spectra leads to increasing uncertainty of the actual position.
This can be partially overcome by taking a topography image after
every few spectra to correct for this drift as described above at
the cost of increasing acquisition time.

Therefore, in this
work, we collected high-pixel resolution AFM-IR
images at a series of selected wavelengths (or ”marker bands”).
For brevity’s sake, we refer to the fast scanning direction
as ”x” and the slow scanning direction
as ”y”. Furthermore,ywas along the direction of the cantilever, andxwas orthogonal to it. The topography channel of each image is then
used to determine the drift between images and correct for it using
SIFT. Results of this process are shown inFigure, and the full results are shown inS5.

Three markers chosen on the topography reference
image (a) and
the compared topography image (b). The SIFT algorithm was used to
determine the drift between the images, and the images were overlaid
in part (c). All of the markers from parts (a, b) were projected on
the overlaid image (c), and the difference can be observed. We found
a maximum difference of ± 12.9 nm inxand ±
9.3 nm iny.

The performance of SIFT alignment of AFM-IR images
was evaluated
by manually determining the pixel coordinates of distinctive features
on images and their offsets between images before and after correction.
The SIFT algorithm was able to correct the drift with a maximum error
of ± 12.9 nm in thexdirection and ± 9.3
nm in theydirection.Tableshows the difference in the positions for
points before and after the SIFT correction.

Once the full set of images has been
recorded and drift-corrected,
the AFM-IR images are stacked to generate a single hypermap data set,
which can be evaluated using a range of chemometric techniques. In
this work, the image size was chosen such that a larger number (here
≈30) of EVs was covered within a single image, parallelizing
the analysis (seeFigure). By setting up the AFM-IR instrument to automatically collect
a series of images (i.e., one per marker band), this process can be
carried out without user interaction after the initial setup.Figureshows a topographic
overview of the scanned area.

(a) Loading plot of the NMF analysis and the corresponding
mean
AFM-IR spectrum. (b) Score plot of the identified pixels.

Topography image of the area, where the AFM-IR
images were taken
from.

NMF is used in exploratory data
analysis to identify patterns by
dimensionality reduction. In the case of spectroscopy, NMF can be
thought of as decomposing the matrix of all sample spectraV(with one spectrum per row) into a product of two matricesV=W H, wherebyHcontains row-wise
spectra of ”pure” components andWcontains
row-wise contributions of said components to each experimental spectrum.
The number of components for NMF was selected by using principal component
analysis (PCA). The first four principal components (PCs) explained
99% of the total variance (seeFigure S6); hence, four PCs were used for NMF (seeFigure). When mapping the contributions of the components onto the
pixels, they largely showed smooth changes, which is a good indication
that they correspond to the changes in the AFM-IR signal rather than
noise. It should also be noted that the data is normalized to the
band of 1260 cm–1before performing NMF; thus, the
before-mentioned effect on the IR images should not have a big effect
on the analysis.

The loading values (Figure) describe the relationship between the components
and the
AFM-IR signals. A higher value indicates that this wavenumber contributes
more to the score of the corresponding NMF component. In the zeroth
component (blue), high values can be seen at 1392 and 1737 cm–1. This component likely corresponds to the EV membrane,
as it is distributed evenly across the EV surface area. Additionally,
it is known that the membrane consists of a lipid bilayer. This is
further supported, as the value at 1737 cm–1, which
is assigned to the saturated CO stretch, is relatively high.
The highest value at 1392 cm–1is likely showing
contributions from lipids and proteins, strengthening the idea that
this component describes the lipid bilayer. The first component (orange)
shows a high value of 1737 cm–1. This component
likely corresponds to the membrane, as it is evenly distributed across
EVs with a few hotspots. Additionally, the small contribution from
1620 cm–1also shows some protein in these areas.
The second component (green) shows high values at the amide I band
and a small value at the 1737 cm–1band. This component
can be used to identify the location of proteins within individual
EVs. Again, some areas in the score plot have a higher value, so it
is possible to identify the ”hotspots” of content in
the vesicles. Additionally, these hotspots point toward α-helix
or disordered protein structure. The third component (red) shows high
values at 1392, 1542, and 1620 cm–1, whereas the
signal at 1646 and 1737 cm–1cannot be observed.
The component has a small contribution to almost all pixels inside
of EVs and some small areas where a much higher value is observed.
These could point toward protein cargo that has aggregated due to
the desiccation of the EVs on the substrate. It should also be noted
that the value at 1620 cm–1points toward the β-sheet
protein structure.,To view if a trend can be observed
in the composition of vesicles, we studied the relationship between
vesicle composition and mean NMF contribution per vesicle (seeFigure S7a). There is no apparent trend or relationship
for size and NMFs for vesicles <60 nm diameter/radius. For larger
vesicles, a relationship between size and NMF may exist, but for practical
reasons, only a few such large vesicles appear in the data set. The
NMFs appear to follow a unimodal distribution with few outliers (seeFigure S7b).

In this work, we demonstrated
chemical analysis of individual EVs
using AFM-IR in a way that allows chemical characterization at the
nanoscale. We implemented a new protocol to obtain label-free chemical
information from single EVs. We were able to immobilize EVs on an
AFM-IR compatible substrate via anti-CD9 antibodies and were able
to analyze them via the implementation of machine learning algorithms.
Single EVs could be described separately, and the high heterogeneity
within a single vesicle and within a whole sample set was determined.
In comparison to other works, this protocol only needs very few wavenumbers
to work but is still able to provide a comprehensive picture of the
sample without requiring user input to select measurement spots for
spectra. This enables a faster analysis of the EV samples without
cherry-picking. This work shows that for heterogeneous nanoscale samples,
only through hyperspectral imaging and image registration can a full
picture of the distribution of components be acquired by AFM-IR.

The authors would like to acknowledge the financial
support
received from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and
innovation programme (grant agreement: 818110). N.H. and G.R. would
like to acknowledge Tumor-LN-oC (grant agreement no. 953234). The
financial support by the Austrian Federal Ministry for Labour and
Economy and the National Foundation for Research, Technology and Development
and the Christian Doppler Research Association is gratefully acknowledged.
This work was supported by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII),
Spain, and cofunded by the European Union [grant numbers CP21II/00003
and PI23/00202]; the Counseling of Innovation, Universities, Science
and Digital Society, Generalitat Valenciana, Spain [grant number CIAICO/2022/233],
and grant CNS2022-135398 funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033
and, as appropriate, by ”European Union NextGenerationEU/PRTR”.
B.L. and G.R. acknowledge funding from the Austrian Science Fund (FWF)
[doi.org/10.55776/COE7]. The authors acknowledge TU Wien Bibliothek
for financial support through its Open Access Funding Programme. The
table of content graphic andFigurewere prepared using the Blender software (https://www.blender.org) and
the Molecular Nodes plugin (10.5281/zenodo.14873613). Protein structures used in these graphics were taken from RCSB
PDB (https://www.rcsb.org/) with RCSB PDB IDs 1IGT and 4F5S.

The data underlying
this study are openly available in Zenodo at DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.14514540.

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsmeasuresciau.5c00001.

CRediT:Nikolaus Hondldata curation, formal analysis,
investigation,
methodology, software, validation, visualization, writing - original
draft;Lena Neubauerinvestigation, validation, writing
- review & editing;Victoria Ramos-Garciainvestigation,
methodology, writing - review & editing;Julia Kuligowskiconceptualization, resources, writing - review & editing;Marina Bisharamethodology, writing - review & editing;Eva Sevcsikmethodology, resources, writing - review &
editing;Bernhard Lendlfunding acquisition, resources,
supervision, writing - review & editing;Georg Ramerconceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, funding acquisition,
project administration, software, supervision, writing - review &
editing.

The
authors declare no
competing financial interest.