The systematics and conservation management of the Red pandora (Pagellus bellottii) remain challenging due to the overlapping morphology and distributions with closely related congeners in the Eastern Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea. These challenges are further exacerbated by population declines driven by intensive coastal fisheries and a paucity of molecular data. In this study, high-throughput sequencing was utilized to assemble the first complete mitogenome ofP. bellottiifrom its native range. The mitogenome (16,666 bp) comprises the typical set of 13 protein-coding genes (PCGs), 22 transfer RNAs (tRNAs), two ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs), and a non-coding control region (CR). The analysis of PCGs revealed a predominance of hydrophobic and neutral amino acids and strong purifying selection. UnlikeP. bogaraveo, no evidence of heteroplasmy was observed in the WANCY tRNA gene cluster ofP. bellottii. Notably, nucleotide polymorphisms were identified within conserved motifs of the CR. The Bayesian inference and Maximum Likelihood phylogenetic analyses revealed non-monophyly among several Sparidae genera (Pagellus,Dentex, andPagrus), withP. bellottiiclustering most closely withP. erythrinus. Molecular dating estimated the divergence betweenP. bellottiiandP. erythrinusat approximately 6.1 million years ago (MYA), during the Miocene, a period more recent than the divergence ofP. bogaraveoandP. acarne(~ 10.5 MYA). These divergence times coincide with major geological events, such as the formation of the Gibraltar Arc and the opening of the Atlantic–Mediterranean gateway, which likely facilitated speciation and lineage diversification ofPagellus. Additionally, the asymmetric biogeographic distribution ofP. bellottiiand related species may be influenced by hydrographic barriers, climatic gradients across the North and South Atlantic, and historical events such as the Messinian salinity crisis. Overall, this study provides the first comprehensive mitogenomic insights intoP. bellottiiand underscores the importance of further genome-wide research to elucidate adaptive evolution and phylogeographic history for developing effective conservation and management strategies for all Sparidae in marine ecosystems.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-16187-y.

The Sparidae family consists of a diverse group of fish species found in both marine and brackish-water environments1. The family currently comprises approximately 164 recognized species under 39 genera, with eight new species described within the past decade, highlighting ongoing systematic efforts and the expanding understanding of its biodiversity2. They are commonly known as seabreams or porgies and are widely dispersed across the tropical and subtropical Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans3. Based on their dental and jaw morphology, sparids often exhibit herbivorous, piscivorous, and carnivorous feeding behaviors4. Moreover, dentition patterns have become widely recognized as critical diagnostic features in the taxonomic classification of the group5. Among this group, the Red pandora,Pagellus bellottii, inhabits demersal waters in shallow depth ranging from 15 to 70 m2,6. This species is, regarded as a vital resource for small to large-scale commercial fisheries for several West African countries, such as Senegal, Mauritius, Ghana, and Guinea. Based on the data reported to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO),P. bellottiicontributed to 69% among the ~ 2 million tons of total catch ofPagellusgenus in FAO Fishing Area 34 (Eastern Atlantic) in last 65 years7,8. AlthoughP. bellottiiis currently classified as ‘Least Concern’ by the IUCN, growing global concern has emerged due to its population decline, indicating overexploitation in several West African countries9. Notably, a progressive increase in fishing pressure in FAO Fishing Area 34 has resulted in a downward trend in annual catch since 2005, highlighting the urgent need for sustainable fisheries management measures8,10. Therefore, to ensure the conservation ofP. bellottii, one of the most economically important species in this region, the integration of both morphological and molecular approaches is urgently demanded.

With respect to traditional taxonomy, emerging evidence suggests a range expansion ofP. bellottiiinto the Bay of Biscay within FAO Fishing Area 27 (Northeast Atlantic) and the southeastern Mediterranean Sea11,12. This expanded natural distribution ofP. bellottiihas led to range overlap with its congeners (P. acarne,P. bogaraveo, andP. erythrinus), increasing the likelihood of their co-occurrence and simultaneous harvest within the same fishing grounds7. Hence, the overlapping distributions and shared morphological traits amongPagellusspecies often pose challenges for accurate species identification13,14. The red pandora,P. bellottii, is typically distinguished from otherPagellusspecies by its silvery-red coloration, the presence of blue spots along the flanks, and a characteristic dark red mark near the lateral line3,4. Moreover, their systematic position has been frequently revised across different taxonomic groups, often hindering accurate identification and complicating effective management and conservation efforts5. Therefore, the incorporation of molecular approaches is essential for accurate species identification, serving as a prerequisite for systematics research and the development of effective, species-specific fisheries management strategies. So far, several molecular studies have successfully facilitated species identification and characterization within Sparidae, contributing to phylogenetic interpretations, detection of cryptic diversity, and estimation of lineage diversification using partial mitochondrial and nuclear markers, as well as microsatellite DNA15–18. In addition, recent mitogenomic studies have rapidly expanded worldwide due to their effectiveness in elucidating genomic features, gene-level variation, and enabling comprehensive phylogenetic analyses across diverse groups of marine fishes, including members of the Sparidae family19–21. To date, three complete mitogenomes of thePagellusspecies have been sequenced, all derived from specimens collected in the Mediterranean Sea22–24. As a result, the maternal inheritance-driven evolutionary pathways of these Pandora fishes remain poorly understood, largely due to the absence of mitogenomic data for congeners distributed in the Atlantic and western Indian Ocean. Therefore, the present study aims to (i) generate the first complete mitochondrial genome of theP. bellottiibased on specimens from its native range in the Eastern Atlantic Ocean; (ii) assess the structural features and genetic variation among closely related congeners; (iii) evaluate its phylogenetic placement within major Sparidae lineages; and (iv) estimate divergence times and correlate them with historical geological events, present-day ocean currents, and climatic conditions to infer potential drivers of diversification. The findings of this study may serve as a foundational resource for future systematic research within the Sparidae family, while the generated genetic data could support further population genetic studies ofPagellusspecies. Additionally, the study provides valuable insights into the divergence time estimation ofP. bellottiiand other congeners, particularly within the biogeographic context of marine ecosystems, thereby contributing to a more comprehensive understanding of their evolutionary history and distribution patterns.

The mitogenome ofP. bellottiiis totalling 16,666 bp and is available in GenBank under accession numberPQ524309. It consists of 13 protein-coding genes (PCGs), 22 transfer RNA (tRNA) genes, two ribosomal RNA (rRNA) genes, and a noncoding control region (CR). Out of the 37 genes, 28 are placed on the heavy-strand including 12 PCGs, two rRNAs, and 14 tRNAs, while the remaining nine genes (ND6and eight tRNAs) are accommodated on the light-strand (Fig.1; Table1). Comparative analysis revealed the total length of mitogenome withinPagellusranged from 16,486 bp inP. acarneto 16,941 bp inP. bogaraveo. The gene arrangement in light- and heavy-strands closely mirrors that of otherPagelluscongeners. The gene organization is consistent across mostPagellusspecies, except forP. bogaraveo, which has an extratRNA-Cyspseudogene within the tRNA gene group located on the light-strand. The mitogenome ofP. bellottiishows a noticeable nucleotide composition of AT bias (54.93%) with nucleotide composition values of 27.45% adenine (A), 27.48% thymine (T), 28.28% cytosine (C), and 16.79% guanine (G). OtherPagellusspecies also exhibits the AT-bias, withP. bogaraveohaving the lowest AT bias (53.62%) followed byP. acarne(53.69%),P. bellottii(54.93%) andP. erythrinus(55%). The AT and GC skewness values forP. bellottiiwere manually calculated as −0.001 and − 0.255, respectively. In comparison, the skew values for otherPagellusspecies ranged from − 0.002 to − 0.261 inP. acarne, 0.005 and − 0.256 inP. bogaraveo, to 0.0004 and − 0.252 inP. erythrinus(Table2). The complete mitogenome ofP. bellottiiincludes seven overlapping regions spanning 37 bp, with the longest overlap of 13 bp shared betweentRNA-Ser(S2) andCOI. Additionally,tRNA-Asngene shows the largest intergenic space, spanning 38 bp. Comparative analysis showed that three overlapping regions within PCGs are common to all examinedPagellusspecies, such as bothND4andND4Lsharing 7 bp,ATP8andATP6sharing 10 bp, and betweenND5andND6sharing 4 bp nucleotide (Supplementary TableS1).

(A) Geographic distribution map illustrating the IUCN-defined ranges of fourPagellusspecies across the Euro-African marine ecosystem, overlaid with major ocean currents and bathymetric features. The collection locality ofP. bellottiiis indicated with a Ghana circular flag symbol, and the species photograph was taken by the second author (E.O.M.E.). The map was generated using ArcGIS v10.6. global-scale ocean current data were sourced from the NOAA National Weather Service and the U.S. Army (https://data.amerigeoss.org/dataset/major-ocean-currents-arrowpolys-100 m-76). Additionally, bathymetric layers derived from the CMIP6 Earth System Models were obtained from the Bio-ORACLE v3.0 database (https://bio-oracle.org/). (B) Circular representation of the complete mitochondrial genome ofP. bellottii, showing gene arrangement through various colored arcs. This circular map was generated using the MitoFish MitoAnnotator web server and manually edited in Adobe Photoshop CS 8.0.

Mitochondrial genome organization ofP. bellottii, covering strand arrangement, size, and intergenic nucleotide (IN). ‘H’ and ‘L’ indicates the position of each gene in the heavy and light strands. ‘-’ marks indicate an incomplete stop codon.

Nucleotide composition of mitochondrial genomes ofP. bellottiiand other congeners.

The complete mitogenome ofP. bellottiiconsisting of 13 PCGs (four cytochromes, two ATP synthases, and seven NADH dehydrogenases) with a combined length of 11,443 base pairs, representing 68.7% of the complete mitogenome. Among the PCGs,ATP8is being the shortest with 168 bp, whereasND5appears to be the longest with 1,839 bp (Table1). Comparative analysis of PCG lengths across otherPagellusspecies showed a range of 11,439 bp inP. acarne, 11,442 bp inP. bogaraveo, and 11,444 bp inP. erythrinus. An evaluation of AT bias in the PCGs revealed values of 52.95% inP. bogaraveo, 53.34% inP. acarne, 54.56% inP. bellottii, and 54.70% inP. erythrinus. The AT-skewness value ranged from − 0.058 inP. bellottii, −0.097 inP. acarne, and − 0.093 inP. bogaraveoto −0.092 inP. erythrinus. Similarly, the GC-skewness values were calculated as −0.322 inP. bellottii, −0.293 inP. acarne, −0.287 inP. bogaraveo, and − 0.291 inP. erythrinus(Table2). Nucleotide diversity (π) analysis on PCGs produced the average value of 0.16187, encompassing 3,023 polymorphic nucleotides withND4exhibits the highest value of 0.26 (Fig.2A). Furthermore, saturation analysis revealed that neither transitions nor transversions reached saturation, even with increasing Tamura-Nei 93 (TN93) divergence values across all PCGs in the Sparidae mitogenomes (Fig.2B). The Open Reading Frame (ORF) finder tool successfully identified the initiation and termination codons for all 13 PCGs. The start codon ATG was identified in 11 PCGs (ND1,ND2,COII,COIII,ATP6,ATP8,ND3,ND4L,ND5,ND6, andCytb), whereas GTG served as the start codon forCOIandND4. In terms of termination codons, three PCGs (ND1,ND4L, andND5) terminated with TAA, whileCOIandND6used GTG and TAG, respectively. The remaining eight PCGs featured incomplete stop codons, either with TA- or T–. Comparative analysis revealed that the start codon GTG inCOIis conserved across otherPagellusspecies, whereas the use of GTG as the start codon inND4appears to be shared exclusively withP. erythrinus. Notably, the termination codon usage is different among fourPagellus, with seven PCGs having incomplete stop codon inP. acarne, three PCGs inP. bogaraveo, and six PCGs inP. erythrinus(Supplementary Table S2).

Mitogenomic characteristics of the protein-coding genes (PCGs): (A) Nucleotide diversity (π) across PCGs, illustrating genetic variability among the fourPagellusspecies. (B) Scatter plot of transition (s) and transversion (v) rates relative to genetic divergence in PCGs, calculated using the Tamura-Nei (TN93) distance across all Sparidae species. (C) Box plot showing the mean Ka/Ks ratios for each PCG, with values consistently below 1 across Sparidae, indicating purifying selection.

The estimation of nonsynonymous (Ka) and synonymous (Ks) ratios in the PCGs indicated that all sparids, includingP. bellottii, are subject to similar levels of selection pressure. The Ka/Ks ratio analyses across all sparid species revealed that all PCGs exhibited ratios below 1, indicating purifying selection. The mean Ka/Ks values ranged from 0.011 ± 0.004 forCOI, representing the lowest ratio, to 0.074 ± 0.018 forND2, representing the highest. Subsequently, the Ka/Ks ratios across all sparids follow the order:COI<Cytb<COII<ND1<COIII<ND5<ND3<ND4L<ND4<ATP6<ND6<ATP8<ND2(Fig.2C, Supplementary Table S3). Moreover, the Relative Synonymous Codon Usage (RSCU) analysis showed that the combination of nucleotides was transcribed into specific amino acids in the PCGs of fourPagellus. In total, the number of amino acids inP. bellottiiPCGs are 3,608 without the stop codons. The amino acid contributors were primarily dominated by Leucine (14.4%) and Alanine (6.3%) with hydrophobic hydropathy characteristic, followed by three neutral hydropathic amino acids, such as Proline (11.4%), Serine (10.8%), and Threonine (6.9%). Meanwhile, two hydrophobic amino acids, cysteine (1.5%), and tryptophan (2.9%) and three hydrophilic amino acids, aspartic acid (2.1%), glutamic acid (2.2%), and lysine (3.0%) were found as less abundant (Fig.3A, Supplementary Table S4). Comparative analysis showed that the amino acid composition with hydrophobic properties is more dominant compared to others. Two hydrophobic amino acids, such as Leucine and Alanine, followed by three neutral hydropathic amino acids (Proline, Serine, and Threonine) are commonly observed in all fourPagellusspecies. Notably, six codon variants of leucine and serine were identified, contributing to an increased abundance of these amino acids across all fourPagellusspecies. Moreover, several codons exhibited higher relative usage, indicated by values greater than 1.5, reflecting their preferential contribution to the translation of specific amino acids. For example, GCC for alanine, CTT for leucine, TCT for serine, and ACC for threonine showed elevated usage in all fourPagellusspecies (Fig.3B, Supplementary Table S4).

The mitogenome ofP. bellottiiincludes two rRNA genes: the12 S rRNA(small subunit) and the16 S rRNA(large subunit), spanning a total of 2,650 bp, which accounts for 15.9% of the overall mitogenome length. Comparative analysis showed that the rRNA length inP. erythrinusis conserved, whereasP. bogaraveoandP. acarnepossess slightly shorter rRNAs (2,648 bp). The rRNA genes showed a bias towards AT, ranging from 52.5% inP. acarneto 54.0% inP. bellottii. Additionally, AT-skewness value ranged from 0.191 to 0.212 and GC-skewness values ranged from − 0.087 to − 0.071 among all fourPagellusspecies (Table2).

The 22 tRNA genes within the mitogenome ofP. bellottiiare scattered between rRNA and PCGs regions. It has a collective size of 1,556 bp, accounting for 9.3% of the total mitogenome length. All 22 tRNAs demonstrated a bias towards AT content of 54.5%, showing an AT-skewness and a GC-skewness value of 0.087 and − 0.102, respectively (Table2). Furthermore, the secondary structure of the majority of tRNA molecules displayed the typical cloverleaf shape, with the exception oftRNA-Ser1, which failed to form this structure due to the absence of a nucleotide bond in its DHU arm. A total of 17 tRNA genes were found to be structured through a combination of standard Watson-Crick base pairing and Wobble base pairing (G-T, T-T, G-G, G-A), leading to an interesting blend of conventional and mismatched pairings in their overall configuration. In contrast, the remaining five tRNA genes rely exclusively on Watson-Crick base pairing (Supplementary Fig.S1). Comparative analysis showed that all fourPagellusspecies have a similar anticodon pattern in all 22 tRNA genes (Supplementary Table S5).

The CR ofP. bellottiispans 987 bp located in betweentRNA-ProandtRNA-Phe, contributing 5.9% of the complete mitogenome. Comparative analyses showed that the CR length varies among fourPagellusspecies, withP. bogaraveohaving the longest one (1,195 bp), followed byP. erythrinus(1,154 bp), andP. acarne(781 bp). Notably, the CR of all fourPagellusspecies showed a similar portion of AT content ranged from 62.5% inP. erythrinusto 63.9% inP. acarne, with AT skewness varies amongPagellus, ranging from − 0.006 inP. bellottiito 0.029 inP. bogaraveo(Table2). Since the CR showed a bias towards AT, the GC content is low, resulting in GC-skewness ranging from − 0.233 inP. bogaraveoto −0.135 inP. acarne.

The CR of fourPagellusalso incorporates four conserved sequence blocks (CSB): CSB-1, CSB-2, CSB-3, and CSB-D. Among these conserved domains, CSB-1 is the longest (21 bp) compared to the others, ranging from 18 bp (CSB-2 and CSB-D) to 19 bp (CSB-3). Comparative analysis of CSB-D showed thatP. bellottii,P. acarne, andP. bogaraveowere classified in similar groups, showing a similarity in conserved nucleotides pattern, whileP. erythrinushas a single base pair deviation compared to its congeners. In CSB-1,P. bellottiiandP. bogaraveoexhibited conserved nucleotide sequences, whereas the other two species displayed nucleotide variations at three positions. In CSB-2 and CSB-3,P. bellottiiandP. erythrinusshowed a consistent pattern in conserve nucleotide, whileP. bogaraveohad 1 bp and 3 bp differences in CSB-2 and CSB-3, respectively. Unfortunately, due to the shorter sequence of CR inP. acarne, the comparison of nucleotide composition within the CSB-2 and CSB-3 is restricted with other threePagellusspecies. Moreover, the CR ofP. bellottiiandP. acarneshowed no repetitive sequences, while the CR of the two other congeners exhibited long repetitive nucleotide patterns in the extended termination-associated sequences (ETAS) region, withP. bogaraveohaving two copies of 183 bp consensus base pairs andP. erythrinushaving two copies of 160 bp consensus base pairs (Fig.4).

Nucleotide features of the control regions (CRs) in the mitogenomes of fourPagellusspecies, emphasizing conserved sequence blocks. Highly conserved nucleotides are denoted by black asterisks. The graphical panel below depicts the presence or absence of tandem repeats, along with their sequence characteristics in differentPagellusspecies.

Both Bayesian (BA) and Maximum Likelihood (ML) phylogenetic trees revealed a cohesive clustering of Sparidae family members, supported by high posterior probabilities and bootstrap values, in contrast to the outgroup taxa from Lethrinidae and Nemipteridae (Fig.5, Supplementary Fig. S2). Within the Sparidae, species members of the Pagellinae, Sparinae, Denticinae, and Boopsinae subfamilies exhibited clear non-monophyletic clustering. Notably, two major clusters were identified among all sparid species, one cluster comprises species from the generaDentex,Evynnis,Pagellus,Pagrus,Argyrops,Polysteganus, and the monotypic genusParargyrops, while the other includes species fromCalamus,Stenotomus,Archosargus,Boops,Rhabdosargus,Diplodus,Acanthopagrus,Pagellus, and the monotypic generaLagodonandSparus. Specifically, the phylogenetic trees revealed a non-monophyletic cladistics pattern in three genera:Pagrus,Dentex, andPagellus.Within the genusPagellus,P. bellottiiexhibits the closest phylogenetic relationship withP. erythrinus, whileP. bogaraveoandP. acarneare resolved as sister species based on the current mitogenomic-based cladistic analysis. Furthermore, divergence time estimation for sparid species indicated a split between the two major clusters at approximately 28.8 million years ago (MYA), likely occurring during the Oligocene epoch. The divergence betweenP. bellottiiandP. erythrinuswas estimated to have occurred around 6.1 MYA, during the Miocene epoch (Fig.6). As this event is more recent than the divergence betweenP. bogaraveoandP. acarne, which occurred approximately 10.5 MYA in the Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea,P. bellottiiandP. erythrinuscan be considered the ‘younger sister’ species among the fourPagelluscongeners.

Bayesian phylogeny based on complete mitogenomes, depicting the non-monophyletic evolutionary relationships of the fourPagellusspecies within the Sparidae lineage. Posterior probability values are indicated at each node. Subfamilial classifications are represented by colored boxes adjacent to each clade. Distribution ranges of the four species are integrated with the phylogeny to visualize their biogeographic patterns across the Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea. All distribution maps were produced using ArcGIS version 10.6 based on IUCN data. The photograph ofP. bellottiiwas taken by the second author (E.O.M.E.), while images ofP. erythrinus,P. bogaraveo, andP. acarnewere sourced from Wikimedia Commons (Creative Commons Attribution 4.0) and edited in Adobe Photoshop CS 8.0.

(A) Maximum Likelihood-based timetree estimating the divergence times amongPagelluscongeners, with divergence estimates denoted by red font at each node. Calibration points (orange diamonds) are based on previous fossil-derived data42indicating the divergence betweenP. acarneandP. bogaraveoduring the Messinian-Miocene epoch (lower 7–upper 14 Mya). (B–D) Paleogeographic maps depicting tectonically driven changes in the Atlantic–Mediterranean gateway from the middle Miocene to the present. The black arrows trace the inferred drift path of the Alboran Plate from the early-middle Miocene through the formation of the Gibraltar Arc. The source map was obtained from previously published literature48and edited manually with prior permission granted by Walter Capella through personal communication. (E) Map showing the present-day sea surface temperature map of the Atlantic Ocean, generated using ArcGIS version 10.6 with environmental layers sourced from Bio-ORACLE v3.0 database (https://bio-oracle.org/)and manually refined in Adobe Photoshop CS 8.0.

Despite variations in total length, the mitochondrial genomes of the fourPagellusspecies exhibit notable similarity, encompassing 37 genes and a control region. The organization and arrangement of these genes align with the typical mitochondrial architecture observed in other teleosts, including Spariformes25. The mitogenomic base composition of fourPagelluswith AT-bias is also similar to vertebrates, including teleosts26. It is aligned with the hydrophobic character in mitochondrial proteins27. The results indicate the mitogenome ofP. bellottiiis conserved similarly to otherPagellusor sparids22–24,26. The overall organization of mitochondrial genomes, particularly gene order, plays a critical role in inferring gene rearrangement events, as comparisons with the putative ancestral gene order provide essential insights into organismal evolutionary trajectories28. Consequently, comprehending gene organization and base composition in mitogenome is pivotal for enhancing the accuracy of species classification. Additionally, placement of mitochondrial genes can impact various biological aspects in fish, including physiology, life history, molecular mechanisms, and other evolutionary processes29.

The start and stop codon pattern ofPagellusspecies is consistent with investigation in other subfamilies within the Sparidae family26. In this study, amino acids with hydrophobic characteristics are more frequently, with Leucine being found as the most frequent than others with hydrophilic or neutral hydropathy properties. The observed high abundance of hydrophobic amino acids is consistent with findings reported in other teleost species30. The hydropathy characteristics of amino acids fundamentally shape the evolution of mitochondrial proteins, which are vital for regulating tissue-level metabolism and enabling organisms to adapt to fluctuating environmental conditions, thereby underscoring their evolutionary significance31. Given the frequent environmental fluctuations in the Atlantic Ocean and their potential impact on the observed range expansion ofP. bellottii, further investigations into the hydropathy characteristics and adaptive modifications of mitochondrial proteins are warranted. Such investigation could provide valuable insights into the role of these modifications in improving protein configuration and their functional purposes under various changes of environmental stressors. Such mitogenomic information facilitates the inference of adaptive mechanisms and metabolic responses that underpin the resilience and tolerance of aquatic organisms, includingPagellusspecies, within the highly variable habitats of tropical and subtropical Atlantic and Mediterranean marine ecosystems32,33.

Moreover, the present findings demonstrate that the codon usage patterns of PCGs are conserved across all fourPagellusspecies, and that various codon combinations contribute to the translation of specific amino acids. Overall, the RSCU values deviated from 1, indicating varying degrees of codon usage bias among different codons in thePagellusspecies. This codon usage bias is closely associated with gene expression levels; highly expressed genes tend to utilize specific codons more frequently than genes with lower expression efficiency34. Compared to low-expression genes, highly expressed genes exhibit a stronger codon usage bias and preferentially employ a subset of synonymous codons. The findings of this study suggest that PCGs inPagellusspecies are conserved and likely maintain similar functional roles. In various organisms, codon usage bias arises from a combination of mutation pressure, natural selection, and genetic drift. Furthermore, codon bias is influenced by multiple factors, including tRNA abundance and interactions, recombination rates, mRNA secondary structure, codon position and context within genes, GC content, gene expression levels, gene length, and overall genomic composition35.

Furthermore, the calculation of Ka/Ks ratio is a widely acknowledged method for estimating selective pressure in line with Darwinian theory, providing insights into selection pressure at the molecular level across both same and closely related taxa35. This selection pressure is fundamental for understanding the evolutionary dynamics of genes subjected to selective forces and plays a crucial role in elucidating species divergence. Therefore, detailed analysis of the Ka/Ks substitution ratios in PCGs provides insight into the selection pressures acting on each gene, a ratio greater than 1 indicates positive selection, a ratio equal to 1 suggests neutral evolution, and a ratio less than 1 reflects purifying (negative) selection36. In this study, the Ka/Ks ratios in PCGs were less than 1, indicating strong purifying selection to preserve their functional integrity, with the majority of mutations occurring as synonymous substitutions across all species within the Sparidae family. Among the 13 PCGs, theND2gene exhibited the highest Ka/Ks ratio, followed byATP8andND6, suggesting thatND2has undergone the least selective constraint and evolved at a relatively faster rate. In contrast,COIdisplayed the lowest Ka/Ks ratio, followed byCytb, indicating strong purifying selection and slower evolutionary rates. These findings highlight the role of natural selection in eliminating deleterious nucleotide mutations through negative selective pressure, consistent with patterns previously observed in teleost species37–39. The Ka/Ks analysis ofPagellusand related species provides a valuable framework for understanding the subtleties of natural selection. The strong purifying selection acting on PCGs enhances the evolutionary resilience ofPagellusspecies, contributing to genetic stability and facilitating speciation through ecological adaptation and colonization. This process reflects the evolutionary trajectory and native distribution ofPagellusspecies, offering insights into the complex interplay between mutational events and selective pressures in shaping their evolution. Such interactions are fundamental to protein evolution, as demonstrated by the composition and relative abundance of PCGs25.

The complete mitochondrial genome ofP. bellottiicontains both the small and large rRNA subunits encoded on the heavy strand, consistent with the mitochondrial gene arrangement observed in otherPagellusspecies23,24. These rRNA genes, which are generally maintained as ribonucleoproteins, play a pivotal function during genetic information translation from mRNAs into amino acids, providing constructive understanding into the essential mechanisms to accelerate the protein synthesis40. The tRNAs inP. bellottiipredominantly exhibited the canonical secondary structures, except fortRNA-Ser1, which deviated due to missing or mismatched base pairs in the DHU arm. This missing base-pairing feature is commonly detected in the vertebrates, including the order Spariformes22–25. Comparative analysis revealed that the organization and structure of tRNA genes are conserved among the threePagellusspecies, except inP. bogaraveo, which contains a 66 bptRNA-Cyspseudogene within the WANCY region22. This distinct organization of tRNA genes and the presence of heteroplasmy in the WANCY region are critical for the expression and functional integrity of mitochondrial tRNA genes22.

The CR ofP. bellottiiexhibits an A-T bias, consistent with otherPagelluscongeners and sparid species, and contains four conserved sequence blocks, as observed in sparid fishes likePagrus major21–24. The investigation of these conserved domains is significant due to the presence of highly conserved nucleotides within the highly variable CR. Therefore, the nucleotide variations identified within these conserved domains serve as critical markers that can be employed for species-level differentiation40. The nucleotide composition of the CR inPagellusspecies, including the detection of polymorphic sites within conserved blocks, offers valuable insights for the development of specific molecular markers for species identification and for elucidating population structure. Furthermore, elucidating the complex mechanisms governing the CR including random loss, dimer formation, non-random loss, duplication, and genomic rearrangements is crucial for comprehending the structural diversity of mitochondrial genes and the evolutionary dynamics25. The detection of tandem repeats within the ETAS region ofP. bogaraveoandP. erythrinusfurther highlights notable diversity and distinct repeat patterns that likely contribute to the formation of stable hairpin loops, which are recognized as sequence-specific signals involved in regulating mitochondrial DNA replication termination41.

The present cladistic framework derived from mitogenome data corroborates earlier evolutionary hypotheses concerning the non-monophyletic nature of Sparidae21as well as certain genera includingPagellus, as previously inferred from partial mitochondrial and nuclear markers42–45. These findings are also consistent with phylogenomic analyses based on six mitochondrial and 21 nuclear genes, which similarly reveal a non-monophyletic pattern amongPagellusspecies in the marine environment46. Our findings indicate thatP. bellottiiis closely related toP. erythrinus, while exhibiting a more distant phylogenetic relationship to the other two congeners. This observed phylogenetic affinity betweenP. bellottiiandP. erythrinusmay be further substantiated by the notable morphological similarities shared between these two species. BothP. bellottiiandP. erythrinusexhibit a more laterally compressed body shape, whereas the other two species display a more oblong and fusiform morphology. Additionally, the pattern of scalation on the dorsal surface of the head terminates anterior to a transverse line through the middle of the eye inP. bellottiiandP. erythrinus, in contrast to the posterior termination inP. bogaraveoandP. acarne.The mouth configuration inP. bellottiiandP. erythrinusis low-set and slightly oblique, while it is low-set and nearly horizontal in the other two species. The number of gills rakers on the lower and upper limbs of the first arch ranges from 8 to 10 and 5–6, respectively, inP. bellottiiandP. erythrinus, whereas higher counts are observed in the other two species. Lateral line scale counts further support this relationship, withP. bellottiiexhibiting 54–60 andP. erythrinus55–65 scales, in contrast to the significantly higher counts inP. bogaraveo(68–74) andP. acarne(65–72). Furthermore, coloration of the oral cavity also differs as it is typically whitish to greyish inP. bellottiiandP. erythrinus, whileP. bogaraveoandP. acarnedisplay a distinct orange-red hue13,14. Hence, both the phylogenetic relationships and morphological characteristics provide a more comprehensive understanding of the evolutionary affinities betweenP. bellottiiandP. erythrinus, particularly in contrast to the more distantly related congenersP. bogaraveoandP. acarne.

Notably, divergence time estimates indicate an approximate 4.4 MYA interval between the initial divergence ofP. acarneandP. bogaraveo, and the subsequent split betweenP. bellottiiandP. erythrinus. These findings suggest that evolutionary processes and reproductive isolation within thePagelluslineage have occurred over an extended timescale in the marine environment, highlighting the long-term nature of sparid evolution as reported in previous studies42,47. Based on the estimated divergence times, it can be hypothesized that geological events in the Atlantic–Mediterranean gateway and the formation of Gibraltar Arc may have driven the speciation and lineage diversification ofPagellusin both the Eastern Atlantic Ocean and the Mediterranean Sea. The split divergence ofPagellusspecies can be traced back to the late Miocene period corresponding to the disconnection of the Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea followed by the hypersaline event also known as the Messinian salinity crisis48. Subsequently, the connection between the Atlantic and Mediterranean was re-established during the Pliocene (5.4 to 1.8 MYA) leading to a shared geographical distribution for major sparids42,47. It is worth discussing that threePagellusspecies are widely distributed across the Mediterranean Sea and the northeastern Atlantic Ocean, whereasP. bellottiihas extended its native range into the southeastern Atlantic. This asymmetric distribution pattern ofP. bellottiimay be influenced by hydrographic and climatic conditions in the North and South Atlantic Oceans, which have gradually diverged due to the Coriolis effect driven by Earth’s rotation49,50. In the North Atlantic, distinct oceanic gyres form due to oceanic current circulation, with the warm Gulf Stream current flowing away northward and the cold Canary current flowing southward, restricting the distribution of tropical marine fishes species towards the northward region49,50. In addition, the existence of cold-Benguela and warm-Agulhas currents along with the South Equatorial warm currents in southern coast of Africa are profound primary physical barrier which may restrict the overlap distribution of the AtlanticPagellusspecies with its congeners (P. natalensisandP. affinis) distributed in Western Indian Ocean51.

Furthermore, the recent northward expansion ofP. bellottiiinto the northeastern Atlantic and southeastern Mediterranean Sea could be attributed to abiotic factors, such as increasing sea surface temperatures, which may be influencing its distribution. A similar pattern of northward range expansion has been observed in several tropical marine fish species, likely driven by the accelerated warming of marine environments over recent decades52. This indicates that the cold-water current passing through the Canary Islands warms up, may enableP. bellottiito expand its distribution range toward the Bay of Biscay52. Moreover, the range expansion ofP. bellottiito Haifa Bay in the southeastern Mediterranean Sea suggests that this species might possess a high tolerance to salinity, as the Mediterranean Sea has exhibited higher salinity levels than the Atlantic Ocean since the end of the Messinian Salinity Crisis49,50.

The present study provides the first complete mitochondrial genome ofP. bellottiifrom the Eastern Atlantic Ocean and renders insights into its structural characteristics and phylogenetic placement within the major Sparidae clade; however, several limitations persist that warrant attention in future research. Notably, the current analysis is based on a single specimen collected from Ghana, which may not adequately capture the species’ genetic diversity or its phylogeographic structure, given its broader distribution from the Eastern Atlantic to the Bay of Biscay in the northward Atlantic region and the south-eastern Mediterranean Sea. Future investigations should therefore incorporate extensive surveys and sampling across the full geographic range of the species, including multiple individuals from different populations. This approach would enable a more in-depth understanding of population structure, gene flow, and demographic history by incorporating both partial and complete mitochondrial genetic data. Moreover, this study incorporates mitogenomic data only from four out of six currently recognisedPagellusspecies worldwide. Hence, the addition of complete mitogenomes forP. affinisandP. natalensis, which inhabit the Western and Southwestern Indian Ocean, is essential for clarifying the comprehensive matrilineal evolutionary relationships and lineage diversification within this genus. Additionally, the application of whole-genome sequencing and genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) analyses would enable more precise inferences of genetic variation, population divergence, and adaptability ofPagellusspecies in diverse marine ecosystems. Ultimately, an integrative approach encompassing morphological and genetic analyses, biogeographic patterns, and geological history will yield deeper insights into the evolutionary trajectory and present-day population structure of this species. Such findings will significantly contribute to marine ichthyological systematics, conservation strategies, and aquaculture development.

In the present study, the complete mitochondrial genome ofP. bellottiiis reported for the first time. The comprehensive analyses offer an in-depth understanding of the genetic structure and variations of this species compared with its closely related congeners. The phylogenetic reconstruction further elucidates the non-monophyletic clustering ofPagellusand inferring the evolutionary relationships within the broader Sparidae family. Considering the overlapping geographic distributions of fourPagellusspecies and the recently documented range expansion ofP. bellottiiinto the Bay of Biscay (northeastern Atlantic) and Haifa Bay (southeastern Mediterranean), this study discusses potential lineage diversification driven by Miocene-era geological events, subsequently influenced by oceanic currents and ongoing climate change. Overall, the findings underscore the significance of integrating mitogenomic data and demographic history to understand matrilineal speciation and diversification processes, particularly in the context of the biogeographical complexity of the Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea.

A sample ofP. bellottiiwere collected from Tema, Ghana (5.611389 N, 0.044444 W) (Fig.1). Muscle tissues between the area of the lateral line and the dorsal fin were carefully excised under sterile conditions, placed in 95% ethanol, and stored in 2 ml tubes. To prevent cross-contamination and DNA hydrolysis, the tissue sample was stored in freezer at − 20 °C. Later on, the specimen was vouchered in 10% formaldehyde and deposited at the Fisheries Scientific Survey Division under Ghana’s Ministry of Fisheries and Aquaculture Development (MOFAD). The study design and all methods were conducted in compliance with the relevant guidelines and regulations of ARRIVE 2.0 (https://arriveguidelines.org), specifically for animal research53. Then species identification was confirmed through several key morphological features3,4. All laboratory examinations were conducted by using the relevant guidelines and regulations approved by the Pukyong National University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (PKNU-IACUC) under Approval No. PKNUIACUC-2025-16, dated February 18, 2025.

The extraction of the genomic DNA was performed using the AccuPrep®DNA Extraction Kit (Bioneer, Republic of Korea) according to the standard instructions provided by the manufacturer. A paired-set primer Fish-BCH (5′-TCAACYAATCAYAAAGATATYGGCAC-3′) and Fish-BCL (5′-ACTTCYGGGTGRCCRAARAATCA-3′) was used to amplify the targeted mitochondrialCOIpartial marker (~ 650 bp)54. Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) was conducted using a Takara thermal cycler with a 30 µL reaction mixture consisting of 1 µL each of forward and reverse primers, 0.9 µL of 3% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), 19.9 µL of sterilized deionized water, 3 µL of 10× ExTaq Buffer, 0.2 µL of Ex Taq HS enzyme, 3 µL of dNTPs, and 1 µL of 1/10 diluted target DNA template. The thermal conditions included an initial denaturation at 94º C for 3 min, followed by 40 cycles of denaturation at 94º C for 30 s, annealing at 50º C for 30 s, extension at 72º C for 1 min, and a final extension at 72º C for 5 min. Gel electrophoresis with 1.5% agarose was applied to visualize the DNA integrity, followed by a DNA purification assessment using NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Successfuly amplified PCR product was sent and read using the Sanger sequencing at Macrogen (Republic of Korea). The PCR product was purified using the AccuPrep®Purification Kit (Bioneer, Republic of Korea) to remove impurities, and then sequenced bidirectionally at Macrogen (Daejeon, Republic of Korea). TheCOIsequence was subjected to species examination based on sequence query and similarity using nucleotide BLAST (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) and was submitted in the GenBank database (Accession numberPQ242656).

The high-throughput next-generation sequencing (NGS) with NovaSeq platform was employed for complete mitogenome analysis. A paired-end library with size 2 × 150 bp was generated through the TruSeq library preparation kit for Illumina®(Illumina, USA). About 100 ng of extracted DNA was fragmented using a Covaris ultrasonicator technology to generate double-helix DNA with straight ends and 5′ phosphorylation. After end reparation and ‘A’ tailing, the fragments were ligated as stubs with TruSeq UD DNA Indexing adapters. To construct the final library, the purification and PCR enrichment of the resulting products were performed using a bead-based method. Library quantification and size distribution quality assessment were performed using KAPA Library Quantification Kits for Illumina and the Agilent Technologies 4200 TapeStation D1000 (Agilent Technologies, USA), with sequencing conducted by Macrogen.

The NGS reading and assembly were constructed using Geneious Prime and referred to the publishedP. erythrinusmitogenome (Genbank Accession No.MG653592) using default mapping algorithm. The PCGs were validated by adjusting overlapping regions with MEGA X55. The genes placements and boundaries were determined by employing the MITOS Galaxy version 1.1.656and MitoFish MitoAnnotator webserver57. Moreover, the boundaries of each PCG, including the start and stop codons were verified using the Open Reading Frames (ORFs) Finder webtool in GenBank (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/orffinder), with standard genetic code for vertebrate mitochondrial analysis in conjunction with MITOS Galaxy webserver. The final annotatedP. bellottiimitogenome was submitted to the GenBank database (Accession numberPQ524309).

The mitogenome ofP. bellottiiwas represented as a circular map using MitoFish MitoAnnotator webserver. Comparative analyses were performed to assess mitogenomic structural variations inP. bellottiiwith three other congeners withinPagellusgenus:P. bogaraveo(Genbank Accession No.AB305023)22P. acarne(GenBank Accession No.MG736083)23andP. erythrinus(GenBank Accession No.MG653592)24. Base compositions of PCGs, tRNA, rRNA, and the CR were evaluated using MEGA X, and intergenic and overlapping regions between contiguous genes were calculated manually. The nucleotide skewness, specifically the AT and GC skews, was calculated using the following formulas: AT-skew = (A − T)/(A + T) and GC-skew = (G − C)/(G + C), respectively58.

Nucleotide diversity (π) for allPagellusspecies was scrutinized using a sliding window method in DnaSP ver 6.059, applying a 25 bp step size, which is the size of the shifted sequence within each window, and a 200 bp window size, which means the sequence size at each time. By using these sizes, the accuracy of determining the location of protein coding regions in eukaryotes can be significantly improved60. The DnaSP software was also employed to calculate the pairwise substitution patterns in PCGs among fourPagellusspecies and other Sparidae family members, including the ratio of Ks and Ka. In addition, the transition and transversion codon saturation rates across the PCGs of all Sparidae species were assessed using the DAMBE6 software61. To analyze the RSCU and the distribution of amino acids within the PCGs, the dataset of allPagellusspecies was aligned using MEGA X. The secondary structures of tRNAs were reconstructed using the tRNA prediction tools in ARWEN 1.262and ARAGORN63which were integrated into the MITOS Galaxy web server. Furthermore, the conserved blocks within the CR were identified using CLUSTAL X64in MEGA X referring to the published CR ofP. majorin a previous study40. As repeat sequences serve a vital role for further development markers in population structures studies, we employed the Tandem Repeats Finder program to detect the tandem repeats pattern within the CR65.

To construct the matrilineal lineage of fourPagellusand other sparids, a dataset encompassing the complete mitogenomes of 32 species was assembled, including a newly sequenced mitogenome from this study (Supplementary Table S6). In addition, two mitogenomes ofLethrinus obsoletus(Accession No.AP009165)20andNemipterus japonicus(Accession No.KJ473717)66under the families Lethrinidae and Nemipteridae, respectively were designated as outgroups. To investigate matrilineal phylogenetic relationships withinPagellusand other Sparidae species, a concatenated dataset of 13 PCGs were generated using the Concatenator Tool in iTaxoTools ver 0.167. The ‘GTR + G + I’ model was determined to be the most suitable based on the lowest Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) value, as assessed using both PartitionFinder ver 268and the JModelTest program69. Then, phylogenetic trees were constructed by Bayesian analysis employing a Metropolis-coupled Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm in MrBayes 3.1.270. The ML-based phylogenetic tree was made with standard settings in PhyML 3.0 online server71. The two phylogenetic trees were then saved in Newick format (*.nwk) and visualized using Interactive Tree of Life (iTOL)72.

The estimation of diverging times among sparids lineage, including the fourPagellusspecies, were calculated by RelTime73method with the ML topology as the baseline tree in MEGA 1274. The RelTime method is widely recognized for its efficiency and accuracy in divergence time estimation, making it particularly well-suited for analysing large datasets with reduced computational time75. Thus, a known fossil calibration was applied to constrain the analysis based on the splitting age betweenP. acarneandP. bogaraveoby determining the fossil ofPagellus leptosomusfrom the Messinian diatomites of the Chelif Basin, Algeria (about 7 MYA) as the lower splitting age of both species. Additionally, fossils ofBoopssp. were also used as the upper boundary from the Messinian diatomites and middle Miocene (about 14 MYA), as described in the previous study42. The generated timetree was further refined and visually enhanced using MEGA12 to improve clarity and presentation quality.

The generation of the maps entailed a multi-step process involving the acquisition and processing of both vector and raster datasets. Initially, global administrative boundary shapefiles were downloaded from the DIVA-GIS platform (https://diva-gis.org/data.html), which offers high-resolution vector data suitable for spatial analysis. These shapefiles were subsequently imported into ArcMap within the ArcGIS v10.6 environment for further geospatial processing and overlay analyses. Global-scale Ocean current data were sourced from the NOAA National Weather Service and the U.S. Army (https://data.amerigeoss.org/dataset/major-ocean-currents-arrowpolys-100 m-76; accessed on 15 May 2025). Additionally, bathymetric and sea surface temperature layers from the CMIP6 Earth System Models were obtained via the Bio-ORACLE v3.0 database (https://bio-oracle.org/)76. All spatial datasets were reprojected to the WGS 84 geographic coordinate system to ensure interoperability and spatial consistency. The processed datasets were then integrated and exported for the creation of the final thematic maps. In addition, paleogeographic maps illustrating tectonically driven changes in the Atlantic–Mediterranean gateway and the evolution of the Gibraltar Arc from the middle Miocene to the present were manually adapted from previously published literature48.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

The first author (A.W.) extends heartfelt gratitude to the Ministry of Oceans and Fisheries, Republic of Korea, for their generous support through the ‘Establishing Integrated Ocean Fisheries Technology Training Center and Enhancing Capacity Building in Indonesia (PG54000)’ program, which played a pivotal role in enabling his doctoral studies at PKNU, Republic of Korea. The authors would also like to express sincere thanks to Emmanuel Dovlo and Eunice Nuerkie Ofoli-Anum for their exceptional assistance in obtaining the necessary documentation for the shipment of samples. We also acknowledge the staff of the Fisheries Scientific Survey Division of the Fisheries Commission Ghana, including Audrey Lamptey, Salman Sheini, Peter Baah Essel, Kelvin Kafui Fiadoyor, Linda Yeboah, Efua Ansah Mensah, Ama Nyarkoa Sarpong, and Agness Mensima Arthur, for their invaluable contribution to the sampling efforts. We also thank Walter Capella for granting permission to reproduce and modify maps from his publication, and Imon Abedin for his assistance in generating the distribution map of the studied species.