Shortening prehospital time and door-to-puncture (DTP) time are important to achieve better outcomes in patients with acute stroke. To reduce treatment delays, particularly DTP time and prehospital delays, our core hospital in the Saitama Stroke Network (SSN) implemented a series of interventions aimed at enhancing collaboration with emergency medical services (EMS) personnel and optimizing in-hospital workflows.

A revised prehospital flowchart was co-developed with the EMS to shorten on-scene time and streamline information transmission using the Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale and essential clinical indicators. Simultaneously, the in-hospital stroke treatment algorithm was modified: CT was omitted, MRI was prioritized, and patients were transferred directly from the imaging suite to the operating room. Intravenous recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator (rt-PA) was administered in the operating room. Simulation training for hospital staff was conducted bimonthly to reinforce the new protocol. We retrospectively analyzed changes in time metrics and patient volumes before (Group A, January 3, 2019, to January 3, 2020) and after (Group B, January 4, 2020, to January 4, 2021) these interventions.

Among 66 patients undergoing mechanical thrombectomy (MT), DTP time significantly decreased in Group B (p <0.001), with notable improvements in door-to-imaging and imaging-to-operating room intervals. However, prehospital times showed no significant change. The number of MT procedures increased by 54%, and SSN transports rose by 43% from Groups A to B. The rates of successful recanalization (thrombolysis in cerebral infarction score ≥2b) and rt-PA administration increased, but without significant differences.

Although we could not shorten prehospital time sufficiently, DTP time was significantly shortened by our new algorithm and simulation training, and the numbers of acute stroke patients and MT were increased significantly through collaboration with the EMS. Further collaboration with the EMS remains an important challenge going forward.

Longer delays before recanalization of vessels in acute stroke patients are associated with decreased likelihood of good outcomes,1–3)so reduction in the time from onset to recanalization is one of the most important factors affecting good patient outcomes. Therefore, the Saitama Stroke Network (SSN) was independently established to improve care for acute stroke patients.4,5)The SSN classifies medical institutions into core hospitals that can perform mechanical thrombectomy (MT) and affiliated hospitals that can only perform intravenous recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator (rt-PA) therapy. In addition, emergency medical services (EMS) personnel are encouraged to quickly transport patients to core hospitals for immediate treatment. However, several reports have indicated that the implementation of the SSN alone has been insufficient to significantly shorten the time from stroke onset to reperfusion.5)To further improve patient outcomes, reduction in both prehospital time,6–8)the interval from the 1st contact between EMS and the patient to hospital arrival, and the door-to-puncture (DTP) time must be achieved. Furthermore, based on our experience as a core hospital in the SSN, we considered that shortening treatment time alone was not sufficient to save more patients, and that more acute stroke patients needed to be transported by EMS.

In this study, we created a new flowchart for EMS to shorten the on-scene time (OST), and we revised the in-hospital stroke treatment algorithm and conducted in-hospital simulation training to shorten the DTP time. Furthermore, to increase the number of acute stroke patients who are transported to our hospital, we held educational sessions with EMS personnel to share the importance of this initiative and further strengthened our collaborative system. Here we describe the background of this effort, the changes in treatment time, and the number of acute stroke patients who were transported by EMS before and after the intervention, and our future challenges.

To shorten prehospital time, a new flowchart for the SSN was created specifically for EMS in the jurisdiction of the Western Saitama Fire Department. Before the flowchart was created, EMS utilized an emergency scene information form that included many data items (Fig. 1). Following the introduction of the SSN, the Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale (CPSS) was incorporated into the assessment protocol, along with 6 additional clinical observation items: arrhythmia, aphasia, conjugate eye deviation, facial paralysis, hemispatial neglect, and upper limb paralysis.

To incorporate these updates, a series of educational sessions and problem-solving meetings were conducted with EMS to enhance interprofessional collaboration. Through these efforts, a revised flowchart was jointly developed. The flowchart was then explained to our hospital staff, and cooperation for rapid patient acceptance was requested.

Following the implementation of the flowchart, EMS personnel evaluated the patients using only the CPSS as a 1st call and reported only essential patient information to our hospital. Based on this information, the attending neurosurgeon determined whether to accept the patient.

Then, EMS personnel reported detailed information from the ambulance as a 2nd call during transportation to minimize prehospital time. Additionally, we asked EMS to display the flowchart inside the ambulance and ensure easy accessibility to encourage rapid transport of patients to our hospital based on minimal information and the CPSS (Fig. 2).

Next, we modified the in-hospital stroke treatment algorithm. Following the modification, CT was omitted, and only MRI was performed. After imaging, patients were transferred directly to the operating room without passing through the emergency room to shorten treatment time. Additionally, intravenous administration of rt-PA was shifted from the emergency room to the operating room to further shorten patient transport time (Fig. 3). To educate our staff on how to use the algorithm, training (simulation) sessions were implemented every 2 months for hospital staff.

In addition, we retrospectively reviewed patient age, sex, rt-PA administration rate, and thrombolysis in cerebral infarction (TICI) score ≥2b.

We also examined whether the number of stroke transports and MT procedures changed after strengthening collaboration through joint sessions with EMS.

The research described in our submission has been approved by the Ethics Institutional Review Board of Ken-o-Tokorozawa Hospital (No. 000029).

Statistical software StatView version 5.0 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA) was used for all analyses. Continuous variables of the differences in median and interquartile range (IQR) values were compared using the Mann–WhitneyUtest. Statistical significance was considered at p <0.05.

From January 3, 2019, to January 4, 2021, a total of 628 patients were transported via EMS, of whom 66 patients underwent MT. These patients were divided into Group A (n = 26) and Group B (n = 40) for comparative analysis.

The median age of all patients was 86 years, with 55% being female. There were no significant differences between the 2 groups in terms of age (Group A: 86 years [IQR: 81–94] vs. Group B: 86 years [IQR: 81–93], p = 0.948) or sex distribution (Group A: 50% female vs. Group B: 53% female, p = 0.85). Regarding prehospital times, neither OST nor transport time showed significant improvement in Group B (OST: p = 0.942; transport time: p = 0.887).

In contrast, significant reductions were observed in in-hospital time intervals for Group B, specifically in DTI (p <0.001), ITOR (p <0.001), and DTP (p <0.001). However, no significant differences were found in ORTP (p = 0.485), DTN (p = 0.733), or DTR (p = 0.728) (Table 1).

Values for non-categorical data are presented as the median and 25%–75% interquartile range.

The rate of intravenous rt-PA administration increased from 46% in Group A to 63% in Group B, although this difference was not statistically significant (p = 0.197). Similarly, the proportion of patients achieving successful recanalization (TICI score ≥2b) rose from 77% to 93%, but this was also not statistically significant (p = 0.0756).

The number of EMS transports was 169 in 2019, 217 in 2020, and 242 in 2021, reflecting a 43% increase in transport volume from the early to the late period (Fig. 4). The number of MT cases increased over the 3 years, from 28 in 2019 to 40 in 2020 and 46 in 2021 (Fig. 5).

Shorter time from onset to recanalization requires both shorter prehospital time and DTP time.9)However, at our hospital, the DTP time has been about 90 min,10,11)so treatment has been delayed, and the prehospital time was also considered unsatisfactory. We continue to work to provide better treatment to acute stroke patients as the core hospital in this area by strengthening cooperation with the EMS to shorten prehospital time and DTP time, and to increase the number of acute stroke patients admitted.

Although we could not shorten prehospital time sufficiently, the number of acute stroke patients increased significantly, and DTP time was also significantly shortened. We consider that the DTP time was shortened by our new algorithm and simulation training. Effective reduction in DTP time requires shortening of 4 key times: DTI, imaging duration, ITOR, and ORTP.

Previously, we did not have a unified protocol in our hospital, and neurosurgeons individually decided on the instructions and treatment plans. In addition, medical care was not consistent due to differences in medical staff skills and the effects of department transfers. As a result, the DTP time was very long in our hospital. So, to address these challenges, we developed a new algorithm. First, to shorten the DTI time, the tasks each staff member performs during initial treatment have been standardized and clearly documented. Additionally, we minimized nonessential procedures to shorten both imaging duration and ITOR time. We also documented and standardized staff tasks, as is done in the emergency room, to shorten ORTP time. However, new algorithms and lecture-based learning are insufficient to acquire the necessary skills,12)so we conducted simulation training to acquire algorithm skills and shorten the DTP time. Neurosurgeons, nurses, radiologists, clinical laboratory technicians, pharmacists, and rehabilitation staff participated in the simulation training. The rehabilitation staff also played the roles of patients because of their extensive understanding of the neurological findings (Fig. 6).

The simulations were designed to closely replicate real clinical scenarios by utilizing actual cases and real equipment, thereby enhancing realism and fostering a sense of urgency among participants. MRI procedures were performed on simulated patients using authentic clinical protocols to ensure alignment with standard practice. Each simulation session was recorded and evaluated by an independent scorer to facilitate mastery of the algorithm. Objective debriefing sessions were subsequently conducted, during which participants reviewed the footage, engaged in self-assessment, and received structured feedback focused on identifying deviations from the established algorithm based on the scoring results. These results were brought to regular meetings, where repeated discussions on algorithm modifications were held. Through these discussions, we aimed not only to optimize individual roles of simulation participants but also to achieve overall system optimization. As a result, the algorithm was continuously revised and refined.

As a result, the DTP time was substantially reduced to 65 min. In particular, DTI time, imaging time, and ITOR time were shortened significantly. On the other hand, the ORTP time did not show any improvement because intravenous rt-PA administration in the operating room required additional time, and the time required to prepare for surgery did not change. However, the fact that ORTP time did not increase, although many procedures were performed in the operating room, suggests that the algorithmic improvements had some effect.

On the other hand, we were unable to shorten prehospital time despite various collaborative efforts with the EMS. Therefore, we recognized that hospital staff alone could not effectively shorten prehospital time, so we initiated discussions with the EMS. Through these discussions, we concluded that acceptance of overtriage, more rapid hospital response to emergency calls, the sharing of only essential information, and utilizing a 2nd call to provide additional information were necessary to shorten prehospital time. Based on these considerations, we developed a flowchart with the EMS at our hospital to make it easier to accept patients into the SSN. The key point in its design was that EMS personnel assess patients using only the CPSS as the 1st call and report the minimum essential patient information to our hospital. Based on this information, the attending neurosurgeon would then determine whether the patient could be accepted. The patient is then promptly transported to our hospital, and the EMS personnel report detailed information from the ambulance as the 2nd call to minimize the prehospital time. Furthermore, we asked the EMS to display the flowchart inside ambulances, allowing immediate availability at all times to ensure constant access. These efforts enable EMS personnel to request hospital admission without hesitation but do not shorten prehospital time. Several factors may have contributed to this outcome.

First, the prevalence of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) during the survey period was significant. To prevent infection with COVID-19, protective equipment had to be put on and taken off, which may have increased prehospital time compared to the previous period. In fact, several reports of increases in emergency calls and delays in emergency transport time have been made globally.13–15)Similarly, in our study, this factor may have contributed to prolonged prehospital time. Although we would like to investigate this factor, verification was difficult because the EMS continued to take preventative measures against infection after the COVID-19 pandemic had subsided.

Second, we confirmed that the new flowchart was not being used effectively, possibly because the EMS personnel used previous information sheets and collected information from patients that had been considered necessary. In the future, other ways for the co-use of the previous information sheets and the new flowchart should be considered. On the other hand, by strengthening collaboration with EMS and revising the patient admission process through the use of the flowchart, we were able to reduce the barriers to requesting acceptance to the SSN, improve awareness of emergency transport among EMS personnel, and improve hospital staff awareness of stroke patient acceptance. As a result, requests for SSN admissions and the number of MT procedures increased significantly. In addition, prehospital assessment of stroke patients by EMS personnel may be associated with shortened DTP,16)and we believe that education for EMS personnel and changes to the flowchart both contributed to shortened DTP. However, these efforts were conducted as a before-and-after comparison over a continuous period at a single hospital, so factors such as staff familiarity with treatment may have influenced the results. Therefore, there are limitations to accurate comparisons.

As future challenges, we believe that it is necessary to further shorten DTP time, shorten DTP time at night, and ensure that EMS personnel thoroughly adhere to our flowchart. Further improvement is needed, as a target for DTP time of 60 min or less has been reported, although we significantly reduced DTP time to 65 min.11)In fact, many reports have shown that strengthening the in-hospital system leads to shorter DTP time, particularly through improved cooperation between the various specialities, so neurosurgeons and other team members must work together to solve problems17–20)and the cooperation of medical staff members is undoubtedly essential in the treatment process. Therefore, improving the overall level of knowledge within the hospital through staff education is considered extremely important. During debriefing sessions after simulation, we have implemented stroke education sessions to enhance stroke knowledge and aim to further shorten DTP time. In addition, we consider that simulation training using role-playing patients enabled new or unskilled staff to acquire optimal techniques. However, the current hospital system cannot shorten the DTP time at night because there are few staff in the hospital during the night shift.21,22)Therefore, we are trying to create a new approach in which operating room nurses stay at the hospital at night and stroke care unit nurses support the emergency nurses during the treatment of SSN patients to strengthen the current in-hospital system. Furthermore, to ensure the consistent use of the flowchart by EMS personnel, we believe that further strengthening of collaboration is essential. In the future, we plan to hold joint discussions with the EMS to implement collaborative simulations aimed at promoting the effective use of the flowchart.

As a result of these efforts, we were able to achieve some success in shortening DTP time. However, we are not satisfied with this achievement and will continue to make various efforts to improve treatment outcomes and work on new approaches.

In this study, we strengthened collaboration with the EMS and restructured the in-hospital treatment system to shorten the time to treatment for acute stroke patients. As a result, DTP time was significantly shortened by our new algorithm and simulation training, and the numbers of acute stroke patients and MT procedures increased significantly through collaboration with the EMS. Further collaboration with the EMS remains an important challenge going forward.