Approximately 10% of breast and 20% of ovarian cancers are hereditary in nature. The most commonly implicated genes are the BRCA genes, and the current gold standard for testing is by direct DNA sequencing. This process is expensive, time-consuming, and has a turnaround time of several weeks. Radiogenomics involves extracting quantitative data from medical imaging and using mathematical models to predict the underlying genetic makeup of tissues.

To perform a systematic review and meta-analysis evaluating the accuracy of radiogenomics in determining BRCA alteration status.

A systematic review was performed in accordance with PRISMA guidelines. Diagnostic test accuracy analyses (i.e. pooled sensitivity and specificity) were performed. Statistical analyses were performed using RevMan V5.4.

Thirteen studies compromising 2835 patients were included. Of these, 857 were BRCA alteration carriers. The mean age of patients was 46 years. Radiogenomic methods correctly identified BRCA alteration with a strong diagnostic test accuracy (pooled sensitivity: 0.82, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.79-0.84, pooled specificity: 0.81, 95% CI: 0.78-0.83).

Radiogenomics may be an accurate method to predict BRCA alterations. However, these findings should be validated in larger, prospective studies to determine their utility in clinical practice. Until further refinement of these methods, DNA sequencing should remain the gold standard.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first systematic review and meta-analysis that has been carried out on this topic. We believe that our results demonstrate the potential clinical utility radiogenomics could have in the BRCA alteration testing process.

Solid tumours are heterogeneous, both spatially and temporally, and conventional biopsy may miss clinically significant information. One of the potential advantages of radiogenomics is that medical imaging has the ability to capture the heterogeneity of the entire tumour, non-invasively.10Thus, the application of radiogenomics to inform genetic alterations may further personalize therapeutic and surgical strategy in accordance with the respective needs of each patient.

In contemporary practice, patients are selected for BRCA testing based on prediction models which take into consideration age and family cancer history; however, information about family structure may be deficient and this could potentially preclude those with a genetic susceptibility from testing.13By using radiomics to reliably extract imaging features which are consistent with BRCA1/2 alterations, it may help improve selection of patients for genetic testing, which could subsequently expedite accurate diagnoses of BRCA alterations within this population, years prior to those alterations giving rise to breast and ovarian cancer diagnoses.14Accordingly, the aim of this study was to perform a systematic review and meta-analysis to evaluate the diagnostic ability of radiogenomic profiling to accurately predict alterations in the BRCA gene.

A systematic review was performed in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA) guidelines15and the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Diagnostic Test Accuracy.16This study was prospectively registered with the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO—CRD42023476196). Ethical approval for this study was not required as the outcome data has been published previously.

Population: Patients who have a confirmed alteration of the BRCA1 or 2 gene by genetic testing and who have undergone radiomic analysis of the breast or ovary.

Intervention: Detection of alterations in the BRCA gene by radiogenomic profiling.

Comparison: Detection of alterations in the BRCA gene through direct DNA sequencing or next-generation sequencing.

Outcomes: The evaluation of the accuracy, and thus clinical utility, of radiomics to detect alterations in the BRCA gene as evidenced by the diagnostic parameters of sensitivity and specificity.

An electronic search of the databases PubMed Medline, EMBASE, and Scopus was initially performed on February 8, 2023 with a further updated search carried out on February 20, 2025. The searches were carried out by 2 independent reviewers (DMcA and MGD). The searches used the following terms: (BReast CAncer gene) OR (BRCA) AND (Radiomics) OR (Radiogenomics). Searches were conducted from inception to February 2025. Only studies published in the English language were included. Retrieved results were exported to EndNote20 prior to screening. Once duplicate studies were removed, the titles and abstracts of all remaining studies were screened according to inclusion criteria. A third reviewer (MJK) acted as an arbitrator where there was discrepancy in opinion between the 2 primary reviewers. All potentially eligible studies subsequently had their full texts reviewed while applying our inclusion and exclusion criteria. Included studies had their reference lists screened to ensure any additional relevant studies were captured.

Inclusion and exclusion criteria along with a data collection proforma were agreed upon by both reviewers and the senior author prior to commencement of the study. Studies which met the following inclusion criteria were included in the review: (1) Studies whose primary goal was to evaluate the ability of radiogenomic characterization algorithms to predict BRCA gene alteration status, (2) studies involving the ovarian and breast region only, (3) studies which used any conventional imaging modality were considered (mammography, ultrasound [US], computed tomography [CT], magnetic resonance imaging [MRI], positron emission tomography [PET]), (4) studies detailing sensitivity, specificity or receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analyses assessing the diagnostic capability in predicting BRCA alterations, and (5) studies published in English. While only studies which provided results allowing for the analysis of sensitivity and specificity data were eligible for inclusion in the meta-analysis, we included all relevant literature pertaining to the application of radiomic profiling to decipher BRCA alterations in the systematic review component of this study.

The exclusion criteria included: (1) studies which used imaging characteristic without the use of radiogenomics (i.e. radiologist opinion, contrast uptake parameters, etc.) to determine BRCA alteration status, (2) subsequent studies involving the same patient population, (3) conference abstracts, and (4) case reports.

The following data was extracted from the eligible studies into the data collection proforma: (1) first author name, (2) year of publication, (3) study design, (4) country, (5) level of evidence, (6) number of participants, (7) age demographics, (8) number of BRCA positive alteration participants, (9) imaging modality used, (10) region of interest, and (11) sensitivity, specificity, and area under the curve (AUC) scores from ROC analyses, where available. Sensitivity and specificity were directly extracted from tables and study text. Where studies tested multiple radiogenomic methods, only data relating to the best performing method was extracted. In studies where participants were separated into training and testing cohorts, results from the testing cohorts were used, to minimize potential bias which may arise from the training cohorts. Similarly, where studies used age-matched cohorts, results from these cohorts were extracted. An appraisal of the quality and risk of bias of the included radiogenomic studies was carried out independently by 2 reviewers (DMcA and MGD) and assessed using the radiomics quality score (RQS) as described by Lambin et al18and the Quality Assessment of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies 2 (QUADAS-2).19Description of these tools along with results included in this study can be found in theSupplementary Material. Any discrepancies between reviewers were resolved following discussion with final judgement by the senior author (MJK).

Descriptive statistics were used to outline characteristics of the various included studies. Statistical analysis was performed in accordance with the Cochrane guidelines.16Study specific estimates of sensitivity and specificity were calculated from the study data. Summary ROC analysis was used to convey the relationship between sensitivity and specificity of radiogenomic analysis in detecting BRCA gene alteration and to demonstrate the diagnostic test performance of radiogenomics in detecting BRCA gene alteration. Where sensitivity and specificity were not explicitly stated by the authors, estimated diagnostic test sensitivity and specificity were calculated from ROC analyses with the most accurate sensitivity prioritized. For all sensitivity and specificity analyses, 95% percent confidence intervals (CI) are reported. Statistical significance was determined to be aP-value <.05. No heterogeneity test was applied as sensitivity and specificity analysis did not lend the opportunity for such analysis. Statistical analysis was undertaken using Review Manager (RevMan), version 5.4 (Nordic Cochrane Centre, Copenhagen, Denmark).

The initial electronic database search yielded a total of 283 studies of which 15 were duplicates, leaving 268 to be reviewed. After screening of titles and abstracts, 18 manuscripts were deemed appropriate for full text and reference screening. From this, 11 studies were deemed to meet the inclusion criteria and 2 further studies were identified in the reference screening, resulting in a total of 13 studies included in the systematic review.14,20–31Thereafter, we noted that 10 of those provided data which was eligible for inclusion in the meta-analysis.14,20–23,25,26,28,30The literature search did not produce any non-English language papers that the authors felt could have potentially relevant results. The PRISMA flow chart of study selection is depicted inFigure 1.

PRISMA flowchart outlining systematic literature search.

The 13 studies included had a total of 2835 patients, of which 1255 were used in the test and age-matched cohorts. There were 857 BRCA alteration carriers. The mean age was 46 years (range: 19-89 years) (10 studies). Seven of the studies looked at radiogenomic analysis of the breast, while 6 looked at ovarian tissue. There was a combination of both healthy tissue and tumour for both regions of interest. The majority of the studies were conducted in China (46%). All of the included studies were a retrospective cohort design. Quality of the included studies was satisfactory with the mean RQS being 17.6/36 (range 12-21). While the retrospective nature of the included studies added the potential for bias, using the QUADAS 2 tool it was deemed that overall the risk for bias was low.Tables 1and2provide a summary of the study characteristics.

Abbreviations: LOE = level of evidence; NA = not applicable; NR = not reported.

Abbreviations: A = arterial phase; CC = craniocaudal; CT = computed tomography; DCE = dynamic contrast enhanced; DWI = diffusion weighted imaging; fl3d = 3D fat-suppressed fast low angle shot; MMG = mammography; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; PV = portal venous phase; ROI = region of interest; RQS = radiomics quality score; TV = transvaginal.

The imaging modalities utilized included CT, MRI, mammography and US. Five studies14,20–22,25included a non-imaging variable along with radiogenomic analysis in their results, while Li et al28used routine CT features in conjunction with radiogenomic analysis.

Two studies utilized MRI and looked at radiogenomic analysis of breast tumours.14,23These studies had sensitivities and specificities which ranged from 0.76 to 0.84 and 0.64 to 0.83, respectively.

Five of the studies employed CT and assessed ovarian tumours,20,21,28–30with sensitivities and specificities ranging from 0.60 to 0.83 and 0.55 to 0.90, respectively.

Three studies employed mammography to evaluate breast tissue.24,26,27These studies looked at the retroareolar area of healthy breasts.

Three studies used US based radiogenomics. Nero et al31undertook radiogenomic analysis of healthy ovaries. They used a number of different radiogenomic strategies and models of US machine. Reported sensitivities and specificities for the various strategies and machines used ranged from 0.18 to 0.75 and 0.48 to 0.91, respectively. The other two US studies looked at breast tumour.22,25A summary of the data for the sensitivity and specificity analysis for studies included in the meta-analysis is illustrated inTable 3.

Data for sensitivity and specificity of studies included in meta-analysis.

Abbreviations: CI = confidence interval; FN = false negative; FP = false positive; TN = true negative; TP = true positive.

The overall pooled sensitivity and specificity for studies included in the meta-analysis was 0.82 (95% CI 0.79-0.84) and 0.81 (95% CI 0.78-0.83), respectively.Figure 2depicts the forest plots for sensitivity (Figure 2A) and specificity (Figure 2B) of the individual studies.Figure 3depicts the forest plots for sensitivity (Figure 3A) and specificity (Figure 3B) of the pooled data.

Individual studies sensitivity (A) and specificity (B) with 95% confidence intervals.

Pooled sensitivity (A) and specificity (B) for the meta-analysis with 95% confidence intervals.

This is the first systematic review which concerns the diagnostic ability of radiogenomics to predict alterations in the BRCA genes. Importantly, 12 of the included studies showed positive results in predicting BRCA alterations using radiogenomic analysis. The study conducted by Meier et al29assessed associations between texture metrics and BRCA alteration status within ovarian tumours, but they were unable to discriminate between BRCA alteration and non-alteration carriers. They noted the small study population (n= 88) and BRCA subpopulation (n= 28) as possible contributors to these findings. At meta-analysis, radiogenomics correctly identified BRCA alteration status with a strong diagnostic test accuracy, having a pooled sensitivity and specificity of 0.82 and 0.81, respectively. Vasileiou et al,14Avesani et al,20Cao et al,21Deng et al,22and Guo et al25combined non-imaging variables to improve their predictive performance, a technique that has been described elsewhere.32,33The utilization of non-imaging variables is also captured in the RQS, resulting in a higher score, representing enhanced radiomic quality. This reinforces the fact that radiogenomics should be viewed as complementary to our current practice, and not as a replacement, in providing diagnostic, prognostic and predictive value.

There are a number of limitations to this study. Firstly, all of the included studies were single-centre and retrospective in design, which are known to be more prone to selection and confounding biases when compared to prospective studies.41Secondly, the relatively small population size limits the power of the results. Finally, the included studies were conducted using different imaging modalities and across 2 distinct anatomical regions of interest, thus limiting interpretation somewhat. Furthermore, radiomics is still a heterogeneous area of study and involves a wide spectrum of different techniques to build models such as machine-learning and neural networks. In this study, we have combined all radiogenomic studies irrespective of model used; however, it is recognized that there can be variations in the reproducibility of data from these different techniques.42Nevertheless this study provides a comprehensive review of studies using radiogenomics to aid the detection of BRCA alterations with strong diagnostic test accuracy, which broadens the horizon for further studies to refine this process, moving its application closer to use in clinical practice.

Radiogenomics is a rapidly evolving field which has the potential to revolutionize personalized medicine. This review provides evidence for the use of radiogenomics in identifying BRCA alteration status. We recommend that our findings be validated in larger, prospective studies. Although currently direct DNA sequencing remains the gold standard for genetic testing, in the future radiogenomics may act as an adjunct to patient selection and, as technology advances, may become a validated diagnostic tool in its own right.

David McAuliffe, 
School of Medicine, University of Galway, Galway H91 TK33, Ireland.

Matthew G Davey, 
School of Medicine, University of Galway, Galway H91 TK33, Ireland; 
Department of Surgery, Galway University Hospitals, Galway H91 YR71, Ireland.

Michael J Kerin, 
School of Medicine, University of Galway, Galway H91 TK33, Ireland; 
Department of Surgery, Galway University Hospitals, Galway H91 YR71, Ireland.