A surface-acoustic-wave-driven microactuator that allows
separation
of the piezoelectric substrate and chip has been fabricated and characterized.
By simply placing the microactuator on a disposable chip, the microactuator
did not contaminate the substrate with any reagent and could easily
transport droplets and powders. The microactuator also allowed mixing
of heterophase materials, such as powder and droplets, in a microfluidic
well to increase their chemical reaction. This microactuator will
enable significant cost savings and automation of plants and research
facilities.

In recent years, micro chemical analysis
systems (micro total analysis
systems, μTAS) have attracted interest in the fields of medicine,
environmental measurement, and biochemistry.−μTASs have the following advantages: (1) measurement of small
sample volumes, (2) short reaction times, (3) automation of measurements,
including pretreatment, (4) downsizing of equipment, (5) disposability
of the equipment, and (6) low cost and reduced manpower. In particular,
a μTAS, which is also known as a lab-on-a-chip (LOC), is expected
to integrate all of the chemical and biochemical analysis operations,
such as sample preparation, reaction, separation, and detection, performed
in laboratories and testing centers, on a single chip to further increase
the processing capacity. Therefore, in order to integrate multiple
small devices such as pumps, valves, and sensors, on a single chip,
it is desirable that the manufacturing process for each device is
simple.

The micropumps commonly used in chemical processes include
mechanical
diaphragm pumps and nonmechanical electro-osmotic pumps. Diaphragm
pumps pump liquid by causing displacement of the channel volume by
elastic deformation. However, diaphragm pumps have a complex structure.
Electro-osmotic pumps use electro-osmotic flow.,Electro-osmotic
flow is the phenomenon where positive and negative charges are separated
and face each other at the contact surface of a solid and a liquid.
When an electric field is applied along the flow path, the ions in
the liquid are transported according to the movement of the electric
field. However, in order to pump a liquid using electroosmotic flow,
the solution must be an electrolyte.

Although the example of
a pump is described here, a mechanical
actuator mechanism, including a pump, is essential to drive the actual
microchip, which needs to pump continuous fluids and transport droplets
and powders. Syringe pumps are often used in microchemical systems
that are fabricated and evaluated in the laboratory for research purposes.
Syringe pumps have excellent controllability, but the entire system
is connected to tubing and a syringe pump, which increases the size
and is not suitable for in situ measurements in an external environment,
e.g., for environmental analysis. In addition, residual fluid remains
in the tubing and inside the syringe, making it unsuitable for ultratrace
measurements, and other mechanisms have been requested.

In 1885,
Lord Rayleigh reported on surface acoustic waves (SAWs),
which propagate by concentrating energy only on the surface of an
elastic body. Since the discovery of SAWs,
physicists have performed extensive fundamental research on SAWs in
relation to seismic waves, and methods for analyzing SAWs have been
established. In 1965, the generation and detection of SAWs became
remarkably efficient owing to the development of an interdigital transducer
(IDT) by Bell Laboratories. This, together
with the discovery of lithium niobate−and lithium tantalate,,which have large piezoelectric effects, led to the generation of
SAWs with high efficiency. The SAWs have been actively investigated
for practical applications over the last 30 or so years. For example,
in the field of wireless communications, noise-reduced data transmission
is achieved owing to the SAW bandpass filters. Today, the wireless
communication environment would be unthinkable without SAW bandpass
filters. Currently, SAW bandpass filters are used for mobile phones
and other applications are in practical use, but actuators−and sensors−using SAWs are still in the research stage.

The IDTs used to generate SAWs have a
very simple structure and
are easy to fabricate, making them suitable for microsystems, such
as μTASs. Various applications of SAW devices have been reported,
such as fluid drive, droplet transfer,,,continuous fluid pumping on a
single chip, and mixing.,However, depending on the fluid used, the substrate can become contaminated
and cannot be reused, because the microfluidic channels are directly
formed on the piezoelectric substrate and the liquid is directly manipulated
on the substrate. Hence, there has been a demand for the possibility
of separating the microchemical system containing the driving mechanism
and the microfluidic channels by SAWs. Kondoh and co-workers and Yamaguchi et al. responded to this demand by showing that the SAW-excited piezoelectric
substrate and the microchannel can be separated by SAW propagation
through the liquid. Since then, continuous fluid pumping and cell sorting−have also been investigated in systems that allow separation of
the chip from the piezoelectric substrate.,,−As mentioned above, various examples
have been reported, but none have been utilized for powder transport
or droplet/powder mixing. In μTAS, many analyses and other operations
are carried out by chemical operations using liquids and droplets,
but unit chemical operations such as dissolving powders into liquids
or extracting components from liquids to obtain them as powders for
transport are also essential for automating the system.

In this
study, a SAW device capable of separating the microchip
from the piezoelectric substrate, serving as the drive source, was
fabricated. The SAW device was fabricated by propagating the longitudinal
waves of the SAWs generated by an IDT through the liquid on the substrate
to drive the liquid on the microchip.,,−Regardless of the reagents used, contamination of
the piezoelectric substrate can be prevented by simple replacing the
chip, and the SAW device can be repeatedly reused. In addition, the
dead volume can be significantly reduced, and pump-less and valve-less
microsystems can be fabricated. Three example applications of the
SAW-driven microfluidic device are reported: acceleration of the antigen
alternation reaction by introducing a mixing process, droplet transport,
and powder transport are simultaneous transport and mixing of liquids
and powders.

The design consideration
for disposability is the physical separation
between the piezoelectric substrate (SAW actuator) and the microchip
(reaction or transport site). The disposable chip, made of a low-cost,
easily replaceable material such as an aluminum plate or cover glass,
is placed above a coupling liquid, allowing efficient SAW energy transmission
without direct contact. A custom-designed 3D-printed jig ensures precise
alignment, prevents coupling liquid dispersion, and enables repeated
use of the actuator without contamination. This standardized disposable
interface minimizes cross-contamination of reagents and facilitates
integration into automated screening systems and factory or laboratory
automation environments.

A medium (coupling liquid) is needed
between the microchip and
the SAW actuator to propagate the mechanical vibrations caused by
the SAW. However, if the medium is confined, it becomes difficult
to propagate the SAWs through the medium to the microchip. Therefore,
it is necessary to consider a structure in which the microchip is
loosely fixed to the substrate, i.e., to the extent that it is fixed
by static frictional forces, and the SAWs can propagate through the
medium. Therefore, as shown inFigurea–c, a 3D printer is used to form a jig with
a structure in which an aluminum (Al) disposable microchip placed
on the micromixing machine and connected to the piezo substrate with
a coupling fluid. The design policy is to coexist a structure where
the substrate and the jig are in contact with each other, such that
the jig is fixed and the SAW directly propagates mechanical vibrations
to the medium, as shown in theFigureb,c. A circular jig structure is prepared, with a pair
of areas in contact with the substrate and a pair of areas not in
contact with the substrate, which are formed in opposite directions;
by placing the areas not in contact with the substrate in the direction
of SAW propagation, SAW propagation is transmitted to the medium,
enabling SAW propagation to an Al microchip placed on the jig.

(a) Photograph
of the micromixing system and magnified view of
the jig section. Schematic view of the micromixing system from the
(b) top and (c) cross-section of the micromixer. (d) Schematic view
and layout of the disposable microchip platform with one IDT.

For microchips transporting droplets or powders,
the same design
guidelines should be used to fabricate the structure: in the case
of a single IDT, the jig should be fabricated in the area of SAW propagation
where it does not contact the substrate, as shown inFigured, so as not to interfere with
SAW propagation.

The fabrication procedure
of disposable microstirrer is shown inFigure. The device was
mainly fabricated by the lithography and etching techniques used in
the normal semiconductor manufacturing process.,−A piezoelectric substrate (LiNbO3: 128°
rotating Y-plate X propagation) was used as the starting substrate
to induce the SAWs. The thickness of the piezoelectric substrate was
500 μm, and its surface roughness was less than 0.3 nm. Cr and
Au were sequentially deposited on this piezoelectric LiNbO3substrate by radio frequency (RF) sputtering (CFS-4EP-LL, Shibaura
Mechatronics). The thicknesses of the Cr and Au films were 10 and
100 nm, respectively. Next, ultraviolet (UV) exposure was performed
using a positive resist (OFPR800LB-20 cP, Tokyo Ohka Kogyo). The IDT
pattern on the glass mask was transferred using a mask aligner (MA6,
SUSS Micro Tec). Based on this pattern, etching of Au and Cr was then
performed, and the resist was peeled off to fabricate the IDT (pitch
= 200 μm, aperture width = 6.0 mm, log 20), which served as
the SAW generator.

Schematic diagram of the device and system fabrication
process.
(a) Preparation of the LiNbO3substrate as the starting
substrate. (b) Deposition of Cr/Au onto the substrate by a magnetron
sputtering. (c) Resist coating for ultraviolet (UV) lithography. (d)
UV lithography for patterning the interdigital transducer (IDT) structure.
(e) Development and metal etching. (f) Removing the resist. (g) Placement
of the jig and coupling liquid. (h) Placement of the microchip with
liquid on the coupling liquid.

The SAW-induced microstirrer system was then composed
of placing
a jig made with an optical three-dimensional (3D) printer (Mars 2
Pro by Elegoo) and placing an Al chip (outer diameter = 10 mm, height
= 2.1 mm, thickness = 0.1 mm, density = 2.7 g/cm3, B0143017,
PerkinElmer) on the LiNbO3piezoelectric substrate. The
distance from the substrate to the Al chip was determined by adjusting
the height of the jig. The jig was designed so that the Al chip did
not directly touch the surface of the LiNbO3substrate,
which was the incident area.

Both cover glass and Al chips are
available cheaply in large quantities
and are suitable for applications such as environmental analysis and
medical testing, where unit chemical operations should be carried
out without contamination.

This paper presents the
results of four experiments, with a discussion
of each experimental topic. Details of the experiments can be found
in the ‘Results and Discussion’ section for each topic.
This section described the common device handling and experimental
methods used in the experiments.

For SAW excitation, the IDT
is basically powered under the following
experimental conditions: The RF voltage supplied to the IDT was a
1 kHz burst voltage consisting of 2000 cycles of a 19.12 MHz sine
wave generated by a signal generator (AFG3252, Tektronix) and amplified
by a RF amplifier (ALM00110-2840FM, R&K). The power supplied to
the IDT was regulated by the voltage of the signal generator and checked
with a RF power meter (NRP-Z91 and AR, DC3001M1, Rohde & Schwarz).
The peak-to-peak output voltage of the arbitrary waveform signal generator
was set arbitrarily from 0 to 5 V.

In the case of disposable
micromixing systems, opposing IDTs were
electrically connected and electric power was applied under the above
conditions in the same phase. The jig should be constructed with a
gap in the area where the SAW is propagated into the coupling liquid,
and the rest of the jig should be installed on the LiNbO3substrate, as shown inFiguresb and g. An Al chip was placed
on top of the jig for the experiment. For droplet and powder transport,
a cover glass, commonly used in microscopy, was used as a disposable
microchip. A gap was left open between the cover glass and the LiNbO3substrate in the area where the jig was placed to propagate
the SAW into the coupling liquid, while the other areas were directly
contacted to the LiNbO3substrate to prevent the cover
glass and jig from moving. In this transport experiment, a device
with a single IDT was used for simplicity; the SAW excitation conditions
were the same settings as those described above. All experiments were
performed at room temperature and in air.

A disposable SAW-driven microstirrer was used to
react the enzyme-labeled antibodies and substrates used in enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The typical ELISA procedure is shown
inFigurea. In this
experiment, procedure 6 inFigurea was compared with and without the use of the microstirrer.
Anti-IgG­(H+L), Mouse, Goat-Poly, horseradish pyruvate oxidase (HRP)
(1 mg/mL) was used as the enzyme-labeled antibody, and the tetramethylbenzidine
(TMB) Microwell Peroxidase Substrate System (two-component system)
was used as the substrate solution.

(a) Typical protocol of enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
for the sandwich method. Schematic diagram and photograph of the substrate
injection and coloration reaction (procedure 6) in the micromixer
with surface acoustic waves (SAWs). (b) Schematic diagram of the system
for measuring the absorbance during micromixing. The light generated
by the light source passed through an optical fiber and irradiated
the microchip (Al cup). The transmitted light passed through another
optical fiber, and the absorbance was measured by an absorbance meter.
(c) Actual photograph of the light irradiation observed in the fabricated
system.

By mixing the two solutions, the antibody-labeled
enzyme HRP decomposes
the hydrogen peroxide water in the substrate solution to generate
the active enzyme. The produced active enzyme is highly unstable and
acts as an oxidizing agent. The active enzyme oxidizes TMB, which
generates an oxidized dye. The dye also absorbs light at wavelengths
of 370 and 650 nm. In this experiment, the reaction rate of the enzyme
substrate reaction was determined by measuring the absorbance of the
reaction reagent at a wavelength of 650 nm.

In the experiment,
55 μL of the substrate solution and 5
μL of the enzyme-labeled antibody solution diluted to 100, 30,
3, 1, 0.3, or 0.1 ng/mL in phosphate-buffered saline (DPBS) were mixed
on an Al chip to give a total volume of 60 μL. The experiment
was performed at room temperature (20 °C). The RF voltage supplied
to the IDT was a 1 kHz burst voltage consisting of 2000 cycles of
a 19.12 MHz sine wave generated by a signal generator (AFG3252, Tektronix)
and amplified by a RF amplifier (ALM00110–2840FM, R&K).
The power supplied to the IDT was regulated by the voltage of the
signal generator and checked with a RF power meter (NRP-Z91 and AR,
DC3001M1, Rohde & Schwarz). As described above, the peak-to-peak
output voltage of the arbitrary waveform signal generator was set
arbitrarily from 0 to 5 V. The signal generated by the signal generator
in burst mode was amplified by the RF amplifier and input to the SAW
device, which was monitored by the RF power meter as input power rather
than voltage. A RF power of 1.0 W was supplied to the IDT. When an
amplified in-phase RF voltage was supplied to the IDT, SAWs were generated,
which propagated across the substrate surface and reached the coupling
liquid, radiating longitudinal waves. The longitudinal waves propagated
to the coupling liquid, the chip, and the liquid on the chip, causing
the solution to agitate. The energy efficiency of a separable (disposable)
mixing system with coupling liquid is about 88% for distance of 1.0
mm between SAW substrate and chip, as described in the Supporting
Information (Figure S1). The energy efficiency
of a separable mixing system is considered to be sufficiently high
to be worthwhile considering the pollution problems and the cost of
fabricating SAW devices. The distance from the substrate to the chip
was 1.0 mm, and 40 μL of pure water was used as the coupling
liquid. Here, when power of 1.0 W was supplied to the IDT, the solution
temperature increased to 30 °C. Therefore, for comparison, in
the experiment without stirring, the experiment was carried out at
30 °C on a hot plate.

A schematic diagram of the detection
system is shown inFigureb. First, the light
emitted from a halogen light source (DH-2000) passes through an optical
fiber and collimating lens and is incident on the solution on the
Al chip. The transmitted light that passes through the solution and
is reflected at the bottom of the Al chip passes through a collimating
lens and optical fiber and is incident on a spectrophotometer (HR4000),
and the absorbance of the solution is measured. The jig used here
was fabricated using an optical 3D printer. From a photograph of the
transmitted light side shown inFigurec, the incident light is reflected at the bottom of
the Al chip and proceeds to the spectrometer side.

The absorbance
versus concentration plots for IDT power of 0 (without
SAWs) and 1.0 W (with SAWs) are shown inFigurea. The concentration of the enzyme-labeled
antibody solution is shown on the horizontal axis, and the absorbance
of the reaction solution is shown on the vertical axis. The absorbance
values were measured 9 min after the start of solution mixing. Compared
with IDT power = 0, the reaction volume increases with agitation by
SAWs (IDT power = 1.0 W) at each concentration. This is because of
the increase in the number of physical collisions between the enzyme-labeled
antibody and the substrate owing to agitation by SAWs. From these
results, the use of a disposable SAW-driven microstirrer is expected
to increase the reaction efficiency and sensitivity of enzyme reactions
in ELISA. The changes of the absorbance with time for an enzyme-labeled
antibody concentration of 30 ng/mL with IDT power of 0 and 1.0 W are
shown inFigureb.
The horizontal axis shows the time course from the start of solution
mixing, and the vertical axis shows the absorbance. The absorbance
at 9 min was 0.61 without SAWs and 1.08 with SAWs. This shows that
the absorbance increased 1.8-fold with stirring by SAWs. The absorbance
exceeded 0.61 after 3.5 min with SAW stirring. From these results,
the reaction rate was approximately three times faster with SAW stirring
than without SAW stirring. Therefore, the disposable microstirrer
can be used to increase the sensitivity and speed of enzyme substrate
reactions in ELISA.

(a) Dependence of the absorbance on the concentration
of enzyme-labeled
antibody with and without SAW agitation. (b) Change of the absorbance
with time with and without SAW agitation. The black solid and white
open circles are the measured absorbances values at each concentration
in the cases with and without SAW agitation, respectively.

The devices used in the droplet transport experiments were fabricated
by the same technique as that described above. A photograph of the
disposable microactuator is shown inFigurea, and a schematic of the cross-section of
the device is shown inFigureb. SAWs generated by the IDT (pitch = 200 μm, aperture
width = 6.0 mm, log 20) and propagating on the piezoelectric substrate
surface were incident on the coupling liquid. The SAWs then reached
the cover glass placed on the 0.5 mm-high jig and propagated to the
droplet on the cover glass. To reduce the friction at the solid/liquid
interface on the cover glass, a fluorine coating material (Cytop)
was deposited (150 nm thick) on the cover glass. The contact angle of the untreated cover glass was 20°,
whereas that on the Cytop coating was 112°.

(a) Optical photograph
of the entire system. The area enclosed
by the yellow dotted line is the cover glass, which was placed on
top of the coupling liquid and jig on the piezoelectric substrate.
(b) Schematic diagram of the cross-sectional structure of the entire
system. (c) (i) Photographs of a 10 μL droplet dropped driven
by SAWs on the cover glass surface without any surface treatment at
0, 0.5, and 1.0 s. Photographs of (ii) 10 μL, (iii) 40 μL,
(iv) 100 μL, and (v) 200 μL droplets dropped and driven
by SAWs on Cytop-coated cover glass.

The transport velocities of 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0,
5.0, 10, 20, 30,
40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 100, 150, 200, and 250 μL droplets of pure
water on a cover glass were measured with IDT power of 1.0 W. A typical
movie for the transport a 10 μL droplet on Cytop-coated cover
glass is shown in the Supporting InformationMovie No. 1. Images of the transport of a 10 μL droplets on
untreated cover glass and 10, 40, 100, and 200 μL droplets on
Cytop-coated cover glass are shown inFigurec. Comparing with the results of droplet
transport on untreated cover glass and Cytop-coated cover glass, the
Cytop-coating dramatically improved the transport properties owing
to the change in the contact angle. The droplet volume dependence
of the droplet transport velocity on the Cytop-coated cover glass
is shown inFigure. The transport velocity of droplets with volume less than 10 μL
were not stable. This is considered to be due to variation in the
wettability of the Cytop surface. The dependence of the transport
velocity of the droplet on the variation of the wettability on the
cover glass increased with decreasing droplet size, and the droplet
sometimes stopped or slowed down during droplet transport. The transport
of the 40 μL droplets was the most stable and fastest. Droplets
with volumes above 100 μL could also be transported, although
they were larger than the aperture width of the IDT. The ability of
this disposable micropump to transport droplets of 10 ∼ 200
μL droplets shows the potential of the micropump for droplet
transport.

Droplet volume dependence of the droplet velocity.

Images of the transport of copper powder (40 μm particle diameter)
on a cover glass coupled through the coupling liquid on the piezoelectric
substrate are shown inFigure. Images of the copper powder at 0 s and 10, 20, 30, 60, 120,
and 180 s from the start of power 1.0 W supply to the IDT are shown
inFigurea–g,
respectively. The powder was transported in the opposite direction
to the SAWs generated by the IDT. This suggests that Rayleigh waves
were also generated on the cover glass surface. This result is consistent
with the previous studies.,However, this is the
case when cover glass was used, and it depends on the material properties
of the chip used. Many variables of the powder should be considered,
such as the atomic structure of the material, the interatomic distances,
and the atomic interactions of the powder. Future investigations should
be carried out using network analyzers and laser Doppler meters to
elucidate the principles of the waves generated on the chip surface.

Photographs
of SAW-driven transport of copper powder (particle
size of 40 μm) on cover glass at (a) 0, (b) 10, (c) 20, (d)
30, (e) 60, (f) 120, and (g) 180 s.

The powder transport characteristics of the powder
transport on
the cover glass connected by a coupling liquid and directly on the
piezoelectric substrate were compared. Cross-sectional schematic diagrams
of the powder transport directly driven on the piezoelectric substrate
and on the cover glass are shown inFigurea,b respectively. The actual photographs
of both cases are shown inFigurec,d. In both cases, the powder was transported to the
IDT side, and it was therefore transported by backward elliptical
vibrations excited by the piezoelectric substrate, as schematically
illustrated inFigurea,b. Comparison of the photographs inFigurec,d showed that the wavelengths of the standing
waves were approximately the same. However, when the powder was transported
on the cover glass (Figurec), all of the powder horizontally spread, indicating that
the vibration amplitude from the piezoelectric material was weakened
and the effective full width at half-maximum (fwhm) increased. Typical
example movies for the powder transport on LiNbO3substrate
and on cover glass coupled through the coupling liquid (distance 1.0
mm) LiNbO3substrate are shown in the Supporting InformationMovies No. 2andNo. 3, respectively.

Cross-sectional schematic diagrams of SAW-driven powder
transport
(a) directly on the piezoelectric substrate (LiNbO3) and
(b) on the cover glass coupled with the coupling liquid on the LiNbO3substrate. Photographs of the SAW-driven powder transport
experiments on (c) the piezoelectric substrate and (d) cover glass
at arbitrary time. In both cases, standing waves were induced. The
yellow lines are included to compare the respective periods.

As discussed above, the vibration amplitude from
the SAWs is weakened
in the disposable microsystem, but that powder transport is also possible
without contamination. To improve the propagation characteristics
of the SAWs, impedance matching can be achieved by changing the coupling
liquid and materials of the microchip.

We have shown that it is possible to transport droplets and powders
using the disposable microchips. We then thought that it might be
possible to simultaneously transport and mix liquids and powders using
the SAW-driven microdevice. As an example, both a droplet and a powder
were placed on the cover glass which was coupled through the coupling
liquid on the LiNbO3piezoelectric substrate, as shown
inFigurea. The time
course observations after the application of the SAWs are shown inFigureb–f. The directions
of the propagation of the liquid and powder were opposite, which means
that they collided and the powder was encapsulated in the droplet.
From the time course observations, the powder exhibited swirling behavior
within the droplet. After 25 s (Figuref), a large vortex structure formed within the droplet.
These results show that the disposable system is capable of simultaneously
performing unit operations on powders and droplets (see the Supporting
Information,Movie No. 4). Combining this
SAW-based micropump enables the microfluidic device to be fully disposable
as shown in the Supporting InformationMovie No. 5.

(a) Photographs of the simultaneous transport and mixing of a droplet
and copper powder on the cover glass. The SAWs propagated from the
IDT in the direction of the arrow. The droplet was placed closer to
the IDT and the powder was placed farther away. (b–f) Photographs
observed after 3, 5, 10, 15, and 25 s, respectively.

We have reported three applications of
SAW-driven disposable microsystems.
First, using a SAW-driven disposable microstirrer for enzyme substrate
reactions in ELISA increased the reaction efficiency and sensitivity.
Second, a SAW-driven disposable micropump showed the ability to transport
droplets with volumes ranging from 10 to 200 μL. Third, transport
of copper powder (40 μm particle size) was successfully achieved
with a SAW-driven disposable microdevices. The powder was transported
in the opposite direction of the SAWs generated by the IDT. As an
example of an interesting applications of the microdevice, SAW-driven
simultaneous powder and droplet handling and mixing was demonstrated.

In the future, the disposable microfluidic platforms actuated by
SAW will be applied to flow microsystems for continuous liquid manipulation
to further expand their applications. This microfluidic platform ensures
that the reagents do not contaminate the substrate, irrespective of
the types of reagents, and that the microfluidic platform can be easily
manipulated by simply replacing the chip. In addition, this microfluidic
platform will enable significant cost savings and automation of factories
and research facilities.

This research was partly supported by the Science
Research Promotion Found of Promotion and Mutual Aid Corporation for
Private Schools of Japan, Izumi Science and Technology Foundation,
the Japan Science and Technology Agency (Grant No. JPMJSF23DJ), and
the Innovative Science and Technology Initiative Security, ALTA, Japan
(Grant Number JPJ004596). The authors thank Professor Utsumi, Professor
Sumitomo, and Professor Suzuki of the University of Hyogo for fruitful
discussions. The authors also thank Dr. Saegusa for engineering support.
The authors thank Edanz (https://jp.edanz.com/ac) for editing a draft of this manuscript.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsmeasuresciau.5c00027.

A.Y. and
M.T. conducted the overall research project. M.T. carried out the
design and fabrication of the jigs and the construction of the system.
S.A. and T.S. designed and fabricated the SAW devices. M.T. and A.Y.
carried out the measurements, analyzed the results and summarized
them in a paper. The paper was written by all, led by A.Y., through
the collaborative discussion and writing.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.