To assess the function of the erector spinae muscle’s cross-sectional area (ESMCSA)as a biomarker for the outcome of AECOPD hospitalized patients. Based on chest CT imaging, ESMCSAwere caculated following admission. Cox regression analyses, including univariate and multivariate approaches, were utilized to determine risk factors associated with 1-year mortality and initial hospitalization in patients with AECOPD. Additionally, Poisson regression was implemented to assess the rate of rehospitalization. There were 236 AECOPD patient included in the present study, including 59 and 177 patients in the ESMCSAlower group and normal groups respectively. Seventeen patients died within 1 year after discharged from the hospital, and the 1-year mortality rates were 15.3% and 4.5% for the ESMCSAlower group and normal group. A total of 112 patients suffered from 273 rehospitalizations for AECOPD within 1 year after discharged from hospital. Cox regression analysis showed that ESMCSAwere associated with the 1-year first hospitalization for AECOPD. Poisson regression analysis showed that ESMCSAwere associated with the rate of rehospitalization for AECOPD (IRR = 0.57, 95% CI 0.45–0.73 for univariate analysis, and IRR = 0.56, 95% CI 0.43-0.72for multivariate analysis). Both univariate (HR = 0.29 95% CI: 0.11–0.75) and multivariate Cox regression analyses (HR = 0.35, 95% CI: 0.12–0.99) showed that ESMCSAwas associated with 1-year mortality. Lower ESMCSAwas a risk factor of 1-year mortality and 1-year rehospitalization for AECOPD.

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality, with increasing incidence internationally1. Patients with advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary disease generally have skeletal muscle atrophy2. Body mass index (BMI) is a measure commonly used to categorize a person’s weight. Variations in BMI may play a role in the pathophysiology of COPD and influence patient outcomes3–5. Overweight or obese increased all-cause mortality across all regions6. Underweight is associated with higher mortality risk relative to normal-weight patients7. Due to the reduction of skeletal muscle without loss of adipose tissue, the components of BMI include bone, visceral, blood volume, extracellular fluid, and adipose mass, normal or even higher levels of BMI, skeletal muscle reduction can occur8. Therefore, BMI cannot fully measure skeletal muscle loss. However, relying solely on BMI assessment cannot fully determine the risk of poor prognosis in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease9. The cross-sectional area of the erector spinae muscle(ESMCSA) adjacent to the 12th thoracic vertebra measured by CT images. It can be used to evaluate skeletal muscle reduction and is associated with the risk of future acute exacerbation and death in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease6. Tanimura et al. investigated the relationship between ESMCSAand mortality in patients with COPD6. It was found that a decrease in ESMCSAis a risk factor for death. However, their study only included male participants. The number of participants and the sample size of the study are relatively small6. Attaway et al.10found in another study that a decrease in ESMCSAwas not associated with adverse outcomes such as death. In their study, only patients with advanced chronic obstructive pulmonary disease were included. And the relationship between decreased ESMCSAand rehospitalizasion were not studied10. And there is no study has explored the associations between ESMCSAand 1-year mortality and 1-year rehospitalization for AECOPD. We performed a prospective cohort study to evaluate the possible role of ESMCSAmeasured on chest CT images as a biomarker for the outcome predictions of patients hospitalized for AECOPD. The primary endpoints were all-cause 1-year mortality. Secondary outcomes included the time to the first hospitalization for AECOPD and the frequency of hospitalization at the 1-year follow-up.

This is a prospective observational research in an actual situation. Between January 25, 2016, and February 14, 2022, we screened and enrolled AECOPD patients who were admitted to the Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine Department of the Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University in the study. Only the data of each patient’s first admission during the study period were included in the analysis. All the subjects were followed up with telephone interviews combined with review of the electronic medical records every 3 months by the study investigators. Follow-up for every participant began at the time of discharge from the hospital and ended at death, loss to follow-up, or end of follow-up 1 year from the time of discharge from the hospital, whichever came first. The study protocol was approved by the ethics committee of The Third Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University(No.2016-004). Informed consent was obtained from all the subjects prior to their enrollment in the study. All subjects’ confidentiality was maintained at all times.This study was conducted in accordance with the amended Declaration of Helsinki, and all methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations.

AECOPD was defined according to the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) guidelines1. The inclusion criteria were (1) hospitalization because of a COPD exacerbation, (2) Diagnosis of COPD based on spirometric evidence of airflow obstruction (forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) of < 0.70 after the using of bronchodilators. ⑶Patients undergoing thoracic CT scans.The exclusion criteria were a previous diagnosis of bronchial asthma, active malignancy, neuromuscular disease, patient inability or unwillingness to cooperate with the investigators, and lack of available spirometry data.

Chest CT imaging was performed in the supine position at the full inspiration breath-hold for diagnostic purposes on admission. All CT images were analyzed using the 3D Slicer software. The image analyses and ESMCSAmeasurements were independently performed by two trained pulmonologists blinded to the patients’ information, and average values were used.Quantitative evaluation of ESMCSAon a single-layer axial CT scan at the lower edge of the 12th thoracic vertebra. The user visually identifies and marks the axial image of the lower edge of the 12th thoracic vertebra through vertebral counting, and then selects the marked position to identify the left and right erector spinae muscles and measure their area. The muscles are manually colored using a pre-defined attenuation range (-50 to 90) HU. Express the total area of the left and right erector spinae muscles as the erector spinae muscle cross-sectional area (ESMCSA) (in cm2(as shown in Fig.1).

Representative axial computed tomographic image used to measure the area of the erector spinae muscles in a hospitalized patient with exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The cross-sectional area of the erector spinae muscles measured at the 12th thoracic vertebral region is surrounded by red.

On admission, we recorded the patients’ clinical characteristics, including age, sex, body mass index (BMI), smoking habit and comorbid conditions (hypertension, coronary heart disease). Laboratory findings, including arterial blood gases (pH, arterial carbon dioxide tension (PaCO2), arterial oxygen tension (PaO2)), white blood cells and differential counts, hemoglobin, eosinophils, serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen, were recorded on admission. The blood gas was performed within 4 h after hospitalization.The Decisions on inspection, examination, treatment and discharge were made by attending physicians not involved in this study, according to the Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) guidelines1. After discharge from the hospital, patients were treated according to the physicians’ suggestion and the patients’ willingness, which was not influenced by the study investigators.

The endpoints of this study were all-cause 1-year mortality and first 1-year rehospitalization for AECOPD and rehospitalization rate within 1 year.

The optimal cutoff value was based on the distribution of measurement (greater than or equal to the quartile or less than the quartile) in the COPD cohort of patients. Patients were divided into 2 groups based on the quartile level of the erector spinae muscle area: lower than the quartile group (lower group), and above the quartile group (normal group). The differences between the 2 groups were analyzed using the χ2 test for categorical variables and variance analysis for continuous variables. To identify variables associated with 1-year mortality and first hospitalization for AECOPD, univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses were implemented. The results are presented as hazard ratios with 95% confidence intervals (CIs). The times to death and first hospitalization according to the level of the erector spinae muscle area were evaluated with Kaplan–Meier survival curves and log-rank tests. Univariate and multivariate Poisson regression analyses were additionally performed to account for variability in hospitalization for AECOPD rates between patie nts. The results are presented as incidence rate ratios (IRRs) with 95% CIs.

To limit the number of events per variable, variables with a p value < 0.05 in the univariate analysis were included in the multivariate Poisson and Cox regression model.

We also performed sensitivity analysis to evaluate the effect of the cross-sectional area of erector spinae muscle adjust to gender, gender and height (ESMcsa-I, which calculated with ESMcsa divided by height squared ) on 1-year mortality and rehospitalisations for AECOPD.

All statistical assessments were 2-sided. A P value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Data were analyzed using SPSS 18.0 for Windows (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA).

Figure2showed the flow chart of the study. There were 236 AECOPD patient included in the present study. According to the quartile of ESMCSA, patients were divided into 2 groups: less than the quartile (< 23.65cm2, lower group), and more than quartile (≥ 23.65cm2,normal group), The demographic characteristics of the 236 patients who were included in the data analysis are presented in Table1. There were 59 and 177 patients in the lower group and normal groups respectively. There were more males, current smokers and less comorbidities with coronary heart disease (CHD), diabete in the ESMCSAnormal group(p< 0.05). And there were more subjects with old age and frequent exacerbation in the ESMCSAlower group. There were nonsignificant associations of ESMCSAwith PaO2, pH, BMI, PaCO2, lung function, comorbidity with hypertension, congestive heart failure, renal dysfunction, exacerbations during preceding year and respiratory failure (P> 0.05).

Baseline characteristics of participants according to the cross-sectional area of the erector spinae muscle.

PaO2: arterial oxygen tension, PaCO2: arterial carbon dioxide tension; ESMCSA:the cross-sectional area of the erector spinae muscle.

A total of 112 patients suffered from 273 hospitalizations for AECOPD within 1 year after discharge from the hospital. The survival plot of the time to first hospitalization for AECOPD according to the erector spinae muscle area on admission is presented in Fig.3(p= 0.001 by the log-rank test).

The survival plot of the time to first hospitalization for AECOPD according to the levels of the cross-sectional area of the erector spinae muscle.

Univariate cox regression analysis showed that ESMCSA, PaCO2, BMI, frequent exacerbation and respiratory failure were associated with the 1-year first hospitalization for AECOPD (Table2).

Univariate and multivariate Cox regression analysis evaluating the effect of the cross-sectional area of the erector spinae muscle and confounders on 1-year first hospitalization for AECOPD.

PaO2: arterial oxygen tension, PaCO2: arterial carbon dioxide tension; ESMCSA:the cross-sectional area of the erector spinae muscle.

Multivariate cox regression analysis showed that only ESMCSAand BMI were associated with the 1-year first hospitalization for AECOPD (Table2).

For the rate of hospitalization for AECOPD, in univariate poisson regression analysis, ESMCSAwere associated with the risk of hospitalization for AECOPD (IRR = 0.57, 95% CI 0.45–0.73,P= 0.000). In the multivariate analyses, ESMCSAremained an independent predictor of a higher risk of hospitalization for AECOPD (IRR 0.56, 95% CI 0.43–0.72) at the 1-year follow-up. The other factors associated with the rate of hospitalization for AECOPD were PaO2, PaCO2, frequent exacerbation in the previous years, respiratory failure, and lung function status (Table3).

Univariate and multivariate Poisson regression analysis evaluating the effect of the cross-sectional area of the erector spinae muscle and significant confounders on hospitalisations rate for AECOPD during 1-year follow-up.

ESMCSA：the cross- sectional area of the erector spinae muscle.

Seventeen patients died within 1 year after discharged from the hospital, and the 1-year mortality were 15.3% and 4.5% for the ESMCSAlower group, and normal groups respectively. The survival plot of the time to 1-year death according to the levels of ESMCSAon admission is presented in Fig.4(p= 0.007 by the log-rank test).

The survival plot of the time to death for AECOPD according to the levels of the cross-sectional area of the erector spinae muscle.

In univariate cox regression analyses, age, PaO2, CHD, CHF were associated with 1-year mortality, whereas PaCO2, and BMI were not. However, multivariate cox regression analysis confirmed that age, PaO2, CHF were associated with 1-year mortality (Table4).

Univariate and multivariate Cox regression analysis evaluating the effect of the cross-sectional area of the erector spinae muscle and confounders on 1-year mortality.

ESMCSA:the cross-sectional area of the erector spinae muscle.

Both univariate (HR = 0.29 95% CI: 0.11–0.75,P= 0.011) and multivariate cox regression analyses (HR = 0.35, 95% CI: 0.12–0.99,P= 0.048) showed that ESMCSAwere associated with 1-year mortality (Table4).

We performed sensitivity analysis to evaluate the effect of the ESMCSAadjust to gender, gender and height on 1-year mortality and rehospitalizations for AECOPD. The sensitivity analysis showed that when ESMCSAadjust to gender, lower ESMCSAwere a independent risk factor for first rehospitalization and rehospitalization rate within 1 year (Table5). When ESMCSAadjust to gender and height, lower ESMCSA-I were an independent risk factor for first rehospitalization and rehospitalization rate within 1 year (Table5). At the same time, univariate cox regression analyses showed that the lower ESMCSAadjust to gender were risk factor for 1-year mortality. However, multivariate cox regression analyses showed ESMCSAadjust to gender were not risk factor for 1-year mortality (Table5). Univariate cox regression analyses showed that the lower ESMCSA-I were risk factor for 1-year mortality. However, multivariate cox regression analyses not confirmed it (Table5).

Sensitivity analysis to evaluate the effect of the cross-sectional area of erector spinae muscle adjust to gender and height on 1-year mortality and rehospitalisations for AECOPD.

ESMCSA-I: The cross-sectional area of erector spinae muscle adjust to gender and height.

*: adjust to Hospitalization for AECOPD in previous years, BMI, PaCO2.

**: adjust to age, smoking status, Hospitalization for AECOPD in previous years, BMI, PaCO2, morbidity of coronary heart disease and hypertension.

***:adjust to age, PaO2 and morbidity of coronary heart disease and congestive heart failure.

This is a prospective study that evaluates the CT features of AECOPD patients through quantitative CT; We explored the relationship between ESMCSAand the prognosis of hospitalized AECOPD patients, and analyzed the related factors affecting the occurrence of acute exacerbation, time to first acute exacerbation, and death of AECOPD patients in the next year.

Our data showed that the time to first hospitalization for AECOPD was shorter for ESMCSAlow group than the normal group. We also showed that ESMCSAlow group was a risk factor of 1-year first hospitalization for AECOPD. At the same time, ESMCSAwas associated with 1-year rehospitalization rate for AECOPD. To our knowledge these is first time to explore the association between ESMCSAand the 1-year first rehospitalization and 1-year rehospitalization rate for AECOPD. The study also showed that ESMCSAwere associated with 1-year mortality. This is consistent with previous studies showing that ESMCSAis a useful CT index that closely associated with long-term mortality in patients with COPD11. Study by Liu, J12showed that ESMCSA is a significant predictor for 5-year all-cause mortality in COPD patients. Study by Tanimura et al.13showed that lower ESMCSAwas independently and significantly associated with mortality. Another study by Tanimura et al.6also showed that ESMCSAwas the strongest risk factor for mortality. A study by Murakami showed that reduced ESMCSAon chest CT at admission were significantly associated with in-hospital death14. However, study by Attaway AH showed that ESMCSAwas not associated with the mortality and severity of GOLD stage of COPD10. For other respiratory disease, study also showed that lower ESMCSAwere associated with poorer prognoses in n IPF patients15,16and in PPFE patients17aspiration pneumonia18community-acquired pneumonia16,19.

The underlying pathophysiological mechanisms of the association between lower ESMCSAand poor outcome of AECOPD are incompletely understood. However, we can proffer the following explanations. The first may be associated with decreased activities of daily living and physical activity level. Study by Shirahata showed that ESMCSAwere positive correlated with the COPD Assessment Test score and physical activity level20. Another study showed that there is a positive correlation between the daily physical activity and ESMCSA21. Another study showed that smaller ESMCSAon chest CT performed on admission was significantly associated with poor recovery of the ability to perform activities of daily living in hospitalized patients with pneumonia22. Study have showed that ESMCSAcorrelated positively with diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide, residual volume/total lung capacity (a marker of hyperinflation), and correlated negatively with radiologic severity of emphysema10.And ECMCSAwere significantly correlated with oxygen uptake at peak exercise23.

The clinical significance of and the strength of this study was as follows: for the first time, it explores the relationship between ESMCSAand the 1-year first readmission, 1-year readmission rate, and mortality of AECOPD patients at the same time; The results of this study contribute to the evaluation of ESMCSAas an effective tool for risk stratification of AECOPD patients on admission; In addition, because chest CT is usually performed to diagnose and evaluate emphysema and to exclude other critical pulmonary diseases, which can be quickly and easily obtained through routine chest CT examination upon admission. Therefore, ESMCSAcan serve as a risk factor of readmission and mortality in AECOPD patients. The pulmonary rehabilitation on erector spinae muscles may be an effective intervention methods to improve the outcome of COPD patients, and study by Yuji Higashimoto showed that pulmonary rehabilitation was an independent factor for annual change in ESMCSA24.

However, our research also has some limitations. Firstly, we have not collected the information of patients’ clinical symptoms, such as dyspnea, or activities of daily living at the time of on admission. Muscle cross-sectional area does not directly reflect the strength of a particular muscle because no muscle works in isolation, rather groups of muscles are generally recruited to work together. Secondly, this is a single-center study, and the number of patients included was relatively small. Thirdly the standard method for measuring muscle cross-sectional area has not yet been established. After applying a density mask between − 50HU and 90HU, manually color specific muscle areas for segmentation. There is a certain measurement error in analyzing the cross-sectional area of muscles. Finally, we only measured the cross-sectional area of the erector spinae muscle, however, other antigravity muscles, such as the iliopsoas and quadriceps muscles were not assessed.

In summary, lower ESMCSA<23.65 cm2is a risk factor for 1-year mortality and rehospitalization for AECOPD. Our findings suggested that ESMCSAcan be used to assess the severity and predict survival of patients with AECOPD. And COPD patients with low ESMCSAneed rehabilitation exercise and nutritional support to improve muscle atrophy, reduce acute exacerbations, and improve the prognosis of COPD patients.

This study was supported by The National Natural Science Foundation of China (81670042, 82460014).