As rapid development of medical technology, virtual reality (VR) technology has been extensively applied in anesthesiology training. Anesthesia simulation base on virtual reality technology offers an innovative teaching method for the professional training of anesthesiologists, both anesthesia technical training and improving teaching efficiency. The anesthesia technical training, include airway management, spinal/epidural anesthesia, nerve block skill training, and pain management. In addition, virtual reality is improving teaching efficiency, include distance teaching, doctor–patient communication simulation and scenario simulation. It allows trainees to practice and refine critical clinical skills in a highly realistic simulation without any risks, especially in the high risk and technically demanding field of anesthesia. At present, literature is lacking on the recent virtual reality technology in anesthesia simulation. Hence, this article will summarize the reference basis for current application status of virtual reality technology in anesthesia simulation, aiming to provide insights for future teaching in anesthesiology simulation. This article is useful for anesthesiologists, clinical staff, teaching professors, and researchers in the field of simulation teaching.

Virtual reality (VR) has been extensively applied in anesthesia simulation, it can provide secure, reliable and immersive simulation training. A lot of studies demonstrated VR improved anesthesia technical training, such as airway management, spinal/epidural anesthesia, nerve block skill training and pain management. VR also improved teaching efficiency, such as distance teaching, doctor–patient communication simulation and scenario simulation. Gradually, VR is becoming an important method for trainees.

This article will explore the application of VR technology in anesthesiology teaching, and how to combine VR technology with teaching methods to improve the quality and article of anesthesiology education. Through a thorough study of the application of VR technology in anesthesiology teaching, this review aims to provide a reference for the reform and development of anesthesiology education.

VR is a technology that creates a simulated virtual three-dimensional (3D) environment, practitioners can interact with the virtual environment and experience immersive [1]. The concept of virtual reality was first introduced in the 1960 s and 1970 s [2,3], but early systems were large and expensive, it was mainly used for research purposes. In the 1990 s, VR technology became more accessible to consumers with the adoption of affordable VR headsets and software [4]. However, the technology was still limited in terms of graphics quality and user experience [5]. The development of modern VR began in the early 2010 s with the introduction of devices, such as the Oculus Rift and HTC Vive [6]. These devices offered high-quality immersive experiences with improved graphics and motion tracking capabilities. In recent years, VR technology has made significant achievements. High-resolution displays, improved tracking systems, powerful graphics processing units, and a microprocessor that specializes in image and graphics-related computing on personal computers, workstations, and some mobile devices, which enhanced the immersive experience [7]. Companies such as Oculus, HTC, and Sony have released consumer VR headsets that can offer high-quality VR experiences [8].

VR has been applied to various training, such as venipuncture, colonoscopy, dental procedures, and burn care [1]. The application of VR in anesthesiology has made significant progress. VR simulators have been developed for training both technical and non-technical skills [5]. In terms of technical skills, VR simulators have been used to train anesthesiologists in operations, such as percutaneous cervical plexus block, fiberoptic bronchoscopy intubation, and central venous puncture, etc. In terms of non-technical skills, VR simulators can be used to doctor–patient communication, train team collaboration, and decision-making abilities.

Airway management is an essential skill for anesthesiologists, because it involves ensuring the potency and normal functioning of the patient's airway during anesthesia and surgery. Traditional teaching through an apprenticeship model of opportunity learning in residency training, students often lack of initiative and creativity [9]. However, VR simulation teaching can provide a more realistic, safe and immersive learning experience, which can help to improve the learning efficiency and cultivate students'practical ability [10,11].

First, VR was used for training in routine endotracheal intubation. A simulator applying VR technology for endotracheal intubation was described in the study by Jeffrey et al. [12]. The simulator is real and dynamic, responding to the user's operation timely and providing accurate visual presentation. In addition, through 3D view and interactive functions, the pre-hospital medical staff and students can practice endotracheal intubation without contact with the patients [13]. Difficult airway can be a calamity and even the most experienced may fail to respond properly to the situation. Kuduvalli et al. found that the ability to deal with cannot intubate or cannot ventilate situations markedly improved in residents primed with simulator technology and they recommended 6 monthly reviews of the simulation training exercise [14]. The authors used Computed Tomography (CT) scans to create virtual models of the airway and simulate fiberoptic approaches [15]. This approach provides a useful and novel approach to predict the critical steps in airway management and to assist the anesthesiologists in selecting the most appropriate intubation method. Using VR software, physicians can interactively view patients'CT scan results in the form of 3D images to better understand the patient's anatomy and to support making decisions about airway management [16].

VR can also be used for simulation exercises for bronchoscopic intubation. David et al. studied evaluating the impact of virtual reality bronchoscope simulator training on patient operating performance of bronchoscope-guided intubation [17]. The results show that VR can help medical staff to improve their intubation skills and reduce the occurrence of complications [18].

VR simulators, offers a realistic experience of difficult airway management techniques. It allows users to experience realistic patient interactions, anatomical variations, and complications with may occur during airway management [19,20]. Adding difficult airway management scenarios to VR training can improve the effect of the skills of fiberoptic bronchoscopy intubation for anesthesiologists training [21]. In addition, a study by Bruno aimed to observe how consultant anesthesiologists manage a"cannot intubate, cannot ventilate"scenario in a high-fidelity simulator and to evaluate whether a simulation teaching session improves their adherence to difficult airway guidelines [22]. The study found that there were no substantial changes in airway management after an intense 1-h personalized video assisted airway focused simulation debriefing session with an expert. The study concluded that multiple factors other than airway algorithms come into emergency airway decision-making processes, including one's personal clinical experience by the available airway devices.

VR can be used as an assessment tool to evaluate the competency of healthcare providers in airway management. With the VR simulation test, assess physicians'application of current guidelines and determine whether they act by the guidelines. The simulation tests can also be graded by doctors at different levels of training and determine their readiness to enter the next phase of training [23]. The previous assessment model was mainly based on traditional questionnaires and written examinations. While VR simulation can track and measure performance metrics, such as intubation success rates and time of completion. VR assessments can provide objective feedback and identify areas of improvement in individual performance [24].

The utilization of VR in anesthesia skills training represents an innovative educational approach, particularly in the context of nerve block skill development. Nerve blocks are a type of regional anesthesia technique that blocks nerve function distal to the injection site [25]. Traditional anesthesia skills methods of teaching, training on human models and instructor-led sessions, often result in a lack of student involvement and initiative [26]. In the realm of anesthesia skills education, the integration of VR technology has shown promise in enhancing both teaching effectiveness and students'practical proficiency. One of the most difficult local anesthetic blocks to master in dentistry is the inferior alveolar nerve block (IANB) [27]. With dental surgery representative, VR technology has been widely used in the training of inferior alveolar nerve block [27–29]. Cléber et al. reported a VR simulator specifically for the training of inferior alveolar nerve block, which greatly improved the success rate of the operation and the satisfaction of the training [28]. The VR simulator performed well in simulating needle insertion tasks, including the correct insertion position, depth, and the perception of tissue resistance during insertion. Compared with traditional teaching, the simulator is regarded as an effective tool for anesthesia training, which can provide a more realistic training experience, reduce risk and save cost. Similarly, study, Elen adopted VR simulators to train clinical dental students in inferior alveolar dental anesthesia procedures, which showed that students receiving immersive instruction or immersive training provided higher accuracy and confidence in anesthesia management [29]. Furthermore, researchers have developed a VR training simulator for medical interns to practice ultrasound-guided regional anesthesia (UGRA) [30,31]. UGRA is a nerve block procedure performed by critical care doctors, which requires intense training. Traditionally, interns are trained by experts on simulated models before attempting the procedure on live patients [32]. This new application allows interns to practice in a virtual environment, making future performance safer and more efficient than current approaches.

VR can be utilized in the training of epidural block skills, which is a common anesthesia method for obstetric delivery and cesarean section. Currently, the most common used is positioned through palpation or lumbar CT and X-ray, and the success rate of accurate positioning is only 30% [33]. Ashab et al. reported a training system for epidural anesthesia to obtain the simulated target gap by stacking with data lumbar ultrasound images of different segments [33]. Studies have confirmed that the system is more accurate than conventional localization methods, which is up to 85% success rate. Insufficient teaching resources for intraspinal anesthesia often limit students'opportunities to practice [34]. To address this issue, the researchers are developing a virtual platform for combined spinal–epidural anesthesia that merges virtual reality technology with haptic feedback technology while assessing its educational impact and learning outcomes [35]. This platform effectively facilitates the acquisition of basic and accurate puncture skills on virtual patients. In addition, Alireza introduced a robotic lumbar puncture simulator with force feedback that allows students to experience the insertion force while practicing in a virtual reality environment, providing a promising framework for trainees to train lumbar [36]. Gorman et al. developed a lumbar puncture simulator that utilizes a lumbar puncture needle connected to a Sensable Technologies Phantom Premium 1.5 haptic feedback device [37]. The simulator includes six modeled tissue layers: skin, dermis, subcutaneous tissue, muscle, ligamentum flavum, and the dura mater. This system is capable of recording each insertion and replaying the internal actions, potentially enhancing a user’s comprehension during training [37].

Pain is a common problem for inpatients; therefore, pain management is an important work of anesthesiologists, and should be given attention in the training process. The traditional pain management methods include pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatments, but with some limitations and side effects [38]. Opioids and physical therapy are two common traditional pain management methods, but they are frequently insufficient or ineffective [39]. In recent years, VR technology has made significant strides in pain management education. It offers a secure and controlled learning environment for learners to simulate clinical scenarios, enhancing their comprehension of intricate concepts with real-time feedback and adaptive learning features [40]. Brian et al. created a pain treatment simulator that allows residents to enhance pain management by simulating a patient's pain scenario without risking harm to the patient [41]. The simulator displays pain scores and time graphically, enabling residents to devise treatment plans based on the pain response curve for improving pain management. Similarly, Khadra et al. utilized VR technology as an intervention to alleviate pain and anxiety by immersing individuals in a virtual environment [42]. Their studies assess various clinical outcomes, such as pain intensity, anxiety levels, comfort levels, and sedation levels, it offers valuable insights and techniques for managing pain in pediatric burn patients using VR. Chiu et al. demonstrated that virtual reality can effectively reduce pain sensation in children receiving intramuscular injections by acting as a distraction technique [43]. They also proposed to use VR models as a novel teaching tool for training medical staff, improving children's daily care, and enhancing health education.

Distance teaching is a new teaching mode, it adopts various media methods for online system teaching. Distance teaching can transmit online teaching resources to off-campus learning terminals through network [44]. Under the background of current digital education policy, the application of VR technology in distance teaching has become a research hotspot. Especially under the influence of Coronavirus disease 2019(COVID-19), distance learning has become an important part of education [45]. However, due to the lack of interactivity, the traditional learning effect is difficult to guarantee, which is unable to meet the needs of modern education [46]. In this context, the application of VR technology brings new possibilities to distance teaching.

VR is becoming more widely used in medical fields such as telemedicine. VR is used in remote supervision and robotic remote surgery, which provides a better technical platform for the implementation of remote teaching and telemedicine [47]. Telemedicine is defined as the use of communication and information technology to facilitate access to medical care or information [48]. Telemedicine has been explored in a variety of utilities, including but not limited to teleconsultation, telesurgery and medical education [49]. In the study of Jurgen [50], a haptic immersive workbench has been developed for at-home rehabilitation for stroke patients, with an internet-based system for communication between patients and clinical assessment centers. A study by Nadir described a new telemedicine approach called ARTEMIS (Augmented Reality Technology Enable reMote Integrated Surgery, ARTEMIS), which used augmented reality technology to enable experienced surgeons to remotely aid less experienced ones in the field [51]. Experts can interact with a representation of the patient, instruct remote novices through annotations projected on the patient's body, and project small video clips of specific procedures to follow. This approach could help overcome the challenges of providing timely surgical treatment in large-scale disasters or other situations, where local medical systems are overwhelmed. Erin performed an exploratory study that compared the use of standard telepsychiatry over 2D devices with Head Mounted Device (HMD) using Thera VRTM software [52]. The study focused on a single example of a pediatric mental health subject with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) co-morbid symptoms related to the impact of COVID-19. The results showed a positive improvement in patient engagement and treatment outcomes after continuous use of VR telehealth avatar technology.

VR has greatly promoted the development of distance teaching. In the last few years, Natascha of Colorado State University conducted a program for distance education in human anatomy [53,54]. The program allowed students to participate in online laboratory sessions using VR technology, which resulted in an increased engagement and knowledge acquisition. Qualitative and quantitative data showed that the VR course was as effective as traditional methods in teaching anatomical spatial relationships, and students enhanced opportunities to interact with peers and teaching assistants. The program also resulted in statistically significant examination scores compared to previous in-person laboratories, demonstrating its effectiveness in distance education. Similarly, the researchers used VR technology combined with cooperative learning strategies for distance learning. In VR simulation, students learn with VR equipment, and complete assignments and make video introductions to the anatomical system in team-cooperation and self-learning [55]. Through the statistical analysis of students'performance and learning experience, the researchers found that VR technology can significantly improve students'academic performance. Although the use of VR devices may lead to some discomfort symptoms, they can reduce these discomfort symptoms and improve students'learning experience through adaptive training and personalized setting [56]. In the Barry study, the effect of using screen simulation in anesthesia distance education was explored [57]. The study used a screen simulation software called Sim STAT, which allows students to practice anesthesia in a remote environment by simulating real surgical scenarios. Screen simulations also help students discover their strengths and areas to improve by assessing their behavior and composite scores [58]. The potential of synchronous screen simulation in anesthesia distance education to provide a reference for further improvement and development of distance education [59].

VR can improve the inconvenience of traditional medicine practice, reduce medical accidents due to unskilled operation, and save the cost of medical education or training [60]. Although distance teaching has made rapid development, there are still some deficiencies, such as insufficient teaching interaction, practical skills training, and sharing of teaching resources [61].

Doctor–patient communication is an important part of the medical process. Due to differences in professional knowledge and culture, the communication between doctors and patients can be considered as cross-cultural communication, especially for those with verbal communication disorders, such as children and the elderly, the communication is more difficult [62,63]. VR technology is used to build a virtual medical environment, so that patients can get a better view of the disease situation and treatment plan [64]. VR allows patients to visualize their unique anatomy and pathology by a virtual simulator (e. g., using a VR helmet) to better understand the proposed surgical treatment options [65–67]. Palanica et al. found that explaining surgical anatomy knowledge by VR to patients transfers medical knowledge more effectively, it was easier for patients to understand surgical information and improve their satisfaction [68]. The investigators described a newly developed VR technique, called Health Voyager, designed to help facilitate this transfer of knowledge between physicians and patients. The platform uses a smartphone or tablet to show personalized surgical or treatment results and simulations of normal anatomy. Patients can understand medical knowledge and treatment information more effectively by VR simulations [69]. A study by Vivek et al. discovered that not many patients had experience with VR, but most of them felt better informed about their health status using VR and expressed a desire to use VR more in their further health care [70].

The use of VR technology in medical education and training may also improve the communication skills of medical students. Hoek uses patient-embodied virtual reality as an educational tool for improving communication skills in a preoperative setting [71]. The results showed that participants found the VR experience to be immersive and effective in improving their communication style. The study suggests that patient-embodied VR is a potential valuable tool in healthcare education programs. In addition, Lea found that the virtual environment enables researchers to assess the behavioral skills required in provider–patient communication and subsequent treatment decisions [72]. After engaging in an immersive experience, providers express an enhanced understanding of the patient or surrogate perspective, which can lead to a continuous development of effective communication skills. A study was conducted by Masaki to evaluate the effect of simulated communication skills training using augmented reality (AR) and timely feedback to students [73]. Compared with traditional care model training, the results show that using augmented reality training significantly increases the proportion of time in eye contact and increases students'empathy for patients. This indicated that training in simulated communication skills using augmented reality and feedback can improve nursing students'ability to interact with simulated patients and have empathy for patients. In a recent article, Shefaly et al. used VR technology for communication skills training: 24 undergraduate students used the Virtual Counseling Application Using Artificial Intelligence (VCAAI), conducted focus group discussions and personal interviews [74]. Early implementation of VCAAI, continued accessibility, enhanced realism, and technological improvement were listed as key areas for planned improvement. Meanwhile, improving situational sensitivity and language training to further improve students'communication skills.

VR technology has great potential to address doctor–patient communication barriers. However, how to use this technique effectively is still a question which needs further research. Future research should focus more on how to combine VR technology with medical education methods to improve the effectiveness of doctor–patient communication.

Operation room crisis management simulation creates simulated patients and clinical situations to practice anesthesia management instead of real patients by scenario [75]. However, the traditional crisis resource management mode often has problems, such as opaque information, untimely response and unreasonable resource allocation [76–78]. The application of VR technology in crisis resource management has been deeply studied, and it is found that VR can provide real-time and intuitive crisis scenarios by simulating the real environment, same to improve the speed and efficiency of crisis response [79,80]. VR technology can effectively improve the professional skills of anesthesiologists and their ability to deal with the crisis.

VR can be used to imitate some scenarios that are clinically difficult to replicate, with a quantitative assessment of capacity in some typical and high-risk scenarios. Brett et al. introduced a simulation on cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) for junior residents whom about to begin their cardiac anesthesia rotation [81]. The simulation covers relevant critical actions and concepts involved in going on or off of CPB. The simulation has been found to significantly improve the learning curve for trainees, and it has been incorporated into the cardiac anesthesia curriculum at the University of Iowa. All junior residents experience in this simulation prior their rotation. Likewise, a study describes a simulation on cardiac tamponade and complete heart block in the context of severe aortic stenosis, which was developed to address a recognized area of need for cardiothoracic anesthesia scenarios in the simulation curriculum of the University of Iowa [82]. The simulation was conducted using a high-fidelity, low-risk environment and involved anesthesia residents experiencing and improving their understanding of tamponade hemodynamic pathophysiology and recognition of hemodynamically unstable bradycardia. Sheriff compared the effectiveness of virtual reality simulator (VRS) and mannequin-based simulation (MBS) in training anesthesia trainees for managing life-threatening critical incidents like local anesthetic systemic toxicity (LAST) [83]. Both VRS and MBS were found to be effective in improving trainees'non-technical skills, with significant improvement seen in the VRS group. This indicated that VR is a better tool in anesthesia clinical crisis management training.

Apart from crisis management training in scenario simulation, the researchers have developed many new applications based on VR technology in crisis management training programs, such as anesthesia machine failure, mass casualty incident, and operating room fire [68,84,85]. The virtual anesthesia machine is a VR virtual model developed by researchers at the University of Florida to enable trainees to see the internal work of the anesthesia machine. Preliminary studies show that the training of virtual anesthesia machines improves the participation of trainees, enhances students'understanding of these devices, and also improves the ability to prevent and handle crisis situations such as equipment failure [68]. Dale conducted a study to evaluate the influence of VR environments on the development of triage skills among novice learners [84]. The study involved 24 medical students who utilized a fully immersive VR environment to engage with simulated patients. The findings revealed a noteworthy enhancement in triage scores during Scenario B, along with decreased completion times for Scenarios A and C. Self-efficacy surveys also indicated favorable responses to the training. Ultimately, the study concluded that iterative VR training led to improved scores and enhanced experiences among novice learners. Linda et al. evaluated the technical and non-technical skills of 32 students registered nurse anesthetists in airway fire during simulated tracheotomy [85]. By wearing VR headset, virtual elements of smoke, fire and water are triggered at certain times and displayed in the trainee's field of view. The results showed that participants demonstrated excellent technical and non-technical skills in the management of VR simulated operating room fires.

VR technology in operation room crisis management has been widely recognized and affirmed, but VR operation room crisis management is still in the initial stage, there are still some problems and challenges [86]. To improve the VR simulation, it should increase real effectiveness and integrate with traditional medical training methods.

There are lots of advantages in VR simulation, such as safety, reliability, interactive integration, and immersive training. Many studies demonstrated VR is not only improving anesthesia professional skills, but improving traditional teaching methods reforming and efficiency. While the range of development is limited, the main reason is high cost [86], the supporting equipment is complex [87] and less resource sharing [88]. The development of hardware and software is an important condition for the adoption of VR. In the future, more realistic and clinically relevant software and naked eye 3D technology can be developed to further improve the efficiency of simulated teaching.