Mindfulness-based interventions, such as mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR), are efficacious mind–body treatments for chronic pain, though their modest effect sizes suggest room for improvement. Notably, recent studies indicate that mindfulness meditation does not engage the endogenous opioid system, which plays an important role in analgesia. Therefore, exploring the combination of a mindfulness-based intervention with a non-opioid treatment that activates this system is warranted. Open-label placebo (OLP), a placebo that is given to a participant without deception, has shown significant promise as a safe and potentially effective analgesic, with studies indicating its effects are mediated by the release of endogenous opioids. This study aims to evaluate the feasibility and acceptability of combining MBSR and OLP treatment compared to each intervention alone for chronic pain in a three-arm randomized controlled trial (RCT).

This study will include an 8-week exposure to one of three treatments for individuals with chronic pain: MBSR-only, OLP-only, or a combined MBSR + OLP intervention. Participants will attend four in-person sessions (baseline assessment, randomization session, mid-treatment assessment, and posttreatment assessment), followed by an online assessment at a 3-month follow-up. MBSR sessions will be conducted live via Zoom. Participants in OLP groups will take placebo pills twice daily, with adherence monitored using an electronic pill bottle cap and urine riboflavin tracer testing. Daily diary assessments will be completed over 7-day periods at baseline, mid-treatment, post-treatment, and 3-month follow-up.

Findings from this single-site feasibility RCT will help refine and optimize study protocols needed for a future, fully powered multi-site efficacy trial.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40814-025-01692-8.

Chronic pain is one of the leading causes of disability, impacting about 50 million adults in the USA [1]. Furthermore, the annual expenses associated with managing chronic pain exceed those of any other major chronic illness, including cancer, cardiovascular diseases, and diabetes [2]. Thus, developing highly effective, safe, and accessible chronic pain management strategies to improve the lives of those with chronic pain is a crucial public health goal.

Mindfulness-based therapies (MBTs), such as mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR), are designed to enhance present-moment attention, nonjudgmental awareness, and acceptance of challenging internal states (e.g., pain and negative affect) [3,4]. They are among the most widely utilized mind–body interventions for chronic pain due to their favorable safety profile [5] and generally robust efficacy for chronic pain [6]. MBTs also show comparable efficacy with cognitive behavioral therapy, another well-established psychological intervention for chronic pain [7].

Nevertheless, similar to other non-pharmacological interventions for chronic pain, the overall effect sizes of MBTs on pain-related outcomes are small-to-moderate in magnitude [8], suggesting opportunity for enhancement in their efficacy. Notably, recent mechanistic studies have indicated that mindfulness-induced analgesia may be mediated by expectancy effects [9,10], and that mindfulness meditation does not modulate the endogenous opioid system [11,12], which plays a key role in pain relief [13,14]. Hence, there is a compelling case for exploring the combination of an MBT with another low-risk, non-opioid intervention capable of modulating the endogenous opioid system and does not rely primarily on expectancy mechanisms, potentially yielding enhanced therapeutic effects.

Open-label placebo (OLP) or nondeceptive/honest placebo (i.e., patients are aware that they are receiving a placebo) is a promising treatment that can be combined with an MBT. OLPs have shown considerable promise as safe and efficacious analgesic agents [15,16]. Unlike traditional placebos that can raise ethical issues relating to concealment or deception, and the effects may be driven by positive expectancy effects, OLPs are free from these issues and, thus, could potentially transform real-world clinical practice [17].

In fact, emerging meta-analyses demonstrate OLPs’ promising efficacy in improving various clinical symptoms and conditions, including chronic pain [15,16]. Furthermore, a few recent studies demonstrate the potential of OLPs to reduce opioid consumption in patients dealing with acute pain in the early postoperative period [18,19]. These findings echo those of previous mechanistic studies demonstrating that placebo-analgesia, including OLP-analgesia [20], is mediated by the release of endogenous opioids [21–23]. Thus, there is strong theoretical justification to hypothesize that the combination of an MBT and OLP treatment may produce more potent and enduring therapeutic effects in chronic pain management compared to MBT alone (see Fig.1for a conceptual model).

As a first step toward answering the question of whether an MBT combined with OLP treatment can yield enhanced benefits in comparison to either an MBT or OLP treatment alone, we will conduct a single-site three-arm randomized controlled feasibility trial. Study Aim 1 is to assess the feasibility of conducting a three-arm randomized controlled trial (RCT) with a combined MBSR and OLP treatment for individuals with chronic pain. Feasibility will be determined by evaluating (1) participant enrollment rate, (2) participant retention rate, (3) adherence to MBSR (% of sessions attended and % of daily homework completed), and (4) adherence to OLP treatment (% of days consumed monitored via an electronic pill bottle cap and detection of urinary riboflavin biochemical tracer in mid- and posttreatment visits). Aim 2 is to evaluate the acceptability of combining MBSR and OLP treatment. Acceptability will be determined by self-report ratings of (1) satisfaction, (2) intervention effectiveness, (3) intervention convenience, (4) side effects, (5) appropriateness of intervention length/frequency, and (6) appropriateness of study measures.

This protocol follows the 2013 SPIRIT guidelines, with the SPIRIT checklist provided in Additional File 1 and the trial schedule detailed in Table1.

This study will employ a three-arm RCT to assess the feasibility and acceptability of an 8-week exposure to MBT-only, OLP-only, and the combination of MBT and OLP treatment (MBT + OLP) in individuals with chronic pain. The MBT groups will receive an MBSR treatment program, a widely recognized and one of the most extensively studied MBTs in the context of chronic pain [6]. A total of 45 participants will be randomly assigned to one of three groups, with 15 participants per group: (1) MBSR-only, (2) OLP-only, and (3) MBSR + OLP. All data collection will be conducted at Arizona State University in the USA. The study protocol has received approval from the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at Arizona State University (STUDY00020051), ensuring that all procedures adhere to the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki. Informed consent will be obtained from all participants prior to their involvement in our study. This study was registered in ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT06720909).

The recruitment of participants for this study is expected to start early in 2025. Inclusion criteria for this study are as follows: (1) ≥ 18 years old; (2) ability to speak, write, and read in English; (3) physical pain present on at least half the days in the past 3 months; and (4) average past week pain severity rating ≥ 3 on a 0–10 numerical rating scale. Exclusion criteria are as follows: (1) Acute pain due to recent injury or surgery; (2) self-reporting of chronic malignant pain (e.g., cancer); (3) self-reporting of Raynaud’s disease (those who can be contraindicated for cold pressor testing); (4) severe psychopathology (e.g., a psychotic disorder) or significant cognitive deficits judged to interfere with study procedures; (5) currently pregnant or breastfeeding; (6) inability to discontinue use of vitamin B2 supplements or a multivitamin containing vitamin B2 throughout the study period (these interfere with riboflavin tracer monitoring); and (7) inability to commit to the study period.

We will recruit participants through a variety of strategies that have been used successfully by our research team. These strategies include distributing flyers in community hospitals, clinics, and veteran support groups; posting flyers online and on social media platforms such as Facebook and Instagram; conducting paid media campaigns on various platforms such as Meta, Google, and Craigslist; and obtaining referrals from the Doctor of Nursing Practice students and clinical faculty at Arizona State University’s Edson College of Nursing and Health Innovation.

Individuals who are interested in participating in the study will complete a brief online screening survey to establish initial eligibility. Provisionally eligible participants will be provided with a document that briefly describes the study and its expectations and introduces them to the pre-determined study schedule that must also be compatible with their schedule. After reviewing the document, those who express continued interest in participating will be routed to provide their contact information. Participants will then be contacted by study staff via phone to share a brief introduction to the study, address any questions relating to the study, verify that their availability aligns with the pre-determined study schedule, and conduct a telephone version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (T-MoCA). The T-MoCA is used to screen for and exclude individuals with significant cognitive deficits (T-MoCA score < 17/22) that may impair their ability to safely engage with the MBSR and/or OLP treatments. If deemed eligible based on the T-MoCA, participants will then be provided with a detailed set of instructions for the first in-person laboratory visit. In cases where potential participants do not own a smartphone, the study team will provide one with a data plan for use throughout the duration of the study.

Following this phone screening, those who remain interested and are eligible to participate will be sent a follow-up email containing a survey link (i.e., the pre-Visit 1 survey). This survey consists of a range of self-report measures and a copy of the informed consent document that participants may review prior to their in-personVisit1 (V1). During V1, female participants who consent to study participation and are of childbearing potential will complete a urine pregnancy screening to further establish study eligibility. This urine pregnancy screening is brief (approximately 5 min to complete), requires only a small urine sample, and is therefore expected to be minimally burdensome for participants. Those who test positive for pregnancy will be excluded from the study. Those who meet the eligibility criteria will then take part in a series of data collection procedures, including self-report measures and the World Health Organization Alcohol, Smoking and Substance Involvement Screening Test [24]. Participants will then undergo a series of quantitative sensory testing (QST) procedures. During QST, brief pressure and cold stimuli will be applied in a standardized manner to assess conditioned pain modulation [25]. After QST, research staff will conduct a training session to acclimate participants to 7-day pre-intervention daily diary assessments via MetricWire (Waterloo, ON, Canada, a mobile app platform for delivering the daily diary assessment). Participants will provide daily diary entries once each evening starting on the day they return home after V1.

After the 7 days of baseline daily diary assessment are completed, participants will be invited forVisit 2(V2) to the research lab. Female participants who are of childbearing potential will repeat a urine pregnancy screening, and those who test positive for pregnancy will be excluded from the study. Then, participants will be randomized to one of the three conditions.

Participants who are assigned to either OLP only or MBSR + OLP will receive instructions and review videos on OLP treatment described below. Furthermore, individuals in these groups will receive additional training on using the electronic Medication Event Monitoring System (MEMS) SmartCap (Aardex Group; Searing, Belgium) and MEMS mobile app which will monitor their adherence to OLP treatment. Participants assigned to either the MBSR-only or MBSR + OLP group will receive instructions to register for a synchronous (i.e., live) 8-week MBSR program delivered via videoconferencing. The program will be facilitated by the Center for Mindfulness at the University of California San Diego (UCSD). The MBSR groups will exclusively consist of participants enrolled in our study, preventing the general public from registering for our study’s MBSR groups. Because the MBSR program is a group intervention, sufficient participants must be recruited and randomized to an MBSR condition before each set of group members can proceed to intervention stage. We anticipate a waiting period (e.g., few weeks) between randomization, and the beginning of the intervention will be required to allow for enrollment of enough participants with compatible schedules for the MBSR groups. Lastly, after the randomization, participants from all groups will complete a treatment expectation questionnaire, which inquiries about perceived risks and benefits associated with the participants’ assigned intervention(s).

Approximately 4 weeks after the start of intervention, participants will be invited to attendVisit 3(V3) for a mid-treatment assessment, which will include a series of self-report measures, QST assessment, and urine testing to assess pregnancy (for applicable female participants) and OLP treatment adherence. Starting on the evening after V3, they will begin the 1-week mid-treatment daily diary assessment phase. At V3, participants assigned to either the OLP-only or the MBSR + OLP group will be provided with a home urine collection kit containing all necessary materials for collecting and storing the sample in their freezer or refrigerator. Participants will be asked to document the time of urine sample collection. They will then bring this urine sample to Visit 4, where the research staff will determine whether riboflavin is present in the sample.

Visit 4(V4), the posttreatment visit, will be held approximately 8 weeks after the start of intervention. The assessment procedures at V4 will mirror those of V3, except that (a) pregnancy testing will not be conducted and (b) acceptability measures will be collected during the visit. For the urine assessment of OLP treatment adherence, participants will be asked to collect a urine sample in a sterile container approximately 1 to 7 days before their treatment ends, rather than providing the sample during V4 (the posttreatment visit). This is because riboflavin, the chemical tracer included in the placebo pills, remains in the body for only about 24 h. Because the posttreatment session may not be conducted immediately after the treatment ends, collecting the sample beforehand ensures accurate measurement of treatment adherence. Starting on the evening after V4, participants will complete the 1-week post-treatment daily diary assessment phase. The final study assessment will be conducted online at a 3-month follow-up. Participants will complete self-report measures online and will also complete a final 1-week daily diary assessment phase.

Randomization will be conducted by the study statistician who is not involved in any outcome assessments. Allocation to study conditions in a 1:1:1 ratio will be performed at V2 using the randomization module in REDCap. The study statistician, who will have no contact with participants and will not be involved in delivering the intervention or administering outcome assessments, will produce an allocation table with the randomizeR [26] package in R and then upload the table to REDCap. During each eligible participant’s V2 visit, a project staff member will open the participant’s data record in REDCap and use the randomization module to reveal the participant’s group assignment. At no time will the allocation table be accessible to anyone other than the study statistician. Note that blinding treatment conditions among participants and staff members is not feasible due to the nature of the current study design (i.e., inclusion of OLP groups).

The standard 8-week MBSR program [27] will be led by certified instructors from the UCSD Center for Mindfulness. The program content will consist of a variety of mindfulness and meditative techniques, including sitting meditation, body scans, awareness of breathing, awareness of emotions, mindful yoga and walking, mindful eating, mindful listening, and loving-kindness meditation. These techniques share a common emphasis on cultivating present moment awareness, acceptance, non-reactivity, and non-judgment. Participants will engage in weekly sessions via Zoom videoconference, dedicating approximately 2 to3 h each session to mindful meditation practice, participation in group discussions, and honing their other mindfulness skills. Throughout the program, participants will be instructed to commit to a daily mindfulness meditation practice lasting approximately 45 min, at least 6 days a week. This formal mindfulness practice will be complemented by the informal practice of mindfulness in daily activities. We will provide participants with access to audio/video-guided mindfulness practice files through the MetricWire app. The daily audio-/video-guided mindfulness practice files will be set up in the MetricWire app so that, as participants navigate through the 8-week program, they will see only the session(s) we want them to see and complete each day. This will limit participant burden and confusion and will also create a feeling that participants are progressing through the 8-week program on a day-by-day basis as opposed to giving them access to the whole 8-week program up front. These features will enable the research team to track participation in assignments, thereby enabling assessment of participants’ daily homework completion. In addition, an “all-day” silent retreat day will be scheduled between the 6th and 7th week of the program, spanning about 6–7 h. During this retreat, participants will practice mindfulness meditation and related activities that they have learned throughout the program. If participants miss a weekly MBSR session, they will be contacted by study staff who will work to address any barriers relating to their completion of the intervention.

Prior to attending the first MBSR program session, a staff member will conduct a brief orientation session for all participants assigned to either MBSR-only or MBSR + OLP to familiarize them with the Zoom videoconferencing platform that will be used for MBSR sessions. During this training, participants will receive an overview of essential Zoom videoconference functions, ensure proper screen visibility, and practice audio and video controls. This session will address any technological concerns or questions related to their devices, webcams, microphones, videoconference software, or other technology used (e.g., tablets). Participants will also receive written instructions and etiquette guidelines for participating in MBSR sessions via videoconference. Of note, participants assigned to MBSR-only and MBSR + OLP will attend the same weekly MBSR sessions. To prevent any cross-condition influence, participants will be strictly instructed not to disclose or discuss their group assignment to other participants during MBSR sessions. To help enforce this, at least one research staff member will be present throughout each MBSR session to monitor any cross talk related to study condition.

To ensure the fidelity of the MBSR program, all instructors will be MBSR certified through the UCSD Center for Mindfulness. In addition, all program sessions will be audio recorded for subsequent evaluation of instructor competency and adherence. Fidelity will be assessed by an expert reviewer who has extensive experience in conducting MBT trials and has maintained a long-standing mindfulness meditation practice. The fidelity assessment will employ the validated Mindfulness-Based Intervention Teacher Assessment Criteria (MBI-TAC) [28], a well-established tool for assessing fidelity in mindfulness-based interventions, including MBSR. The MBI-TAC evaluates fidelity across six competence domains, assigning ratings on a scale from 1 to 6, where a rating of 6 reflects advanced skills and fidelity. The expert reviewer will randomly select two out of the eight MBSR sessions (25% of all sessions) for a fidelity and integrity review using the MBI-TAC. In the event of any identified fidelity issues or deviations during the trial, the expert reviewer will provide instructors with corrective feedback, additional coaching and practice, and ongoing monitoring to ensure the delivery of MBSR as intended.

The placebo pills will be size no. 1 capsules filled with (1) microcrystalline cellulose, a common inert excipient for pharmaceuticals and (2) 25-mg riboflavin tracer for evaluating OLP treatment adherence. These placebo pills are manufactured by a local commercial compounding pharmacy. Participants who are assigned to either OLP-only or MBSR + OLP groups will be informed that the placebo pills are inactive substances, like sugar pills, and contain no active medication. Then, they will watch a brief OLP introduction video led by our study physician who has expertise in pain medicine. The video script is adapted from earlier OLP studies [29,30]. The video covers four main discussion points: (1) The placebo effect can be powerful and can have beneficial effects for diverse symptoms, (2) the body can respond to taking placebo pills automatically despite the knowledge that it is placebo, (3) a positive attitude or expectation can be beneficial but is not necessary, and (4) taking the pills faithfully throughout the intervention period is critical. They will also watch a short video clip of a television news report in which a participant in an OLP trial for chronic pain was interviewed. In the event that participants express skepticism about whether or not placebo pills are effective, we will acknowledge that disbelief is understandable and encourage them to “see what happens.” All participants in the OLP arms will receive the same instructions to take one capsule twice daily, morning and evening. Placebo pills will be placed in a bottle with a MEMS SmartCap, labeled clearly with “placebo pills” and instructions to take one pill twice daily. Importantly, participants receiving OLP will not be required to make any adjustments to their existing pharmacological treatments, as OLP will be layered onto existing medication strategies. Thus, the addition of OLP will not pose any safety or other risk for patients.

The assessment of riboflavin presence in urine will be conducted at V3 and V4, following the established method outlined by Del Boca and colleagues [31]. Participants will provide urine samples in transparent glass specimen tubes. Subsequently, two trained raters will examine the urine samples for the presence or absence of fluorescence using nonspecific ultraviolet (UV) light activation in a dark room. A third rater will resolve any discrepancies. After the completion of the qualitative assessment of the urine sample for the OLP treatment adherence, the urine sample will be stored in a − 80 °C freezer for potential future quantitative urine riboflavin assay. The assessment of riboflavin presence in urine will complement OLP adherence data captured by the MEMS SmartCap system, which electronically logs the exact date and time participants open the placebo pill bottle to take the pill but does not provide biological confirmation of ingestion.

Table2provides a summary of the primary feasibility and acceptability measures, along with the associated benchmarks for success.

To parallel the planned future full-scale RCT, we will collect measures of self-reported clinical outcomes including the Brief Pain Inventory-Short Form (BPI) [32], PROMIS Short Form v2.0 — Physical Function 8b [33], PROMIS Short Form v1.0 — Depression 8a [33], PROMIS Short Form v1.0 — Anxiety 8a [33], opioid analgesic use measured by daily diary assessment [34], Patient Global Impression of Change [35], Mindful Attention Awareness Scale [36], Pain Catastrophizing Scale [37], Chronic Pain Acceptance Questionnaire-8 [38], Insomnia Severity Index [39], and conditioned pain modulation index from QST, as well as reports of adverse events.

The proposed study is a feasibility trial, and, thus, we did not conduct a statistical power analysis to determine the sample size. Instead, we based our sample size determination on the nature of the feasibility study and our available resources. Specifically, we will enroll and randomize a total of 45 participants (n= 15 per arm). We opted for a sample size of 15 participants per intervention arm for several reasons. Our study’s primary aim is not to establish efficacy but to rigorously evaluate the feasibility of implementing our intervention. This sample size aligns with the feasibility study’s objectives, which primarily focus on assessing practical aspects, such as participant recruitment, retention, intervention delivery, intervention acceptability, and data collection logistics. Furthermore, our decision was informed by budgetary constraints, as securing additional resources for a larger sample size would have placed undue strain on our available funding.

We will conduct descriptive analyses of feasibility and acceptability measures and evaluate them with respect to benchmark values (see Table2). For the non-feasibility outcome measures, we will use univariate and bivariate statistics (e.g., means, standard deviations, frequencies, correlations, and cross-tabulations) and plots (e.g., histograms, box plots, line plots, and scatterplots) to explore the data. These methods will be employed to screen data for out-of-range or implausible values, examine how missingness are associated with baseline characteristic variables and time-varying factors, and characterize the distributions of and associations between variables. We will also calculate internal consistency reliability for multi-item measures. To address Aim 1, we will (a) compare observed rates for study enrollment, study retention, and intervention adherence to a priori benchmarks and (b) compute an overall observed daily diary compliance rate across the four daily diary assessment phases (i.e., baseline, mid-treatment, posttreatment, and 3-month follow-up) and compare that to our benchmark. To address Aim 2, we will compare sample mean and study arm means on each acceptability indicator to the benchmark value. Lastly, we will explore how key baseline characteristic variables (e.g., demographics, pain levels, and treatment expectancy) are associated with feasibility and acceptability outcomes. All data analyses will be conducted by a biostatistician who is blinded to the group assignment variable.

All data will be stored on password-protected computers and on Arizona State University (ASU)’s secure services (e.g., Qualtrics and REDCap), servers, and/or shared drives with access limited to approved research staff. Following the funder (NCCIH)’s requirement, for the current randomized-controlled feasibility trial, an Internal Monitoring Committee (IMC) will be formed, comprised of a group of independent investigators who are not affiliated with PI (Dr. Mun)’s institution and the current study. The primary responsibilities of the IMC are to monitor participant safety and assess study progress. Roles and responsibilities are similar to those of a Data and Safety Monitoring Board. Plans for communicating important protocol modifications (e.g., changes to eligibility criteria) will be effectively communicated with not only the funder but also the IMC and ASU’s IRB.

This early-phase trial will specifically determine the feasibility and acceptability of combining an MBT (i.e., MBSR) and OLP intervention for individuals with chronic pain. The combination of an MBT with OLP that is capable of modulating the endogenous opioid system may yield enhanced therapeutic effects for managing chronic pain.

With the proposed study, we will (1) identify unforeseen barriers and pitfalls of our study procedures, (2) evaluate and refine strategies to more effectively recruit and retain participants, (3) finalize study measures and data collection methods, (4) develop data and participant safety monitoring procedures, and (5) estimate resource requirements for future larger clinical trials. As such, this single-site feasibility trial will yield important information that will guide the optimization of study protocols, which could then readily be implemented in a multi-site clinical trial. Findings from the fully powered multi-site clinical trial can ultimately inform clinical practice by determining whether combining MBSR with OLP is not only feasible but also enhances therapeutic effects in chronic pain management.

This study includes notable strengths. First, this dual-intervention design combining MBSR and OLP has not been previously examined. When combined, these interventions may produce an accessible and more effective treatment for managing chronic pain compared to being used alone. Second, we utilize objective intervention adherence monitoring for each condition. These procedures allow researchers to more accurately determine the ability of participants to adhere to the prescribed intervention(s) they are participating in. Third, the study includes a wide range of biobehavioral outcome assessments. These data will provide valuable insights into the specific benefits and potential mechanisms through which MBSR, OLP, and their combination may improve chronic pain outcomes in future clinical trials.

There are several important limitations that we anticipate in this study. First, participants are asked to complete numerous assessments as part of the pre-screening process and throughout the intervention once enrolled. We acknowledge that this could lead to a higher-than-anticipated burden for some participants prior to and after enrollment. To prevent significant participant burden in future clinical trials, participants will be asked about treatment acceptability during visit 4, which allows us to assess any potential burden of study-related assessments. In addition, to minimize issues related to literacy, research staff will be available during survey administration to participants as needed and support comprehension. Second, limiting recruitment to participants who are only available during the predetermined MBSR session schedule might introduce some sample bias. However, this approach mirrors how MBSR programs are delivered in real-world settings. Live MBSR programs are typically offered on specific dates that are announced in advance, and only people who are available during those times are able to enroll. Third, the waiting periods prior to MBSR start date may result in retention challenges. To minimize these potential challenges, we will send personalized thank-you cards to participants, as well as regular email/text/phone reminders in an attempt to maximize participant retention. Fourth, the study currently does not have dedicated measures of pre-treatment motivation and posttreatment credibility. While this study focuses on the feasibility and acceptability of MBSR and OLP interventions for chronic pain, we acknowledge the importance of considering these types of measures in a future multi-site clinical trial, as it would provide a deeper insight into individual participant differences and potentially enhance our interpretations of the generalizability of MBSR and OLP interventions to individuals with chronic pain. Fifth, the sample size in this study is small, and, therefore, we will not be able to accurately determine intervention efficacy through the results of this early-phase clinical trial. Lastly, due to the unique nature of the OLP intervention, full blinding is not possible for either participants or staff members, which may introduce some bias into the results.

In conclusion, this study will serve as an important initial step in establishing procedures and strategies necessary for a comprehensive evaluation of combined MBSR and OLP treatment in a future multi-site clinical trial. If the fully powered clinical trial validates the efficacy of this combined treatment, it could significantly improve the care for the millions of adults living with chronic pain by utilizing the safe and accessible nature of both mindfulness and OLP treatments.

Additional File 1. SPIRIT 2013 Checklist: Recommended items to address in a clinical trial protocol and related documents.

CJM, ASM, FL, LC, KED, RBF, and MCD acquired funding and designed the study. CJM, EC, and YX prepared and wrote the initial draft. All authors contributed to the review and editing of the final manuscript. All authors have approved the final version of the manuscript. All persons.

designated as authors qualify for authorship, and all those that qualify have been listed as authors.

Funding for this research was provided by the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health at NIH (R34AT012677 for C. J. M.).