The bimolecular reactions between CH3F and H2+, HD+and D2+have been studied in the range of collision energies between ∼0 andkB× 30 K using a merged-beam approach. The ion–molecule reactions were investigated following photoexciting of H2(HD, D2) to high Rydberg states in a supersonic beam, merging the Rydberg-molecule beam with a cold supersonic beam of CH3F using a surface-electrode Rydberg–Stark deflector and monitoring the CH3+, CH2F+and CH3F+ions generated by the reactions of H2+(HD+, D2+) with CH3F within the distant orbit of the Rydberg electron. In all three reaction systems, a strong increase of the rate coefficients was observed at collision energies belowkB× 4 K. Branching ratios for the formation of CH3+, CH2F+and CH3F+were measured for all three reactions as a function of the collision energy. The branching ratio for the formation of CH3+was found to decrease with increasing deuteration of the hydrogen molecular ion and to increase at collision energies belowkB× 4 K. The experimental results were interpreted using model calculations based on a rotationally adiabatic capture model as well as using classical trajectory simulations. The reaction products are shown to be generated in two distinct mechanisms: electron transfer leading to a dominant CH2F+and a weaker CH3F+product channel, and short-range complex formation leading predominantly to CH3+by F−transfer, with a weaker contribution of CH2F+by H−transfer. The model calculations highlight the role played by quantum-statistical and stereodynamical effects associated with theJ= 1, |K| = 1 ground state ofpara-CH3F and by the reduced mass of the colliding partners: the orientation of CH3F molecules induced by the electric field of the ion favours the production of CH3+by F−transfer at low collision energies and the slower approach of the reaction partners with increasing reduced mass favours electron transfer at intermediate distances.

The bimolecular reactions between CH3F and H2+, HD+and D2+have been studied in the range of collision energies between ∼0 andkB× 30 K using a merged-beam approach.

Ion–molecule reactions can be broadly classified in two main categories:13–16(i) charge-transfer (or electron-transfer) reactions A++ B → A + B+, sometimes followed by the fragmentation of B+, which can be regarded as nonadiabatic processes starting on the potential-energy surface of the reactants with asymptote A++ B and ending on the potential-energy surface of the products with asymptote A + B+; and (ii) adiabatic reactions A++ B → C++ D taking place on a single Born–Oppenheimer potential-energy surface. Over the years, a broad range of concepts and methods has been elaborated to predict the rates of ion–molecule reactions and the branching ratios for the formation of different products. Whereas adiabatic reactions can be treated within the framework of transition-state theory, the description of electron-transfer processes requires a nonadiabatic treatment. In typical ion–molecule reaction systems, electron-transfer and adiabatic reactions are in kinetic competition and understanding the factors that may favour one type of reaction over the other is important. Full-dimensional quantum-mechanical treatments yield quantitative information in this regard and have brought considerable insights in the case of reactions involving atoms and diatomic molecules (see,e.g., ref.17–21). However, these treatments rapidly become prohibitively complex and expensive with increasing number of atoms.

In the present article, we report on the investigation of the competition between electron-transfer and adiabatic reactions at low collision energies in the range belowkB× 30 K, using as examples the reactions between rotationally cold (Trot≈ 5 K) CH3F and H2+(as well as HD+and D2+), forming CH3F+, CH2F+, and CH3+. In this range, which corresponds to the conditions encountered in interstellar molecular clouds, hardly any kinetic energy is available to drive endothermic reactions or to overcome potential barriers separating reactants from products. The reactions taking place under these conditions are therefore almost exclusively exothermic barrier-free adiabatic reactions as well as electron-transfer reactions A++ B → A + B+in which the adiabatic ionization energy of B is less than that of A. The observation in the present work of significant energy-dependent isotopic effects in the branching ratios for the formation of the three ion products leads to the conclusion that, at low collision energies, electron transfer competes with F−and H−atom transfer. This reaction system thus provides an ideal opportunity to investigate this competition and to link the observed branching ratios and energy-dependent rate coefficients to state-specific stereodynamical effects resulting from the orientation of the dipolar CH3F molecule induced by the field of the ion. To anticipate the main conclusions of this investigation, the importance of electron transfer is found to increase with the degree of deuteration of the molecular hydrogen ion and with increasing collision energy. Somewhat unexpectedly, the main trends observed experimentally can be explained, at least in part, by capture theory, in contrast to the general belief that capture theories cannot be used for that purpose.

Several previous studies of ion–molecule reactions involving CH3F have been reported and helped us rationalizing our findings: Chau and Bowers have reported total rate constants for the reaction of CH3F with the rare gas ions and several molecular ions and found charge transfer to be the dominant process in most cases. They interpreted their results in terms of the Franck–Condon factors for ionization of the fluoromethane molecules.54Tsujiet al.have used a flowing-afterglow apparatus coupled with a low-pressure chamber to measure product-ion distributions and rate constants in the charge-transfer reactions between Ar+and CH3F. The dominant product was found to be CH2F+, although CH3+, CH2+and CHF+were also observed as minor products.55Willitschet al.reported collision-energy-dependent rate coefficients for the reaction between Ca+and CH3F in the range betweenkB× 2.6 K and 3.2 K and observed a decrease of the rate coefficient with increasing collision energy.56Zhelyazkovaet al.measured the collision-energy dependence of the total rate coefficient of the He++ CH3F reaction between ∼0 andkB× 10 K observing the CH2+, CF+and CHF+products, and reported a strong increase belowkB× 1 K.40Okadaet al.reported a decrease of the capture rate constant of the Ca++ CH3F reactions with increasing rotational temperature of CH3F at collision energies down tokB× 30 K.57In a related study, Jankunaset al.have investigated the Penning-ionization reaction between metastable neon and CH3F at low collision energies in a merged-beam apparatus and observed that the branching ratios for the production of the CH3F+, CH3+and CH2F+ions are independent of the collision energy down to aboutkB× 120 mK.58Finally, the fragmentation dynamics of CH3F+following threshold photoionization of CH3F has been characterized in a series of detailed studies using synchrotron radiation and coincidence methods,59–61extending earlier experimental62–66and theoretical67,68studies of the fragmentation dynamics of CH3F+.

The ground states ofortho-H2and -D2are chosen because of the larger populations resulting from the spin-statistical factors. The electric field is generated between two parallel planar electrodes located near the entrance of a curved surface-electrode Rydberg–Stark deflector and accelerator.72This deflector is used to merge the beam of H2(n) [HD(n), D2(n)] Rydberg molecules with the CH3F beam and to precisely set their mean relative velocityv0rel.

The collision-energy dependence of the rate coefficient is measured in the reaction zone, which consists of a Wiley–McLaren-type time-of-flight mass spectrometer with its ion-extraction axis perpendicular to the merged-beam-propagation axis, by monitoring the yield of ionic reaction products as a function ofv0rel. The measurements are carried out under conditions where the CH3F molecule density is much larger than the density of H2(n) [HD(n), D2(n)] molecules and the reaction probability of the H2(n) molecules is less than 1%. Consequently, the relative rate coefficients can be determined by normalising the product-ion signal by the densities of the H2(n) and CH3F molecules. In our experiments, we do not measure absolute but only relative densities and therefore we can only determine relative, not absolute, values of the collision-energy-dependent rate coefficients. The relative densities are extracted from the integrated signal measured with the fast-ionization gauges for the neutral CH3F molecules and from the integrated ion signal in the time-of-flight mass spectrum for H2+(HD+, D2+).

To precisely control the reaction-observation timeτ=t2−t1, we use a sequence of two electric-field pulses (see top-right inset inFig. 1) and only monitor the product ions generated in the field-free interval between the two pulses. The first pulse, with falling edge att1, rejects all ions produced beforet1and the second pulse, with rising edge att2, extracts the product ions formed during the intervalτfor detection. Although the product ions are initially formed within the Rydberg-electron orbit, their internal energy is high so that autoionization takes place rapidly at thenvalues studied (n≈ 30). To ensure that no product ions leave the reaction zone prior to the extraction pulse, we verify that the product-ion yield increases linearly withτ. Under these conditions (τ≤ 15 μs), the slope of the increase of a given product ion withτis directly proportional to the rate coefficient of the corresponding reaction channel. In the case of the HD++ CH3F reaction, a constant (τ-independent) offset of the CH3+product yield was observed, probably caused by a small misalignment of the two molecular beams and leading to the production of CH3+during the ion extraction aftert2.

The mean collision energy 〈Ecoll〉iand its distributionfi(Ecoll) are determined at each experimental cycle (indexi) from (a) time-of-flight and imaging measurements of the three-dimensional velocity distribution of the cloud of deflected H2(n) [HD(n), D2(n)] molecules, and (b) time-of-flight measurements of the longitudinal velocity distribution of the CH3F molecular beam, as detailed in ref.45. Because the size of the Rydberg-molecule cloud in the reaction zone is much smaller (ϕ≈ 1 mm) than that of the CH3F molecule cloud, the distribution of relative velocities between the CH3F and the Rydberg molecules is primarily given by the transverse (x,y) velocity distributionsfx(vRx) andfy(vRy) of the Rydberg molecules and by the distribution of longitudinal (z) relative velocitiesfz(vrelz) at the measured mean forward velocities of the two beams. Indeed, the longitudinal dispersion of the short CH3F gas pulse over the long (0.9 m) propagation distance between the CH3F valve orifice and the reaction zone guarantees that only molecules within a very narrow longitudinal velocity class (∼±15 m s−1) overlap with the Rydberg-molecule cloud during the reaction-observation time. Moreover, the transverse-velocity distribution of the CH3F molecules is limited geometrically by the size of the H2(n) cloud and the skimmers to less than ±4 m s−1at the typical forward velocities of the CH3F beam (∼1200 m s−1).

The different widths of the observed collision-energy distributions for the three reaction systems reflect the different reduced masses, differences in the intersection volumes of the three lasers used to excite H2, HD and D2to the Rydberg–Stark states, and the relative positions of these volumes with respect to the deflector, as well as differences in the dynamics of the molecules in the moving electric traps at the surface of the deflector. In particular, the collision-energy resolution in the experiments involving HD(n) Rydberg states is slightly worse than for the experiments involving H2(n) and D2(n), which we attribute to a less efficient excitation of the HD(n) molecules that made it more difficult to optimize the experimental conditions.

Because our measurements primarily target the low-collision-energy range between 0 andkB× 30 K, the experiments are carried out under conditions where the initial velocities of both supersonic beams are similar (∼1200 m s−1). We operate the valves at a stagnation pressure of ∼3 bar. For the CH3F beam, we use a CH3F : Ne : He mixture with a 1 : 7 : 13 pressure ratio and heat the valve to about 380 K. Under these conditions, the vibrational motion of the CH3F molecules in the supersonic expansion is cooled to the ground state and the rotational motion to a temperatureTrotof ∼5 K (see also Section 3). For the H2(HD, D2) beams, we expand the pure gas and cool the valve to temperatures between 45 and 140 K, depending on the desired final velocity. The collision energy is then adjusted by changing the settings of the surface-electrode deflector to precisely control the mean velocity of the H2(n) [HD(n), D2(n)] beams.

Fig. 3shows a typical ion-time-of-flight (TOF) mass spectrum of the D2++ CH3F reaction system recorded after a reaction-observation time of 15 μs. The experiments are carried out under single-collision conditions and the CH3+, CH2F+and CH3F+products are the only observed products for this reaction system. The remaining ions observed in the TOF spectrum, H2O+and H2DO+, are products of the reaction of D2+with H2O molecules in the background gas. They are also observed when the CH3F valve is either turned off or triggered so that the CH3F gas pulse does not overlap with the D2(n) beam in the reaction zone, whereas the CH3+, CH2F+and CH3F+signals disappear in these cases. The fact that the CH3+, CH2F+and CH3F+peaks are well separated from the other masses enables us to derive the branching ratios for the formation of the different product ions from the integrated signal intensities, as discussed in more detail in Section 3. In experiments in which the magnitudes of the two electric-field pulses were varied, we verified that the product ions are generated by autoionization of the CH3F(n), CH2F(n) or CH3(n) products during the reaction-observation time, releasing the corresponding ions (CH3F+, CH2F+, or CH3+) and an electron.

The relative rate coefficients and product-ion branching ratios obtained from our measurements of the reactions of CH3F with H2+, HD+and D2+are presented in the upper part ofFig. 4. The red dots with error bars represent the total product-ion yield,i.e., the sum of the integrated CH3+, CH2F+and CH3F+ion signals, as a function of the collision energy, which is obtained as the expectation value of the distributions of collision energiesf(Ecoll). Each data point corresponds to the average of a large number of measurements binned according to their collision energy. As explained in Section 2, these ion yields are proportional to the total reaction rate constant. The horizontal error bars represent the standard deviationsEcollof the collision-energy distributionf(Ecoll) as shown inFig. 2and the vertical error bars represent one standard deviation of all measurements contributing to a given data point.

The experimental data are compared with absolute capture rate constantskcapobtained from classical trajectory calculations (blue diamonds, blue dotted line) as discussed in Section 4.3 and using the rotationally adiabatic capture model (black circles and dotted line) outlined in Section 4.2. Unlike the classical trajectory calculations, the adiabatic-capture-model calculations are performed for a quantum Boltzmann population distribution of the rotational states of CH3F at a rotational temperature of 5 K, assuming that noortho-to-paraconversion takes place in the expansion.73The calculated rate constants are averaged over the experimentally determined collision-energy distributionsf(Ecoll) to enable comparison. For the comparison, the experimental product-ion yields were multiplied by a global scaling factor (one for each of the reaction systems involving H2+, HD+and D2+) to minimize the respective sums of squared residual deviations from the calculated capture rate coefficients. In all three reaction systems, an increase of the total product-ion yield is observed as the collision energy is reduced towards zero and the overall trend is well described by the calculations, although the classical trajectory calculations underestimate the increase of the rate constants at low collision energies, as discussed in detail in Section 4.3.

The branching ratios corresponding to the formation of CH3F+, CH2F+and CH3+are displayed in violet, yellow and blue in the lower panels ofFig. 4. These branching ratios were determined from the integrated intensities of the corresponding mass peaks in the ion-time-of-flight spectra, as explained in Section 2. In all three reaction systems, the dominant product ion is CH2F+. The most striking trend in the branching ratios is the decrease of the importance of the CH3+products when H2+(CH3+branching ratio of about 38% atEcoll≈kB× 25 K) is successively deuterated to HD+(29%) and D2+(22%). In the D2++ CH3F reaction system, the CH3+product even becomes as weak as the CH3F+product at collision energies beyondkB× 20 K. The branching ratios also reveal a weak collision-energy dependence, slightly favouring the production of CH3+over the other two product ions at the lowest collision energies. This trend is barely noticeable in the H2++ CH3F reaction system but increases with increasing degree of deuteration. It thus appears that the smaller the CH3+branching ratio is, the more it increases as the collision energy approaches zero.

We discuss in the next section how the competition between electron transfer and F−or H−atom transfer may be invoked to explain the trends observed inFig. 4.

whereηETand (1 −ηET) represent branching ratios for the electron transfer and the short-range reactions, respectively.pCH3+,pCH2F+andpCH3F+are the conditional probabilities that the electron transfer leads to the product ions CH3+, CH2F+and CH3F+, respectively, andandare the conditional probabilities that F−or H−is transferred at short range. CH3F+ions can only be produced by electron transfer so thatand thus.

To estimatepCH3+,pCH2F+andpCH3F+, we model the electron transfer as a sudden, resonant process in which the electron hops from CH3F molecules in their ground vibronic state and attaches toortho-H2+X+ 2Σ+g(v+= 0,N+= 1) (HD+,ortho-D2+X+ 2Σ+g(v+= 0,N+= 0)) molecules to form neutral H2(HD, D2) in the X1Σ+gelectronic ground state without transfer of kinetic energy. In this sudden approximation, which also assumes that the CH3F structure is not strongly perturbed by the ion, the resulting distribution of H2(HD, D2) vibrational levels is given by the Franck–Condon factors |〈v+= 0|v〉|2of the e−+ H2+X+ 2Σ+g(v+= 0) ↔ X1Σ+g(v) transition and the energies transferred to CH3F are given by the corresponding threshold-ionization energiesEI,v+=0←v=hcCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019I,0←vof CH3F, as summarized in the upper part ofTable 1, see alsoFig. 5.

can be determined as the normalised productand is given in the fifth row of the body ofTable 1.

The dissociation energies leading to the fragments CH2F++ H and CH3++ F are 6640(40) cm−1(ref.62,66,74and75) and 15 900(160) cm−1,60,62,74,75respectively, and the corresponding dissociative-ionization thresholds for the formation of CH2F++ H and CH3++ F (at 13.358 eV and 14.51 eV, respectively60) are marked by vertical lines inFig. 5. Below 13.358 eV, the energy is insufficient for the CH3F+ions generated by threshold ionization to fragment. The probabilitypCH3F+for the H2++ CH3F reaction system can thus be estimated by summing thep0←vvalues inTable 1forv= 5 andv= 6 (seeFig. 5; the energy transferred upon production of H2(v> 6) states is insufficient to ionize CH3F). When H2is formed in thev= 2–4 vibrational levels, the product of the electron transfer is mainly CH2F+, with only a very minor contribution from CH3F+(see violet trace inFig. 5). Both CH3+and CH2F+can result from electron-transfer processes forming H2(v= 0, 1). In these cases, their relative importance corresponds to the ratio of the CH3+and CH2F+ion signals in the mass-selected slow-photoelectron spectra of CH3F to the total signal, as measured by Tanget al.60and given in the bottom rows ofTable 1. Summing the probabilitiesfor the production ofj= CH3F+, CH2F+, or CH3+by the electron-transfer mechanism yields the values listed in the first row of the body ofTable 2, where they are compared with thepjvalues predicted for the CH3F + HD+and CH3F + D2+reaction systems. Tables similar toTable 1but for the reactions involving HD+and D2+are provided in the appendix (Tables 5 and 6). This analysis predicts that electron transfer should lead to a dominant CH2F+product, as observed experimentally, and to a close-to-negligible yield of CH3+, which implies that the CH3+ions observed in the ion–molecule reactions are essentially only produced through F−atom transfer.

between the ions (H2+, HD+and D2+, treated as point charges) and CH3F molecules in the rotational states |JKM〉. Ineqn (17),μis the reduced mass of the collision,L2=ħ2l(l+ 1) is the square of the angular momentum of the collision system,Rthe distance between the H2+(HD+, D2+) ion and CH3F,α′ the polarizability volume of CH3F (2.54 Å3)76,77and ΔEJKMStark(R) is the rotational-state-specific Stark shift of the |JKM〉 rotational level of CH3F in the field of the ion. At the low rotational temperature of CH3F in the seeded supersonic beam (∼5 K), only rotational levels withJ≤ 2 andK= 0, 1 are significantly populated. Moreover, because the nuclear-spin symmetry is conserved during the supersonic expansion, the Boltzmann factors of excited rotational levels are given with respect to theJ= 0,K= 0 andJ= 1,K= 1 levels forortho- andpara-CH3F, respectively. AtTrot= 5 K, the most populated levels are the |000〉 (11.3%), |10M〉 (20.7%) and the |1±1M〉 (26.5%) levels. The population of the |20M〉, |2±1M〉 and |2±2M〉 levels are 13.0%, 16.6% and 0.4%, respectively.

The Stark shifts of the CH3F rotational states and the corresponding adiabatic interaction potentials for the He++ CH3F reaction were reported by Zhelyazkovaet al.(see Fig. 3 of ref.40). These interaction potentials are practically identical to those for the D2++ CH3F reaction presented inFig. 7because the two reaction systems have almost the same reduced mass. They are easily adapted to obtain the interaction potentials for the H2++ CH3F and HD++ CH3F system by changing the value of the reduced massμin the first term on the right-hand-side ofeqn (17).

over the populated rotational levels of CH3F, with weightswJKMcorresponding to their quantum Boltzmann occupation probability at a rotational temperatureTrot= 5 K of the CH3F molecules. As explained in ref.40, the rate coefficients at low collision energies are dominated by the contributions of the high-field-seeking rotational states, which are subject to negative Stark shifts (see Fig. 3 of ref.40),e.g., the state |000〉 and theJ≥ 1 states withKM= +J2.

and the rate coefficient for electron transfer iskET=σETvrel. In sets of calculations performed for different values ofR>andR<, we found that neither the width nor the location of the interval have a significant impact on the resulting value ofηET, because the different values ofτJKM(seeeqn (21)) resulting from specific choices ofR>andR<are compensated by the value ofκeffwhenκeffis adjusted to best match the experimental data. For the calculations presented below, we selectedR<= 0.5 nm andR>= 0.7 nm, for which we obtained a value ofκeff= 9.3 × 1012s−1.

The full circles inFig. 6represent the values obtained for the branching ratioηRACMET(Ecoll) determined in this way as a function of the collision energy. In all three reaction systems, the branching ratio decreases with decreasing collision energy. The reason for this behaviour is that, at low collision energies, the reaction rate is dominated by contributions from high-field-seeking states, and in particular |(J= 1, 2)KM〉 states withKM= +J2. The attractive internuclear potential accelerates the particles and reduces the time available for the electron transfer and thus the electron-transfer branching ratio decreases.

To compare the experimentally determined values withηRACMET(Ecoll) resulting fromeqn (23), we follow the same procedure as used for the total rate coefficients in Section 4.2.1 and convoluteηRACMET(Ecoll) with the experimentally determined collision-energy distributionsf(Ecoll). BecausepCH3+is assumed to be zero, as explained in Section 4.1, the conditional probabilities of forming CH3F+and CH2F+upon electron transfer arepCH3F+and (1 −pCH3F+), respectively. To best represent the experimental data usingeqn (14)–(16)we therefore only adjustκeff,pCH3F+and. The results of this analysis are presented inFig. 9below (see Section 4.3.2) and the optimal parameter values are listed inTable 3below.

Fixed to 0 based on the analysis of the electron transfer process presented in Section 4.1.

Fixed to 0 because CH3F+can only be formed by charge transfer.

For comparison with the measured capture rate coefficients, thekclcapvalues calculated at different collision energies were interpolated with a modified Akima method81,82as implemented in MATLAB83and the resulting functionkclcap(Ecoll) was convoluted with the experimentally determined collision-energy distributions, following the same convolution procedure as for the capture rates calculated using the rotationally adiabatic capture model. The results are plotted as blue diamonds in the top panels ofFig. 4. They are in excellent agreement with both the experimental values and the values calculated with the rotationally adiabatic capture model aboveEcoll≈kB× 4 K. In this range, the classical trajectory and the rotationally adiabatic capture model calculations do not only reproduce the observed trend in the capture rate coefficient but they also give the same quantitative absolute values forkcap(Ecoll), which in itself is a remarkable result, given that the classical trajectory simulations do not rely on the assumption of rotationally adiabatic channels. At lower collision energies, however, the classical-trajectory calculations, unlike the rotationally adiabatic capture model, do not reproduce the sharp increase observed experimentally. This difference can unambiguously be attributed to a quantum effect arising from CH3F molecules in |JKM〉 rotational levels withKM= +J2because the diatomic model of CH3F implies that there is no rotational angular momentum along the symmetric-top axis and quantum-statistical effects are disregarded.

To illustrate this point, the top panels ofFig. 7depict the adiabatic interaction potentialsVJKML(R) (seeeqn (17)) of the |JKM〉 states withJ= 0 andJ= 1 for the D2++ CH3F reaction as a function of the ion–molecule separationRforl= 0 (full lines) andl= 70 (dashed lines). The corresponding state-specific rate coefficients calculated based on the rotationally adiabatic capture model are displayed in the bottom panels ofFig. 7, where they are compared with the rates obtained from the classical trajectory calculations (brown dots). The rate coefficients obtained with the two methods agree for theK= 0 case, which is the consequence of representing CH3F as a diatomic molecule in the classical trajectory calculations,i.e., as a molecule with zero angular momentum (K= 0) along the internuclear axis. The interaction potentials and state-specific rate coefficients of the |JKM〉 levels withKM= ±J2, which have a nonzero angular-momentum component along the F–CH3axis, exhibit a very different behaviour, as already pointed out in ref.40. TheKM=+J2(−J2) states are associated with strong attractive (repulsive) potentials (seeFig. 7) and their rate coefficients sharply increase (becomes zero) belowEcoll=kB× 4 K. These states are not represented in the classical trajectory calculations and are responsible for the deviations between the rate coefficients calculated with the two methods belowEcoll=kB× 4 K. This difference would persist even atTrot= 0 because theK= 0 and |K| = 1 rotational levels of CH3F have different nuclear-spin symmetry and represent the absolute ground states ofortho- andpara-CH3F, respectively. The simplifying diatomic description of CH3F in the classical-trajectory simulations is crucial in revealing this effect.

whereh̃(R<,R>,Ecoll) represents the average ofhoverLandκcleffis an effective rate constant that is adjusted to best reproduce the experimental data.Fig. 8depicts theL-averaged histograms corresponding solely to trajectories having led to capture. The grey area in the figure corresponds to the range ofRvalues over which electron transfer was assumed to take place, as in the rotationally-adiabatic-capture-model calculations presented in Section 4.2.2. We verified that the linearisation ofPJKM(L,R<,R>,Ecoll) does not significantly modify the results in equivalent calculations performed using the rotationally adiabatic capture model.

The data presented inFig. 8follow three main trends: (i) the time spent in the different intervals decreases with decreasingRvalue because the CH3F dipole orients toward the charge, which accelerates the motion of the collision partners towards each other. (ii) The time spent by the collision partners in any givenRrange increases with the degree of deuteration, as expected from the increasing value of the reduced mass and hence the propensity to be accelerated. (iii) The increase withRof the time spent in the different intervals is weaker at low collision energies than it is at high collision energies. This effect primarily stems from the fact that, at low collision energies, the dipoles start orienting at larger distances, which reduces the time spent atRvalues larger than 0.3 nm compared to the high-collision-energy situation.

The values of the electron-transfer branching ratioηclETobtained from the classical trajectories after interpolation and convolution with the experimental collision-energy distributions are presented as diamonds inFig. 6, where they can be compared with the corresponding values (dots) determined with the rotationally adiabatic capture model. The electron-transfer branching ratios obtained with both models reveal the same decreasing trend with decreasing collision energies resulting from the dominance, at low collision energies, of contributions from strongly oriented dipoles, as already discussed in Section 4.2.1. The fall of these branching ratios occurs in the range of collision energies where the experimental branching ratios start to change. This region also corresponds to the range where the total rate coefficient increases (seeFig. 4). At the lowest collision energies, theηETvalues calculated with the rotationally adiabatic capture model decrease more rapidly than is the case for the values extracted from the classical trajectory calculations. This difference can be attributed to the contribution of the |JKM〉 states withKM= +J2which are not included in the classical trajectory calculations, as already discussed in Section 4.3.1. Finally, theηclETvalues are overall slightly larger than theηRACMETvalues, and this difference increases with the degree of deuteration.

Fig. 9compares the CH3+, CH2F+and CH3F+branching ratios obtained experimentally (full symbols with error bars) with the branching ratios derived from the rotationally adiabatic capture model (framed stars) and the classical trajectory simulations (framed diamonds), based on the assumption that CH3+is not formed by electron transfer (pCH3+= 0) and that CH3F+can only be formed by electron transfer. Only three parameters were adjusted for each model:pCH3F+,andκeffand their optimal values are listed inTable 3. The value ofκeffreflects the interval (chosen somewhat arbitrarily) to evaluate the charge-transfer branching ratio, as explained in Section 4.2.2.κeffis slightly smaller for the classical trajectory simulations than for the rotationally adiabatic capture model. This difference can be explained by the fact that the contribution of the attractiveKM=J2potentials in the latter case reduces the time spent by the collision in the interval [R<,R>], which needs to be compensated by a higherκeffvalue.

Overall the calculated branching ratios provide a satisfactory description of the observed branching ratios, in particular they qualitatively reproduce the decreasing trend of the CH2F+and CH3F+product branching ratios and the increasing trend of the CH3+branching ratio as the collision energy is reduced below ∼kB× 4 K. However, the trends predicted by the rotationally adiabatic capture model are stronger than observed experimentally, particularly for the D2++ CH3F reaction system, indicating possible shortcomings of the capture model calculations. The predictions based on the classical trajectory simulations are closer to the experimental results. However, we demonstrated above that this better agreement is the result of the neglect, in the classical trajectory simulations, of rotational angular momentum along the symmetric-top axis and is not physical.

The H2+(v+= 0) + CH3F reaction and the corresponding reactions of HD+(v+= 0) and D2+(v+= 0) have been studied at collision energies in the range between 0 andkB× 30 K and a CH3F rotational temperature of ∼5 K, at which only the lowest rotational levels withJ≤ 2 are significantly populated. The measurements focused on the determination of the dependence on the collision energy of the total rate coefficient and the branching ratios for the formation of the different product ions (seeFig. 4). The total rate coefficients of all three reactions were found to increase with decreasing collision energies, particularly belowEcoll≈kB× 4 K. Three product ions were observed: CH3F+, CH2F+and CH3+. The branching ratios for their formation were found to depend on the collision energy and on the degree of deuteration of the molecular-hydrogen ion. The dominant product is CH2F+but its importance decreases with decreasing collision energy and decreasing degree of deuteration. The second most abundant product is CH3+and its branching ratio follows the exact opposite trends: it increases with decreasing collision energy and degree of deuteration. CH3F+is the least abundant product and its branching ratio is only ∼20% and hardly depends on the degree of deuteration and the collision energy.

To interpret these experimental observations, the ion–molecule capture process was modelled by classical trajectory calculations and by using a rotationally adiabatic capture model inspired by the work of Clary32and Troe,34,36as described in detail in ref.40and41. The rotationally adiabatic capture model quantitatively reproduces the observed collision-energy dependence of the total rate coefficient in all three reaction systems and demonstrates that the sharp rate-coefficient increase belowEcoll=kB× 4 K can be attributed to the reactions involving the high-field-seeking rotational states of CH3F withJ= 1,KM= +1 (8.8% of the CH3F population). The classical trajectory calculations were performed for a diatomic-molecule model of CH3F,i.e., with no angular momentum along the symmetric-top axis to highlight quantum-statistical effects and the effect of the high-field-seekingK≥ 1 states by comparison. They quantitatively reproduced the collision-energy dependence of the total rate coefficient down toEcoll=kB× 4 K but failed to account for the sharp rate-coefficient increase observed at the lowest collision energies, thus indirectly confirming the attribution of this increase to CH3F molecules inJ> 0,KM= +J2rotational states made on the basis of the rotationally adiabatic capture model.

All three product ions CH3F+, CH2F+and CH3+can be produced following electron transfer from CH3F to H2+, HD+or D2+. However, modelling the electron transfer as a resonant, sudden process could not explain the observed branching ratios. CH2F+was predicted to be the dominant electron-transfer product, as observed, but the model did not predict any energy dependence of the branching ratios and led to the conclusion that electron transfer hardly produces any CH3+ions at all.

A satisfactory interpretation of the experimentally observed branching ratios and their collision-energy dependence could only be reached by invoking competitive kinetics between an electron-transfer pathway yielding only CH3F+and CH2F+and formation of a short-range complex yielding CH3+(and XF + X, with X = H, D) by F−atom transfer and CH2F+(and XH + X, with X = H, D) by H−atom transfer. The corresponding overall reaction scheme is presented inFig. 10for the H2++ CH3F reaction system with analogous schemes for HD++ CH3F and D2++ CH3F.

Because the total rate coefficient can be quantitatively accounted for by the rotationally adiabatic capture model, the electron transfer must take place at ion–molecule separations smaller than the capture radius (which is on the order of a few nm atEcoll=kB× 4 K). The electron transfer is a nonadiabatic process connecting the potential-energy surface associated with the H2+(v+= 0) + CH3F reactants with that associated with the CH3F++ H2(v) products. Assuming that the electron transfer takes place stochastically with a rateκeffover a selected range of ion–molecule distances, we could explain the dependence of the product-ion branching ratios on the degree of deuteration and on the collision energies. With increasing degree of deuteration, the reduced mass increases and the reactants need more time to reach the short-range complex, thus favouring the longer-range electron-transfer reaction pathway. Similarly, low collision energies favour the reaction of high-field-seeking rotational states of CH3F (J> 0,KM= +J2). These states are associated with strongly attractive ion–molecule interaction potentials and thus with shorter approach times to reach the short-range complex. Consequently, low collision energies favour the F−and H−atom-transfer reactions in a short-range complex.

Based on a simplistic stereodynamical argument, with the C–F bond pointing toward the ion, one would expect the ion–molecule approach at short range to favour the formation of CH3+by F−transfer and to inhibit the formation of CH2F+by H−transfer. However, at short distances, the C–F bond is not expected to exactly point toward the ion but instead to perform a pendular motion with the classical turning points at a nonzero deviation angle from the internuclear axis (see schematic structure in the lower part ofFig. 10), making H−transfer possible, though not as likely as the F−transfer. Considering that at long range the CH3F molecules inJ= 1K= 1 states precess around the collision axis at an angle of 45°, it is reasonable to take this angle as representative of the amplitude of the pendular motion at short range. The angle of the C–H bond,i.e., 109° − 45° = 64° suggests that the H−transfer should be possible, although less likely than the F−transfer (seeFig. 10).

The observed energy-dependent branching ratios could be reproduced semi-quantitatively by fitting only three parameters, the probabilitypCH3F+of forming CH3F+upon electron transfer (∼45%), the probabilityof forming CH3+by short-range F−transfer (∼60%) and an effective rate constantκefffor a charge transfer to occur in the range of internuclear separation between 0.5 and 0.7 nm (9.3 × 1012s−1inTable 3), seeFig. 9. The optimal values of the parameterspCH3F+andare both greater than 50%, which confirms the expectations from the resonant, sudden electron-transfer model and from the stereodynamical argument concerning the orientation of CH3F during the approach towards the short-range complex. A full quantitative understanding of the experimental observations would require a careful treatment of the interactions at short range. In this context, progress has been made recently in the case of the electron-transfer reaction between He+and CH3CN84through the treatment of the short-range nonadiabatic dynamics. Our results are compatible with the results obtained in ref.84in that they show that the approach of the ion and the molecule at low collision energies is restricted to a narrow cone of orientation angles of the symmetric-top axis with respect to the collision axis, and that the charge-transfer rate coefficient can be much smaller than the capture rate coefficient.