Breast cancer (BC) is the most frequently diagnosed cancer worldwide. Both the disease itself and the side effects of its treatments significantly impair the quality of life (QoL) of women with BC. Non-pharmacological therapies (NPTs), including exercise therapies, mindfulness-based interventions, cognitive therapies, acupoint therapies, and other complementary therapies, are increasingly being employed to improve the QoL for women with BC. However, the effects and acceptability of NPTs may vary depending on the treatment phases (intra-treatment and post-treatment) of the women with BC. This systematic review and network meta-analysis aims to compare the effects and acceptability of NPTs among women with BC across different treatment phases.

Relevant randomised controlled trials will be systematically searched in 7 databases, including the Cochrane Library, Embase, PubMed, Web of Science, China National Knowledge Infrastructure, China Biomedical Literature Database, and Wanfang, covering the period from their inception to February 2025. Two researchers will independently assess the risk of bias using the Cochrane Risk of Bias Tool for Randomised Trials 2.0. The network meta-analysis will be conducted using STATA 16.0. The assessments of heterogeneity, inconsistency, publication bias, evidence quality and sensitivity analysis will also be conducted. The subgroup network meta-analysis will be conducted based on the treatment phases of women with BC.

This protocol does not need approval from an ethics committee, as it is conducted based on previous research data. The results will be disseminated via peer-reviewed publications.

The study is in compliance with the recommendations of the Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions and the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis Protocol guidelines.

The overall quality of evidence will be determined by the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development and Evaluation framework for network meta-analysis.

Considering the nature of trials with subjective outcomes and certain non-pharmacological therapies (NPTs), blinding the participants, researchers or outcome assessors may be challenging, which can result in an overestimation of the effectiveness and acceptability of some NPTs.

Although we will use standardised and validated rating scales, the diversity of measurement tools may contribute to heterogeneity in our study, potentially affecting the comparability of results.

This study will include only peer-reviewed publications, excluding unpublished studies and grey literature. While this criterion will ensure the quality of the studies included, it may result in the omission of some relevant research on this topic.

Breast cancer (BC), the most common cancer worldwide, is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths in women and ranks fifth in overall cancer mortality rates.1 2Early detection of cancer and advances in primary cancer treatment, including surgery combined with chemotherapy or radiotherapy, as well as endocrine therapy, have resulted in a growing number of BC survivors.3However, due to the cancer itself and the long-lasting side effects of its treatments, women with BC usually suffer varying degrees of fatigue, depression, anxiety, stress and pain, which can last for months or even years after treatment ends, thereby significantly diminishing their quality of life (QoL).4,6Therefore, developing effective strategies to improve the QoL of women with BC is of paramount importance.

A previous systematic review7found that while pharmacological therapies can improve the QoL of women with BC, their side effects, including drowsiness, sleep difficulties, dry mouth and constipation, should not be underestimated. Therefore, certain non-pharmacological therapies (NPTs), which were suggested to be less prone to cause undesirable side effects,8are attracting increasing research interest and clinical application. Currently, NPTs have been reported to be effective for managing depression, hot flushes and pain-fatigue-sleep disturbance symptom clusters in women with BC.9,11Notably, NPTs not only result in fewer adverse events but also offer a wide range of benefits for women with BC. Therefore, NPTs represent a promising therapeutic option for improving QoL in women with BC.

Based on previous meta-analyses, certain NPTs such as aerobic resistance exercise, yoga, mindfulness-based interventions, traditional Chinese exercise and moxibustion12,17have been reported to improve the QoL of women with BC. Further, current network meta-analyses (NMAs)18,20compared the effects of exercise types on the QoL. Nevertheless, for women with BC who have poor physical conditions, exercise may be difficult to sustain. A previous NMA21compared the effects of various exercise and behavioural interventions on the QoL in BC survivors. However, the scope of interventions included and the sample size were both limited. Consequently, many promising NPTs were not considered in recent NMAs. As a result, it remains unclear which NPTs are the most effective in improving the QoL of women with BC.

Furthermore, women with BC may have different needs and limitations at various stages of treatment, which could result in varying effects and acceptability of NPTs.22For example, for women with BC undergoing primary treatment (such as chemotherapy, radiotherapy or surgery), the side effects of therapy may make it difficult to adhere to certain types of exercise.23Additionally, women with BC who have completed primary treatment may face challenges related to reintegration into society and rebuilding social connections. For these individuals, frequent visits to healthcare facilities may lead to time conflicts.22Therefore, it may be reasonable to conduct subgroup analyses based on the treatment phases of women with BC to determine the effects and acceptability of various NPTs.

In conclusion, the purpose of this systematic review and NMA is to include a relatively comprehensive range of NPTs to evaluate and compare their effects on improving the QoL in women with BC. Additionally, subgroup NMAs will be conducted to determine the effects and acceptability of NPTs for women with BC at different treatment phases.

This systematic review and NMA has been registered with the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (registration number: CRD42023476312). The protocol of this review is in compliance with the guidelines of Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis Protocols (PRISMA-P) (online supplemental Table S1).24The findings of this study will be reported in accordance with the PRISMA-NMA guidelines.25Any amendments to the protocol will be updated in PROSPERO.

Population: Adult women with BC (≥18 years old), regardless of race or country.

other complementary therapies, including massage therapy, music therapy and aromatherapy.

Comparator: Control groups received ‘treat as usual’ (including wait lists and usual care) or other NPTs.

Study design: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) published in Chinese or English will be included.

The exclusion criteria will be as follows: (1) studies including participants with other cancers; (2) studies of NPTs combined with pharmaceutical interventions (except for endocrine therapy for BC); (3) protocols, qualitative studies, duplicates, dissertations, retracted articles, studies without full text or available data.

We will adopt the definition of the treatment phases of women with BC provided by the American Cancer Society and the American Society of Clinical Oncology.27The term ‘intra-treatment period’ refers to the phase encompassing all primary treatments, including surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy and hormone therapy, typically completed within the first year following a BC diagnosis. If hormone therapy was administered alongside other treatments during this initial year, it was classified as part of the intra-treatment phase. Furthermore, treatments provided at the onset of metastasis or cancer recurrence were also categorised as intra-treatment. The ‘post-treatment period’, on the other hand, is defined as the survivorship period following the completion of the aforementioned treatments. This phase includes the continuation of hormone therapy when administered as a routine maintenance regimen after the conclusion of active treatment.

The Cochrane risk of bias tool for randomised trials (version 2, RoB 2)29will be used to assess the methodological quality of the studies included by 2 researchers (TL and DZ) independently. This tool appraises 6 principal components for assessing the quality of a study, including the randomisation process, adherence to the intervention, missing outcome data, outcome measurement, selective reporting and overall risk of bias. Each area is rated as at either a ‘low’, ‘unclear’ or ‘high risk’ of bias. Disagreements will be resolved by the corresponding author (MT).

For pairwise meta-analysis, if more than 2 studies are available for the same NPT, a conventional pairwise meta-analysis will be performed to facilitate direct comparisons utilising STATA 16.0. For data measured on different scales, the standardised mean differences (SMDs) with 95% CIs will be applied. For dichotomous outcomes (acceptability), the ORs with 95% CIs will be used.

We will conduct this NMA using STATA 16.0 under a frequentist framework with a random-effects model to account for potential heterogeneity across the NPTs. Given the potential use of various instruments to measure QoL, we will apply SMDs with 95% CIs to compare the relative effectiveness of the NPTs. The ORs with 95% CIs will be used to assess acceptability. Global consistency will be assessed using the design-by-treatment model, while local consistency will be evaluated through the node-split model. If p>0.05, suggesting no significant inconsistency, the consistency model will be applied; otherwise, the inconsistency model will be used. Additionally, loop inconsistency will be assessed using the loop-specific method, with a 95% CI including 0 indicating no significant loop inconsistency.

A league table will be used to present pairwise comparisons between different NPTs, providing a clear visualisation of their relative effectiveness. To identify the most effective or acceptable interventions, a probability-based ranking will be generated using the surface under the cumulative ranking curve (SUCRA) method. Higher SUCRA values indicate a greater likelihood of the intervention being the most effective or acceptable. An adjusted network funnel plot will be generated to identify publication bias; in the absence of significant publication bias, the funnel plot should be symmetric around the midline. A narrative synthesis will be conducted for eligible RCTs with insufficient data for the NMA or non-imputable data.

Heterogeneity will be tested using Cochran’s Q test and inconsistency index (I2).30When I2>50%, indicating substantial heterogeneity, a random-effects model will be applied. Otherwise, a fixed-effects model will be applied.

It is crucial to evaluate the above-mentioned characteristics of patients and studies included in the NMA, as these factors are regarded as effect modifiers.31In the study, variables such as patient age and cancer stage, as well as intervention types, durations and intensities, will be identified as effect modifiers. It will be assumed that the primary effect modifiers are as comparable as possible across the included studies. The presumed transitivity will be evaluated by comparing the primary effect modifiers of the included studies.

Besides conducting an NMA of all included studies, we will also conduct subgroup NMAs for the different treatment phases (intra-treatment and post-treatment). For pairwise meta-analysis, we will conduct subgroup analyses based on various types of NPTs and treatment phases in women with BC. These subgroup analyses aim to identify whether and how these factors influence the effects and acceptability of NPTs.

Sensitivity analyses will be conducted by excluding studies with a high risk of bias, studies with intervention arms containing fewer than 25 participants, and studies with imputed data. These sensitivity analyses will help examine if these factors have biased the results and assess the robustness and validity of our findings. Furthermore, publication bias will be evaluated by Egger’s test and by assessing the symmetry of the funnel plot.

Patients and the public will not be directly involved in the study.

Currently, BC is the most common cancer worldwide.1The various side effects of cancer and its treatment significantly reduce the QoL in women with BC.4,6There is growing evidence suggesting that NPTs are promising for improving the QoL in women with BC. While some NMAs18,21have compared exercise therapy and behavioural interventions, many promising NPTs have not been included in these studies. Additionally, the acceptability of NPTs among women with BC may vary between different treatment phases. Therefore, this study will conduct an NMA to compare the effects of various NPTs in enhancing the QoL of women with BC. Additionally, subgroup NMAs will be conducted to determine the effects and acceptability of NPTs in women with BC at different treatment phases. The findings of this study will further guide the clinical application and decision-making of NPTs in women with BC.

The authors thank all the editors and reviewers for their support.