Dental implants using digital technologies have become more popular for partial and fully edentulous patients. This in-vitro study aimed to compare the accuracy of one- and two-phase photogrammetry implant impression techniques. Six abutment-level implant analogs (screw-retained abutment diameter 4.6 mm, Straumann) were parallelly attached to the maxillary edentulous model. Scan bodies (CARES® RC Mono, Straumann) were put in place and scanned with an E4 lab scanner. Cylindrical abutments with bars (Dental system, 3Shape) were then designed and exported as a "Reference file". The study samples were divided into two groups, each containing 15 samples; Group I involved placing and capturing all six scan bodies (PIC transfers) using a stereo camera (PIC legacy), and Group II involved recording four anterior PIC transfers using a stereo camera. Following the import of the recorded data, a dental system was used to design cylindrical abutments with bars. Then, PIC transfers were removed, except the first left premolar, and the remaining PIC transfers were placed on the first molar on both sides, and records were made. Finally, the exported files were incorporated into a reverse engineering software program (Geomagic Design X) for comparison through best-fit alignment. It revealed no significant differences in linear, angular, and overall discrepancies between Groups I and Group II. Both groups exhibit discrepancies that are within the prescribed range for well-fitted complete arch implant support prostheses (< 100 µm). The capture protocols of one- and two-phase photogrammetry implant impressions present similar linear, angulation, and overall discrepancies. Both one- and two-phase photogrammetry implant impressions can be used in the complete arch implant support prostheses.

Dental implants have become more popular for partial and fully edentulous patients. Various factors were involved in the long-term prognosis and success rate of dental implants and prostheses, one of which is achieving a passive fit (Katsoulis et al.2017; Lee et al.2008; Rivara et al.2016). However, an exact passive fit requires precise clinical and laboratory procedures. Many researchers agree that absolute precision is extremely difficult (Paniz et al.2013). A reasonably recommended, well-fitted prosthesis varies among the types of restorations on the implant. A single- and multiple-unit implant support prosthesis should have a gap of fewer than 50 µm if possible (Jemt and Lekholm1998; Rivara et al.2016), and a complete arch implant-supported prosthesis should be less than 100 µm (Katsoulis et al.2017).

Photogrammetry is a method of capturing the position of dental implants by recording the geometrical properties and spatial positions of 3D objects from photographic images. It generates detailed maps and 3D models of the objects (Wolf2014). This technology has been used in various professions, including mapping landscapes and buildings in construction work on a large scale, medicine for measuring body parts, and several branches of the dental field on a smaller scale (Ey-Chmielewska et al.2015; Stuani et al.2019; Zotti et al.2022). Photogrammetric technology was introduced in dentistry in 1994 by Jemt and Lie to assess the fitting of superstructure frameworks for dental implants (Lie and Jemt1994). Furthermore, the technique has been used to capture implant positions in partial and complete edentulous cases. However, this impression technique cannot be used in partial edentulous cases with limited edentulous mesiodistal space and not having enough space for the scan body. The technique seems more favorable in long-span partial or fully edentulous cases (Agustin-Panadero et al.2015; Peñarrocha-Oltra et al.2014). Hence, this technology has been widely used in fully edentulous cases (Azevedo et al.2019; Penarrocha-Oltra et al.2017; Sanchez-Monescillo et al.2016,2019; Suarez et al.2018). Recently, various photogrammetry systems and brands have become available in the market with different designs and features (Hussein2023). Various studies comparing the accuracy of this impression technique with other techniques showed diverse outcomes. Some studies showed conventional impression techniques were better than photogrammetry (Revilla-Leon et al.2021), some showed similar results (Bergin et al.2013), and some showed photogrammetry technique was better (Sallorenzo and Gomez-Polo2022).

In the photogrammetry impression technique, capturing implant position requires a clear path of the site from the stereo camera to the object of interest. There should be no obstacles blocking the capture of scan bodies. In cases when implants are blocked by another implant or by the oral structure, the capturing must be done in multiple phases (Agustin-Panadero et al.2015).

Hence, it is important to analyze the accuracy of dental photogrammetry systems, such as comparing them with various impression systems or capturing protocols. The present study compared the accuracy of different capturing protocols between one- and two-phase photogrammetry implant impression techniques. The null hypothesis was that there were no significant differences in linear, angulation, and overall discrepancies between one- and two-phase photogrammetry impression techniques.

The research was done at the Faculty of Dentistry, Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai 90110, Thailand. The maxillary edentulous model was made with gypsum type IV (Atlas, Die stone, Type IV, Pink). Six holes (size 8 mm in diameter) were drilled for an implant analog (screw-retained abutment diameter 4.6 mm, edentulous, straight (Straumann) placement on both sides of the lateral incisor, first premolar, and first molar area. Six implant analogs were then attached parallel to each other in each hole on the maxillary edentulous model (Fig.1). Scan bodies (CARES® RC Mono Scanbody, D 4.1 mm, H 10, PEEK/TAN, Straumann, Basel, Switzerland) were placed and tightened to a maximum of 15 Ncm on each implant analog. The reference model was scanned with an E4 lab scanner (3Shape, Copenhagen, Denmark), and then six cylindrical-shaped abutments were designed and splinted with a round bar. The standard tessellation language (STL) file of reference was exported as a “Reference STL file” (Fig.2). The study samples were divided into two groups, each containing 15 samples; Group I involved placing and capturing all six scan bodies (PIC transfers) using a stereo camera (PIC legacy), and Group II involved recording four anterior PIC transfers using a stereo camera.

Group I: In this group, the protective cap (Protective Cap for Screw-retained Abutment, PEEK/TAN, Straumann, Basel, Switzerland) was affixed and secured with a maximum torque of 15 Ncm on each analog. An E4 lab scanner was used to scan the model and the images were exported as a"Gingival STL file". Then, all six protective caps were removed and replaced with PIC transfers. The model was scanned again with a PIC camera 20 cm away at a 45-degree angle. The PIC camera was mounted on a tripod to ensure the stability of the capturing process. 50 to 60 3D images of each pair of PIC transfers were taken, and the PIC camera software registered the data. After completing the registration process, the scan files were exported as a “One-phase PIC-Transfer STL file.” The “Gingival STL file” and “One-phase PIC-Transfer STL file” were imported into the 3Shape Dental System Software (3Shape, Copenhagen, Denmark). These two files were aligned with the 3-point alignment method, and a round bar was attached to splint each abutment as the reference model. Each abutment and bar design was exported as a “One-phase photogrammetry STL” file. This process was repeated 15 times (Fig.3).

Group II: In this group, PIC transfers were placed on the lateral incisor and first premolar analog in the two-phase photogrammetry impression technique and captured the four abutment positions first. Then, all PIC transfers were removed except the first left premolar as a reference to correlate the file with the second capture. The remaining PIC transfers were subsequently positioned on either side of the first molars and recorded once again. Upon completion, output scans were created as a"Two-phase PIC-Transfer STL file". The procedure for producing the circular bar was reiterated and exported as the"Two-phase photogrammetry STL"file. This procedure was also repeated 15 times (Fig.4).

The “Reference STL file” was imported into the reverse engineering software (Geomagic Design X, 3D Systems, Rock Hill, South Carolina, USA). A plane was established on the upper and lower surfaces of each abutment, subsequently utilizing these two planes to delineate a central plane across the midpoint of each cylindrical abutment. An axis was established from the cylindrical surface of each abutment and utilized the intersections of this axis with the top, middle, and bottom planes as measurement points, totaling 18 points. The bottom point of the abutment was set on the first right molar as the origin point of measurement (X0, Y0, Z0).

The process was repeated to create these planes, axes, and points for each abutment from the imported “one- and two-phase PIC abutment STL file”, except for setting the origin point of measurement. Then, either “one-phase PIC abutment STL file” or"Two-phase photogrammetry STL"sample was aligned with the “Reference STL file” using the best-fit alignment method, using the platform on the bottom of each cylindrical abutment as an alignment area (Fig.5).

Finally, accuracy was determined by calculating the mean discrepancies between the samples and the reference file. All coordinate data of each sample were computed and exported into a spreadsheet (Microsoft Excel, Microsoft Corp., Redmond, Washington, USA). Root mean square (RMS) error of linear (compared to X, Y, and Z axes), angular discrepancies (compared to XZ and YZ angles), and overall discrepancies were calculated (Fig.6). Statistical analysis was performed with SPSS version 29 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Means and standard deviations were computed to generate descriptive statistics. The Shapiro–Wilk test and Mann–Whitney U test (P < 0.05) were used to compare the results.

Table1presents the comparative results of one-phase and two-phase photogrammetry methodologies. The data reveals disparities across multiple dimensions, offering insights into the accuracy and performance of each method relative to the reference model.

The results did not exhibit a regular distribution according to the Shapiro–Wilk test (P < 0.05). Between group I and group II, no substantial differences were observed in any of the measurements.

X-axis Discrepancy: Group I (one-phase) showed the mean discrepancy of 20 µm (± 4), while Group II (two-phase) showed 23 µm (± 8). Although the discrepancy in Group II was slightly higher, the difference was minor and may not be clinically significant. Both methods demonstrated relatively low variability.

Y-axis Discrepancy: Group I exhibited a mean discrepancy of 24 µm (± 13) compared to 22 µm (± 9) for Group II. The discrepancies were close, with Group II showing slightly lower variability.

Z-axis Discrepancy: Group I reported a mean discrepancy of 8 µm (± 5), whereas Group II showed a mean discrepancy of 10 µm (± 5). Both groups had minimal discrepancies, with Group I demonstrating slightly better precision.

YZ Angle: Group I had a mean discrepancy of 0.023 degrees (± 0.011), while Group II showed a mean discrepancy of 0.027 degrees (± 0.014). Both methods performed similarly, with Group II showing marginally better angular accuracy.

ZX Angle: For the ZX angle, Group I recorded a mean discrepancy of 0.033 degrees (± 0.018), and Group II had a mean discrepancy of 0.031 degrees (± 0.01). The discrepancies were close, with Group I performing slightly better in this regard.

The overall discrepancy for Group I was 17 µm (± 10), while Group II was 18 µm (± 9). The overall discrepancies are quite similar, suggesting that both methods offer comparable accuracy in terms of overall measurement.

The data indicates that both the one-phase and two-phase photogrammetry techniques provide high precision with minimal discrepancies. The differences between the two methods are relatively small.

Various implant impression systems include conventional impressions, intraoral scanners, and photogrammetry. The photogrammetric technique has been used in scanning the dental implants from photographic images. It generates detailed maps and 3D models of the objects. The present study compared the accuracy between one-phase and two-phase photogrammetry impression techniques in full-arch implant scans. We found no statistical significance in linear, angular, and overall discrepancies between both protocols; therefore, the null hypothesis was accepted. Similar to previous studies (Bergin et al.2013; Revilla-Leon et al.2021,2023), the Z-axis showed fewer discrepancies than the X and Y axes, which showed that the PIC camera has higher accuracy in capturing the vertical position of PIC transfer than the lateromedial and anteroposterior positions.

Using one reference connecting abutments in a two-phase scan represents the worst-case scenario where all abutments cannot be scanned simultaneously. If the anterior abutments (incisor area) in the first scan were left in place, the second scan of the posterior abutment (molar area) could not be carried out. Revilla-León et al.(Revilla-León et al.2025) recommended selecting the right and most posterior abutment as a reference scan abutment for maximizing the accuracy of the PIC system; however, in their study, scanning was carried out only in one-phase scanning. The author also concluded that the impact of the discrepancy measured was minor and should not be clinically significant.To date, no previous research or recommendation for choosing a reference scan abutment when doing multiple-phase scans was found in the literature review, so selecting the first left premolar as a reference abutment was arbitrary in this scenario setting, which affects the one-phase scanning protocol that choose the same abutment area as the reference scanning abutment.

As in previous studies, a coordinate measurement machine is typically used to measure the physical reference or sample model (Bergin et al.2013; Bratos et al.2018; Revilla-Leon et al.2021,2023; Sallorenzo and Gomez-Polo2022), while other measurement tools, such as a laboratory scanner, have also been employed. After acquiring an STL file of the sample or reference, the file was measured digitally. The present study utilizes an E4 laboratory scanner with 4 µm accuracy, similar to several prior studies using laboratory scanners to capture reference files (Revilla-León et al.2025; Tohme et al.2023). The objective of designing the cylindrical abutment splinted with round bar was not to measure the abutment and bar themselves but to create a similar STL file to assess measurement discrepancies between two different origin of reference model (made from a model with a scan body) and sample model (created from a PIC camera combined with gingival STL file) like in previous study (Sallorenzo and Gomez-Polo2022). The best-fit alignment between the sample and reference files in the reverse engineering software was achieved by utilizing only the bottom platform of each cylindrical abutment instead of the entire model. This approach resembles using only the implant platform as the alignment area, which should minimize alignment errors by excluding other model components, such as the abutment surface and round bar.

Photogrammetry records implant position by generating X, Y, and Z coordinates. However, it does not capture information on soft tissue. A second scan of the soft tissue using an intraoral scanner or a laboratory scan of the stone model is required (Pradíes et al.2014; Sanchez-Monescillo et al.2016,2019). This study used a PIC camera to scan the implant position. The exported STL file only displays groups of protective caps related to the implant position. A lab scan of the model, with a protective cap screwed onto each analog, was performed and used as a gingival file. Then, the protective caps file from the PIC scan was aligned with the protective caps on the gingival file from the model scan and used to design the sample.

Currently, studies assessing factors that may affect the accuracy of the photogrammetry impressions technique are sparse (Penarrocha-Oltra et al.2017; Pradíes et al.2014; Sallorenzo and Gomez-Polo2022). Unlike the intraoral scanner, the photogrammetry acquisition process take place extraorally.Therefore, intraoral factors like blood, saliva, and humidity have less or no effect on accuracy (Hussein2023). The PIC camera also uses an infrared flash to capture the abutments, which should reduce the impact of ambient light conditions (Revilla-Leon et al.2021). A study by Revilla-León et al. (Revilla-León et al.2024) showed that scanning distance influences the trueness of linear and angular discrepancies in photogrammetry scanning. However, the differences observed in linear and angular discrepancies between scanning distances of 20 cm and 35 cm were within 10 μm and 0.02 degrees, respectively, which can be regarded as having low clinical significance given the magnitude of the discrepancies measured. The scanning distance was maintained at 20 cm, as per the manufacturer's recommendation, by positioning the master model consistently for each scan. Both one-phase and two-phase procedures were conducted under identical room conditions throughout the experiment.

Various studies have identified angulation discrepancies as a factor influencing the passive fit of implant impressions (Pozzi et al.2023; Revilla-Leon et al.2021,2023; Revilla-León et al.2024,2025; Sallorenzo and Gomez-Polo2022; Tohme et al.2023). Currently, there is no universally accepted standard for acceptable angulation discrepancies in implant impressions for full-arch fixed prostheses that ensures a passive fit. The literature commonly highlights reducing discrepancies as much as possible instead of specifying a precise degree limit. The overall distribution and volume of discrepancies across all implants are crucial. Research consistently emphasizes that excessive angulation increases stress on the prosthesis and implants, potentially leading to complications like screw loosening, fracture, or even implant failure. In this study, both one-phase and two-phase exhibited quite similar degrees of discrepancy. The YZ and ZX angles showed a relatively low extent, which has less or no effect on the fit of the prostheses. Regarding the passive fit, Katsoulis et al.(Katsoulis et al.2017) proposed a fit and misfit classification that can be used to assess the passive fit of the prosthesis. The acceptable misfit range should be within 50–100 µm for a complete implant support fixed prosthesis. According to this classification, one-phase and two-phase PIC scan discrepancies were within this range. Even though slight differences were presented between these two groups in some aspects of measurements, such differences should not have a significant impact in a clinical setting.

There are some limitations in this research. This study presents results that are limited only to the capturing process of implant position.The capturing process may vary in different clinical scenarios. A one-phase scan should be performed if all abutments can be scanned simultaneously. This will reduce clinical time and might reduce mistakes that can happen when placing and removing scan abutments in a two-phase scan, which can cause the movement of reference abutments if accidentally touched. Also, discrepancies might increase throughout the design and manufacturing process, which can increase the prosthesis's misfit in the following fabrication steps. Further studies should be done using different scanning protocols in multiple phases of the photogrammetry scan, representing different clinical settings, such as the number of implants, angulation, and reference abutments.

Under the limitations of the present study, the capture protocols of one- and two-phase photogrammetry implant impressions present similar linear, angulation, and overall discrepancies. Both one- and two-phase photogrammetry implant impressions can be used in the complete arch implant support prostheses. This technology allows for the capturing of implant positions, resulting in a digital model that enhances the accuracy of implant restorations.

We would like to acknowledge Dr. Pokpong Amornvit and Assoc. Prof. Dr. Chaimongkon Peampring for the guidance and assistance in the completion of this research.