In 2023–2024, measles cases progressively increased in Europe. Multiple outbreaks were reported and viral strains with three-nucleotide mutations potentially compromising diagnostic testing were identified. We analyzed the first cases of measles reported in Lazio (Central Italy) from September 2023 to March 2024, combining molecular characterization and phylogenetic analysis with epidemiological investigation to identify transmission chains and evaluate the sensitivity of PCR tests adopted on circulating viral strains.

We tested samples collected through routine measles and rubella surveillance for IgM, IgG and Real-Time PCR. We sequenced positive samples with higher viral titers using an amplicon-based whole-genome next-generation sequencing (WG-NGS) approach and performed mutational and phylogenetic analysis. Furthermore, we tested the sensitivity of the PCR molecular diagnostic assay adopted in our laboratory to identify the mutated strains.

Of the 39 suspected cases, 28 were confirmed. Endemic cases were 82%; of these, 78% were sporadic at epidemiological investigation. From 21 high-titer samples, we obtained 14 strains belonging to the D8 genotype. Phylogenetic analysis identified four distinct clusters: three associating 50% of sporadic cases, and one confirming the epidemiological investigation. Several mutational patterns were identified, one of which had three nucleotide mutations potentially affecting the diagnostic test. However, our routine diagnostic PCR tests are able to detect mutated strains at different dilutions.

Our results demonstrate that WG-NGS can be used to distinguish transmission chains and identify infection clusters to improve surveillance activity and enable the implementation of more targeted control measures, highlighting the importance of integrated epidemiological and genomic surveillance.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12985-025-02910-8.

Measles is a highly infectious disease caused by the measles virus (MeV). Although a safe and cost-effective vaccine has been available since 1963, measles remains a leading cause of death in young children worldwide. In 2020, the World Health Assembly endorsed the programme to achieve and sustain regional measles and rubella elimination targets [1]. However, during 2024, over 125 000 measles cases were reported in the European Region, doubling the number of cases reported in 2023, and more than half of the reported cases required hospitalization. Furthermore, vaccination rates are declining in most European countries, increasing the risk of new outbreaks. International institutions therefore call on national health systems to strengthen vaccination campaigns, case detection and contact tracing [2].

This situation led to the spread of measles with the consequent identification of distinct outbreaks in various European countries, including Italy [3]. To promptly identify measles cases and interrupt transmission chains, a coordinate and comprehensive approach has been proposed, even in healthcare settings [4].

Whole genome sequencing (WGS) of MeV is not yet widely adopted by the Global Measles and Rubella Laboratory Network (GMRLN) coordinated by the World Health Organization (WHO) [5]. However, recent studies demonstrated that WGS and genome-based phylogenetic analysis could improve standard epidemiological investigations and strengthen public health responses [6]. Furthermore, novel MeV strains harboring three nucleotide (nt) mutations in the 450 nt long C-terminal have recently been detected, resulting in a slight loss of sensitivity of molecular diagnostic tests in Italy and Switzerland [7,8], thus reinforcing the further relevance of this type of surveillance.

In this context, we analyzed the first cases of measles reported in the Lazio Region (central Italy) from September 2023 to March 4, 2024, combining molecular characterization and phylogenetic analysis with epidemiological investigation in order to improve the identification of transmission chains, and evaluated the sensitivity of PCR tests adopted on circulating viral strains.

Between September 1, 2023 and March 4, 2024, 39 cases of suspected measles were tested at the Subnational Reference Laboratory of the measles and rubella surveillance network MoRoNet of the National Institute for Infectious Diseases Lazzaro Spallanzani-IRCCS (RRL-INMI) for specific IgM and IgG in serum samples (Liaison XL®Measles-IgM/IgG, Diasorin spa, Italy). MeV genome amplification was performed in urine/blood samples by real-time (RT) PCR (RealCycler®, Progenie Molecular, Spain) specific for the nucleoprotein gene of the viral genome.

Eleven cases (28.2%) tested negative for IgM and RT-PCR: all tested positive for IgG except one, who was diagnosed with Parvovirus B19 infection.

Twenty-eight cases (71.8%) tested positive for the presence of IgM. All tested positive for the presence of the MeV genome. The epidemic curve is shown in Fig.1.

These 28 cases represent 80% of the cases reported from Lazio to the National Surveillance System with symptom onset in the study period (7 cases were tested and confirmed after 04/03/2024), and 21.1% of the cases confirmed in Italy in the same period (Table1).

There were 23 endemic cases (82.2%), three of which were exposed in other regions of Italy; of the 20 endemic cases acquired in Lazio, two (10%) were epi-linked to a primary case in two outbreaks and 18 were considered sporadic (Table2). Of the 28 cases, one was a health worker and four were teachers, none of whom had been vaccinated despite specific recommendations and the free offer for these categories of workers. Overall, 27 cases were unvaccinated; only one case was vaccinated with 2 doses (the last one in 2015).

Of the 28 positive PCR samples, 21 had higher viral titers, with a cycle threshold (Ct) less than 27. We amplified these samples by multiplexed PCR amplicon [6], and their sequences were obtained by WGS using a Gene Studio S5 Prime Sequencer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Complete genomes were reconstructed by reference-based assembly. We successfully sequenced complete genomes for fourteen out of the 21 selected samples (66.7%).

To explore any statistically significant difference between sequenced and non-sequenced cases, we performed Pearson’s Chi-squared test to compare categorical data, and the Student’s t-test for continuous data. P-value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. The line list of sequenced and non-sequenced cases is shown in Table2, and the comparison of their epidemiological characteristics in Table3.

Sequenced samples showed four different mutational patterns at the site where the reverse primer attaches. Six samples (43%) had all three mutations in the reverse primer attachment site (nt positions: 1307, 1310, and 1313 in referenceNC_001498MeV) reported by Pérez-Rodríguez et al. [7]. Moreover, four samples (29%) had a mutation at nt 1310, three samples (21%) showed a mutation at nt 1316, and only one sample (7%) exhibited no mutation in this region (Fig.2).

We compared the sensitivity of the of the RealCycler Measles virus assay against mutated viral genome using serial dilutions of two positive samples. More in detail, we used for our tests 2 replicates of 10-fold dilutions of one sample with three mutation and another without mismatches (wild type, WT).

We retrieved all complete MeV genomes available on March 1, 2025 from the NCBI Virus Database (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/labs/virus) to perform mutational and phylogenetic analyses. Sequences that appeared phylogenetically distant from INMI sequences were discarded, and, for each phylogenetic group supported by a bootstrap value > 80, we selected one sequence representative for each country and year of collection.

Phylogenetic analysis revealed that all sequenced samples belonged to the D8 genotype. However, the four mutational patterns found at the annealing site were associated with four genomic clusters in the phylogenetic tree (Fig.3). One genomic cluster (A) confirmed the results of the epidemiological investigation (MVs/Rome.ITA/49.23/01, and MVs/Rome.ITA/51.23/02), while 9 sequenced MeV strains associated with genomic clusters B, C and D belonged to endemic cases that, at epidemiological investigation, had been considered sporadic. Two sequences appear to be phylogenetically unrelated to other strains, both from imported cases (from Germany, MVs/Rome.ITA/7.24/05, and from Romania, MVs/Rome.ITA/3.24/14).

Interestingly, the six MeV genomes harboring the three mutations at the reverse primer annealing sites (i.e., MVs/Rome.ITA/49.23/01, MVs/Rome.ITA/51.23/02, MVs/Rome.ITA/7.24/04, MVs/Rome.ITA/9.24/10, MVs/Rome.ITA/9.24/11, MVs/Rome.ITA/3.24/13) were clustered together (bootstrap ≥ 80) and were close to, but well separated from, six whole-genome sequences from samples collected in Russia in 2023. These sequences also harbored the same three mutations. However, the six genomes sequenced at RRL-INMI appear to cluster into three phylogenetic subgroups, one of which, containing the sequences MVs/Rome.ITA/49.23/01 and MVs/Rome.ITA/51.23/02, is associated with the identified epidemiological outbreak.

Additionally, four samples with a mutation at nt 1310 appeared close to other sequences collected in Austria, Russia, and Hungary in 2023 and 2024, while the sample without a mutation at the primer site clustered with a sequence collected in Japan in 2023. Finally, the three samples with a mutation at nt 1316 clustered with complete MeV genomes available from Austria and Hungary.

Furthermore, the measles virus genotype was confirmed based on phylogenetic analyses of the 450 nucleotides encoding the 150 carboxyl-terminal amino acids of the nucleoprotein (N-450). A comparison between the WGS tree and the N-450 tree is shown in FigureS1. The same genomic clusters were identified in both trees, however the WGS tree showed higher bootstrap values among the genetic groups.

Phylogenetic analysis revealed that all sequenced samples belonged to the D8 genotype. Notably, the four mutational patterns identified corresponded to distinct groups on the phylogenetic tree, providing substantial evidence for the likely multiple introductions of MeV in Lazio. By combining molecular and epidemiological investigations, we were able to identify four clusters, associating 12 of the 28 measles cases reported in the study period, and 9 of the 18 sporadic cases. By examining the three clusters previously unidentified during epidemiological investigations, we found that cases in each cluster were spatiotemporally related, and we hypothesize that the cases came into contact randomly in previously unidentified locations, such as public places or other neighbourhood settings frequented by cases. One cluster originated from an imported case from the Czech Republic. Two additional sequenced cases were imported, but no associated sequences were identified among endemic cases; however, since 14 cases could not be sequenced, we cannot exclude that these were involved in other transmission chains.

In July 2017 the Italian government made 10 vaccines, including measles/mumps/rubella (MMR), mandatory for access to schools, following a decline in vaccination coverage between 2013 and 2015 reaching a level as low as 85% for the MMR vaccine, and in the midst of a large measles outbreak [9,10]. Of the 28 cases, two fell within the age group requiring mandatory vaccination, but only one was fully vaccinated; the remaining cases were adults. In Lazio, by the end of 2024, the highest incidence of measles was observed in the 15–39 age group (80.7 per million inhabitants, more than double the national average of 38.2), followed by the 40–64 age group (24 per million inhabitants, against the national average of 12) [11]. An ad hoc analysis of regional vaccination coverage performed in March 2024 to estimate the susceptible population of Lazio, following the age distribution of cases, found that 77.8% of the population in the 20–50 age group was not vaccinated. Supplementary immunization activities have therefore been implemented at the regional level, targeting this age group.

Concerns about the increase in measles cases in Europe [2] and the contemporary alarm of a new MeV variant impacting molecular diagnostics [7,8], highlight the need to characterize circulating strains and evaluate the potential of this variant to hinder laboratory diagnostics.

WGS analysis revealed that samples sequenced at RRL-INMI were characterized by four different mutational patterns at the reverse primer annealing site, one of which had previously been associated with a slight impact on molecular diagnostics [7,8]. The appropriateness of the molecular diagnostic test used at RRL-INMI to detect the currently circulating MeV strain was assessed, and we found no reduction in sensitivity between the mutated and WT strains: both triple-mutated and WT samples were detected up to in 2/2 (100%) replicates down to a 10− 4dilution equal to 36 Ct. More recently, Beck et al. designed and tested a new mixed reverse primer strategy able to rescue the sensitivity of CDC assay [12]. Nonetheless, monitoring of variants remains important to continuously update molecular diagnostics.

The present work has some limitations, firstly that the diagnostic procedures and the sensitivity tests presented in this study are based on a commercial assay, so primers and probes sequences are not available, and cannot be checked for primer mismatch. However, the RealCycler assay is widely used by many Subnational Reference Laboratories of the measles and rubella surveillance network MoRoNet (10.1136/sextrans-ICAR-2024.177). Moreover, the relatively small number of whole genome sequences obtained in this study limits the strength of phylogenetic conclusions. Anyway, the measles virus genotype of all positive samples was confirmed based on phylogenetic analyses of N-450. A comparison between the WGS tree and the N450 tree confirmed the genomic clusters identified in the WGS tree; however, the added value of WGS may be that of elucidating specific chains of transmission previously undetected, to support both the accuracy of epidemiological investigation and the implementation of additional measures to control the spread of measles. Moreover, through the integration of WGS and molecular characterization, we were able to rule out the existence of other circulating variants with mutations that could potentially affect the efficacy of existing assays.

The key role of WGS in improving public health response, especially where measles is close to elimination, has already been demonstrated [13]. When several genetic variants co-circulate simultaneously in the same geographical area, WGS and molecular characterization can be critical to discriminate transmission chains and associate sporadic cases in a single outbreak to enable the implementation of more targeted control measures and achieve WHO Indicators on the quality of measles surveillance [2]. Given the short time needed to perform WGS from the identification of the MeV genome in a sample, molecular epidemiology could effectively complement classical epidemiology, especially at the beginning of a new increase in cases.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

We gratefully acknowledge all data contributors and their originating laboratories responsible for obtaining the specimens analysed in the present work.