Nipple-sparing mastectomy (NSM) has been increasingly used therapeutically for breast cancer patients in whom the nipple-areolar complex is not involved, being associated with better esthetic results and QOL than skin-sparing mastectomy. Robotic nipple-sparing mastectomies (R-NSM) using da Vinci SP surgical system (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) with immediate breast reconstruction (IBR) has been reported as a suitable surgical treatment for early breast cancers. We present a patient who underwent R-NSM and IBR, with excellent results. To our knowledge, this is the 1st reported case of R-NSM and IBR using the da Vinci SP surgical system in Japan.

We performed R-NSM for a 41-year-old Japanese woman with cTisN0M0 breast cancer. NSM and IBR to place a tissue expander (TE) into the post-pectoral pocket were performed using the da Vinci SP surgical system with the double bipolar method.

This is the 1st reported case of R-NSM using da Vinci SP surgical system in Japan.

The recently released da Vinci SP surgical system (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) is a true single-port platform with all instruments entering one single port.1,2)We present a patient who underwent robotic nipple-sparing mastectomy (R-NSM) and immediate breast reconstruction (IBR), with excellent results. To date, there have been only a few reports worldwide on R-NSM using the da Vinci SP system, and none have been reported in Japan.1,3–6)This is the 1st reported case of R-NSM and IBR using the da Vinci SP surgical system in Japan.

A 41-year-old Japanese woman noticed a breast mass located in the inner-upper quadrant area of the left breast. Preoperative imaging investigations included mammography breast ultrasound imaging, breast MRI, CT, and FDG-PET (Fig. 1). She was diagnosed with TisN0M0 Stage 0 breast cancer based on the TNM classification. On a genetic test, no mutations were detected in BRCA1/2. She was slim and her breasts were non-ptotic (Fig. 2). The patient’s height was 155.5 cm, weight was 45.3 kg, and BMI was calculated to be 18.7. She had no history of drinking or smoking. We planned R-NSMs to be performed by a surgical team (Y.K., M.H., and I.U.), and IBR by a plastic surgery team (Y.I. and H.N.). Informed consent was obtained from the patient for R-NSM and IBR, involving the insertion of tissue expander (TE) under the major pectoral muscle. Our institutional ethical committee approved of the R-NSM procedures. Written informed consent was also obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report.

After superficial dissection, peripheral dissection along with the blue dye proceeded from the lateral to an inner area of the breast. We resected 141 g of breast tissue without extending the 35-mm primary incision (Fig. 3).

A pectoral pocket to insert the TE was prepared by direct and robotic approaches. The outer and cranial parts of the pocket including the pectoral major muscle and a part of the anterior serratus muscle were elevated by direct vision, and the lower and inner parts of the post-pectoral area were elevated by a robotic approach. We inserted a 300-cc TE according to the resected tissue size. After the insertion of TE, two drainage systems were inserted in the pre- and post-pectoral areas, respectively (Fig. 4).

The oncological time was 178 min, the console time was 66 min, and the reconstructive time was 74 min. The amount of intra-operating bleeding was 33 cc. The length of hospital stay after R-NSM was 9 days.

There was no postoperative complication due to either R-NSM or the reconstruction procedure. The surgical scar was inconspicuous, and the cosmetic result was excellent (Fig. 5).

During the 7 months after R-NSM, a total of 200 mL of normal saline was injected. Delayed breast reconstruction was performed, exchanging from TE to a silicon breast implant (SBI) (165 cc).

The consensus statement on robotic mastectomy referred to the indications, contraindications, technical considerations, patient counseling, outcome measures, indicators, and training and learning curve assessment.18)According to this statement, we selected this case to be indicative for a 1st case performed in R-NSM; patients’ indications included breast size, breast shape, and nipple position; oncological indications were DCIS, spread of intraductal component, and no cancer involvement of nipple and lymph node.

The 1st description of R-NSM with the da Vinci SP surgical system was reported by Joo et al. in 2022. They concluded that da Vinci SP was the most appropriate platform for carrying out mastectomy and breast reconstruction through a small single incision.3)In our case, we dissected breast tissue from the major pectoral muscle by direct vision, and then dissected using a robotic procedure. Subsequently, we dissected breast tissue from the skin with non-robotic scissors followed by robotic dissection to avoid skin injury via a 3.5-cm skin incision on the mid-axillary line. As a result, we could avoid skin injury and preserve good flow to the nipple.

In this case, we introduced double bipolar method previously reported by Katsuno et al. for robotic total mesorectal excision in patients with rectal cancer. They concluded that the double bipolar method was more useful than the single bipolar method, in which a pair of monopolar curved scissors were used.7)In the previous reports referring R-NSM for breast cancer patients, no discussion about the instruments to undermine breast tissue from the skin and the major pectoral muscle exists. Although the use of the double bipolar method for R-NSM has not been reported, we introduced this method for our 1st case. We undermined the breast tissue from the skin and the major pectoral muscle, and made a subpectoral pocket for insertion of TE without any injury. We were convinced that the double bipolar method should be useful for R-NSM as well as for robotic surgery of gastrointestinal tissue.

As of the end of 2024, R-NSM has yet to be covered by insurance in Japan. While robotic-assisted surgeries are becoming more widely used in other medical fields, their application to breast cancer surgery remains limited in terms of indications and insurance coverage. Regarding the da Vinci surgical system, although certain components have received regulatory approval, it has not yet become a standard treatment option for breast reconstruction or breast cancer surgery. Challenges such as high implementation costs, the need for surgeons to develop expertise, accumulation of clinical evidence, and adjustments to the insurance system are factors contributing to this situation. In the future, with further accumulation of evidence and potential reforms in the healthcare system, robotic-assisted surgeries may see broader applications in breast cancer treatment. Continued attention to developments in this area is essential.

We successfully performed Japan’s 1st NSM and IBR using the da Vinci SP system. This could become a popular surgical option for early breast cancer patients.

All authors were involved in performing this clinical procedure.

Y.K., M.H., I.U., H.N., and Y.I performed surgery.

K.S., Y.N., R.K., and N.H. contributed to postoperative procedures and researched the previous published articles.

All authors have reviewed and approved the manuscript submission.

The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Fujita Health University Hospital (23-14), and the patient provided their written informed consent for inclusion in this study.