A 77-year-old man was admitted for catheter ablation due to frequent premature ventricular complexes (PVCs). Activation mapping revealed that the earliest ventricular activation during the PVC was recorded on the left upper septum, where a clear His bundle electrogram was recorded during sinus rhythm. Radiofrequency ablation was performed with step-wise incremental application of the radio frequency energy. AV block was observed twice during RF ablation and disappeared within 5 s after stopping energy application each time. As he exhibited normal atrioventricular conduction, the patient was discharged home the following day. Five days after discharge, he experienced recurrent syncope, with ECG showing complete heart block. Although continuous telemetric echocardiogram monitoring revealed resolution of the complete atrioventricular block after 8 days, it recurred 5 days after. Follow-up evaluation of the pacemaker revealed persistent atrioventricular block at 3 and 6 months.

Radiofrequency (RF) catheter ablation is a well-established treatment option for symptomatic premature ventricular complexes (PVCs) [1]. However, ablation near the atrioventricular (AV) conduction pathway may lead to transient or persistent AV block. Delayed recurrence of complete AV block has been reported in patients who underwent RF ablation of AV nodal reentry, posteroseptal accessory pathway, and ventricular tachycardia [2–4]. We herein report a case of delayed complete AV block following ablation of left para-Hisian PVCs.

A 77-year-old man was admitted for catheter ablation of frequent PVCs because of a 3-year history of palpitations. A total of 15,040 PVCs were detected using 24-h Holter monitoring. He was treated with propafenone and beta blockade, which had no effect. He had a history of coronary heart disease and percutaneous coronary intervention 2 years ago. He denied a history of myocardial infarction. His laboratory data were unremarkable. Echocardiography performed during hospitalization revealed normal cardiac dimensions and function. PVCs presented with a left bundle branch block and normal axis morphology with a precordial R-wave transition atV2 on a 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) (Fig.1).

Mapping was performed using a three-dimensional mapping system (EnSite Velocity,St. Jude Medical, StPaul, MN, USA) and a contact force ablation catheter (TactiCath Quartz, St. JudeMedical). Activation mapping of the right ventricle revealed that the earliest PVC occurred at the His bundle region where a ventricular electrogram preceding the QRS by 0 ms was recorded on the bipolar recording. Left ventricular endocardial mapping was performed via the retrograde aortic approach. The earliest ventricular activation with an activation time of − 26 ms during the PVC was recorded on the left upper septum, where a clear His bundle electrogram was recorded during sinus rhythm (Fig.2). RF ablation (5–25 W, flow of 17 mL/min, and temperature control mode at 43 °C) was performed in this region with a step-wise incremental application of the RF energy. The RF energy application was terminated when junctional ectopy with short cycle length, prolongation of the AV interval, or AV block was observed. AV block was observed twice during RF ablation and disappeared within 5 s after stopping energy application each time. Although the PVCs could be transiently inhibited, they could not be eliminated. After delivering RF energy 9 times for 301 s, the procedure was aborted, considering the risk of AV conduction impairment. The patient was monitored after the procedure via continuous telemetric ECG recording and continued to have normal AV conduction. The patient was discharged home the following day on metoprolol succinate sustained-release tablet at 23.75 mg once daily.

The patient experienced recurrent syncope on the morning of the 5thday after discharge (6 days after ablation). ECG in the emergency room revealed complete AV block with intermittent loss of escape rhythms (Fig.3). A temporary transvenous cardiac pacemaker was inserted, and metoprolol succinate was immediately discontinued. Dexamethasone 10 mg once daily was intravenously administered for the first 3 days. The complete AV block lasted for 8 days but was resolved with normal PR interval on the 9th day (15 days after ablation), which was confirmed via continuous telemetric ECG monitoring. However, on the 5thday after the recovery of AV conduction (22 days after ablation), complete AV block recurred. A permanent dual chamber pacemaker was implanted on the 27th day after ablation due to persistent third-degree AV block. Interrogation of the pacemaker and ECG revealed persistent AV block at 3 and 6 months of follow-up.

This study describes a case of delayed recurrence of complete AV block following ablation for PVCs. The earliest ventricular activation during PVC was recorded with a delayed His bundle electrogram on the left upper septum. The timing of the onset of the bipolar and unipolar QS electrograms was identical (Fig.2). These findings suggested that the PVCs originated from the ordinary endocardial myocardium surrounding the His bundle region. Ablation in this area caused delayed recurrence of complete AV block. However, the relationship between the patient’s history and the PVC’s that were ablated is unclear, owing to the fact that the occurrence of PVC’s was one year before the PCI procedure and we did not find any area of low voltage in the left ventricle mapping. Thus, the etiology of the PVC’s may be idiopathic.

Fenelon et al. reported patients who developed late complete AV block after RF ablation of atrioventricular node reentrant tachycardia. Transient complete AV block during radiofrequency ablation was associated with late complete AV block. However, the duration of the AV block during the procedure did not predict the development of a delayed AV block [5]. Left-sided RF ablation is more likely to cause His bundle damage than a right-sided procedure while also promoting an unstable escape rhythm due to a more distal-part injury of the AVN–His bundle pathway [6]. Therefore, those who experience transient AV block during RF ablation in the left-sided His bundle region, as with the current patient, should be carefully observed via continuous postprocedural ECG telemetry for more than 1 week. In addition, corticosteroids might be more useful if administered immediately when transient AV block is observed during the procedure.

Delayed effects on AV conduction are probably associated with the development of inflammation and/or edema around the direct lesion caused by RF energy. The administration of corticosteroids may be effective in this situation [7,8]. However, RF ablation can also cause reduced flow in coronary arteries beyond the borders of the acute lesion because of microvascular endothelial cell injury, resulting in the delayed effects of RF ablation [9]. Implantation of a permanent pacemaker is necessary for some patients with delayed AV block [2]. In addition, activation mappings and ablation of VA arises from left upper septum are challenging because the site is difficult to retain the position of the ablation catheter. A HD Grid mapping catheter could be placed stable in this region and permit acquisition different bipoles (across and along) covering a wide area to precisely locate the site of origin of the PVCs [10]. Irrigated tip catheters create deeper lesions because of cooling of the tip which has more potential for injury to the conduction system. reducing the flow rate of saline perfusion may help to narrow the depth of injury. Due to the risk of injury to the conduction system, cryoablation could be considered as an alternative to RF ablation in this case.[11] While we acknowledge that cryoablation would have been preferable for minimizing conduction system injury, it was unavailable at our center during this procedure.

A transseptal approach with a steerable sheath (i.e., Agilis Nxt Steerable Introducer, Abbott) should work for both mappings and RF applications. Ouyang et al. [12] reported the utility of the transeptal approach via a non-steerable Swartz sheath for mapping and ablating LV outflow tract PVCs. Chen et al. [13] reported the feasibility of the transeptal approach via a steerable sheath for aneurysm-related ventricular tachycardia. Although the patient exhibited normal AV conduction post-procedure, a more cautious approach would have involved prolonged monitoring (> 48 h) and immediate discontinuation of beta-blockers.

We would like to thank our patient’s family for allowing us to present this case and for photographs to be used.

YZ and XYD contributed to manuscript writing; XMH contributed to manuscript revision and data review. All authors have read and approved the manuscript.

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.