Prototheca(Chlorophyta: Trebouxiophyceae) is a genus of non-photosynthetic microalgae that causes increasingly frequent infections in both humans and animals, collectively referred to as protothecosis The genetic landscape of theProtothecaalgae has remained largely uncharted until recent advances in sequencing and genomics. In this study, a combination of Illumina and Oxford Nanopore technologies was employed for sequencing of 18 mitochondrial genomes, representing all currently recognizedProtothecaspecies.

The genomes differed in terms of size and GC content, ranging from 38 kbp to 68 kbp and from 25 to 30%, respectively. The gene content and gene order within the mitochondrial DNA exhibited specific characteristics. The gene content was conserved but showed variable number of hypothetical proteins and a clustering tendency fornadgenes. Noteworthy, most genes were located on the clockwise strand, with type I introns, containing long open reading frames encoding homing endonucleases, suggesting a mechanism for intron mobility and genome plasticity. Comparative genomic analyses and phylogenetic classification across the 21 core genes showed a close relationship between the mitochondrial genomes, as evidenced by average nucleotide identity (ANI) and average amino acid identity (AAI), supportive for the currentcytbgene-based taxonomy. The phylogenetic tree constructed from concatenated alignments of the core genes confirmed the presence of three distinctProtothecaclades, indicating the polyphyletic nature of the genus.

In conclusion, this work provides another important step toward elucidating the genetics ofProtothecaalgae, serving as a framework for future studies on the phylogeny and evolution of these peculiar microorganisms.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12864-025-11952-9.

In the entire green plant lineage (Viridiplantae), standing at about 400,000 species [1], unicellular, achlorophyllous microalgae of thePrototheca(Trebouxiophyceae, Chlorophyta) genus are unique in having been repeatedly implicated in the causation of diseases in both humans and animals, collectively referred to as protothecosis. Human protothecosis, whose rising incidence has now been an emerging trend, affects mainly patients with underlying immunosuppression and may have various clinical manifestations, the most severe of which is disseminated infection, with limited treatment options, poor prognosis, and a high mortality rate [2,3]. In animals, the most prevalent form ofProtothecadisease is bovine mastitis, a globally recognized problem that leads to a significant drop in milk production and heavy economic losses to the dairy industry [4,5]. Of 18 thus far describedProtothecaspecies, six (P. bovis,P. blaschkeae,P. ciferrii,P. cutis,P. miyajii, andP. wickerhamii) are pathogenic to either animals or humans [6,7]. TheProtothecaalgae and protothecosis have been much neglected areas of research. However, recent interest in this genus has increased due to their growing significance in clinical and epidemiological contexts. Therefore, over the past two decades, significant progress has been made in understanding the biology and genetic composition ofProtothecaalgae. The early molecular studies onProtothecaspp. focused on their rRNA clusters and substantially contributed towards resolving the phylogenetic and taxonomic position of theProtothecagenus [8–11]. Compelling evidence for a close phylogenetic relationship betweenProtothecaand green algae was provided by studies investigating mitochondrial DNA. Early phylogenies targeting mitochondrially encoded rRNA (mt-rRNA) genes including those for the small and large subunit of the ribosomal RNA (SSU and LSU rRNA), as well as the gene for the subunit I of the cytochrome oxidase (coxI) showed a conspicuous affiliation of theProtothecamitochondrial genome with that of higher plants [12–14]. These observations were further confirmed by the phylogenetic analysis inferred from the mitochondrialcytbgene, coding for cytochrome b, a component of the respiratory chain bc1 complex [7]. Thecytbgene has demonstrated a high discriminatory power for theProtothecagenus, making it an efficient phylogenetic and diagnostic marker for these algae [12]. It is thecytbgene that the present classification system of theProtothecaalgae has been built upon [6,7,12].

An important step forward in disclosing phylogeny and evolution of theProtothecaclade was made with the introduction of new-generation sequencing (NGS) technology, which allowed to assess the genetic landscape of the algae at the whole-genome level. Genome-wide sequencing ofProtothecais still in its infancy, with merely a few attempts made so far, for fiveProtothecaspecies [13–20]. The organellar genomes have most often been studied along with nuclear genomes [14–18]. Although the first protothecal genome to be sequenced, as early as in the mid-1990s, was mtDNA ofP. wickerhamii[21] (or in factP. xanthoriae– [14]), only six more mitochondrial genomes representing fourProtothecaspecies (single strains ofP. bovis,P. ciferrii,P. stagnora, and three strains ofP. wickerhamii) have been reported since then [14–16,18]. In contrast, plastid genomes have been studied more frequently, mainly to gain a better understanding of their evolution in non-photosynthetic lineages and to determine whether photosynthesis was lost once or several times within the genus [14,17,22]. Although the plastid genomes are eroded, a core set of genes present in all plastid genomes enabled the reconstruction of the phylogeny of the genus and pointed to its polyphyly [22]. The purpose of this study was to perform an extensive parallel sequencing of mitochondrial genomes of allProtothecaspecies currently accepted, using the same sequencing and analytical pipelines. Such an approach minimized technical biases, facilitated interspecies comparisons, and enhanced the reliability of data collected. In undertaking this work, we sought to provide more insights into the genetic diversity ofProtothecaalgae to better resolve their interspecies phylogenetic relationships, and thereby to either support or revise thecytbgene-basedProtothecataxonomy.

The 18 selectedProtothecasp. strains used in this study (Table1) were stored in Viabank™ cryogenic vials (Medical Wire & Equipment Co Ltd., UK), at − 70 °C and were revived by streaking a loopful (10 µL) of the frozen culture on Yeast Peptone Dextrose (YPD) (Difco, USA) agar plates. Cultures were maintained aerobically at 37 °C for 72 h. Cells of each strain were picked from a single colony and grown in a 100 mL volume of YPD broth under the same conditions, yet with shaking (200 rpm) until the optical density at A600 reached ca. 5.0 (ca. 6.5 × 105CFU).

Genomic DNA (gDNA) was isolated as described before [23] with a method based on three-pronged approach for whole cell lysis, i.e. mechanical (glass bead pulverization and grinding in liquid nitrogen using mortar), surfactant-based (Triton-X100, SDS, and CTAB treatment), and enzymatic (Proteinase K treatment) disruption methods. DNA integrity was analyzed by 0.8% agarose gel electrophoresis and by capillary PFGE using gDNA 165 kb kit and FemtoPulse instrument (Agilent, USA).

In total, 16 of 18Protothecagenomes were sequenced using a combination of Illumina (Illumina Inc., USA) and Oxford Nanopore (Oxford Nanopore, UK) technologies. The genome ofP. moriformiswas sequenced by means of Illumina sequencing. TheP. wickerhamiigenome was sequenced using a combination of Illumina (Illumina, USA) and PacBio (Pacific Biosciences, USA) technologies, essentially as described elsewhere [13]. The Illumina pair-end sequencing libraries construction was performed with 500 ng of input DNA extract and the NEB Ultra II FS reagents (New England Biolabs, USA), according to manufacturer’s instructions. The libraries were pooled and sequenced on a NextSeq 550 instrument (Illumina, USA) using 300-cycle chemistry kit. The long-read libraries were constructed using approximately 10 µg of gDNA that was first size-selected using the BluePippin apparatus and High Pass Plus cassettes (Sage Science, USA) with a minimum cutoff of 10 kb. During ONT library construction, samples were indexed with the native barcoding expansion kit (EXP-NBD103). Long read sequencing was conducted with R 9.4.1 flowcells using MinION and GridION instruments (Oxford Nanopore Technologies, UK).

Illumina sequence quality metrics [14–18] were initially assessed using FASTQC and quality trimmed using fastp [24]. Raw nanopore data were basecalled using Guppy v6.1.3 in super accuracy mode (Oxford Nanopore Technologies, UK) and quality checked using NanoPlot v1.41.6 [25]. The assemblies were performed using Canu v2.1.1 [26] and Flye v2.9.2 [27].

Nucleotide sequence data including annotation for all 18Protothecamt genomes were submitted to the GenBank/EBI/DDBJ database and are retrievable under the Bioproject No. PRJEB82245. In addition, the data have been deposited in Zenodo and are available at 10.5281/zenodo.16410224.

Based on the ‘Contig length versus Read count’ analysis [28–30] the mitochondrial (mt) genomes of allProtothecastrains were identified as one contig in the corresponding assembled data set. Gene prediction and functional annotation was performed by MFannot [31] using gene code 16 for chlorophyte algae. Gene prediction and annotation results were manually curated, as described elsewhere [32].

The mt genomes of theProtothecastrains and their closest available relatives (Table2) were used for comparative genomic and phylogenetic analysis. Comparative genomics was accomplished using a modified version of the program EDGAR 3.2 designed to handle multi-exon genes [33–35]. The analyses included identification of orthologous genes, classification of genes as core genes or singletons and visualization of Venn diagrams. In addition, average nucleotide identity (ANI) [36] and average amino acid identity (AAI) [37] analyses were performed to determine the relationship between different species. Synteny analysis was performed by applying EasyFig [38] and BLASTn [39].

We conducted phylogenetic analyses on the 21 core annotated mitochondrial genes (Table S2, genes marked in green) from the 18Protothecastrains (Table1). The core genes were identified by EDGAR, relying on the Blast Score Ratio (BSR) values. BSR helps to determine sequence similarity and is used to identify orthologous genes, ensuring that only highly conserved genes are included in the core genome. By using specific BSR thresholds, EDGAR can accurately determine which genes are present across all genomes studied.

We further complemented the dataset with information fromAuxenochlorella protothecoidesandHelicosporidiumsp. DifferentChlorellaspecies andMarvania geminatawere selected as the outgroup for the phylogenies (Table2). Individual alignments with amino acid sequences from all the species were constructed using MUSCLE [40] with default settings for each of the 21 genes. The original alignments are accessible through doi: 10.6084/m9.figshare.29328425. Alignments were automatically trimmed with trimAl v1.5.0 [41] using a heuristic selection of the positions with the option -automated1, which considers the average identity score (i) among all the sequences, (ii) for each most similar pair of sequences, and (iii) the number of sequences in the alignment. Maximum likelihood phylogenetic trees were inferred for every single-gene alignment with IQ-TREE 2.0 [42], selecting best-fitting substitution models with ModelFinder [43] under the Bayesian information criterion, and 1000 ultrafast bootstrap replicates [44]. Since no incongruences among the single-gene phylogenies were detected, we constructed a concatenated alignment comprising 5,277 positions. The concatenated dataset did not show differences when considering potential partition schemes among the genes, so we considered mitochondrial genomes as single-evolving units and constructed the final maximum likelihood phylogeny as previously stated, under the model LG + F + R4, with 500 non-parametric bootstrap replicates (Fig. 2). Because the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene (cytb) is often employed to differentiateProtothecaspecies as barcode region [12] we additionally inferred the single-gene phylogeny of this gene following the same procedure under the model mtZOA + I + R3, and considering 1000 non-parametric bootstrap replicates (Supplementary Fig. 1).

The genome sequencing ofProtothecaspecies was part of an extensive project focused on 18 different strains, includingP. moriformis, which was sequenced exclusively via Illumina technology. For the remaining 17 species, third-generation sequencing technologies, such as Oxford Nanopore and PacBio were employed, complemented by second-generation Illumina sequencing. For 18Protothecaspecies (type strains) under the study, the number of reads obtained by Nanopore sequencing ranged from 72,339 to 438,974 with an average read count of 159,546, while the N50 read length was 14,445 bp (5,547–21,755 bp). For more details, see Table S1. Assemblies polished by Illumina short reads were screened by “Contig length vs. Read Count Analyses” [28–30] revealing that allProtothecamt genomes were identified as single circular contigs in the assembled data set.

The complete mt genome sequences ranged in their size from 38 kbp (P. ciferrii) to 68 kbp (P. miyajii). Interestingly, the main reason for the larger sizes of theProtothecamt genomes related to the presence of non-conserved hypothetical ORFs and numerous introns in areas without core genes, explained in detail in the next chapter (Fig.1). Furthermore, when compared to related species, the mt genome sizes were generally similar, except forChlorella vulgaris, whose mt genomes reached a size of up to 100 kbp (Table2). The GC content of theProtothecamt genomes ranged from 25 to 30%, which is comparable to mt genomes ofChlorella,Auxenochlorella,MarvaniaandHelicosporidium. The highest GC ratio in mitogenomes can be found in green algae. For example, the mtDNA ofChlamydomonas reinhardtiihas a GC content of 57% [45].

The features of the protothecal mt genomes, including genome size, GC content, and number of annotated genes are detailed in Table3. On average,Protothecamt genomes contained 38 protein-coding sequences. In general, all mt genomes contained genes encoding 26 transfer RNA (tRNA) and three ribosomal RNA (rRNA). To identify replication origins in bacterial genomes GC-skew analysis is commonly applied [46]. A similar approach has been proposed for predicting the origin of replication in fungal mt genomes [47]. However, for theProtothecamt genomes, it was impossible to predict the origin of replication based on GC-content or GC-skew analyses due to their strong mosaic structure. Mosaic refers to the structure when mt genomes are compared against each other. This reveals modules that are in different mt genomes in different positions. In comparison, chromosomes typically have a conserved structure with few, if any, rearrangements. Nevertheless, here the structure is fragmented for many mt genomes.

The number of protein-coding genes is highly variable among eukaryotic mt genomes [30,48]. Universally, two mt genes, namelycox1andcytbare always present in green algae mt genomes, coding for subunit I of cytochrome c oxidase and cytochrome b, respectively. In addition, organisms with complete respiratory complexes always retain thenadgenes (nad1,nad2,nad4, andnad5) in their mitogenomes. Additionally, most algae possess genes, such ascox2,cox3,nad3,nad4L,atp6, andatp8. The proteins encoded by these genes are highly hydrophobic, featuring numerous transmembrane stretches [49].

The core mitochondrial genome ofProtothecacontained 21 genes, while its pan-genome comprised 78 genes, demonstrating the remarkable plasticity of the mt genome content in these algae. A few essential genes are surprisingly absent from some mt genomes that reduces the amount of potential core genes. Technical problems for theProtothecamt genomes were not found. Only one mt genome showed a quite high methylation rate, which could lead to more sequencing errors, resulting in SNPs that might prevent a proper gene prediction. However, these genes were in detail checked and found that sometimes they are completely missing, sometimes only fragments can be found, and sometimes point mutations seem to “destroy” these genes. This variability is primarily reflected in the diverse array of potential endonuclease-like genes present. As reference, the pangenome analysis of eight availableChlorellamt genomes produced a total of 41 genes. In a pangenome vs. pangenome comparison, the pangenomes ofProtothecamt genomes with those of reference mt genomes were compared. Only a few unique genes, so called singletons, were identified in each pangenome, mainly coding for hypothetical proteins. The average number of genes coding for hypothetical proteins is at about 6 per mt genome overall, whereasP. stagnorahas 12. A few of these genes are present in several mt genomes (Table S2). Here, groups can be indentified: 1)P. blaschkeae,P. bovis,P. cerasi,P. ciferrii,P. cookei,P. moriformis,P. pringsheimii,P. zopfii,P. stagnora,P. tumulicola, andP. vistulensisshared homologous hypothecial proteins as well asP. lentecrescens,P. fontanea,P. wickerhamii,P. cutis,P. paracutis and P. miyajii.Notably, there was no significant evidence of typical gene loss or gene transfer to the nuclear genome. The mt gene content of the 18Protothecaspecies seems to be typical for algal genomes, since all the genes mentioned above were found in allProtothecaandPrototheca-related mt genomes (Table S2).

InProtothecamt genomes, the predicted genes were typically mono-exonic without introns, with the notable exception of thecox1gene. In 12 out of the 18 examined mt genomes, thecox1gene contained introns, with each genome having one to three introns on average. These introns, featuring T and G bases at their splice sites, are classified as type I introns. On the other hand, in the remaining six protothecal mt genomes, thecox1gene consisted of a single exon without introns. The introns in thecox1gene showed variation across differentProtothecaspecies in terms of their position, size, and number, as well as in the overall structure of the exon-intron configuration.

Type I introns in mt genomes are characterized by ORFs encoding the so-called homing endonucleases. These enzymes facilitate intron mobility by recognizing rare DNA sites and cleaving them, triggering the cell’s DNA repair mechanisms to insert the intron sequence precisely into the target gene [50]. In theProtothecamt genomes, nearly all type I introns included sequences similar to endonuclease genes.

In addition to the GC skew analysis, the analysis ofProtothecamt genomes highlights the variability in the gene order of core genes across different species. Nonetheless, the NADH dehydrogenase (nad) genes showed a tendency for clustering in specific groups, such asnad2-nad3,nad4L-nad5, andnad4-nad6, demonstrating a conserved organizational pattern withinProtothecamt genomes. Similar clusters have also been identified in other algal [51] and also fungal mt genomes [30]. Further comparative analysis revealed a significant synteny only in the protein-coding genes, even amidst numerous rearrangements (Fig.1). Overall, a cross structure could be found, which is also typical for bacterial chromosomes or plasmids [52]. This pattern suggests that the genomes had been actively shaped by the evolutionary forces, imparting a high degree of plasticity. Despite these variations, certain elements, including the core gene set, tRNAs, and rRNAs, remained conserved across species, likely due to their crucial functional roles. However, manual inspection revealed that a few essential genes are missing in some mitochondrial genomes. It is well established that multiple variants of mitochondrial genomes can coexist within the same cell, potentially representing different versions or heteroplasmic states. Typically, the consensus sequence generated from short or long read data reflects the dominant variant present in the sample; however, minority variants may be underrepresented or even absent from the consensus. In this case, while the consensus sequence likely reflects the main mtDNA version, we cannot entirely exclude the possibility that some genes may be missing due to sequencing or assembly artifacts—or, alternatively, due to biological heterogeneity among mtDNA copies (heteroplasmy or structural variation) or other biological reasons [53].

Overall, the mitogenomes ofProtothecaspecies exhibited a typical gene composition for algal genomes, including protein-coding genes, tRNAs, and rRNAs, showcasing their functional stability. However, the variability in gene order, the presence of different type I introns as well as other genes coding for hypothetical proteins, and numerous rearrangements emphasize the plasticity of their mt DNA.

We inferred the phylogeny of theProtothecastrains from the reconstruction of the maximum-likelihood phylogenomic tree based on the 21 core genes encoded in the mt genomes (Fig.2). The resulting tree topology revealed three mainProtothecaclades (A − C), as previously reported in the phylogeny based on plastid genomes [22]. While clades A (includingAuxenochlorella protothecoides) and C showed full phylogenetic support (BS = 100), clade B received low support (BS = 51) and consisted of two well-supported subclades (Fig.2). Remarkably, clade C included all strains without introns in thecox1gene and mt genome sizes of about 39 kb, whereas clades A and B were more heterogeneous (Table3).

The phylogeny inferred from thecytbgene (Supplementary Fig. 1) recovered the same clades B and C, although the former did not show phylogenetic support (BS = 38). The phylogenetic reconstruction based solely on thecytbgene did not recover clade A comprising species ofP.xanthoriaeandA.protothecoides. Similarly, the position ofHelicosporidumsp. differed between both phylogenies, branching as the sister species to allProtothecaclades according tocytbphylogeny (BS = 99). The genome-based phylogeny recovered this species as sister to clade C (BS = 100), and the corresponding clade in the plastid phylogeny [22]. To validate the accurate classification of all species and to assess the genetic similarities within thePrototheca genus, a comprehensive analysis using pairwise ANI and AAI analysis was performed. The results of these analyses are detailed in Table S3 and Table S4, respectively. These metrics provide a quantitative measure of genomic and protein-level similarities, further supporting the taxonomic distinctions and relationships among theProtothecaspecies. Typically, genomes of prokaryotic isolates belonging to the same species exhibit higher ANI and AAI values (> 95%) than those representing different species [36,37]. For fungal genomes, these values are even higher (> 97%) [54,55]. Pairwise comparisons of theProtothecamt genomes revealed that the average ANI values were less than 97%, indicating still a considerably high degree of sequence homology between strains representing different species. Likewise, the AAI values were below 97% except forP. bovisandP. zopfii(97.8%) and forP. pringsheimiiandP. ciferii(98.5%), suggesting a closer relationship between the two species. For species demarcation, the ANI threshold appears to be similar to that observed in fungi (> 97%), whereas the AAI threshold may need to be somewhat elevated. Although ANI analysis may offer potential insights for species delineation, it has to be done with caution. While ANI is a well-established tool for prokaryotes, its application to eukaryotic genomes requires careful consideration due to the unique evolutionary dynamics involved. The distinction between the slower evolution of mtDNA genes and the faster evolution of intergenic regions highlights the complexity of using whole-genome comparisons. Despite the lack of standardized thresholds for classifying plastid or mtDNA, ANI can still provide valuable preliminary insights, which, when combined with other molecular and morphological data (e.g. AAI), can contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of species relationships.

In this study, we have explored the mt genome diversity of 18Protothecaspecies, providing further insights into their genetic makeup and evolutionary trajectory. A relatively high genetic variation of theProtothecamt genomes was demonstrated, evidenced by differences in the size of the genomes, their GC content, gene content, and gene order.

The clustering ofnadgenes, which encode key subunits of the NADH dehydrogenase complex involved in mitochondrial energy production, along with the predominance of genes on the clockwise strand, were found to be hallmarks of the protothecal mt genomes. Additionally, the presence of type I introns harboring homing endonucleases hints at mechanisms of intron mobility and mitogenome evolution. Similar genomic arrangements and features have been observed in other related algae, includingHelicosporidiumandChlorella[51]. Here also, the mechanisms involving intron mobility and mt genome evolution are often characterized by the presence of type I introns and clustering of essential genes. Therefore, while these features are notable inPrototheca, they may also reflect broader evolutionary pattern shared among other related algal species, indicating common strategies in mitogenome structuring and adaptation. More comparative studies across these and other related taxa can provide greater insights into the uniqueness or conservation of these genomic characteristics.

The phylogenetic tree constructed from concatenated 21 core gene alignments delineated three distinct clades within theProtothecaspecies pointing to the polyphyly of the genus. The core-gene tree aligned with thecytbgene tree, which showed two distinctProtothecaclades with varying mitogenome sizes and intron presence, suggesting different evolutionary paths. In addition, this phylogenetic framework, coupled with the high intra-species sequence homology observed in ANI and AAI analyses, provided a new lens through which to view the evolutionary relationships within this genus. Our comparative genomic analyses underlined the phylogenetic relatedness within the genusPrototheca, corroborating the currentcytbgene-based taxonomy while also opening up avenues for taxonomic refinements.

Our findings help address a knowledge gap inProtothecagenetics, and provide a foundation for future research into the taxonomy, phylogeny, and evolution of this genus. As we continue to unravel the genetic complexities of theProtothecaalgae, we have moved closer towards reconstruction of the evolutionary history of Chlorophyta algae and their mt genomes. Looking ahead, the next step involves the analysis of whole genomes of 18Protothecaspecies, which is expected to significantly advance our understanding of the genomic diversity and evolutionary patterns ofProtothecaalgae.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

Supplementary Material 1: Phylogenetic maximum-likelihood tree ofProtothecabased on the cytochrome b protein (cytb), comprising 384 unambiguously aligned sites under the model mtZOA + I + R3. Related Chlorellaceae species were selected as the outgroup. Phylogenetic support assessment is based on 1000 non-parametric bootstrap replicates; only support values > 50% are shown, and black dots indicate maximum support.