Hydrogels that are engineered for environmental and biomedical applications possess an overlapping set of material and surface properties. In this work, we have repurposed a poly(acrylic acid-co-vinyl sulfonic acid) (PAcVSA) hydrogel that has been previously used for organic dye removal, for the pH-sensitive release of small molecule pharmaceuticals. The engineered PAcVSA hydrogel displayed highly pH-sensitive swelling behaviour with a percentage swelling of 6000% or more in the pH range of 5–8. The known pharmaceutical sulfadiazine (SDA) and an indigenously developed small molecule pharmaceutical (TBS), displayed pH-responsive cumulative release of 82.1% and 80.6% of SDA and TBS, respectively, at pH 5 over 24 h. The difference in cumulative release percentage of the small molecules from PAcVSA at pH 5 and pH 8 is superior compared to other reported pH-responsive synthetic hydrogels. The kinetic modelling of release from the loaded PAcVSA hydrogels suggests different mechanisms underlying release, with Fickian diffusion for SDA and polymer relaxation for TBS. This work represents the successful cross-use of an adsorbent hydrogel relevant for environmental remediation, towards the distinctive carry and release of small molecule pharmaceuticals.

Poly(acrylic acid-co-vinylsulfonic acid) hydrogel is capable of pH-responsive release of different small molecule pharmaceuticals in a physiologically relevant pH range with superlative cumulative release percentage.

Polymeric hydrogels have attractive applications in the apparently unrelated contexts of trapping hazardous agents and delivery of drugs.1–3pH-responsive hydrogels are stimuli-responsive materials that are sensitive to the pH of the surrounding medium.4Hydrogels responsive to temperature, ionic strength and concentration of glucose exemplify other types of stimuli-responsive behaviour.5–7The ability of hydrogels to control the uptake or release of analytes in dynamic response to the surrounding medium is valuable for environmental or biomedical applications.2,8Notably, disease conditions in humans can produce changes in the physiological environment in a spatio-temporal manner.9,10The release profile of drugs from stimuli-responsive hydrogels can be tuned to optimize bioavailability and efficacy.11Stimuli-responsive hydrogels can be designed to respond to specific environmental cues, such as pH, light, magnetic fields, electricity, or biological factors, and perform targeted functions.12,13Poly(acrylic acid) (PAc) is a prominent constituent of pH-responsive hydrogels. The inclusion of other pH-responsive components such as poly(vinyl sulfonic acid) (PVSA) has sought to expand on the pH-sensitivity of the resulting hydrogels.14,15Hydrogels comprising PAc and PVSA have been reported previously for the adsorption of methylene blue dye from aqueous solutions.16PAc displays high drug storage and delivery capabilities and is attractive for its nontoxic behaviour.17Polymers comprising acrylic acid have been separately reported for drug delivery and dye adsorption. Notably, Ujwalaet al., developed sodium alginate, acrylic acid, 2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propane sulfonic acid and locust bean gum microbeads for pH-responsive release of doxorubicin, while Chenet al., used acrylic acid, tea polyphenol and chitosan hydrogel for curcumin delivery.18,19On the other hand, Wuet al., and Singhet al., reported acrylic acid hydrogels for MB dye adsorption.20,21The present study addresses three distinct research gaps. First, while hydrogels have been widely reported in the unrelated domains of environmental and biomedical applications, there is a dearth of synthetic hydrogels that can be cross-used across the domains. This dearth of reports is felt even more sharply upon benchmarking the performance of the synthetic hydrogelvis-à-visother synthetic and biopolymer composite hydrogels.22Second, while acrylic acid is a prominent constituent of hydrogels, there are no reports of synthetic poly(acrylic acid)-based hydrogels being used both for environmental mitigation and for release of small molecule drugs. Existing drug-releasing hydrogels comprising poly(acrylic acid) rely on the use of prominent biopolymers.23,24Third, differences in the mechanism of release of different small molecule drugs from the same hydrogel are rarely scrutinized. This creates a lacuna in understanding the scope of use of drug-releasing hydrogels considering that the discovery of small molecule drugs routinely depends on modifying or adapting the chemical scaffolds of established drugs. This study addresses the above gaps by demonstrating the distinctive small molecule drug-releasing behaviour of poly(acrylic acid-co-vinyl sulfonic acid) or PAcVSA, a synthetic hydrogel that has already been reported previously for its attractive cationic dye adsorption properties.20,21A pH-responsive PAcVSA hydrogel was loaded with two different small molecules sulfadiazine (SDA) and a triaryl benzenesulfonamide (TBS), that represent an established pharmaceutical agent and a scaffold displaying potent pharmaceutical activity.25–28The release of these molecules from PAcVSA was accompanied by one of the best reported cumulative release percentages, different mechanisms of release and a superlative pH-responsive behaviour of the hydrogel. To the best of our knowledge, this work represents the first crossover application of an environmentally relevant adsorbent hydrogel as a carrier for release of small molecules and pharmaceutical agents.

Acrylic acid (Ac) and vinyl sulfonic acid (VSA) as monomers were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (Bangalore, India), along with ammonium persulfate (APS) (Sigma Aldrich, Bangalore, India) and Ethylene glycol Di methacrylate (EGDMA) (Alfa Aesar, Bangalore, India) as initiator and crosslinker respectively for the synthesis of poly(acrylic acid-co-vinyl sulfonic acid), (PAcVSA) hydrogel. For the synthesis of triaryl thiazolyl benzenesulfonamide (TBS) molecules, thioanisole, phenyl acetyl chloride, aluminium trichloride, hydrogen peroxide, and hydrogen bromide were used and purchased from Sigma Aldrich (Bangalore, India) and thiourea and 4-bromo-2-fluorobenzenesulfonyl chloride were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry (Hyderabad, India). Sulfadiazine which was used as a reference molecule was purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry (Hyderabad, India). Human embryonic kidney (HEK293T) cells were procured from National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS) Pune, India.

The pH-sensitive poly(acrylic acid-co-vinyl sulfonic acid) hydrogel PAcVSA was synthesized by the free radical polymerization method reported in the literature with some modifications.161.491 g of acrylic acid (Ac) and 1.148 g of vinyl sulfonic acid (VSA), corresponding to an optimized weight ratio as reported in the literature, were transferred into a 100 ml beaker. The mixture was magnetically stirred at room temperature (25 °C) for 10 min to ensure homogenous blending. 0.0105 g of ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EGDMA) was added as the crosslinker to the monomer solution, and the mixture was stirred for another 10 min to ensure uniform dispersion. 0.0148 g of ammonium persulfate (APS) was added to the reaction mixture under continuous stirring for 5–10 min to ensure thorough mixing of the initiator. Milli-Q water was gradually added to the mixture while stirring to bring the total weight of the solution to 5 g. The final solution was stirred for 1 h at room temperature to achieve a uniform reaction mixture. Nitrogen gas was bubbled through the solution for 1 h to eliminate dissolved oxygen and air bubbles that could inhibit polymerization. The degassed solution was transferred into a reaction vessel and placed in a water bath maintained at 60 °C. The polymerization was allowed to proceed for 45 min until gelation was complete. After gelation, the hydrogel was allowed to cool to room temperature. The hydrogel was removed from the reaction vessel and washed thoroughly with a 50 : 50 (v/v) ethanol–water mixture to remove unreacted monomers. The washed hydrogel was dried in a hot air oven at 60 °C until a constant weight was obtained. The dried hydrogel was stored in a vacuum desiccator until further use.

For the detailed characterization of hydrogel before and after adsorption of small molecules, powders of dried PAcVSA, PAcVSA_SDA and PAcVSA_TBS were prepared using mortar-pestle followed by drying in a hot air oven at 60 °C. Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectra of the oven dried powder of pristine PAcVSA, PAcVSA_SDA, and PAcVSA_TBS were recorded with an attenuated total reflectance (ATR) accessory in transmission mode using a PerkinElmer Spectrum Two spectrophotometer. The spectra were recorded between 4000 and 400 cm−1at 4 cm−1resolution at room temperature. Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) of TBS, SDA, and oven dried powders of pristine PAcVSA, PAcVSA_SDA, and PAcVSA_TBS hydrogels were evaluated by using a NETZSCH STA 449F3 instrument with a 10 °C min−1rate ranging from 30 °C to 500 °C. Powder X-ray diffraction studies of oven dried powders of pristine PAcVSA, PAcVSA_SDA and PAcVSA_TBS hydrogels were carried out using Bruker D8 discover diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation of 1.54 Å at room temperature. The surface morphology of freeze-dried pristine PAcVSA, PAcVSA_SDA, and PAcVSA_TBS hydrogels were studied by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), on a JEOL 7900F at room temperature. For the FESEM analysis the freeze-dried hydrogel samples were plasma coated for 90–120 s in a gold-based sputter coater under argon environment. For the rheological study of pristine PAcVSA, PAcVSA_SDA, and PAcVSA_TBS, initial swelling of the pristine hydrogels were performed in DI water at neutral pH. The rheological study of pristine PAcVSA, PAcVSA_SDA and PAcVSA_TBS hydrogel were performed using MCR 702 Anton Paar Rheometer at normal room temperature.

To study the swelling behaviour of PAcVSA, the measurements of swelling characteristics and swelling ratio of the prepared PAcVSA hydrogel were studied at pH 5, 7.4 and 8. The gravimetric method was used to determine the hydrogel sample's swelling ratio.29,30Briefly, 110 mg of hydrogel sample was placed inside a weighed tea bag and submerged in 100 mL of different pH buffer solutions at room temperature. After soaking for a predetermined time interval for 96 h the tea bag containing swollen hydrogel was wiped off with filter paper and weighed. The swelling ratio (%) at different pH were measured at least in triplicate and the mean and standard error were calculated.

The commercially available Sulfadiazine (SDA) and indigenously synthesized triaryl thiazolyl benzenesulfonamide (TBS) were used as small molecules for the loading and release study. In a typical procedure, 100 mg of dried PAcVSA hydrogel was immersed in 5 mg in of each SDA and TBS solutions [prepared in 30 mL of ethanol : water (1 : 1)] at 37 °C and shaken at 100 rpm. After 48 h of incubation the hydrogel was carefully removed from the drug solution, washed with DI water, and dried in an oven at 60 °C for 48 h. The amount of the drug-loaded in PAcVSA hydrogel were calculated according to the original concentration of the drug molecules and the concentration the drugs in the solution after loading, which was quantified by UV-visible spectroscopy (JASCO V-750 spectrophotometer)viaabsorbance at wavelength 277 nm (SDA) and 304 nm (TBS), respectively. Standard calibration curves for SDA and TBS molecule solutions are shown inFig. 1d and e.

About 100 mg of drug-loaded dried hydrogels, namely PAcVSA_SDA and PAcVSA_TBS, were immersed in 100 mL of different pH buffer solution (pH 5, pH 7.4 and pH 8) in a 250 mL beaker. The beakers were placed on a water bath at 37 °C under constant stirring at 250 rpm. At a preplanned time point, the released media were collected and replaced with 1 mL of fresh buffer solution. The released TBS and SDA released were quantified by UV-visible spectroscopy, all results were collected through three parallel samples. The cumulative release percentage was calculated byeqn (1).

In order to evaluate the release kinetics of TBS and SDA from PAcVSA hydrogel, all collected data were fitted to different kinetic models, (1) zero-order model, (2) first-order model, (3) Higuchi model, (4) Korsmeyer–Peppas model, and (5) Hixon–Crowell model.31–33The best kinetic fit for drug release from the TBS and SDA-loaded hydrogels were estimated by comparing the performance of the five models. The equations underlying each of the five models tested are described here.

whereQtrepresents the amount of drug released from polymeric matrix,Q0is the initial amount of drug present in the solution,k0is the zero-order rate constant in concentration/time, andtis time. Zero-order kinetics refers to a process in which a drug is released at a constant rate from a polymeric matrix.

whereQtis the amount of drug released at timet,Q0is the initial amount of the drug in the matrix at timet= 0, andkis the rate constant expressed in time.

whereW0is the initial amount of drug,Wtis the amount of drug at any timet, andKhcis the Hixson–Crowell constant.

The pH-sensitive PAcVSA hydrogel was synthesized by free radical polymerization as described in the Experimental section and depicted in Fig. S1. The PAcVSA hydrogel was synthesized with an optimized weight ratio of 5 : 1 of acrylic acid (Ac) and vinyl sulfonic acid (VSA), based on the ability of the higher proportion of Ac to self-bridge by cross-linking.16We used ethylene glycol di-methacrylate as a crosslinking agent. Based on the prospective mechanism of hydrogel formation, the vinyl sulfonic acid (SO3−) of VSA and the carboxylate (COO−) group of Ac may exert substantive electrostatic interactions with the sulphonamide small molecules being used, thereby increasing their likelihood of sustained absorption or trapping in aqueous environment.

4-Bromo-2-fluoro-N-(4-(4-(methylsulfonyl)phenyl)-5-phenylthiazol-2-yl) benzenesulfonamide was synthesized based on previous report.25,27Briefly, the free amine containing intermediateDwas synthesized from compoundCbased on the Hantzsch's thiazole condensation in ethanol at 80 °C. The compoundDwas reacted with 4-bromo-2-fluoro benzene sulfonyl chloride in pyridine solvent at room temperature for 5 h to produce the desired compound TBS. The detailed multi-step synthetic procedure and spectroscopic characterization of TBS are provided in the SI.

We used two different small molecule drugs for the present work. SDA is effective against a wide range of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria, with a long history of use against various bacterial infections. The incorporation and release of SDA from a variety of delivery systems including polymer hydrogels has been reported.42,43TBS is a screened lead compound for antibacterial/antitumour purposes with good biocompatibility.25–28As described in the materials and methods section, 100 mg of dried PAcVSA hydrogel was immersed in 5 mg in of each SDA and TBS solution [prepared in 30 mL of ethanol : water (1 : 1)] at 37 °C, at pH 7 and shaken at 100 rpm. After 48 h of incubation, the hydrogel was carefully removed from the drug solution, washed with DI water, and dried in an oven at 60 °C for 48 h. The amount of the drug-loaded in PAcVSA hydrogel was calculated according to the original concentration of the drug molecules in solution and the concentration of the drugs in the solution after loading, which was quantified by UV-visible spectroscopy (JASCO V-750 spectrophotometer)viaabsorbance at wavelength 277 nm (SDA) and 304 nm (TBS), respectively as shown inFig. 1a and b. As per calculation using a calibration plot, we found that SDA and TBS were loaded in PAcVSA hydrogel in 4.5 mg and 4.25 mg respectively.

whereWiis the initial amount of drug in solution before adsorption, andWfis the amount of drug in solution after adsorption.

For the FTIR analysis of pristine hydrogel, we dried the sample in the oven at 60 °C for 24 h and made powder using mortar-pestle. For drug-loaded hydrogel (PAcVSA_SDA and PAcVSA_TBS) we first loaded the drug into the PAcVSA hydrogel, and followed the same procedure as mentioned above. The FTIR spectra of synthesized PAcVSA hydrogel, SDA and TBS loaded PAcVSA hydrogels are shown inFig. 2a. The FTIR spectra of the Ac and VSA monomers are shown in Fig. S2.

We next investigated the thermal stability of the small molecule loaded hydrogelsviathermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The TGA of PAcVSA_SDA, PAcVSA_TBS SDA, TBS and pristine PAcVSA hydrogel are shown inFig. 3.

The TGA of pristine and drug-loaded hydrogels indicate degradation in two stages. The pristine PAcVSA hydrogel is sufficiently stable up to 185 °C. By this temperature, 8% weight loss was observed for the pristine hydrogel which is attributed to the loss of water. The next weight loss for the pristine PAcVSA of up to 24% was observed between 185 °C to 310 °C while the maximum weight loss of 47% was observed from 310 °C to 500 °C. In comparison, the performance of PAcVSA_SDA was stable up to 5% weight loss up to 185 °C, followed by 22% between 185 °C to 310 °C and a maximum loss of 38% between 310 °C to 500 °C. And the PAcVSA_TBS hydrogel was stable up to 185 °C with 10% weight loss, followed by 19% between 185 °C to 310 °C and subsequently to 46% between 310 °C to 500 °C. At 500 °C, the PAcVSA_SDA and PAcVSA_TBS hydrogels degraded by 65% and 74%, respectively, compared to nearly 79% degradation observed for pristine PAcVSA. The improvement in thermal stability is approximately 14% and 5% for PAcVSA_SDA and PAcVSA_TBS, respectively.51,52The greater thermal stability of PAcVSA_SDA and PAcVSA_TBS hydrogels can be attributed to the (1) good thermal stability of SDA and TBS, and (2) favourable forces of interaction between the polymer matrix and the small molecules that limit the molecular chain movement of the polymer. The improved thermal stability of the small molecules loaded PAcVSA hydrogel bodes well for their further consideration and scrutiny as drug release agents.

whereWsis the hydrogel weight in a swollen state (g) andWdis the weight of dry hydrogel (g).

Comparison of the swelling ratio at pH 5, 7.4 and 8 (Fig. 6a) indicate the lowest overall swelling ratio of the hydrogel at pH 5.

As shown inFig. 6b, the swelling ratio of PAcVSA displayed a rapid increase initially before attaining a constant proportion. In contrast to pH 5, the hydrogel swelling ratio displayed a remarkable increase at pH 7.4 especially over the first 12 h, before reaching equilibration at ∼80 h. The pH-sensitive behaviour of PAcVSA is exemplified by the higher swelling ratio at pH 8 compared to pH 7.4. A substantially greater swelling ratio was observed for PAcVSA at pH 8 compared to pH 7.4 after the first 12 h, emphasizing the pH-sensitive character of the hydrogel. The swelling ratio continued to increase for the hydrogel at pH 8 till 96 h, albeit at a diminished rate. The greater SR(%) of PAcVSA at pH 8 compared to pH 5 and 7.4, can be correlated to protonation or deprotonation of the constituent functional groups occurring at each pH. Since the pKaof the carboxylic acid of polyacrylic acid is 4.5 and for sulfonate of vinyl sulfonic acid is −1.3, at pH 5 some of the COO−gets protonated while the SO3−is in anionic form.65,66The protonation of these groups likely facilitates hydrogen bonding between them, resulting in intra-polymer interactions gaining prominence compared to polymer–water interactions, and increasing the propensity of the polymer to contract. Strong intra-polymer interactions would mitigate electrostatic repulsion between residual numbers of charged functional groups, further constraining the ability of the polymeric network to swell. At pH 7.4, a significant proportion of the COO−and SO3−groups are deprotonated resulting in the disruption of intra-polymer hydrogen bonding. The increased electrostatic repulsion between the carboxylate and sulfonic anions likely facilitates greater relaxation of the polymer network.67,68A small increase in pH from 7.4 to 8 results in substantive ionization of carboxylate and sulfonic anions resulting in further disruption of intra-polymer hydrogen bonding and enhancing the swelling propensity of the hydrogel.69The PAcVSA hydrogel exhibits a significant increase in swelling behaviour (in terms of SR(%)) when the pH value exceeds 7.4. The present results indicate that changing the pH value from 5 to 8 leads to a substantial variation in swelling ratio (%), reaching approximately 6000% or more, as illustrated inFig. 6b. The lower swelling profile observed for the PAcVSA synthesized in the present work compared to previously reported formulation may be attributed to use of a different initiator during synthesis.16Nevertheless, the swelling behaviour displayed by the PAcVSA hydrogels is superior to that reported for other pH-sensitive acrylic acid containing hydrogels. For instance, the poly(acrylamide-co-acrylic acid) hydrogel used for the controlled release of gentamicin sulphate shows a swelling variation of 730% from pH 4.5 to pH 7.23Likewise, the poly(acrylamide-co-acrylic acid)/chitosan semi IPN hydrogel, studied for the release behaviour of ranitidine hydrochloride, exhibits a swelling variation of 1174% from pH 2 to pH 10.70The dramatic transition in swelling behaviour of PAcVSA reported here in response to relatively small pH changes is likely to encourage distinctive small molecule release profiles.

Thein vitrorelease of SDA and TBS from PAcVSA_SDA and PAcVSA_TBS, respectively, were studied at pH 5, 7.4 and 8. As illustrated inFig. 6c and d, the release of SDA and TBS are pH dependent, and the release rate increased markedly as the pH decreased from 8 to 5. At pH 8, the PAcVSA_SDA and PAcVSA_TBS hydrogels released only 5.4% and 3.2% of the drug molecules, respectively, in the first 1 h and ∼20% after 24 h. In, neutral conditions (pH 7.4), the hydrogels show 7.6% of SDA and 4.2% of TBS initially in first 1 h and ∼30% (SDA) and ∼25% (TBS) after 24 h. In contrast, exposure of the loaded hydrogels to pH 5 resulted in the release of 16.6% SDA and 12.2% TBS after 1 h. The released quantities reached 82.1% for SDA and 80.6% of TBS after 24 h, which is about six times higher than that of pH 8 and five times higher than pH 7.4. The observed release profile can be justified based on weaker electrostatic interaction at pH 5 between the hydrogel and small molecules due to protonation of carboxylate groups in the former.71In addition, the greater hydrophilicity and solubility of SDA and TBS due to protonated sulfonamide groups at the acidic pH likely contribute to their faster release.71Progressively stronger electrostatic interactions at pH 7.4 and pH 8 between the positively charged amine groups of SDA and TBS with negatively charged carboxyl groups, blocks the release of the small molecules from the hydrogel. The release profiles of SDA and TBS from PAcVSA are compared with other prominent pH responsive hydrogels later in this article.

The quantitative modelling of kinetics of small molecule release from PAcVSA_SDA and PAcVSA_TBS is likely to shed light on the mechanism of diffusion in each case.72The accurate quantitative modelling of experimentally observed drug release is a key indicator of the predictability of hydrogel behaviour. We modelled the time-resolved cumulative release percentage using five different models namely zero-order, first-order, Higuchi, Korsmeyer–Peppas (KP) and Hixson–Crowell.72–74These models were applied on both PAcVSA_SDA and PAcVSA_TBS for release over 48 h in medium of pH solutions 5, 7.4 and 8. The model with the values of coefficient of regression (R2) closest to 1 indicates the best fit to experimental data. The KP and Higuchi models delivered the bestR2for the release of SDA and TBS across all three pH being tested.Table 1lists the calculated parameters for these two models applied on PAcVSA_SDA and PAcVSA_TBS. The release behaviour of both the small molecules are best fit by KP model (Fig. 7a and b). While the Higuchi model fit the release of PAcVSA_TBS well, it was less effective for modelling the release of PAcVSA_SDA (Fig. 7c and d). The results of fitting zero-order, first-order and Hixson–Crowell models are provided in SI (Fig. S4 and Table S1).

The KP model offers a straightforward empirical approach for describing release of small molecules from hydrogels.75In addition to the payload release rate, the KP model provides a release exponent ‘n,’ that can define the broad contours of underlying release mechanism. In particular, the release of drugs from swellable carrier is driven by Fickian diffusion when the value ofn≤ 0.43. If ‘n’ lies in the range, 0.43 <n< 0.85, the release of the drug is controlled by diffusion and polymer relaxation (non-Fickian or anomalous transport). Also, ifn> 0.85, the release is controlled by “super case II transport”.37Interestingly, the release exponent ‘n’ for SDA release from PAcVSA_SDA is ≤0.43 implying that the release of SDA from the hydrogel follows Fickian diffusion (Table 1). In contrast, for PAcVSA_TBS the release exponentnlies in the range of 0.43 <n< 0.85 suggesting that TBS release from the hydrogel is controlled by non-Fickian diffusion or due to the polymer relaxation in pH 5, 7.4 and 8 (Table 1). The comparable values ofnfor PAcVSA_SDA across pH 5, 7.4 and 8, are instructive as they suggest a similar extent of diffusion-driven release of SDA from the hydrogel despite dramatic changes in the intra-polymer interactions that have been outlined in the previous section. On the other hand, the value ofnfor PAcVSA_TBS gradually increases from pH 5 to 7.4 and 8, reflecting the effect of greater relaxation of the polymer network due to deprotonation of the constituent COO−and SO3−groups. The movement of small molecules from poly(acrylic acid) containing composite hydrogels has been previously justified based on changes in pore sizes of the hydrogel upon change in pH of the surrounding medium.23Polymer relaxation is the principal mechanism for release of small molecules from hydrogels with strong crosslinking, inter-penetrating network architecture, or bearing magnetic nanoparticles.24,76Considering that Fickian diffusion is responsible for the release of SDA irrespective of pH, the changes in pore sizes clearly do not impact the mobility of the drug. TBS is a larger molecule compared to SDA and relies mainly on polymer-chain relaxation to affect its release from the hydrogel. The present observation of dissimilar mechanisms governing two different small molecules from the same hydrogel is quite unique. The KP model is constrained by inability to robustly characterize long-term limit of the release kinetics beyond approximately 60% of the released material. Nevertheless, the difference in overall rate of release of SDA and TBS from the cognate loaded hydrogels is best captured by the KP model. At pH 5, the rate of release of SDA from PAcVSA_SDA was 19.85 h−1while the rate of release of TBS from PAcVSA_TBS was 14.76 h−1. The greater release of SDA is evident from the cumulative release percentage profile (Fig. 6c and d). While the application of the Higuchi model on release of TBS results in a rate of release of 24.8 h−1, the fitting of SDA release is not satisfactory and is therefore unsuitable for comparison.

We performed MTT and live/dead cell assay to evaluate the cytotoxicity of PAcVSA towards HEK 293T cells.40,41As shown inFig. 8a, the PAcVSA hydrogel is not toxic to HEK 293T cells between 1 to 5 mg mL−1for 72 h. The live/dead assay was performed using calcein AM dye (green) for live cell staining and propidium iodide dye (red) for dead cell staining. Calcein AM is rapidly hydrolyzed by cellular esterase within live cells, resulting in the cleavage of the AM group. This hydrolysis converts the non-fluorescent Calcein AM into a strongly green fluorescent Calcein. In contrast, Propidium Iodide (PI) can only traverse compromised cell membranes and intercalates with DNA and RNA within dead cells, thereby emitting red fluorescence.77Non-treated HEK 293T cells were used as a control. HEK 293T cells were treated with different concentrations of the PAcVSA hydrogel ranging from 1 to 5 mg mL−1. The treatment of HEK 293T cells with PAcVSA at 5 mg mL−1did not result in any cell death (Fig. 8band S5) for up to 72 h. Overall, these results suggest the biocompatibility of the PAcVSA hydrogel making it an attractive carrier for pharmaceutical agents.

We performed an extensive literature study on small molecule/drug release profiles from pH-responsive hydrogels. Our survey is listed inTable 2. Two aspects emerge from a scrutiny of performance of the different pH-responsive carriers. Firstly, the PAcVSA hydrogel described in this work exhibits remarkable release profile in mildly acidic conditions (pH 5). Secondly, the hydrogel described in this work displays the greatest differential in small molecule release between pH 5 and 8. The release of 82.1% SDA and 80.6% TBS in a strongly pH-dependent manner over a prolonged duration of time without use of any other adjuvants highlights the distinctive of the PAcVSA hydrogel. Nearly all the previously reported hydrogels listed inTable 2have been characterized by the Korsmeyer–Peppas model. In this regard, PAcVSA is unique for eliciting different mechanisms for two different small molecule cargo; polymer relaxation for release of TBS, and Fickian diffusion for release of SDA. This unique behaviour of PAcVSA is rarely reported in recent hydrogel literature, and indicates the singular interactions that are exerted by the polymeric scaffold and suggest versatility of use.

The cross-use of synthetic hydrogels between adsorption of environmentally relevant analytes and release of small molecule pharmaceuticals is extremely rare. While such cross-use of biopolymer composite hydrogels in environmental mitigation and for drug release has been reported in slightly greater numbers, the performance of the hydrogels is rarely benchmarked against the best-in-class synthetic or composite hydrogel candidates. Thus, the question about whether a specific synthetic hydrogel that has been developed and demonstrated for environmental applications can also be readily used for loading and release of small molecule drugs is yet to be convincingly addressed. The strength of the present work lies in the unambiguous demonstration of PAcVSA as a robust and superlative pH-responsive delivery agent of small molecules, based on subtle modifications in its formulation that has been previously reported as an attractive adsorbent of environmentally relevant cationic dyes. Further, studies on small molecule release by hydrogels are predominantly focused on established pharmaceutical agents. The applicability of a hydrogel for the carry and release of small molecules that may be related to but distinct from a known drug is rarely addressed. In this context, the ability of PAcVSA to carry and release SDA and TBS highlights the capability of the hydrogel and sheds light on interesting differences in the mechanism of their release. This study introduces the paradigm of assessing multiple small molecule drugs on the same hydrogel, and is thus significant in the broader context of hydrogel research. The present study is limited by its inability to comment on the efficacy of the released small molecule drugs. Notwithstanding the responsive behaviour of the PAcVSA hydrogel towards physiologically relevant pH range of fluid environments, the ability of specific pharmaceutical agents to exert their activity post-release remains to be experimentally investigated. Similarly, considering the design of the present work, the compatibility of PAcVSA with various chemical scaffolds underlying drug development cannot simply be extrapolated and would require thorough experimentation.

The application of synthesized materials for diverse and disconnected functions is an accepted milestone of sustainable design. There are very few reports of intentional repurposing of synthetic hydrogels across the two domains, and this work successfully demonstrates the same. Questions surrounding additional tunability of such cross-use hydrogels, and assessment of the pharmacological efficacy of released drugs, are likely to improve their potential for real deployment, and are being investigated in our laboratory.