Reliable functional connectivity (FC) measurements are important for robust neuroimaging findings, yet pediatric functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) faces unique challenges due to head motion and bias toward shorter scans. Passive viewing conditions during fMRI offer advantages for scanning pediatric populations, but FC reliability under these conditions remains underexplored. Here, we used precision fMRI data collected across three passive viewing conditions to directly compare FC reliability profiles between 25 pre-adolescent children and 25 adults, with each participant providing over 2.8 hours of data over 4 sessions. We found that FC test–retest correlations increased asymptotically with scan length, with children requiring nearly twice the post-censored scan time (24.6 minutes) compared with adults (14.4 minutes) to achieve comparable reliability, and that this effect was only partly attributable to head motion. Reliability differences between lower-motion adults and higher-motion children were spatially non-uniform and largest in ventral anterior temporal and frontal regions. While averaging features within functional networks improved intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) reliability, values for higher-motion children remained in the poor-to-fair ICC range even with 24 minutes of data. Of note, we observed substantial increases in edge-wise ICC between 24 and 54 minutes of data. Viewing conditions with greater engagement reduced head motion in children but had lower FC reliability than less engaging “low-demand” videos, suggesting complex state- or condition-related trade-offs. These findings have important implications for developmental neuroimaging study design, particularly for higher motion pediatric populations.

Reliable measurements—defined in this context as measures with high test–retest consistency and minimal variation across repeated assessments (Shrout & Fleiss, 1979)—are necessary for reproducible research findings. While a growing body of literature supports best practices for reliable functional magnetic resonance imaging functional connectivity (fMRI-FC) in adults (Bennett & Miller, 2010,2013;Elliott et al., 2021;Kragel et al., 2021;Noble et al., 2019;Shehzad et al., 2009), and despite research on both clinical and nonclinical pediatric FC reliability (Camp et al., 2024;Somandepalli et al., 2015;Thomason et al., 2011;Y. Wang et al., 2021), there are few established guidelines specific to pediatric fMRI-FC reliability. Relatedly, precision fMRI (pfMRI) is an emerging neuroimaging approach that can reliably estimate metrics of brain function from individuals by collecting relatively large amounts of fMRI data per person (Michon et al., 2022). Adult studies using pfMRI describe asymptotic relationships between scan time and FC reliability (Gordon et al., 2017;Laumann et al., 2015), but the shape of these curves has not been compared between adult and pediatric populations, which limits our understanding of its applicability to children and other populations with substantial head motion. Understanding how FC reliability profiles differ between adults and children and how factors such as scan length, head motion, and viewing conditions impact these profiles is critical for advancing reproducible developmental neuroimaging.

Reliability of FC measures in pediatric populations remains a significant challenge due to head motion and concerns regarding tolerability of longer scans (Dosenbach et al., 2017). Some studies also suggest that lower FC reliability in developmental populations may be inherent to developmental differences in functional brain organization (i.e., higher intra-individual variability), and not just a reflection of noise (Bottenhorn et al., 2023;Vanderwal et al., 2021). In adult populations, prior work has suggested whole functional connectome reliability asymptotes between 30 and 90 minutes of data, depending on factors including scan sequence and level of resolution (Gordon et al., 2017;Noble, Spann, et al., 2017;Noble et al., 2019;Shah et al., 2016); though, these estimates may not be applicable for higher motion pediatric cohorts. Previous research has highlighted that both age and motion affect FC reliability (Parkes et al., 2018;Shirer et al., 2015;Song et al., 2012); however, to our knowledge, no studies have collected longer duration, multi-session fMRI time series to directly compare FC time-by-reliability profiles between young children and adults, while also assessing the potential impacts of head motion on the reliability of post-censored data.

Given the need to reduce head motion and improve participant engagement for reliable FC measures, movies offer a compelling alternative to both conventional tasks requiring focused attention and task-free rest (Sonkusare et al., 2019;Vanderwal et al., 2019). Movie-watching fMRI has proven valuable for populations that are difficult to scan, such as young children, due to concerns with task performance, higher head motion, drowsiness, and scanner-related anxiety (Cantlon & Li, 2013;Eickhoff et al., 2020;Engelhardt et al., 2017;Frew et al., 2022;Greene et al., 2018;Vanderwal et al., 2015). While conventional tasks variably influence FC reliability (Elliott et al., 2019;Rai et al., 2024;Shah et al., 2016), naturalistic conditions have demonstrated comparable or superior FC reliability compared with both resting-state and conventional task conditions (Elliott et al., 2019;Hasson et al., 2010;O’Connor et al., 2017;Vanderwal et al., 2021;J. Wang et al., 2017). Recent reviews (Eickhoff et al., 2020;Nastase et al., 2020;Sonkusare et al., 2019) further highlight the benefits of naturalistic paradigms for developmental neuroimaging, emphasizing increased compliance and ecological validity. However, there remains limited guidance on how choice of video may impact FC reliability for children and youth.

Canonical functional brain networks have been shown to exhibit varying levels of FC reliability, with higher-order cognitive networks (e.g., default mode, frontoparietal, and attention networks) generally demonstrating greater reliability relative to sensory networks (e.g., somatomotor and visual networks) (Noble, Spann, et al., 2017;Rai et al., 2024;Tozzi et al., 2020). Investigating the variation in reliability patterns and their interaction with head motion is important for planning analyses in pediatric fMRI studies, especially for higher-order cognitive networks that are often of interest in developmental and clinical research (Grayson & Fair, 2017;Marek et al., 2015;Uddin et al., 2009). Hence, for this study, we considered variation across functional networks in the relationship between scan duration and reliability.

This study used a densely sampled dataset from adults and pre-adolescent children (aged 6.6–8.9 years) to compare time-by-reliability relationships while considering age, head motion, brain networks, and viewing condition. While FC test–retest reliability is expected to be most reliable between identical repeated sessions (e.g., having participants watch the same movie scene at each measurement) (O’Connor et al., 2017;J. Wang et al., 2017), here we consider reliability across different movies with similar content (e.g., different scenes from the same narrative film). Recent findings have demonstrated that ICC measures remain consistent across different movies (Tian et al., 2021) and have found reliable functional network topography using different films (Jiahui et al., 2023).

First, we compared test–retest correlation profiles between adults and children with increasing scan lengths while considering the impact of head motion. Next, we examined the spatial distribution of FC reliability across the cortex in high- and low-motion groups using both test–retest correlation and ICC. Finally, we assessed the effect of different passive viewing conditions on data retention and test–retest correlation. Through this work, we provide some practical guidelines for developmental fMRI researchers, particularly when working with higher motion pediatric populations, with the limitation that data acquisition, processing choices, and sample characteristics can all impact the specific values reported here.

Data were collected from 50 participants consisting of 25 parent–child pairs (5 female–female, 7 female–male, 8 male–female, 5 male–male), recruited through community advertisements and a laboratory participant database. Children were typically developing between the ages of 6.56 and 8.92 years old at session 1, (mean = 7.88 years, std = 0.69 years; 13 F, 12 M), and parents were between the ages of 33.75 and 47.13 years old at session 1 (mean = 41.39 years, std = 3.63 years; 12 F, 13 M). One child participant and the parent were excluded from analysis due to excessive motion (<40 minutes of post-censored data), resulting in a final sample of 24 parent–child pairs. Our sample included two families in which two parents and two children participated. Children provided assent, while parents provided written informed consent for their own and their child’s participation in the study. Study procedures were approved by the University of Calgary Conjoint Health Research Ethics Board (REB19-1973).

Participants completed 4 MRI sessions in a 3T GE MR750w (Waukesha, WI) scanner with a 32-channel head coil, approximately 1 week apart, at the Alberta Children’s Hospital. EEG and cognitive data were also collected as part of this study which are not reported here. The order was pseudo-randomized, with half the parents undergoing EEG first, followed by MRI, while their children had MRI first, then EEG, and half the sample in a reversed order. In each MRI session, a T1-weighted 3D BRAVO sequence was acquired (0.8 mm isotropic, TR = 6.764 ms, TE = 2.908 ms, FA = 10°). Multi-echo, multiband functional data were collected in six runs per session using a T2*-weighted gradient-echo echo-planar sequence covering the full brain (3.4 mm in-plane, 45 slices, slice thickness = 3 mm, slice spacing = 0.4 mm, TR = 2 seconds, TEs = 13, 32.3, 51.6 ms, FA = 70°, FOV = 220 mm, AP phase encoding direction, phase acceleration = 2, multiband acceleration factor = 3). A total of 205 volumes (excluding 5 dummy volumes) were acquired per run, for a total acquisition time of roughly 41 minutes per session and approximately 2.8 hours per participant across 4 sessions.

Narrative Movie:Sequential scenes from the live-action movieDora and the Lost City of Gold(Bobin, 2019). This movie was selected based on the following criteria: (1) lack of visually dark and scary scenes appropriate for viewing on a projector in the MRI scanner and for our pre-adolescent sample; (2) filmed within the last decade; (3) highly engaging Hollywood live-action movie (Cutting et al., 2011), and (4) relatively diverse cast. For this condition, each movie clip contained between 5 and 12 scene transitions (mean: 6.58; median: 6).

Non-Narrative Clips:Short (24–65 seconds long, mean = 46.4 seconds) and popular (>1 million views at the time of download) videos accessed viaYouTubeorTikTokwere selected to sustain visual interest with minimal storytelling (e.g., video game scenes such asMinecraft, stop-motion animation, miniature food preparation videos a.k.a. “tiny kitchen”, toy unboxing videos,TikTokdancing videos, Rube Goldberg machines, and building videos where individuals create structures such as water slides using natural materials). Background music was either kept from the original clips or instrumental music was added to clips without sound. For this condition, each clip contained between 9 and 16 scene transitions (mean: 10.58; median: 10).

Low-Demand Video:In pilot testing, participants reported sleepiness during Inscapes (Vanderwal et al., 2015) across repeated viewings. We, therefore, developed a condition consisting of calming videos inspired by Inscapes but with more variety across sessions. For this condition, videos featured gentle instrumental music and slow-moving imagery (e.g., Earth seen from space, underwater wildlife footage, walk through a canyon, and drone footage of a Swiss farmland or a Japanese island). For this condition, each video clip contained between 1 and 15 scene transitions (mean: 3.58; median: 1.5).

Following each MRI session, participants completed surveys (Supplemental Table S1) that asked recall questions about the videos they viewed during each of six functional runs and whether they felt tired, sleepy, or had difficulty staying awake (derived from the PROMIS Sleep-Related Impairment Short Form;Yu et al., 2012). To assess attention to videos, the percent of correct responses was calculated. To assess drowsiness levels, a summary score was computed by coding no response as 0, felt tired as 1, sleepy as 2, difficulty staying awake as 3, which were summed across the two runs per viewing condition.

We used a customized preprocessing pipeline in Nipype version 1.5.0 (Gorgolewski et al., 2011) with tools from FSL version 6.0.0 (Smith et al., 2004), ANTs version 2.3.4 (Avants et al., 2011), and AFNI version 21.1.16 (Cox, 1996) to preprocess individual scans.

For T1-weighted image processing, ANTs was used to correct intensity inhomogeneities, remove the skull and non-brain tissues, warp each participant’s brain to either the adult MNI 152 nonlinear atlas or the pediatric NIHPD 7–11-year-old atlas (Fonov et al., 2009,2011), generate tissue segmentations, and then warp segmentations back into native space. Following this, FSL was used to create white matter, cerebrospinal fluid, and gray matter masks, and AFNI was used to erode tissue segments by seven levels to create conservative tissue masks.

Initial preprocessing steps were done on each echo separately. The first five volumes for each run were discarded using FSLExtractROI. Using FSLMCFLIRT, multi-echo EPI (MEPI) images were warped to the first volume of each run, to generate motion estimates on the uncorrected data, and for rigid body realignment. Framewise displacement (FD) estimates from the second echo of each run were used as motion estimates going forward. FSLslicetimerwas used for slice time correction. Next, the first echo from each run was realigned to the reference run (Run 1 Echo 1) using FSLFLIRTand the transformation matrix was applied to all echoes of that run to maintain alignment between echoes. Finally, FSLMergewas used to combine all three echoes for each video run together. Next, FSLFLIRTwas used to co-register all videos for each session. Using session 1 echo 1 as the reference, the remaining sessions and echoes were co-registered to that reference image. Finally, we used FSLMERGEto concatenate all six runs from all conditions together.

For each session, the merged three-echo inputs were denoised and optimally combined using thetedanaworkflow version 0.0.12, a Python library to process multi-echo fMRI data (DuPre et al., 2021). Multi-echo data were optimally combined using the T2* combination method (Posse et al., 1999). Among the three options for selecting principal component analysis (PCA) components, our study opted for the Akaike Information Criterion option. This choice, known as the least aggressive approach, improves the probability of successful convergence in the following independent component analysis (ICA) step, while retaining meaningful components. ICA was then used to classify components as BOLD (TE-dependent), non-BOLD (TE-independent), or uncertain (low-variance) based on the Kundu decision tree (v2.5) (Kundu et al., 2013). ICA-based denoising methods tend to fail at classifying many of the components labeled as uncertain (low-variance components) (Dipasquale et al., 2017;Griffanti et al., 2017;Mejia et al., 2020); therefore, we reviewed and manually re-classified components as necessary.

Subsequent steps were run on individual optimally combined (OC) fMRI runs (4 sessions x 3 viewing conditions x 2 runs). FSLBETwas used for skull stripping, and FSLFLIRTwas used for boundary-based registration to register each OC image to the participants’ T1-weighted image. Next, linear regression was performed to remove the mean, linear, and quadratic trends from each voxel, along with bandpass temporal filtering between 0.01 and 0.08 Hz, and nuisance regression. We filtered high-frequency motion (>0.1 Hz) in the phase-encoding direction (Gratton, Dworetsky, et al., 2020) from head motion estimates, and following that, regressed out 24 head motion parameters, along with white matter, cerebrospinal fluid, and the global signal. Lastly, we censored volumes above an FD threshold of 0.15 mm (Power et al., 2012); this threshold was chosen after inspection of the FD “floor” across participants which showed that for low-motion participants, essentially all volumes fell below this threshold. Preprocessed functional runs were then warped to the participants’ T1 using ANTSApplyTransformsand runs of each viewing condition were concatenated.

T1-weighted images were used to generate the cortical surface of each participant through Freesurfer’srecon-allpipeline (Dale et al., 1999), version 6.0. Subsequently, the outputs of Freesurfer were converted into grayordinate-based space in the Connectivity Informatics Technology Initiative (CIFTI) format (Glasser et al., 2013) using Ciftify’sciftify_recon_allpipeline (Dickie et al., 2019).The grayordinate resolution for each participant corresponds to a low-resolution mesh of approximately 32,000 vertices per hemisphere, mirroring the standard space for fMRI analysis in the Human Connectome Project (Glasser et al., 2013).

Preprocessed OC fMRI time series underwent surface mapping via Ciftify’sciftify_subject_fmripipeline, which uses a ribbon-constrained sampling procedure through the Connectome Workbench command line utilities (Glasser et al., 2013). The resulting surface-mapped time series were spatially smoothed using a geodesic Gaussian kernel of σ = 4 mm and excluded non-gray matter tissue.

As expected, there was higher motion overall and larger inter-individual variation in the number of censored volumes in children relative to adults. To help distinguish effects of age from confounding effects of motion, we created groups of high- and low-motion children and applied the same threshold to adults. To generate a cutoff point, we examined the distribution of post-censored data for adults and children. We calculated and plotted probability density functions for each age group using their respective means for the full range of post-censored volumes (Supplemental Fig. S1) and found the intersection of these curves occurred at 3,863 volumes. Participants below this threshold were classified as the low-motion group and those exceeding this threshold were classified in the high-motion group. This resulted in 22 low-motion adults (LMA) (11 M, 11 F; aged 33.75–47.13 years; mean FD: 0.048–0.163), 10 low-motion children (LMC) (4 M, 6 F; aged 6.56–8.92 years; mean FD: 0.050–0.270), and 14 high-motion children (HMC) (8 M, 6 F; aged 7.03–8.90 years; mean FD: 0.122–0.939). An additional two high-motion adults (HMA) were excluded from analyses that used these motion groups but were retained for analyses where head motion was treated as a continuous variable. Sex, age, and head motion were compared across motion groups. A chi-squared test was used to examine sex differences. One-way ANOVAs were used to compare motion groups on age, censored volumes, and scan duration required to reach 30 minutes of post-censored data, along with post hoc Tukey’s HSD tests to determine specific motion group differences.

We used template matching (Seitzman et al., 2019) to delineate individual functional networks for each participant and derive ROIs that had consistent network membership across the sample. This ensured that features assigned to a particular network are aligned with functional boundaries across age groups. Each cortical vertex was assigned to 1 of 14 functional networks based on the approach described inGordon et al. (2017). We used a data-driven group network map, using vertex time series data derived from the Midnight Scan Club sample in previous work from our group (Rai et al., 2024), as our template, which was first binarized to the network labels from the WashU 120 map (Seitzman et al., 2019) (Supplemental Fig. S2). For each participant, 60 minutes of post-censored data across all viewing conditions and sessions were used for template matching. Once individual network maps were created, we generated group maps for the adults and children using 66% and 75% threshold levels (Supplemental Fig. S3A) in line with previous study thresholds (Dworetsky et al., 2021). We found that using the less stringent threshold of 66% resulted in greater spatial overlap between the age groups (Supplemental Fig. S3B). According to the nomenclature used inGordon et al. (2017)andPower et al. (2011), brain networks were labeled as default mode (DMN), frontoparietal (FP), visual, dorsal attention (DAN), ventral attention (VAN), salience (SAL), auditory (AUD), cinguloopercular (CON), somatomotor dorsal (SMd), somatomotor lateral (SMl), temporal pole (Tpole), medial temporal lobe (MTL), parietal memory (PMN), and parietal occipital (PON).

Using the MNI coordinates of 153 high probability regions of interest (ROIs) (Dworetsky et al., 2021), we first created volume spheres via Ciftify’sciftify_vol_resultcommand line function. Next, we projected those volume spheres into 3 mm cortical surface spheres using Ciftify’sciftify_surface_roisfunction. We manually assessed the agreement between all surface spheres and the final overlap network map, which resulted in a total of 143 ROIs after excluding ROIs that did not overlap with the final map in our sample (Supplemental Fig. S3C). We further excluded the PMN since network-level analyses required at least two ROIs within each network to compute averages. All other networks consisted of at least 2 ROIs for averaging, resulting in a final set of 142 ROIs across 12 networks.

To assess whole-connectome reliability as a function of scan duration, we used two approaches with the full post-censored data available across all viewing conditions and sessions. First, we employed a “split-session” approach, where we concatenated each participant’s time series data in three ways: sessions 1 and 4 versus sessions 2 and 3, sessions 1 and 2 versus sessions 3 and 4, and sessions 1 and 3 versus sessions 2 and 4. In this approach, temporal sequencing of post-censored volumes is maintained. We computed FC matrices using Pearson correlations, applied Fisher z-transformation, and calculated test–retest correlations (TRC) by correlating the flattened matrices from each split. We evaluated FC-TRC using scan lengths from 5 to 80 minutes, in 5-minute increments, averaged across split combinations. We used a linear mixed-effects model to assess how age group, head motion, and their interaction affected the scan time required to reach a reliability threshold of FC-TRC ≥ 0.8, with family as a random effect. Following this, we performed apost hocanalysis of the interaction effect by calculating slopes for the relationship between head motion and time-by-reliability for each age group. T-tests were then conducted to assess the significance of these slopes within each age group. Effect size was calculated using Cohen’s D for each time increment to show the magnitude of motion group differences in FC reliability. The incremental benefit was computed as the difference in FC-TRC between successive 5-minute scan lengths, for each motion group.

Second, we used an “iterative” approach, similar toGordon et al. (2017)andLaumann et al. (2015)by correlating subsets of time series data. For each participant, we censored and concatenated data from all available sessions and randomly selected 1-minute chunks to make a 60-minute “true” reference subset of data and kept the remaining data as the “residual” subset. FC matrices were computed using Pearson correlations for each subset which were Fisher z-transformed, and FC-TRC was calculated by correlating the “true” data FC matrices with the “residual” data from 5 to 80 minutes in 5-minute intervals repeated across 1,000 iterations and averaged. Here, data were randomly sampled from across the residual time series and, therefore, did not maintain temporal ordering of volumes. We again used a linear mixed-effect model to examine relationships between scan duration, head motion, and age group at a reliability threshold of FC-TRC ≥ 0.8, with family as a random effect. For comparison to the “split-session” approach, we also calculated effect sizes and incremental benefit of scan lengths as above.

We constructed parcellated FC connectomes across all viewing conditions and sessions to visualize test–retest correlations and ICC across the cortical surface for each motion group. Using the Schaefer 1,000 parcel 17-network atlas (Schaefer et al., 2018) and Connectome Workbench’scifti-parcellatecommand line utility, we parcellated each participant’s time series data across all sessions and viewing conditions. We matched each time series to include the participant with the lowest amount of usable data at 24 minutes of split-half data or 48 minutes of total data (i.e., 24 minutes from sessions 1 and 4 combined and 24 minutes from sessions 2 and 3 combined). Following this, we computed Pearson correlations to produce a 1,000 x 1,000 FC connectome for each participant within each motion group. We calculated intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC (2,1)) (Shrout & Fleiss, 1979) for functional connections of each parcel with all other parcels across participants separately for each motion group (LMA, LMC, HMC). We then averaged these ICC values across all connections for each parcel to visualize surface reliability maps for each motion group. To assess region-specific differences, we compared FC-TRC and ICC values between motion groups by subtracting the high- and low-motion children’s maps from the adults’ map.

We explored the relationship between signal quality metrics and FC reliability to provide context for group differences in regional FC-TRC. Specifically, we calculated the temporal mean signal (tMean; the numerator of temporal-signal-to-noise ratio) of the time series (Murphy et al., 2007;Rai et al., 2024;Yeo et al., 2011) using the Schaefer 1,000 parcel 17-network atlas (Schaefer et al., 2018). In total, 1,440 volumes (48 minutes) were used per subject for tMean, and 24 minutes of split-half data were used to compute FC-TRC. We focused on comparative analyses between LMA and HMC as they yielded the largest group difference in our FC-TRC surface maps. We first examined the relationship between tMean and FC-TRC across all 1,000 parcels and fitted regression lines to first show a positive relationship between tMean and FC-TRC (Rai et al., 2024). To understand whether group differences in FC-TRC were associated with differences in tMean, potentially reflecting signal dropout, we computed parcel-wise differences between LMA and HMC. We visualized ΔFC-TRC versus ΔtMean for parcels in networks showing the largest group differences in FC-TRC: the Default B, Limbic A, and Control B networks, with a linear regression model fitted.

To compare reliability across motion groups and time points, we calculated ICC matrices across all viewing conditions and sessions using varying split-scan durations based on available data for each motion group. For low-motion adults and low-motion children, we computed edge-wise ICC values at 5, 10, 24, and 54 split-half minutes (equivalent to 10, 20, 48, and 108 total minutes of data), and for the high-motion children, we computed values up to 24 split-half minutes (48 total minutes of data). Edge-wise ICC values were computed, belonging to 1 of 12 networks, for each motion group. Next, we asked whether averaging edges within networks before computing ICC values would yield higher reliability than averaging post-ICC computation within the same network regions. Following established conventions (Cicchetti & Sparrow, 1981), we categorized ICC values into four ranges: poor (0 < ICC ≤ 0.4), fair (0.4 < ICC ≤ 0.59), good (0.6 ≤ ICC ≤ 0.74), and excellent (ICC ≥ 0.75).

To determine the variability in data retention between viewing conditions and motion groups, retention percentages were calculated for each condition by dividing the number of volumes retained by the total number of volumes collected (1,640 volumes for each condition across all sessions). Repeated measures ANOVAs were conducted across motion groups, viewing conditions, and their interaction to assess differences in data retention. We performedpost hocTukey’s HSD tests for comparisons of data retention between motion groups and viewing conditions. Apost hocpairwise t-test was also computed to assess significant differences within the motion group by condition interaction term, with Bonferroni correction applied to correct for multiple comparisons. Using the drowsiness and attention metrics, we performed a repeated measures ANOVA to examine the effects of viewing condition, motion group, and their interaction on drowsiness and attention scores.Post hocTukey’s HSD tests were conducted to identify specific motion group differences in viewing conditions. We further conducted Levene’s tests to examine the variances in ratings across different conditions for both drowsiness and attention measures.

To compare FC-TRC across the different viewing conditions, we used the split-session approach. First, for each participant, we concatenated data from each condition separately in 1-minute increments and computed FC matrices across sessions 1 and 4 versus sessions 2 and 3, sessions 1 and 2 versus sessions 3 and 4, and sessions 1 and 3 versus sessions 2 and 4. Next, we Fisher z-transformed connectomes and calculated FC-TRC as above for scan lengths from 1 up to 22 minutes. Using a linear mixed effect model, we compared FC reliability across viewing conditions at 5 minutes. The model included motion group (LMA, LMC, HMC), viewing condition, and both standardized attention and drowsiness scores for each condition averaged across runs as fixed effects, and subject as a random effect. We conducted post hoc analyses using Bonferroni-corrected pairwise comparisons.

To further investigate the relationship between task and FC-TRC, we considered how tasks impact temporal standard deviation (tSD; the denominator of tSNR), which has been associated with reliability (Bennett & Miller, 2010;Mueller et al., 2015;Rai et al., 2024). We computed tSD of the time series for 8 exemplar low-motion adults across conditions, using 1,157 volumes per condition (38 minutes) and the Schaefer 1,000 parcel 17-network atlas (Schaefer et al., 2018). We examined the regional variability in tSD in relation to FC-TRC within each condition and related differences in tSD and FC-TRC between pairs of conditions. We visualized ΔtSD between conditions across 1,000 parcels to assess regional changes between conditions and performed a one-sample t-test on parcel-wise ΔtSD values for each condition pair.

Sex did not vary significantly across the three motion groups (p > 0.05, chi2= 1.80) and age did not differ between the low-motion and high-motion child groups (p > 0.05). Different amounts of scan time were required between motion groups to achieve 30 minutes of usable (post-censored) data. We required an average of 32.93 minutes (range: 30.49–37.18 minutes) for the LMA group, 34.68 minutes (range: 30.67–37.28 minutes) for the LMC group, and 50.85 minutes (range: 39.66–67.49 minutes) for the HMC group (Fig. 1). The high-motion adult group consisted of 2 participants, with an average of 61.47 minutes of data required to reach 30 minutes of usable data, which were not included in further group analyses. A one-way ANOVA revealed significant differences in data required between the three motion groups (F = 58.635, p < 0.001, ηp² = 0.732). Post hoc Tukey’s HSD tests showed that the HMC group required significantly more data than both the LMA and LMC groups (p < 0.001).

Pre-censored data required for 30 minutes of useable data using all viewing conditions across motion groups. The plot shows the total amount of data required to obtain 30 minutes of post-censored data (FD > 0.15 mm) for each motion group. Low-motion adults (LMA, light blue circles) and low-motion children (LMC, dark blue triangles) required significantly less data compared with high-motion children (HMC, red triangles; both p < 0.001). High-motion adults (HMA, gray circles) were excluded from further motion group analyses. Each point represents a participant, and horizontal bars represent motion group means. The dashed line indicates the target 30-minute threshold of post-censored data. Significance: ***p < 0.001.

As expected, based on our motion group definition, we found significant differences in censored volumes across the three motion groups (F = 84.701, p < 0.001, ηp² = 0.798) visualized inSupplemental Figure S4.Post hoctests revealed differences in censored volumes occurred between both the HMC and LMA groups (p-adjusted < 0.001) and between the HMC and LMC groups (p-adjusted < 0.001), but not between the LMA and LMC groups (p-adjusted = 0.223).

Across both approaches to calculating time-by-reliability curves, FC reliability asymptotically increased with scan length for all participants (Fig. 2A, B). Using the split-session approach (Fig. 2A), we found that head motion (indicated by the color gradient) had a significant positive association with time to reach FC-TRC ≥ 0.8 (standardized β = 0.536, SE = 0.159, z = 3.381, p = 0.001). Age group had an additional positive association with time to reach FC-TRC ≥ 0.8, with adults having shorter time to reach this reliability level (standardized β = -0.986, SE = 0.235, z = -4.203, p < 0.001). We also found a significant interaction between head motion and age group (standardized β = -0.599, SE = 0.240, z = -2.498, p = 0.012). Post hoc analysis showed a significant positive effect of head motion on the time to reach FC-TRC ≥ 0.8 for children (SE = 0.158, t = 3.360, p = 0.002) and no significant effect for adults (SE = 0.183, t = -0.394, p = 0.696).Supplemental Figure S5Ashows averaged reliability for each motion group. The amount of pre-censored data required to reach FC-TRC ≥ 0.8 was 15.82 minutes for the LMA group (range = 5.94 to 27.74 minutes), 23.74 minutes for the LMC group (range = 10.63 to 36.04 minutes), and 47.10 minutes for the HMC group (range = 22.13 to 78.74 minutes).

FC reliability asymptotically increased with scan duration using two methodological approaches under passive viewing conditions. Both the split session (A) and iterative (B) approaches show improved test–retest correlations (FC-TRC) as scan time increases, with color gradients indicating censored volumes (FD > 0.15 mm). Both approaches highlight variations between adults and children to achieve an FC-TRC value ≥ 0.8. (C) Effect sizes (Cohen’s d) for the split-session approach show the largest gap between low-motion adults (LMA) and high-motion children (HMC), with group differences diminishing at longer scan durations. (D) Effect sizes for the iterative approach show no distinctions between the high-motion children (HMC) and low-motion children (LMC), and a less clear relationship with scan duration. (E, F) The incremental benefits of FC-TRC relative to scan length show the most substantial advantage occurs between the 5- and 10-minute range, with larger gains for children relative to adults.

Using the iterative approach to calculate FC reliability (Fig. 2B), we found a significant effect of age group on time to reach FC-TRC ≥ 0.8 (standardized β = -1.648, SE = 0.235, z = -7.023, p < 0.001), but no significant effect of head motion (standardized β = -0.168, SE = 0.151, z = -1.116, p = 0.264) or an interaction between age group and head motion (standardized β = -0.186, SE = 0.238, z = -0.781, p = 0.435). Averaged FC-TRC for all three motion groups is shown inSupplemental Figure S5B.

We next asked whether the reliability gap between adults and lower- and higher-head motion children closes when sufficient data are collected.Figure 2C and Dshows the effect size for differences in reliability between motion groups for different scan durations. Using the split-session approach (Fig. 2C), we note that up to the largest amounts of split-half data available, the LMA group had higher reliability than either child group, but that more data reduced the gap between motion groups, with all pairwise effects trending toward zero. Using the iterative approach (Fig. 2D), the data show more stable reliability gaps between motion groups, which do not converge with increasing amounts of data, and reliability curves distinguishing adults from children, independent of motion group.

Given the asymptotic shape of reliability curves, with diminishing reliability gains as scan length increased, we plotted the incremental reliability gains inFigure 2E and F. For both methods, the benefits of collecting longer time series are higher for children than for adults at the lowest amounts of data (e.g., going from 5 to 15 minutes). The curves converge and become essentially flat at 40 minutes for the split-session approach and 50 minutes for the iterative approach.

InFigure 3, with equally matched and post-censored data, the LMA group showed uniformly high reliability across the cortex, except within high-dropout ventromedial prefrontal and temporal pole regions. Greater heterogeneity across the brain was observed in both the LMC and HMC groups with the lowest FC-TRC values overall in the HMC group. Differences in reliability were small and relatively uniform across the cortex for the LMA and LMC groups. Differences between the LMA group compared with the HMC group were larger, particularly in regions of the ventral prefrontal cortex and temporal lobe, areas typically associated with the frontoparietal, default mode, and limbic networks. Specifically, using the Schaefer 17-network atlas, regions exceeding a difference greater than 0.2 units between the LMA and HMC groups were parcels from the Control B (also known as frontoparietal network), Limbic A and B, Default A and B, and Salience/Ventral Attention A networks. While these observations are broadly consistent using ICC reliability measures inSupplemental Figure S6, the ICC analysis revealed more pronounced differences between motion groups. To investigate the source of this difference further, we considered differences in tMean between groups as a marker for signal dropout. We found a significant positive correlation between tMean and FC-TRC for both groups across all parcels (p < 0.001), with Limbic parcels exhibiting both low FC-TRC and low tMean (Supplemental Fig. S7). We next considered group differences in FC-TRC in relation to group differences in tMean within Default B, Limbic A, and Control B networks (Supplemental Fig. S8). We found that parcels showing the largest group difference in FC-TRC in LMA relative to HMC also tended to exhibit larger group differences in tMean. Though not all parcels followed this trend, the significant positive correlation (β = 0.205, p < 0.001) suggested that regional mean signal may be a contributing factor to differences in FC reliability.

Regional differences in FC reliability across motion groups under passive viewing conditions. Cortical surface maps illustrate regional variations in test–retest correlations (FC-TRC) across motion groups using 24 minutes of split-half data. The left column shows FC-TRC maps for each motion group, with low-motion adults (LMA) demonstrating higher overall FC-TRC than both child groups, particularly in the precuneus, superior frontal lobe, and inferior parietal lobe. The right column features between-group difference maps, highlighting disparities between the low-motion adults (LMA) and high-motion children (HMC) within the frontoparietal, default mode, and limbic networks. Brighter colors represent regions with the most pronounced differences in FC-TRC between groups. The Schaefer 1,000 parcel 17-network atlas was used to parcellate brain regions, and the split-session approach was used to compute FC-TRC.

Next, we assessed whether some functional network edges are more reliable with smaller amounts of data and whether acquiring more data improves reliability uniformly or focally (Fig. 4). With 5 minutes of post-censored split-half data, specific edges within the DMN, FP, and visual networks exhibited reliability values in the “good” to “excellent” ICC range across all three motion groups. With 24 minutes of split-half data, inter-network edges remained in the “poor” and “fair” ranges across all motion groups with fewer “good” to “excellent” reliability edges overall (both within and between) in the HMC group. With 54 minutes of split-half data, available only for the LMA and LMC groups, we observed global improvements in reliability both within and between most edges across both motion groups, suggesting additional benefits may be achieved between 24 and 54 minutes of scan time when feasible. Comparing ICC values for average network edges (Fig. 5A) with the average edge-wise ICC values for the same networks (Fig. 5B), we found that averaged network values generally had higher ICC values, supporting the use of network-averaged features from a reliability perspective.

Edge-wise Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC) reliability across motion groups and scan durations under passive viewing conditions. Matrices show ICC reliability for edge connections at 5, 10, 24, and 54 minutes of split-half data. Some edges show good-to-excellent reliability at 5 minutes of split-half data, especially within the default mode network, frontoparietal, and visual networks. As split-half scan duration increases, all groups demonstrate increases in edge-wise ICC reliability, with the most pronounced improvements noted in the low-motion adults (LMA) (left column). High-motion children (right column) demonstrate consistently lower ICC reliability across all scan durations. ICC values are color coded as follows: poor (0 < ICC ≤ 0.4, dark purple), fair (0.4 < ICC ≤ 0.59, violet), good (0.6 ≤ ICC ≤ 0.74, orange), and excellent (ICC ≥ 0.75, yellow).

Network-wise Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC) reliability comparing pre- and post-averaging approaches under passive viewing conditions. Matrices show ICC reliability across motion groups at 5, 10, 24, and 54 minutes of split-half data. (A) Network-wise values averaged prior to ICC computation generally resulted in relatively stronger ICC strengths relative to values averaged in the same networks post-ICC computation in panel (B). ICC values are color coded as follows: poor (0 < ICC ≤ 0.4, dark purple), fair (0.4 < ICC ≤ 0.59, violet), good (0.6 ≤ ICC ≤ 0.74, orange), and excellent (ICC ≥ 0.75, yellow).

We next considered specific functional networks with average high- and low-reliability features, to ask whether increasing scan time uniformly increases reliability (Fig. 6). Specifically, we selected DMN and FP as the higher reliability networks and AUD and SMd for our lower reliability networks. Overall, ICC ranges improved with increasing scan duration, but for some networks, the gap in reliability between the lowest and highest motion participants remained relatively stable (DMN, AUD), while for others, the gap was smaller and less consistent across scan durations (FP, SMd). This suggests that while increasing scan length is generally beneficial for edge-wise reliability, it does not always overcome residual effects of signal drop out, head motion, and censoring on the BOLD time series.

Intraclass Correlation Coefficient (ICC) reliability in specifically selected high-reliability networks (DMN, FP) and low-reliability networks (AUD, SMd) during passive viewing. (A, B) The difference between groups in ICC reliability remains large between low-motion and high-motion groups for the DMN and AUD networks. In contrast, in (C, D) the difference observed in the FP and SMd networks is less widespread. Low-motion adults (LMA, light blue circles) consistently exhibited higher ICC values than both low-motion children (LMC, dark blue triangles) and high-motion children (HMC, red triangles). ICC values are color coded as follows: poor (0 < ICC ≤ 0.4, dark purple), fair (0.4 < ICC ≤ 0.59, violet), good (0.6 ≤ ICC ≤ 0.74, orange), and excellent (ICC ≥ 0.75, yellow).

Participant drowsiness was significantly associated with viewing condition (F = 6.95, p = 0.001, ηp² = 0.139) (Fig. 7A), but there was no significant effect of motion group (F = 2.96, p = 0.055) or an interaction between motion group and condition (F = 0.48, p = 0.753). Post hoc analyses found self-reported drowsiness scores were significantly higher in the low-demand condition than both narrative (p-adjusted = 0.003) and non-narrative conditions (p-adjusted = 0.007). Attention scores also significantly associated with viewing condition (F = 9.11, p < 0.001, ηp² = 0.175) (Fig. 7B), but there was no significant effect of motion group (F = 1.78, p = 0.172) or motion group by viewing condition interaction (F = 0.59, p = 0.673). Post hoc tests showed that attention scores were significantly lower in the low-demand condition than in both narrative (p-adjusted = 0.001) and non-narrative (p-adjusted < 0.001) conditions. Levene’s tests revealed significant differences in variance for the drowsiness measure across conditions (F = 3.62, p = 0.029), with the low-demand condition showing the highest variance. Similarly, for the attention measure, there were significant differences in variances across viewing conditions (F = 11.74, p < 0.001), with the variance in attention scores for the low-demand condition again substantially higher than the other conditions.

Trade-offs between participant engagement, data retention, and FC reliability across viewing conditions. (A) Self-reported drowsiness levels were highest during the low-demand condition across all motion groups. (B) Attention scores were significantly reduced during the low-demand condition compared with other conditions. (C) Data retention percentages post-censoring showed significant differences between the low-demand and non-narrative conditions. (D) FC-TRC, measured at 5 minutes of split-half data, was highest during the low-demand condition across motion groups and had significantly higher FC-TRC than the narrative condition. Low-motion adults (LMA, light blue circles) consistently showed better metrics than low-motion children (LMC, dark blue triangles) and high-motion children (HMC, red triangles). Significance: **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.

In terms of data retention, we observed significant differences between the motion groups (F = 84.701, p < 0.001, ηp² = 0.797), viewing conditions (F = 27.755, p < 0.001, ηp² = 0.392), and their interaction (F = 7.904, p < 0.001, ηp² = 0.269) inFigure 7C.Post hocanalyses found that the HMC group had significantly lower data retention than both LMA (p-adjusted < 0.001) and LMC groups (p-adjusted < 0.001), with a difference of 30.8% and 26.3%, respectively, while the LMA and LMC groups did not differ significantly (p-adjusted = 0.123). When considering viewing condition,post hocanalyses found that the non-narrative condition had significantly higher data retention than the low-demand condition (p-adjusted = 0.008), with a difference of 10.6%. Retention differences between the other conditions were not statistically significant (p-adjusted > 0.05). When considering the motion group by condition interaction, we found that the HMC group had significantly lower retention than both LMA and LMC groups across all conditions (all p-adjusted < 0.001), with the largest differences found in the low-demand condition (HMC vs. LMA: 37.8%, p < 0.001; HMC vs. LMC: 32.8%, p-adjusted < 0.001) and smallest in the non-narrative condition (HMC vs. LMA: 20.2%, p < 0.001; HMC vs. LMC: 18.5%, p-adjusted < 0.001). We found no significant differences between LMA and LMC groups for any condition (all p-adjusted > 0.09). In sum, these results indicate that the choice of viewing condition impacts both variation in participant engagement and data retention.

Finally, we considered the effect of viewing condition on averaged FC reliability across motion groups using only the split-session approach (Supplemental Fig. S9) as there was insufficient post-censored data to use the iterative approach. We assessed reliability differences using 5 minutes of split-half data and found significant main effects of motion group, with the LMA group showing the highest FC-TRC (β = 0.160, p < 0.001), followed by the LMC group (β = 0.079, p = 0.003), relative to the HMC group. More notably, inFigure 7D, we found effects of viewing condition on FC reliability with the low-demand condition achieving significantly higher reliability (β = 0.022, p = 0.031). Conducting pairwise comparisons between viewing conditions, we found the only significant difference occurred between the narrative and low-demand conditions (t = -2.742, d = -0.265), with the low-demand condition showing higher FC reliability than the narrative condition. Neither attention nor drowsiness scores had significant effects on FC-TRC (both p > 0.3). FC-TRC showed a significant positive relationship with tSD across all viewing conditions (Supplemental Fig. S10; p < 0.001). Parcels with both low FC-TRC and low tSD were found within Limbic, Default, and Control networks. InSupplemental Fig. S11, we observed a significant positive correlation between ΔtSD and ΔFC-TRC for all condition pairs (all p’s < 0.001). This relationship was strongest for comparisons involving the low-demand condition. Comparisons against the low-demand condition also showed the highest mean ΔtSD. Specifically, we found ΔtSD was significantly greater than zero for low-demand versus narrative (t = 8.751, d = 0.277, p < 0.001) and low-demand versus non-narrative comparisons (t = 11.198, d = 0.354, p < 0.001), with no significant difference observed between the narrative and non-narrative conditions (t = 0.734, d = 0.023, p = 0.232). Overall, this suggests that slightly higher tSD in the low-demand condition may help explain higher reliability. We also show that viewing condition impacts tSD in a region-dependent manner inSupplemental Fig. S12. Specifically, the low-demand condition had greater tSD in visual and default regions than the other conditions. The spatial distribution of tSD also revealed that superior temporal regions had increased variability in narrative and non-narrative conditions relative to low demand.

While adult studies have provided data on the relationship between scan time and FC reliability (Braga & Buckner, 2017;Gordon et al., 2017;Laumann et al., 2015), there are no current guidelines specific to pediatric samples. This is an important gap given the complexities involved with imaging children, including higher rates of head motion, difficulty remaining still for long scan durations, and the need for child-friendly viewing conditions (Barkovich et al., 2019;Raschle et al., 2012). Using repeated sampling of adults and pre-adolescent children across varying movie and video content stimuli, the present study considered FC reliability as a function of scan duration, head motion, and viewing condition. Overall, our findings suggest that although reliability increases with scan time,bothhead motion and younger age can have a dampening effect on FC reliability even for relatively long durations. Age and head motion effects on reliability are not spatially uniform and may impact anterior/ventral regions most strongly. We also found that the choice of viewing condition significantly impacts both data retention and FC reliability. Together, our work suggests special consideration is needed when adapting study designs from adults to children.

We considered two approaches for calculating test–retest correlations, which we refer to as split-session and iterative. The split-session and iterative approaches each offers distinct perspectives for assessing FC reliability. The split-session approach captures the practical scenario where a specific amount of data is collected and some volumes within that time may be corrupted by motion. There are similarities to intraclass correlation approaches where samples are compared but no ground truth is available. The iterative approach, used in previous adult studies (Gordon et al., 2017;Laumann et al., 2015), attempts to compare data against a highly reliable “ground truth”, and specifically removes information about temporal sequence and head motion losses. This approach averages FC reliability estimates across many sub-samples of data and, as implemented here, may inflate FC measures due to temporal autocorrelation introduced by sampling data within sessions. This limitation could be mitigated in future work by purposefully preventing within-session sampling. The choice between approaches ultimately depends on the research question. Researchers may opt for the split-session approach when evaluating FC reliability when only shorter acquisitions are available, whereas the iterative approach may be utilized when assessing how FC reliability scales with increasing data against a stable reference and temporal sequencing and head motion are not considerations of interest. Both approaches show age effects, though in the split-session approach the reliability gap between groups decreased with increasing scan length, whereas the gap remained relatively stable in the iterative approach. Together, these results suggest that (1) connectomes calculated from continuous and motion-free data (e.g., 10 minutes) may be more reliable than from the same amount of post-censored data and (2) relatively lower whole-connectome test–retest correlations in children cannot be solely attributed to head motion.

Several studies have examined FC reliability in pediatric populations (Moore et al., 2024;Somandepalli et al., 2015;Thomason et al., 2011;Y. Wang et al., 2021), though direct comparisons of FC reliability between children and adults remain limited. Our results of FC reliability differences between adults and children align with previous work showing age-related differences in task fMRI reliability (Kennedy et al., 2022;Koolschijn et al., 2011). We speculate that our findings represent a meaningful developmental difference, rather than solely due to group differences in head motion, as we know that brain structure and function change across adolescence (Blakemore, 2008;Casey et al., 2008;Mills et al., 2016). These differences may reflect age-related differences in functional network topography (Bottenhorn et al., 2023;Cui et al., 2020) further evidenced by “fuzzier” network boundaries in pre-adolescents (Tooley et al., 2022), which could ultimately translate to lower connectome reliability.

By considering FC-TRC as a function of scan duration, our findings provide information about reliability for shorter duration scans, as well as for pediatric precision fMRI applications. On average, children required nearly twice the post-censored scan time (24.6 minutes) compared with adults (14.4 minutes) to reach a predefined level of whole-connectome reliability (FC-TRC ≥ 0.8), which was achieved with more than double the amount of data (36.5 minutes of pre-censored data required for children and 16.9 minutes for adults). These findings underline the importance of minimizing head motion by using engaging stimuli (e.g., movies) (Finn & Bandettini, 2021;Greene et al., 2018;Meer et al., 2020;Vanderwal et al., 2015) or weighted blankets and incentive systems (Horien et al., 2020). Moreover, real-time motion monitoring systems such as FIRMM (Dosenbach et al., 2017) could be calibrated for children to require longer amounts of motion-free data, given that motion effects reduce FC reliability even post-censoring (Satterthwaite et al., 2012;Van Dijk et al., 2012).

In terms of implications for precision fMRI, our study speaks of the feasibility of pfMRI (Gordon et al., 2017;Gratton, Kraus, et al., 2020;Michon et al., 2022) in pre-adolescent children during naturalistic conditions. Across four sessions, our study retained all recruited participants and found no significant differences in sex distribution or age between the low- and high-motion child groups. Our results do, however, suggest that at relatively long scan durations, reliability gaps between adults and children, particularly high-motion children, persist and that while volume censoring techniques can mitigate motion-related bias (Ciric et al., 2017;Power et al., 2014), there may remain increased variance in these data (Parkes et al., 2018). Moreover, spatial differences in reliability suggest that even with longer scan durations, it may be challenging to precisely delineate specific functional networks in high-motion children.

Exploring group differences in spatial patterns of FC-TRC using 24 minutes of post-censored split-half data showed that adults had relatively uniform and high reliability across the cortical surface, while children, especially high-motion children, exhibited greater spatial variance and lower overall reliability. The most prominent differences between adults and high-motion children were observed in ventral prefrontal and temporal regions, frequently associated with limbic networks that are prone to dropout. The differences observed in temporal mean signal between low-motion adults and high-motion children suggest that reduced FC reliability in high-motion children may partly reflect spatial variation in signal quality. Our findings suggest that results pertaining to these regions should be interpreted with greater caution due to their lower reliability relative to other regions, particularly when examining age-related differences or longitudinal changes. We also note that while we used a multiband, multi-echo fMRI protocol for this study—acquisitions that have shown to improve temporal resolution and reduce susceptibility artifacts (Lynch et al., 2020)—this did not completely mitigate reliability in high dropout regions. Approaches to processing these data in the context of head motion, respiration, etc. are still evolving. Further, protocols with additional echoes, beyond our three-echo sequence, may provide both improved T2* fitting accuracy and differentiation between BOLD and non-BOLD signal and, therefore, affect the test–retest reliability measures reported here. However, there are trade-offs associated with this choice, commonly increased scan time, and acceleration factor requirements (Kundu et al., 2017;Posse, 2012). Studies that target such vulnerable regions may also benefit from newer acquisition techniques such as Echo Planar Time-resolved Imaging (EPTI) to further combat distortion and blurring in drop-out regions (F. Wang et al., 2019).

Practically, with 5 minutes of post-censored data, we generally found poor ICC reliability across all groups and functional networks, aligning with prior work that suggests short scans result in poor overall network reliability (Noble et al., 2019). We observed global improvements in reliability from 5 to 24 minutes of split-half data across groups, consistent with studies evaluating the benefits of longer scan durations (Anderson et al., 2011;Birn et al., 2013;Noble, Scheinost, et al., 2017;Shehzad et al., 2009;Termenon et al., 2016;Tian et al., 2021). Expanding on our previous finding on the effects of motion on reliability, here, we again found ICC reliability differences between age and motion groups even at 24 minutes of split-half scan time. At 54 minutes of split-half scan duration, a small gap between low-motion adults and low-motion children remained. Averaging functional network values prior to ICC computation, rather than post-ICC computation, generally boosted reliability and complements previous findings (J. Wang et al., 2017), establishing superior ICC ranges for averaged network values compared with unit-wise values, though most remained in the poor to fair range with 10 minutes of post-censored split-half data.

Though FC reliability analyses presented here examined the consistency of multivariate functional connectivity patterns using test–retest Pearson’s correlations (Damoiseaux et al., 2006) and univariate connectivity patterns using ICC (Brandmaier et al., 2018;Chen et al., 2018), there are additional multivariate approaches that can be employed. Measures such as discriminability and image intraclass correlation coefficient (I2C2) demonstrate higher reliability than univariate ICC (Camp et al., 2024;Noble, Spann, et al., 2017) and these multivariate metrics have also shown improved FC reliability in visual and temporal brain regions using movies compared with rest (Shearer et al., 2024). Future work should examine developmental differences in FC reliability by incorporating these complementary multivariate measures.

Our analysis of viewing conditions revealed significant effects on both data retention and participant engagement. Overall, in adults, both the narrative and non-narrative conditions had comparable post-censored data retained, while in children, the more engaging non-narrative condition retained the most data. Across all participants, the low-demand condition had the highest drowsiness levels and lowest attention scores, and the highest variation across participants. Our findings align with previous work showing that engaging naturalistic paradigms enhances compliance, increases homogeneity of engagement levels, and reduces motion in developmental samples (Greene et al., 2018;Vanderwal et al., 2015).

Based on our findings and the literature, the relationship between viewing condition and FC reliability appears complex. Here, we found that the impact of viewing condition on FC reliability was significant, albeit relatively small, with the low-demand condition showing both higher FC reliability and greater signal variability relative to the narrative and non-narrative conditions. This pattern is consistent with prior findings that tasks tend to dampen signal variability (Cole et al., 2014) and signal variability relates to FC reliability (Rai et al., 2024). Researchers selecting naturalistic stimuli should consider not only engagement, but also how stimulus conditions modulate BOLD signal variability, given its influence on FC reliability. This appears to contradict prior work using repeated presentation of identical movie clips that found generally higher test–retest reliability of videos compared with rest (Finn & Bandettini, 2021;Meer et al., 2020;J. Wang et al., 2017;Zhang et al., 2022). Our study used different movie and non-narrative clips across sessions, which may have contributed to lower reliability than the more stationary content in the low-demand videos. Other work that has considered connectome reliability using different movie clips has shown lower intra-session reliability for Hollywood movies than rest (Hlinka et al., 2022), and comparable ICCs for varied movie content relative to rest (Tian et al., 2021). Although it has been shown that connectivity from eyes-open rest is more reliable than eyes-closed (Patriat et al., 2013) few studies have systematically varied movie content and compared reliability.Tian et al. (2021)found that whole-brain connectome ICCs were marginally higher for independent Creative Commons style movies compared with commercial Hollywood style movies. Relative to rest, tasks show regionally specific patterns of differential reliability (Rai et al., 2024). Given that movies broadly engage multiple brain regions (Bottenhorn et al., 2023), it is notable thatO’Connor et al. (2017)found higher FC reliability in the visual network during movies and Inscapes, yet higher reliability in the frontoparietal network during task and rest. Collectively, these findings highlight important trade-offs between stimulus choice and FC reliability that should be considered in future naturalistic study designs.

The choice of viewing condition for pediatric fMRI can be challenging, and the options we compared here are far from exhaustive. While the choice of stimuli geared toward pre-adolescent children may limit the generalizability of our findings, we hope that this comparison provides some useful metrics for consideration of trade-offs in stimulus choice. We note that while the low-demand condition used here was inspired by Inscapes (Vanderwal et al., 2015), it is not identical to Inscapes or other nature-based passive viewing conditions (Vanderwal et al., 2019), which could show different results in terms of reliability. Recent work suggests that stimulus choice can significantly influence inter-subject synchrony patterns (Li et al., 2021) given impacts from movie content and valence (Mochalski et al., 2024), as well as scene transitions (Lu et al., 2016). In turn, brain–behavior relationships are specific to a particular movie which may limit the generalizability of specific findings (Leipold et al., 2024). In the present work, we used three conditions that varied in terms of content and pacing, enabling a perspective on how much movie choice might impact FC reliability.

An important consideration with stimulus choice is the difference in understanding and processing the video content across ages. While this study did not directly measure content comprehension, we can speculate that the narrative movie condition likely contains layers of meaning more understandable to adults than children, whereas both the low-demand and non-narrative clips may be more similarly understood across both age groups. This is an essential factor given the increased synchrony of neural responses during naturalistic stimuli with age (Cantlon & Li, 2013;Moraczewski et al., 2018;Richardson et al., 2018), suggesting that as children develop, their understanding of social and emotional content likely evolves and may translate to older adolescents showing more adult-like FC reliability patterns than younger children (Blakemore, 2008). Here, we acknowledge the limitation that group differences in reliability could be impacted by differences in comprehension but also engagement and depth of processing, and that these are not separable from differences related to age. Overall, the field can benefit from a more systematic characterization of video properties (e.g., emotional valence and scene transitions) with the goal of identifying stimuli that maximize FC reliability and balance between compliance, engagement, and reducing head motion (Finn, 2021).

Strengths of this study include leveraging a unique dataset with >2.5 hours data collected in pre-adolescent children and well-matched adult controls. Limitations include a narrow pre-adolescent age range which could limit the generalizability of our findings and a limited scene-by-scene characterization of the naturalistic content. We also note that sample, data acquisition (including viewing condition), scanner characteristics, and processing choices (such as multi-echo ICA and global signal regression) all impact reliability (Anderson et al., 2011;Bennett & Miller, 2013;Cho et al., 2021;Graff et al., 2022;Murphy & Fox, 2017;Noble, Spann, et al., 2017;Noble et al., 2019;Parkes et al., 2018;Rai et al., 2024;Ramduny et al., 2024;Tozzi et al., 2020). Therefore, specific values presented here will not apply directly to different study designs. While an exhaustive comparison of scan parameters, sample characteristics, and processing and methodological choices is beyond the scope of this work, we feel that our findings can nonetheless provide useful guidelines for adapting study designs to pediatric samples and add to the chorus that reliability considerations are important for reproducible neuroimaging findings (Bennett & Miller, 2010;Lynch et al., 2020;Vanderwal et al., 2019;Xu et al., 2023).

Using a unique dense sampling dataset, this study provides several practical considerations for fMRI-FC in children under passive viewing conditions. First, we demonstrated that dense sampling designs are feasible in pre-adolescent children, however, we emphasize the need for more extensive data collection for pediatric samples to achieve FC reliability comparable with adults. Relatedly, we also observed that reliability improvements show diminishing returns after 40–50 minutes of post-censoring data and that head motion may remain a persistent confound, such that differences in reliability remained substantial between lower and higher motion participants even with 24 minutes of split-half data (48 minutes of total scan duration). In terms of spatial patterns of reliability, our work suggests that head motion has a particularly detrimental impact on high-dropout regions. And lastly, our investigation of viewing condition showed nuanced trade-offs between data retention, participant engagement, and FC reliability. Together, our findings provide insights toward more reliable fMRI-FC in children.

We would like to acknowledge the dedication of all the families that participated in our study, along with the support of the Diagnostic Imaging staff at the Alberta Children’s Hospital.

The preprocessed surface-projected PreciseKIDS dataset, and descriptions of all viewing conditions, along with Python version 3.12.2 and MATLAB version 9.11.0 (R2021b) (The MathWorks Inc., 2022) scripts used in this study are available athttps://github.com/BrayNeuroimagingLab/BNL_open.