Risk stratification for sudden cardiac death (SCD) mainly relies on severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), but its poor predictive efficacy fails to meet clinical needs. Myocardial scarring identified using cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging has emerged as a potent risk indicator for SCD and life‐threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias (LTVTA). This study aimed to develop a risk prediction score for SCD and ventricular tachyarrhythmias in symptomatic heart failure. Consecutive patients with nonischemic heart failure undergoing CMR were monitored from 2018 to 2024. A risk stratification score was developed by integrating CMR parameters with clinical variables. Among the 199 patients, the median LVEF was 32.7%, and the average age was 50.3 ± 15.2 years. During a median observation period of 3 years, 21 (10.5%) patients experienced LTVTA. Among multiple CMR parameters, the presence of late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) was the only independent risk factor for LTVTA. The final risk scoring model comprised the presence of LGE (hazard ratio, 10.68;p= 0.023), assigned a score of 2; syncope (hazard ratio, 4.41;p= 0.003), assigned a score of 1; and nonsustained ventricular tachycardia (hazard ratio, 3.82;p= 0.004), assigned a score of 1. A total score of ≥ 3 was considered high risk. Harrell's C‐statistic was 0.814 in the derivation cohort and 0.785 in the external validation cohort. The 3‐year cumulative risks for the low‐ and high‐risk groups were 3.6% and 32.8%, respectively. Among CMR parameters, the presence of LGE was identified as the sole independent and strong risk marker of LTVTA. The novel scoring model may assist in the preliminary screening of patients with symptomatic heart failure with a potentially elevated risk.

The presence of LGE, syncope, and nonsustained ventricular tachycardia were identified as risk markers of LTVTA. A total score of ≥ 3 was considered high risk. The novel scoring model may assist in the preliminary screening of patients with symptomatic heart failure with a potentially elevated risk.

Patients with symptomatic heart failure exhibit a six to nine times higher risk of sudden cardiac death (SCD) than the general population [1,2]. Early identification of patients at high risk of SCD and life‐threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias (LTVTA) is critical because of their poor overall survival rates of less than 10% [3]. Current guidelines for SCD risk stratification and primary prevention mainly rely on severely decreased left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) [4]. Nevertheless, this criterion faces a dual challenge of overtreatment and underprediction [5,6,7,8]. Furthermore, emerging evidence questions the association between LVEF and SCD [9,10].

Over the past few decades, researchers have evaluated various clinical factors as potential SCD predictors, but no reliable candidate was identified until the development of late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging. LGE‐CMR has a distinct advantage in detecting myocardial scarring, which serves as an arrhythmogenic substrate [11,12]. The prognostic significance of LGE‐CMR is evident within the most recent guidelines for the prevention of lethal ventricular tachyarrhythmias [4].

Despite new SCD risk stratification methods, such as the 1.5 prevention indication [13], multiparametric quantitative tools, especially those including LGE, remain lacking, and a clinically feasible assessment capable of more precise predictions is urgently needed. Therefore, we aimed to develop an LVEF‐independent risk prediction score for SCD and ventricular tachyarrhythmias in symptomatic heart failure by combining multiple CMR parameters with routine clinical variables.

This study retrospectively included consecutive patients diagnosed with symptomatic heart failure caused by nonischemic cardiomyopathy (non‐ICM) undergoing LGE‐CMR examination at Shanghai General Hospital between January 2018 and June 2023. The definition and diagnostic criteria of heart failure are provided in theSupporting Information[14]. The inclusion criteria were 18–80 years of age and a diagnosis of congestive heart failure, that is, New York Heart Association classes II–IV. The full spectrum of LVEF was covered without being limited to a specific range. The exclusion criteria comprised ICM (see the definition in theSupporting Information); hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; primary valvular disease; primary electrical diseases; congenital heart disease; infiltrative disease; acute myocarditis; and a history of cardiac arrest.

The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Shanghai General Hospital (2018KY250). Written informed consent was obtained from all participants, and the study was conducted in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki.

Patients underwent follow‐up evaluations in cardiology clinics or wards every 6 months and had at least one annual telephone follow‐up by a cardiovascular specialist. All follow‐ups were concluded by October 2024. The follow‐up assessment data included patient survival, arrhythmia status, and therapeutic adjustments. The causes of death were determined based on the death diagnosis or certificates, referencing the International Classification of Diseases codes. Arrhythmia status was verified by reviewing electrocardiograms, Holter electrocardiograms, or other relevant medical records at the time of the event. Patients with an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) or cardiac resynchronization therapy with a defibrillator (CRT‐D) underwent follow‐ups in electrophysiological clinics every 6 months or irregular follow‐ups post‐ICD shock treatment. Stored electrograms were retrieved, and the appropriateness of ICD therapy was evaluated by a cardiovascular specialist.

The study endpoint was set as the occurrence of LTVTA, characterized as a combination of adverse events, with SCD, ventricular fibrillation, and hemodynamically unstable sustained ventricular tachycardia (> 30 s), and appropriate ICD therapy, including either shock or antitachycardia pacing. SCD was defined as an unexpected natural death presumed to be a cardiac cause that occurs within 1 h of symptom onset [4].

CMR imaging was performed using 3.0‐T magnetic resonance scanners from two manufacturers (Ingenia, Philips; and Vida, Siemens). Cine images were captured via an electrocardiogram‐gated balanced steady‐state free procession sequence in both left ventricle (LV) long‐ and short‐axis planes. All images were acquired during multiple end‐expiration breath‐holding. Delayed‐enhancement imaging using a phase‐sensitive inversion recovery sequence in both short‐axis and four‐chamber views was conducted 10 min following intravenous injection of 0.2 mmol/kg gadolinium. The LGE imaging parameters included 8‐mm slice thickness; 2.4‐ms repetition time; 1.1‐ms echo time; 1.5 × 1.5‐mm2voxel size; and matrix size ranging from 160 × 138 to 176 × 192. All images were uploaded to Cvi42 version 5.17 (Circle Cardiovascular Imaging Inc., Calgary, Canada) for subsequent analysis.

Based on current guidelines [16], LGE presence, mass, extent, location, and pattern were assessed by a cardiovascular imaging specialist with over 10 years of expertise in CMR interpretation and analysis, who was blinded to patients' outcomes. LGE was deemed present only when observed in both LV short‐ and long‐axis views. Right ventricular LGE was not observed in this study. An LGE mass was quantified as zero in the absence of visual enhancement [17]. Myocardial scarring was measured by comparing a signal threshold to reference myocardium. Remote myocardium exhibiting neither enhancement nor abnormal wall motion was used to derive the mean and standard deviations. The discrepancy between LGE mass (in grams) measured under the 2‐ and 5‐standard deviation conditions was classified as gray zone fibrosis (GZF) [17] (Figure1). The LGE mass was calculated by multiplying total LGE area, myocardial specific gravity (1.055 g/mL), slice thickness, and interslice gap. The ratio of the LGE to LV myocardial masses was defined as the LGE extent.

Cardiovascular magnetic resonance with late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) is used to image the myocardial scar, which is considered to be present only if it is visible in both (A) long‐axis and (B) short‐axis views. The LGE mass is calculated using (C) 2‐SD and (D) 5‐SD methods. The gray zone fibrosis mass is the difference between the LGE mass measured by the 2‐SD and 5‐SD methods.

Candidate risk markers identified in previous studies, including familial SCD, history of syncope, frontal QRS‐T angle, fragmented QRS complexes, and electrocardiogram‐based LV hypertrophy [18,19,20,21], were also considered. The definitions and diagnostic criteria for the included variables are detailed in TableS1. The criteria for defining frequent premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) differed across studies and included PVCs ≥ 10 times per hour [13], > 1000 PVCs per 24 h [22], and > 5% PVC burden over 24 h [23].

The external validation cohort included 295 primary prevention patients from the ESTIMATED study [24], including cases from the National Center for Cardiovascular Disease of China, that were diagnosed with nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy between December 2010 and July 2015.

Variables and samples with more than 30% missing values were excluded. Other missing data were imputed in quantitative variables using the mean and in qualitative variables using the mode. Student'sttest or the Mann–WhitneyUtest and the chi‐squared test were used to compare quantitative and qualitative variables.

Correlations between candidate risk factors and the endpoint were assessed utilizing Cox proportional hazards regression. A multivariate model was constructed using forward stepwise selection by incorporating variables significant in univariate analysis withp< 0.05. A logarithmic curve was fitted to describe the nonlinear relationship between LGE extent and LTVTA risk, based on the HRs corresponding to the tertiles of LGE extent. A variance inflation factor > 10 was considered indicative of multicollinearity. Based on the Framingham Heart Study [25], each risk factor in the final scoring model was assigned points corresponding to its regression coefficient.

Kaplan–Meier curves were used to show survival disparities between low‐ and high‐risk groups and compared using log‐rank tests. The Kaplan–Meier analysis was also employed to estimate the cumulative LTVTA risk. The scoring model underwent validation in an external cohort. Model performance was evaluated using Harrell's C‐statistic and calibration plots. C‐statistics between different models were compared using the DeLong test. Statistical significance was set as a two‐sidedpvalue < 0.05. All statistical analyses were conducted using R version 4.3.2 (R Foundation, Vienna, Austria).

A total of 210 patients were recruited, 199 of whom completed all follow‐ups (Figure2). The average age was 50.3 ± 15.2 years, and 73.8% of the patients were male. The median LVEF was 32.7%, with 53.7% of the patients exhibiting an LVEF ≤ 35% and 29.1% exhibiting an LVEF ≥ 50%. The main baseline characteristics are displayed in Table1; a complete version is provided in TableS2.

Study flowchart. CHF, congestive heart failure; CMR, cardiovascular magnetic resonance; LGE, late gadolinium enhancement.

Abbreviations: ACE, angiotensin‐converting enzyme; ARB, angiotensin II receptor blocker; ARNi, angiotensin receptor–neprilysin inhibitor; CLBBB, complete left bundle branch block; CRT‐D, cardiac resynchronization therapy with a defibrillator; ICD, implantable cardioverter defibrillator; LVEDD, left ventricular end‐diastolic diameter; LVEF, left ventricular ejection fraction; LVESD, left ventricular end‐systolic diameter; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; MRA, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists; NSVT, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia; PVCs, premature ventricular contractions.

Over a median follow‐up duration of 3 years (interquartile range, 2.3–4.5 years), 21 (10.5%) patients reached the endpoint, including six with SCD, three with ventricular fibrillation, four with sustained ventricular tachycardia, one with torsade de pointes, and seven who underwent appropriate ICD therapies. A total of 20 (10%) patients underwent ICD (n= 15) or CRT‐D (n= 5) implantation during the observation period. Among these, seven (35%) patients received appropriate ICD therapies.

The baseline CMR characteristics are presented in Table2. LGE was observed in 56.7% of patients. The median LGE extent was 1.69% among patients exhibiting LGE and 0.72% across the entire cohort. The median GZF mass was 1.72 g in patients with LGE and 0.81 g in the entire cohort.

Abbreviations: CMR, cardiovascular magnetic resonance; LGE, late gadolinium enhancement; LV, left ventricular.

Significant differences in LGE were observed between the groups with and without LTVTA, whereas LVEF showed negligible variation, regardless of whether echocardiography or CMR was used for the measurements (p= 0.351 and 0.238, respectively). Interestingly, LTVTA was more frequently observed in patients lacking severe LV systolic dysfunction. Patients with an LVEF of ≤ 35%, 36%–49%, and ≥ 50%, as measured by echocardiography, showed LTVTA incidences of 9.3%, 10.1%, and 11.8%, respectively. When evaluated by CMR, the corresponding incidences were 10.2%, 20.5%, and 5.1%, respectively. LGE exhibited strong negative predictive power (98.8%), with only 1 out of 21 LTVTA cases lacking LGE.

The main results of the univariate analyses are available in Table3, with a complete version in TableS3. Eleven variables with a significant effect were identified, including previous syncope, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia (NSVT), frequent PVCs (≥ 10/h), QRS duration, LGE presence, LV end‐diastolic volume, mid‐wall LGE, and both LGE mass and extent.

Univariate and multivariate analyses for prediction of LTVTA.

Abbreviations: LGE, late gadolinium enhancement; LV, left ventricular end‐diastolic volume; NSVT, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia; PVCs, premature ventricular contractions.

Defined as premature ventricular contractions ≥ 10/h.

Multivariate Cox regression analysis identified three variables as independent risk factors: (1) the presence of LGE (hazard ratio [HR], 10.68;p= 0.023), (2) history of syncope (HR, 4.41;p= 0.003), and (3) NSVT (HR, 3.82;p= 0.004) (Table3). Minimal multicollinearity was observed among these variables. The other LGE parameters, namely, mass, extent, location, pattern, and GZF mass, were not independently correlated with LTVTA. The LVEF, regardless of analysis as a continuous or dichotomous (≤ 35%) variable, exhibited no significant association with the endpoint.

To further explore the relationship between LGE extent and LTVTA risk, a nonlinear curve was fitted to describe their interaction (Figure3). Compared with patients without LGE, the age‐ and sex‐adjusted HRs for LGE extent tertiles of < 1.32%, 1.32%–2.84%, and > 2.84% were 12.51, 21.33, and 17.20, respectively.

Nonlinear relationship between LGE extent and life‐threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias (LTVTA). Patients presenting LGE were trisected into equal groups based on LGE extent: < 1.32%, 1.32%–2.84%, and > 2.84%. Hazard ratios for LTVTA were calculated at the median LGE extent of each tertile, using patients without LGE as the reference. A nonlinear curve was fitted to these hazard ratios.

Regression coefficients were obtained and served as a basis for point assignment (Table4). The final SNE2score incorporated syncope (1 point), NSVT (1 point), and the presence of LGE (2 points) (Figure4).

Abbreviations: LGE, late gadolinium enhancement; NSVT, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia.

The SNE2score and cumulative risks of life‐threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias according to risk stratification. LGE, late gadolinium enhancement; NSVT, nonsustained ventricular tachycardia.

Based on previous studies [26,27], a > 15% LTVTA risk threshold was used to classify patients as high risk. Patients scoring 0–2 and 3–4 points were classified as low‐ and high‐risk, respectively. The 1‐, 3‐, and 5‐year cumulative risks for low‐risk patients were 1.9%, 3.6%, and 4.9%, respectively; for high‐risk patients, the rates were 5.4%, 32.8%, and 51.2%, respectively (Figure4). Patients scoring 4 all suffered LTVTA, while no patients with a score of 0 met the endpoint. A total of nine cases with an LVEF > 35% (assessed by CMR) were reclassified as high risk, based on the SNE2score, and six of these cases (66.6%) reached the endpoint (Figure5).

Distribution of life‐threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias (LTVTA) among patients classified as high‐risk based on left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and SNE2score.

The C‐statistic was 0.814 (0.736–0.892) in the derivation cohort and 0.785 (0.722–0.848) in the external validation cohort. Kaplan–Meier analysis confirmed the effectiveness of the SNE2score in risk stratification, showing clear event‐free survival differences between low‐ and high‐risk patients (Figure6A,B). Calibration plots analysis confirmed the potential clinical utility of SNE2scores in both cohorts (Figure6C,D).

Evaluation of model effectiveness. Cumulative event‐free curves for life‐threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias in the (A) derivation cohort and (B) external validation cohort. Calibration curves of the SNE2score in the (C) derivation cohort and (D) external validation cohort.

The predictive abilities of the SNE2score and conventional SCD risk markers, specifically an LVEF of ≤ 35% and the presence of LGE alone, were also compared. The SNE2score outperformed the established markers (C‐statistic: 0.814 vs. 0.541 and 0.700, allp< 0.01). Incorporating LVEF ≤ 35%, LGE extent, or GZF mass into the scoring model did not enhance its discriminative ability, with C‐statistics of 0.826, 0.826, and 0.822, respectively (allp> 0.1).

Our objective in this study was to develop an efficient and clinically convenient risk assessment tool for LTVTA. Unlike previous studies, this study broadened the inclusion criteria beyond patients with severe LV dysfunction or specific etiologies. The simplicity and outpatient feasibility of the developed SNE2score make it ideal for initial screening. For patients classified as high risk, further genetic or electrophysiological assessments and close monitoring would be beneficial.

Furthermore, LGE was delineated as a potent risk marker for LTVTA in symptomatic heart failure, irrespective of the extent, location, and pattern of LGE, which indicates that the mere presence of myocardial scarring signifies a risk. The robust negative predictive value of LGE is noteworthy. Finally, a tenuous correlation between LVEF and LTVTA was identified, regardless of the assessment method.

LGE‐CMR is widely recognized for its efficacy in detecting ventricular myocardial scarring, which, regardless of etiology, acts as a critical substrate for ventricular tachyarrhythmias [28,29]. Because these “electrically inert” regions facilitate re‐entry pathways for arrhythmias, LGE provides the most direct assessment of arrhythmic substrates compared with other clinical variables. Prior studies have revealed an obvious correlation between LGE, SCD, and ventricular tachyarrhythmias in heart failure, categorized by either LV function or pathogenesis [10,17,30]. This study further provides evidence for the superiority of LGE across the full LVEF spectrum. Some studies have also reported the significance of LGE in patients beyond the scope of current guidelines, noting its increased predictive value for SCD in those with an LVEF > 35% [31,32]. Given the existing evidence, recent guidelines recommend ICD intervention in dilated cardiomyopathy with an LVEF of < 50% and at least two risk factors, including LGE on CMR, syncope, inducible sustained ventricular tachycardia, or pathogenic mutations [4]. Emerging additional evidence may reinforce the role of LGE in LTVTA risk stratification and ICD indications.

The potential use of LGE absence as a rule‐out reference warrants attention. In our study, only one patient without LGE reached the endpoint, leading to a negative predictive power of 98.8%. Notably, every SCD case exhibited LGE. A study by Leyva et al. [17], involving 700 recipients of cardiac implantable electronic devices, found that myocardial fibrosis detected by CMR exhibited negative predictive values of 100% for SCD and 98.6% for arrhythmic endpoints. Zegard et al. [9] also reported similar findings. The absence of LGE may therefore exclude the likelihood of SCD and avert ICD overtreatment. However, disease progression should be considered. Myocardial scars may evolve over time, and a single‐time‐point assessment lacking myocardial scarring does not definitively preclude future SCD risk. The required frequency of CMR examinations should therefore be established.

It remains controversial whether a quantitative relationship exists between myocardial scarring and SCD, and whether scar burden provides greater prognostic value. This study found that neither LGE mass nor LGE extent exhibited a dose‐dependent correlation with LTVTA, nor did adding LGE extent to the scoring model improve its discriminative ability. Logarithmic analysis demonstrated a 12‐fold increase in LTVTA risk at the lowest tertile of LGE extent. However, the risk escalation slowed with subsequent increases in LGE extent. Several studies have reported a comparable nonlinear correlation between myocardial scarring and SCD. Halliday et al. [33] observed a substantial increase in SCD risk at minimal LGE extents (0%–2.55%) in dilated cardiomyopathy, stabilizing beyond this range. The authors proposed that this may be attributed to the multifaceted nature of fibrosis development, with replacement fibrosis being just one contributing factor to ventricular tachyarrhythmias [34]. Multiple features of myocardial scarring, such as heterogeneity, act together to ultimately contribute to arrhythmias development, rather than in a dose‐dependent manner [35]. Similarly, Kwong et al. [36] observed in ICM that patients with an LGE extent in the lowest tertile (< 2%) faced a 7‐fold increased risk of major adverse cardiac events. Klem et al. [10] demonstrated a curvilinear relationship involving LGE burden and SCD risk in non‐ICM, with a risk plateau at 20%–25%. These findings suggest that an increased scar burden does not invariably correlate with a commensurate increase in SCD risk. Consequently, the presence, rather than the extent, of myocardial scarring is likely a more reliable marker for risk stratification.

Mid‐wall and septal LGEs have been reported to correlate with LTVTA in dilated cardiomyopathy; however, the findings vary across different studies [26,30,32,33]. Within our cohort, LGE was predominantly observed in the mid‐wall and septum. However, neither the location nor the pattern of LGE exhibited any prognostic capabilities. At present, the location and distribution of myocardial scarring lack sufficient evidence to be considered reliable predictors.

In patients with ICM, the gray zone, that is, the region where scar tissue surrounding the infarction intertwines with viable myocardial tissue, is a nidus for re‐entry wavefronts [37], providing an anatomical basis as a potential risk marker. However, the present study showed a weak link between the GZF mass and LTVTA, and adding GZF mass to the scoring model failed to improve predictive efficacy. In contrast, the CMR‐SCD study identified GZF as a significant indicator of SCD and composite arrhythmic endpoints in coronary artery disease [9]. The disparate findings may be attributed to population heterogeneity. While GZF exhibits a distinct pathophysiological link with ventricular tachyarrhythmias in ICM, its application in non‐ICM is contentious and lacks histological corroboration [33]. The PROFID project team announced their latest research progress at the 2022 ESC Congress, concluding that neither GZF nor the extent of CMR‐detected scarring improves SCD prediction postmyocardial infarction [38]. Consequently, the prognostic significance of GZF remains undetermined.

Given the limitations in risk stratification based on LVEF, leading organizations advocate for a multidisciplinary approach in identifying novel potential predictors with improved efficiency and a combination of risk markers [39,40]. This study revealed that more than half of patients experiencing LTVTA exhibit either preserved or mildly reduced LV systolic function, underscoring the necessity for improved risk stratification. Approximately 66.6% of patients with LVEF > 35%, yet classified as high‐risk based on the SNE2score, ultimately experienced LTVTA. These patients were overlooked by traditional risk stratification methods and may be candidates for primary ICD intervention.

However, a high‐risk classification based on the SNE2score does not guarantee that these patients will benefit from ICD treatment. The benefit of primary prophylactic ICD intervention would be affected by factors such as age, pathologic heterogeneities, and other competing non‐SCD deaths, especially in Asia, where the prevalence of SCD is at a low level and the risk of nonarrhythmic death surpasses that in Western countries [41]. Consequently, identifying suitable patients in Asian populations is even more challenging.

The SNE2cohort comprised relatively young patients, with over 70% treated with β‐blockers and renin–angiotensin system inhibitors, and more than half treated with spironolactone. These characteristics, observed in consecutively included patients, reflect clinicians' tendency to utilize CMR for etiological diagnosis in non‐ICM patients, who generally have a lower mean age of onset than those with ICM. The external validation cohort, derived from the ESTIMATED study, focused on dilated cardiomyopathy, characterized by reduced LVEF, a younger patient demographic, and extensive use of the aforementioned medications. However, the SNE2score is not confined to specific LVEF ranges or heart failure etiologies, thereby making it applicable across the validation cohort. Notably, the SNE2cohort predominantly comprised patients from southern and eastern regions of China, while the validation cohort included those from northern, eastern, and western regions. Geographic and baseline characteristic variations between the two cohorts further demonstrate the broad applicability of the SNE2score. We anticipate further validation of the SNE2score in a more extensive real‐world population.

This was a single‐center study; however, the prevalence of SCD exhibits regional variations. This study offers insights into the current state of SCD and ventricular tachyarrhythmias in developed, first‐tier cities in Asia. We observed SCD incidences of 3% and 0.9 per 100 person‐years in patients with symptomatic heart failure, slightly higher than the 2.8% reported in Japan and significantly lower than the rates observed in Western countries (5%–9% and 6 per 100 person‐years) [41,42]. This underscores the necessity for individualized approaches and region‐specific recommendations. Additional external validations via multicenter studies are required before implementation of the SNE2score in clinical practice.

Additionally, appropriate ICD therapies may overestimate the SCD risk by twofold or more due to the self‐terminating nature of partial ventricular tachyarrhythmias. Nevertheless, since this study aimed to develop an approach for screening potential SCD risk rather than refining ICD indications, a certain degree of overestimation is deemed acceptable.

Among various CMR parameters, only the presence of LGE emerged as an independent and strong indicator for LTVTA. Both positive and negative predictive values of LGE could provide valuable information for risk identification. The SNE2score, which comprises the presence of LGE, syncope, and NSVT, may enhance risk stratification for SCD and ventricular tachyarrhythmias in nonischemic heart failure.