Music reduces pain and anxiety in various contexts, but the possible effect on pain anticipatory mechanisms remains unclear.

This study examines the effects of a standardized musical intervention (Music Care) on pain perception and on pain modulation induced by expectations of low or high pain.

Healthy participants were tested in an experimental study using a crossover design involving the musical intervention counterbalanced with an active auditory control condition (audiobook) and a silent control condition. Pain perception was assessed using contact heat stimulation, and expectations were manipulated using prestimulus anticipatory cues signalling high or low pain.

Perceived pain intensity, measured using a visual analog scale, was decreased during the music intervention and the audiobook compared to silence (P's< 0.001). Music was more effective than the audiobook control, especially at the higher pain stimulation level (P< 0.001). Anticipatory cues modulated pain and anxiety in the expected direction across all conditions (P's< 0.001). Music and the audiobook produced comparable reduction in (1) expectation-induced (1a) hypoalgesic and (1b) hyperalgesic effects (allP's< 0.005) and in (2) pain anticipatory anxiety (allP's< 0.05). Overall, music was more effective than the active auditory control to reduce pain but both forms of auditory distraction partly blocked the modulatory effects of low and high pain expectations.

This study highlights the multiplicity of processes contributing to music-induced analgesia and suggests that music may help improve pain management in the context of high pain expectation and anxiety. However, music may also interfere with pain-relieving strategies involving the induction of low pain expectations.

Music is an essential part of culture and traditional healing rituals, yet its integration into modern health care is, at best, considered complementary.34The 2023 Global Year for Integrative Pain Care of the International Association for the Study of Pain (IASP) promotes new approaches to pain management and highlights the need to improve our understanding of their underlying mechanisms (seehttps://www.iasp-pain.org/publications/iasp-news/the-iasp-2023-global-year-for-integrative-pain-care/). Translational research is needed to explain how music modifies pain experiences.

The fear-avoidance model of pain describes how anticipatory cues eliciting pain expectation can increase pain perception.59Experimental studies have shown that expectations of high or low pain produce the corresponding changes in pain perception through endogenous modulatory systems.3,13,23Music may potentially help improve pain management by neutralizing hyperalgesic expectations.

This registered protocol is available at Open Science Framework (https://osf.io/s98w7; see minor deviations in Supplementary Material,http://links.lww.com/PR9/A331).

Thirty-six healthy adult participants (19 men, 16 women, 1 unreported; mean age = 27.7± 11.0 y.o.) were recruited through word of mouth, posters, or digital advertisements posted at University of Montreal and on social media. Exclusion criteria included neurological or psychiatric disorders, presence of any serious illnesses (eg, cancer or cardiovascular disease), hearing loss, and taking psychotropic or analgesic medication, or recreational drugs. The experimental procedures were approved by the local ethics committee (Project #CER VN 18-19-25), and all participants provided written informed consent and received a compensation (75$ Can). Participants were not told about the specific hypotheses on music and expectations and were simply informed that the study investigated various forms of auditory stimulation.

Each participant completed 3 testing sessions to compare: (1) Music Care, (2) Audiobook (active control), and (3) Silence Control (order counterbalanced).

The experiment was conducted in a quiet room, and participants wore earphones in all conditions (Sennheiser OCX 686 SPORTS). Participants were given a computer tablet to choose their preferred music from 7 original instrumental pieces (piano ballad, Folk guitar, Celtic music, music from movies, Cuban music, classical music, and Andean music) composed following specifications provided by the creator of Music Care (seehttps://www.music.care/en/index.html). The Music Care protocol used was the U-sequence as shown in Figure1and described in previous studies.25–30,34,39,46,47,54In the audiobook control condition, participants chose one of 7 books provided by the experimenter (see Suppl. Materials,http://links.lww.com/PR9/A331). Participants were given a short summary of each book and listened to a 1-minute excerpt. The audiobooks had no background music, were selected to avoid strong emotional content, and were read by professional readers with a relatively neutral tone. The silence control condition was conducted with the earphones on with no audio intervention.

Experimental procedure. (A) Time course of a session. After the Music or Audiobook selection, the thermal calibration was conducted to select 3 target temperatures to produce low, moderate, and high pain. The auditory intervention then began for 5 minutes before the learning phase and continued throughout the learning and test phases. The learning phase is composed of 12 trials with valid cue-stimulus contingencies. The test phase contains 16 valid cue-stimulus pairs and 8 invalid cue-stimulus pairs. The invalid pairs are always composed of a moderate pain stimulus preceded by a low (4 trials) or a high (4 trials) pain cue to assess the effects of low or high (vs moderate) pain expectation on the pain produced by the moderate pain stimulus. Note that the proportion of trials with low–moderate–high pain cues is maintained to 1/3 each throughout the learning and test phases so that there was no explicit or implicit information provided to the participant on the change in cue-stimulus contingencies from the learning to the test phase. (B) U-Sequence in Music Care. The music intervention followed the U-sequence developed by Music Care to provide a progression of the musical arrangement intended to facilitate the induction of a relaxed state. (C) Time course of an experimental trial. After the anticipatory cue, the stimulus temperature increased to reach low, moderate, or high pain and then returned to baseline. The participant provides a rating of the pain felt after each stimulation using keyboard keys to move a cursor over the VAS displayed on the computer screen.

The 3 sessions took place at the same time of the day on different days within 2 weeks (except for one participant tested over a 6-week period).

Participants first selected their preferred music or book (Fig.1A) and underwent a pain calibration phase in silence to select temperatures to produce low, moderate, and high pain. After calibration, the music, audiobook, or control silence period began. Participants were free to close their eyes during a 5-minute initial auditory stimulation and were then asked to open them to see the pain anticipatory cues and to rate pain.

Pain was assessed using the method of constant stimuli, following a standard procedure applied routinely in our lab (5 × 7 intensities between 40°C and 50°C). This calibration procedure took about 20 minutes and allowed calculating a stimulus-response function to determine 3 temperatures selected to produce low, moderate, and high pain, based on target ratings of 30/100, 65/100, and 80/100 on the pain VAS, respectively.

The sample size was determined using G*Power (V. 3.1.9.4) to detect a medium effect size (ANOVA, within-subject, f = 0.25), at α = 0.05 and 1 − β = 0.90, and assuming a correlation or r = 0.50 between the repeated measures across subjects (seehttps://osf.io/s98w7).

Statistical analyses were conducted as planned using SPSS v. 26, by one of the team members (P.R.) who was kept blind to the coding of the interventions. Significance was set toP< 0.05, and all follow-up contrasts were adjusted using the Bonferroni correction. Partial eta-squared (partial η2) is reported to describe the effect size (small = 0.01, medium = 0.06, large = 0.14). Pairwise contrasts are calculated to help interpret interactions, and the Means and SD of each condition are reported in Supplementary materials,http://links.lww.com/PR9/A331.

The effect of music on pain perception was assessed using a 3 × 3 repeated measures ANOVA comparing the 3 interventions and the 3 stimulus temperatures. The significant interaction was decomposed by calculating an analgesic score for the music and audiobook intervention (vs silence). An additional analgesic score was calculated by subtracting pain in the music condition from the audiobook condition to assess the superiority of music analgesia.

The effect of music on expectation-induced pain modulation was assessed using a 3 × 3 repeated measures ANOVA comparing the 3 interventions and the 3 anticipatory cues for the moderate pain stimulus condition only. To decompose this interaction, we calculated the hyperalgesic and the hypoalgesic expectation effects by subtracting pain from the moderate pain cue condition from the high and low pain cues, respectively.

The effect of music on anxiety elicited by the anticipatory cues was tested in a 3 × 3 repeated measures ANOVA to compare the 3 interventions and the 3 anticipatory cues.

Exploratory correlational analyses (Pearson-r) were conducted to test the association between the modulation of pain by music (vs silence, and vs audiobook) and the corresponding changes in anticipatory anxiety. Similarly, correlation analyses were computed to assess if the effects of music (vs silence, and vs audiobook) on expectation-induced hyperalgesia and hypoalgesia was associated with the corresponding changes in anticipatory anxiety. Given the exploratory nature of those analyses, they are reported with bilateral uncorrectedP-values.

Data from all participants are included in the results. Means and standard deviations of all dependent variables are reported in Supplementary Tables S1-S5,http://links.lww.com/PR9/A331.

The mean pain ratings displayed in Figure2A are consistent with the target levels determined in the calibration procedure, and the results of the ANOVAs are reported in Table1.

Effects of the interventions on pain perception. (A) Pain ratings reported to the low, moderate, and high stimulus intensity in the Silence, Audiobook, and Music condition. Main effects of, and interaction between, intervention (3) and stimulus (3) are significant atP< 0.001, and all pairwise contrasts are significant atP< 0.05 except for Music vs Audiobook at the low stimulus intensity (P= 0.055). (B) The interaction is further illustrated by change scores calculated for each participant with positive Pain Decrease indicating a hypoalgesic effect of the Audiobook and Music conditions compared to Silence, and of the Music condition compared to the Audiobook. Results of the ANOVA comparing the hypoalgesic effects of Music and Audiobook (difference from Silence) confirmed the main effects of, and interaction between, intervention (2) and stimulus (3) significant atP< 0.001. The interaction term indicates that the superiority of Music over the Audiobook is significantly larger at the high vs moderate stimulus intensity. Each dot represents one subject in each condition, and the Boxplot represents interquartile intervals. Results of the ANOVA are detailed in Table1B, and Means (SDs) are reported for each condition and contrast in Supplementary Tables S1 and S2,http://links.lww.com/PR9/A331.

(A) The first section reports the results of the ANOVA evaluating the effects of the Intervention (3) Music, Audiobook, and Silence (control) and of Stimulus intensities (3; low, moderate, and high) on pain ratings. (B) The second section reports results of the ANOVA comparing the analgesic effect of the Music and the Audiobook conditions, calculated as the absolute difference in pain from the Silence condition, examined across the 3 stimulus intensity levels.

Degrees of freedom adjusted using the Greenhouse–Geisser correction if applicable.

Pairwise contrasts adjusted using the Bonferroni correction; sig, significant; ns, not significant.

Means and SDs are reported in Supplementary Table S1 and S2,http://links.lww.com/PR9/A331.

There was a significant main effect of intervention on pain. Lower pain was reported overall in the music condition compared to both silence and the audiobook (all pairwise contrastsP< 0.001). There was also a significant main effect of stimulus intensity on pain (all pairwise contrastsP< 0.001). Furthermore, there was an interaction between intervention and stimulus intensity (P< 0.001) suggesting that the analgesic effect varied with the intensity of the stimulus. Both main effects and the interaction were very large (partial η2= 0.28–0.97; see Table1).

Follow-up analyses confirmed a larger analgesic effect of music compared to the audiobook (P<0.001; partial η2= 0.33). This effect was observed for low, moderate, and high pain (P's< 0.05; see Fig.2B and Table1B). The superiority of music was significantly larger in the high pain intensity conditions compared to the moderate and the low pain intensity conditions (P's < 0.01), but it did not differ between the moderate and low pain intensity conditions (P= 0.81). These results confirmed the superiority of the music condition, especially for more intense pain.

The pain ratings of the moderate stimulus intensity are displayed in Figure3A, and the analyses of the effect of the intervention on pain modulation induced by anticipatory cues are reported in Table2.

Effects of the interventions on pain modulation induced by anticipatory cues. (A) Pain ratings in response to the moderate stimulus intensity preceded by anticipatory cues signaling a low (invalid), moderate (valid), or high (invalid) pain stimulus in the Silence, Audiobook, and Music condition. Main effects of, and interaction between, intervention (3) and anticipatory cue (3) are significant atP< 0.001, and all pairwise contrasts are significant atP< 0.05 except for Music vs Audiobook in the low cue condition:P= 0.12. (B) The interaction is further illustrated by change scores calculated for each participant with the hypoalgesic expectation effect indicated by a negative pain modulation value (Low − Moderate Pain cue), and hyperalgesic expectation effect indicated by a positive pain modulation value (High − Moderate Pain cue). Results of the ANOVA indicated that the modulation of pain by the anticipatory cues was reduced significantly by Music and the Audiobook in both the hypoalgesic (P's < 0.05) and hyperalgesic (P's < 0.005) conditions. There was no indication of a differential effect of Music vs the Audiobook on expectation-induced hypoalgesia (P= 1.00) or hyperalgesia (P= 0.38). Results of the ANOVA are detailed in Table2, and Means (SDs) are reported for each condition and contrast in Supplementary Tables S3 and S4,http://links.lww.com/PR9/A331.

Effects of the interventions on pain modulation induced by anticipatory cues signaling different levels of pain when administering the moderate pain stimulus.

(A) The first section reports the results of the ANOVA evaluating the effects of the Intervention (3: Music, Audiobook, and Silence-control), and of the anticipatory cue (3; low, moderate, and high pain) on pain ratings. The second and third sections of the table report results of the ANOVA comparing the 3 interventions on (B) the hypoalgesic effect of the low pain cue and (C) of the hyperalgesic effects of the high pain cue (difference in pain ratings from the moderate pain cue condition).

Degrees of freedom adjusted using the Greenhouse–Geisser correction if applicable.

Pairwise contrasts adjusted using the Bonferroni correction; sig, significant; ns, not significant.

Means and SDs are reported in Supplementary Table S3 and S4,http://links.lww.com/PR9/A331.

The hypoalgesic effects of the low pain anticipatory cue isreducedin the Music and Audiobook conditions compared to Silence (ie, less decrease induced by low pain expectations; see Fig.3).

The hyperalgesic effects of the high pain anticipatory cue isreducedin the Music and Audiobook conditions compared to Silence (ie, less increase induced by high pain expectation; see Fig.3).

There was a very large and significant main effect of the anticipatory cue on pain (P< 0.001, partial η2= 0.88). A hyperalgesic effect was observed after the high vs the moderate pain cue, and a hypoalgesic effect was observed after the low vs the moderate pain cue (P's< 0.001). These effects confirmed the efficacy of the expectation manipulation on pain.

The ANOVA also indicated an interaction between intervention and the expectation effects (P< 0.001, partial η2= 0.23). The hypoalgesia produced by low pain expectation was reduced significantly in both the music and audiobook condition (P's < 0.05; see Fig.3B and Table2B). This reduction in expectation-induced hypoalgesia was almost identical in the music and the audiobook condition (P= 1.00). Similarly, the hyperalgesic effect was reduced in both the music and the audiobook condition (P's < 0.005; Fig.3B and Table2C). This reduction in expectation-induced hyperalgesia was similar across the music and the audiobook condition (P= 0.38). These results indicate that music and the audiobook interfered to a comparable extent with the effects of high and low pain expectation.

The mean anxiety ratings are displayed in Figure4, and the analyses of the effect of the intervention on anxiety are reported in Table3.

Effects of the interventions on anxiety induced by the anticipatory cues. Anxiety induced by the anticipatory cues signaling a low, moderate, or high pain stimulus is reported for the Silence, Audiobook, and Music condition. Main effects of the interventions and the anticipatory cue are significant atP< 0.001, and the interaction is significant atP= 0.004. Pairwise contrasts confirmed the significant decrease in anticipatory anxiety in both the Music and the Audiobook conditions compared to Silence (allP's < 0.005). No significant difference was found between the Music and the Audiobook in the moderate (P= 1.00) and high (P= 0.98) pain cue condition. A very small but significant effect was observed in the low cue condition (P= 0.004). Results of the ANOVA are detailed in Table3, and Means (SDs) are reported for each condition in Supplementary Table S5,http://links.lww.com/PR9/A331.

Effects of the interventions (3) on anxiety induced by the anticipatory cues (3) signaling different levels of pain (interventions: music, audiobook, and silence-control; anticipatory cues: low, moderate, and high pain).

Degrees of freedom adjusted using the Greenhouse–Geisser correction if applicable.

Pairwise contrasts adjusted using the Bonferroni correction; sig, significant; ns, not significant.

Means and SDs are reported in Supplementary Table S5,http://links.lww.com/PR9/A331.

There was a large and significant main effect of the anticipatory cue (P< 0.001, partial η2= 0.83) with more anxiety reported after the high vs moderate pain cue, and the moderate vs the low pain cue (allP's< 0.001). There was also a large and significant main effect of the intervention on anticipatory anxiety (P< 0.001, partial η2= 0.42). The music and the audiobook conditions resulted in lower anticipatory anxiety (P's< 0.001) but did not differ significantly from each other (P= 0.44).

The ANOVA also revealed a significant interaction between the intervention and the anticipatory cue (P= 0.004, partial η2= 0.13). The music and the audiobook conditions produced a significant reduction in mean anticipatory anxiety across all pain cues (P's< 0.005; Fig.4). Almost identical reductions were produced by the music and the audiobook condition after the high and the moderate pain cue (P> 0.97). The interaction reflected a significant advantage of the music compared to the audiobook in reducing the anxiety induced by the low pain cue (P= 0.004; Fig.4). However, the absolute magnitude of this advantage was very small and may reflect a floor effect. Taken together, these results indicate that music and the audiobook were effective to a comparable extent in reducing anticipatory anxiety when moderate and high pain are expected.

Additional analyses showed that music-induced hypoalgesia (Fig.2) correlated to the reduction in anticipatory anxiety (Fig.4) for the high pain intensity (r = 0.42,P= 0.01; ns for moderate or low pain,P's > 0.10). The superior hypoalgesic effect of music compared to the audiobook was also associated with a larger effect of music on anticipatory anxiety (high pain: r = 0.41,P= 0.01; ns for moderate or low pain,P's > 0.15). A small association was also observed suggesting that individuals reporting less anticipatory anxiety (Fig.4) also reported smaller expectation-induced hyperalgesia (Fig.3A) (r = 0.36,P= 0.03). No significant association was found in the audiobook and silence conditions (r's < 0.10,P's > 0.60).

Finally, we tested the relation between (1) the differential effect of the music intervention (vs silence and vs audiobook) on expectation-induced hyperalgesia (Fig.3) and (2) the corresponding effect on anticipatory anxiety (Fig.4). The reduction in hyperalgesia in the music condition (vs silence) was not significantly related to the corresponding reduction in anticipatory anxiety (r = 0.22,P= 0.19). Nevertheless, participants showing a larger reduction in hyperalgesia in the music vs the audiobook condition also reported a larger reduction in anxiety in the corresponding contrast (r = 0.34,P= 0.04). These results indicate that the effects of music on expectation-induced pain modulation were largely independent from changes induced by the interventions on anticipatory anxiety but that the superiority of music over the audiobook might relate, to a small extent, to changes in anxiety.

The results support the superiority of music compared to an audiobook intervention. However, music and the audiobook reduced the hyperalgesic effect of high pain expectations and the hypoalgesic effects of low pain expectations to a comparable extent. Similar reduction in anticipatory anxiety was also observed in both the music and the audiobook condition but changes in anxiety accounted for only a small part of pain reduction. These results provide novel insights on the psychological mechanisms underlying the effects of music on pain-related processes by demonstrating a combination of nonspecific components affecting pain expectations and anticipatory anxiety, and other components possibly more specific to music.

Both auditory interventions reduced pain, but music produced larger improvements. This indicates that the effect of music cannot be explained simply by a nonspecific auditory distraction. Using the same music app, Soyeux and Marchand56further showed that most-liked music resulted in greater analgesia than least-liked music in response to acute thermal pain. However, the advantage of preferred music, including using one's own music, was not confirmed statistically in a meta-analysis on surgical pain and anxiety.43The musical pieces used here were judged as more relaxing and pleasant than the audiobooks excerpts in our previous clinical study.6This implies that the superiority of music observed here may relate to positive affective responses induced by music. However, we cannot disentangle a possible confound induced by the specific material used here from a potential effect inherent to music.

It has also been suggested that a greater sense of control over musical choice is a more important parameter than the emotional responses related to musical excerpts.36However, in our study, participants were allowed to choose both the music and the audiobook. Thus, the superiority of music for inducing hypoalgesic effects is unlikely to be explained solely by a greater sense of control over the selection of preferred stimuli.

With increasing clinical interest in the integration of standardized interventions to improve pain and anxiety management,54experimental research has shifted towards the understanding of potential regulatory processes triggered by music. Music has been found to reduce central sensitization induced by the temporal summation of pain.61This might involve the activation of cerebro-spinal pathways, consistent with the inhibition of the spinally mediated nociceptive flexion reflex by pleasant music.52However, a reduction in the analgesic effect of conditioned pain modulation (CPM; ie, pain inhibits pain phenomenon)15,49by music9rather suggests a possible interference over some descending pain regulatory processes. In the study of Soyeux and Marchand,56the magnitude of music-induced analgesia was also correlated with the magnitude of CPM, tested separately in silence. These results suggest a possible competition or saturation of endogenous inhibitory processes when music and CPM are tested concurrently. On the other hand, another study found no effect of music on the temporal summation of pain or on CPM11so the specific conditions under which music-induced hypoalgesia interacts with mechanisms of central sensitization and descending inhibition remain to be determined.

Cognition and emotion are powerful modulators relying partly on descending processes, reward-related activity, and activation of the endogenous opioid and/or cannabinoid systems.1,2,5,42,60Previous research has demonstrated the role of affective processes and descending inhibition in music-induced analgesia,53but this is the first study that tested the impact of music on expectation-induced modulation. Both music and the audiobook condition partly blocked the hyperalgesic effect of high pain expectation.

The fear-avoidance model of pain suggests that high pain expectation increases anticipatory anxiety and produces hyperalgesia while optimism and positive affect may reduce pain.59Nocebo hyperalgesia also involves higher pain expectations and anticipatory anxiety.12A recent meta-analysis suggests that distraction techniques involving audiovisual stimuli can be effective in reducing fear and anxiety in clinical settings.32Experimental studies indicate that expectation-induced pain modulation involves the up or downregulation of descending modulatory systems.14,16,23Two studies further demonstrated that a positive mood induced before hyperalgesia suggestions reduced the hyperalgesic response during the cold-pressor task22and reduced the nocebo effect to a sham treatment.21The same music and audiobooks used in the present study were previously tested in a clinical study in which participants consistently reported experiencing the music as more pleasant and relaxing than the audiobook.6This is consistent with an affect-based explanation. However, the relatively small associations observed between the changes in pain and in anticipatory anxiety induced by music suggests that pain-related anxiety may not be the main explanation.

The possibility that the induction of positive affect reduces the impact of a subsequent aversive stimulus is not new,8but our experimental design allowed testing the underlying psychological processes. According to the affect-based explanation, the positive affect induced by music should have no impact on the effects of hypoalgesic expectation or it may possibly improve it by reinforcing positive expectations, consistent with the reward-related explanation. In contrast, the present results show the opposite effect with the hypoalgesic effects of low pain expectations blocked to a comparable extent by music and the audiobook. A simple affect- or reward-based explanation is insufficient to account for the impact of music on expectation-induced pain modulation.

One alternative explanation is that auditory distraction interfered with the effects of expectations in both directions. Previous studies have shown that low pain expectations produce hypoalgesic effect in both experimental and clinical contexts.12It has been suggested that both music19and expectations of analgesia17independently result in a reduction of pain. However, some studies suggest that enhancing expectations of analgesia in the presence of music does not have an additive effect.37Our results further indicate a reduction in expectation-induced hypoalgesia while listening to music. This implies that auditory distraction might interfere with the processing of the anticipatory cue and/or the activation of expectation-related inhibitory processes. Taken together, this indicates that the modulation of pain by music and hypoalgesic expectations rely on partly separate mechanisms that may interfere with each other.

The positive affect induced by music can help improve pain management.24Several meta-analyses support the benefits of music interventions on pain, anxiety, mood, quality of life, and/or satisfaction in diverse clinical contexts,54including aversive medical procedures in infants and children,58cancer,7chronic pain,20and surgery or postoperative recovery.35,41,43,44However, these reviews highlight the need for methodological improvements. Nevertheless, most clinical studies involve between-subject designs and the large interindividual variability in uncontrolled factors including nociception, inflammation, and psychosocial contextual variables might introduce biases and reduce the sensitivity to clinical benefits, especially in small samples. The present findings relied on a sensitive within-subject design indicating a clear superiority of music over the audiobook control, as confirmed by very large effect sizes, but also demonstrating comparable large effect sizes of music and audiobook in reducing the effects of anticipatory processes producing hypoalgesia or hyperalgesia.

The ecological validity and generalizability of experimental approaches to study pain are admittedly limited, but they have the advantage of allowing for a precise control of the nociceptive stimulus, the individual differences in pain sensitivity, and the contextual factors known to modulate pain. The musical pieces and audiobooks used here were tested in our previous clinical study and provided highly consistent results showing the superiority of music over the audiobook for inducing relaxation and positive affect, and reducing the burden of care in dental implant surgery.6Our translational approach suggests that the overall effect of music relies on several mechanisms including a nonspecific component involving interference with expectation-related processes.

The 2023 Global Year for Integrative Pain Care of the IASP (seehttps://www.iasp-pain.org/publications/iasp-news/the-iasp-2023-global-year-for-integrative-pain-care/) promotes new approaches to pain management. The present findings increase our understanding of the psychological processes that explain how music reduces pain and support further research on the use of standardized and personalized music interventions, such as that provided by the apps Music Care©, as a complementary method to optimize clinical care.

Importantly, music reduced the hyperalgesic effect of high pain expectations and the hypoalgesic effect of low pain expectations. This reinforces the importance of adopting a mechanistic approach to integrative pain care to highlight potential synergistic effects but also detect possible interference between psychological factors involved in pain management techniques.

No conflict to declare. A licence to use Music Care was provided free of charge to conduct the study. Stéphane Guétin, CEO of Music Care, participated in the early discussion on the research design and supported the study registration (https://osf.io/s98w7) and transparent reporting of the study. Pierre Rainville is a member of the Scientific Counsel of Music Care but receives no personal advantage, financial or otherwise, for this participation.

Supplemental digital content associated with this article can be found online athttp://links.lww.com/PR9/A331.

The authors thank Orelle Soyeux for her participation in the early discussion and planning of the study, and Adrianne Létourneau for her help in pilot testing of the pain expectation paradigm. Music Care training was provided to the research team by Julie de Stoutz and Stéphane Guétin. The authors thank their institutions and all funding organisations for their financial support. Ethics approval did not include the public sharing of individual data but means and SDs are provided in supplementary material for each dependent variable and all conditions. Anonymized data may be made available upon reasonable request addressed to the corresponding author.

This study was initiated with seed funding from the Faculty of Dentistry of the University of Montreal. Further funding was obtained from theRéseau de recherche en santé buccodentaire et osseuseof theFonds de Recherche du Québec[FRQ #247292], by the Intersectoral initiative support program of theUniversity of Montreal[All-012_CF00140830], and by the Interdisciplinary research program of theCentre interdisciplinaire de recherche sur le cerveau et l'apprentissageandNational Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada(NSERC) and from theFRQ. M.M. received an undergraduate research bursary from the NSERC.

Conceptualization of goals, aims, research design, and methodology: P.R., N.G., M.R., E.E., and R.D.; Development and validation of the expectation paradigm: P.R., M.R., T.A.V., A.B., and D.T.; Study coordination and Data acquisition: A.B. and D.T.; Data analysis: D.T. and P.R.; Visualization: M.M. and P.R.; Writing original draft: P.R. and M.M.; Revisions and approval of final draft: M.M., P.R., A.B., T.A.D., R.D., M.R., E.E., and N.G.; Supervision and Project administration: P.R. and N.G.; Funding acquisition: P.R., N.G., E.E., and R.D.