Spastic ataxia Charlevoix-Saguenay is a rare autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by a combination of spasticity, ataxia, and peripheral neuropathy. Although predominantly affecting individuals of French-Canadian descent, the geographic distribution of spastic ataxia Charlevoix-Saguenay-associated cases is expanding.

This study presents the case of a 3-year-old Uruguayan girl with suspected autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay, demonstrating the disease’s presence in previously unreported locations. Exome sequencing analysis revealed two compound heterozygous variants in the sacsin molecular chaperone gene, one of which was novel.

This report highlights the genomic heterogeneity of spastic ataxia Charlevoix-Saguenay and emphasizes the importance of investigating the genetic landscape of the disease in diverse populations. Understanding the underlying genetic alterations and their geographic distribution contributes to improved diagnosis, management, and potentially targeted therapies for individuals affected by spastic ataxia Charlevoix-Saguenay worldwide.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13256-025-05480-z.

Spastic Ataxia Charlevoix-Saguenay (SACS) is a rare autosomal recessive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by a combination of spasticity, ataxia, and peripheral neuropathy [1]. Although a very rare disease, autosomal recessive SACS (ARSACS) is thought to be the second most common form of autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxia after Friedrich’s ataxia [2]. ARSACS predominantly affects individuals of French-Canadian descent, with a higher prevalence in the Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean region of Quebec, as previously described here [3]. That study revealed a distinctive form of early-onset spastic ataxia, with a long course with little progression after age 20 years. Features additional to the ataxia include dysarthria, spasticity, distal muscle wasting, nystagmus, defect in conjugate pursuit ocular movements, retinal striation obscuring the retinal blood vessels in places, and the presence of mitral valve prolapse [3].

The genetic alterations that cause ARSACS are biallelic loss of function mutations in theSACSgene. The high frequency in Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean region is owing to a founder effect of a couple that lived in Quebec City in 1650 [3].

TheSACSgene encodes the multidomain sacsin protein, which is expressed in the central nervous system, and plays a critical role in cellular homeostasis and neuronal function [4]. SACS protein has a functional DNAJ/Hsp40 domain that would be relevant for the proper function of the Hsp70 chaperon machinery.

The Hsp70 chaperone machinery plays a key role in managing aggregation-prone mutant proteins linked to neurodegenerative diseases [5,6]. Small intefering RNA (siRNA)-mediated sacsin knockdowns do not affect the viability of wild-type (30Q) ataxin-1 transfected cells but increase toxicity in 82Q-transfected cells, suggesting that sacsin protects against polyglutamine-expanded ataxin-1 toxicity [4]. This study proposes SACS as a regulator of Hsp70, involved in processing other ataxia-associated proteins.

The disorder has very heterogeneous clinical manifestations most likely owing to various mutations harbored within theSACSgene. Several studies have identified homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in theSACSgene related to ARSACS using whole exome sequencing (WES) in Europeans and Asian populations [7–11]. According to a study [12], the most frequent variant that accounts for approximately 94% of the disease alleles among individuals in the French-Canadian population is a deletion of a T at position 6594 ofSACSgene, causing a frameshift and a premature stop codon [13]. There is very little information on the genetics of ARSACS in Latin America [14].

Here, we present the case of a 3-year-old Uruguayan girl with suspected ARSACS condition. WES analysis revealed two (one of them novel) compound heterozygous variants in theSACSgene. This case report enables an expansion of the genomic heterogeneity of the disease, including previously unreported geographic locations.

Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood (200 μL) using ZYMO Research Quick DNA Mini Prep Plus kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. We performed whole exome sequencing (100 ×) of the patient sample on a HiSeq2500 using V6 Agilent SureSelect library preparation protocol. Both candidate variants were confirmed in the patient, and we found one in each parent by means of Sanger sequencing.

FastQC [15,16] was used for quality assessment, and Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) [17] for mapping of reads onto the human genome (GRCh37). GATK was used for variant calling [18] by using the best practices. Annotate variation (ANNOVAR) was used for the annotation procedure [19]. Different filters were used in order to detect candidate variants (see below). ExpansionHunter [20] was used to detect repeat expansions associated with disease on the following genes:ATXN1,ATXN2,ATXN3,CACNA1A, andATXN7.

Homozygous mutations with population frequency less than 1%.

Heterozygous mutations in coding/splicing regions with a population frequency less than 0.5%, having at least two variants in the same gene (potential compound heterozygosity).

Heterozygous mutations in coding/splicing regions with a population frequency less than 0.5%.

Pathogenic variants as reported by the Clinvar (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar) database with low frequency (less than 0.5%).

A 3-year-old female Uruguayan patient presented with symptoms compatible with ataxia and hyperlaxity. She is the daughter of healthy, nonconsanguineous parents, has a healthy 10-year-old brother, and had no alterations during pregnancy or delivery.

She presented with a delay in the acquisition of motor patterns, with gait acquisition delayed at 2 years of life, with joint hyperlaxity at first consultation. From the beginning of independent walking, an ataxia of gait was evident, a difficulty which was stable up to presentation. The growth of the cephalic perimeter was normal, presenting no alterations at the level of the spinal sector, with strength, tone, and deep reflexes preserved. She did not present with alterations of the rest of psychomotor development. No morphological anomalies were evident.

She had a normal female karyotype. Other investigations included: basic metabolic assessment, vitamins B12 and E dosage, thyroid hormones, creatine kinase, antigliadin, and antiendomysial antibodies, which were all within normal ranges.

A cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed to assess any potential abnormalities related to the presenting symptoms. The MRI report indicated normal findings; however, upon reexamination (see below), bilateral hypointense stripes in pons, and a discrete hyperintense rim around both thalami were noticed (Fig.1).

The age of onset and the absence of secondary causes prompted the diagnosis of hereditary ataxia. As referred, at first, no alteration on cranial magnetic resonance was noticed; therefore, no specific signs were present to aid in the diagnosis. Given the huge heterogeneity of hereditary ataxias, an exome sequencing approach was favored.

The girl has been followed up until present by a group of physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM and R) physicians, also known as physiatrists.

Ataxia has progressed slowly, causing minimal but noticeable interference with daily activities. No abnormalities in neurological and intellectual development are present.

We performed WES in the setting of a local pilot program aimed at promoting the use of high throughput sequencing in the diagnosis of rare genetic diseases.

In this case, we performed WES (100 × estimated depth of sequencing) in the patient. Information on quality, number of reads and percentage of mapped reads are presented in Supplementary Table S1. After variant calling, we obtained 132,397 variants, of which 318 were nonsynonymous or located in canonical splice sites with a low population frequency (less than 0.5%; filter 3 in Methods section, bioinformatics analysis, and variant prioritization). Of those, 16 pairs were potentially compound heterozygous variants (more than one variant per gene; filter 2). In addition, two variants were homozygous with frequency less than 1% (filter 1). ​​Genes remaining after filtering included:ABHD17A, ANKRD36B, ANKRD36C, ASPN, BAGE3, FRG1, HRNR, LOC112268354, METTL2B, MUC6, POTED, PRIM2, SACS, SNX8, TUBB8B, ZNF540, AGAP4, ERAP2. According to the patient’s phenotype and given that one of the variants have been previously reported as pathogenic (see immediately below), the candidate gene prioritized wasSACS.

The first variant inSACS(chr13:NM_014363:exon10:c.5744_5745del:p.His1915fs), which corresponds to a deletion that causes a frameshift in the first 27–42% of the protein (depending on the transcript) (Fig.2A). It generates a premature stop codon 19 codons after the frameshift (p.His1915Argfs*19). According toin silicopredictions [21], the frameshift is classified as “damaging” but it does not activate a nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) mechanism. The variant was already described as pathogenic in the ClinVar database (Accession ID VCV000371265.9/Variation ID: 371265) by at least three submitters (ClinVar review status 2 stars). This variant is not present in the population databases (gnomAD).

The second variant inSACS(chr13:NM_014363: exon 10: c.C7106T, p.Pro2369Leu) is a novel missense variant (Fig.2B), which is not present in the Gnomad database.In silicophysicochemical scores predicts this variant as pathogenic/damaging (example, SIFT 0; PolyPhen 0.985) and conservational scores classifies it as conserved site (eg. SiPhy 20.14). Metapredictor Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion (CADD) has a value of 15.42. No Clinvar entries were found for this variant.

Sanger sequencing in both parents confirmed the presence of one variant in each individual. The father carries the frameshift variant and the mother the missense one.

In order to rule out a dominant form of ataxia, we also investigated 318 heterozygous variants of low population frequency (filter 3) detected in genes related to ataxia. However, among the heterozygous variants, we did not find any variants fulfilling pathogenicity criteria for this phenotype (Supplementary Table S2).

Moreover, tandem repeats in genes associated with forms of dominant ataxia caused by this mechanism were all within normal ranges (Supplementary File S3).

Here, we report the case of a 3-year-old girl diagnosed with ARSACS via exome sequencing. We found two compound heterozygous variants in theSACSgene; one of them novel and one previously reported. The latter (the frameshift variant), was already classified as pathogenic in ClinVar by several submitters.

The novel variant (a proline to leucine change) was classified as probably pathogenic according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) criteria [22]: (1) PS4 since the variant is absent in controls (no frequency in the Gnomad database), (2) PM3 since this is a recessive disorder and the variant was detected intranswith a pathogenic variant, as validated by Sanger sequencing in both progenitors, (3) PP3 sincein silicoscores of different sources (conservation, evolutionary, and meta predictors) classified it as damaging/pathogenic, and (4) PP4 since the phenotype is highly specific for a disease with a single genetic etiology. The formal ACMG classification corresponds to a “probably pathogenic” variant since the variant has one “pathogenic strong” category plus one “pathogenic moderate” plus two “pathogenic supporting.” Even though it would be beneficial to measure the protein expression or other functional analysis in patient fibroblasts to confirm the pathogenicity of both mutations, we are confident that these two variants cause the phenotype, hence we would classify them as pathogenic.

ARSACS clinical and allelic heterogeneity, as is the case with many other diseases, still needs to be properly investigated. In this case, the symptoms are mild, since ataxia is progressing very slowly and no additional neurological features such as spasticity or epilepsy are observed, as well as no muscular, ophthalmological, or hearing complications. However, early-onset ataxia and delays in motor milestones are clear. As in most reported cases, the patient lacks developmental delay and learning disability [23]. In fact, she actively participates in school and sports activities without requiring special adaptations.

Previous studies have attempted to predict the position of theSACSvariations with the age of onset or the clinical severity. One proposed that individuals carrying missense variations in homozygosity or heterozygosity with a null allele exhibit significantly milder phenotypes than those carrying a truncating variation on each allele, which is the case of the present patient [24]. However, more recently, a study identified a correlation among the pathogenicity score of the variations, the phenotype severity, and the age at onset. The missense variant of the present patient has anin silicoCADD score of 15.42, which is classified as likely pathogenic according to that study (there is no CADD estimate for the deletion). Likely pathogenic scores were associated with a mean age of onset of 10 years (with large confidence intervals) [25]. However, the patient’s onset was much earlier (2 years). In a more recent study, the genotype–phenotype correlation was studied through determination of sacsin mRNA levels and not the type of mutations [26]. Even in patients with missense mutations, sacsin levels were absent or strikingly low. Those results suggest a mechanistic explanation for the lack of genotype–phenotype correlation in ARSACS. Massive genomic and molecular analyses are expected to detect more cases and expand our knowledge on the mutational spectrum of this disease, and might establish more solid genotype–phenotype correlations in the future.

Recent efforts in gene therapy are focused on restoringSACSgene function, aiming to compensate for its loss and mitigate disease effects (https://reporter.mcgill.ca/developing-gene-therapy-for-ataxia-of-charlevoix-saguenay/). Early results have shown that several ARSACS symptoms are delayed in animal models.

The cranioencephalic MRI performed was reported as normal at first. After genetic results were received, it was reviewed and characteristic neuroimaging features of ARSACS were present: T2 hyperintense rims around both thalami (“thalamic rims”) and bilateral hypointense stripes in pons, providing further support for the utility of this neuroimaging diagnostic marker for ARSACS and the need for data from many sources to be integrated in the proper evaluation of rare diseases.

Although initially described and mostly confined to Quebec, genetically confirmed ARSACS has now been reported in individuals worldwide [14,27,28], being one of the most prevalent causes of recessive ataxia [1]. To date, only a few cases have been identified in South America, all in Brazil [29]. The Uruguayan patient has an admixed ancestry, with self-reported contributions from Brazil and Portugal (maternal grandfather with Portuguese and Brazilian ancestors) and Spain (maternal grandmother of Spanish descent, paternal grandfather from Spain, and great-grandfather of French Basque origin). The heterogeneity of the symptoms and the age of onset in these cases is very wide [14]. The identified mutations are also all different. This emphasizes the need for more comprehensive studies worldwide.

Our findings expand the set of known mutations responsible for ARSACS and they also improve geographical representation of this disorder since it is the first case reported in Uruguay to the best of our knowledge.

We thank the patient and her family for kindly participating in the study.