Transcatheter CT hepatic angiography (CTHA) enhances liver tumour ablation by enabling multiple direct intra-arterial contrast injections during a single procedure. We report the implementation of a single-room CTHA workflow using a mobile fluoroscopic C-arm, focusing on feasibility and safety.

A prospective service evaluation was conducted following a radiation risk assessment and training at an expert centre. Feasibility—defined as the ability to integrate CTHA into a four-hour ablation session—was assessed alongside technical success, which was defined as acquisition of CTHA images. All CTHA-related adverse events were recorded and graded using the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE). Radiation dose, contrast volume, and tumour visualization were also documented.

Twenty patients (14 men, median age 66 years) underwent 21 CTHA procedures (April–September 2024). Feasibility and technical success were 100%, without any instance of CTHA-related complications. Median catheterization time was 10 min16 s, contrast dose was 174 mL (7 acquisitions), and radiation dose-area product was 18.86 Gy·cm2. Ninety-seven percent of tumours (32/33) were visible. All these tumours were completely covered by an ablation zone using image fusion software.

Single-room CTHA using a mobile C-arm is feasible and safe for liver tumour ablation. This technique enhances tumour and ablation zone visibility whilst requiring low contrast volumes, enabling multiple acquisitions and real-time margin assessment. Our technique can be readily implemented without expensive infrastructure, holding significant promise in improving liver ablation outcomes and broadening access to advanced interventional oncology techniques.

Single-room CTHA can be readily implemented in centres with catheterization experience, without expensive infrastructure. The method holds significant promise in improving liver ablation outcomes and broadening access to state-of-the-art interventional oncology techniques globally.

Contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) imaging can accurately depict both tumours and ablation zones, and therefore improve outcomes.7Ablation confirmation software uses image fusion of pre- and post-ablation CECT to mathematically describe ablative margins. However, intravenous contrast administration confers several challenges. Firstly, tumour enhancement is transient. Secondly, conspicuity of both tumours and ablation zones is variable.7,8Thirdly, contrast volume limits acquisitions to 3 or fewer due to concerns about contrast induced nephropathy.9CT hepatic angiography (CTHA) addresses these issues. CTHA involves catheterization of the arteries supplying the liver to enable high quality CECT imaging to be acquired using small volume (10–30 ml) transcatheter contrast injections.

Although first reported for diagnostic imaging in 1979,10CTHA was repurposed for tumour ablation in the 2010s,11with an impressive local tumour progression-free survival advantage of 9% versus 33% for intravenous CECT.12Although it constitutes an additional intervention, previous studies have reported no associated complications, supporting use based on its potential to improve outcomes.

However, CTHA has been unavailable in the UK until now, largely due to logistical adoption barriers including the need for equipment such as specialist CT-angiography hybrid suites or two room approaches necessitating patient transfer. Here, we describe our development and initial clinical experience of single-room CTHA in our CT scanner room using a mobile C-arm for target vessel catheterization. We describe the necessary setup, with a focus on feasibility and safety.

We first established our mobile C-arm (Cios Fusion, Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, DE) with digital subtraction angiography capabilities could be manoeuvred between the CT table and gantry (Figure 1). An abdominal phantom, body mass index 32 (Kyoto Kagaku, Kyoto, JP) was used together with an angiographic catheter to optimize image quality and ensure radiation doses were within safe limits. A radiation risk assessment was then undertaken based on calculations and measurements of staff doses. Dose monitoring requirements, personal protective equipment (PPE) and safe systems of work were assessed. PPE mandated lead aprons, thyroid shields, lead glasses, whole body and collar dosemeters and a lead skirt CT table attachment. Other measures include a controlled area sign on the scanner room door and maximizing distance from the patient. The risk assessment was approved by the Radiation Protection Advisor, and local rules updated.

Example images from a CT hepatic angiography (CTHA) procedure. (A) Catheter being positioned under mobile C-arm fluoroscopic guidance. (B) Microwave ablation antenna inserted using robotic assistance (C-arm equipment now removed from scanner room). (C) Stabilization of catheter at the right groin using tape to reduce the chance of dislodgement. (D) Connection of the end of the catheter to a continuous saline infusion pump and contrast injector using one-way non-return valves to only allow antegrade flow into the catheter. N.B. To prevent CTHA failure, antenna placement occurs only after catheter stabilization and connection to the saline pump.

In an initial collaborative training visit, E.J. and N.F. visited Professor Meijerink in Amsterdam UMC, NL. Two clinical procedures were observed, and materials, setup and procedure steps recorded.

This study was conducted as a prospective service evaluation (Royal Marsden Hospital, identifier 1361) with written informed consent obtained from all patients. Procedures were conducted at The Royal Marsden Hospital, a specialist cancer hospital in London. Patients were selected following detailed review of images by the interventional radiologists and discussion at multidisciplinary team meeting.

Since CTHA is standard of care forallablation procedures in some centres, selection for procedures was not based on formal eligibility criteria, but was convenience-based, with heavy emphasis on human factors. Cases were selected considering staffing levels, procedural scheduling (morning list availability), and an initial strategy of limiting cases to one per day to ensure a smooth integration of the technique without overwhelming the clinical team. We limited operators to 2 interventional radiologists (E.J., 6 years’ experience and N.F., 20 years’ experience in interventional radiology, including vascular and non-vascular training) to concentrate expertise and rapidly ascend the learning curve. Deputy and superintendent radiographers (J.B./S.F.) supervised the first 5 cases. CT physicists attended the first 2 cases to ensure safe radiation practices were upheld.

Patients with relevant vascular occlusions, unfavourable anatomy and contraindication to contrast administration (e.g. severe renal impairment or contrast allergy) were ineligible.

Minimal staff comprised (1) 1 consultant interventional radiologist (2) 2 radiographers for c-arm, CT scanner, and microwave generator operation (3) scrub and circulating nurses (4) anaesthetist and operating department practitioner.

Procedures were performed in a 64-slice CT scanner (Definition Edge, Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, DE) under general anaesthesia using high frequency jet ventilation (Monsoon Acutronic Jet Ventilation System III, Hirzel, CH) to reduce respiratory motion. Patients were immobilized on the CT table using an immobilization mattress (Klarity Vacuum Bag, OH) and positioned headfirst with arms up. A team brief was performed and World Health Organisation (WHO) safety checklist completed.

All CTHA catheter placements were performed under general anaesthesia, following induction and prior to ablation planning. This ensured patient comfort and procedural efficiency, minimizing movement-related challenges during catheterization. The radiographer positioned the mobile C-arm on the left of the patient, parallel to the gantry with tube underneath the scanner table. A sterile field was prepared, and a 6F sheath (Cordis Corporation, Bridgewater, New Jersey) was inserted in the right common femoral artery under ultrasound guidance in the standard fashion. A 5F catheter (Cordis) cannulated the target vessel (coeliac artery, proper, left or right hepatic artery), with correct catheter position confirmed using hand-injected non-ionic contrast medium (Omnipaque 350, GE Healthcare, WI, United States). The catheter was secured in position and connected to the contrast power injector (Medrad Stellant, Bayer, Leverkusen, DE) and a continuous (30 mL/h) heparinized saline infusion to maintain patency via a 3-way tap using one-way non-return valves. The C-arm was then replaced with the microwave equipment and robotic device. Example images are shown inFigure 1.

CTHA was performed as needed, at any stage of ablation (planning, needle verification, ablation zone monitoring, and margin assessment). Typical procedure steps are shown inFigure 2. Contrast medium (Omnipaque 350 mg/ml) and 0.9% saline were injected (1:1) via the catheter at 4–6 mL/s. The total injection volume per scan varied from 20–60 mL, with multiple acquisitions performed during each procedure as needed. Arterial scans were acquired using a 7 s delay, whilst late-phase scan delay varied depending on catheter position, similar to Van Tilborg et al.11Full acquisition parameters are detailed inTable 1for our preferred technique of coeliac arterial catheterization.

Intraprocedural CT hepatic angiography (CTHA) images of a 69-year-old man undergoing microwave liver ablation of a 2.4 cm colorectal cancer liver metastasis. (A) Planning: arterial phase axial plane CTHA showing the target subcapsular tumour in segment VI. (B) Needle verification: arterial phase axial plane CTHA showing co-axial needles position prior to ablation. (C) Monitoring: arterial phase CTHA during ablation, demonstrating the peripheral hyperaemic rim of the ablation zone with respect to the target tumour, i.e. wide margins medially, but insufficient margins laterally, necessitating a “pull-back” manipulation of both microwave applicators. (D) Confirmation: arterial phase CTHA showing a large ablation zone extending towards the liver capsule.

Quality reference mAs (Qref mAs) is the effective mAs (mA * rotation time/pitch) required to achieve a specific image quality for a reference sized phantom.

Abbreviations: kV = kilovolts; mAs = milliamp seconds; mL = millilitres.

DICOM images were transferred to our robotic navigation system (MAXIO v2 Perfint Healthcare, Chennai, India) for 3-dimensional planning and stereotactic execution.13Tumour ablation was performed using 1 of 2 microwave systems (NeuWave, J&J MedTech, NJ, United States or Emprint, Medtronic, MN, United States). The NeuWave system was used together with 14G co-axial needles to improve targeting accuracy (Argon, TX, United States). Tumours and ablation zones were segmented, registered and fused on pre- and post-ablation CTHA images on the robotic workstation. Minimal ablative margin was measured and where unsatisfactory, further ablation was performed if safe to proceed. Once adequate, the catheter and sheath were removed, and a closure device deployed (6 Fr AngioSeal, Terumo, Tokyo, JP).

Per patient data comprised age, sex, and tumour type. Per procedure data comprised number of target tumours, CTHA duration/technical success/radiation dose and complications, catheter malposition, number of contrast-enhanced scans, total contrast volume and total procedure duration. Per tumour data comprised size, visibility, number of ablation zones and ablation technical success. CTHA duration was the time between first and last fluoroscopic images. Total procedure duration was the time between intubation and extubation.

Endpoints comprised (1) CTHA technical success, defined as acquisition of CTHA images, (2) feasibility, defined as total ablation duration within a four-hour session, (3) documented CTHA adverse events using Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) version 5.0, (4) total contrast volume administered for catheterization plus ablation, (5) fluoroscopic catheterization dose-area product, (6) tumour visibility, (7) ablation technical success defined as complete coverage of tumours by an ablation zone,14judged by image fusion using the robotic workstation. We documented the evolution of our technique, and ablation technique efficacy using follow-up a combination of MRI, FDG-PET/CT and contrast-enhanced CT.15A minimum sample size of 12 patients was set for feasibility,16and to allow for sample size calculations for future trials.

Data were analysed using GraphPad Prism (Version 10, Boston, MA, US). Continuous variables were expressed as median (range), and categorical variables were presented as frequencies. The Shapiro–Wilk test assessed normality. A large language model (ChatGPT, OpenAI) was used for language refinement only. It did not contribute to scientific content, data interpretation, or conclusions of the study.

Twenty patients, median age 66 years (range 41–87), underwent 21 procedures for 33 tumours between April and September 2024. The cohort included patients with various tumour types, sizes, and numbers (Table 2), comprising 14 with colorectal cancer (CRC), 2 with breast cancer, and 4 with other tumours (anal, pancreas, hepatocellular carcinoma [HCC], and neuroendocrine tumour [NET]) (Table 2).

Abbreviations: CRC = colorectal cancer, NET = neuroendocrine tumour, TT = target tumour(s), DAP = dose-area product, AZ = ablation zone, CTHA = CT hepatic angiography, AZ = ablation zone.

CTHA technical success was achieved in all procedures (21/21). Despite a high number of complex ablations necessitating multiple (overlapping) ablation zones, our single-room technique was feasible with all procedures (21/21) with 2 h 20 min (1 h 17 min to 3 h 35 min) total procedure time.

All CTHA-related adverse events were systematically assessed using CTCAE criteria, including potential complications such as arterial access hematoma, vessel dissection, and catheter-related issues. No such complications (0/21) were observed in this study.

Catheterization time was 10 min 16 s (5 min 32 s to 22 min 35 s), total contrast dose was 174 mL (80–410 mL), despite performing median 7 contrast-enhanced scans (2–22). Ninety-seven percent (32/33) of tumours were visible despite many being small, including subcentimetre. Ablation technical success was achieved in 32/33 tumours, since margins could not be assessed in one tumour due to invisibility on CTHA, despite prior identification on MRI. Procedure details are shown inTable 2.

We aimed to cannulate the common or proper hepatic arteries with a C1 catheter for the first 5 cases. However, screening times (>20 min in 2 cases), radiation dose and the need to exchange catheter in 2 cases meant we opted for a less selective catheterization of the coeliac artery using a SIM1 catheter from the sixth case onwards. We positioned the catheter tip in the superior mesenteric artery for the final case due to a replaced right hepatic artery. We ascertained that routine subtraction angiography was unnecessary, further lowering radiation dose. There were 2 instances of catheter malposition: one full dislodgement requiring repositioning under fluoroscopic guidance, and suboptimal image quality requiring minor adjustment without fluoroscopic guidance. In both instances, catheter repositioning was successful, and CTHA technical success was ultimately achieved. Illustrative cases are presented inFigures 3–5.

A 77-year-old man undergoing microwave liver ablation of a 5.8 cm right lobe colorectal cancer liver metastasis. Compared with intravenous contrast-enhanced images, CT hepatic angiography (CTHA) demonstrates higher target tumour conspicuity, larger apparent tumour size, and offers the ability to comprehensively treat large tumours using multiple applicators/overlapping ablation zones. (A) Multiplanar reformats from a portal venous phase pre-procedural diagnostic CT scan using intravenous contrast acquired 3 days before microwave ablation. The target tumour in the right hepatic lobe is hypoenhancing and measures 4.9 × 3.9 × 4.8 cm. (B) Multiplanar reformats from the intraprocedural planning arterial phase CTHA showing the tumour is more conspicuous than on the diagnostic scan and has an arterialized rim. Dimensions were 5.7 × 4.6 × 5.8 cm, i.e. larger apparent gross tumour volume. (C) Multiplanar reformats from the intraprocedural verification arterial phase CTHA showing 6 co-axial needles distributed around the target tumour periphery. (D) Axial plane intraprocedural post-ablation arterial phase CTHA showing the large central ablation zone coagulum with florid peripheral hyperaemia.

A 66-year-old man with colorectal cancer liver metastases. Images show the higher sensitivity of CT hepatic angiography (CTHA) for tumour detection than with intravenous contrast. (A) Axial plane diagnostic Gadoxetate disodium (Primovist) enhanced MRI performed three weeks prior to ablation, showing a 10 mm tumour in the medial aspect of segment V/VI (arrow). (B) Axial plane diagnostic venous phase CT performed the same day as MRI showing the tumour is occult. (C) Intraprocedural arterial phase CT hepatic angiogram clearly demonstrating the tumour, measured at 14 mm. The tumour was subsequently ablated.

Images of a 49-year-old man undergoing microwave liver ablation for a colorectal cancer liver metastasis. The high diagnostic sensitivity of CT hepatic angiography (CTHA) offers the ability to change the course of ablation, and for prognostication. (A) Intraprocedural arterial phase axial plane CTHA verification scan showing a 22 mm tumour targeted with a single microwave ablation applicator, as agreed in multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting. However, 2 further possible tumours were also demonstrated (encircled) which were not present on pre procedure imaging. (B) Intraprocedural arterial phase axial plane completion CTHA showing an arterial pseudoaneurysm within the ablation zone without clinically significant sequelae. The decision was taken to leave the other potential disease sites untreated due to this and lack of MDT discussion. (C) Intraprocedural arterial phase axial plane CTHA monitoring scan showing ablation of the pseudoaneurysm in the same session. The patient was discharged the following day without clinically evident sequelae. (D) Diagnostic axial plane intravenous contrast-enhanced CT in the portal venous phase, 8 weeks after ablation. The 2 tumours (encircled) demonstrated size increase in keeping with progression of genuine metastases. Due to systemic progression including at pulmonary sites, the patient was started on systemic anti-cancer therapy.

Median follow-up up was 6.6 months (1.8–11.6 months). There was a single instance of residual unablated tumour (of the tumour invisible on CTHA), which was successfully re-ablated in separate session supported by CTHA, using vascular landmarks. Two of 33 tumours (6%) developed suspected local tumour progression during the observed period, who later died with systemic progression.

We introduced a novel single-room CT hepatic angiography (CTHA) technique using a mobile C-arm within the CT scanner environment to augment liver ablations. In this initial cohort of 20 patients, we achieved a 100% technical success rate, without complications. Despite the complexity of some cases including tumours more than 5 cm, all procedures were comfortably completed within a session. The technique was executed with minimal training, suggesting a short learning curve and the potential for high reproducibility across institutions.

The advantages of CTHA are well documented. First, improved tumour visualization is supported by the 97% tumour visibility in our study, despite many small tumours. Tumours which are traditionally described as “hypovascular” (e.g. colorectal liver metastases) with intravenous contrast often demonstrate intense hypervascular margins on CTHA. Ablation zones are also more conspicuous, making margin assessment more accurate. The ability to acquire multiple contrast-enhanced scans during procedures due to small contrast doses required enables dynamic, real-time monitoring of applicator/tumour/ablation zone relationships. As such, while its role in small tumour visualization is well recognized, we have found its benefits extend across a range of tumour sizes, including larger tumours where multi-applicator ablations are necessary.

Our single-room solution addresses these limitations directly. It maintains sterility and procedural efficiency while providing immediate access to both fluoroscopy and CT without the need for patient transfer. Because it relies on widely available imaging infrastructure—rather than specialized CBCT or angio-CT systems—it is more accessible and feasible, even in resource-constrained settings. The simplicity of nonselective catheterization may also encourage wider adoption.

Whilst navigation systems, including robotic guidance such as those as used in this study, improve needle placement accuracy20,21and have image fusion capabilities, CTHA provides real-time visualization of tumour position relative to ablation antennas. This means CTHA may offer the greatest benefit in centres without access to advanced navigation technologies. Indeed, CTHA has significant potential to enhance healthcare efficiency on a broader scale. More accurate margin assessment can improve local tumour control, reduce the need for repeat ablations, spare patients’ unnecessary chemotherapy, and alleviate pressure on healthcare services. Collectively, these benefits contribute to better patient quality of life and increased societal productivity.

Whilst our results are promising, several limitations should be acknowledged. The small sample size and short follow-up period (<1 year) limit conclusions about long-term oncologic outcomes such as progression-free or overall survival. However, this study was designed to evaluate the feasibility and safety of single-room CTHA for liver ablation, rather than to assess durable treatment effects. Early radiologic response offers a preliminary indication of efficacy but should be interpreted with caution.

The absence of strict inclusion criteria reflects a pragmatic design aligned with real-world practice, although implementation at our specialized centre may affect generalizability. Image interpretation remains challenging with this nascent and highly sensitive modality; CTHA can reveal subtle findings that may prompt unnecessary intervention compared to conventional CT. One tumour was not visible on CTHA despite prior identification on MRI, which is likely due to enhancement characteristics and a replaced right hepatic artery, highlighting the possible influence of tumour perfusion and arterial anatomy on CTHA performance. Despite high overall tumour visibility, the sample size was insufficient to assess differences between tumour types. Larger, multicentre studies are therefore needed to determine whether tumour subtype or vascular anatomy affects visibility on CTHA, and to further evaluate its diagnostic accuracy.

Follow-up data collection is ongoing, and a future, adequately powered study is planned to assess long-term oncologic outcomes, including progression-free and overall survival. As single-room CTHA gains wider adoption, further multicentre research with larger cohorts and extended follow-up will be needed to clarify its impact on local tumour control, recurrence, and cost effectiveness.

Single-room CTHA using a mobile C-arm is feasible, safe and can be readily implemented in centres with catheterization experience, without expensive infrastructure. The technique holds significant promise for improving liver ablation outcomes and may play a crucial role in democratizing access to advanced interventional oncology techniques worldwide.

This project represents independent research funded by the National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust and The Institute of Cancer Research, London, and by the Royal Marsden Cancer Charity, and Cancer Research UK (CRUK). The views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care. This work uses data provided by patients and collected by the NHS as part of their care and support.

Edward W Johnston, 
Interventional Radiology, The Royal Marsden Hospital, London SW36JJ, United Kingdom; 
Radiotherapy and Imaging, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton SM2 5NG, United Kingdom.

Jodie Basso, 
Interventional Radiology, The Royal Marsden Hospital, London SW36JJ, United Kingdom.

Shaira Farooq, 
Interventional Radiology, The Royal Marsden Hospital, London SW36JJ, United Kingdom.

Ed McDonagh, 
Radiotherapy and Imaging, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton SM2 5NG, United Kingdom; 
Joint Dept. of Physics, The Royal Marsden Hospital, London SW36JJ, United Kingdom.

Louise Giansante, 
Joint Dept. of Physics, The Royal Marsden Hospital, London SW36JJ, United Kingdom.

David Cunningham, 
Gastrointestinal Oncology Unit, The Royal Marsden Hospital, London SW36JJ, United Kingdom; 
Medical Oncology, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton SM2 5NG, United Kingdom.

Dow-Mu Koh, 
Radiotherapy and Imaging, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton SM2 5NG, United Kingdom; 
Diagnostic Radiology, The Royal Marsden, London SW36JJ, United Kingdom.

Martijn Meijerink, 
Interventional Radiology, Amsterdam UMC, Amsterdam 1081 HV, Netherlands.

Nicos Fotiadis, 
Interventional Radiology, The Royal Marsden Hospital, London SW36JJ, United Kingdom; 
Radiotherapy and Imaging, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton SM2 5NG, United Kingdom.

This project represents independent research funded by the National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre at The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust and The Institute of Cancer Research, London, and by the Royal Marsden Cancer Charity, and Cancer Research UK (CRUK).This work was supported by a Kodak Fellowship from the Royal of College of Radiologists. The authors had full control of the data including decision to publish.