Cardiovascular conditions account for millions of deaths globally. Myocardial infarction (MI) remains the foremost cause of cardiovascular death. Post-MI pathology can activate a diverse type of programmed cell death (PCD), which aggravates cardiac dysfunction and causes post-ischemic heart failure. Although various PCD inhibitors have shown potential efficacy against several cardiac complications, their roles in preventing or reducing myocardial loss and dysfunction in post-MI pathology have never been clarified. A rat model of MI was used in this study and post-MI rats were randomly assigned into 5 subgroups (n= 7/group): (1) vehicle (3%V/V DMSO), (2) enalapril (10 mg/kg), (3) zVAD-FMK (1 mg/kg), (4) Necrostatin-1 (1.65 mg/kg), or (5) Ferrostatin-1 (2 mg/kg). All treatments were given for 32 days via intraperitoneal injection. A control group of sham-operated rats underwent thoracotomy without left anterior descending (LAD) artery occlusion (n= 7). After 32 days of treatment, echocardiography and ventricular pressure-volume (P-V) loop studies, mitochondrial function, histopathological studies, and molecular analysis were carried out. Treatment with zVAD-FMK, Necrostatin-1, and Ferrostatin-1 mitigated pathological cardiac remodeling, reduced apoptosis and necroptosis-mediated myocardial injury, alleviated mitochondrial dysfunction, and improved cardiac function in post-MI rats. These findings indicated that inhibition of apoptosis and necroptosis could be novel strategies for treatment in post-MI conditions.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-17275-9.

Myocardial infarction (MI) is the most prominent major cardiovascular health issue, which causes millions of deaths and drastically impacts the global disease burden1,2. MI is caused by significant damage or loss of functional cardiomyocytes following a sustained ischemic episode. During an acute period of MI progression, the extension of different types of programmed cell death (PCD), specifically apoptosis, necroptosis, and ferroptosis, has been shown to play a role in the development of infarcted myocardium, which leads to poor outcomes associated with heart failure3–6. Excessive activation of PCD not only exacerbates the myocardial damage but also impairs cardiac mitochondrial function and augments pathological remodeling of the heart5,7. Previous studies have reported that apoptosis is detectable as early as 2 h after MI, evidenced by augmentation of apoptosis-relevant proteins (i.e., cleaved caspase 3 and cytochrome C)3,8,9.

Necroptosis is closely related to myocardial inflammation and has been implicated in post-ischemic heart failure5,8,9. Necroptosis is significantly initiated by inflammation, death receptor cascades, and intracellular oxidative stress5,8,9. Previous studies have reported that sustained ischemia drastically exacerbates the levels of receptor interacting serine/threonine kinase 3 (RIPK3) and mixed lineage kinase domain like pseudokinase (MLKL) phosphorylation5. The phosphorylation of RIPK3 promotes the formation of pro-necrotic complexes, or necrosomes, which subsequently phosphorylate MLKL9,12,13. The phosphorylated pMLKL then oligomerizes and translocates to the plasma membrane, ultimately leading to membrane disruption and necroptotic cell death9,12,13. Quite apart from apoptosis and necroptosis, ferroptosis has been shown to contribute to cardiomyocyte death and the development of cardiac dysfunction and heart failure in several cardiovascular diseases5. Ferroptosis involves the depletion of antioxidant molecules (specifically glutathione peroxidase 4 or GPX4) and the augmentation of intracellular free radicals, which leads to an increase in lipid peroxidation and subsequent cell death5,14. These occurrences of PCD have an overwhelming contribution to cardiac geometrical and biomechanical alterations, thus potentially leading to heart failure after MI. Since these incidences of PCD could play important roles in the development of heart failure post-MI, modulation of PCD after MI has emerged as a promising therapeutic strategy for addressing post-MI complications.

Several pharmacological agents have been developed to target different types of cell death pathway and promote functional outcomes in many diseases14–18. zVAD-FMK (zVAD) is a plasma membrane-permeable pan-caspase inhibitor that non-selectively and irreversibly binds to the catalytic site of the caspase family15,17. zVAD has been widely used to prevent the activation of apoptosis in many pathologies6,15–17. Previous studies reported that zVAD potentially limited cardiac injury, subsequently improving cardiac function in cardiac ischemic/reperfusion (I/R) models6,17. Necrostain-1 (Nec-1) is known to act as a membrane-permeable, potent, and selective inhibitor of necroptosis11,19. Nec-1 binds specifically to the hydrophobic pockets of receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 1 and 3 (RIPK1 and 3)10,11,19. This results in Nec-1 effectively inhibiting the activation of RIPK1, thus preventing RIPK1-RIPK3 interaction and necrosome assembly. This has been shown to suppress necroptotic death in several disease models10,11,19. Ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1) is a classic hydroperoxyl radical scavenger that acts as a synthetic antioxidant14,18,20. Fer-1 inhibits ferroptosis by preventing lipid hydroperoxidation in a similar fashion to the anti-ferroptotic enzyme GPX420. A previous study reported that acute administration of different cell death inhibitors provided promising cardioprotective benefits against cardiac I/R insults in rats6. However, whether the continuous inhibition of multiple types of PCD would exert cardioprotection against post-MI pathology is still unknown.

In this study, we aimed to elucidate the potential cardioprotective benefits of chronic treatment with specific cell death inhibitors, including zVAD, Nec-1, and Fer-1, in post-MI rats. We hypothesized that continuous inhibition of PCD mitigates mitochondrial dysfunction and cardiomyocyte death, thus attenuating damage to left ventricular (LV) function in post-MI rats. We believe that any novel findings would encourage further clinical investigation and could facilitate the development of new therapeutic approaches to improve the clinical outcome in post-MI patients.

The representative echocardiographic images showed that post-MI rats exhibited LV anterior wall akinesis, indicating the success of post-left anterior descending (LAD) coronary occlusion in creating an infarct (Fig.1A). Both systolic and diastolic cardiac contractile dysfunction were observed in post-MI rats, as evidenced by the reduction of % LV ejection fraction (%LVEF), % LV fractional shortening (%LVFS), and trans-mitral flow during early to late diastolic filling velocity (E/A) ratio when compared to the sham rats (Fig.1B-D). The invasive cardiac function measurements obtained from cardiac catheterization also confirmed that prolonged ischemia significantly altered LV function by decreasing LV end-systolic pressure (LVESP), stroke volume (SV), and cardiac output (CO), but increasing LV end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP), LV end-systolic volume (LVESV), and LV end-diastolic volume (LVEDV), which indicated MI-induced contractile dysfunction (Fig.1E-J). In addition, post-MI rats displayed an increase in the ratio of high-frequency to low-frequency components (HF/LF ratio) and heart rate, which indicated an imbalance in cardiac sympathovagal activation after MI (Fig.1K-L).

Chronic inhibition of apoptosis, necroptosis or ferroptosis improved heart function and reduced LV decompensation in post-MI rats. (A) representative images of transthoracic echocardiography of SHAM, VEH, zVAD, Nec-1, and Fer-1 groups; (B) quantitative analysis of %LVEF; (C) %LVFS; (D) E/A ratio; (E) LVESP; (F) LVEDP; (G) LVESV; (H) LVEDV; (I) SV; (J) CO; (K) LF/HF; (L) Heart rate;n= 5–7 each group. All data on bar charts are expressed as mean ± SEM. *p< 0.05 vs. SHAM,†p< 0.05 vs. VEH.MImyocardial infarction,VEHvehicle,ENAenalapril,zVADzVAD-FMK,Nec-1necrostatin-1,Fer-1ferrostatin-1,%LVEFleft ventricular ejection fraction (%),LVFSleft ventricular fractional shortening (%),E/A ratiotransmitral ratio of peak early to late diastolic filling velocity,LF/HFlow frequency to high frequency ratio,LVESPleft ventricular end-systolic pressure,LVEDPleft ventricular end-diastolic pressure,LVESVleft ventricular end-systolic volume,LVEDVleft ventricular end diastolic volume,SVstroke volume,COcardiac output.

Continuous treatment with specific PCD inhibitors, specifically zVAD, Nec-1, or Fer-1 also ameliorated post-MI-induced systolic dysfunction by improving %LVEF and %LVFS to a similar level of efficacy to enalapril when compared to the vehicle-treated group (Fig.1A-C). Similarly, treatment with enalapril, zVAD, Nec-1, or Fer-1 significantly attenuated post-MI-induced LV pressure and volume overload, as evidenced by reductions in LVEDP, LVESV, and LVEDV when compared to the vehicle-treated group (Fig.1F-H). However, only treatment with enalapril and zVAD improved SV and CO in these MI rats (Fig.1I-J). Treatment with enalapril, zVAD, Nec-1, or Fer-1 also improved cardiac sympathovagal activation as evidenced by a reduction in LF/HF ratio and heart rate when compared to vehicle-treated rats (Fig.1K-L). However, all treatments failed to preserve the E/A ratio, which indicated LV diastolic dysfunction after MI (Fig.1D). These data suggested that chronic inhibition of PCD using apoptosis, necroptosis, or ferroptosis inhibitors could effectively improve cardiac systolic function and mitigate cardiac geometric alteration after MI.

The histopathological findings revealed that the post-MI rat hearts exhibited extended cardiac fibrosis and myocardial hypertrophy, as evidenced by prominent LV scar formation, interstitial fibrosis in the infarct border zone, and increased cardiomyocyte cross-sectional area, in comparison to the sham group (Fig.2A-G). In addition, the molecular analysis results demonstrated an increase in the levels of expression of the profibrotic mediator transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) in the post-MI group compared to the sham group (Fig.2H).

Chronic inhibition of differences in apoptosis, necroptosis or ferroptosis mitigated pathological remodeling and post-ischemic heart failure after MI. (A) representative images of cardiac fibrosis of cross-sectional mid-LV section using picrosirius red staining; (B) high power field of fibrosis in IBZ; (C) representative images of cardiac tissue of mid-left ventricular sections using H&E staining; (D) representative micrographs of cardiomyocytes in mid-LV of cross-sectional myocardium; (E) quantitative measurements of %infarct scar size per total LV; (F) quantitative measurements of %fibrosis in IBZ; (G) quantitative measurements of cardiomyocyte cross-sectional area in the LV in the experimental groups; (H) quantitative analysis of the levels of expression of TGF-β/GAPDH; (I) HW/BW ratio; (J) Lung wet/dry weight ratio;n= 3–7 each group. All data on bar charts are expressed as mean ± SEM. *p< 0.05 vs. SHAM, †p< 0.05 vs. VEH.MImyocardial infarction,VEHvehicle,ENAenalapril,zVADzVAD-FMK,Nec-1necrostatin-1,Fer-1ferrostatin-1,IBZinfarct-border zone,HW/BWheart weight to body,TGF-βTransforming growth factor-β.

Our results demonstrated that zVAD, Nec-1, or Fer-1 treatment mitigated fibrosis in the infarct border area of the post-MI hearts without affecting the LV infarct size, similar results to enalapril, when compared to the vehicle group (Fig.2A-B and E-F). Continuous treatments with enalapril, zVAD, Nec-1, or Fer-1 significantly reduced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy after MI, as shown by decreased cardiomyocyte-cross sectional areas when compared to the vehicle-treated group (Fig.2C-D and G). In addition, the heart-to-body weight ratio (HW/BW) and the wet-to-dry lung weight ratio (Lung W/D) were decreased in all treatment groups when compared to the untreated MI group (Fig.2I-J), indicating the mitigation of post-MI-induced cardiac hypertrophy and congestive heart failure after treatment.

In this study sustained myocardial ischemia augmented reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, depolarization of membrane potential (i.e., decreased red to green fluorescence intensity ratio), and swelling (i.e. decreased absorbance at 540 nm) of cardiac mitochondria in the vehicle-treated group when compared to the sham rats (Fig.3A-C). Additionally, the post-MI hearts treated with the vehicle had an increase in the expression of dynamin-related protein 1 phosphorylation at Ser616 (pDRP1) when compared to the sham group, indicating excessive mitochondrial fission and fragmentation (Fig.3D). Representative cardiac mitochondrial transmission electron microscopy (TEM) ultrastructure also demonstrated cardiac mitochondrial swelling, vacuolization, and cristae disorganization in post-MI rats compared to the sham rats (Fig.3E). These findings suggested that post-MI hearts showed deterioration of mitochondrial function, which were associated with the changes in mitochondrial architecture and fragmentation.

Chronic inhibition of apoptosis, necroptosis or ferroptosis mitigated cardiac mitochondrial functional aberrations, oxidative stress, cardiac injury, and inflammation after MI. Quantitative analysis of: (A) Mitochondrial ROS production; (B) Mitochondrial membrane potential; (C) Mitochondrial swelling; (D) the expression levels of pDRP1/tDRP1; (E) the representative images of cardiac mitochondrial TEM ultrastructure; (F) quantitative analysis of Serum MDA levels; (G) Cardiac tissue MDA levels; (H) Serum cTnI levels; (I) Serum NT-proBNP levels. ;n= 6–7 each group. All data on bar charts are expressed as mean ± SEM. *p< 0.05 vs. SHAM,†p< 0.05 vs. VEH.MImyocardial infarction,VEHvehicle,ENAenalapril,zVADzVAD-FMK,Nec-1necrostatin-1,Fer-1ferrostatin-1,ROSreactive oxygen species,pDRP1dynamin-related protein 1 (phosphorylated form),tDRP1dynamin-related protein 1 (total form),MDAmalondialdehyde,cTnIcardiac troponin-I,NT-proBNPN-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide.

As anticipated, chronic treatment with cell death inhibitors using zVAD and Nec-1 showed significantly decreased levels of mitochondrial ROS and membrane potential depolarization, thus eventually preventing mitochondrial swelling when compared to the vehicle-treated group (Fig.3A-C). Following treatment with Fer-1, mitochondrial ROS generation and mitochondrial swelling, but not membrane depolarization, were attenuated when compared to the vehicle-treated group (Fig.3A-C). In line with this, levels of expression of pDRP1/tDRP1 were downregulated in all treatment groups (Fig.3D). The representative mitochondrial ultrastructure also showed the attenuation of structural aberrations across all treatment groups (Fig.3E). Treatment with enalapril as a control treatment improved all aspects of mitochondrial dysfunction, reduced DRP1 phosphorylation, and resulted in mitigation of mitochondrial dysmorphology when compared to the untreated MI group (Fig.3A-E). These results revealed that chronic inhibition of PCD mitigated cardiac mitochondrial functional and structural aberrations after MI.

Chronic myocardial ischemia significantly increased the MDA levels in both cardiac tissue and serum of post-MI rats when compared to the sham group (Fig.3F-G). Similarly, the circulating levels of cTnI and NT-proBNP were also higher in the post-MI vehicle-treated group than those in sham group (Fig.3H-I). The MI hearts also had higher levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines (i.e., TNF-α and IL-6) compared to the sham group (Fig.4A-B). These data indicated that prolonged myocardial ischemia caused excessive oxidative stress, myocardial cell injury, and cardiac inflammation.

Chronic inhibition of apoptosis, necroptosis, and ferroptosis attenuated myocardial apoptosis and inflammation after MI. Quantitative analysis of the expression levels of: (A) TNF-α/GAPDH; (B) IL-6/GAPDH; (C) Bax/Bcl-2; (D) Cytochrome C/GAPDH; (E) Cleaved-caspase 3/Caspase 3; (F) Representative TUNEL staining of each experimental group;n= 6–8 per group. All data on bar charts are expressed as mean ± SEM. *p< 0.05 vs. SHAM,†p< 0.05 vs. VEH.MImyocardial infarction,VEHvehicle,ENAenalapril,zVADzVAD-FMK,Nec-1necrostatin-1,Fer-1ferrostatin-1,Baxbcl-2-like protein 4,Bcl-2B-cell lymphoma 2,TUNELterminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase biotin-dUTP nick end labeling,TNF-αtumor necrosis factor-α,IL-6interleukin-6.

Treatment with enalapril, zVAD, Nec-1, or Fer-1 mitigated levels of MDA in both cardiac tissue and serum in post-MI rats (Fig.3F-G). The circulating levels of cTnI and NT-proBNP were also alleviated among all treatment groups (Fig.3H-I). In addition, treatment with enalapril, zVAD, Nec-1, or Fer-1 effectively reduced cardiac inflammation, as shown by decreased expression of TNF-α (Fig.4A). However, only treatment with enalapril attenuated levels of IL-6 expression in post-MI hearts (Fig.4B). Collectively, these findings indicate that chronic inhibition of apoptosis, necroptosis, and ferroptosis effectively attenuated oxidative overproduction and reduced cardiac injury and inflammation following MI.

Our results showed that the post-MI heart exhibited higher expression of apoptosis-relevant proteins, including Bax/Bcl-2, cytochrome C, and cleaved caspase 3/caspase 3 compared to the sham rats (Fig.4C-E). The representative TUNEL images also visualized an increase in positive nuclei, as seen in red dots, in the vehicle group (Fig.4D).

Treatment with a pan-caspase inhibitor (zVAD) effectively mitigated all apoptosis biomarkers with a comparable efficacy as enalapril when compared to the vehicle-treated group (Fig.4C-E). However, chronic treatment with the necroptosis inhibitor (Nec-1) and ferroptosis inhibitor (Fer-1) failed to alleviate intrinsic apoptosis, as indicated by no significant difference in Bax/Bcl-2 and cytochrome C expression levels compared to the vehicle-treated group (Fig.4C-D). Interestingly, all treatments (enalapril, zVAD, Nec-1, or Fer-1) resulted in a significant reduction of the cleaved caspase 3/caspase 3 ratio, when compared to the vehicle-treated group (Fig.4E). The representative TUNEL images of all treatment groups are shown in Fig.4F. Taken together, our results suggested that chronic administration of these apoptosis, necroptosis, or ferroptosis inhibitors attenuated myocardial apoptosis in the post-MI heart.

In the case of the determination of necroptosis and ferroptosis, the MI hearts exhibited higher expression levels of necroptosis pertinent proteins (pRIPK3/tRIPK3 and pMLKL/tMLKL) 32 days post-MI when compared to the sham group (Fig.5A-B). Although the expression levels of the ferroptosis marker ACSL4 were not statistically different between all groups (Fig.5C), the expression of the protein GPX4, which is known as the key negative regulator of ferroptosis, was significantly augmented in the post-MI heart (Fig.5D).

Chronic inhibition of apoptosis, necroptosis or ferroptosis mitigated myocardial necroptosis but not ferroptosis after MI. Quantitative analysis of the expression levels of: (A) pRIPK3/tRIPK3; (B) pMLKL/tMLKL; (C) ACSL4/GAPDH; (D) GPX4/GAPDH;n= 6–8 per group. All data on bar charts are expressed as mean ± SEM. *p< 0.05 vs. SHAM,†p< 0.05 vs. VEH.MImyocardial infarction,VEHvehicle,ENAenalapril,zVADzVAD-FMK,Nec-1necrostatin-1,Fer-1ferrostatin-1,pRIPK3receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 3 (phosphorylated form),tRIPK3receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 3 (total form),pMLKLmixed lineage kinase domain like pseudokinase (phosphorylated form),tMLKLmixed lineage kinase domain like pseudokinase (total form),ACSL4acyl-CoA synthetase long chain family member 4,GPX4glutathione peroxidase 4.

Chronic treatment with Nec-1 effectively mitigated the overexpression of pRIPK3/tRIPK3 back to sham control levels. This effect was similar to that in enalapril-treated MI rats (Fig.5A). Surprisingly, our data revealed that chronic administration with all types of PCD inhibitor (i.e., zVAD, Nec-1, or Fer-1) abrogated the overexpression of necroptosis executioner proteins (pMLKL/tMLKL) in post-MI rats with similar levels of efficacy to enalapril when compared to the vehicle-treated group (Fig.5B). Collectively, our findings affirm that chronic administration of zVAD, Nec-1, or Fer-1 mitigated myocardial necroptosis after MI.

MI refers to a condition where the coronary perfusion to the heart muscle is disrupted which can lead to an insufficient supply of oxygen and glucose to the myocardium9,21,22. The prolongation of the ischemic episodes can lead to the deterioration of various molecular cascades, eventually leading to a substantial loss of functional cardiomyocytes23. Myocardial death is the critical hallmark characteristic of post-MI pathology3–5,23. To date, different types of PCD have been identified in the progression of post-MI pathology5–7. Therefore, the concept of modulating PCD is a promising therapeutic strategy for post-MI pathology, however the mechanisms need to be established.

Previous studies reported that apoptosis, necroptosis, and ferroptosis participated in myocardial loss during acute development of MI24–26. Besides, recent studies have shown that acute administration of PCDs using zVAD and Fer-1 could reduce cardiac mitochondrial dysfunction, myocardial cell death, and cardiac dysfunction in acute MI and cardiac I/R injury6,27,28. However, there has never been an investigation into the role of PCD in the chronic development of MI. In this regard, our study provides novel findings as it is the first evidence to explore the cardioprotective effects of inhibitors targeting apoptosis, necroptosis, and ferroptosis in post-MI pathology. This novel approach could reshape therapeutic strategies for post-MI pathology by demonstrating that chronic inhibition of specific PCD pathways can mitigate long-term myocardial damage, potentially improving clinical outcomes in post-MI patients.

In the present study, a pre-clinical model of post-MI was used, and the highlighted findings are as follows: (i) post-MI insults increased cardiac mitochondrial fragmentation and mitochondrial dysfunction, which led to cardiac injury, pathological remodeling, and post-ischemic heart failure; (ii) different types of PCD, including apoptosis and necroptosis, but not ferroptosis, were prevalent in post-MI pathology; (iii) chronic administration of apoptosis, necroptosis, and ferroptosis inhibitors alleviated mitochondrial dysfunction and reduced cardiac injury; (iv) chronic treatment with PCD inhibitors mitigated myocardial apoptosis and necroptosis, thus alleviating post-MI pathology and limiting post-ischemic heart failure. The summary of these findings is illustrated in Fig.6.

Post-MI insults augmented mitochondrial fragmentation and mitochondrial dysfunction. Two main types of PCD, specifically apoptosis and necroptosis were prevalent in post-MI pathology, while no evidence of the action of ferroptosis was observed. Prolonged ischemic insults ultimately intensified cardiac injury, worsening LV decompensation and pathological remodeling, impairing contractile function, and leading to post-ischemic heart failure. However, continuous administration with zVAD-FMK, Necrostatin-1, and Ferroptosis-1 proved effective in mitigating pathological remodeling, reducing apoptosis and necroptosis-related myocardial injury, alleviating mitochondrial dysfunction, and improving LV function in post-MI rats. Figure was created with Biorender.com.

A significant and sustained occlusion of the coronary vessels, the primary cause of MI, leads to a sudden disruption in glucose and oxygen supply to the myocardium, ultimately resulting in acute myocardial cell death within the infarcted area29,30. The current recommended therapeutic approach for acute MI is based on reperfusion therapy, including acute thrombolysis, percutaneous coronary intervention, and coronary artery bypass grafting31. However, to effectively reduce mortality, reperfusion of the infarct-related artery must be performed within the first few hours of symptom onset31,32. In case of non-perfused MI, the infarcted myocardium chronically progresses, thus altering cardiac geometry, such as LV chamber dilatation, cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, and cardiac fibrosis7,9,22. Murine models are commonly used to study MI pathology, as they closely mimic key clinical features of myocardial ischemia and infarction. Preclinical MI models are typically categorized into reperfused and non-reperfused models33–35. Preclinical MI models are typically categorized into reperfused and non-reperfused models33–35. The reperfused model replicates the clinical scenario of therapeutic reperfusion, including the impact of ischemia-reperfusion injury and the area at risk33.

In contrast, the non-reperfused MI model is widely used to investigate cardiac inflammation, repair, remodeling, and the development of post-MI congestive heart failure34. This model reflects approximately 30% of clinical cases in which timely reperfusion is not achieved or reperfusion therapy fails33. In our study, we employed a chronic non-reperfused model via permanent ligation of the LAD coronary artery. This approach is technically well-suited for investigating long-term cardiac remodeling and the progression of heart failure following MI33,34. Accordingly, we assessed post-MI pathologies in terms of both LV structural and biomechanical alterations, including anterior wall akinesis, increased LV internal diameter, and cardiac fibrosis, based on established guidelines33. This model was selected due to its clinical relevance to cases of untreated or unsuccessfully reperfused MI, as well as its robustness in consistently reproducing progressive post-infarction remodeling and heart failure, making it well-suited for the evaluation of post-MI pathophysiology.

Unlike acute MI and cardiac I/R, post-MI pathology is characterized by a stable infarct size, where the consistent ligation site yields a similar infarct scar size36. The pathological process of MI occurs on both tissue and cellular perspective with 3 overlapping phases9,37. The inflammatory phase occurs within 1–4 days after ischemia, leading to inflammatory cells infiltration37. The proliferative phase begins a couple of days followed the inflammatory phase and lasts for weeks37. In this phase the inflammatory process is diminished along with myofibroblast activation, angiogenesis, vascular maturation, and collagen-base deposition in the extracellular matrix37. Finally, the healing phase starts around 2–6 weeks post-MI, where the infarcted myocardium undergoes scar maturation, resulting in a remodeled structure with dense collagen fibers, myofibroblasts, and neovascularized vessels37. It has been shown that the development of fibrosis in the extracellular matrix primarily develops during the proliferative phase and healing phase38,39. In our study, we observed that the resultant infarction size, expressed as the percentage of infarct scar relative to the total LV area, was consistent across all MI groups, indicating no ligation bias among all MI groups, and confirming the stability of our MI model. In addition, our pharmacological interventions were done at 1 week after LAD ligation. At this time, the infarct size was already permanent in all MI rats. Interestingly, chronic administration of zVAD, Nec-1, and Fer-1 significantly attenuated interstitial fibrosis in the infarct border zone, suggesting that these treatments mitigated interstitial fibrosis in the infarct border area of post-MI hearts without influencing the LV infarct size.

In this study, we demonstrated that chronic administration of zVAD, Nec-1, and Fer-1 not only reduced cell death activation but also provided cardioprotective benefits against MI by mitigating oxidative stress, cardiac mitochondrial dysfunction, and interstitial fibrosis in the infarct border area. Generally, mitochondrial function depends on the maintenance of transmembrane potential40. Supporting this notion, Ricci and colleagues (2003) reported that the proteolytic activity of caspases caused mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization, altering complexes I and II activity in the electron transport chain, leading to a loss of the proton gradient, changes in transmembrane potential, mitochondrial ROS overproduction, and subsequent apoptosis41. Furthermore, zVAD has been demonstrated to effectively inhibit caspase-mediated mitochondrial membrane potential loss and ROS production during apoptosis in both cardiac and non-cardiac cells6,41,42. Moreover, it has been shown that abnormal increases in ROS production and mitochondrial dysfunction could further activate the RhoA/Rho-kinase (ROCK) pathway in cardiomyocytes and fibroblasts, leading to the activation of the pro-fibrotic factor TGF-β and alpha smooth muscle actin (α-SMA)43. In addition, previous studies demonstrated the structure of Nec-1 and Fer-1 showed a direct radical scavenging ability against oxidative stress-induced cell damage18,44,potentially mitigating fibrosis. Consistently, in this study, we found that zVAD, Nec-1, and Fer-1 not only mitigated myocardial cell death but also reduced cardiac mitochondrial dysfunction and ROS generation, ultimately decreasing fibrosis in the infarct border zone and improving cardiac function without affecting infarct scar size in post-MI rats.

As previously reported, the sustained prolongation of an ischemic episode could trigger myocardial apoptosis through two major pathways, specifically intrinsic (mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis) and extrinsic (death receptor-related apoptosis) apoptosis pathways3. Regarding mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis, since cardiomyocytes have a significant vulnerability to the ischemic episode, the prolongation of MI leads to the significant disruption of cardiac architecture and function by impairing mitochondrial dynamics and function21,23. Our results showed that post-MI insults caused cardiac mitochondrial fission, as evidenced by increased pDRP1-mediated excessive fission. In addition, the post-MI heart also exhibited cardiac mitochondrial dysfunction, as indicated by increased mitochondrial oxidative stress, a decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential, and an increase in mitochondrial swelling. In parallel, the post-MI heart had a higher expression of TNF-α which is involved in the initiation of both inflammation signaling and extrinsic apoptosis. The activation of extrinsic and/or intrinsic apoptosis would eventually activate the production of the caspase protease protein family (e.g., cleaved caspase 3), indicating apoptosis3,5. In this study, we demonstrated that post-MI hearts showed a significant increase in the ratio of the pro-apoptotic protein Bax to the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-2, which facilitated the release of mitochondrial apoptogen cytochrome C and thus ultimately activated caspase-mediated apoptosis.

The post-MI heart is also vulnerable to necroptosis-induced cell death7,8. During prolonged MI injury, an inflammatory immune response occurs in both the infarcted and neighboring myocardium45. TNF-α has been identified as the upstream regulating factor of necroptosis5,9. The binding of TNF-α to its membrane receptor TNFR1 recruits complex I formation, thus further facilitating the phosphorylation of RIPK1 and RIPK3 and pro-necrotic complex formation5,9. The phosphorylation of RIPK3 in the necrosome facilitates the phosphorylation and assembly of MLKL5,9. The oligomerization of pMLKL would result in formation of membrane pores, which would disrupt the integrity of the plasma membrane and eventually cause necroptotic death. We also found that post-MI hearts exhibited a significant increase in the expression of the necroptotic related proteins pRIPK3/tRIPK3 and pMLKL/tMLKL, which indicated myocardial necroptosis after MI.

As previously mentioned, post-ischemic myocardial inflammation and oxidative stress are known as the prerequisite to and hallmark of post-MI pathology21,22,46. Likewise, ferroptosis is a type of cell death that is characterized by the accumulation of ROS and lipid peroxides5. Previously, ferroptosis has been implicated in the pathogenesis of acute MI and cardiac I/R5,6. The upregulation of ACSL4 was considered a potential biomarker and essential pertinent protein for the execution of ferroptosis in several pathologies47,48. However, a previous study by Park et al. (2019) reported that ferroptosis is not involved in the late phase of MI due to the compensatory upregulation of the anti-ferroptosis protein GPX449. Adding weight to these findings, in this study, our results also confirmed that the expression levels of the pro-ferroptosis protein ACSL4 were no different across all groups and that the expression levels of anti-ferroptosis protein GPX4 were measurably augmented in post-MI groups. Collectively, we demonstrated that the post-MI pathology occurs as a consequence of multifaceted pathologies, including mitochondrial fragmentation, mitochondrial dysfunction, cardiac injury, pathological remodeling, and post-ischemic heart failure. Also, our findings indicated that there is evidence of myocardial apoptosis and necroptosis in the post-MI heart.

It has been previously demonstrated that zVAD irreversibly inhibits the proteolytic activity of caspase families, thus inhibiting apoptosis15,17. zVAD was shown to effectively abolish TNF-α-induced mitochondrial damage (specifically mitochondrial swelling and dilatation) by preventing the proteolytic activity of the caspase protease family50. Our results also showed consistent findings that chronic administration of Nec-1 not only reduced the expression of the apoptosis executioner proteins cleaved caspase 3/caspase 3, but also mitigated cardiac mitochondrial dysfunction and damage after a long period of MI. Previous studies reported that administration of Nec-1 after MI reduced myocardial necroptosis by mitigating RIPK3/MLKL-mediated necroptosis11. Nec-1 has been shown to suppress necroptosis, and prevent the activation of apoptosis in several diseases by inhibiting RIPK-mediated apoptosis and through its anti-inflammation11,51,52. Furthermore, Nec-1 was shown to prevent mitochondrial damage by mitigating mitochondrial calcium overload, preserving the integrity of mitochondrial membrane potential, and improving ATP production in a post-spinal cord injury model53. However, the exact mechanism underlying the action of Nec-1 in the context of post-MI pathology is still elusive and needs further investigation.

Even though ferroptosis seems not to be associated with post-MI pathology, we have found a potential beneficial effect of Fer-1 against MI. As previously reported, Fer-1 non-selectively acts as a free radical-trapping antioxidant, which effectively mitigates intracellular oxidative damage, thus potentially preventing oxidative stress-induced PCD14,18. On top of that, it has been reported that Fer-1 also attenuated mitochondrial dysfunction by reducing mitochondrial ROS generation, mitochondrial membrane depolarization, and preventing the release of cytochrome C release54. In the present study, our findings also support the previous theory that Fer-1 treatment could mitigate mitochondrial oxidative stress and swelling, thus preserving mitochondrial ultrastructure in the post-MI heart.

Given the promising effects of enalapril in the present study, we found that it effectively attenuated cardiomyocyte hypertrophy following MI, reduced cardiac mitochondrial ROS and MDA levels, and suppressed cardiac inflammation (i.e., a reduction in IL-6 expression). In addition, it also mitigated apoptosis markers (i.e., Bax/Bcl-2, cytochrome c, and cleaved caspase-3/caspase-3), downregulated the pRIPK3/tRIPK3 axis, and consequently inhibited the expression of necroptosis execution. In addition, enalapril enhanced cardiac contractile function by improving SV and CO in post-MI rats. When considered alongside the protective effects observed with zVAD-FMK, Necrostatin-1, or Ferrostatin-1, the combination of enalapril with one of these cell death inhibitors suggests a promising synergistic interaction that may further enhance the preservation of cardiac function following MI. Future studies exploring the long-term efficacy, optimal dosing strategies, and translational relevance of these combination therapies are warranted, as they may offer novel therapeutic avenues for improving clinical outcomes in patients with MI.

A limitation of this study is the lack of the use of a pyroptosis inhibitor in our post-MI model. Further studies are needed to investigate the potential efficacy of the pyroptosis inhibitor against post-MI pathology. Overall, our findings open a new window of opportunity for targeted therapy for post-MI patients. Since post-MI pathology consists of diverse types of PCD, their further investigation is warranted to determine whether the cardioprotective efficacy of a combined or adjunctive treatment with different types of PCD inhibitors would provide a better clinical outcome than monotherapy.

Our study highlights the great therapeutic potential of the application of cell death inhibitors (specifically inhibitors of apoptosis, necroptosis, or ferroptosis) for reducing the extent of post-MI pathology by alleviating cardiac mitochondrial dysfunction, mitigating oxidative stress, reducing cardiac injury, and preventing myocardial death. Cell death inhibitors may represent a promising therapeutic strategy for post-MI, and continued research in this area may lead to the development of novel therapies for this life-threatening condition.

Adult male Wistar rats with 8 to 10 weeks of age weighing 350–400 g (Nomura Siam International Co., Ltd., Bangkok, Thailand) were used in this study. All experimental procedures were conducted in specific accordance with the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Laboratory animal management, welfare, and ethical considerations were sanctioned by the Laboratory Animal Center and the Chiang Mai University Animal Care and Use Committee (permit number 2564/RT-0014).

Rats were subjected to permanent left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery occlusion. Since post-MI pathologies alter LV architecture and biomechanical function, including anterior wall akinesis, increased LV internal dimension, and cardiac fibrosis, after the first week of MI7,34,35,55,56.  Transthoracic echocardiography was performed one week post-operatively (day 8) to confirm post-MI pathology. Rats without akinetic anterior wall motion were excluded from our study. Sham-operated rats underwent left-thoracotomy without LAD occlusion and were considered as the sham-operated control group.

The MI rats were then divided into 5 subgroups (n= 7 per each group), specifically: vehicle (VEH), enalapril (ENA), zVAD-FMK (zVAD), Necrostain-1 (Nec-1), and Ferrostatin-1 (Fer-1). Rats in the vehicle group were given 3% V/V DMSO (Sigma-Aldrich Co., USA) via intraperitoneal injection (I.P.) at a single dose daily for 32 consecutive days. Enalapril (10 mg/kg, Berlin Pharmaceutical Industry Co., Ltd., Thailand) was given orally via intragastric feeding at a single dose daily for 32 consecutive days. Since excessive activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis is strongly linked to the development of congestive heart failure following MI, enalapril was considered as a positive control in our study57–59. Inhibitors of apoptosis (zVAD-FMK, 1 mg/kg, My biosource, USA), necroptosis (Necrostatin-1, 1.65 mg/kg, Santa Cruz, USA), and ferroptosis (Ferrotstain-1, 2 mg/kg, Sigma-Aldrich Co., USA) were given by I.P. injection by a single dose daily for 32 consecutive days. In the present study, the dosages of cell death inhibitors (zVAD, Nec-1, and Fer-1) were selected based on our previous study, which demonstrated their protective effects in an acute-MI model6.

After 32 days of treatment, LV functions were determined by transthoracic echocardiography and ventricular pressure-volume (P-V) loop studies under general anesthesia using a combination of Xylazine HCl (5 mg/kg; LBS Laboratory Ltd. Part, Bangkok, Thailand) and Zoletil®(50 mg/kg; Virbac Laboratories, Carros, France) administered intraperitoneally. Subsequently, rats were euthanized by decapitation method. Afterward, cardiac mitochondrial function assessment, histopathological examination, and subsequent molecular analyses were conducted. A visual representation of the study protocol is shown in Fig.7. This study is reported in accordance with ARRIVE guidelines60.

A schematic diagram of the study protocol.MImyocardial infarction,VEHvehicle,ENAenalapril,zVADzVAD-FMK,Nec-1necrostatin-1,Fer-1ferrostatin-1,IPintraperitoneal administration,LADleft-anterior descending coronary artery,MImyocardial infarction,POoral administration.

Surgical induction of post-MI and the sham operation were conducted using aseptic techniques and under general anesthesia as described previously7,55,56. In order to induce post-MI pathology, rats were intubated, mechanically ventilated, and anesthetized with vaporized isoflurane (2%) to maintain anesthesia depth. Rats were placed on a 37 °C temperature-controlled surgical platform and connected to monitoring equipment (Indus instruments, Texas, USA). MI was implemented by permanent ligation of LAD using a USP 5 − 0 non-absorbable ligature at 2–3 mm from the left atrial appendage. The success of LAD occlusion was verified by visual assessment of cyanotic discoloration of the LV anterior wall distal to the ligature and pronounced ST-segment elevation on an electrocardiogram monitoring system.

Transthoracic echocardiography (Philips Affiniti 50, Amsterdam, Netherlands) was determined using 12 − 4 MHz high-frequency for the assessment of non-invasive cardiac function. The LV systolic function, including % LV ejection fraction (%LVEF) and % LV fractional shortening (%LVFS), were obtained from a standard 2-D echo parasternal short axis view at the mid papillary level. In addition, the transmitral ratio between peak early (E) to late (A) ventricular filling velocity during diastole (E/A) was investigated from an apical four-chamber view and used as representative of LV diastolic function. Invasive cardiac function, including left ventricular end-systolic volume (LVESV), left ventricular end-diastolic volume (LVEDV), left ventricular end-systolic pressure (LVESP), left ventricular end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP), heart rate (HR), cardiac output (CO), and stroke volume (SV) was determined using an ADVantage PV catheterization system (ADV500; Transonic Scisense, Ontario, Canada).

Heart rate variability (HRV) was calculated from the ratio of high-frequency (HF; 0.15–0.40 Hz) to low-frequency (LF; 0.2–0.6 Hz) components obtained from an electrocardiogram (PowerLab 4/25T, AD Instrument, Sydney, Australia). An increase in LF/HF ratio was considered to indicate cardiac sympathovagal imbalance.

Freshly-isolated cardiac mitochondria were used for assessment of mitochondrial function by spectrophotometric assays as previously described7. In this study, we determined cardiac mitochondrial functions, including generation of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS), mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm), and mitochondrial swelling, by using fluorescent microplate readers (Gen5 Microplate Reader, BioTek Instruments, Vermont, USA)61,62. Mitochondrial ROS production was assessed using the fluorescent dye 2′,7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCFDA, Sigma-Aldrich, Missouri, USA)61,62. Similarly, changes in mitochondrial membrane potential were assessed by measuring the fluorescence intensity of 5,5’,6,6’-tetrachloro-1,1’,3,3’-tetraethylbenzimidazolylcarbocyanine iodide (JC-1, Sigma-Aldrich, Missouri, USA) with the microplate reader (Gen5 Microplate Reader, BioTek Instruments, Vermont, USA)61,62. Fluorescence intensity levels served as ratiometric indicators for both cardiac mitochondrial ROS production and mitochondrial membrane potential61,62. Additionally, mitochondrial swelling was evaluated by measuring absorbance at 540 nm using the spectrophotometer function of the microplate reader (Gen5 Microplate Reader, BioTek Instruments, Vermont, USA)63. In addition, condensed mitochondrial pellets were prepared and examined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM; JEOL JEM-2010PLUS, MA, USA) for visual representation of mitochondrial morphology.

Cardiac injury biomarkers, specifically, serum cardiac troponin-I (cTnI) and N-terminal prohormone of B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP), were quantified using a commercially available Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) detection kit (MyBioSource, Inc., San Diego, USA). The concentrations of both serum and cardiac tissue malondialdehyde (MDA) were quantified using a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system7. The augmentation of MDA levels is considered a biological marker for oxidative stress.

The proteins used for immunoblotting analysis were obtained from freshly isolated LV myocardial tissue. Protein samples were prepared and separated by sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE), then transferred to a nitrocellulose membrane. The nitrocellulose membranes were immunoblotted with primary antibodies against acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 4 (ACSL4) (1:1000, Santa cruz), Bax (1:1000, Cell signaling), Bcl-2 (1:1000, Cell signaling), DRP1 (1:1000, Cell signaling), GAPDH (1:5000 Abcam), GPX4 (1:1000, Abcam), MLKL (1:1000, Invitrogen), OPA1 (1:1000, Cell signaling), pDRP1 (Ser616) (1:1000, Cell signaling), pRIPK3 (Ser232) (1:1000, Cell signaling), and RIPK3 (1:1000, Cell signaling) overnight at 4 °C, and then incubated with the appropriate secondary antibody (1:1000, Santa cruz). Subsequently, the immunoblotted membranes were conjugated with horseradish peroxidase and visualized using enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) reagents under a electro-chemiluminescence imaging system (Bio-Rad Laboratories, USA). The band density of pre-scanned images was quantified using ImageJ software.

After being euthanized, sections were taken from mid-LV tissue of the rats, fixed with 10% buffered formalin, and then embedded in paraffin blocks. The 3-µm cross-sectional tissue sections were stained with picrosirius red staining to enable investigation of any infarction and analysis of the fibrosis. The proportion of areas showing fibrosis and non-fibrosis of LV was quantified using ImageJ software. LV tissue in cross-sectional sections was stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and used for the measurement of cardiomyocyte cross-sectional area. A hundred LV cardiomyocytes with equal-sized and centrally located nuclei, were randomly selected, and the cross-sectional surface area was measured based on circumferential length of the cardiomyocytes.

A terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL) assay was used to assess DNA fragmentation during apoptosis in the myocardium, using a commercial detection kit (Roche, Switzerland). The images were acquired as representative pictures using FLUOVIEW FVf3000 Confocal Laser Scanning Microscopy (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan).

The data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism 8 software (GraphPad Software, California, USA) and reported as the mean and standard error of the mean (mean ± SEM). Comparisons between groups were made by analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Fischer’s least significant post hoc test. Apvalue < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.