The supramolecular host–guest interaction between heteroleptic iridium(iii) complexes and cucurbit[10]uril (Q[10]) in an aqueous medium was investigated in this work. Both studied iridium complexes, [Ir(ppy)2(bpy-(CHO)2)]+(complex 1) and [Ir(ppy)2(bpy-(COOH)2)]+(complex 2), possessed two phenylpyridine ligands and a single R-bipyridine ligand. The formation of the encapsulated species (Q[10]·1 and Q[10]·2) was demonstrated by1H NMR and luminescence studies. A significant improvement was observed in the luminescence properties of both iridium complexes (emission intensity, quantum yield and lifetime) upon the addition of Q[10] in an aqueous medium. Results suggested a major effect of the hydrophobic cavity in the destabilization of the3MLCT state (lowest excited state) of the iridium complexes. The binding study of both complexes with Q[10] revealed the formation of 1 : 1 and 1 : 2 host–guest species, with the binary complex dominating the emission behavior. The equilibrium between the emitting species was significantly influenced by the temperature, wherein the 1 : 1 inclusion complex was less favorable at elevated temperatures. The effect of pH on the emission profiles of the free and encapsulated iridium complexes was also investigated in this study. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations showed that introducing different substituent groups (CHO and COOH) on the bpy ligand had a negligible effect on the orientation of these complexes within the Q[10] cavity.

This study outlines a strategy to optimize the luminescence properties of heteroleptic iridium(iii) complexes in an aqueous mediumviaencapsulation within a cucurbit[10]uril cavity with strong binding affinities.

Many studies have demonstrated that Q[n] can be used to tune the photophysical properties of luminescent dyes;36based on this point, we previously applied host–guest chemistry to some large luminescent cyclometalated iridium(iii) complexes. Sizable enhancement in the luminescence properties and aqueous solubility of these complexes was obtained upon encapsulation inside Q[10].16,37Wallace showed that this effect is not universal for all iridium complexes and depends mainly on the electronic structure of the guest.35Herein, we extend our previous work to consider more polypyridyl iridium(iii) complexes with different electronic properties. These complexes have different substituent groups on the bpy ligand ([Ir(ppy)2(bpy-R)]n+) and are commonly used in sensing applications. In addition, the effect of changing the position of the substituent groups on the binding mode, luminescence and solubility properties of these complexes will be explored. Aldehyde (–CHO) and carboxylic acid (–COOH) moieties are used as substituent (R) groups in this study (Fig. 1) because of their benefits as building blocks in the synthesis of sensors.38,39Furthermore, the ionizable nature of the carboxylic acid group enables pH-dependent behavior, which is valuable for designing pH-sensitive sensors and systems that respond to biological environments.

Iridium(iii) chloride hydrate, 2,2′-bipyridine-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid, 2,2′-bipyridine-4,4′-dicarboxyaldehyde, 2-phenylpyridine, tris(2,2′-bipyridyl)ruthenium(ii) chloride ([Ru(bpy)3]Cl2), NH4PF6, 2-ethoxy ethanol, and sodium acetate (anhydrous) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (USA). Methanol, HCl, toluene, hexane, acetone andtert-butanol (t-BuOH) were obtained from Tedia (USA). Glacial acetic acid was purchased from Fisher Chemical. Acetonitrile and dichloromethane were obtained from Anaqua Chemical Supply (ACS). Q[10] and Q[8] were prepared by Anthony Day (UNSW/Australia), according to the method described in the literature.40,41For NMR experiments, all deuterated solvents and deuterated acetic acid were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, and sodium acetate buffer (0.05 M, pH = 4.7) was prepared from solid sodium acetate and deuterated acetic acid dissolved in D2O.

1H NMR spectra were recorded using a Bruker AVANCE-III 400 MHz NanoBay FT-NMR spectrometer at 25 °C, and tetramethylsilane (TMS) was used as a reference. Luminescence spectra were recorded using a Jasco spectrofluorometer (FP-6500). This spectrofluorometer was also used to study the temperature dependence of the emission spectra, and a circulating water bath (Jeio Tech RW-1025G) was used for controlling the temperature. Samples were excited at 350 nm using quartz cuvettes (1 cm path length). Luminescence lifetimes were determined using a spectrofluorometer from Edinburgh Analytical Instruments FL-900S (Germany) equipped with time-correlated single photon counting. Sample decay was fitted using exponential tail fit analysis. The value of theχ2was used to assess the quality of the fitted result (which should be close to 1.00 for a successful fit). UV-visible spectra were recorded on a Cary 100 UV-Visible spectrophotometer. Acetate buffer (0.05 M, pH = 4.7) was used to calculate the absorption coefficients (ε) of the iridium complexes.

In the preliminary1H NMR experiments (400 MHz, D2O/acetate-d4buffer), solid Q[10] was added directly to the individual solutions of guests 1 and 2. The addition of the macrocycle immediately produced a visible precipitate, implying that the resulting inclusion complexes were substantially less soluble in water than either the free host or the free guests. To obtain reliable spectroscopic data on these low-solubility adducts, the measurements were conducted on a higher-field instrument (500 MHz), followed by optimisation of the acquisition parameters (see the SI for details).

The Q[10] concentration in acetate buffer was determined by adding 5 μL of a standard solution oft-BuOH (0.01 M) to the Q[10] NMR sample of known volume (prepared by dissolving a certain amount in acetate buffer, sonication, and centrifugation to obtain a clear dissolved sample). The integration value of Q[10] proton peaks was compared to that of the standardt-BuOH peak in order to determine the concentration of Q[10].

In the photophysical study, iridium complexes and Q[10] solutions were prepared in acetate buffer (0.05 M, pH 4.7). For absorption titration experiments, various amounts of the Q[10] stock solution (2.0 × 10−5M) were added to 2.5 mL of the solution of complex 1 (5.9 × 10−6M) or complex 2 (7.6 × 10−7M). For luminescence titration experiments, different amounts of the Q[10] stock solution (2.0 × 10−5M) were added to 2.5 mL of the solution of complex 1 (5.9 × 10−6M) or complex 2 (7.6 × 10−7M). For the luminescence study of Q[8] with iridium complexes, an excess solid of Q[8] was added to both iridium complexes in acetate buffer to form saturated samples. Centrifugation was then used to get clear samples for the luminescence study.

The effect of the temperature on the emission properties of the free and encapsulated iridium complexes was examined in this work. To both iridium complex solutions, an excess solid of Q[10] was added in order to prepare the encapsulated samples in a buffer solution. To make these saturated samples clear, centrifugation was used. The temperature of the solutions was controlled using a circulating water bath.

For the solvent effect study, iridium complexes (1 and 2) were dissolved in different solvents (sodium acetate buffer, methanol, and acetonitrile), and the emission spectra were recorded.

In this experiment, water was used as a solvent. For pH adjustment, diluted aqueous solutions of H2SO4and NaOH were used for both free complexes and encapsulated species. Encapsulated iridium complex species were prepared by adding an excess of solid Q[10] to a solution of the iridium complexes, followed by centrifugation to obtain clear supernatant solutions.

In the above equations,A0(orI0) is the absorbance (or luminescence intensity) of the guest without Q[10], A (orI) is the absorbance (or emission intensity) with a certain concentration of Q[10],A′(orI′) is the absorbance (or emission intensity) at the maximum concentration of Q[10] used andKais the binding constant. The linear relation is obtained by plotting 1/(A−A0)vs.1/[Q[10]] for 1 : 1 inclusion complexes (eqn (2)) and by plotting 1/A−A0vs.1/[Q[10]]2for 1 : 2 inclusion complexes (eqn (3)). The slope obtained from the Benesi–Hildebrand plot (usingeqn (4)) was used to calculate the binding constantKa.

Gaussian 16, Revision C.02, was used for the DFT calculations. Geometry optimization was performed using the Minnesota functional (M062X) and 6–31+G** basis set for all atoms and LANL2DZ for Ir. The solvation effect (for water) was considered by applying the SMD solvation method.45The time-dependent density functional theory (TD-DFT) was used to calculate the UV-visible spectra and corresponding excitation energies.

[{Ir(ppy)2μ-Cl}2] was prepared based on the published procedure,46and1H NMR (Fig. S1) was used to confirm the purity of this complex.

This complex was prepared by a method reported by Liu and coworkers47with minor modifications in the workup process. In this step and after the reflux, the solvent was evaporated completely; then, the remaining solid was dissolved in water. A saturated aqueous solution of NH4PF6was added to the previous aqueous solution to produce a red precipitate. The red precipitate was collected by centrifugation and then washed with water and diethyl ether. The precipitate was then dried using a vacuum oven (at 30 °C) to produce pure [Ir(ppy)2(bpy-(CHO)2)]PF6as a reddish-brown solid.

The complex was prepared using a method reported by Waern and coworkers.38The Cl form of this complex was prepared in the same way, but without the last addition of NH4PF6. This form was prepared to obtain better solubility in an aqueous medium. The purity of iridium complexes 1 and 2 was confirmed by1H NMR (Fig. S2 and S3) and UV-visible (Fig. S4) spectroscopies.

Different spectroscopic techniques can be used to investigate the supramolecular interactions between host and guest molecules.1H NMR is one of the most important methods that is typically used to confirm the formation of the encapsulated species and further gain structural insights. The limited solubility of the resulting encapsulated complexes in aqueous buffer solutions, which falls even below that of the free components, hindered direct measurements using the 400 MHz machine. For this reason, a more sensitive NMR spectrometer (500 MHz) with a different experimental setup (see the SI) was applied to collect evidence of the formation of the encapsulated species of both iridium complexes.

As further support for the encapsulation of complex 1 in the cavity of Q[10], complex 1 and Q[10] were combined in D2O; however, it was found that the low solubility of 1 retarded the formation of Q[10]·1. A comparative spectrum of 1 alone was only feasible if 1 was first dissolved in ACN-d3and then diluted with D2O to a final concentration of 5% ACN-d3/D2O (Fig. 2B). It was also observed that the aldehyde resonance at 10.18 ppm was significantly reduced, indicating partial hydration. Combining 1 and Q[10] in D2O required extended sonication to form a soluble form of Q[10]·1, and the progressive formation was observed by NMR as the free Q[10] doublet resonance at 5.82 ppm decreased and the resonances for the associated guest 1 increased (Fig. 2). The new association product Q[10]·1 appears as a dynamic multiplex with two new upfield doublets occurring for Q[10] at 5.7 and 5.9 ppm, which suggests two association forms in an approximate ratio of 1 : 2, respectively. The broadness of the resonances suggests dynamics of different orientations of the guest, possibly between two forms and/or intermediate exchange. The remaining Q[10] resonances (normally a singlet and doublet) fall near the original chemical shift of free Q[10] as broad peaks at 4.2 and 5.5 ppm. Two pertinent guest proton resonances indicate that the phenyl pyridine ligands are located in the cavity and that the bipyridine ligand is near the portal. This is indicated by an upfield shift to 6.2 ppm for the proton doublet α to the Ir–C bond compared to the original shift of 6.4 ppm38,48and the downfield shift for the CHO resonance, from 10.2 to 10.3 ppm.

In the case of complex 2, in the pD range of 2–9, the solubility of Q[10]·2 is too low for resonances to be visible by1H NMR spectroscopy. Adding 2 as a D2O solution or as a solid to a solution of Q[10] in equimolar quantities results in a yellow precipitate with no resonances observable from the supernatant. When the pD of a suspension of the precipitate in D2O is adjusted with the addition of NaOD, resonances begin to appear for the free complex2and free Q[10] at pD = 8.5, suggesting that the dicarboxylate ion was released. At lower pD < 3.7, 2 must be associated with Q[10] in the protonated form, and above this value, only one carboxylic group would be deprotonated to form a zwitterion complex, with a corresponding increase in the emission. Increasing the pD > 9 results in complete ionisation, and dissociation begins, consistent with the behaviour of carboxylates from Q[7 or 8], as previously reported.49–57The1H NMR spectrum at pD 9 showed the release of 2 in an excess relative to the observable Q[10] with broader resonances of some of the protons of 2 and the downfield doublet of Q[10], indicating intermediate exchange within the NMR time scale (Fig. 3).

The luminescent nature of the yellow precipitate obtained in the NMR study was determined in the solid form (λem= 587 nm, see the SI). For comparison, equimolar quantities of complex 2 and Q[10] were ground together to a fine homogeneous powder withλem= 608 nm. The 2-fold increase in the intensity and the blue shift of 21 nm indicate that the Q[10]·2 complex is formed almost quantitatively as the yellow precipitate from aqueous solutions (Fig. S12).

The photophysical study was used to emphasize the supramolecular interactions. The sensitivity of UV-visible absorption and luminescence spectroscopies to low concentrations makes them suitable to overcome the low-solubility problem of the encapsulated species. The photophysical data of free complexes and encapsulated species in an aqueous buffer solution are shown inTable 1. The encapsulated species for both complexes were prepared in the presence of excess Q[10], in which the cavity-bound species is dominant (see the binding study).

Adding Q[10] to the buffer solutions of both complexes (1 and 2) has almost similar effects. A minor red shift is noticed with a decrease in the intensity of most absorption bands, especially the high-energy bands (λmax= 257 → 260 nm for 1, andλmax= 254 → 261 nm for 2). The bathochromic shift can be related to the alteration in the polarity of the medium (high polar in the buffer to less polar in the host cavity). On the contrary, researchers reported that the absorptivity coefficients of some organic chromophores decrease after encapsulation within Q[n] because the cavity has lower polarizability.60The larger shifts of the high-energy bands (1LC), which probably correspond to the ppy ligand,59compared to the lowest bands (1MLCT and1LLCT), may be related to the accommodation mode of these complexes inside Q[10] (see the DFT study). Assuming that the ppy ligand sits inside the cavity, it is significantly affected by adding Q[10] compared to the bpy ligand, which is located on the portal. This effect is consistent with that observed in our previous study for some iridium complexes16and another previous study for polypyridyl ruthenium complexes.34TD-DFT calculations were performed to compute the UV-visible spectra of 1 and 2 and their complexes with Q[10]. Despite the slight changes in HOMO–LUMO energy gaps upon the formation of host–guest complexes, the calculated UV-visible spectra nicely reproduce the observed bathochromic shift inλmaxupon complexation (see Fig. S8 and Tables S1–S3). The isosurface plots of the HOMO and LUMO wave functions of free 1 and 2 and their Q[10] complexes are given in the SI (Fig. S9 and S10).

In the luminescence study, both 1 and 2 showed broad and weak emission profiles in aqueous buffer solutions. Upon adding Q[10], the emission spectra of Ir-complexes showed a blue shift with a clear enhancement in the emission intensities. The enhancement factors are ∼40 times for complex 1 and ∼20 times for complex 2 (Fig. 5). This suggests the formation of the encapsulated species (Q[10]·1 and Q[10]·2 complexes), which also confirms that the size of the host (portal diameter = ∼10.3 Å) is suitable to encapsulate the iridium complexes (∼9.6 Å) within its cavity, providing protection to the guest from quenching factors such as solvents and photodegradation.

Luminescence titration experiments were used to estimate the binding affinity of iridium complexes with Q[10]. After adding different volumes of Q[10], the emission intensity of both guests (1 and 2) increases significantly with a blue shift (Fig. 6). The shape of the binding curves (Fig. 7) suggests the presence of multiple host–guest emitting species (1 : 1 and 1 : 2), which is in agreement with the non-exponential emission decays noted in the presence of excess Q[10] (based on lifetime measurements). This result is similar to that obtained for previously studied iridium complexes.61The modified Benesi–Hildebrand equation was used to calculate the “apparent” binding constant (Ka) of both complexes with the Q[10] host molecule, assuming a 1 : 1 host–guest stoichiometric ratio. The slope and intercept of the double reciprocal plot of 1/(I−I0)vs.1/[Q[10]] were used to get theKavalues. For a higher order of complexation complexes, this fitting would be nonlinear. The obtainedKavalues are 1.02 × 106and 2.31 × 105M−1for complexes 1 and 2, respectively (Fig. 7).

The binding constants of iridium complexes with Q[10] were also estimated using the UV-visible spectroscopic technique. Absorption titration experiments were carried out for each complex with Q[10] in a buffer solution. A decrease in the absorbance values of each iridium complex with a small red shift resulted after Q[10] addition (Fig. S6). The modified Benesi–Hildebrand equation was also used to determine the binding constantsKaof both complexes with Q[10], assuming a 1 : 1 host–guest stoichiometric ratio. The estimated binding constants are found to be 2.6 × 106M−1for complex 1 and 6.3 × 105M−1for complex 2 (Fig. S7), which are in good agreement with the values obtained by luminescence titrations. The lowerKavalue of complex 2 compared to complex 1 may be related to the repulsion force between the carboxylate moiety COO−and the portal carbonyl groups of the host molecule49,51(see the pH study below).

The sensitivity of the emission profile of the free iridium complexes and their host–guest assemblies was investigated in this study. Upon changing the temperature from 15 to 55 °C, a clear decrease in the emission intensity of both encapsulated species (Q[10]·1 and Q[10]·2) is noticed (Fig. 8), in agreement with previously published work.16This result shows that the temperature has a significant impact on the binding equilibrium: elevating the temperature reduces the amount of the strongly emissive cavity-bound species (1 : 1 host–guest) and shifts the equilibrium to 1 : 1 or 1 : 2 portal-bound forms or the free species (Fig. 9). In the last status, a clear change in the emission peaks is unlikely to be seen, as these emitting species are very weak compared to the strong 1 : 1 encapsulated species. The emission profile can be quenched by increasing the temperature as a result of the activation of non-radiative pathways (collisions and vibrations). Applying the same study to both free complex 1 and complex 2 gave an insignificant change in the emission intensity. In general, emitting species that possess long lifetimes are usually more sensitive to the temperature than those that possess short lifetimes. Thus, the impact of the temperature on the emission profile is probably a result of its influence on the binding equilibrium and non-radiative pathways together.

The effect of pH variation on the emission spectra of both free and Q[10]-encapsulated iridium complexes (1 and 2) was also investigated. Expectedly, no change is observed for both free and encapsulated complex 1, while a significant effect is observed in the case of complex 2 because of the presence of carboxylic acid groups on the bpy ligand. By increasing the pH from 2 to 10, the emission spectra of both free complex 2 and Q[10]·2 shift to higher energies (blue shift). This shift is strong for free 2 (585 → 570 nm) but weaker in the case of Q[10]·2 (558 → 554 nm). An increase in the emission intensity is observed upon increasing the pH for both the free and encapsulated species (Fig. S11), suggesting that the Ir–COO−form (under highly basic conditions) is a stronger emitting species than the protonated form Ir–COOH.51The encapsulation process of ionizable guest molecules within Q[n] can result in a shift in their pKavalues.16,34The emission response of free 2 as a function of the pH reveals a single inflection point, with an excited-state pKavalue (pKa*) of 3.21 ± 0.20. It is worth noting that the acid–base behavior of similar complexes was previously investigated.63,64For example, ruthenium(ii) complexes containing dicarboxybipyridine [Ru(bpy)2(bpy-(COOH)2)] show two closely ground-state pKavalues of 1.75 and 2.85 and a single excited-state pKa* of 4.25.63The pKa* value of the encapsulated species Q[10]·2 is measured to be 3.68 ± 0.03 (Fig. 10). This pKashift (ΔpKa∼0.5) reveals that the proton of COOH is less acidic in the encapsulated form due to the favorable interaction of the COOH with the portal of Q[10].49,51It should be noted that the second deprotonation equilibrium is observed at a pH above 9.

The free Q[10] and iridium cyclometalated complexes were optimized in water by the M062X method and 6–31+G** basis set for all atoms and LANL2DZ for Ir. As shown inFig. 11, the Q[10] structure is symmetrical with cavity and portal diameters of ∼11 and 10 Å,65respectively, which is sufficiently large to accommodate the iridium complexes (1 and 2).

The optimized structures of the Q[10]-complexes are shown inFig. 12. The substituted iridium cyclometalated complexes show similar binding modes, in which they all fit well inside the cavity of Q[10]. As expected, the hydrophobic part is deeply encapsulated inside the inner cavity, while the hydrophilic groups (–CHO, –COOH, and –COO−) are excluded and more exposed to water. In the case of the protonated carboxylated iridium complex (Ir–COOH), the complex is further stabilized by hydrogen bonding with the carbonyl portal of Q[10] with a hydrogen bond distance of 1.7 Å. The calculated binding energy reveals higher affinity for Q[10]·2 (R = –CO2H), followed by Q[10]·2 (R = –CHO). It should be noted that the weak binding affinity of the dicarboxylated complex 2 is in accordance with its dissociation from the cavity, as seen in1H NMR experiments (Fig. 3).

Iridium complexes (complex 1 and complex 2) that have different substituent groups on the bipyridine ligand can be encapsulated within the Q[10] cavity in an aqueous solution. The encapsulation of both iridium complexes in Q[10] reveals the significant effect on their luminescence properties, quantum yields and lifetimes, offering an alternative to traditional ligand modification for tuning emission colors. In addition, the pH study reveals the complexation-induced pKashift of complex 2. This study demonstrates that changing the position of the substituent groups from the ppy ligand (as in our previous work) to the bpy ligand (in the current study) does not significantly affect the binding mode of the iridium complexes within Q[10]. This strategy holds significant promise for applications reliant on the luminescent properties of such complexes, particularly in sensing. Furthermore, because the bipyridine (bpy) ligand extends outside the Q[10] cavity, it remains accessible for functionalization (e.g., with CHO or COOH groups), enabling interactions with analytes such as amino acids without disrupting the host–guest complex. This structural feature makes the system well-suited for the development of responsive, water-compatible luminescent sensors, including biosensors. Finally, the contrast in the solubility of CHO complex 1and (–COOH)2complex 2 when encapsulating them in Q[10] is important to understand when developing potential applications. Increasing solubility in an aqueous environment has sensing potential in environmental chemistry and/or biochemistry. The low solubility and ease of formation of Q[10]·2 and the zwitterion may make this association complex and similar construction applicable to the development of electronic devices.