Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) and AD-related dementias (ADRD)
represent a significant health challenge, with a growing impact on
marginalized populations who often experience inequities in overall
healthcare access and outcomes. Many factors contribute to these inequalities
and can impact the benefits of broad appreciation of new technologies
in AD/ADRD to these populations. For example, clinical proteomics
offers a promising avenue for early and timely detection of disease
and elucidation of the mechanisms of AD/ADRD. Unfortunately, gaps
exist in the access and application of proteomic innovations for the
health of marginalized communities. This editorial (1) highlights
systemic barriers and explores the underlying factors that contribute
to these inequities, (2) examines health disparities in the implementation
of clinical proteomics tools for the management of AD/ADRD among marginalized
populations, and (3) offers opportunities for advancing clinical proteomics
in AD/ADRD. Implementation by basic and clinical researchers will
lead to a more effective and inclusive approach to combatting AD/ADRD
disparities.

Alzheimer’s disease (AD) and AD-related dementias (ADRD)
are a public health challenge that affect millions of people globally. AD is the most common cause of dementia in the
elderly population.,Greater than a trillion US dollars
are required for the management of AD worldwide. AD/ADRD is the fourth leading cause of disability-adjusted
life years (DALYs) lost in persons ≥75 years of age. In 2023, the World Health Organization (WHO)
estimated that by 2050, ∼139 million people will suffer from
dementia, of which greater than 60% reside in low- and middle-income
countries (LMICs). As the global population
ages, the prevalence of AD/ADRD is expected to rise significantly. This will have profound fiscal and infrastructural
implications for healthcare systems and further widen the healthcare
access gap between the affluent and the most vulnerable and underserved
communities.

Considerable progress has been made in improving
our understanding
of the molecular pathophysiology of AD/ADRD and has led to substantial
investments in therapeutics and diagnostics based on markers such
as amyloid-β (Aβ) and the major microtubule-associated
proteintau. However,
effective treatments and diagnostic avenues remain elusive, and there
are only two Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved therapies
(lecanemab and donanemab) for AD that may slow disease progression. One FDA-approved AD therapy (aducanumab) was
recently discontinued. Disease diagnosis
has been better facilitated by combining probes such as positron emission
tomography (PET) and magnetic resonance imagining (MRI) scans with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), blood, and other
biospecimen-based markers,and traditional clinical
approaches.

Clinical proteomics (CP), the large-scale study
of the full complement
of proteins in biological systems, holds
great promise for unraveling the complex molecular mechanisms underlying
AD/ADRD and for accelerating diagnostic and therapeutic avenues for
ADRD. However, a broad-based translation
of proteomic findings into clinical practice has been hindered by
various modifiable factors such as disparities in research funding,
as well as technical and logistic limitations in access to technology,
cost, infrastructure, human resources, statistical modeling, data
harmonization/integration, data deposition, and underrepresentation
of marginalized populations.−Minority populations, including
but not limited to ethnic and racial minorities, indigenous populations,
as well as socioeconomically disadvantaged groups, bear a disproportionate
burden of AD/ADRD prevalence and related risk factors.−Unfortunately, they are often underrepresented in clinical research, leading to a lack of diversity in proteomic
data sets and limited generalizability of findings. CP research has
also predominantly focused on populations in high-income countries,
neglecting the unique challenges faced by marginalized communities
in LMICs. Given the expected increase
of older adults in marginalized communities by 2050, there is an urgency to ensure AD/ADRD research is advancing.
This editorial aims to elucidate health disparities in the utilization
of CP for AD/ADRD among marginalized populations, identify contributing
factors, and propose strategies to address these disparities.

The risk of developing AD/ADRD also differs
by ethnicity, race,
and gender.,,−Caribbean-Latino and African American adults were
observed to have a higher burden of AD/ADRD as compared to non-Hispanic
White adults.,Women are twice as likely to
develop AD/ADRD as compared with men, particularly after the age of
60 years.,Plausible explanations for this gender disparity
include differences inAPOEε4 allele risk,
neurodegenerative shortening of telomeres, psychosocial comorbidities
(insomnia, higher depression risk, and low educational levels), as
well as pregnancy-related disorders (preeclampsia and gestational
hypertension) that are capable of contributing to disparities in cognitive
reserve. Genetic risk factors such as mutations in Adenosine Triphosphate-Binding
Cassette, Subfamily A, Member 7 (ABCA7),APOE, Bridging Integrator 1(BIN1), Triggering
receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2(TREM2), WW
domain-containing oxidoreductase (WWOX), CD2 associated
protein (CD2AP), and FERM Domain Containing Kindlin-2
(FERMT2), have been implicated in African American
adults with AD.

ABCA7 is a lipid-transporter
that, when mutated, can disrupt key
biological processes such as lipid homeostasis and phagocytosis. In fact, theABCA7gene has
been identified as possessing stronger associations with risk of AD
in people of African ancestry as compared with those of European ancestry. Mutation of the APOE ε4 allele affects
the aggregation of amyloid plaques as well as the development of neurofibrillary
tangles. BIN1 mutation is the second
most important AD risk gene that has been identified to affect calcium
homeostasis in human brain glutamatergic neurons at the later stages
of AD pathogenesis. Mutation in the TREM2
gene, which is a receptor involved in pattern recognition and is well-expressed
in microglia, is also known as an important risk factor for AD pathology. By binding to Tau via the c-terminal Short-chain
dehydrogenase/reductase domain, WWOX blocks AD progression by interacting
with key Tau phosphorylating enzymes such as GSK-3β, ERK, and
JNK. Mutation of this gene can lead to
AD pathogenesis. CD2AP is a scaffolding molecule that regulates cytoskeletal
molecules and signal transduction, and its mutation has been implicated
in AD pathogenesis. Mutation in the FERMT2
(also known as Kindlin-2), a protein involved in the regulation of
synaptic plasticity and axonal growth, has been reported to directly
modulate the metabolism of APP and thus contribute to the development
of AD.

Genetics, aging, sex, ethnicity,
and race are nonmodifiable risk
factors; thus, modifiable lifestyle risk factors can be leveraged
to mitigate the development and progression of AD/ADRD among high-risk
populations. Nongenetic risk factors
such as multidimensional poverty, psychosocial stress, and chronic
low-grade infection may play roles in the epidemiology of AD among
the elderly African population. However,
inequities in AD risk are poorly researched in multiethnic AD/ADRD
cohorts. Pervasive disparities in access
to other structural and social determinants of health, such as healthcare,
employment opportunities, living environments, quality of education,
and discrimination and oppression (racism and classism), have been
tied to AD/ADRD burden among African American communities.,−Rubinet al. found that well-established
genetic risk factors of AD/ADRD were poorly researched among U.S.
minority populations. Similarly, dementia
risk factors based on cardiovascular conditions, physiological variables,
and lifestyle factors were identified as most prevalent among African
American/Black participants from the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating
Center (NACC) database.

Clinical proteomics entails the study of proteins
in various clinical
samples (e.g., blood plasma/serum, CSF, saliva, etc.) on a global
scale. Despite the promising potential of using human brain tissues
as a target organ for AD biomarker discovery, a key drawback is the
impediment in isolating and analyzing specific subpopulations of cells,
e.g., glia or neuronal cells, from different regions of the brain. Additionally, brain tissue is acquired post-mortem. Variability within or between regions of post-mortem
brain tissues also can lead to interpretation difficulties.

Clinical proteomics has traditionally
used targeted approaches
to measure proteins (e.g., Aβ, tau, ApoE, BACE, NfL, TDP-43),
which limits the discovery of other novel and potential biomarkers
of AD/ADRD.,,Conventional protein approaches such as Western blotting and enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) have evolved to high-throughput array-based
or mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics methods, due to the requirement for scale, cost, and availability.
In 2020, the Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation Diagnostics
Accelerator supported a biomarker research effort that led to the
discovery of the first blood test for the detection of brain amyloid
plaque by the C2N Diagnostics company. Subsequently, in 2024, a large clinical study evaluated the diagnostic
accuracy of C2N’s PrecivityAD2 blood test for AD in primary
and specialized care settings and documented strong performance robustness
in both care settings. This MS-based
blood test analyzes plasma samples to evaluate the ratio of phosphorylated
tau 217 (p-tau217) to non–p-tau217. An accuracy, sensitivity,
and specificity of over 90% were found for the C2N’s PrecivityAD2
blood test when compared with amyloid PET and CSF analyses in over
1,200 patients.,Even though there are currently
no FDA-approved blood tests for AD/ADRD, there has been a rapid evolution
of clinical proteomics instrumentation (FigureA) as well as novel potential biomarkers,
which are in the pipeline for approval (FigureB).

Emerging instruments and analytical approaches
for the implementation
of clinical proteomics biomarker discovery from blood samples (A)
and a timeline highlighting developments from clinical proteomics
on blood test development for ADRD (B) (Figure 1A partially generated
in Biorender).

On the policy level, the National
Alzheimer’s Project Act
(NAPA) subcommittee has called on various stakeholders, such as the
Center for Diseases Control (CDC), the National Institute of Health
(NIH), the Indian Health Service, the Veterans Administration, the
Health Resources and Services Administration, the Centers for Medicare
& Medicaid Services, Administration for Community Living and the
Aging Services Network, and others, to support a comprehensive, equitable,
and inclusive intervention for the assessment, and reduction of dementia
risk in a manner that fosters proportional representation of minority
populations. Various FDA-approved drugs,
such as aducanumab (Aduhelm), lecanemab (Leqembi) and donanemab (Kisunla),
Memantine (Namenda), Donepezil (Aricept), Galantamine (Razadyne),
Rivastigmine (Exelon), and others, have emerged over time for the
management of AD/ADRD, albeit some have been discontinued, and most
are disease-modifying and are mostly useful in early and middle disease
stages.−There is still no cure for AD or ADRD.

Various institutional proteomics platforms and core facilities
have been established across the United States, providing precision
clinical care for risk stratification, diagnosis, and targeted therapies.,However, despite the promise of CP, marginalized communities often
face barriers to accessing healthcare services, including diagnostic
tests and specialized treatments, and
in research participation. Limited participation in CP research hinders
the development of culturally sensitive interventions.−Currently, African American populations experience long-term disparities
in healthcare access as well as health outcomes, which include higher uninsured rates and higher likelihood
to be deprived of adequate healthcare due to (personally unaffordable)
costs, as well as having poor health status.,Over the past decade, life expectancy in the African American population
has been 3–6 years shorter compared to the non-Hispanic White
population.−Even if CP tools were provided in major healthcare
facilities, the aforementioned disparities would limit the access
of marginalized populations despite goals to achieve equitable healthcare
for all. Beyond differences in access
and utilization of CP for marginalized populations, socioeconomic
factors, such as inadequate education, poverty, and the social stigma
surrounding dementia, can act as a deterrent to individuals from seeking
medical help or participating in research studies.

The delivery of high-quality healthcare
can be impeded by language
barriers, and this can have a negative impact on patient safety, healthcare
quality, and the sense of fulfillment of patients and healthcare providers. In the United States, cross-cultural and racial
health disparities are well documented, and health indicator disparities
have been found between the general populace and minoritized groups
such as Native Americans, Latino Americans, and African Americans.,Language barriers, cultural beliefs, and mistrust of research institutions
can negatively impact the willingness of minority populations to participate
in proteomic studies. It is customary
in many CP studies to exclude papers that are not written in English
and other major languages from systematic reviews and meta-analyses,,thus limiting the amount of research that can be conducted among
marginalized populations. Language barriers in healthcare systems
result in miscommunication between patients and medical professionals.
Hiring language interpreters, where needed, indirectly adds to the
cost and time spent in treatment visits. The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Office for
Civil Rights deems insufficient interpretation during healthcare consultations
as a form of discrimination, a view upheld by the DHHS from the Civil
Rights Act of 1964. Cultural competency
and community engagement are essential for building trust and facilitating
meaningful collaborations. In spite of the federal government mandates
to ensure inclusion of women and minoritized populations in federally
funded research, Black populations are still highly unlikely to participate
in research studies compared to White populations. Due to mistrust, lower rates of Black population participation
have been reported in many disease studies,−including AD/ADRD.

Despite the clinical utilities
of emerging proteomic biomarkers
of AD/ADRD, overlooking racial differences in the expression profile
of these biomarkers could lower healthcare quality. The lack of diversity and inclusion of minority groups
in proteomic data sets systematically dampens the identification of
novel biomarkers and therapeutic targets that are relevant to minority
populations. Without adequate representation,
research findings may not be applicable or effective in addressing
the needs of these communities.,,A significant number of reported AD studies in the last decade lack
explicit information on the inclusion of African American adults or
other minoritized groups in their study design (Table). Of these 34 studies, 29 (85.3%) do not
include clear information on inclusion of marginalized populations,
while only five (14.7%) contained detailed information on inclusion
of African American and Latino American groups. In addition, a majority
of the studies were carried out using post-mortem brain tissues (29.4%)
and invasive samples such as CSF (50%). Only ∼20% included
plasma as the study sample.

Unknown population breakdown; ADNI
- Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative; ADRC - Alzheimer’s
Disease Research Center; BIOCARD - Biomarkers for Older Controls at
Risk for Dementia; BLSA - Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging; CLEIA
- Chemiluminescent enzyme immunoassay; DIAN - Dominantly Inherited
Alzheimer Network; ELISA -Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; EMIF-AD
MBD - European Medical Information Framework for Alzheimer’s
Disease Multimodal Biomarker Discovery; IP/MS - immunoprecipitation
mass spectrometry; MS - Mass Spectrometry; ROSMAP - Religious Orders
Study and Memory and Aging Project.

The identification of AD/ADRD-related protein biomarkers
is crucial
for early detection, risk stratification, and precision treatment
monitoring among minoritized populations. Statistical methods that
can evaluate the effects of multiple rather than single AD/ADRD predictors
are more informative when considering designing disparities research
for dementia. Poor access to innovative
therapies in underserved communities can severely impact patient outcomes,
thus exacerbating the dismal burden of AD/ADRD among ethnic minorities.

The causative factors
and the consequences of AD/ADRD health inequities
in the United States are nuanced. In
order to address disparities in the usage of CP, a multifaceted approach
that involves stakeholders at various levels is urgently required
to reduce (or eliminate) the detrimental effects of AD/ADRD inequalities. Innovative solutions should be developed to
bridge these disparities to achieve the desired outcomes for AD/ADRD
among marginalized groups (Figure). Hence, a few suggestions to potentially realize
this goal are presented in the following section.

Illustration of innovative
strategies to bridge health disparities
for AD/ADRD among marginalized communities.

Thestatus quofor most US-based research reveals that participants
in well-funded studies are mostly affluent, cisgender, non-Hispanic,
White adults who are geographically in proximity to academic medical
facilities. Governments, philanthropic
organizations, and research agencies should prioritize funding for
CP that solely addresses health disparities in AD/ADRD and includes
diverse populations. Federal funding opportunities have catalyzed
AD/ADRD disparities studies, among marginalized populations; however,
there is still more work required in this space. Funding mechanisms for AD/ADRD CP should strategically
attract new investigators to AD/ADRD research as currently practiced,and incentivize collaboration with researchers from LMICs and minority-serving
institutions. High-income, research-rich
countries benefit from a competitive advantage in innovation and discoveries
using cutting-edge proteomics technology for AD/ADRD research; however,
such innovations have been severely limited by poor access to research
funding in LMICs.

Various innovative efforts
have been proposed to accelerate the funding and enrollment of underrepresented
groups in AD/ADRD research. Pena-Garciaet al.evaluated
the recruitment of a community advisory board to improve recruitment
of minoritized populations and to increase their participation in
AD neuroimaging research. Their study
indicated that participants enrolled via the community advisory board
approach were more willing to obtain MRI and PET scans. Participation
of African American/Black participants in brain health registry, proteomics
research, and biobanking development has been improved by various
innovative educational and digital interventions.,−Most of these studies are made possible
only by research funding allocated to the investigators to evaluate
pathways to the increase participation of minority populations in
AD/ADRD research. Gilmore-Bykovskyiet al.investigated
published reports that documented the recruitment and retention strategy
for ethnic/racial minorities in AD/ADRD research. Few studies used a multifaceted approach that included
community outreach efforts and demonstrated improvements in representation
and diversity in their ADRD cohorts, albeit evidence of best practices
for recruitment and retention of minoritized populations in AD/ADRD
research was found to be low. This indicates that more prospective
and longitudinal research focused on addressing disparities in AD/ADRD
research participation among minority populations ought to be urgently
funded by governments, philanthropic agencies, and nongovernmental
organizations.

Prompt identification and recruitment of
a large cohort of healthy
individuals at high risk of developing AD/ADRD is a critical challenge
for AD/ADRD primary prevention trials. Thus, engaging with minority communities through culturally tailored
outreach programs, community-based participatory research, asset-based
community development approaches, and health literacy initiatives
can enhance awareness, trust, and participation in proteomic studies.,,−Involving community members in study design, recruitment, and dissemination
of findings fosters ownership, control, and relevance of research
efforts.,To achieve enrichment of proteomics
studies geared toward prevention of AD/ADRD among racial minorities,
proactive and creative community-engagement approaches are needed.,−These active AD/ADRD outreach strategies
should be deliberately aimed at building reciprocal community relationships
that benefit both the research participants and the investigators.,For example, using text- and video-based materials that tell AD/ADRD
research participation stories of African Americans can cultivate
a culturally salient strategy for participant enrollment. Established ties with community representatives
and dissemination of educational materials in the communities via
health fairs, word-of-mouth referrals, presentations, and flyer distribution can increase enrollment of older adults from
ethnic minority groups as observed at the University of California,
Davis Alzheimer’s Disease Center. It would be helpful for CP researchers to become engaged with communities
or stakeholders to share their proposed research questions, study
designs, and outcomes in order to receive feedback to inform study
design and the perceived impact of the work.

Novel proteomics-based diagnostic tests should
be widely accessed and used by all elderly individuals, irrespective
of their geographic location. This will foster early detection, risk
stratification, and treatment monitoring. U.S. Alzheimer’s
Association Technology Professional Interest Area cataloged four ongoing
and upcoming domains of technology developments in the AD/ADRD field. These were technologies around management and
caregiving; diagnostic assessment and monitoring; leisure and activity;
and maintenance of function. Along with proteomics, emerging smart
technologies and AI tools such as smart home systems (Google Home
Hub and Amazon Alexa), driverless cars, virtual reality, and wearables
will potentially drive new technology for the management of AD/ADRD. Assistive remote devices were well-accepted
for the support and management of AD/ADRD and may support people living with dementia and their caregivers.

Contemporary CP approaches sit on the methodological
tripod of
mass spectrometry (MS)-, aptamer-, and immunoaffinity-based approaches.,Each of these techniques has distinct advantages and limitations,
with MS-based methods currently being the most widely employed due
to their multiplexing capabilities and high sensitivity. Aptamer- and immunoaffinity-based approaches
are also gaining good traction for highly specific CP applications,
especially when unique protein epitopes are being targeted.,Recent advancements in technology and bioinformatics pipelines promote
continuous evolution for clinical translational biomarker discovery.,Despite the remarkable evolution of these proteomics techniques
for AD/ADRD research, only a few FDA-approved blood diagnostics and
drug treatments have emerged, as discussed earlier. Diagnostics provide
hope but are only disease- modifying interventions and not a cure.−The depth of clinically relevant and ethically compliant proteomic
information that can be collected from human specimens has been significantly
improved by recent advances in CP approaches and workflows.,,The fact that the pathological
deposition of oligomeric amyloid-β plaques and hyperphosphorylatedtauprotein in neurofibrillary tangles in the brain may
occur up to 20 years before clinical symptoms in AD/ADRD requires
paradigm-shifting approaches to early detection, diagnosis, monitoring
and diseases modification. The Lancet
Commission on dementia, prevention, intervention and care, in its
2020 update, showed that up to 40% of AD/ADRD could be delayed or
prevented by focusing on modifiable risk factors and advised countries
to set up ambitious public health programs and policies for the control
of AD/ADRD. Despite the entrenched role
of CP in the discovery of various theragnostic tools for AD/ADRD,
there is no clear-cut evidence of their efficacy in early detection
and prompt therapy among ethnic and racial minority communities who
suffer AD/ADRD. Hence, an integrated national public health approach
that establishes collaboration between community organizations, public
health, and health systems will improve health outcomes in these vulnerable
populations.

We previously demonstrated
the importance of including African
American individuals in AD/ADRD studies. Supervised classification,
especially when used to evaluate the accuracy of proteomic biomarkers,
was reliable for distinguishing Non-Hispanic White and Black adults
with AD. Morriset al.discovered significant differences in CSF tau protein concentration
of African American adults when compared with Non-Hispanic Whites
adults. Among the 1255 adult CSF samples collected, it was found that
the mean tau protein concentrations were 294 pg/mL and 443 pg/mL for
Black and Non-Hispanic White adults, respectively. This is consistent with current evidence indicating that
lower CSF levels of tau (an indicator of neuronal damage) have been
reported in African Americans/Black patients with AD when compared
to non-Hispanic Whites.,This difference has been hypothesized
to be related to higher symptoms of cognitive decline in Blacks despite
a lower level of neuronal damage, suggesting that other physiological
mechanisms potentially contribute to the susceptibility of Blacks
to the development of AD, and this warrants further investigation.,Furthermore, synaptic proteins such as VGF nerve growth factor inducible,
Secretogranin II (SCG2) and Neuronal pentraxin II (NPTX2) have been
found to be significantly lower in CSF samples collected from Black
patients with AD as compared with samples from Non-Hispanic White
AD patients. We identified 351 novel
AD proteins in a brain proteomic study by including African American
participants, highlighting the heterogeneity
of disease and missed information when patient populations are not
diverse. Heat shock protein β-1 (HSPB1), APP, and patient age
were found to accurately predict AD (area under curve (AUC) range
= 0.91–0.96) using four brain proteomic data sets that included
African American brain samples. Population-based
proteomic differences at baseline have crucial clinical management
ramifications, albeit additional CP studies, are required that should
include other ethnic minorities such as Hispanics, American Indians,
and Alaska Natives. For instance, O’Bryant et al. demonstrated
that disparities existed in proteomic profiles of neurodegeneration
when comparing Mexican American to non-Hispanic White adults.

Diversity-tailored funding initiatives
can provide support for
studies focused on underrepresented groups and facilitate community
engagement, outreaches, and partnerships.,The limitations identified in the generalized and imprecise application
of current diagnostic and therapeutic approaches to the management
of AD/ADRD in diverse populations can be potentially overcome by the
opportunity that CP offers for understanding disease mechanisms, prediction/monitoring,
and personalized management of diseases.,Essentially, clinical proteomics is poised to offer a powerful lens
for understanding molecular characteristics of AD/ADRD in specific
underserved populations, thereby providing an opportunity for early
detection, accurate diagnosis, tailored treatments, and a more equitable
healthcare.

Health
disparities in CP require urgent attention and remediation.
To reduce or eliminate the disparity gaps, there is a need for international
cooperation among stakeholders, such as policymakers and the general
scientific communities. In addition, concerted efforts in knowledge-sharing
are needed to promote the equitable use of CP to improve outcomes
of AD/ADRD among vulnerable populations. Some strategies that may
be employed to address AD/ADRD disparities include equitable resource
allocation, research partnerships, and capacity development. Innovative
alternative local and inclusive funding strategies can be leveraged
to enhance the development and use of CP. For example, industrial
partnership and investment can be fostered with private stakeholders
such as biotechnology, instruments, and pharmaceutical companies for
the implementation of biomarkers and drug target discovery. Nonprofits,
charities, academic institutions, and philanthropic organizations
can also be involved in CP research funding.,This can be exemplified by the promotion of proteomics research
by the Human Proteome Organization (HUPO) through international partnerships
and initiatives. Local nongovernmental
opportunities that can be leveraged include the integration of high-throughput
and automated proteomics technologies into the diagnostic workflows
of hospitals and clinical laboratories. Advocacy, community engagement,
and health provider training also provide the requisite skills, acceptance,
and knowledge needed to understand and utilize CP tools effectively.
These alternative approaches can result in a more sustainable and
diverse ecosystem. Although CP holds great promise for improving the
clinical management of AD/ADRD, disparities in access to funding,
technology, and research partnerships limit progress in this area
of science. We can ensure that the whole world benefits from the use
of CP for the management of AD/ADRD among minoritized populations
only by working together.

The authors
would like to acknowledge Vanderbilt University
for institutional funds to support this work.

CRediT:Henry A. Adeolaconceptualization, writing - original draft,
writing - review & editing;Renã A. S. Robinsonconceptualization, funding acquisition, writing - original draft,
writing - review & editing.

The authors declare no
competing financial interest.