Mental health related stigma and discrimination are significant issues requiring urgent global action. There is a particular lack of research on stigma in low-and middle-income countries. This study explores the experiences of service users and their carers who access primary care for treatment of mental health conditions in rural Karnataka, India. Purposive sampling was used to conduct qualitative interviews of service users and their carers. This study highlights several barriers to access mental healthcare that individuals face on a system level. The results also bring to light pervasive experiences of stigmatising attitudes and discriminatory behaviour that participants with mental health conditions face from within their communities. Cohesion within both the family and the community was highlighted as a priority for participants, using a “what matters most” approach. This study brings insights to contribute to the development of locally relevant anti-stigma interventions, promoting access to care, and the human rights and quality of life for individuals with mental health conditions in a rural community in Karnataka, India.

Stigma and discrimination experienced by people with mental health conditions are often said to be worse than the condition itself and contribute to barriers in accessing healthcare, employment and education, and damages relationships [1–3]. The way stigma and discrimination are experienced varies within different societies and cultures, according to what matters most in that particular context [3–5]. The experience of stigma negatively impacts upon recovery outcomes as well as on quality of life for people with mental health conditions and is a barrier to access and provision of care [1,6,7].

It is widely recognised that there is a stark treatment gap between the number of people with mental health conditions worldwide and those accessing treatment, particularly in low- and middle-income countries (LMIC) [8]. There is a significant discrepancy globally between the priority of physical health care and mental health care, with mental health care often taking a lower priority in terms of budget and policy [1,9]. The stigma associated with seeking care for mental health conditions can inadvertently reinforce this treatment gap by reducing the demand for care, and the lack of demand reduces the pressure to raise the priority of mental health care funding and to support a greater supply of services [1,9].

Stigma has been shown to be a factor in delayed help-seeking in mental health [10,11]. However, the way stigma affects individuals, communities and healthcare systems varies between societies and is less well understood in LMICs where less research has been conducted [1–3]. As well as a treatment gap for mental health, there is a significant research gap in LMIC [3,9,12], although the evidence base in LMICs is emerging [3,13]. The recent Lancet Commission on Ending Stigma and Discrimination in Mental Health highlighted the importance of research focused on the perspectives of service users and carers, especially in LMICs [1]. Exploring the lived experience of people with mental health conditions in LMICs is crucial to understand the complexities underlying the gap between the number of people requiring and accessing support for their mental health [1,14]. High quality qualitative research sheds light on the nature of the barriers and facilitators related to the accessibility, quality and effectiveness of mental healthcare [1].

India’s population was estimated to be approximately 1.4 billion in 2023, equivalent to nearly a fifth of the total world population [15]. India is governed by a federal system and comprises of 28 states and 8 union territories with healthcare being governed by the union and state governments [16]. India has private and public healthcare providers, as well as non-governmental organisations providing healthcare, with the majority of private healthcare located in urban centres and rural areas mainly being served by the public system [17]. There is a three-tier system of public community care with the most local service being primary health centres (PHC) serving populations of 20–30,000, community health centres (CHC) serving 80–120,000 and tertiary health care [16]. Primary health centres may follow up individuals who have received diagnoses at a tertiary level by specialists and have long-term close therapeutic relationships with the communities they serve.

In 2017, nearly 200 million people in India were estimated to have a mental disorder – 1 in every 7 people [18]. From 1990–2017, the proportion of people with mental disorders contributing to overall disease burden in India doubled. Access to care varies from state to state and India’s first national mental health policy was launched in 2014 prior to the 2017 revised Mental Health Act [19]. The treatment gap for common mental disorders has been estimated to be approximately 80% [20]. India has approximately 0.75 psychiatrists per 100,000 people [21]. Mental health conditions are mainly diagnosed at a tertiary or district level by psychiatrists as well as via the District Mental Health Programme. Medical officers at primary health centres are trained to identify mental health conditions and provide follow up with service users including ongoing prescribed treatment.

Given this context, the aim of this study was to explore the experiences of stigma and discrimination of service users, and their carers, attending a primary health centre in rural Karnataka, India for mental health conditions. The results of this study contribute to understanding the barriers in accessing mental health services that individuals face in rural communities such as Karnataka in India. Such insights can inform the development of stigma reduction interventions and contribute to the enhancement of the rights and quality of life of individuals facing mental health conditions, and improve access to care in the future [1].

This study used data collected as part of the Indigo PRIMARY study [22], a multisite qualitative study of experiences of stigma relating to mental health conditions in primary care settings across Asia, Africa and Europe. Methodological details for this broader study have been reported previously [22]. The site considered for this study was in rural India, in Ramanagara district within Karnataka state, at PHCs associated with the District Mental Health Programme. These data have previously been analysed using framework analysis techniques, considering data across all research sites [22]. The purpose of this study is to carry out a richer, more in-depth exploration of these data, though an inductive analysis of the data collected with service-users and carers in the site in India specifically.

Participants were recruited through purposive sampling by staff at PHCs who identified people receiving care for their mental health at the PHC and their carers. Recruitment procedures emphasised assessing potential participants’ capacity, and the voluntary nature of study participation. Those who were willing to participate were included and service users who were currently symptomatic or cognitively impaired were excluded. Participation in the study was initiated only after written, informed consent had been obtained. The sample size was dictated by the data collected in the Indigo PRIMARY study, where a sample of around 10–15 participants per research site was assessed as sufficient to reach data saturation [23,24]. Saturation was considered achieved when the interviews were deemed to not provide new information or insights, indicating that additional data collection is unlikely to further the understanding of the research question.

The recruitment and data collection took place between 1stJune 2018 and 31stJuly 2019. Interviews were carried out by members of the research team from National Institute for Mental Health and Neurosciences (NIMHANS), experienced in conducting mental health research and trained to recognise and respond to signs of potential distress during data collection. The interviews were conducted in the Kannada language, in private settings where participants could freely express their views.

Interviews lasted 60–90 minutes and a semi-structured approach was used, with an interview guide addressing topics related to experiences of stigma within healthcare and community settings for service users and carers. Questions used in the interviews are available as supplementary material (appendix 1). The interviews were translated and then transcribed in English by the same researcher. A further researcher, fluent in both English and Kannada crosschecked the transcript with audio recordings and reviewed the translation independently.

The transcribed data were inputted to NVivo (R14.23.2) to facilitate data analysis. The data were examined through thematic analysis [25]. An inductive method of thematic analysis was used, allowing themes to emerge directly from the data without being influenced by pre-existing theories, enabling a rich, data-driven understanding of participants’ experiences. This process involved an initial familiarisation and immersion in the data through repeated reading of the transcripts, followed by generating a set of initial codes representing emerging broader patterns and descriptors of the raw data. These were then analysed and organised, through considering clustering between similar codes and connections between these broader groupings. Themes were identified from the codes, reflecting latent constructs characterising these emerging code clusters. These emerging themes were refined through an iterative process of re-reading transcripts, revisiting the codes and themes and their connections, and reviewing and refining the code and theme names for more accurate representation of the experiences and constructs they captured. The lead author (SJP) led this process, and the emerging insights and thematic structure was discussed in a series of online meetings between authors. The themes were refined to final key themes and a visual representation of the thematic map created as part of this process [25]. Analysis was carried out by author SJP in collaboration with three other authors (AC, PCG, GM), to identify the key themes describing the entire data set. Two authors (AC, GM) work within the study context, and two authors (SJP, PCG) work externally to the setting. This range of perspectives reduced bias in the analysis whilst maintaining important knowledge of the context. All key themes were developed and agreed on by all four authors over a series of online meetings.

Following practical guidance for achieving trustworthiness criteria in thematic analysis conduct [26], the analytical procedures described above also attest to how trustworthiness was established in this research. For example, the analytical process involved prolonged engagement with the data, retained field notes and transcripts, documenting the evolving coding process through notes shared amongst the research team, researcher triangulation during coding, audit trail of code generation, diagramming to make sense of code generation, vetting themes and subthemes among the research team, team consensus of themes, and providing a detailed description of the process of coding and analysis.

Ethics approval was obtained from the PNM Research Ethics Subcommittee, King’s College, London: Reference Number (No.) RESCMR-17/18–4109; approval date 23 February 2017 and NIMHANS Institutional Review Board: Reference Number (No.) NIMHANS/IEC(BEH.SC.DIV.)7th MEETING/2017. Permission was granted from Directorate of Health Family Welfare Servicers, Government of Karnataka, India, No: DD/Mental Health/10/18–19 dated 26.04.2018.

Additional information regarding the ethical, cultural, and scientific considerations specific to inclusivity in global research is included in the supplementary materials (appendix 2).

A total of 14 qualitative interviews were carried out with nine service users and five carers. Demographic data was collected for the participants, detailed inTable 1.

The aim of this study was to explore the experiences of stigma and discrimination of service users and carers attending a primary health centre in rural Karnataka, India for mental health conditions. The results reflected four interconnected key themes relating to this research question: 1) Complex System, 2) Knowledge, 3) Stigma and Discrimination and 4) Social cohesion within family and community. Each theme also includes a set of subthemes. These themes and their interconnections are illustrated inFig 1, and described in further detail below.

There is some overlap and connection between the four themes (seeFig 1). The themes “Knowledge” and “Stigma and Discrimination” feed into the theme “Social cohesion” and these three themes sit within the wider context of the theme “Complex System”. Furthermore, themes 2 (Knowledge) and 3 (Stigma and Discrimination) interact with each other and there is some overlap and connection between these two themes. For example, the “Stigma and Discrimination” subtheme 3b (Myths about mental illness) does to some extent reflect aspects of the “Knowledge” theme 2. However, the data in theme 3 (stigma and discrimination) was more specifically related to stigma and discrimination than the data presented in theme 2.

This theme captures the difficulties highlighted by participants in navigating accessing care for their mental health conditions. Participants described seeking help and support for their mental health through a variety of sources and via a number of different routes without clear referral pathways, sometimes simultaneously and sometimes sequentially (subtheme 1a). Participants described barriers at each stage of accessing care and continuing to seek support through the PHC where this study was carried out (subtheme 1b). There was not a single, uniform pathway leading to participants accessing help for their health condition, and several systemic barriers described in accessing consistent healthcare (subtheme 1b). This theme addresses the practical and logistical barriers that have arisen due to the complex system, rather than barriers in accessing care relating to knowledge and stigma; these are described in themes 2 “Knowledge” and 3 “Stigma and Discrimination”, which sit within the context of this theme.

“We went to temples and did poojas*, but had no improvement. Then our neighbours told about taking treatment from Ramanagara District Hospital.”(CG3) (*Pooja is a word used to describe a ritual of respect or worship to a god, e.g., visiting a temple, making an offering, chanting prayers).

The variety of responses highlighted the heterogeneity in pathways for seeking care for mental health conditions and the lack of awareness of the possibility of attending the primary health centre for mental healthcare referral and follow up, despite it being the usual first point of access for other health issues.

These barriers described the difficulties service users experienced in accessing the public healthcare system to get support for their mental health. As well as the complex journey to reach the system and the practical barriers to accessing the system participants experienced, they also experienced difficulty once within the system in the way of several limitations creating obstacles to accessing continued support for their mental health. Stigma-related influences constituted another barrier to accessing care, which is discussed in theme 3.

Reflections around how much knowledge service users, their carers and health professionals had around the service user’s mental health was a repeated and prominent theme in the data. The concept of “not knowing” in subtheme 2a about one’s mental health (e.g., the name of your diagnosis, the name of your treatment, where/how to get further support) was a repeated concept. It is important to highlight that this was not assumed to be negative and participants lack of knowledge was not presented in an overtly negative or positive light (subtheme 2a). It was also noted that the way participants conceptualised their conditions was frequently with relation to physical symptoms and beneficial treatments were often biological (e.g., medication, behavioural activation) as described in subthemes 2b and 2c. Participants also expressed a desire for improving and increasing knowledge for carers and staff (subtheme 2d).

Regarding knowledge about sources of support, when asked if they are treated differently or have a complaint what to do, half of the participants said that they “did not know” what to do.

Participants spoke about the positive benefits of support they have received for their health problems including medication, and alternative therapies. Beneficial treatments included medication, alternative/spiritual support and behavioural activation, rather than reference to psychological therapies.

When asked whether there are any human rights or advocacy organisations that support people with mental health conditions and their families, all participants said no, or that they did not know of any which is in keeping with the lack of such organisations in this area.

Experiences of stigma and discrimination were described by all the participants. Participants described their observations of negative attitudes from others related to their mental health condition (subtheme 3a) as well as incorrect and stigmatising beliefs around mental health conditions about their treatability or consequences (subtheme 3b). The largest subtheme of this theme was the experiences of negative social and behavioural consequences (discrimination) and being treated differently as a result of their mental health condition (subtheme 3c).

The most distressing stigmatising experiences of discrimination presented by participants were most frequently in the context of exclusion from the community and a prominent theme throughout the interviews was of service users and carers describing their experiences generally in the terms of how it related to their family or caregivers. The involvement of family in supporting with accessing and providing care was frequently described (subtheme 4a) and the subsequent impact on families and carers of the individuals experiences was also frequently described (subtheme 4b). Within this, the initial presentation to services was often described as being due to a breakdown of relationship or conflict within the family or community, highlighting the importance of social cohesion. Rather than seeking care as a result of symptoms, it was more commonly seen that families sought care when disruption to the family cohesion was experienced. Within theme 4 is also data relating to the positive experiences participants described relating to social cohesion (subtheme 4c).

The aim of this study was to gain an insight into the experiences of stigma and discrimination that service users and their carers attending a primary health centre in rural Karnataka, India, face relating to their mental health care. It is important to understand the stigma-related barriers that individuals in specific contexts face in accessing mental health services to inform the development of locally relevant anti-stigma interventions and improve access to care for people with mental health conditions. In addition, such insights aim to improve quality of life and promote the rights of individuals with mental health conditions. Such studies are particularly needed in LMICs, where research to date is limited and where there are significant treatment gaps for mental health [1,12].

This study highlights barriers to accessing care on both a system level and also relating a lack of knowledge about mental health. This study brings to light the pervasive experiences of discriminatory behaviour due to their mental health condition that individuals in a rural community in India face, as is the case in other countries in the region [7,12,27]. Stigmatising attitudes (prejudice) and behaviours (discrimination) were described by participants from within their local communities and family contexts. It was noted that cohesion within the family and community was a priority for participants, and may be considered “what matters most” [4] for the participants in this study. The concept of “what matters most” is considered a helpful framework for understanding the contextual nuance and cultural influences on stigma [4,28]. Social cohesion and connection appears to be a culturally significant aspect of daily life in this study, that is compromised by the threat or experience of stigma and discrimination.

In India, as in most LMICs, many people with severe mental health conditions may be made homeless, or depend on their families financially and for support with personal and health care [29]. Families are therefore often closely involved with seeking healthcare and taking on roles that may be filled by health or social care services in other settings [29]. India is traditionally viewed as a collectivist society, where values such as social cohesion and community are held as a priority and where interdependence is promoted [30]. The value of social cohesion may be even higher in rural settings where cultural values may be more traditional, and studies have shown differences between experiences of discrimination of people with mental health conditions such as schizophrenia in India in rural compared to urban areas [31]. The finding of social cohesion and the importance of family being a key theme in this data is therefore in keeping with what is expected from existing literature and knowledge [7,30].

Rather than operating as individuals as might be seen in a Western context, participants in this study routinely described their experiences collectively, in relation to their family and community context, whether directly or indirectly [30,32]. The importance of cohesion and maintaining relationships within their family or community context was repeatedly highlighted as a priority for participants [32]. An interesting phenomenon noted by the authors was that many participants described positive experiences of their engagement with the primary health centre despite the barriers they also described. One possible explanation is that the importance of maintaining cohesion and good relationships with the professionals who care for them may have influenced participant answers in light of professionals having an ongoing role in their care [33]. The value of social cohesion above a more Western value of autonomy therefore may extend beyond family and society and influence experiences within healthcare settings [34].

Participants frequently described mental health conditions as presenting initially with a behavioural change causing conflict within the family or some form of dysfunction with relation to participation in society. Rather than a description of depression involving the cognitive symptoms (e.g., low mood, anhedonia, poor motivation, hopelessness, suicidality) more frequently, behavioural and somatic symptoms were described (poor sleep, poor appetite, irritability, conflict) and their impact on their function within the family or social context [35,36]. Interestingly, no participants described any of their symptoms or illnesses using language relating to thoughts or emotions (e.g., low mood, hopelessness). Furthermore, participants who described helpful aspects of treatment and care referred to biological tools such as medication and a healthy lifestyle.

Previous studies of the experience of stigma and discrimination of people with schizophrenia in India have highlighted that more internalised forms of stigma for example a sense of alienation is a more common experience than negative discrimination [37]. In this study, participants described the negative consequences of stigmatising attitudes from others in terms relating to their social isolation and exclusion from community, for example leading to them not leaving the home [38].

Participants frequently did not know their diagnosis or treatment plan, in contrast with the focus on a medical model of mental illness, patient knowledge, autonomy and rights that are often prioritised in a more Western context [39]. The lack of knowledge was observed to be distinct from the experiences of stigma and discrimination that was described by participants, and was therefore separated into a different theme.

There are several implications of this study relating to clinical practice and future research opportunities. This study highlights the experiences of stigma and discrimination that individuals within a rural context in India are experiencing and the need for the development of relevant anti-stigma interventions which take into consideration the importance of social cohesion and also the practical and systemic barriers that are present for individuals to access care. Addressing stigma and discrimination are urgent global issues, which require immediate action [1]. Given the size of India and the diversity of its population, it would be beneficial for this research to be replicated with a wider range of participants in a variety of geographical areas across the country. In order to address the potential barrier that participants may face regarding speaking openly about their experiences of healthcare, and given the importance of social cohesion and hierarchical relationship with professionals, it would be beneficial to involve independent researchers separate from healthcare settings in carrying out further studies.

Certain limitations of this study are important to highlight. As interviews were carried out in Kannada and translated to English before being transcribed, the analysis is based on the translator’s interpretation of the participants responses, rather than the direct responses themselves. However, the translators were confident in both languages and all translations were subsequently cross checked. We also acknowledge the limitation that for feasibility reasons, the analysis did not include independent coding by multiple authors or procedures to establish intercoder reliability. However, the lead author collaborated with other authors during the analysis process, ensuring coding was not biased by a subjective perspective. The insights gathered from the data remain valuable as despite the limitations, important rich data have been collected relating to the experiences of individuals with mental health conditions in rural India.

The participants of this study shared several similar characteristics; they were all married, all Hindu and from a rural district in India. Therefore the results may not necessarily be able to be generalised. However, qualitative research findings are not intended to be broadly generalisable, but rather intend to explore the experiences and insights of the specific participant group involved in the study. Furthermore, the shared characteristics of the sample strengthens the themes identified in these data as there were many similarities in the participants’ context.

The results from this study give a voice to individuals experiencing stigma and discrimination relating to their mental health, and their carers, providing a unique window into the experience of service users and carers from a rural location in India. Service users from LMICs, particularly in rural settings, are a group which are often overlooked, especially in research studies. The experiences of stigma and discrimination the service users and carers who participated in this study is vitally important to be recognised. There is a richness to these data that adds greatly to the body of research exploring service-user experience of stigma and discrimination, which is primarily focused on voices from high-income settings.

We thank the participants for their time in providing data for this study, and the NIMHANS research team for their support in data collection and translation.