TheBactrocera dorsalisspecies complex comprises major pests of various tropical fruit and vegetable crops. Populations typically increase during the rainy season, a period when pesticide applications are often less effective. Additionally, pupation in the soil further complicates control efforts.Streptomycesspp., entomopathogenic bacteria, show potential as biological agents against the pupal stage of fruit flies. This study aimed to evaluate the effects ofS. fradiaestrain JB-1 on pupal mortality, adult development type, and developmental time in soils of varying depths. The mean percentages of pupal mortality, successful imago, and abnormal imago differed significantly among soil treatments, whereas the mean percentage of normal imago did not. Similarly, significant differences in the mean percentages of dead pupae, successful imago, and normal imago were observed across soil depths, but no significant differences were found for abnormal imago. Application ofS. fradiaeextended the pupal stage duration across all imago parameters, while soil depth had no significant effect. These findings suggest thatS. fradiaestrain JB-1 is effective in controlling fruit fly pupae in soils of varying depths. This study provides a foundation for integrating entomopathogenicStreptomycesspp. into fruit fly control strategies targeting the pupal stage.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-16518-z.

Fruit flies belonging to the Tephritidae family are an important pest group in fruit and vegetable commodities1–4.Bactrocerais a large genus within the family Tephritidae, consisting of approximately 750 known species, primarily distributed across Southeast Asia, Australia, the Pacific region, and the Afrotropics. Among these, 79 closely related species are grouped under theBactrocera dorsalisspecies complex with similar morphological characteristics of predominantly or entirely black scutum5. Collectively, theB. dorsalisspecies complex is responsible to cause severe damage to fruit crops in tropical regions, including Indonesia5–10. These pests attack various host plants, including mango (Mangifera indicaL., Anacardiaceae), banana (Musaspp., Musaceae), star fruit (Averrhoa carambolaL., Oxalidaceae), guava (Psidium guajavaL., Myrtaceae), water apple (Syzygium aqueum), orange (Citrusspp., Rutaceae), sapodilla (Achras zapota(L.) P. Royen, Sapotaceae), papaya (Carica papayaL., Caricaceae), peach (Prunus persica(L.) Batsch, Rosaceae), jackfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus), grape (Vitisspp., Vitaceae), pomegranate (Punica granatumL., Lythraceae), lychee (Litchi chinensisSonn., Sapindaceae), and longan (Dimocarpus longanLour., Sapindaceae)8–10. Usually, damaged fruits become hollow and rot quickly, posing a major risk to the fresh commodity trade due to the enforcement of strict quarantine restrictions11. The economic impact ofB. dorsalisis substantial. In India, infestations reduce the marketable mango yields by 25–30%, with estimated losses of USD356 million annually across various crops such as guava, sapodilla, citrus, and mango12,13. Thailand experiences an annual mango yield loss of 15.5%14. In Africa, the annual yield loss exceeds USD2 billion15. Exports restriction of guava to the United States and Japan result an additional loss of USD2.5 million16. In Indonesia, infectious leads to losses between 25% and 50%, with some mango plantations experiencing up to 100%17.

Reports of significant economic losses caused byB. dorsalisspecies complex highlight the need for strengthen biosecurity measures and serve as a warning for existing fruit fly control programs. However, controllingB. dorsalisspecies complex is challenging due to its biological characteristics. The larvae are endophagous which makes them less susceptible to insecticide treatments. As a result, most control strategies target the adult stage. Commonly employed methods include synthetic pesticides, baiting systems using methyl eugenol, standard area wide pest management, Jackson traps, and sterile insect techniques18–21. However, the extensive use of insecticide such as beta-cypermethrin, cyhalothrin, malathion, and spinosad has led to the development of insecticide resistance not only inB. dorsalis(Hendel), but also in related species such asB. oleae(Rossi),Ceratitis capitata(Wiedemann), andZeugodacus cucurbitae(Coquillett)22–25. In response to the growing concerns about pesticide resistance and residue limits in agricultural exports, research has increasingly focused on non-chemical pest control methods. Therefore, biological control using entomopathogenic microorganisms, such as fungi and bacteria, offers a promising alternative, particularly targeting the larval and pupal stages ofBactroceraspp26–30.

Among entomopathogenic fungi, species such asMetarhizium anisopliae(Metschnikoff) Sorokin,Metarhizium robertsiiJF Bisch, SA Rehner & Humber,Isaria fumosoroseaWize,Glomusspp.,Beauveria bassiana(Bals.-Criv.) Vuill., andB. brongniartii(Sacc.) Petch, have demonstrated the ability to infect fruit fly pupae and cause significant mortality29,32,33. Studies have shown thatBeauveria bassianaandM. anisopliaecan achieve pupal mortality rates of up to 50%34. These fungi infect their host by penetrating their mycelium through the larval or pupal cuticles31and secreting enzymes such as chitinases, lipases, and proteases, which disrupt the insect’s physiological functions36–38. In a study, the use of contaminant attractant traps (ACTs) treated withM. anisopliaevar.acridumand methyl eugenol showed increased fly contamination rates, reaching up to 99.67% with higher trap densities35. In addition to fungi, entomopathogenic bacteria also hold potential for pest control39,40. Notably, the genusStreptomyces, have shown efficacy against insect pests. Studies have demonstrated thatStreptomyces narbonensis,S. spectabilis, andS. deserti, can cause up to 100% mortality inBactrocerasp. larvae and pupae41. AnotherStreptomycesspecies,S. fradiaeknown for its production of chitinase42may also possess insecticidal properties and thus warrant further investigation as a potential biological control agent. Moreover,S. fradiaestrain NKZ-259 has been reported to promote tomato seedling growth, suggesting additional benefits for crop productivity43.

Targeting the pupal stage of fruit flies is a strategic approach, as it represents a period of insect dormancy. Many studies on the pupal stage focus on adult emergence rates (eclosion), developmental duration, and survival44–47. These factors are strongly influenced by environmental condition particularly soil properties such as temperature, humidity, and light conditions48–54. Although temperature has been extensively studied for its role in pupal development50–54other soil characteristics are often underexplored. Research has shown that pupation depth significantly affects emergence success46,47. Shallow pupation (0–4 cm) is common under high soil moisture conditions and generally results in higher emergence rate47. In contrast, emergence decreases significantly at depths greater than 20 cm46.

Despite the extensive research on fungal entomopathogens, there is limited information on the efficacy ofStreptomycesspp., especiallyS. fradiaein controlling fruit flies across different soil depth. This gap in knowledge as particularly important, as soil depth directly influences pupal development and could affect the success of biological control agents. Therefore, the objective of this study is to evaluate the effect ofS. fradiaeon the mortality, developmental time and emergence characteristics ofB. dorsalisspecies complex pupae across varying soil depth. By understanding how this bacterial species interacts with soil conditions and insect development, the study aims to contribute to the development of effective, environmentally sustainable pest management strategies for fruit fly control in agricultural systems.

The larvae ofB. dorsalisspecies complex were collected from damaged chili fruit at the Batu Sub-district, Batu City and Dau Sub-District, Malang District, East Java, which are located about 16 km from Malang City, East Java (Fig.1). The larvae were collected from the chili fruit because those were easily collected. Samples of chili fruit attacked by fruit flies were collected from discarded chilies that had symptoms of damage, such as black dots on the base and wilted fruit. A total of 100 chilies were sampled which were then collected from the field and reared in the Laboratory of Animal Diversity and Environmental Technology, the Department of Biology, Universitas Brawijaya, Malang, Indonesia. Those chilies were placed in 10 small plastic boxes and lined with cloth at the bottom. The plastic boxes were inserted into a large plastic box filled with sterilized sand for the development of larvae. After 14 days, the large plastic box was opened, and the pupae were collected by sifting the sand. The pupae were placed on a transparent plastic vial until they hatch into adults. Adults were identified following the description in the key manual54,55. The characteristics of this species were described as follows, distinct dark on the facial spots; scutum on its thorax mostly or entirely black; lateral postsutural yellow vittae present; medial postsutural yellow vitta absent; wings transparent except the costal band which is confluent and overlaps with R2 + 3 and expands around the apex of R4 + 5; scutellum yellow with dark basal band and never with other dark patterns; abdomen with pale posterior band on medially undivided tergite II and terga III-V forming a dark ‘T’ pattern without dark lateral margins54,55. Referring to the key manual for adult fruit fly identification, samples from theB. dorsalisspecies complex were collected and reared for subsequent generations. Fifty pairs of newly emerged adults were housed in a 50 × 50 × 50 cm Plexiglas insect-rearing cage, provided daily with a 10% sucrose solution and protein hydrolysate.

Location of fruit fly larvae and soil sampling in Batu sub-district, Batu City and in Dau sub-district, Malang District, East Java, Indonesia.

The emerging/hatching fruit fly imago were fed with a 10% sucrose solution and protein hydrolysate. Sucrose was given routinely every day. A plastic cup with an oviposition hole (± 0.1 mm in diameter) at the top was placed inside the fruit fly cage to facilitate egg-laying by female imago. The female imago deposited eggs into the plastic cup, which were collected after two hours. The collected eggs were then transferred to a plastic bowl containing food (made of carrot puree (mixed with yeast, nipagin, distilled water and propionic acid)46. This bowl was subsequently placed inside a larger plastic box filled with sand, serving as a pupation medium. The F1 pupae were then collected and used for further experiments. The F1 pupae in the previous test showing the imago eclosion more than 90%. In subsequent studies, rearing up to F3 showed that the eclosion rate slightly decreased, indicating adaptation success in the earlier generation and a reduction in the following generation. Due to this situation, the use of the fruit flies from the field in early generation may affect the mortality in the experiment, this became the limitation of this study.

The soil as media for experiments was collected from Batu Sub-regency, Batu Regency and Dau Sub-regency, Malang Regency, East Java. At each location, 20 kg of soil was sampled. The soil was collected from orange orchards (mixed with chili) from 0 to 20 cm depth of using a hoe. Soil from both locations were mixed. In the laboratory, the soil was air-dried for 96 h. Dried soils were pounded and sieved using a 2 mm mesh. Prior to the experiment, soil texture was analyzed to determine the soil texture and the result indicated that the soil was composed of sand (10%), clay (72%), and silt (18%), while soil moisture was 11%.

Streptomycesspp. microbes were isolated from four locations represented the location in East Java and remote areas in eastern (East Nusa Tenggara) dan western (Belitung) Indonesia. Two locations in East Java were a tomato garden in Pare, Kediri, East Java (Par isolate strain PA-1) and forested areas in Jember, East Java (Jem isolate strain JB-1). Microbes from East Nusa Tenggara was collected from dry land cultivation area in Dompu (Dom isolate strain DO-1); while that from Belitung Island (Bel isolate strain BE1) was collected from former coal mining land. The soil plating method was used for isolation, with 1 gram of soil from each site suspended in 9 ml of sterile distilled water and serially diluted up to 10⁻⁴. A 0.5 ml sample from the final dilution was cultured on inorganic salt starch agar (ISSA) in Petri dishes and incubated at 28 °C for four days to obtain a mixed culture.

After incubation, colonies ofStreptomycessp. were selected by isolating a single loop from each colony and culturing it on ISP-4 complex media in petri dishes. This process was repeated seven times to obtain pureStreptomycesisolates. Prior to treatment, the four isolates were tested for their ability to produce chitinase, all of which successfully demonstrated chitinase expression, except Dom isolate. Therefore, this isolate was excluded from further virulence test. Identification was conducted at the Indonesian Genetics Science Laboratory using 16 S rRNA DNA sequencing. The resulting sequences were analyzed using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) from the Biology Workbench (SDSC).

Sequence analysis revealed that the Par and Jem isolates shared 1292 base pairs (bp) demonstrated 99.85% similarity withStreptomyces fradiaeRSU15, Dom isolate exhibited 1334 bp, indicated 98.92% similarity toStreptomyces leeuwenhoekiiWA12, while the Bel isolate indicated 1346 bp, showed 99.48% similarity toStreptomyces kunmingensisDSD1764. A bioassay was conducted usingB. dorsalisspecies complex pupae per treatment to assess the virulence of the threeStreptomycesisolates, with four replications. The results showed high pupal mortality rates of 90%, 100%, and 100% for the Par, Jem, and Bel isolates, respectively. Based on these findings, further analysis was conducted using the Jem isolate (S. fradiae), demonstrating the highest potential for fruit fly control.

A day-oldB. dorsalisspecies complex pupae were taken from the sand as pupation media. The experiment was conducted by placing pupae in soil media. The treatments consisted of dried soil, watered soil, andS. fradiae-treated soil. Treatment of dried soil represented a negative control (whereStreptomyces fradiaewas absent), while watered soil represented a positive control (where water was present). Prior to the experiment, the soil media was sterilized in an autoclave at 121 °C for 15 min. Watered soil treatment was conducted by adding 15% v/v of sterile distilled water mixed with soil. This water addition increases the soil moisture up to 30%. The concentration of water addition was done following the previous study63. In the previous study, optimum water concentration was achieved at 15% v/v, while more concentration led to clumped and hardened soil because this study used sieved soil.

S. fradiae-treated soil was carried out by mixingS. fradiaedilution with soil media at a concentration of 15% v/v. The soil level was treated using a tube made of transparent mica with a diameter of 5 cm. The mica plastic was attached to 20 × 20 cm of cardboard paper at the bottom. Approximately 10 cm of space was added at the top of the tube to ensure oxygen availability. Furthermore, the plastic tube was filled with 1 cm thick soil media. After that, the pupae were placed on the surface, and then the soil was poured into the tube according to the depth of each treatment. The top of the tube was covered with a layer of cotton cloth to prevent adult fruit flies from flying out. The treatments included eight soil levels: 0, 4, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 cm depths45. Replication was carried out four times, where each replication was given 20 pupae aged 1–2 days. After six days, the pupal status of each treatment was checked every day until 16 days after treatment. The number of fruit flies released and their physical condition were observed. Fruit flies were classified based on the perfection of their abdomen and wings. Imago with deformed or deformed wings was considered abnormal. Regarding the use of animals, this study has received ethical approval from the institutional committee (Research and Community Development Institute, Universitas Brawijaya) that approved the experiments.

The number of adult fruit flies hatched (successful imago), and morphological normality of each treatment were calculated, and the results were presented as a percentage, while the length of development time was presented in days. Imago’s success was counted based on its emerging body. The unsuccessful imago was considered as dead pupae. The surviving imago was then classified into normal or abnormal based on its body characteristics. The normal imago showed flattened wings, a bright yellow body, and an inflated abdomen, while abnormal or deformed adult fruit flies showed the characteristics of wrinkled wings, a pale-yellow body, and a short, small abdomen47.

Statistical data analysis was conducted to compare the average percentage of dead pupa, successful imago, normal imago and abnormal imago between treatments and soil levels. Regression and correlation tests were conducted to analyze the relationship between those imago parameters and soil levels. Data normality analysis was carried out prior to statistical analysis. The normality test indicated that the data were not normally distributed, even though they had been transformed. Therefore, differences in mean dead pupa, successful imago, normal imago and abnormal imago between treatments and soil depth were analyzed using non-parametric analysis. In this regard, Kruskal – Wallis analysis was selected to show the mean difference among the treatments because it meets the requirements for a sample size of more than two groups, and sample members between groups were different. If the analysis results show significant differences, the Dunn’s post hoc test adjusted by Bonferroni correction was done to evaluate multiple pairwise comparisons. Furthermore, the correlation of the means ofB. dorsalissuccessful imago, normal and abnormal was tested using a linear regression model. The data were calculated using the Excel program, while the statistical test was processed using PAST version 4.04, and differences between the means of observed parameter results were considered significant atp≤ 0.05.

To examine the influence of soil properties and the application ofS. fradiaeon mortality and adult development type,B. dorsalisspecies complex pupae were placed in different soil media, including watered soil, dried soil, and soil treated withS. fradiae. The treatment significantly affected dead pupae(χ2 = 6.868;p= 0.0308), successful imago (χ2 = 6.868;p= 0.0308) and abnormal imago (χ2 = 9.800;p= 0.0049) but had no significant effect on normal imago (p> 0.05) (Table1). Post-hoc tests for those significant parameters showed a significant difference in the percentage of dead pupae, successful imago and abnormal imago among the treatments. The average percentage of dead pupae in theS. fradiae-treated soil was higher (81.41% ± 3.29) than in dried soil (76.09% + 4.34) and watered soil (57.03% ± 6.34). However, the difference in adult mortality betweenS. fradiae-treated soil and dried soil treatments was not statistically significant, whereas its difference with watered soil treatments was significant. Consequently, the percentage of successful imago in theS. fradiae-treated soil was lower (18.59% ± 3.29) compared to dried soil (23.91% ± 4.36) and watered soil (42.97% ± 6.34) treatments, with a significant difference equal to the effect on pupae death. The application ofS. fradiaedid not show a significant difference to normal imago (χ2= 4.367,p= 0.104) but had a significant impact on abnormal imago (χ2= 9.800,p= 0.0049). The mean percentage of abnormal imago in theS. fradiae-treated soil was the lowest (3.28% ± 0.80) compared to the dried (9.84% ± 1.67) and watered soil (11.72% ± 3.03) treatments, and the effect of this treatment was significant (χ2= 9.8;p= 0.005) (Fig.2). From the observations of fruit flies appearing on the surface of the soil on mica tubes, it was seen that there were deformed fruit flies. A normal fruit fly has fully developed wings, bright body color, and long abdomen. The two horizontal black lines and the longitudinal median line are barely visible (Fig.3A). Abnormal fruit flies have pale-yellow body, small and deformed abdomen (Fig.3B) or short wrinkled wings (Fig.3C). Pre-treatment pupae usually have tough body (Fig.3D). Dead pupae have flabby body and softened cuticula. Some pupae demonstrated broken cuticula (Fig.3E).

The statistical result (Chi-square value and significance) of the effects of different treatments on the percentage of Imago parameters (dead pupa, successful Imago, normal Imago and abnormal Imago).

Comparison among three different treatments on the percentage of fruit fly imago parameters. The different letters (a, b) above the error bars indicate a significant difference between the means, ns = not significant.

Imago and pupae ofB. dorsalisspecies complex,(A)normal imago,(B, C)abnormal imago,(D)pre-treatment pupae and(E)dead pupae.

The effect of soil level on the percentage ofB. dorsalisspecies complex mortality and adult development type was evaluated by putting the pupae of the in different soil depths (0, 4, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 cm). The effect of soil level was significant on dead pupae (χ2= 42.98;p= 2.58 × 10−7), successful imago (χ2= 42.98;p= 2.58 × 10−7), and normal imago (χ2= 43.45;p= 1.34 × 10−4) but that was insignificant on abnormal imago (p< 0.05) (Table2). The mean percentage of dead pupae ranged from 35 to 94.58%. The lowest dead pupae percentage occurred at a depth of 4 cm (35% ± 8.00), while the highest was at 40 cm (94.58% ± 2.07). The percentage of survived imago ranged from 5.42 to 65%. The lowest percentage of living imago occurred at a depth of 40 cm (5.42 ± 2.17%), while the highest was at 4 cm (65.00% ± 8.00). The normal survived imago ranged from 2.92 to 55.00%. The lowest percentage of normal imago occurred at a depth of 40 cm (2.92% ± 1.56), while the highest was at 4 cm depth (55.00% ± 8.51). The percentage of abnormal imago ranged from 2.08 to 18.75%. The lowest percentage of abnormal imago occurred at a depth of 40 cm (2.08% ± 1.14), while the highest was at 0 depth (18.75% ± 7.13) (Table3).

The statistical result (Chi-square value and significance) of the effects of different soil levels on the percentage of Imago parameters (dead pupae, successful Imago, normal Imago and abnormal Imago).

The mean percentage (± SE) of dead pupa, successful Imago, normal and abnormal Imago across various soil depths (0, 4, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 cm).

Note: Different letters on the same column indicate significant differences at the level ofP< 0.05 Dunn Post hoc Test.

The percentage of dead pupae for all treatments formed a positive relationship with soil level (Fig.4A), while that of successful imago formed a negative relationship with soil level (Fig.4B). The relationship that occurred among those imago parameters was significant, except for theS. fradiae-treated soil (Table4). In this treatment, the regression line that was formed tended to be flat, because it had a low slope (0.2968 for dead pupa and − 0.2968 for successful imago). The results showed that pupae death in theS. fradiae-treated soil was not affected by soil depth. The percentage of normal imago for all treatments formed a negative relationship with soil level (Fig.4C). The relationship between normal imago and soil level for all treatments was insignificant (Table4). The percentage of abnormal imago for theS. fradiae-treated soil formed a positive relationship with soil level, while other treatments formed a negative relationship (Fig.4D). The relationship between abnormal imago and soil level for all treatments was significant except for the water treatment (Table4). This showed that the percentage of abnormal imago in theS. fradiaeand dried soil treatments was influenced by soil level.

Correlation between the means of fruit fly imago parameters: dead pupae(A), sucessful imago(B), normal imago(C)and abnormal imago(D)with soil treatments.

Correlation and significance of the effect of different soil levels on Imago parameters (dead pupa, successful Imago, normal Imago and abnormal Imago).

To examine the influence of soil properties and the application ofS. fradiaeon imago development, pupae of theB. dorsalisspecies complex were placed in different soil media, including watered soil, dried soil, andS. fradiae-treated soil. This study indicated the effect of soil treatments on fruit fly imago parameters. The effect was significant on the mean development time of successful imago (χ2= 46.22;p= 6.68 × 10−8), normal imago (χ2= 31.56;p= 1.18 × 10−4) and abnormal imago (χ2= 35.78;p= 1.35 × 10−5) (Table5). In general, the application ofS. fradiaeextended the development time of all imago parameters. The mean development time of successful imago in theS. fradiae-treated soil was significantly longer (13.72 days ± 0.34) compared to dried soil (11.33 days ± 0.66) and water treatments (7.62 days ± 0.30). The mean of development time of normal imago inS. fradiae-treated soil was also significantly longer (13.49 days ± 0.38) compared to dried soil (10.65 days ± 0.71) and water treatment (8.25 days ± 0.39). The mean development time of abnormal imago inS. fradiae-treated soil was higher than in dried soil and water, but the difference with water treatment was insignificant (Fig.5).

The statistical result (Chi-square value and significance) of the effects of different treatments on the development time of Imago parameters (successful Imago, normal Imago and abnormal Imago).

The effect of different treatments on the development time of imago parameters. The different letters (a, b,c) above the error bars indicate significant differences between the means (Dunn Post-hoc Test).

The effect of soil level on the development time ofB. dorsalisspecies complex was evaluated by putting the pupae of the in different soil depths (0, 4, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 cm). Result showed that there was no difference in the means of development time of successful imago (p> 0.05), normal imago (p> 0.05) and abnormal imago (p> 0.05) at various soil levels (Table6). The mean development time of successful imago ranged from 8.32 to 12.08 days. The longest development time occurred at a depth of 40 cm, while the fastest was at a depth of 0 cm. The mean development time of normal imago ranged from 8.92 to 13.13 days. The longest development time occurred at a depth of 40 cm, while the fastest was at a depth of 4 cm. The mean development time of abnormal imago ranged from 9.46 to 12.00 days. The longest development time occurred at a depth of 10 cm while the fastest was at 4 cm depth (Table7).

The statistical result (Chi-square value and significance) of effects of soil level on the development time of Imago parameters (Dead pupa, successful Imago, normal Imago and abnormal Imago).

The mean development time (± SE) of succesful, normal and abnormal Imago across various soil depths (0, 4, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, and 60 cm).

The soil treatments exerted substantially different effects on the percentages of dead pupae, successful imago, and abnormal imago. The percentage of dead pupae in theS. fradiaeand dried soil treatments was greater than 75%, with no significant difference from those in the two other treatments. Meanwhile, the percentage of dead pupae in the water treatment was lower than 60%, which significantly differed from those in the two other treatments (Fig.1). The high pupae mortality in the dried soil treatment may be related to low soil moisture levels. By contrast, the addition of water into soil media increased imago survival because it improved soil moisture. The dried soil has a water content of 11%, whereas the watered soil has a water content of 30%. With equal soil moisture as the watered soil treatment,S. fradiaeapplication increased pupal mortality. This result indicates thatS. fradiaetreatment effectively reduces imago survival at 30% soil moisture conditions. The application of an entomopathogenic bacterium requires optimal environmental conditions. This condition matches the preconditions required for optimal development of fruit fly larvae and pupae.

Soil water content, pupal media, and other determinants influence pupal mortality by bacterial activities. Soil moisture and texture are key factors determining the success or failure of entomopathogen application48,56. These two factors interact in a complex relationship that involves the size and behavioral movement of the insect. Previous studies on pupation inB. dorsalislarvae showed that pupae develop optimally at 10–60% humidity. At a depth of 0–2 cm, 45.8% and 83.3% of fruit fly larvae pupate at 10% and 30% soil moisture, respectively48. The differences in survival rates between treatments may be ascribed to low soil water content, physical characteristics of the soil, and application of entomopathogens.

Soil texture, particularly the size distribution of pore spaces, affects the infectivity of spores, such as those ofBeauveria bassiana, by mediating physical contact57. In this process, the physical properties of the soil alter as the pore size increases and the bulk density decreases. Physical and chemical characteristics of the soil, such as interstitial space, grain size, compaction, water content, and organic matter content, can affect the emergence of adult fruit flies on the soil surface. The success of fruit fly larval pupation increases in soil with large soil particles because adult fruit flies can quickly emerge from the pupa. Several soil properties, such as porosity and total organic matter, can reduce soil density and make it easier for fruit flies to emerge48. Soil texture can also cause abnormalities in adult fruit flies, such as in the wings and abdomen. Wing growth is imperfect and appears wrinkled or shriveled, and some flies have swollen abdomens. By contrast, fine soil has low porosity and may clump when exposed to water. As a result, the imago has difficulty exiting the pupae and emerging to the soil surface. These properties prevent emerging adult fruit flies from moving upward to reach the surface. In denser soils, adult fruit flies struggle to reach the surface due to the reduced total soil porosity57.

In the present study, soil depth significantly affected the mean percentages of dead pupae, successful imago, and normal imago, but not that of abnormal imago. Further tests revealed that the correlation with the percentage of dead pupae varied across treatments; in the dried soil and watered soil treatments, the percentage of dead pupae was significantly positively correlated, whereas no significant correlation was found in theS. fradiaetreatment. Therefore, soil depth factor also influenced high mortality in the water treatment. In this treatment, the mortality rate increased at under the 10 cm depth. Similarly, in the water treatment, the pupal mortality rate was low at depths of 4–10 cm and increased sharply at depths of more than 20 cm. Conversely, theS. fradiaetreatment had better consistency, with the graph formed having a low slope (Fig.4A). At depths of 0–35 cm, this treatment also suppressed pupal mortality to more than 70%, whereas the other treatments showed a much lower pupal mortality. The results of this study align with those of previous studies that soil depth affects the survival of fruit fly imago46,47. In particular, soil depth exerts a significant negative effect on adult emergence of hybrids betweenB. dorsalisandB. carambolae. The emergence rate decreases with increasing soil depth. Higher survival rates of imago were observed at depths of 4 cm (95% ± 1.91) and 10 cm (86% ± 2.58)46. Similar results were observed inB. dorsalistreated with dried soil at several soil levels. The results suggest that soil depth significantly negatively affects the survival ofB. dorsalispupae. Higher survival rates of imago were observed at depths of 0 cm (60% ± 5.89) and 4 cm (58% ± 6.22)47.

Streptomyces fradiaetreatment significantly affected the mean development time of successful and normal imago, but not that of abnormal imago. Development time was shortest across all imago parameters in the water treatment, likely due to higher humidity supporting pupal development. Although the percentage of normal pupae also increased under this treatment, the difference was not statistically significant. In contrast, pupal development was prolonged in the dried soil treatment, likely due to low moisture. The fastest development into imago occurred at a depth of 0 cm, while depths greater than 10 cm showed more variable development times, possibly because fewer adults successfully emerged. Only fully emerged adults were classified as successful.

Streptomyces fradiaeaffected the mean duration of the pupal stage and emergence of normal adults, likely by inhibiting pupal development and thereby slowing the overall process. As entomopathogenic bacteria,Streptomycesspp. are as promising biological agents due to their ability to produce secondary metabolites toxic to insect larvae and pupae42,58. For example, metabolites fromS. hydrogenansat 1,600 µg/mL can caused 70% larval, 66.66% prepupal and 100% pupal mortality inS. litura59. Other species produce AP-123, a compound that suppresses development inHelicoverpa armigeraandSpodoptera lituralarvae by over 50%60.Streptomycessp. strain ES2 (EMCC2291) synthesizes metabolites from 15 chemical classes, that significantly reduce α- and β-esterase activity inSpodoptera littoralislarvae. In this study,S. fradiaeandS. kunmingensiscan produce chitinase, which has shown up to 100% efficacy against fruit fly larvae and pupae in vitro.S. fradiaeis also known to have ability to produce lipase and protese61,62. Another species,Streptomyces avermitilismay also produce emamectin benzoate, a compound highly toxic to Lepidoptera63and capable of rapidly killS. littoralis64.

Soil depth did not affect imago development time, and pupal development remained stable at > 10 cm depth. The duration of pupation time ranged from 8.82 to 12.10 days. This duration is similar to those in previous studies but differs from the result of this study. In other studies, pupal development time significantly differs at different soil levels46,47. Previous studies reported that soil depth influences the duration of pupal development of hybrids betweenB. dorsalisandB. carambolae. The mean development time ranges from 8.88 to 10.63 days. It is relatively stable at a depth of 4–40 cm and dramatically longer at 50 and 60 cm46. Previous studies also showed that the average pupal duration stage ranges from 8.01 to 12.78 days. Therefore, soil depth treatment significantly affects development time. The difference in this study may be attributed to the trend development time increasing from 10 to 40 cm, and then decreasing to 60 cm. It is also caused by quite extreme fluctuations that occur in the dried soil treatment. In this treatment, the development time increased from 4 to 10 cm in depth, decreased at 30 and 40 cm, increased again at 50 cm, and then decreased at 60 cm47.

The findings of this study highlight theStreptomyces fradiae(strain JB-1) as a promising biological control agent for fruit fly pupae across a range of soil depths, supporting its integration into pest management strategies targeting the pupal stage. This strain demonstrated more than 70% pupal mortality at soil depths of 0–35 cm. Its efficacy was not significantly affected by soil depth, indicating consistent performance. For optimal results, application should coincide with peak fruit infestation, typically marked by increased fruit drop due to larval feeding.

This study demonstrated that soil treatment substantially affected pupal mortality and the percentages of successful, abnormal, and dead adults. Soil level also notably affected pupal mortality and adult emergence, but did not influence imago abnormality. The difference in pupal mortality betweenS. fradiaeand dried soil treatments was not statistically significant, whereas its difference with watered soil treatments was significant. A correlation was observed between soil level and pupal mortality in dried and watered soil treatments. However, no such correlation was found inS. fradiaetreatments, suggesting that its efficacy was unaffected by soil depth. Additionally,S. fradiae-traeted soil significantly extended the pupal stage across all adult emergence parameters, whereas soil level had no such effect. These findings highlightS. fradiaestrain JB-1 as a promising biological control agent for fruit fly pupae across various soil depths, supporting its integration into pest management strategies targeting the pupal stage.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

The authors thank the Rector and the Head of Research and Community Empowerment Institute, Brawijaya University.