Breast cancer is an important global health challenge. Among women, it is the most commonly diagnosed cancer and the leading cause of cancer-related mortality. There are significant variations in the incidence and mortality rates globally with highest incidence and lowest mortality observed in more developed countries. The number of women diagnosed with breast cancer is projected to rise to ∼3 million annual cases by 2050 from ∼2 million in 2022, and the number of breast cancer-related deaths is projected to rise to over 1 million by 2050 from ∼660 000 in 2022. The largest increases in both incidence and mortality will be in less developed regions of the world. Over the last 40 years, significant gains have been made in reducing breast cancer mortality in more developed countries, but significant challenges remain in tackling the less favourable mortality rates in less developed countries. In this article, we discuss the global variation in breast cancer mortality rates. We used Sudan to present a case study of the devastating impact of conflict on cancer care.

A significant reduction in breast cancer mortality rates in more developed countries has been observed over the last 40 years largely attributed to a combination of earlier detection and diagnosis achieved through population-based screening and more streamlined referral pathways between primary and secondary care, combined with the availability of more effective treatments. In comparison, less favourable outcomes from breast cancer continue to be observed in countries with fewer resources.

In this article, we discuss the key drivers that have led to reductions in breast cancer mortality in more developed countries and the challenges that remain for implementing high-quality breast cancer care in poorer regions. We will use Sudan as a case study of what impact conflict has on cancer care.

Breast cancer incidence and mortality rates are highly correlated with development with the highest incidence and lowest mortality rates observed in those countries with the highest levels of development.

Age standardized rate (world) per 100 000 for breast cancer mortality in women in 2022. © International Agency for Research onhttps://gco.iarc.who.int/today. Data version: Globocan 2022 (version 1.1)—February 08, 2024. Downloaded March 2025.

The breast cancer mortality rate in many countries in Europe and North America has fallen by 40% over 3 decades6(Figure 2). This overall reduction in breast cancer mortality rate of roughly 2% per year is the combination of several moderate effects which we will discuss below.

Fall in breast cancer mortality rates in the United Kingdom and United States in people aged 35–69 years (1950-2022). The age-standardized mortality rate is a mean of annual rates in the 7 component 5-year age groups (ages 35-39, 40-44, 45-49, 50-54, 55-59, 60-64, and 65-69 years). Data are from the WHO Mortality Database and UN World Population Prospects 2022 revision. Graph reproduced with permission from the Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group (Hongchao Pan).

The terms early detection and early diagnosis are often used interchangeably but have distinct meanings. Early detection refers to identifying cases among asymptomatic populations through screening, whilst early diagnosis is focused on providing comprehensive diagnostic and therapeutic care at the earliest possible stage to women with symptoms.

Population-based mammographic screening programmes started in Europe and North America in the late 1980s and have been shown to reduce breast cancer mortality by 20% among women who attend screening.9Population-based screening programmes are labour and resource intensive and require robust quality assurance to ensure effectiveness and safety.

In response to the global challenge of breast cancer and observed disparities in outcomes between more and less developed countries various initiatives have been launched with the broad aims of improving survival from this treatable disease.

One of the main challenges in building and strengthening healthcare systems in low- and middle-income countries is economic and political instability.

In 2021, Sudan had 4 cancer centres with a total of 10 radiotherapy machines to serve a population of approximately 45 million. The majority of patients were treated at the largest centre in the capital Khartoum.16Previous efforts to decentralize cancer care services and establish provincial cancer centres to offer diagnostic services, limited surgical procedures, and basic chemotherapy have had limited impact on generating capacity.

Historically Sudan provided cancer care to refugee patients from neighbouring countries, many of which were affected by conflict and fragile healthcare systems. However, the collapse of the healthcare system, particularly in Khartoum, has led to significant disruption of cancer care services, leaving many patients without access to any care. Reported challenges include shortages in the workforce due to forced displacement and unpaid salaries, and in difficulties in accessing healthcare facilities due to unsafe travel routes and high transportation costs.17Without immediate actions to restore the healthcare system and ensure the provision of necessary medications, a rise in cancer-related deaths in Sudan is inevitable.

Breast cancer is a global health challenge of increasing importance. A significant reduction in mortality rates has been achieved over the last 3 decades in more developed countries largely due to early detection, timely diagnosis and improved access to effective treatments. However, disparities persist for women in less developed regions, resulting in avoidable deaths from a commonly curable disease. There remains an urgent need to address this challenge which will require a collective global effort.

Marwa M A Elbasheer, 
Cancer Epidemiology Unit, Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7LF, United Kingdom.

David Dodwell, 
Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7LF, United Kingdom; 
Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, OX3 7LE, United Kingdom.

Toral Gathani, 
Cancer Epidemiology Unit, Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7LF, United Kingdom; 
Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, OX3 7LE, United Kingdom.

M.M.A.E. is funded in part by NDPH and Cancer Research UK (Cancer Research UK Prevention and Population Research Project grant awarded to TG grant number PRCPJT-Nov22/100007). T.G. and D.D. are employees of Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust. T.G. is funded in part by NDPH. D.D. is funded in part from CR-UK (grant reference C7852-A25447).