Contemporary sialography couples mechanical ductal dilation with hydrodilation and utilizes iodinated contrast with antimicrobial properties to generate diagnostic data. This procedure has been reported to have therapeutic value that has not been investigated in a large contemporary series. This study examines the therapeutic value of diagnostic digital infusion submandibular sialography.

Retrospective chart review of a consecutive series of submandibular sialograms from April 2008 to November 2024, focusing on symptomatic response to sialography.

Review identified 135 submandibular sialograms with follow‐up addressing post‐study symptom assessment available in 67. Indications for sialography in this group included pain (6/67), swelling (23/67), or both (38/67). Symptomatic improvement following sialography was reported in 67% of cases (45/67). Those reporting initial complete relief of symptoms rarely (15%) required additional treatment during the follow‐up period (p= 0.019). The radiographic diagnosis of a distal stricture was associated with a higher rate of symptom improvement (78%) when compared to those without a distal stricture (57%) (p= 0.049). Among patients in this cohort, the median effective radiation dose (1.94 mSv) for the CT imaging preceding sialography (N= 39) was significantly greater than that calculated radiation dose (0.14 mSv) for one‐gland sialography (N= 42) (p< 0.001).

Diagnostic submandibular sialography is often therapeutic and is performed with limited radiation exposure. Prospective study is ongoing to provide more detailed evaluation of the therapeutic impact of this procedure.

The use of infusion sialography under fluoroscopic visualization has diminished at many institutions despite technical advances in sialography and duct cannulation [1]. This paradigm shifts away from the use of infusion sialography has been linked to the expanded use of ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance (MR) imaging, and more recently by MR sialography and sialendoscopy [2].

Sialography may refer to a number of radiological examinations targeting the salivary ductal system. Infusion sialography with duct cannulation was first reported in 1913 and is accomplished through instilling contrast medium into Stensen's or Wharton's duct to obtain images captured by techniques that include plain film x‐rays, fluoroscopy, ultrasound, conventional CT, and cone beam CT [3,4,5]. MR sialography was introduced in the mid‐1990s as a technique permitting salivary duct imaging without duct cannulation by employing the patient's own saliva within the gland as the contrast agent [6].

Despite Bertin and colleagues characterizing sialography as an “irradiating, invasive procedure,” the description by Kandula and colleagues as a “noninvasive modality” is more consistent with the impression of many of our patients who often equate the process as similar in discomfort to placement of a peripheral IV [7,8]. Contemporary infusion sialography is widely recognized as providing the greatest detail in ductal imaging. Despite its perceived value, infusion sialography has been acknowledged as underutilized due to difficulties in coordinating schedules between specialists expert in duct cannulation and those performing the radiographic imaging [9].

Support for the application of sialography as not only diagnostic but also therapeutic has been promoted through its success as the primary management modality for juvenile recurrent parotitis [10,11,12,13]. The therapeutic value of infusion sialography for other salivary disorders presenting with salivary pain and swelling was reported 62 years ago by Eisenbud and Cranin. These investigators identified symptomatic improvement following submandibular sialograms in 72% of the 28 patients studied [14]. Other reports identifying the therapeutic value of infusion sialography have been limited to case reports and small case series [15,16].

To date, there has been no large contemporary series investigating the therapeutic utility of infusion submandibular sialography. Review of our experience employing contemporary infusion sialography of the submandibular gland is designed to assess its therapeutic impact and to address technical considerations including radiation exposure.

This project was approved by the University of Iowa Institutional Review Board (Protocol #201909820). Review identified a total of 590 sialograms performed at a single institution between April 2008 and November 2024, with 135 of these addressing the submandibular gland, representing 125 patients. Some patients were evaluated with repeated sialograms in their management, and others received concurrent bilateral sialograms. Each sialogram was treated as a separate event for the purposes of analysis in this study.

Through chart review of the 135 submandibular sialograms performed, the 67 identified with a documented symptomatic response were included in our analysis. The excluded sialograms (n= 68) were removed due to the absence of recorded symptomatic response (n= 63), distal ductal stenosis sufficient to prevent cannulation (n= 3), steroid infusion performed concurrently with the sialogram (n= 1), and open ductoplasty performed at the time of sialogram (n= 1) (Figure1).

Case selection criteria. Patient case selection process highlighting criteria for exclusion and inclusion in this study.

Symptomatic response was determined from the chart review of the patients' recorded impressions of pain, swelling, or both. Documentation considered adequate for inclusion was defined as a clinic note or phone contact recording the patient's account of the change in their symptoms after their sialogram. All patient records were reviewed to assess demographics as well as medical history, sialogram details (date, laterality, clinical indications), procedure details (angiocatheter size used, pre‐procedural antibiotics), and follow‐up visits as well as subsequent interventions directed to the salivary glands.

To assess comparative radiation exposure, records for the 67 selected sialograms were analyzed. The dose area product (DAP) for 1 gland and 2 gland sialograms was extracted along with the dose length product (DLP) of the head and neck CT that the majority of patients received prior to their sialogram. Not all imaging studies had a DLP or DAP recorded, and these were excluded from review. Among these 67 patients, the recorded CT DLP was available for 39. Recorded DAP was available for 42 single gland sialograms and for 12 two‐gland sialograms. Patients that did not have a CT DLP recorded were not consistently the same ones that did not have a sialogram DAP recorded, and vice versa. The DLP or DAP values were converted to an effective radiation dose (reported in mSv) using standardized conversion coefficients [18,19].

Infusion sialography is a commonly performed procedure at our institution and is facilitated by coordination between radiology and otolaryngology. The majority of sialograms in this review were done for the assessment of submandibular pain and/or swelling in the absence of an identifiable stone on ultrasound and/or CT. The submandibular sialograms that were rarely performed for sialolithiasis were done due to inconclusive CT imaging or concern for ductal irregularities associated with previous stone management.

All patients were prescribed a standard 3‐day course of anti‐staphylococcal antibiotics to begin the morning of the sialogram. Most commonly, this was amoxicillin‐clavulanate modified by medication allergies and patient preference. Patients were instructed to arrive for their sialogram well fed and well hydrated. All sialograms were performed in the radiology fluoroscopy suite as a joint effort between otolaryngology and radiology. Immediately prior to the sialogram, patients underwent an oral rinse with dilute betadine. This preventative measure was initiated as a response to the COVID‐19 pandemic and continued as standard practice thereafter.

Following placement of a gauze sponge with topical application of 2% viscous lidocaine to the floor of the mouth, the patient is positioned supine on the fluoroscopy table with the otolaryngologist seated at the head of the patient. The microscope is used to identify the opening to the submandibular duct at the floor of the mouth—often facilitated by gland massage to produce saliva when present. The duct orifice is cannulated with a 0.015 in. Guidewire, when possible, and followed by placement of a 24‐ or 22‐gauge angiocatheter over the wire employing the modified Seldinger technique. When the duct orifice is too small to accommodate the guidewire, the opening is frequently dilated with a Turner needle and less frequently cannulated via a tapered 4–0 Prolene suture over which a 26‐gauge angiocatheter is placed. Once the duct is cannulated, the guidewire is removed, and the cannula is connected to a syringe containing contrast after ensuring the hub of the cannula is filled with either saliva or the contrast agent to avoid bubbles in the system. The cannula is surrounded by a gauze sponge, and the patient is instructed to bite down on the gauze to secure the cannula.

Imaging is performed under videofluoroscopic control with iopamidol (Isovue‐370 (Bracco Diagnostics, Milan, Italy)) infusion to record both still and dynamic images. To image the most distal anatomy of the submandibular duct, the radiologist removes the cannula while continuing to inject contrast with video imaging, termed the “Maley Maneuver” [1]. Following removal of the catheter, the patient is provided with lemon juice to assist gland massage in expelling remaining contrast from the duct system and is also provided water for an oral rinse. Final imaging follows with a single, post‐sialogram anteroposterior image to identify the degree of contrast clearance.

Following completion of the imaging, video and still images are reviewed with the patients and family conjointly by the radiologist and otolaryngologist. Included in the review are observations by the otolaryngologist regarding anatomic findings of the duct at the time of microscopic cannulation, including clinical evidence for distal stricture identified during cannulation as well as the patient's observation of the type and location of discomfort incurred. Discussion of management is done immediately after in the Otolaryngology clinic, where assessment of the early response to the procedure is commonly recorded.

Data were analyzed using RStudio v4.4.1 (Boston, MA). Categorical data was analyzed using either Pearson's Chi‐squared test or Fisher's exact test, depending on sample size. Numerical data were analyzed using a Wilcoxon rank sum test, Wilcoxon rank sum exact test, or Kruskal‐Wallis rank sum test, depending on the number of groups being analyzed.p‐values below 0.05 were considered statistically significant.

Among the 67 included submandibular sialograms, the majority (87%) were performed in female patients with an overall median age of 55 years. Eighteen percent of sialograms were associated with a history of radioactive iodine treatment, and 6% were associated with a diagnosis of Sjogren's syndrome. Eighteen percent of cases (12/67) reported an autoimmune disorder other than Sjogren's disease and included: rheumatoid arthritis (N= 5), psoriasis (N= 1), polymyalgia rheumatica (N= 1), Graves' disease (N= 1), granulomatosis with polyangiitis (N= 1), undifferentiated connective tissue disease (N= 1), celiac disease (N= 1), and ankylosing spondylitis (N= 1) (Table1).

Note:Continuous variables are reported as a median, followed by the first and third quartiles in parentheses. Binary variables are recorded as the total number of patients with that characteristic, followed by the percentage of total patients.

Indications for sialography in this group included pain (6/67), swelling (23/67), or both (38/67). Symptomatic improvement following sialography was reported in 67% of cases (45/67).

There was no significant difference in age, gender, sialogram laterality, or presenting symptoms between patients who reported symptomatic relief versus those who did not (Table2). Approximately one‐half of the patients in this cohort (33/67) had clinical or sialographic evidence suggestive of a distal stricture. In patients with a distal stricture visualized on sialography, 25/32 (78%) reported symptomatic improvement compared to improvement in 20/35 (57%) of patients without a distal stricture (p= 0.049).

Follow‐up characteristics of patients with improved and unchanged symptoms.

Note:Continuous variables are reported as a median, followed by the first and third quartiles in parentheses. Binary variables are recorded as the total number of patients with that characteristic, followed by the percentage of total patients.p‐values compare the prevalence of the patient factors, procedure details, and follow‐up characteristics between patients who reported symptomatic relief and those that reported no symptomatic relief.

There was no significant difference in the size of angiocatheter used in the sialogram or adherence to pre/peri‐procedural antibiotics between patients who reported symptomatic improvement and those who did not (p= 0.10 andp> 0.9, respectively). No infectious complications following the procedure were identified. Patients with no improvement in their symptoms had a slightly shorter length of follow‐up appointment (p= 0.3). Among the patients reporting improvement after sialography, 7/45 had no follow‐up beyond meeting immediately after the sialogram on the day of the procedure. The remaining 38 had follow‐up ranging from 9 days to 729 days, with a median of 95.5 days.

Complete symptomatic relief from pain, swelling, or both was reported in 26 of the 67 patients (39%) representing 26 of the 45 (58%) who had reported any degree of symptomatic relief. This comparative degree of symptomatic relief (partial versus complete) was derived from records of the patients' reported impression of their symptoms. Partial symptomatic relief was defined as continued symptoms occurring less frequently, lasting less time, or less severe in their character.

Among those who reported symptomatic improvement following their sialogram, there was no significant difference in gender, age, sialogram laterality, or the type of symptoms (pain, swelling, or both) between those who experienced complete symptomatic relief and those who experienced only partial symptomatic relief (Table3). Patients with a distal stricture on sialogram were found to report complete symptomatic relief more frequently (18/25, 72%) when compared to patients with an alternative diagnosis (8/20, 40%) (p= 0.003).

Characteristics of patients with complete versus partial symptomatic relief.

Note:Continuous variables are reported as a median, followed by the first and third quartiles in parentheses. Binary variables are recorded as the total number of patients with that characteristic, followed by the percentage of total patients.p‐values compare the prevalence of the patient factors, procedure details, and follow‐up characteristics between patients who reported symptomatic relief and those that reported no symptomatic relief.

Time to follow‐up after sialography was 64 days among those who reported complete symptomatic relief and slightly longer at 93 days in those who reported partial symptomatic relief (p= 0.5). The length of symptomatic relief after undergoing sialography was a minimum of 96 days in patients with full symptomatic relief and a minimum of 130 days in patients with partial symptomatic relief (p= 0.6).

Patients reporting complete symptomatic relief were significantly less likely to undergo additional salivary intervention (p= 0.019). Only 15% of patients with complete symptomatic relief underwent additional intervention versus 47% of patients with partial symptomatic relief. Following the initial sialogram, patients underwent a variety of additional interventions to address their symptoms, including in‐office steroid insufflation under local anesthesia, sialendoscopy with or without gland resection under general anesthesia, and repeat sialography. There was no significant difference between the type of additional intervention between patients who reported partial or complete symptomatic relief.

Representative cases of different degrees of symptomatic improvement are provided in the supplement. Case number 1 describes a patient with a distal stricture visualized on sialography who reported complete symptomatic relief and did not require additional intervention (FigureS1). A second case of proximal stricture demonstrated partial relief after sialography. This patient failed subsequent treatment with sialendoscopy with stricture dilation to ultimately receive successful treatment with in‐office botulinum toxin injections (FigureS2).

Review of the calculated effective radiation dosage demonstrated that patients with single gland sialography received a median dose of 0.14 mSv compared to two‐gland sialography (0.21 mSv) (Table4). These values were significantly smaller than that of a CT scan of the head and neck, which delivered a median of 1.94 mSv of radiation (p< 0.001).

Note:Variables are reported as a median, followed by the first and third quartiles.p‐value represents the comparison of radiation dose and fluoroscopy time (if applicable) for CT head/neck, 1 gland sialography, and 2 gland sialography.

Drage and colleagues performed a prospective study of the discomfort incurred during parotid (N= 37) or submandibular (N= 35) sialography in patients who self‐rated pain and swelling before the procedure (baseline), 1 h after, 1 day after, and 2 days after the sialogram. Although pain was scored significantly higher at 1 h post‐sialogram, the pain was unexpectedly found to be significantly lower than baseline 2 days afterwards. These investigators concluded that this beneficial effect from sialography could result from the antiseptic effect of iodinated contrast used with an “irrigant effect of the sialogram” to “wash out small obstructions” [20].

The recognized therapeutic effect of diagnostic infusion sialography is supported by our study identifying that 67% of evaluated submandibular sialograms produced symptomatic relief. Our analysis suggests that patients with distal strictures were more likely to report symptomatic relief than others. Of the 32 patients with a radiographic diagnosis of distal stricture, 25 (78%) reported symptomatic relief compared to 57% of 35 patients with an alternative diagnosis. This finding supports the likely additional benefit derived from the mechanical dilation that occurs during cannulation in patients with narrowing in the distal duct. More proximal ductal narrowing may also be addressed through “hydrodilation” as proposed by Squires to routinely occur in the process of sialendoscopy [21].

The clinical process of performing the sialogram offers useful information separate from the review of the imaging. Clinical insight is provided by querying the patient about the location and quality of the discomfort incurred during gland infusion. Should the location and quality of the presenting complaint differ from that incurred with the sialogram, an alternate, non‐salivary etiology for the symptoms may be entertained—such as temporomandibular joint syndrome, recurrent angioedema, or atypical facial pain. Additional clinical information may be identified during the cannulation that identifies and relieves a distal stricture that, as a result, is no longer apparent on the sialogram imaging. As a result, a sialogram may be reported as “normal” despite symptoms resulting from the distal stricture successfully dilated immediately before imaging.

The antimicrobial properties of the iodinated contrast as well as the action of “flushing out” the gland may remove the bacteria and debris associated with chronic sialadenitis and implicated in the formation of sialoliths. Mechanisms for sialolith formation remain controversial, with proteomic studies implicating bacterial infection in sialolith formation [22]. Instillation of iodinated contrast has been reported to potentially decrease the risk of future bacterial re‐colonization and resultant recurrent sialadenitis [23].

The widely held perspective that sialography is an invasive and painful procedure that is difficult to perform has contributed to its decreased utilization. However, published studies suggest that many patients experience no discomfort with the process. Through study of sialograms in 24 patients, Kalk and colleagues identified that the majority of subjects reported no discomfort during the procedure (N= 16) and no discomfort after the procedure (N= 15) [24]. In our experience, patients tolerate the procedure well, with many reporting that the discomfort associated with a sialogram was comparable to the insertion of a peripheral IV catheter.

Mettler et al. identified that radiation safety organizations approximate an average of 2.4 mSv of radiation exposure from naturally occurring, background radiation across the United States [25]. These investigators also reported the annual additional per‐capita effective radiation dose due to medical procedures in the United States to be 3.0 mSv in 2006; 1.47 mSv or 49% of the effective dose due to medical procedures, was attributed to CT imaging, compared to 0.33 mSv (11%) due to radiographic (plain x‐ray) and fluoroscopic procedures.

The diagnostic workup for salivary symptoms frequently involves CT scans of the head and neck soft tissues. Our results demonstrate that the radiation delivered to patients with the CT scan preceding the sialogram was significantly greater than the sialogram alone. When done as a unilateral procedure, the sialogram accounted for approximately 7% of the cumulative dose of the two studies.

Our study indicates that sialography is done with low radiation exposure and has therapeutic benefits that may extend to the point that patients may not require additional interventions.

A limitation of this study is its reliance on retrospective chart review relying on clinical documentation of changes to symptoms associated with sialography. To address these limitations, a prospective study assessing symptomatic relief and evolution of symptoms in patients undergoing both submandibular and parotid sialography is ongoing. The updated patient‐centered sialadenitis instrument (SPIT) will be employed to address symptoms before and after sialography [26].

All patients in our study were prescribed a 3‐day course of anti‐staphylococcal antibiotics to begin on the morning of the sialogram, with 92.3% (59/65) reported taking antibiotics as prescribed. The potentially confounding variable of antimicrobial treatment may artificially inflate the rate of symptomatic improvement in this sample.