Blastomycosis is a serious fungal disease affecting humans and animals. It is typically caused by the thermally dimorphic fungus,Blastomyces dermatitidis. In this report, we describe an infection caused by the cryptic fungal species,Blastomyces gilchristii, in a tiger (Panthera tigris).

All relevant data used in this study are presented within the manuscript. The DNA sequences from the isolate recovered in this study are available through BioProject PRJNA767594 (SRR16127079).

Blastomycosis is a serious fungal disease of humans and animals primarily caused by the thermally dimorphic fungal speciesBlastomyces dermatitidis[1]. While most prevalent in North America (endemic in the Ohio and Mississippi River valleys and around the Great Lakes), its geographic distribution is expanding globally and exhibiting dynamic changes [2]. Most infections are asymptomatic, but in some hosts, infections can result in severe respiratory infections, skin lesions and multisystemic manifestations [1]. The disease is very similar to other dimorphic fungal infections caused byHistoplasmaandCoccidioidomyces. The diagnosis of blastomycosis typically involves identifying unique morphological fungal features using cytology, histopathology and culture. A commercial enzyme immunoassay (MiraVista Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN) that detects the fungal cell wall component galactomannan in urine or serum is a useful noninvasive assay for the diagnosis of blastomycosis, and the cross-reactivity withHistoplasmais common [1]. PCR-based methods exist, but their availability is currently limited to specialized reference laboratories. Amphotericin B or the azole group of drugs is commonly used for treating blastomycosis. Blastomycosis in the USA is only reportable in a few endemic states, so there is a lack of information from other areas [2]. Although blastomycosis was assumed to be caused by a single species,B. dermatitidis, with recent advances in sequencing, scientists have identified otherBlastomycesspecies that can cause infections [3,4]. In this report, we describe an infection caused by a cryptic fungal species,Blastomyces gilchristii, in a tiger (Panthera tigris).

An adult female tiger was presented to the University of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine teaching hospital with an acute onset of neurological signs. This tiger was born in Tennessee, and no travel history was reported. The tiger was seen previously at the University of Tennessee College of Veterinary Medicine in March 2009 for suspected bite wounds and in April 2011 for a laparoscopic ovariectomy. A complete blood count and chemistry and urine analysis were unremarkable except for the presence of white blood cells in the urine. The patient was treated with cefovecin and fluconazole empirically, with no improvement, and the patient’s condition quickly deteriorated and was euthanized.

Major necropsy findings included multifocal nodules in the lungs (Fig. 1a), moderate acute multifocal suppurative dermatitis and moderate regionally extensive subcutaneous oedema. In addition, multifocal thyroid follicular cysts and adenomas were observed. On histopathology, areas of the cerebrum were expanded and replaced by macrophages, neutrophils, plasma cells, cellular debris and intrahistiocytic and free 15–25 µm yeasts with thick double-contoured walls and broad-based budding with occasional basophilic nuclear material. Similarly, within the nodules, the lung parenchyma was effaced by inflammation and yeast cells as described above (Fig. 1b). The final diagnosis was disseminated mycosis with encephalitis and pneumonia.

Lung tissue culture on Inhibitory Mould Agar at 30 °C yielded tan, glabrous fungal colonies with a prickly centre after 2 weeks of incubation. Microscopic examination after lactophenol aniline blue staining revealed septate hyphae with variable-sized lollipop-like conidia. Yeast-phase conversion at 35 °C required multiple subcultures only on unconventional media (7H11 slant). PCR amplification was inconclusive. MICs for the isolate were determined using antifungal susceptibility testing performed on the isolate by an outside laboratory. The observed MICs are fluconazole (2.0), itraconazole (<=0.03), posaconazole (0.06) and voriconazole (0.06).

The characteristics of this isolate are somewhat atypical, and the isolate was not identified by conventional PCR; we conducted whole-genome sequencing using the Oxford Nanopore Technologies MinION platform. Sequence reads were massively aligned against the nonredundant GenBank database, with the vast majority of matches obtained againstB. gilchristii. Additionally, more than 98% of the reads could be mapped unambiguously and with almost complete coverage of theB. gilchristiireference genome (strainSLH14081). The sequence reads were submitted to the NCBI SRA and are accessible through BioProject PRJNA767594.

BlastomycesandHistoplasmainfections are prevalent in Tennessee and are most commonly diagnosed in our laboratory by antigen detection tests offered through a commercial laboratory. The number of positive cases from the years 2020–2024 is shown inTable 1.

Blastomycosis in humans and animals is usually caused by the dimorphic fungiB. dermatitidis, a pathogen with a wide geographic range in North America. The genusBlastomycesbelongs to the familyAjellomycetaceaeand the order Onygenales. The genus was initially believed to comprise only a single species,B. dermatitidis. However, multiple additional species have since been identified, including the cryptic speciesB. gilchristii.B. gilchristiihas been isolated in Ontario, Wisconsin and Minnesota, mainly from human, canine and environmental samples [5]. The natural habitat ofB. dermatitidismay be restricted to a particular microenvironment, and similarly,B. gilchristiimay also have hyperendemic hotspots [6]. In addition,B. gilchristii, originally identified asB. dermatitidis, was reported to be highly virulent in immunocompetent humans and mice [5]. Blastomycosis has been previously documented in nondomestic cats in East Tennessee; however, infection withB. gilchristiiin humans or animals has not yet been described in this part of the USA.B. gilchristiiwas found to be a genetically different monophyletic clade withinB. dermatitidis. Other species withinBlastomyceshave been discovered, namely,Blastomyces percursusin the Middle East and Africa,Blastomyces helicusin the western USA and Canada andB. emzantsiin the Middle East and India, and they are all believed to be confined to particular geographic regions [3,4]. Cryptic species have also been found in other dimorphic pathogenic fungi such asHistoplasmaandCoccidioides[7]. Although the ecological niche of blastomycosis is not well understood, previous studies have suggested thatB. gilchristiiis limited to the northern USA and Canada and is not detected in the southern USA [8]. Isolating this organism in the southeastern USA suggests that its geographic span is wider than previously suggested.

A recent report suggested thatB. gilchristiiis likely responsible for a high proportion of clinical blastomycosis cases in humans [6].B. gilchristiihas also been reported to be a cause of fatal acute respiratory syndrome in humans [9]. Genomic sequencing is an ideal strategy to identify case clusters caused by cryptic pathogens and may provide valuable insights into the epidemiology of these infections.

Cryptic fungal species, while morphologically indistinguishable from their known relatives, are genetically distinct and represent a significant yet often underappreciated cause of fungal diseases [5]. Cryptic fungal pathogens in multiple fungal genera have been reported, and the clinical impact of these pathogens is not well understood. Identifying a cryptic pathogenic fungal species as described in this report can be important to study changing patterns of prevalence and risk factors, and possible treatment options. Fungal diseases such as blastomycosis and histoplasmosis are prevalent in canine and feline species in our region, and these animals can also act as sentinels for various infectious diseases. Habitat and antifungal susceptibility patterns may be different for these undescribed species. It has been suggested that there are different virulence factors associated with the different species ofBlastomycesin humans [10]. Application of whole-genome sequencing followed by phylogenetic and population genetic approaches is desirable to understand the evolutionary differences between isolates and their potential impact on pathogenesis. These approaches can be applied in public health settings for evaluating trends in prevalence, pathogen evolution and emergence. Assessing and documenting infection trends and environmental prevalence may provide valuable information on disease characteristics and incidence.