The presence of invasiveAnopheles stephensihas been confirmed from field studies in several urban, peri-urban and rural areas of Ethiopia. Recent studies have shown that these mosquitoes are resistant to common public health insecticides, namely pyrethroids (deltamethrin, permethrin, and alpha-cypermethrin), Carbamates (bendiocarb and propoxur), and organophosphates (pirimiphos-methyl). This study aimed to assess the susceptibility of populations ofAn. stephensifrom Ethiopia to novel chemical insecticides recently recommended for vector control, namely, broflanilide (a meta-diamide targeting GABA receptors), clothianidin (a neonicotinoid disrupting nerve signals), and chlorfenapyr (a pyrrole disrupting respiratory pathways ), as well as pyriproxyfen (an insect growth regulator mimicking an insect juvenile hormone which results in adult mosquito emergence inhibition), which is recommended for mosquito larval control. The WHO bottle bioassay test was conducted to assess the susceptibility level of populations ofAn. stephensireared from larval collections exposed to recommended diagnostic doses of broflanilide, clothianidin, chlorfenapyr, and pyriproxyfen at 18 µg/bottle, 10 µg/bottle 100 µg/bottle, and 100 µg/bottle, respectively. The solvent used was either a mixture of Mero and acetone or acetone alone. Control bottles were treated with solvent only. Mortality was recorded 24 hours post- exposure for all the insecticides and continued to 72 hours post- exposure for chlorfenapyr and pyriproxyfen. The effect of pyriproxyfen on mosquito fecundity (oviposition) was also assessed over four days after 72 hours holding period.Mortality rates ofAn. stephensi24 hrs post-exposure to broflanilide and clothianidin was 100% (100/100), while mortality rates at 24 and 48 hrs post-exposure to chlorfenapyr was 66% (66/100), and 100% (100/100), respectively indicating high susceptibility of populations ofAn stephensito the three candidate chemical insecticides. Mortality rates ofAn. stephensi24hr , 48hr and 72 hr post-exposure to pyriproxyfen was 0%, 11% (11/100), and 15% (15/100), respectively. There was no mosquito mortality in the controls. Moreover, oviposition inhibition rate in adult female ofAn. stephensiexposed to pyriproxyfen was 100% while oviposition rate in adult female ofAn.stephensiin the control was 100%.The study revealed that populations ofAn. stephensifrom Ethiopia were fully susceptible to the three novel chemical insecticides (broflanilide, chlorfenapyr and clothianidin) and an insect growth regulator ( Pyriproxyfen) resulted in complete oviposition inhibition. These findings suggest that the tested candidate chemical insecticides and insect growth regulator (IGR) can be used for indoor residual spraying (IRS) and larviciding, respectively for the control of an invasive malaria vectorAn. stephensiin Ethiopia.

Malaria is a parasitic infectious disease transmitted by bite of an infective femaleAnophelesmosquito1. It remains a major global health problem, 263 million malaria cases and 597,000 deaths were reported globally in 2024, and 94% of the cases and 95% of deaths were from high burden countries2. The top five high burden countries in Africa are Nigeria, Democratic Republic of Congo, Uganda, Ethiopia and Mozambique , which account for half of the global malaria cases2,3.

The 2024 World Health Organization (WHO) global report also indicated increased malaria cases of 11 million compared to the 2023 report. This is because some endemic countries experienced increased cases among which Ethiopia was one of the countries that contributed to more than 3.6% of the global malaria cases2,3.

Malaria in Ethiopia is caused primarily by infection withPlasmodium falciparumandP.vivax4and vector control interventions are the main efforts to control the transmission of malaria targettingAnopheles arabiensis, the main malaria vector in Ethiopia, as well the secondary vectorsAnopheles funestus,Anopheles pharoensis, andAnopheles nili5.

The progress made in decreasing malaria cases could be jeopardized by the recent introduction of the South Asian urban mosquito,Anopheles stephensi, in the Horn of Africa6, particularly in the light of its reported involvement in malaria transmission in Ethiopia7–9.

The presence ofAn. stephensiin Ethiopia was reported in 2016 from Eastern Ethiopia for the first time and further spread of this species has been reported from different areas of Ethiopia10–12. Several studies indicated that populations ofAn. stephensifrom Arabian Peninsula, Asia, and the Horn of Africa including Ethiopia developed resistance to pyrethroids, carbamates, organophosphates, and organochlorines2,3,8,13–16.

The main vector control strategies are dependent on pyrethroids that usually used to treat insecticide nets (ITNs) and indoor residual spraying (IRS).The frequent use of pyrethroids has caused a selection pressure and almost all main malaria vectors have developed a resistance3,17,18. Resistance to pyrethroids in mosquitoes mainly arises from two different mechanisms: target site insensitivity and metabolic-based resistance. Target-site resistance occurs when mutations develop in the voltage-gated sodium channel (vgsc) receptors or altered acetylcholinesterase (Ache) of mosquito neurons,preventing the insecticide’s ability to disrupt sodium channel that could usually result in paralysis (a phenomena known as knockdown) or change the active site that the insecticide would bind19. Such muations as L1014F has been reported inCulexspecies andAn.arabiensis,Ace-1gene (N177D), L1014F and A296S (for the first time), inAn.stephensifrom Ethiopia14,15,20,21. In metabolic resistance, the level of enzymes may increase in insects, which break down the Insecticide active ingredients more efficiently and make it ineffective. Metabolic resistance occurs when elevated activity of enzyme like esterases, mono-oxygenases (P450s), and glutathione S-transferases (GSTs),which causes sufficient amount of insecticide to be sequestered or detoxified before it reaches the target site in nervous system to impair the toxicity of the insecticide19.Oxidase mediated insecticide resistance8,absence ofkdrand and presence of non-target site insecticide resistance13,21, low frequency ofGSTe2genes15, and esterase mediated pyrethroid insecticide resistanc mechanisms were reported inAn,stephensifrom Eastern Ethiopia22.

New novel insecticides with different modes of actions than classical insecticides with neurotoxins are recommended2,23–25. New chemical insecticides (Broflanilide, chlorfenapyr and clothianidin) and an insect growth regulator (pyriproxyfen) are novel in their mode of action to combat insect pests including those resistant to classical insecticides2,24,26,27.

Chlorfenapyr, clothianidin, and broflanilide represent novel insecticides with distinct modes of action for the control of resistant insects: chlorfenapyr disrupts ATP production or respiratory pathways in insects , reducing cross-resistance24,26,28clothianidin overstimulates the nervous system leading to paralysis and death of mosquito; and broflanilide acts as non competitive antagonist that inhibits GABA activity, causing hyperexcitation and death26,27,29. Pyriproxyfen, an insect growth regulator, is not directly insecticidal but mimics juvenile hormone to inhibit mosquito development and reproduction, potentially reducing vector populations in the next generation26,30.The World Malaria Report recommends pyrethroid-pyriproxyfen nets, combining an insecticide with a growth regulator to disrupt mosquito growth and reproduction2.

To effectively control the invasive malaria vectorAn. stephensiand manage insecticide resistance in Ethiopia, a study was conducted in Eastern Ethiopia to assess the susceptibility ofAn. stephensipopulations to chlorfenapyr, clothianidin, broflanilide, and pyriproxyfen, as well as the effect of pyriproxyfen on oviposition rate.

The susceptibility tests were conducted in Dire Dawa City Fig.1.31, 515 km east of Addis Ababa (~1000m altitude). This is an arid, rapidly urbanizing hub and is a key commercial and transport center with trade links to Djibouti. Across the site are many water storage cisterns and overhead tanks for domestic and construction use, which serve as primary breeding sites forAn. stephensi, An. gambiae s.l.,and Culicine mosquito larvae9,32,33.

Map of the study area in Dire Dawa city, 2024.This map was created with ArcGIS Pro 3.5 by Esri.(www.esri.com).

Anopheleslarvae and pupae were collected with a 350 ml dipper and transferred to a jar. Pupae were placed in beakers inside a cage for adult emergence, typically within 2–3 days. Adults were fed a 10% sugar solution and kept at 27 ± 2°C and 75 ± 10% humidity34.

Morphological identification of mosquitoes was performed using standard key ,after morphological identification, the sub-samples (200 randomly selected mosquitoes) were shipped to the genomics laboratory of Jimma University, Tropical Infectious Diseases Research Center (TIDRC) for molecular tests using qPCR35,36.

The 2022 WHO guideline was followed for bottle bioassay tests34. Bottles were coated with active ingredients dissolved in solvents: acetone for chlorfenapyr and pyriproxyfen, and an acetone-Mero mix for clothianidin and broflanilide. The test concentrations were 100µg/bottle for chlorfenapyr, 100µg/ bottle for pyriproxyfen, 18µg/bottle for broflanilide and 10µg/ bottle for clothianidin. Four bottles per active ingredient and control bottles coated with solvents only were used. The test insecticides (AI) and solvents (Mero & Acetone) were obtained from Centers for Diseases and Control (CDC, Atalanta, USA) and pyriproxyfen from Tropical and Infectious Diseases Research Center (TIDRC) of Jimma University..

For testing each of the novel chemical insecticides (broflanilide, chlorfenapyr and clothianidin) and their controls, a batch of twenty-five adult non-blood fed femaleAn. stephensi, aged 3-5 days were transferred to six paper cups of which two of the paper cups that contained each twenty-fiveAn. stephensiwere labeled as controls 1 and 2, and the remaining four paper cups were labeled as insecticide replicates 1, 2, 3 and 4. Each batch of the mosquitoes were then transferred to its labeled exposure and control bottles (coated with Acetone (chlorfenapyr) or Mero-acetone (broflanilide and clothianidin))34.

In the case of pyriproxyfen, equal numbers of mosquitoes were used for both test and control (100 each). It is essential that female mosquitoes be inseminated and blood-fed before exposutre to pyriproxyfen30.To maximize insemination and increase oviposition sucess, plenty of vigorous maleAnophelesmosquitoes were mixed in the cage containing starved femaleAnophelesmosquitoes before insecticide testing.The laboratory kept rabbit were shaved and holded on the cage that contained the adult mosquitoes and starved adult female were blood-fed, using direct feeding with rabit blood, before the test for one hour and all the two-hundred fed mosquitoes in a batch of 25 per paper cup were exposed to respective coated replicates (pyriproxyfen and controls coated with acetone)30,37. In all the tests, mosquitoes were exposed for 60 minutes, and immediately after the knockdown mosquito were recorded, the mosquitoes were re-transferred to labeled paper cups for holding periods of 24 , 48 and 72 hrs38. For the insect growth regulator (IGR) follow-up, holding period was extended to seven days30. For the purpose of ovary dissection, oviposition and staging via Christopher’s method under high power magnification (40×-100×) under dissecting microscope39–41, individual mosquitoes were transferred to each paper cup containing rinsed filter paper and cotton inside the bottom, followed by egg oviposition for seven days.

The temperature and relative humidity were monitored with a thermo-hygrometer during a 60-minute exposure, reset for a 24-hour holding period, and extended to 72 hours for pyriproxyfen. Testing conditions were maintained at 25–29° C using a heater and 65–85% humidity with a humidifier. Post-exposure, mosquitoes were provided a 10% sugar solution via cotton.

DNA was extracted from whole body of sampleAn.stephensimosquito using the Chelex ® 100 Resin extraction Tissue kit (Fisher Scientific, USA)42.

The real time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) was performed for each individual mosquito with the reagent components and concentrations for the qPCR assays were total volume of 12 µl that is mixture of 6µl Fast Advanced Master Mix 2× (MM2×) (ThermoFisher, USA), 0.5 µl of AnSt Fam labeled (FAM) and AnAr (VIC) each, and 0.4 µl for each primer ofAn.stephensiandAn.gambiaes.l with forward (Stq-F) , reverse ( Stq-R) oligonucleotides, forward(AnAr-F) and reverse ( AnAr-R) respectively43,1.4 μl PCR water and 2 μl of isolated DNA template.

The qPCR protocol was as follows:50 °C for 2 min, 95 °C for 2 min, 95 °C for 3 sec, 60 °C for 30 s with total 45 cycles. All primers used are listed in Table1.

Samples were amplified using QuantaStudioTM3 system (Applied Biosystems by Thermo Fisher Scientific,Cat No.272320578,USA) with QuantaStudioTMDesign and Analysis Software V1.6.1 , plot graphs were automatically generated for amplified samples.

The results of the phenotypic bioassay were interpreted according to the WHO 2022 recommendations i.e.the mosquito population is susceptible to an insecticide if mortality is ≥ 98%. However, if mortality ranges from 90-97% possible resistance is expected, and if mortality is less than 90%, resistance is confirmed. The percentage mortality was calculated for both the treatment and control arms. If the control mortality is <5%, no correction of test results is necessary. If the control mortality is ≥5% and ≤20%, the test mortality should be corrected with the control mortality via Abbott’s formula34.

The revised WHO 2022 guidelines for evaluating the sterilizing effect of pyriproxyfen (in terms of oviposition inhibition at the end of day 7 after 1 hr of exposure) states that the oviposition rate (egg-laying rate) is calculated as the proportion of females that lay eggs out of the total females chambered after the 72 hrs holding period.While,oviposition inhibition rate (egg-laying inhibition rate) is the calculated by dividing the percent reduction in oviposition rate in treated (pyriproxyfen exposed) females by the percent reduction in oviposition rate in controls. If the degree of inhibition of oviposition < 90%, the mosquito population is resistant, If the degree of inhibition is between 90 and 97% there is possible resistance and if the degree of inhibition is ≥ 98% the population is susceptible. The percentage oviposition and oviposition inhibition were calculated and comparisions were drawn among pyriproxyfen exposed and non-exposed controls.More over, Christopher’s ovary staging criteria was used to classify ovaries as unfertilized (Stages I-III) when there are coiled traceolar skeins in ovary and absence of ovariol sac or dialation. Fertilized ovaries (Stages late III- V) are characterized by fully formation of ova with developed floats,visualization of retained eggs, presence of uncoiled tracheolar skeins in the ovary, presence of ovariole sac, dialation and presence of degenerated follicles39.

Descriptive statistics were used to interpret the relationship between mosquito mortality inAn. stephensipost-exposure to the novel insecticides and Pearson’s chi square tests were used to compare difference in the mean percentage of oviposition and oviposition inhibition among pyriproxyfen exposed and non-exposed adultAn. stephensi.

Broflanilide and clothianidin killed 100% (100/100) ofAn. stephensi24 hours post-exposure. On the other hand, mortality from chlorfenapyr was 66% (66/100), 100% (100/100) and 100% (100/100) after 24, 48 and 72 hours post-exposure, respectively as indicated in Fig.2Pyriproxyfen killed 0% (0/100), 11% (11/100), and 15% (15/100) ofAn.stephensiafter 24, 48 and 72 hours of post-exposure respectively but there was no mortality in controls (acetone and Mero-acetone treated bottles).

Mortality rates of populations ofAn. stephensi24 , 48 and 72 hrs post-exposure to broflanilide, clothianidin and chlorfenapyr in Dire Dawa, Eastern Ethiopia.

Table2shows the WHO susceptibility status cutoff values (>98% mortality) were fully achieved after 24 hrs for broflanilide and clothianidin, and after 48 hrs and 72 hrs for chlorfenapyr.

Summary of susceptibility test ofAnopheles stephensito various insecticides, Dire Dawa City, Ethiopia (2024).

Ovarial dissection at seven days after exposure indicated that pyriproxyfen (100 µg/bottle) resulted in a 100% oviposition inhibition rate inAn. stephensi,indicating susceptiblity to pyriproxyfen.However, the mortality rate at 72 hrs post-exposure was 15% (Table3).

Oviposition inhibition rates among Pyriproxyfen exposed and non-exposed populations ofAn. stephensifrom Dire Dawa, Ethiopia (2024).

*N stands for numberAn. stephensichambered, *n stands for number ofAn.stephensidissected and %- percentage ofAn. stephensiwith eggs.

In addition, the results of our findings, as per the Christopher’s staging technique, indicated that all pyriproxyfen exposed were in Stage I in which coiled tracheolar skeins were observed and lacked an ovariolar sack. In contrast, the ovaries of the controls presented, uncoiled tracheal skeins with ovariolar sack, retained eggs and fully formation of ova with floats.

No inhibitory effect of acetone were observed in controls but equal number ofAn. stephensiexposed to pyriproxyfen resulted in 100% inhibition and the ovary dissection revealed no egg production or ovule developed (Table3).

The sterilizing effect of pyriproxyfen (PPF) onAn. stephensiwas evident in the exposed groups. Pearson’s chi-square test indicated a strong correlation between pyriproxyfen exposure and oviposition inhibition (x2= 400,df= 1,p< 0.05), demonstrating that, compared with non-exposure, pyriproxyfen was more effective in inhibiting oviposition.

Moprhological analysis based on lack of laterally projecting tufts of scales on the abdomen,absence of entirely pale hindtarsus at least 2 hindtarsomers, absence of entirely dark hindtarsomer-5, white hindtarsomer-4,and presence of specled legs, presence of 3 plae bands on maxillary palps,maxillary palps with 2 pale bands very broader,spekling on palpus segment 3, 2ndmain dark area on wing vein 1 with 2 pale spots, smooth palps with three distinct pale pands, and pale spots in the maxillary palps, has suggested that femaleAnophelesspecies examined were morphologically identified asAn. stephensi.

This study revealed that populations ofAn.stephensiwere fully susceptible to three novel chemical insecticides (broflanilide, chlorfenapyr and clothianidin) from Dire Dawa, Ethiopia. This was also the first report that showed thatAn. stephensipopulations were susceptible to an insect growth regulator (pyriproxyfen) in Ethiopia.

Previous studies in Kebri Dehar and Eastern Ethiopia indicated thatAn.stephensiwas highly resistant to pyrethroids, DDT, pirimiphos-methyl and carbamates13,14,but pre-exposure to piperonylbutoxide (PBO) increases susceptibility to pyrethroids8,44.

Insecticide resistance reports in Ethiopia and Afghanistan have highlighted the high levels of insecticide resistance in the populations ofAn. stephensito pyrethroids, organophosphates, and carbamates8,13–15,44–46.To the pyrethroids, target site insensitivity mediated with West Africa knock down reistance (kdr-L1014F) were reported in Ethiopia14,20,21. Similarly, Acford et al, 202315reported two insecticide resistance markers namely deldrine resistance (rdl) genes A296S (for the first time), Ace-1-N177D and GSTe2-V189L besides the L1014F.But, the low kdr frequency and the lack of kdr mutation in permethrine resistanceAn.stephensipopulations from Dire Dawa suggested the existence of other molecular mechanisms of pyrethroid resistance in Ethiopia21. Moreover, metabolic insecticide resistance mecnahisms (elevated level of esterases,oxidases, pre-exposure to piperonylbutoxide resulted in high mortality were common inAn.stephensisamples from Ethiopia8,13–15,21,22.As an alternative to these classical insecticides, Dagg et al.47reported the use of 2% clothianidin and 100 µg/bottle chlorfenapyr putative diagnostic concentrations was an effective for monitoring of resistantAn.arabiensisin Ethiopia.

Like in the present study, populations ofAn.stephensifrom Awash and Semera sites were fully susceptible to chlorfenapyr8,48. In India, a study indicated thatAn. stephensiare susceptible to 5% chlorfenapyr impregnated paper and lack cross -resistance with other insecticides24. Similarly, Uragayala et al.49reported that resistant strains ofAn.stephensiwere more susceptible to new other necotionoid group insecticides.

Similar studies in Ethiopia and southern Benin have shown the effectiveness of chlorfenapyr (100 µg/bottle) against populations ofAn.stephensi48, and clothianidin (2% impregnated paper) against pyrethroid-resistantAn.gambiaes.l25,50.

Studies from northern Tanzania, Burkina Faso, Benin and Ethiopia have indicated prolonged residual efficacy of broflanilide (VECTRON T500) in experimental hut trials to help in control of pyrethroid-resistant malaria vectors29,51–53.

Our study , provides information on the susceptibility ofAn.stephensito broflanilide in Ethiopia and the results are consistent with those of multi-center studies by Portwood et al.54,which reported complete mortality in resistantAn. arabiensis and An. stephensiwere achieved at lower concentrations of broflanilide.

Additionally, our study revealed the sterilizing effect of pyriproxyfen, with 100% oviposition inhibition which is comparable with studies in southern Benin that reported the sterilizing effects of pyriproxyfen (99% oviposition inhibition), but these studies were conducted againstAn. gambiaes.l21,50. Regarding the sterilizing effect of pyriproxyfen onAn. stephensi, our findings were not in agreement with those of a study by Aiku et al.55, which indicated the absence of sterilizing effect of 2% pyriproxyfen onAn. stephensi. However, another study showed that pyriproxyfen effectively sterilized malaria vectors, suggesting that it could play an important role in malaria control, given its lack of reported resistance and unique mode of action56. Similar to the results of this study, a study onAn. gambiaeKisumu strain in Burkina Faso showed that exposure to pyriproxyfen treated nets caused irreversible, complete inhibition of fertility (100%)57.

This study focused on the susceptibility ofAn. stephensilarvae and pupae populations collected from artificial urban habitats in urban settings. Future research should consider expanding the study to include peri-urban and rural sites to assess potential population variation across different environmental clusters. This broader sampling could help determine if susceptibility to these insecticides varies basis of habitat type.

This study revealed that populations ofAn. stephensifrom Ethiopia were fully susceptible to the three novel chemical insecticides (Chlorfenapyr, Clothianidin, and Broflanilide).The insect growth regulator (pyriproxyfen) resulted in complete oviposition inhibition inAn. Stephensipopulations from Ethiopia. These findings suggest that the tested candidate chemical insecticides and the insect growth regulator (IGR) can be used for IRS and larviciding, respectively to control the invasive malaria vectorAn. stephensiin Ethiopia. The successful application of these novel chemical insecticides and the insect growth regulator could increase malaria control efforts, particularly in regions experiencingAn. stephensiinvasion. However, further studies on residual efficacy of these products should be conducted under semi-field conditions in different eco-epidemiological settings for control decision-making.

We would like to express our sincere gratitude to the International Center of Excellence for Malaria Research (ICMER)/NIH, University of California, Jimma University, and the Jimma University Tropical and Infectious Disease Research Center (TIDRC) for their financial support and provision of laboratory equipment and reagents. Our heartfelt thanks also go to Dr. Getachew Bokore and Mr. Mulualem Hambissa from the PMI Evolve project for their invaluable assistance with field laboratory setup. Additionally, we extend our appreciation to the Dire Dawa City Administration Health Bureau and its staff for providing the necessary information and support for this study.