Cutaneous Leishmaniasis (CL) is a vector-borne disease caused by a protozoan parasite and considered a public health challenge in many countries, including Iran. Recent research has focused on the role ofLeishmaniaRNA virus (LRV) in the pathogenesis of cutaneous and mucosal forms of leishmaniasis. This study assessed the presence of LRV2 and its genotype diversity among isolates in Ilam province, western Iran, an old focus of Zoonotic CL.

Thirty-two lesion specimens were collected from CL patients and subjected to PCR analysis using species-specific primers forLeishmaniaidentification and detection of LRV2. The amplified products were sequenced, and phylogenetic analysis was performed.

All samples were identified asL. major. The PCR showed that 4 of 32 (12.5%) clinical cultures were LRV2 positive. Phylogenetic analysis revealed high nucleotide sequence identity (96–99%) with LRV2 isolated fromL. majorstrains from Iran, Turkey, and Uzbekistan. The four sequences analyzed revealed four distinct haplotypes, with high genetic variability among the isolates.

This study provides the first identification and phylogenetic analysis of LRV2 in CL patients from western Iran and highlights the extensive genetic diversity among LRV2 isolates across different regions, which may have significant implications for disease pathogenesis, transmission patterns, and clinical manifestations.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12920-025-02198-1.

Cutaneous Leishmaniasis (CL) is a neglected vector-borne disease caused by a protozoan parasite of the Trypanosomatidae family [1]. CL is recognized as a public health concern in 98 countries worldwide, including Iran [2]. The pathogenesis of CL is complex, and influenced by various factors, including the species of the parasite, the host’s immune response, the type of sandfly, geographic location, socio-economic conditions, and access to healthcare services [3,4]. In recent years, research has increasingly focused on the role ofLeishmaniaRNA virus (LRV) as a contributing factor in the pathogens of both cutaneous and mucosal forms of leishmaniasis [5,6].

LRV is a genus of double-stranded RNA virus in the Totiviridae family [7]. These viral particles exhibit an icosahedral structure (T = pseudo 2), non-envelope, and range in diameter from approximately 30 to 50 nm [7]. The size of the viral genome varies between 4.9 and 5.3 kilobases and contains genes that code for the capsid protein (ORF2) and RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (ORF3) [8]. LRVs are categorized into two distinct types: LRV1 predominantly found in the New World, and LRV2, primarily found in the Old World [9]. Phylogenetic analysis showed that LRV1 and LRV2 exhibit a greater degree of divergence and these types share approximately 40% sequence similarity in their genomes [10].

Previous research in Iran indicates that LRV2 is predominantly found inLeishmania majorisolates, with only a few cases reported inLeishmania tropicaandLeishmania infantum[11]. Ilam province has long been recognized as a significant endemic region for the CL, in western Iran [12,13]. Previous studies have confirmed the presence of LRV2 isolates from Iran, providing a foundation for the current investigation. The objective of this study was to assess the presence of LRV2 and its genotype diversity among isolates in Ilam province, as an old focus of Zoonotic CL in Iran.

The project was found to be in accordance to the ethical principles and the national norms and standards for conducting Medical Research in Iran (IR.MAZUMS.REC.1404.009). Written informed consent was obtained from all adult participants as well as from the parents of children, in alignment with established protocols. Participant responses were systematically recorded using a structured questionnaire.

The 32 samples analyzed in this study consisted of lesion specimens collected from CL patients referred from endemic foci in Ilam province, as well as archived samples from CL patients within the same region previously stored in the biobank. The collected skin lesion samples were initially incubated in RPMI 1640 medium (Sigma Aldrich), enriched with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Gibco, Germany) to provide essential proteins and growth factors, 100 U/mL penicillin, and 100 µg/mL streptomycin (Gibco, Germany) to prevent bacterial contamination during incubation. Cryopreserved parasites from the biobank were retrieved and cultured in RPMI 1640 medium containing 20% FBS.

Genomic DNA was extracted using the Bioneer DNA extraction kit, following the manufacturer’s protocol. A specific set of primers, LITSR (5’-CTGGATCATTTTCCGATG-3’) and L5.8 S (5’-TGATACCACTTATCGCATT-3’), is then used to amplify a fragment of approximately 350 bp from the Internal Transcribed Spacer 1 (ITS1) region inLeishmaniaparasites [14]. Each amplification reaction was carried out in a final volume of 25 µL, comprising 12.5 µL of 2x Taq DNA Polymerase Master Mix RED (Ampliqon), 1 µL of each primer, 3 µL of DNA template, and 7.5 µL of Distilled Water. The PCR cycling conditions were as follows: initial denaturation at 95 °C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of denaturation at 94 °C for 30 s, annealing at 53 °C for 30 s, and extension at 72 °C for 1 min, with a final extension step at 72 °C for 5 min [14]. A 20 µL of each PCR product was subjected to enzymatic digestion with 2 µL of HaeIII at 37 °C for 6 h, following the manufacturer’s (Fermentas LifeSciences, Germany) recommended protocol. Subsequently, the resulting restriction fragments were separated by electrophoresis on a 3% agarose gel. Following electrophoresis, DNA fragments were visualized using a UV transilluminator [14,15].

Total RNA was isolated using Wizol™ reagent (Wizbiosoultion, Korea) according manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, the culture medium containing the 1 × 106promastigote per ml was centrifuged at 300 g for 5 min. Then, 1 mL of Wizol solution was added, and the precipitate was lysed several times by pipetting. Next, 200 µL of chloroform was added, and the mixture was shaken vigorously by hand for 15 s. The sample was incubated at room temperature for 3 min, followed by centrifugation at 12000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The aqueous phase was carefully transferred to a 1.5 mL tube, and 500 µL of isopropanol was added. The mixture was incubated at room temperature for 10 min and then centrifuged at 12000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded. The pellet was washed with 1 mL of 75% ethanol, briefly vortexed, and centrifuged at 7500g for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was discarded. Finally, 50 µL of nuclease-free water was added. The concentration of the extracted RNA samples was measured using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer. Complementary DNA (cDNA) synthesis was conducted utilizing the EvoScript Universal cDNA Master Kit (Roche) with random hexamer primers, following the manufacturer’s instructions. The reaction conditions included incubation at 42 °C for 15 min, followed by 5 min at 85 °C, then 15 min at 65 °C, and subsequently cooling to 4 °C with an indefinite hold time.

In the PCR reaction, the LRV F9 (5ʹ- TCTAGGTCGAGTACATGGCAC-3ʹ) and LRV R9 (5ʹ- GCAGCATCACACTCTCAGC-3ʹ) primers was used [16]. The PCR amplification was conducted in a total volume of 25 µL, comprising 12.5 µL of master mix, 1 µL each of the forward and reverse primers (10 pmol), 1 µL of cDNA template, and nuclease-free water to bring the reaction to the final volume [16]. The PCR conditions was as follows: initial denaturation at 94 °C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of denaturation at 94 °C for 45 s, primer annealing at 59 °C for 45 s, and strand extension at 72 °C for 1 min, with a final extension at 72 °C for 5 min [16]. Amplification products from each step were visualized on a 1.5% Sybr Safe-stained agarose gel using a UV transilluminator.

PCR products were purified and sequenced at Macrogen (Seoul, South Korea) utilizing an ABI Prism 3730 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The resulting viral sequences were aligned using BioEdit v7.0.5. The sequences were blasted with reference sequences from the GenBank database using the Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) provided by the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). Phylogenetic trees for LRV1 and LRV2 datasets were reconstructed using maximum likelihood (ML) methodology under the Tamura 3-parameter model with MEGA x software. Branch confidence was assessed through bootstrap resampling with 1,000 replicates. TheTrichomonas vaginalis virus(TVV) with Acc. No.MH722259.1was used as the out group. DnaSP v5.10 was employed to calculate the number of diversity indices (haplotype and nucleotide diversity).

PCR amplification was performed on 32 clinical samples using the LITSR/L5.8S primer pair. This reaction yielded single amplicons of 350 base pairs in all samples, thereby confirming the presence ofLeishmaniaDNA. Subsequent RFLP analysis of the PCR products generated distinct banding patterns. Digestion of the amplicons produced two fragments of 210 bp and 140 bp in each isolate. These fragment sizes are characteristic ofL. major, indicating that all 32 clinical isolates were identified asL. major. As illustrated in Fig.1, the digestion pattern produced by the HaeIII enzyme corresponded to the characteristic profile ofL. majorobserved in this study.

PCR amplification targeting a 671-bp fragment of the RdRp gene was performed to detect LRV2 in 32 clinical culture samples. Among the 32 clinical cultures, 4 (12.5%) tested positive for LRV2, while 28 (87.5%) were negative. The presence of LRV2 was confirmed through sequencing. The sequences were deposited to GenBank using Bankit (GenBank Acc. No. PV253963-66. An overview of the basic and demographic characteristics of LRV2-positive CL patients is provided in Table1.

The BLASTn analysis of current LRV2 sequences exhibited high nucleotide sequence identity (96–99%) with complete and partial LRV2 isolated fromL. majorstrains from Iran, Uzbekistan, and Turkey. In contrast, comparative genomic analysis revealed reduced similarity when aligned with LRV2 sequences fromL. ethiopica(KF757256),L. tarentolae(OR192167), andL. adleri(OR192166). In the phylogeny tree, the sequences are divided into two principal evolutionary lineages, the first clade exclusively clusters LRV2 sequences and the second clade encompasses LRV1 sequences. It should be noted, further stratification of LRV2 sequences within the cladogram showed three taxonomically significant subgroups: LRV2-L.major(sub-group 1), LRV2-sauroleishmania (sub-group 2) and LRV2-L.ethiopica(sub-groups 3), respectively (Fig.2). In next step, the four sequences analyzed in this investigation, exhibiting a minimum length of 452 base pairs (bp), revealed four distinct haplotypes. Nucleotide diversity (π) and haplotype (gene) diversity (Hd) were calculated as 0.02212 and 1.000, respectively, indicating high genetic variability among the isolates.

CL is an important and endemic infection disease in Iran, persistent public health challenge, affecting individuals and communities across the country [17,18]. Ilam province is one of the main ZCL endemic regions of Iran, which this province shares a border with Iraq of about 425 km [19]. Annually, a significant volume of cross-border travel occurs from Iran to Iraq for religious pilgrimage, tourism, and commercial purposes. The pathogenesis of leishmaniasis is influenced by multiple factors, including the species ofLeishmaniainvolved, host immune responses, and environmental conditions [20]. Recently, increasing attention has been given to the role of LRVs in modulating disease severity [21].

The first confirmed detection of LRV2 was reported in 1995, when it was identified inL. majorisolates from Turkmenistan [22]. Subsequent studies have since reported LRV2 presence in multiple regions of Iran. Hajjaran et al. analyzed 50 clinicalLeishmaniaisolates (from cutaneous and visceral leishmaniasis patients) and detected LRV2 in only two cases: oneL. majorand oneL. infantumstrain [23]. Consequently, Saberi et al. investigated LRV2 prevalence inLeishmaniaisolates from a historic ZCL focus in northeastern Iran, identifying the LRV2 in 69.4% of CL cases (59/85). Notably, this study reported the first LRV2 detection in anL. tropicastrain [11]. In other study, Farokhi-Karibozorg et al. examined LRV presence inLeishmaniaisolates from CL patients and rodent reservoirs in Isfahan province. LRV2 was detected in 15.3% of clinical isolates (13/85), predominantlyL. major(n= 12), with oneL. tropicacase [24]. In novel geographical findings, Moin-Vaziri et al. achieved the first LRV2 isolation in Aran o Bidgol City, successfully detecting the LRV2 in anL. majorstrain obtained from a hand lesion in a female patient [25]. To the best of our knowledge, this study was the first identification and genetic diversity of LRV2 strains isolated from CL cases in western Iran. The results of the present study revealed a 12.5% prevalence of LRV2 amongL. majorisolates, which aligns with findings from other endemic regions in Iran.

From a phylogenetic standpoint, LRV sequences clearly group into two main clusters: one containing LRV1 sequences and the other comprising LRV2 sequences, which aligns with previous research [24]. In the LRV2 cluster, analysis of the RdRp gene reveals several nucleotide variations among different isolates, highlighting the significant genetic diversity within the LRV2 genome. This diversity is further reflected in the division of LRV2 into three distinct clades, each associated with differentLeishmaniahosts, such asL. major,L. aethiopica, and sauroleishmania species, and evolving independently due to their separate geographic distributions. Overall, LRVs constitute a genetically diverse group of viruses that infectLeishmaniaparasites, with their prevalence and genetic variation influenced by both the geographic region and the specificLeishmaniaspecies involved [10,16].

Extensive genetic diversity among complete genome sequencing of LRV2 isolates has been documented in both Iran and Uzbekistan [8,16]. In our previous study, whole genome sequencing of five LRV2 isolates from various regions of Iran revealed substantial genetic and haplotype diversity, indicating significant divergence and independent evolutionary trajectories among these viruses [16]. Similarly, research conducted in Uzbekistan analyzed the complete genomes of two LRV2 isolates from patients withL. majorinfection. This study identified 19 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) between the viral genomes, most of which were silent mutations, demonstrating that even closely related LRV2 isolates exhibit notable genetic variation within the region [8].

This study provides the first identification and phylogenetic analysis of LRV2 in CL patients from western Iran. PCR-based screening detected LRV2 in 12.5% (4/32) ofLeishmaniaisolates. Phylogenetic analysis showed that these LRV2 sequences were closely related (96–99% identity) to those reported inL. majorfrom Iran, Turkey, and Uzbekistan. The detection of four unique haplotypes among the four sequenced samples highlights significant genetic variability within the isolates. The observation of extensive genetic diversity among LRV2 isolates across different regions may have significant implications for disease pathogenesis, transmission patterns, and clinical manifestations. Given the increasing of research on the role of LRVs in modulating disease severity, further studies are warranted to elucidate their impact on the epidemiology and clinical spectrum of CL.

The authors would like to express their gratitude to the patients for their patience and cooperation during this time.

Conceptualization was carried out by R.S., H.H., and M.F. Methodology was developed by R.S., H.H., and M.F. Writing—review and editing were performed by R.S. Investigation was conducted by A.F. Validation was overseen by H.H. and M.F. All authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript.