This study aimed to investigate the role of pathogenic copy number variations (CNVs) in neurodevelopmental impairments among children with corpus callosum abnormalities (CCAs). We focused primarily on SLC6A3 associated mechanisms and aimed to delineate genotype-phenotype correlations in our cases.

From January 2021 to July 2023, 13 children with MRI-confirmed CCAs underwent chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) for CNV detection. We performed bioinformatic analyses (Gene Ontology, STRING network) to identify neurodevelopmental genes within pathogenic CNVs, and clinical follow up assessed neurobehavioral outcomes.

We identified pathogenic CNVs in 3/13 cases (23.08%). Specifically, Case 8 harbored a 43.05-Mb duplication (5p15.33p12) encompassing SLC6A3, a dopamine transporter gene linked to synaptic signaling. Interaction network analysis suggested that SLC6A3 was the most interconnected gene, providing evidence of its role in CCAs. Clinically, 84.6% of cases (11/13) exhibited psychomotor delay, while 15.4% of cases (2/13) developed seizure. Notably, we observed hearing impairment and psychomotor developmental delay in Case 8 with a SLC6A3 duplication, further suggesting dopaminergic dysregulation in callosal connectivity.

Our study suggests that SLC6A3 may represent a potential contributor to neurodevelopmental impairments in CCAs. Further, CMA-based CNV screening is critical for early intervention in high-risk children. These findings bridge genetic etiology with clinical phenotypes and offer insights into future targeted therapeutic strategies.

The corpus callosum (CC), the largest commissural white matter tract in the human brain, integrates sensory, motor, and cognitive functions between the cerebral hemispheres, serving as the primary conduit for interhemispheric communication [1]. The CC’s development begins during early gestation and continues postnatally, making it vulnerable to genetic, environmental, and metabolic disruptions [2]. Corpus callosum abnormalities (CCAs) include agenesis, hypoplasia, and dysplasia. CCAs occur in approximately 0.018% of live births and have become an increasing contributor to neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs) [3,4]. CCAs clinically manifest heterogeneously and can range from asymptomatic cases to severe phenotypes, such as intellectual disability, seizure, and language delay. The most prevalent feature of these phenotypes is psychomotor developmental delay [5,6]. Despite advances in neuroimaging, development of targeted therapeutic strategies to address CCAs are limited due to the lack of understanding around the genetic and molecular underpinnings of CCAs.

Moreover, current genetic diagnostics for CCAs rely heavily on chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA), which detects copy number variations (CNVs). CMA is capable of higher resolution than traditional karyotyping and therefore the preferred method [7]. CMA is able to identify pathogenic CNVs in 19% of CCA cases [8]; however, most investigations to date have focused on broad chromosomal aberrations (e.g., Xp22.33 duplication [9], 16p13.11 deletion [10] ) instead of understanding specific gene-phenotype relationships. For example, recurrent CNVs in regions such as 5p15.33 have been observed in NDDs, but the precise neurodevelopmental genes driving these associations are underexplored; and there is a particular lack of research focused on understanding the neurodevelopmental genes regulating synaptic connectivity and axonal guidance. This knowledge gap greatly impedes our ability to translate genetic findings into mechanistic understanding or clinical application.

Furthermore, emerging evidence highlights that solute carrier family 6 member 3 (SLC6A3), encoding the dopamine transporter (DAT), plays a critical role in neurodevelopment [11]. Specifically, SLC6A3 regulates dopaminergic neurotransmission by rapidly clearing synaptic dopamine; and this process is essential for cortical circuit maturation and axonal pathfinding [12]. Notably, the SLC6A3 segment 5p15.33 has been observed in Database of Chromosomal Imbalance and Phenotype in Humans using Ensemble Resources (DECIPHER) cases (Patient: 259299/394281/396094/400828) in which patients have CCAs and severe neurodevelopmental delays. However, no study has investigated SLC6A3 alterations in CCAs or whether they are correlated with specific phenotypes (e.g., hearing impairment, psychomotor regression).

The current study helps to provide a better understanding of SLC6A3 alterations in CCAs by integrating CMA-driven CNV profiling, bioinformatic prioritization of neurodevelopmental genes, and longitudinal clinical phenotyping in children with CCAs. We hypothesize that pathogenic CNVs involving SLC6A3 disrupt dopaminergic-glutamatergic signaling, which leads to structural and functional impairments in the CC. Our objectives are threefold: (1) to determine whether SLC6A3 is a novel gene associated with CCAs; (2) to delineate genotype-phenotype correlations, focusing primarily on auditory and motor pathways; and (3) to propose the mechanisms by which SLC6A3 mediates neurodevelopmental sequelae. By combining high-resolution genomics with deep phenotyping, this work not only advances our understanding of CCA pathogenesis, but also offers a framework for early diagnosis and personalized management of CCA in affected children.

This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Affiliated Qingyuan Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University (Qingyuan People’s Hospital) (Approval No. QPH-IRB-A0249). Parents of all the study participants provided written informed consent prior to sample collection and data analysis.

We recruited children aged 6 months to 6 years who were diagnosed with CCAs via magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) between January 2021 and July 2023.

We collected peripheral blood samples (2 mL) and extracted genomic DNA using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany). We assessed DNA concentration and purity using a NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA; A260/A280 > 1.8, concentration ≥ 50 ng/µL).

We used CytoScan 750 K arrays (Affymetrix, USA) with genome-wide coverage of ∼ 750,000 probes. Genomic DNA (250 ng) was amplified, fragmented, labeled, and hybridized to the array using the GeneChip System 3000Dx v.2 (Affymetrix). When then performed post-hybridization washing and scanning according to the manufacturer’s protocol. All raw data were analyzed using Chromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS) v3.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). CNVs were filtered for confidence scores ≥ 90% and sizes ≥ 100 kb. We characterized CNVs as pathogenic, likely pathogenic, variant of uncertain significance (VUS), likely benign, or benign, based on the American College of Medical Genetics’ standards and guidelines (ACMG) (2019) [13]. When judging and evaluating the nature of our CNVs, in addition to referring to the in-house laboratory database, we also consulted online databases: database of chromosomal imbalance and phenotype in humans using ensembl resources(DECIPHER), online mendelian inheritance in man(OMIM), university of california santa cruz (UCSC), Clinical Genome Resource (Clingen).

We annotated protein-coding genes within pathogenic CNV regions using the Ensembl database (GRCh37/hg19). A focused analysis was performed on neurodevelopment- associated genes, including SLC6A3.

For GO term enrichment analysis (biological processes, molecular functions, cellular components), we used DAVID (https://david.ncifcrf.gov). Terms withP< 0.05 were considered statistically significant. SLC6A3-specific pathways were analyzed.

To construct Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) networks for neurodevelopmental genes within pathogenic CNVs (confidence threshold: combined score > 0.4), we used STRING (https://string-db.org). Networks were visualized using Cytoscape v3.9.1, with node sizes reflecting interaction connectivity.

Follow-up continued until July 2023. We have assessed the neurodevelopment of the children using the Gesell Developmental Schedules, which is a classic and widely used tool in the field of child developmental assessment with high authority in clinical practice. In addition, we performed hearing tests on the children using Otoacoustic Emissions (OAE). For children whose OAE results failed, further examination was conducted using Auditory Brainstem Response (ABR). All children underwent light-following response testing; those with abnormal light-following responses received further Visual Evoked Potential (VEP) testing. For children presenting with seizures, electroencephalogram (EEG) examinations were performed.

We validated 5p15.33p12 phenotypic duplications concordance using DECIPHER (https://deciphergenomics.org), Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM,https://omim.org/) and Clinical Variants (Clinvar,https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar/) databases.

Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 25.0.For categorical phenotypic comparisons between Our Cohort and the DECIPHER Cohort, univariate association analyses were performed. Phenotype frequencies were expressed as counts and proportions (n/N, %). Odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated directly from 2 × 2 contingency tables to quantify the magnitude of association between cohort assignment (Our Cohort vs. DECIPHER Cohort) and each binary phenotype. Given the presence of small expected cell frequencies (e.g., phenotypes with < 5 events in either group), Fisher’s exact tests were employed to evaluate the statistical significance of associations, with a two-sidedp-value < 0.05 considered statistically significant.

A total of 13 children with CCAs were recruited (10 males and 3 females). The cases included 9 isolated CCAs (CCA without other malformation) and 4 complex CCAs (CCA with other malformation).

Using chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA), we identified pathogenic CNVs in 23.08% of cases (3/13; case 2, case 5, and case 8; Table1). Case 8 carried a 43.05-Mb duplication at 5p15.33p12 (hg19:113,576–43,164,937), encompassing 143 protein-coding genes. These genes included 6 neurodevelopment-associated OMIM genes (SLC6A3, SLC1A3, TRIO, GDNF, LIFR, ADCY2). We cross-referenced with the DECIPHER database (Case ID: 434729) and confirmed the recurrence of this duplication in CCAs, with phenotypic overlaps including developmental delay, etc. In contrast, Case 2 (6q21q22.31 deletion) and Case 5 (3q12.1q13.32 deletion) carried six (NUS1, MARCKS, HDAC2, NKAIN2, TBC1D32, CEP85L) and thirteen (ZBTB11, NEPRO, ATG3, BOC, CFAP44, DRD3, IFT57, IMPG2, NECTIN3, TBC1D23, TFG, ZBTB20, ZDHHC23) neurodevelopment-associated OMIM genes, respectively. Further, TBC1D23 and ZBTB20 were associated with CCAs. Other genes present were associated only with abnormal development of the nervous system, but they were not associated with CCAs.

In Case 8, our GO enrichment analysis of the coding genes within this duplication region indicated that most genes were involved in at least one of the following biological processes: RNA polymerase II preinitiation complex assembly, cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion, adherens junction organization, cell-cell junction assembly, or calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion via plasma membrane cell adhesion molecules. RNA polymerase II general transcription initiation factor activity and protein heterodimerization activity were the most common molecular functions. The transcription factor TFIID complex and catenin complex were the most representative cellular components of the identified genes (Fig.1). Further, we detected SLC6A3 in positive regulation of multicellular organism growth (GO:0040018), amino acid transport (GO:0006865), neurotransmitter transport (GO:0006836), and the neuronal cell body (GO:0043025).

Moreover, STRING-based PPI analysis of 25 neurodevelopmental genes from the three pathogenic CNVs indicated that there were 5 significant interactions (combined score > 0.4). The highest connectivity was observed in SLC6A3, with interactions identified with dopamine receptor D3 (DRD3), glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and solute carrier family 1 member 3 (SLC1A3) (Fig.2). These interactions were further validated by Reactome pathway analysis (R-HSA-442660, R-HSA-379401). Results highlighted SLC6A3’s role in Na+/Cl- dependent neurotransmitter transporters and synaptic cleft dopamine clearance.

We conducted clinical follow-up for all 13 children included in this study (average follow-up: 23.77 ± 18.48 months). Our results indicated that 84.6% (11/13) children, including Case 8, exhibited varying degrees of psychomotor developmental delay. Hearing impairment was found in 1 case (Case 8). Light-following response testing were normal in all children. Epileptic seizures occurred in 2 children (15.4%, 2/13), and we identified language development delay in 3 cases (23.1%, 3/13) (Table2).

We compared our cohort with public databases to validate findings.

A total of 294 cases that overlapped or partially overlapped with the 5p15.33p12 duplications fragment were included in the DECIPHER database. Among these cases, 5 cases had CCAs, 35 cases had psychomotor developmental delay, 3 cases had hearing impairment, 32 cases had Language delay and 16 cases had Seizure.

Among those 294 cases, after excluding 85 cases lacking documented phenotypes, 209 cases remained. Statistical analysis comparing this study with these 209 DECIPHER cases revealed that for variants in the region 5p15.33p12 (hg19: 113,576–43,164,937), there was no statistically significant difference (P> 0.05) in the associated phenotypes of hearing impairment, language delay, and seizure. This finding aligns with the DECIPHER database. However, for the phenotypes of corpus callosum abnormalities and psychomotor retardation, the incidence in this study was significantly higher than in the DECIPHER database (P< 0.05). This discrepancy is likely attributable to the smaller sample size included in this study (Table3).

In the OMIM database, we identified SLC6A3 (OMIM 126455) as a risk gene for parkinsonism, Tourette syndrome, and substance abuse; but there were no direct associations with CCAs.

No pathogenic SLC6A3 CNVs were currently reported for CCAs in the ClinVar database, which emphasizes the novelty and importance of our findings.

This study provides preliminary evidence implicating SLC6A3, a dopamine transporter gene, as a potential contributor to neurodevelopmental impairments in children with CCAs. We integrated pathogenic CNV profiling, bioinformatic prioritization, and longitudinal clinical phenotyping to demonstrate that SLC6A3 duplication disrupts dopaminergic signaling pathways; and this disruption is associated with psychomotor delay and hearing impairment. The findings we present here help to advance our understanding of the genetic architecture of CCAs and highlight actionable targets for early intervention.

The 5p15.33p12 duplication in Case 8, spanning SLC6A3, aligns with prior reports linking this locus to neurodevelopmental disorders [14]. Crucially, our study establishes the first association between SLC6A3 duplication and CCAs, validated by phenotypic overlaps in five DECIPHER cases (IDs: 281637/286220/338918/396203/ 434729).

Although SLC6A3 has not been directly linked to callosal morphogenesis, converging evidence suggests its indirect role via dopaminergic regulation of white matter integrity. In 2011, Kurian MA, et al. [15] found that in patients with dopamine transporter deficiency syndrome (DTDS), SLC6A3 gene mutations lead to loss of DAT function, and the patients present with subtle neuroradiological abnormalities and white matter abnormalities. In 2015, Gasso P, et al. [16] also conducted a diffusion tensor imaging study on obsessive-compulsive disorder and found that the SLC6A3 gene polymorphism (RS4975646) is associated with microstructural changes in cerebral white matter. Collectively, these findings position SLC6A3 as a modulator of white matter development, providing a plausible basis for its association with CCAs.

Moreover, mechanistically, SLC6A3 encodes the DAT, which regulates synaptic dopamine clearance, which is critical for axonal guidance and interhemispheric connectivity. Caldwell M, et. al [17] found that midbrain dopamine axons can regulate CC oligodendrocyte lineage cells. Further, Bergamino M, et. al [18] and Scamarcia PG, et. al [19] also illustrated that white matter damage in Parkinson’s disease. Collectively, these data suggest that SLC6A3 alterations could mediate dopaminergic dysregulation, potentially disrupting interhemispheric connectivity during critical developmental windows.

Additionally, in our study, PPI network analysis demonstrated that SLC6A3 had significant network centrality, with direct interactions with DRD3, GDNF and SLC1A3. This topological feature suggests SLC6A3’s potential role as a hub node within neurotransmitter regulatory networks. Reactome pathway analysis further suggests that SLC6A3 participates in Na+/Cl- dependent neurotransmitter transporters and synaptic cleft dopamine clearance. These actions could potentially influence CC development via modulation of axonal guidance, synaptic transmission, and myelination processes. These pathway enrichment results provide evidence supporting the association between dopaminergic system dysregulation and neurodevelopmental disorders. We propose that SLC6A3 duplication disrupts dopamine gradient-dependent axon guidance, leading to callosal maldevelopment during critical gestational windows. Future investigations should focus on validating SLC6A3’s spatiotemporal-specific functions in CC development and exploring its potential as a therapeutic target.

In this study, the child in Case 8 also exhibited the first observation of hearing impairment in children with isolated CC dysplasia. Although Kim J et al. [6] reported CC dysplasia may not be related to hearing impairment. However, their study included only 22 cases of isolated CC dysplasia. Additionally, through further literature review, we found that in 2006, Smith LP, et al. [20] reported a patient with corpus callosum hypoplasia and bilateral asymmetric sensorineural hearing loss, who also had bilateral inner ear dysplasia. Their study on 12 infants with corpus callosum hypoplasia revealed that hearing impairment mostly occurs in the central auditory pathway of the brainstem, and the incidence of hearing loss is relatively high in patients with corpus callosum hypoplasia. In 2012, Kau T et al. [21] also reported a case of a child with Chudley-McCullough syndrome, whose brain magnetic resonance imaging showed hypoplasia of the splenium of the corpus callosum, accompanied by sensorineural hearing loss. In the future, we will expand the sample size to further investigate the relationship between CCA and hearing impairment.

Further, dopamine is known to regulate cortical excitability and interhemispheric communication [22,23,24]; therefore, the genotype-phenotype correlation observed in 5p15.33p12 duplication suggests there may be a link between dopaminergic signaling and callosal dysfunction. Excess synaptic dopamine mediated by SLC6A3 duplication may desensitize postsynaptic receptors, leading to epileptogenic hyperexcitability and disrupted auditory sensation circuitry.

Although SLC6A3 was the dominant locus in our findings, other pathogenic CNVs (e.g., NUS1, MARCKS, HDAC2, NKAIN2, TBC1D32, CEP85L in Case 2 and ZBTB11, NEPRO, ATG3, BOC, CFAP44, DRD3, IFT57, IMPG2, NECTIN3, TBC1D23, TFG, ZBTB20, ZDHHC23 in Case 5) align with emerging reports suggesting their roles in neurodevelopment. Because the number of repeated cases is small in our cohort and public databases, and these genes did not exhibit high connectivity in PPI analysis, they may represent rare contributors to CCAs. This contrasts with SLC6A3 in our research, which exhibited both high interaction connectivity and phenotype specificity, and therefore suggests the importance of SLC6A3 in future research.

This study’s primary limitation is the restricted sample size, which reduces statistical power for detecting associations. Because of the rarity of CCAs and low yield of pathogenic CNVs, all genetic studies on CCAs are small-sample studies. Even though this study included all CCA children who were treated in our hospital and whose family members provided informed consent from 2021 to 2023, we still only included 13 cases, which is the largest sample size available at present. Future studies may validate this association through multicenter cohort expansion targeting SLC6A3 CNVs.

Secondly, this manuscript lacks functional validation of SLC6A3’s role in CCA pathogenesis. Functional validation of SLC6A3’s role in CCAs is critical but currently unfeasible due to proband sample unavailability and extended experimental timelines. This limitation will be addressed in our planned follow-up studies involving in vivo and in vitro experiments.

In conclusion, the current study suggests that SLC6A3 is a potential candidate gene involved in CCA-related neurodevelopmental damage via its ability to interrupt dopamine signal transduction. CMA-based screening for SLC6A3 CNVs provides a clinically actionable tool for early diagnosis and personalized care. By bridging genetic etiology with phenotypic outcomes, our work helps to pave the way for targeted interventions to mitigate the lifelong burden of CCAs.

We thank the patients of the Affiliated Qingyuan Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University (Qingyuan People’s Hospital), China for their support and participation. This study was supported by Medical Scientific Research Foundation of Guangdong Province of China (Grant No. A2023328) and Medical Scientific Research Foundation of Guangdong Province of China (Grant No. A2024682).