Elastin-like polymers (ELPs) have been used for a variety
of biomedical
applications, including drug delivery and tissue scaffolding. ELPs
are useful due to their adjustable lower critical solution temperature
and tunable structure for different applications. However, despite
ample characterization of ELPs in aqueous solutions, the characterization
of ELPs on surfaces is less well explored. For example, sources of
inconsistency in ELP modification to surfaces have yet to be explored
in detail. Surface modifications of large macromolecules often suffer
from poor reproducibility and inconsistent measurements. We developed
and optimized a method for modifying a gold electrode surface with
ELPs using a thiol-gold interaction through a single cysteine residue
near the N-terminus. The modification parameters were tuned for reproducible
charge-transfer resistance of the surface, as measured by electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy. The final optimized surface modification parameters,
without dimethyl sulfoxide or other cosurfactant treatment, are 0.0125
mg/mL ELP for 30 min at 4 °C in 3.5 mM TCEP in ultrahigh-purity
water at pH 7.4. The relative amount of cysteine modified to gold
versus ELP solution concentration was determined via thiol reduction.
Using these data, the source of poor reproducibility was confirmed
to be nonspecific polymer interactions.

Elastin-like polymers (ELPs) are genetically
encoded, intrinsically
disordered polypeptides that exhibit behavior closely resembling that
of the naturally occurring protein, elastin. ELPs are classed as thermoresponsive polymers with a lower critical
solution temperature (LCST), above which the polymer condenses and
becomes insoluble and below which it dissolves in solution. Because of their biological nature and ability
to be expressed and produced recombinantly in various organisms, ELPs
are biocompatible, tunable, and benefit from monodisperse formulations,
making them suitable to a wide variety of applications.−ELPs are extensively studied for their applications in aqueous solution
due to the stimulus-response behavior,−but there is interest
in developing surface attachment strategies for ELPs.−For example, ELPs in a surface-attached state have been explored
for their potential in biosensing applications.−Initial reports suggest strategies such as applied electric field
to impact surface mass loading and polymer orientation.,Thermoresponsive films have applications in many fields, such as
wound dressings, temperature-sensitive coatings, and tissue scaffolding,,and we expect surface-attached
ELPs could be used in any field that takes advantage of thermoresponsive
polymer films.

Thiol-gold modifications were primarily used
in this work to bind
ELP to electrochemical surfaces because of its commonly used and readily
available chemistry. Two other common surface modification methods
include electrochemical grafting of diazonium salts and N-heterocyclic
carbene (NHC) modification.,Electrochemical grafting
of diazonium salts relies on the transfer of electrons from the gold
substrate to the diazonium cation, resulting in a very stable covalent
bond.,Reproducibility of this modification is
generally very good, with some variation of functional groups and
applied voltage.,The downside to electrochemical
diazonium modifications is safety hazards, including the instability
of the diazonium salt and the common use of hazardous organic solvents.
Another modification is the self-assembly of N-heterocyclic carbene
(NHS) monolayers by strong σ-bonds to transition metals. NHC modification provides enhanced stability,
especially in the presence of biofluids, where competitive inhibition
by exogenous thiols can displace the thiols used in modification. The reproducibility of NHC modification can
vary greatly depending on temperature, atmosphere, and deposition
solution.

Ensuring a consistent surface has an impact on product performance
for surfaces used in the wound dressing, tissue scaffolding, and biosensing
industries.−A crucial step in developing a reproducible polymer
surface is identifying the potential sources of poor reproducibility
based on the properties of the polymer. Often, one difficulty hindering the translation of polymer-based
electrodes from the laboratory (i.e., benchtop) environments into
the field is due to the consistent fabrication of the surface. In
this paper, we explored the generation of reproducible ELP surfaces
by investigating the physisorption of ELP, the use of organic solvents,
and modification protocols. Often, issues with reproducibility of
thermoresponsive polymer surfaces can be attributed to nonspecific
adsorption or environment-induced structural changes.,We attach ELP to gold surfaces via cysteine-containing ELP molecules,
using isoleucine as a guest residue and a 40-repeat sequence polymer,
denoted as I40. In the context of this
paper, reproducibility is defined as the generation of the surface
with a consistent charge-transfer resistance obtained by electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy (EIS); a Randles circuit model can be applied
to redox-mediated impedance spectroscopy data to obtain the charge-transfer
resistance.−Additionally, we used cyclic voltammetry (CV) to induce thiol-gold
bond cleavage to investigate the role of physisorbed ELPs as a source
of poor reproducibility issues for generating surface-attached ELP
gold electrodes. We believe that improvement in the reproducibility
of these types of surfaces will increase their relevancy in their
intended applications.

I40 was generated by the Balog
Lab at the University of New England. Potassium ferricyanide and potassium
ferrocyanide for the redox couple were obtained from Acros Organics.
Potassium hydroxide (KOH) for CV stripping experiments was obtained
from Alfa Aesar. Tris­(2-carboxyethyl)­phosphine HCl for surface modification
was obtained from Thermo Scientific. Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) used
for pH balancing was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich. Dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) used for the treatment of modified electrodes was obtained
from Fisher Chemical. Ultrahigh-purity deionized (UHP DI) water was
generated with a Direct-Q 3 UV-R Ultra Pure (Type 1) water purification
system obtained from Milli-Q.

Reference 600+ Potentiostat/Galvanostat/ZRA
and the VistaShield Faraday Cage used for electrochemical measurements
were obtained from Gamry Instruments. Electrochemical cells, 1.6 mm
gold rod electrodes, Ag/AgCl reference electrodes, and platinum wire
counter electrodes used in the electrochemical measurements were obtained
from BASi Research Products. XP6 Microbalance was obtained from Mettler
Toledo.

The I40 was designed and synthesized
with a core structure consisting of 40 repeats of the pentapeptide
VPGIG and a cysteine residue near the N-terminus to provide the thiol
group for surface immobilization. The I40 was designed and synthesized
as previously described. Briefly, the
plasmid POE-W I40 was transformed into BL21­(DE3)E. coliand plated on 2XYT solid medium + carbenicillin. Starter cultures
of nutrient-rich liquid medium + carbenicillin were inoculated with
multiple colonies and shaken at 200 rpm at 37 °C for 2–4
h until visible growth was detected. Cultures were transferred to
1 L volumes of the same media in 2 L flasks, which were then shaken
at 200 rpm at 37 °C for 24 h. Cells were harvested by centrifugation,
and I40 was purified from the periplasmic fraction using inverse transition
cycling. Purified I40 was lyophilized
for long-term storage at −20 °C. Our full protocol used
in the expression and purification of I40 is available on protocols.io
(https://dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.5jyl8npw6l2w/v2).

Prior to modification with
I40, the 1.6 mm gold rod electrode was polished with a 3 μm
diamond slurry, followed by 1 μm diamond slurry rinsing with
methanol and UHP DI water. A final polish was done with a 0.55 μm
alumina slurry. The electrode was rinsed thoroughly with UHP DI water
for approximately 30 s before immersing in a prechilled polymer solution
of I40 ELP in 3.5 mM TCEP balanced with NaOH to pH 7.4 atT= 4 °C and dissolved in UHP DI water. TCEP was used
as a reducing agent to prevent the formation of disulfide bonds. A
temperature of 4 °C was chosen, as this is below the LCST of
I40 ELPs under these conditions and prevents the formation of coacervates
that would impede surface modification. I40 ELPs were dissolved in
TCEP in a refrigerator at 4 °C to reach final concentrations
of 0.00625, 0.0125, 0.025, 0.035, and 0.05 mg/mL for 10 min, with
occasional light vortexing. The gold electrode was submerged in 1
mL of the ELP solution at 4 °C. The electrode was then removed
from the solution and rinsed with UHP DI water for 30 s and immediately
transferred to the redox couple solution to measure the impedance
response using EIS. This procedure is tabulated inTable.

All EIS measurements were
performed at the open circuit potential over a frequency range of
100,000–0.05 Hz. A three-electrode array was used: (1) gold
working electrode, (2) platinum wire counter electrode, and (3) Ag/AgCl
reference electrode; the cell was purged with nitrogen for 10 min
prior to adding the working electrode. Prior to all EIS measurements,
the working electrode was rinsed with UHP DI water. A redox couple
solution of 5 mM ferri/ferrocyanide [Fe­(CN)6]3–/4–with a 0.5 M potassium chloride (KCl) supporting electrolyte in
UHP DI water was used at room temperature.

For CV experiments,
the electrodes were rinsed with UHP DI water and moved to a solution
of aqueous 0.5 M KOH solution that was purged for 10 min. CV was run
with an initial voltage of 0 V vs Ag/AgCl and a scan rate of 100 mV/s
from 0 to −1.4 V vs Ag/AgCl.

A Randle’s equivalent
circuit model was used to fit the
impedance data using Gamry EChem Analyst software (Figure) to describe the combination
of kinetic and diffusion processes contributing to the total impedance
response. The Randle’s circuit is composed of resistive and
capacitive components, including the solution resistance (Rs) which corresponds to the uncompensated resistance
of the bulk electrolyte, charge-transfer resistance (Rct) which corresponds to the resistance to the flow of
electrons due to kinetic reduction and oxidation reactions, Warburg
impedance (W) which corresponds to the semi-infinite
diffusion, and a constant phase element (CPE) which corresponds to
the dielectric layer and at the surface of the electrode. The Randle’s
circuit was chosen so that the impedance caused by the addition of
ELPs to the electrode could be interpreted by redox components.

Randle’s
circuit is used to quantify solution resistance
(Rs), charge-transfer resistance (Rct), Warburg impedance (W),
and double-layer capacitance (Cdl) as
components of the impedance response. Image generated with a Gamry
Echem Analyst.

All statistical comparisons were made using the
Student’sttest. Student’sttest was used
due to the assumption of a normal distribution of test variables.

Charge-transfer resistance
is known to increase when proteins are added to the electrode surface.
We expect an increase in charge-transfer resistance after I40 modification
compared to unmodified electrodes because of the formation of an insulating
I40 layer on the electrode surface.,We polished
two electrodes and generated an impedimetric charge-transfer resistance
value of ∼150 Ω. The low charge-transfer resistance indicates
unrestricted access to the electrode surface by the redox couple.
Two electrodes were modified with I40 for 24 h in our ELP modification
solution. Charge-transfer resistance values of ∼42,000 and
∼26,000 Ω were recorded from two unique electrodes, indicating
variability in the modification events (Figure). We propose that the poor reproducibility
of the impedance response at modification times longer than 30 min
is influenced by this nonspecific adsorption. The increase in charge-transfer
resistance includes ELPs attached via nonspecific adsorption due to
electrostatic and van der Waals forces as well as ELPs attached via
thiol-gold interactions (Figure).

Impedance response of an unmodified electrode (∼150
Ω)
compared to two electrodes modified with 0.05 mg/mL I40 fort= 24 h (∼42,000 and ∼26,000 Ω) indicating
poor reproducibility in the surface immobilization of I40. Bode plots
are found inFigure S1.

We hypothesized nonspecific interactions between surface-immobilized
and solvated ELPs hindered the thiol-gold interaction during surface
immobilization, contributing to the variability in the impedance response
observed.

Incubation times and I40 concentrations were varied,
with an expected
change to intermolecular interactions and nonspecific adsorption, influencing the impedance response (Figure). The concentration
was varied between 0.0125, 0.025, and 0.05 mg/mL. We expected that
a lower concentration of I40 would help to prevent intermolecular
interactions hindering reproducibility caused by ELP aggregation or
clustering during modification. Impedance is proportional to the concentration
of I40, indicating less electrode surface area coverage with a lower
concentration of I40. The incubation time was varied between 30 and
60 min. Likewise, we expected lower incubation times to decrease the
nonspecific adsorption of ELP since the thiol-gold interaction between
the cysteine and gold electrode would be faster than the nonspecific
adsorption interactions. Essentially, lower incubation time provides
enough time for the thiol-gold interaction to occur but less time
for nonspecific adsorption to occur. As expected, lowering both the
incubation time and the modification concentration resulted in modifications
with lower impedances. We further investigated if the lower impedance
resulted in less surface modification or less physisorbed ELP binding.

Impedance
response of electrodes modified with varying concentrations
of I40 with a charge-transfer resistance value of ∼42,000 Ω
for 0.05 mg/mL, ∼31,000 Ω for 0.025 mg/mL, and ∼22,750
Ω for 0.0125 mg/mL for 60 min modifications. A decreasing trend
of charge-transfer resistance with I40 concentration was observed,
indicating lower concentrations of I40 achieve lower surface area
coverage. Bode plots are found inFigure S2.

Following surface immobilization
of I40, the modified electrodes were treated with a solvent (DMSO)
to remove nonspecifically bound I40 from the electrode surface. DMSO
should solvate and release nonspecifically bound I40 from the surface,
while I40 immobilized via the thiol-gold bond should remain. The impedance
response from two electrodes modified with 0.05 mg/mL I40 in 3.5 mM
TCEP pH = 7.4T= 4 °C fort= 24 h was recorded before solvent treatment. The impedance responses
from the I40 modified electrodes were recorded after solvent treatment
for 24 h (FigureA).
For electrode one, an initial, untreated impedance response of 26,000
Ω was observed, followed by a decrease in charge-transfer resistance
to 19,000 Ω after 24 h in DMSO. Electrode 2, modified with I40
under the same conditions, had an initial untreated impedance response
of 43,000 Ω, followed by a decrease in charge-transfer resistance
to 18,500 Ω after 24 h in DMSO. Before treatment, electrodes
1 and 2 had a difference of 17,000 Ω, while after treatment,
the difference in charge-transfer resistance is reduced to 500 Ω.
The decrease in charge-transfer resistance of the I40 modified electrode
after soaking in DMSO indicates an increase in the available electrode
surface area, implying the removal of ELPs from the surface. The ELPs
removed from the surface would be those with the lowest binding affinity;
namely, nonspecifically adsorbed ELPs. After the 24 h soak in DMSO,
both electrodes have similar charge-transfer resistance values, indicating
a probable shift in nonspecific physisorption that occurs with a charge-transfer
resistance around 20,000 Ω.

(A) Impedance response from I40 modified
electrodes before and
after treatment with DMSO with an average charge-transfer resistance
response after treatment of ∼18,000 Ω. The reduced charge-transfer
resistance indicates removal of some of the ELPs from the surface.
(B) Impedance response after tuning reaction parameters from three
unique modification events with an average charge-transfer resistance
value of ∼14,700 Ω and the impedance response from two
DMSO-treated electrodes. The improved reproducibility of the modified
electrodes confirms that tuning of the modification procedure was
successful. Bode plots are found inFigure S3A,B.

The impedance responses from (N= 3) unique I40
modification events at 0.0125 mg/mL in 3.5 mm TCEP for 30 min were
compared to each other and to the results of the DMSO-treated surfaces
inFigure. Decreasing
the modification time to 0.5 h and tuning the modification concentration
to 0.0125 mg/mL, it was observed that the charge-transfer resistance
is much more reproducible. Because the DMSO-treated surfaces have
been stripped of nonspecifically adsorbed I40 and because the tuned
modification protocol produces charge-transfer resistance values close
to the DMSO-treated ones, we hypothesize that the tuned modification
surface has a similar surface coverage to the DMSO-treated surface.
Hence, the reproducible modification of a gold electrode with I40
is successful with a modification concentration of 0.0125 mg/mL and
a modification time of 30 min without the need for DMSO treatment.
However, a further investigation into the nonspecific adsorption of
ELP was necessary to explore the hypothesis that nonspecifically adsorbed
ELPs were the cause of poor reproducibility.

A higher charge-transfer
resistance suggests the presence of ELPs on the surface of the gold,
but it does not differentiate between chemisorbed and nonspecifically
adsorbed ELPs. The charge-transfer resistance obtained by EIS directly
after modification is related to the ELP concentration used in the
modification (Figure). The increasing trend shows that the amount of total ELPs adsorbed
to the surface (both chemisorbed and nonspecifically adsorbed) is
proportional to the modification concentration. The 0.05 mg/mL concentration
has a much higher error bar than the others; this is likely due to
a significant contribution of nonspecifically bound ELP to the total
charge-transfer resistance.

Charge-transfer resistance values of electrodes
modified with varying
concentrations of I40 ELP. Larger standard deviations at higher modification
concentrations indicate worse reproducibility at those concentrations.

Cyclic voltammetry response of I40 ELP-modified
gold electrodes
at different concentrations. The inset shows Peak A, the peak associated
with the decoupling of the thiol.

Peak area values are normalized with respect to
a baseline (Figure S4). The value of Peak
B also does not
change with the modification concentration (Figure S5). This supports the claim that Peak A corresponds to the
thiol decoupling from the gold surface. Therefore, we expect the area
under the decoupling peak (Peak A), or the charge, is directly related
to the electrons transferred and can be used to determine the relative
amount of chemisorbed polymer.

The CV results were used to examine
the trend in the amount of
chemisorbed ELP at the different modification concentrations. The
peak area values of Peak A were compared for different modification
concentrations (Figure). The initial downward trend of charge versus modification concentration
suggests that there is some direct relationship between chemisorbed
ELP and modification concentration. However, there is not a statistically
significant difference between the peak area values of different modification
concentrations. The total charge-transfer resistance, and therefore,
the total ELP on the surface, increases according toFigure, but the amount of chemisorbed
ELPs does not significantly change according toFigure. Hence, nonspecifically adsorbed ELPs must
be increasing instead. Therefore, the hypothesis that nonspecific
adsorption contributes to the charge-transfer resistance more than
chemisorption is supported.

Charge values of Peak A from the CV of electrodes
modified with
different concentrations. The values plotted here are in comparison
to a baseline drawn from the anodic to the cathodic side of Peak A
to normalize across potential electrode differences. Nonaveraged raw
data are available inFigure S6.

EIS was run before and after the CV sweep to ensure
that the surface
was successfully modified and that the CV procedure results in expected
thiol decoupling. The Nyquist plots change after CV is performed (Figure). The sharp decrease
in the resistance, indicated by the change in diameter of the semicircle
of the Nyquist plot, indicates that the thiol decoupling was successful.
A control experiment was performed by measuring the impedance of a
modified electrode after a KOH soak without applying a voltage. This
did not result in a decrease of charge-transfer resistance, indicating
that ELP is being decoupled by CV and not by KOH alone.

Electrode modified
with 0.035 mg/mL I40 ELP (chosen randomly from
modification concentrations above the tuned 0.0125 mg/mL concentration)
for 30 min. Effects of the electrode being soaked in KOH without cyclic
voltammetry as well as ELP being stripped from the surface with cyclic
voltammetry in KOH are shown. Low charge-transfer resistance after
KOH stripping indicates that the ELPs were removed from the surface,
while no decrease after soaking in KOH indicates that CV is required
for the ELP stripping. Bode plots are found inFigure S7.

CV was also performed on electrodes modified with
0.05 mg/mL of
I40 ELP that were then treated with DMSO for 24 h. It was found that
treatment with DMSO improved reproducibility from a relative standard
deviation (σ/μ) of 42.3%RSD to 28.3%RSD for charge-transfer
resistance and also increased the area under peak A by 835% to 1395
nC, indicating further chemisorption (Figure). The improved reproducibility is possibly
due to nonspecifically bound ELP molecules desorbing from the surface,
making them available for further chemisorption in the organic solvent.
The decrease in charge-transfer resistance from DMSO treatment as
seen in bothFigureandFigurewould
be consistent with the hypothesis that nonspecifically adsorbed ELPs
contribute more to charge-transfer resistance than gold–thiol
chemisorbed ELPs. Charge-transfer resistance is not proportional to
the amount of surface modified by the cysteine of these ELPs; we hypothesize
that greater charge-transfer resistance can be due to greater physisorption
of ELP islands compared with a more chemisorbed surface (Figure).

Charge-transfer resistance
and Peak A charge values for electrodes
modified with 0.05 mg/mL ELP concentration for 30 min without and
with DMSO for 24 h. The decrease in charge-transfer resistance after
DMSO soaking (p< 0.1) suggests the overall surface
coverage decreases after treatment, while an increase in Peak A area
after DMSO soaking (p< 0.001) suggests that nonspecifically
adsorbed ELPs may be able to reattach to the surface via gold–thiol
interaction during treatment.

In addition toFigure, where we hypothesize that charge-transfer resistance
is
directly proportional to I40 modified to a surface, we now also hypothesize
that nonspecifically adsorbed I40 contributes more to overall charge-transfer
resistance than thiol-bonded chemisorbed I40.

Reproducibility of ELP-modified surfaces
was greatly improved through
adjustment of the modification parameters. This was done by reducing
the concentration of the I40 ELP used in the modification and reducing
the modification time. In order to better understand the nature of
poor reproducibility at higher modification concentrations, electrochemical
stripping of the modified electrodes was performed by CV. The poor
reproducibility was likely due to nonspecific adsorption of ELP molecules.
In addition to removing nonspecifically adsorbed ELP, we hypothesize
that the application of a DMSO treatment increased levels of chemisorption
compared to nontreated surfaces, leading to a larger overall charge-transfer
resistance. The charge-transfer resistance of the DMSO-treated surface
was used as a benchmark to find the ideal modification concentration
and time of 0.0125 mg/mL and 30 min for surfaces that can only be
exposed to aqueous media. However, the non-DMSO-treated surface is
likely to still have nonspecifically adsorbed ELP. This indicates
that DMSO treatment may be used as an additional step in the modification
process for surfaces that can be exposed to nonaqueous solvents. Broadly,
this work suggests that reducing both the modification concentration
and modification time and implementation of solvent treatments can
improve reproducibility in thiol-gold surfaces that are prone to physisorption.
As the reproducibility of these surfaces improves, their reliable
application to industry becomes more feasible.

Support was provided by a National Science Foundation
(NSF) EPSCoR award BIO-SENS (#2119237), NSF Eager CBET Award (#1638896
and #1638893), the University of New Hampshire’s Center for
Integrated Biomedical and Bioengineering Research (CIBBR) through
a grant from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of
the National Institutes of Health under Award Number P20GM113131,
and Summer Undergraduate Research Experience fellowships provided
by the University of New England’s College of Arts and Sciences.
We also thank Laura Marvin for the production of a portion of the
I40.

The Supporting
Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsmeasuresciau.5c00033.

S.F. and M.M. contributed equally to this
work. CRediT:Stanley
Feeneydata curation, formal analysis, investigation, methodology,
validation, visualization, writing - original draft, writing - review
& editing;Marissa Moralesconceptualization, formal
analysis, investigation, methodology, writing - original draft;Galen Arnoldresources;Wynter Paivaresources,
validation;Eva Rose Murdock Balogresources, supervision,
validation, writing - review & editing;Jeffrey Mark Halpernconceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, funding acquisition,
project administration, resources, supervision, writing - review &
editing.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.