Anti-HER2 receptor monoclonal antibodies like trastuzumab are the mainstay of treatment in HER2-positive breast cancer but can result in cancer therapy-related cardiac dysfunction (CTRCD). Guidelines recommend cardiac surveillance prior to anti-HER2 therapy initiation, every 3 months during therapy, and within 1 year after therapy completion. Resource limitations in safety-net settings without cardio-oncology programs may impact cardiac surveillance and treatment patterns and contribute to disparities in cardiovascular health among patients with cancer. We aimed to characterize and compare patterns of cardiac surveillance and short-term cardiovascular outcomes among patients with breast cancer receiving trastuzumab in a safety-net versus a tertiary care system.

A retrospective cohort study was conducted on women diagnosed with stage I-III HER2-positive breast cancer between 2018 and 2020 in a safety-net and a tertiary care system. Clinical data from transthoracic echocardiograms, multigated acquisition scans, and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging one year out from trastuzumab initiation were collected. CTRCD was defined by decrements in left ventricular ejection fraction, global longitudinal strain changes, and symptoms of heart failure. Demographics and referral patterns were also assessed.

A total of 235 patients were included (93 safety-net, 142 tertiary care). The safety-net population was 23% Black, 60% Hispanic, and 69% uninsured, while the tertiary care population was 64% White and 3.5% uninsured (p< 0.001). Baseline cardiac surveillance was obtained in 84% of safety-net patients and 89% of tertiary care patients, with mean surveillance interval of approximately 3 months. Only 54% of patients at each site obtained cardiac surveillance post-trastuzumab. CTRCD occurred in 12% of patients in the safety-net system and 19% in the tertiary care system, with most cases being asymptomatic (p= 0.143). High-risk patients were more likely to be referred to cardiology/cardio-oncology in the tertiary care system compared to the safety-net system (67% vs. 6.7%,p< 0.001).

While our data shows similar frequency of cardiac surveillance based on left ventricular ejection fraction at our safety-net and tertiary care center, the utilization of various imaging modalities and cardiology/cardio-oncology services were significantly different between the two institutions. These differences may result in underdiagnosis of CTRCD in vulnerable populations and contribute to inferior long-term cardiovascular outcomes.

Breast cancer remains one of the leading causes of death for women globally, and human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (HER2) positive breast cancer accounts for more than 15% of all breast cancers [1,2]. There have been various advancements in the treatment of breast cancer which have improved overall survival. Particularly, targeted treatments directed towards the HER2 receptor with monoclonal antibodies have become a cornerstone in the treatment of both early and advanced breast cancer [3]. For instance, patients with early-stage HER2-positive breast cancer routinely are treated with one year of trastuzumab as part of standard care [4]. In patients with advanced disease, HER2-directed therapies are continued until the progression of disease, significant toxicities, or death [5].

Though such developments in treatment have conferred improved survival outcomes, patients receiving anti-HER2 medications, such as trastuzumab, have increased risk of development of cancer therapy-related cardiac dysfunction (CTRCD), which often involves a reduction in left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) but can also encompass a wide spectrum of cardiac dysfunction characterized by changes in global longitudinal strain (GLS), cardiac biomarkers, and clinical symptoms of heart failure [6,7]. Based on the 2022 European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines on cardio-oncology, CTRCD can range from severe symptomatic cases of clinical heart failure requiring inpatient management to asymptomatic cases defined by various thresholds of LVEF and GLS decline [8].

Due to the need to screen for signs of cardiotoxicity during anti-HER2 therapy, there are various guideline recommendations regarding surveillance of cardiac function during therapy, often with echocardiogram but also other modalities like multigated acquisition (MUGA) scans or cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [9]. For instance, the ESC guidelines have a Class I recommendation to obtain echocardiography at baseline prior to anti-HER2 therapy initiation, every 3 months during therapy, and within 1 year after completion of therapy [8], while the American Society of Clinical Oncology does not specify a particular interval to conduct routine surveillance during therapy [10]. The Food and Drug Administration label for trastuzumab also recommends LVEF assessment at baseline, every 3 months during treatment, and every 6 months for at least 2 years after completion of therapy [11].

With guidelines calling for up to quarterly assessments of cardiac function, initiation of anti-HER2 agents requires patients to have frequent and timely care [12]. Limited resources in safety-net settings may impact the timely access to cardiac imaging and impede regular cardiac surveillance. Prior studies have also shown that various sociodemographic factors and health determinants, such as race, may increase the risk of cardiotoxicity in patients treated with anti-HER2 therapy [13]. As these same health determinants may place patients at higher risk for other cardiovascular risk factors, such as hypertension and diabetes, it becomes imperative to identify any barriers to timely, guideline-directed care in this patient population. Developing cardio-oncology programs have been suggested as a strategy to improve surveillance, risk mitigation, and treatment of cardiovascular toxicities of cancer care [14]. As such, we sought to characterize patterns of cardiac function surveillance in patients who received anti-HER2 therapy in a safety-net hospital system and comprehensive cancer center.

A retrospective cohort study was conducted to evaluate all newly diagnosed women with stage I-III HER2-positive invasive breast cancer between 2018 and 2020 and treated with trastuzumab at Parkland Health and University of Texas Southwestern (UTSW) Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center. Parkland Health is the safety-net system for Dallas County and affiliated with UTSW. Patients who were diagnosed with metastatic disease and treated with trastuzumab were excluded from the study given the lack of standardized anti-HER2 therapy duration. Information regarding trastuzumab initiation and completion dates and demographic and clinical data were extracted from review of the electronic medical record by three independent reviewers. Sociodemographic information, including race, insurance status, and ZIP code information, was gathered.

The imaging modalities for cardiac function assessment included in this study were transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), MUGA scans, and cardiac MRI. The time frame for included images was limited to 13 months after trastuzumab initiation to reflect the standard 12-month treatment duration of trastuzumab with some flexibility to account for minor delays. A baseline assessment of cardiac function, defined as obtained prior to and closest to trastuzumab initiation, was also included for each patient if one existed. Assessments of cardiac function that were obtained at more frequent intervals than 3 months for any purpose other than cardiotoxic surveillance (e.g. for monitoring pericardial effusion) were excluded. All measurements of LVEF and GLS were recorded and analyzed independently. For those patients who had more than one LVEF assessment and GLS assessment, nadirs of LVEF and GLS were determined, respectively. Additional chart review was done to determine whether a post-trastuzumab assessment of cardiac function was performed within one year of completing trastuzumab therapy, even if this fell outside the 13-month window. However, only data from images obtained within the 13-month window were used in the analysis.

Risk stratification was performed for all patients according to a scheme adapted from the Heart Failure Association-International Cardio-Oncology Society (HFA-ICOS) risk stratification scheme proposed in the ESC guidelines [8]. We defined high-risk as having any one of the following characteristics: history of heart failure or cardiomyopathy, baseline LVEF 54% or less, age of diagnosis 65 years or older, history of both hypertension and diabetes mellitus, and having received prior anthracyclines. Data on referrals to cardio-oncology/cardiology were also gathered, including the referring provider’s specialty and whether patients successfully initiated care with the cardio-oncology/cardiology service.

Our cohort included 235 patients diagnosed with breast cancer with a mean (standard deviation) age at diagnosis of 52 (11) years. Ninety-three (40%) patients received their care at Parkland Health and 142 (60%) received their care at UTSW Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center. The majority of patients at Parkland were Black or Hispanic (83%), while 64% of UTSW patients were White (p< 0.001). At Parkland, 64 (69%) patients did not have insurance at the time of cancer diagnosis, 20 (22%) had Medicare or Medicaid, and 9 (9.7%) had private insurance, while at UTSW, 5 (3.5%) did not have insurance, 33 (23%) had Medicare or Medicaid, 103 (73%) had private insurance (p< 0.001), and one patient had insurance of unknown type.

While diabetes was more common among Parkland patients compared to UTSW (27% vs. 15%,p= 0.0328), incidence of dyslipidemia (54% vs. 44%) and hypertension (46% vs. 38%) were similar between the two groups. Seventeen (18%) patients at Parkland and 27 (19%) patients at UTSW were on cardioprotective agents (including beta blockers, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers, sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors, or mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists) prior to trastuzumab initiation.

Mean (standard deviation) duration of trastuzumab therapy was 361 (127) days and 358 (159) days at Parkland and UTSW, respectively. Seventy-eight (84%) and 101 (71%) patients at Parkland and UTSW, respectively, received pertuzumab in addition to trastuzumab (p= 0.025). Five (5.4%) and 16 (11%) patients at Parkland and UTSW, respectively, received anthracyclines prior to trastuzumab therapy.

Mean (standard deviation) number of LVEF assessments was 4.4 (SD 1.1) and 4.2 (SD 1.3) at Parkland and UTSW, respectively. Baseline LVEF assessment was obtained in 78 (84%) and 126 (89%) patients at Parkland and UTSW, respectively. Providers at Parkland utilized MUGA scans significantly more, with 34% of all LVEF assessment performed with MUGA scan, 66% with TTE, and none with cardiac MRI. In contrast, providers at UTSW utilized TTE for over 99% of LVEF assessments and MUGA scans and cardiac MRI for less than 1% of LVEF assessments (p< 0.001 between sites). Mean time between LVEF assessments were 99 (SD 23) and 97 (SD 22) days at Parkland and UTSW, respectively. Post-trastuzumab LVEF assessment was obtained in 50 (54%) and 76 (54%) patients at Parkland and UTSW, respectively.

Mean baseline LVEF was 62% (SD 5.8%) and 61% (SD 4.9%) at Parkland and UTSW, respectively. Mean nadir LVEF was 56% (SD 4.6%) and 56% (SD 5.0%) at Parkland and UTSW, respectively. Mean change in LVEF from baseline to nadir was − 5.7% (SD 5.2%) at both Parkland and UTSW. Mean baseline GLS was − 20% (SD 2.7%) and − 19% (SD 2.2%) at Parkland and UTSW, respectively (p= 0.0007). Mean nadir GLS was − 18% (SD 2.5%) and − 17% (SD 1.8%) at Parkland and UTSW, respectively (p= 0.0001). Mean change in GLS from baseline to nadir was + 1.4% (SD 1.8%) and + 1.4% (SD 1.6%) at Parkland and UTSW, respectively. Figure1summarizes baseline, nadir, and final LVEF and GLS for all patients who had more than one LVEF or GLS assessment.

Similar rates of CTRCD occurred at the two sites. Eleven (12%) Parkland patients and 27 (19%) UTSW patients developed CTRCD with most of these patients developing mild asymptomatic CTRCD (8 at Parkland and 17 at UTSW). Of the entire cohort, only one Parkland patient developed CTRCD with overt heart failure symptoms. At Parkland, of the 11 patients who developed CTRCD, all patients had an LVEF that was 50% or greater at the end of the 13-month follow-up period. At UTSW, of the 27 patients who developed CTRCD, 23 (85%) had an LVEF that was 50% or greater at the end of the 13-month follow-up period. Tables1,2and3provide a summary of patient characteristics, cardiac function surveillance practices, and CTRCD incidence stratified by health system for the overall cohort, while Table4presents corresponding data for the subgroup of patients who developed CTRCD.

Based on our risk stratification scheme, there were similar proportions of high-risk patients at Parkland and UTSW. However, the risk factors contributing to high-risk classification differed between the two institutions; at Parkland, a greater proportion of high-risk patients were classified as such due to a history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus (20% at Parkland vs. 11% at UTSW,p= 0.0025), whereas at UTSW, advanced age was more commonly the predominant risk factor (15% at UTSW vs. 4.3% at Parkland,p= 0.0253). There were no differences in ZIP code distributions between patients who were and were not identified as high-risk. There were also no differences in ZIP code distributions between patients who did and did not undergo baseline and post-trastuzumab LVEF assessments.

Of those 30 high-risk patients at Parkland, only 2 (6.7%) patients were referred to cardio-oncology or cardiology specialists while 39 of the 58 high-risk patients at UTSW (67%) received such referrals. Of the Parkland patients who received referrals, one was referred externally to UTSW’s cardio-oncology clinic while the other was referred to Parkland’s general cardiology clinic. Of all the high-risk patients referred, only one patient at UTSW did not successfully establish care with cardio-oncology or cardiology. Of the entire UTSW cohort, including non-high-risk patients, 81 (57%) patients were referred to cardio-oncology. Of the 81 referrals, 73 (90%) were by breast or general oncology, 4 (4.9%) by surgical oncology, 3 (3.7%) by general or hospital medicine, and 1 (1.2%) by emergency medicine. Table5summarizes the referral patterns across the risk groups and health systems.

Our study presents a novel characterization and comparison of two populations of patients with breast cancer receiving trastuzumab in a safety-net and tertiary care hospital system and of the cardiac function surveillance patterns in these two unique populations and care settings.

When comparing the patient populations from Parkland and UTSW, demographics differed significantly with Parkland having predominantly Hispanic and Black patients and UTSW having predominantly White patients. Most Parkland patients were uninsured while most UTSW patients had private insurance. These differences are expected given the distinct populations served by a safety-net system compared to a tertiary care center. Although the two populations differed in demographic characteristics, they exhibited similar rates of comorbidities (except for Parkland patients having a higher rate of diabetes), number of cardiovascular risk factors (with Parkland patients trending toward a higher proportion with three cardiovascular risk factors, 17% at Parkland vs. 8.5% at UTSW,p= 0.0624), and baseline medication use, suggesting a comparable burden of disease from a cardiovascular perspective. Both populations received a similar mean duration of trastuzumab therapy consistent with the expected 1-year duration of adjuvant trastuzumab for early-stage HER2-positive breast cancer. The Parkland population had significantly higher use of concurrent pertuzumab, which is reflective of the higher rate of node positive/larger tumors in the safety-net patient population. However, this combination with trastuzumab is unlikely to contribute additional cardiotoxicity [16]. In contrast, the rate of anthracycline use, which is known to increase cardiotoxic risk, was similar between the two sites, further underscoring the comparable baseline cardiovascular risk profiles across both populations.

Parkland and UTSW had similar adherence rates to guideline recommendations for cardiac function surveillance throughout trastuzumab therapy. In both hospital systems, over 80% of patients underwent baseline surveillance of cardiac function, mainly with TTE or MUGA scans when access to TTE was delayed, and the mean time between interval assessments was approximately 3 months. Our observed adherence rates to surveillance recommendations exceed those reported in a prior study, which found that only 36% of patients underwent baseline cardiac assessment followed by subsequent assessments every 4 months [17]. This reflects the fact that Parkland and UTSW are part of an academic medical center with physicians at both locations belonging to the same academic practice group. However, overall, there is a paucity of research evaluating adherence to recommended surveillance guidelines. While rates of baseline cardiac function assessment and interval assessment throughout trastuzumab therapy was adequate in our cohort (> 80% rate of baseline assessment; 3-month mean interval between assessments), only about half of patients at both Parkland and UTSW completed post-treatment assessments following trastuzumab completion. This lack of follow-up is likely due to a combination of patient, provider, and institutional factors and represents a significant gap in care as the risk of developing CTRCD persists well after trastuzumab completion. Additional research is needed to identify barriers to obtaining follow-up cardiac surveillance post-chemotherapy and improve adherence to this guideline recommendation.

The primary difference in surveillance practices between the two hospital systems was the usage of MUGA scans. Parkland physicians often use MUGA when access to TTE is delayed. Historically, MUGA scans have been used to monitor cardiac function in patients treated with anthracyclines. As TTE and other imaging modalities have become more readily available, surveillance with MUGA scans has fallen out of favor. Although the risk is minimal, exposure to radiation from MUGA scans should be considered when used as a surveillance modality [18]. Given that lower-income, indigent patients at Parkland were more likely to undergo a MUGA scan, concerns for equity are raised as this population was more likely to be exposed to higher levels of radiation toxicity. Additionally, many patients alternated between MUGA scans and TTE, which can limit retrospective comparison due to inter-modality variation in measurements of cardiac function [19].

Notably, the presence of a cardio-oncology service at UTSW did not impact the surveillance practices between the two hospital systems, likely because the medical oncology providers are the same at both locations and are frequently the providers who order the imaging studies, especially at Parkland where few oncology patients were connected with cardiology providers. Given the short follow-up period of our study, we are unable to assess the impact of the cardio-oncology service on long-term outcomes related to cardiotoxicity surveillance and the development of CTRCD. While our findings suggests that a safety-net hospital system may be able to achieve cardiotoxicity surveillance practices and short-term cardiovascular outcomes similar to those of a tertiary care center, further research with extended follow-up is needed to evaluate the impact of a dedicated cardio-oncology program on long-term cardiovascular outcomes.

The rates of CTRCD found in our cohort (12% at Parkland and 19% at UTSW) are similar to each other and to rates found in prior studies [20,21,22], although our findings fall on the higher end of the reported range. This may be due to our inclusion of GLS changes in the definition of CTRCD, unlike other studies that relied only on LVEF changes or symptoms of clinical heart failure to define CTRCD. The inflation of CTRCD rates due to inclusion of GLS criteria is more prominent for UTSW compared to Parkland due to the proportionally higher utilization of TTE compared to MUGA, which does not measure GLS. Supporting the comparable CTRCD rates between the two institutions are the similar inter-site prevalences of known CTRCD risk factors, including hypertension and dyslipidemia. Baseline and nadir LVEF and GLS were similar between patients at Parkland and UTSW, with most patients recovering their LVEF and GLS following trastuzumab completion. Overall, our findings suggest that with consistent cardiac surveillance, the incidence and management of CTRCD are similar across different healthcare settings in our study. Furthermore, both sites in our cohort conducted surveillance at appropriate intervals, and most patients diagnosed with CTRCD ultimately recovered their cardiac function.

Nevertheless, our results still show that there is marked underutilization of cardio-oncology and cardiology services in the care of patients with breast cancer receiving cardiotoxic therapies. Prior studies have demonstrated that a variety of reasons, such as institutional restrictions or excessive patient travel time, have hindered primary care and oncology referrals for patients with cancer to receive further specialized care [23]. At UTSW, less than 70% of patients identified as high-risk for CTRCD—based on a risk-stratification approach aligned with that of current guidelines—were connected to cardio-oncology. At Parkland, fewer than 10% of high-risk patients were referred either externally to cardio-oncology or internally to cardiology. Notably, only one patient at Parkland was externally referred to cardio-oncology at UTSW despite the proximity of Parkland and UTSW, likely reflecting disparities in insurance coverage and limited capacity for cross-system referrals. While Parkland’s current practice may not prioritize cardiology referral in the absence of overt CTRCD, this represents a potential area for intervention. Establishing a dedicated cardio-oncology service could facilitate earlier and more frequent referrals; however, such efforts may be constrained by the resource limitations commonly faced by safety-net hospital systems.

In regard to improving the overall care of patients receiving cardiotoxic medications, there are several opportunities for our hospital systems as well as other institutions to deliver higher quality care. For instance, faculty within Parkland are developing patient education resources to emphasize and promote patient awareness of cardiovascular health among those undergoing oncologic treatment as well as breast cancer survivors. These fliers will serve as a reminder to both the patient and provider to discuss management of cardiovascular risk factors during patient encounters. At UTSW, cardio-oncology faculty have previously conducted patient-centric seminars to highlight the importance of cardiovascular health in oncologic patients and the important role that the cardio-oncology department plays in supporting this aspect of their care. Continuing these seminars on a regular basis would further promote patient awareness and encourage active engagement in managing their cardiovascular health. Additionally, the integration of nurse navigators into oncology and cardio-oncology clinics is another area for improvement, especially at Parkland and UTSW where such roles are not currently in place. In institutions where nurse navigators are utilized, their responsibilities may include screening patients who have been referred to cardio-oncology, collecting relevant oncologic history to streamline upcoming visits, and reviewing oncology service patient panels to identify high-risk individuals who have not yet been referred and recommend appropriate referrals. Furthermore, in institutions where there are no dedicated cardio-oncology departments, it may be helpful for future studies to explore the possibility of scheduling echocardiograms upfront. This may help promote improved surveillance rates and allow patients to communicate to their physicians sooner if they are unable to attend a scheduled imaging appointment and facilitate efficient re-scheduling.

Our study also highlights that the majority of referrals were placed by oncologists, with a small portion of referrals placed by breast oncology surgeons and internal medicine physicians. This observation illustrates the significant burden placed on oncologists to refer patients to cardio-oncology to help guide cardiovascular risk management. However, considering that cancer care is multidisciplinary in nature, our overall healthcare system may benefit from sharing this responsibility with primary care physicians, hospitalists, and other providers who may participate in patient care at various timepoints [24,25]. Prior studies have also highlighted the important role primary care providers play in cardio-oncology by engaging with patients throughout all phases of cancer treatment [26]. By increasing the visibility of cardio-oncology within other departments, this may improve referral rates and promote surveillance for CTRCD within any given hospital system [27]. In future studies, it may also be worthwhile to analyze whether development of risk calculators for patients receiving cardiotoxic medications and best practice advisory pop-ups in the electronic health records may help with ease of appropriate referrals.

Although the cardiotoxic effects of various chemotherapies are well-known within oncology, physicians often face time constraints during clinic visits, which limits their ability to address all aspects of a patient’s care [28,29], including cardiovascular risk and surveillance. As the cardiotoxic effects of breast cancer treatments are not immediate, physicians may unintentionally address more urgent topics when building rapport with their patients. Patients with cancer also may be inundated with information and unable to fully comprehend all aspects of their treatment plans [29,30]. This may be further exacerbated when serving diverse patient populations requiring the use of translators [31]. Collectively, these barriers may hinder timely access to cardiac surveillance for patients with cancer. Further research is needed to understand physician attitudes towards cardiotoxicity surveillance and cardiovascular health discussions with patients when establishing cancer care.

Our study has several limitations, especially considering its retrospective nature and inability to draw causal relationships. It was also challenging to ascertain whether chemotherapy was discontinued in response to changes in LVEF or GLS, a potential balancing measure that could indicate harm associated with excessive surveillance. This was particularly true for patients at UTSW, many of whom received portions of their cancer care across multiple institutions, resulting in incomplete documentation of their chemotherapy course. Our study also did not assess physician perspectives or patient attitudes regarding the importance of cardiac surveillance in cancer care. As our study relies on information documented on patient records, there may be conversations regarding cardiac surveillance, referrals to further specialists, or challenges with frequent cardiac surveillance that are not reflected in our study.

Our study is the first to characterize patient demographics, cardiac function surveillance patterns, short-term CTRCD-related outcomes, and utilization rates of cardio-oncology specialists in patients with HER2-positive breast cancer receiving trastuzumab therapy across two unique hospital systems. Our results demonstrate relatively high rates of cardiac surveillance at both institutions, with the exception of post-chemotherapy cardiac surveillance. Resource limitations in the safety-net setting, however, contribute to the use of MUGA as an alternative to TTE and significant underutilization of specialized care for cardiac care/risk mitigation compared to a tertiary care center with a cardio-oncology program. Our results also underscore the need for a more integrated, multidisciplinary approach to care, particularly in improving cardiology referral rates and ensuring appropriate cardiac surveillance for patients with breast cancer who are receiving cardiotoxic chemotherapy and are high-risk for CTRCD.