The striatin family proteins, striatin, SG2NA, and zinedin, belong to the calmodulin-binding WD-40 repeat protein group and are components of the striatin interacting phosphatase and kinase (STRIPAK) complex. These proteins are known for their roles as scaffold proteins, facilitating various cellular pathways, and regulating cell–cell interactions and signaling mechanisms. The observation that Striatin is expressed in cell junctions, suggests a potential role in maintaining cell integrity and communication. Here, we used shRNA technology to examine the biological significance of the striatin family proteins. This approach allowed us to modulate their expression levels and observe the effects on cellular processes. Our results suggest that the striatin family members affect the Hippo signaling pathway by protecting phosphorylated YAP (pYAP) from proteasomal degradation, thus decreasing the expression of Hippo target genes. This regulation impacts key cellular processes, such as cell migration and proliferation. RNA sequencing analyses of keratinocytes and fibroblasts depleted of striatin proteins enabled the identification of novel gene sets affected by the modulation of striatin expression and provided insights into the broader impact of striatin proteins and their roles in various cellular pathways.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13578-025-01461-3.

The striatin family of proteins comprises striatin (STRN1), SG2NA (STRN3), and zinedin (STRN4), which are all multi-domain scaffolding proteins that include a caveolin-binding domain, a coiled-coil region, a calmodulin-binding domain, and a WD-repeat domain [1,2]. The unique structural organization of these proteins implies a defined function, yet data show that their function, subcellular localization, and expression patterns vary in different scenarios [3,4]. The Striatin proteins are both cytosolic and membrane-bound proteins that function in cell–cell adhesion [3,5]. Importantly, they are core components of the large striatin-interacting phosphatase and kinase (STRIPAK) complex, which is involved in cytoskeleton organization, cell migration, and neural development [6–10]. While the three proteins in the family share similar characteristics, there are also certain differences. For example, SG2NA is ubiquitously distributed through all human tissues, while Striatin and Zinedin are mainly located in dendritic spines [4]. In addition, there is a slight change in the amino-acid sequence at the N-terminus of Striatin and Zinedin, which further distinguishes them from SG2NA [3]. The functions of the striatin proteins and the STRIPAK complex are not entirely clear, probably due to their number and pattern of interacting partners, cell specificity, and temporal expression. Striatin has been shown to affect the Wnt pathway by binding to the core Wnt signaling component adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) [11]. Recent data also link the STRIPAK complex to the Hippo pathway [12,13], which is a tumor suppressor signaling cascade and a major regulator of organ size and development. Activation of the Hippo pathway by various signals and factors, results in the nuclear localization of YAP/TAZ transcription factors, and the expression of target genes such as Cyclin D1, connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), Snail, and Slug [14]. The cascade is initiated by autophosphorylation of MST1/2 and SAV1, which in turn phosphorylates LATS1/2 and the MOB complex. This phosphorylation regulates YAP/TAZ phosphorylation, which leads to proteasomal degradation following specific ubiquitination by E3 ligase. The STRIPAK complex is thought to negatively regulate the Hippo pathway by interacting with and dephosphorylating MST1/2, thus allowing for translocation of YAP/TAZ into the nucleus and transcription of target genes [13]. The STRIPAK complex components, have different roles, including cellular signaling, cardiovascular health, cell adhesion, and hormone signaling. Here, we examined the specific roles of each Striatin family member by knocking down their expression in keratinocytes and fibroblasts to provide insights into their common and distinct cellular functions.

Interestingly, our results indicate that silencing each striatin family member individually leads to global gene expression changes that are unique to the silenced protein and specific to the cell type. Nevertheless, the observation that all three single depletions had similar effects on some biological processes and on the levels of phosphorylated Yap (pYAP) suggests a common role involving the Hippo pathway.

To better understand the functions of the different Striatin proteins, specific shRNA sequences were used to knockdown (KD) each of the three striatin family members in both fibroblasts (Fig.1A-C) and keratinocytes (KTs; Fig.1D-F). Keratinocytes play a major role in epithelial cell barrier formation, and we have previously shown that striatin is involved in cell adhesion [5]. Fibroblasts, on the other hand, are adherent cells and thus may serve as a functional control. Fourteen shRNA sequences (listed in the Materials section) targeting the three different striatin family genes were purchased, cloned into lentivirus construcst and used to infect the cells. The sequence for each Striatin family member with the most robust protein depletion (shSTR-79, shSG2NA-17, shZinedin-68; Fig. S1) was used in further experiments. Figure1presents the reduction in expression of each protein at both the mRNA (Fig.1C,F) and the protein level (Fig.1A-B,D-E). The efficacy of the selected shRNAs was confirmed by immunofluorescence assays in both fibroblasts (Fig.1G) and keratinocytes (Fig.1H).

As already noted, SG2NA is ubiquitously expressed while Striatin and Zinedin are more brain-specific [2]. Analysis of published single-cell RNA-Seq data (Fig.2) revealed unique expression patterns of the three studied protein in mouse fibroblasts (left panels) and keratinocytes (right panels). This is in accordance with a previous report [15] that key biological functions and pathways are differentially expressed in the two cell types. Principal component analysis (PCA) of the knocked down cells indicates that in accordance with the already noted cellular distribution [4], the effects of striatin and zinedin silencing on gene expression of both fibroblasts and keratinocytes are more similar than SG2NA KD (Fig. S2). Venn diagram analysis of the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in shRNA vs control (scrambled sequence; SCR) treated cells revealed around 50% unique DEGs (159 out of 319) in SG2NA KD fibroblasts (Fig.3A), with lower numbers after silencing of striatin or zinedin. In contrast, silencing zinedin was associated with the highest number of unique DEGs (224) in keratinocytes (Fig.3B), where most DEGs were specific to each shRNA. The RNA-seq results were validated by quantitative PCR (qPCR) analysis of several genes using specific primers (Fig. S3). In most cases, the results were similar to those obtained in the RNA-seq experiments. Only two genes were seen to be upregulated in all three keratinocyte KDs: ENDOU, an endoribonuclease [16,17], and keratin 16 (KRT16), a type I intermediate filament cytoskeletal protein that regulates innate immunity in response to epidermal barrier breach [18] (Fig.3C-D). Interestingly, while qPCR analysis (Fig.3D) confirmed the RNA-seq results for KRT16, silencing of STRN and SG2NA had insignificant effects on ENDOU. This may be attributed to sensitivity differences or multiple gene variants [19].

Comparing the DEGs detected in fibroblasts and keratinocytes (Fig.3E) revealed a larger number of altered genes in fibroblasts (Fig.3E, upper panel), with more efficient silencing of all striatin family proteins (in red) in keratinocytes than fibroblasts (Fig.3E, bottom panel). There were no shared DEGs detected in the two cell types following striatin depletion, and only a few commonly affected genes after silencing of SG2NA or zinedin. Notably, there was considerable variation in the overlap of cells exposed to the SCR (control) and the different shRNAs, which could be due to distinct regulatory elements, cell types, or variable contexts and expression levels. Similar results were reported for other gene families like the FOXP family [20].

Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID) and Gene Set Enrichment (GSEA) analyses were employed to better understand the variability in the affected biological processes and pathways. One biological process shared by keratinocytes and fibroblasts is cellular development (Fig.4A). Interestingly, cell differentiation was affected by silencing of all three family members only in keratinocytes, whereas functions related to cell localization, migration, and motility were upregulated only in fibroblasts. Notably, differentiation and migration have previously been reported to be mutually exclusive during wound healing, where migrating keratinocytes cease to differentiate, and normal differentiation resumes only after epidermal wound closure is achieved [21]. This observation could provide some explanation for the inhibitory effect on keratinocyte migration rate observed following striatin family knockdown. The results of GSEA analysis using additional databases [22], as presented in Fig.4B, demonstrate that the response of keratinocytes and fibroblasts to shRNA treatments is both cell and protein specific.

Our results indicate more efficient silencing of the striatin family proteins in keratinocytes than in fibroblast (Fig.3E). Striatin is known to be expressed in epithelial cell–cell junctions [4,23–25], which are highly developed in keratinocytes [26], we thus continued to examine the effects of striatin protein loss in primary mouse keratinocytes. Since Striatin was shown to interact with APC [11,27] a core negative regulator of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway [28], we examined a possible connection with the Wnt cascade. Z-scores of the RNA-seq data did not detect any direct effect on the overall Wnt signal transduction pathway, or any clear pattern shared by silencing of the three striatin family members (not shown). However, expression of APCDD1, which is a known Wnt signaling inhibitor [29], was elevated in all the knocked down cells (STRN- 4.58; SG2NA-1.82; Zinedin-10.12 fold), although the depletion of SG2NA had a relatively minor effect by RNA-Seq analysis (Fig.5A). APCDD1 is a transmembrane protein that blocks the interaction between the LRP receptor and the cognate Wnt ligand, thus inhibiting Wnt signaling activation [29]. qPCR analysis of silenced keratinocytes revealed an increase (1.5–2.5-fold) in APCDD1 transcript levels, with the most robust increase observed in the shZinedin treated cells (Fig.5B). The increase in transcript levels was accompanied by a minor but significant rise in the levels of APCDD1 protein expression (Fig.5C-D). The effect of APCDD1 on the Wnt cascade was confirmed by over-expressing the protein in fibroblasts that constitutively express Wnt3A (L-Wnt3A cells). As expected, APCDD1 upregulation reduced the levels of active-β catenin in these cells (Figure S4). A minor effect was also seen on the levels of active β-catenin protein in KTs, most significantly after striatin depletion.

Literature evidence for crosstalk between the STRIPAK complex and the Hippo signaling pathway, suggests collaborative roles in governing cellular behavior and fate [13,30–32]. Examining the effect of silencing the striatin family proteins on Hippo signaling components revealed some distinctive patterns (Fig.6A) that imply involvement in regulating the Hippo cascade. This was further examined by monitoring known core components of the Hippo pathway in the silenced keratinocytes. The results revealed that neither Yes-associated protein (YAP) nor TAZ, which are the key effector proteins of the Hippo pathway, were affected by silencing (thus excluded from the heat map). However, the two phosphorylated forms of YAP, namely pYAP(127) and pYAP(397), were significantly downregulated by all three shRNAs (Fig.6B-C). This finding is in accordance with previous reports that cell–cell contact leads to increased YAP phosphorylation (pS127), while total YAP remains constant [33], and that serum concentration or LPA levels can affect YAP phosphorylation without changing the levels of total YAP [34,35]. In all these reports, the Hippo pathway was activated by the increase of the pYAP form and the translocation of YAP between the nucleus and cytoplasm.

Examination of Hippo target genes involved in cell survival and proliferation revealed downregulation of Axin2 (also a Wnt target gene) [36] and Slug [37] in keratinocytes where any of the three shRNAs was silenced (Fig.6D). The results were not reproduced in knockdown fibroblasts (Fig. S5), which suggests that the Striatin/Hippo interplay is cell-specific and probably highly complex. The phosphorylation site of YAP has been shown to govern the fate of the YAP protein, with pYAP(127) associated with cytoplasmatic retention, while pYAP(397) is designated for proteasomal degradation [38]. We therefore examined whether the effect observed in the knockdown keratinocytes can be attributed to induced proteasomal degradation of pYAP variants. To this end, we treated the cells with the proteasomal inhibitor, MG132 and monitored the expression levels of total YAP and pYAP variants. As shown in Figure 6E-F, hindering protein degradation increased the levels of both pYAP forms, suggesting that the striatin family proteins may protect phosphorylated YAP from proteasomal degradation. However, depletion of SG2NA (Fig. S6) or the other two Striatin proteins (not shown) did not affect YAP ubiquitination. This observation could imply that a ubiquitination-independent mechanism may be involved [39].

Mass-spectrometry analysis of the silenced keratinocytes revealed a decrease in the levels of various members of the 14–3-3 proteins in cells exposed to shStriatin or shSG2NA (Fig.6G). This finding can partially explain the reduction in pYAP(127), which is usually bound to 14–3-3 proteins, leading to cytoplasmatic retention [38]. Thus, a decrease in 14–3-3 protein levels may facilitate proteasomal degradation of this form.

Cell migration is crucial for correct development and maintaining the organization of multicellular organisms, while aberrant cell migration is a hallmark of many pathological disorders. Cell migration can be monitored using a wound healing assay that involves growing a cell monolayer to confluence, then producing a ‘wound’ (a cell-free zone in the monolayer) into which cells can migrate, and monitoring the recolonization of the scratched region [40]. Slug, which was affected by the striatin family KD, is a known inducer of the endothelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and has an important role in cell migration [41]. The results of an automated wound healing assay revealed that depletion of each of the striatin family proteins leads to a decrease in cell movement between 3–9 h after wound generation (Fig.7A-B). Interestingly, this was accompanied by a minor reduction in cell proliferation as measured by the Ki-67 marker, most notably after zinedin knockdown (Fig.7C-D).

Keratinocytes and fibroblasts represent the major cell types in the epidermis and dermis of the skin, where they participate in the cutaneous repair/regeneration process in response to inflammatory signals [43]. Both keratinocytes and fibroblasts play a significant role in the maintenance of skin homeostasis. However, several key biological functions and pathways, including: regulation of the actin cytoskeleton, focal adhesion, and ECM-receptor interactions, are differentially expressed in the two cell types [15]. The results of our lentiviral knockdown system that specifically silences the individual Striatin family proteins in the two cell types, indicate that the roles of the striatin family members are also cell-type specific.

The RNA-seq analysis revealed that the knockdown was more robust in differentiated primary keratinocytes. A subtle compensatory effect was detected, as a moderate increase in striatin was detected in cells depleted of zinedin (not shown). Since zinedin and striatin share similar features [4], this observation is not surprising.

Interestingly, our results indicate that out of the three Striatin knockdowns, shZinedin caused the most robust effects on global gene regulation, APDDC1, and cell proliferation. We speculate that specific modifications may may influence various properties, including: interactions with other proteins, activity, and localization, contributing to the overall effect.

Only two genes were altered by the silencing of all three shRNAs in keratinocytes. ENDOU, an endoribonuclease that binds polyuridine-enriched single-stranded RNA [16,17], and keratin16 (KRT16), an intermediate filament cytoskeletal protein that regulates danger signals, innate immunity, and barrier function of the skin epidermis [18]. Neither of these genes has previously been connected to the striatin family. KRT16, which forms a complex with KRT6, may be of particular interest because of the important roles in cell migration [44,45] and the previous report that KRT16 overexpression reduces the migration potential of human immortalized keratinocytes [46]. We show that the expression KRT6 is decreased following overexpression of Striatin in human keratinocytes. Also, our current results support literature evidence [5,6,9,47–49] that striatin family proteins and the STRIPAK complex are involved in cell migration of different cell types, and it is possible that, in keratinocytes, this effect is mediated, at least in part, through KRT16 (together with its polymerization partners KRT6 KRT17). In this context, an additional skin filament protein, KRT14, interacts with 14–3-3 through a residue that is conserved in keratins, and affects Hippo signaling [50]. The increased levels of KRT16 in all three types of silenced keratinocytes suggest a common function for the striatin family proteins in protecting against skin injury or inflammatory conditions.

Although striatin has been shown to interact with the tumor suppressor gene APC [11,27], a known inhibitor of the canonical Wnt signaling pathway, there was no global effect of silencing striatin family members on Wnt signaling-related gene expression. Nevertheless, APCDD1, a canonical Wnt signaling inhibitor [29], was upregulated. APCDD1 blocks the interaction between Wnt ligands and the cognate LRP receptor, and subsequent degradation of active β-catenin. By inhibiting Wnt signaling, APCDD1 helps regulate cell proliferation and differentiation, maintain tissue homeostasis, and prevent uncontrolled cell growth [51]. The increases in APCDD1 mRNA levels detected by qPCR were much more moderate than those obtained by RNA-Seq, with the greatest increase in zinedin knockdown cells. The discrepancy between the RNA-seq and qPCR results may be due to multiple factors, including sensitivity differences, normalization methods, and technical variability. In addition, RNA-seq captures the gene expression profile at the time of sampling, which can vary due to biological factors such as cell cycle stage, differentiation status, or environmental influences. Subsequently, the results may differ if the qPCR is conducted on a different sample or time point. This is particularly true for primary cultures. The effect on the APCDD1 protein levels was even more subtle (less than 1.5-fold), which accords with the minor decrease observed in β-catenin expression. It is also possible that other factors affect the protein expression levels of APCDD1 as miR-130, for example has previously been shown to be a posttranscriptional regulator of APCDD1 gene expression [52]. Our results suggesting that the connections between the striatin family proteins and the Wnt cascade are diverse and may be indirect agree with previous findings of the different effects of striatin on the Wnt pathway. Thus, in addition to the interaction of Striatin with APC [11], Striatin was also shown to inhibitWnt1expression in specific cells [53], and to co-localize with β-catenin in different pathological conditions [54]. Our observation of lowered levels of active β-catenin following striatin depletion may not be directly related to changes in APCDD1 levels but could be due to other mechanisms, including the effect of shSTRN on cytoskeleton organization (Fig.4A; STRN column), which was shown to influence β-catenin expression levels [55].

Striatin family proteins and the STRIPAK complex are strongly connected to the Hippo signaling pathway [47,56–59], which plays an essential role in maintaining tissue homeostasis and preventing tumorigenesis by regulating organ size, cell proliferation, and apoptosis. The STRIPAK complex inhibits Hippo signaling by dephosphorylating and inactivating core Hippo components including the transcription activator YAP, which then translocates to the nucleus and promotes the transcription of pro-growth genes [59]. Conversely, in the absence of STRIPAK, phosphorylated YAP is retained in the cytoplasm and eventually targeted for degradation [56]. Our findings that silencing the different striatin family members decreased the levels of phosphorylated YAP, may be attributed to increased proteasomal degradation since other upstream components of the Hippo pathway, such as the LATS1 kinase and SAV1, were unaffected by the Striatin depletion. In addition, our mass spectrometry analysis revealed a decrease in the expression of 14–3-3 protein variants following the silencing of Striatin or SG2NA which may facilitate pYAP(127) degradation. In these cases, inhibiting proteasome activity restored the levels of both pYAP(127) and pYAP(397). Different studies have perviously shown the connection between Striatin and the Hippo pathway, mainly focusing on the connection between Hippo to the entire STRIPAK complex. These studies show that STRIPAK integrates upstream signals to control the initiation of Hippo signaling [13], that context-dependent assembly of the STRIPAK complex affects Hippo signaling [32], and specific roles of STRIPAK in regulating Hippo in synaptic formation [61]. In our study, we aimed to understand the role of the individual Striatin protein family members. Our result suggests that all striatin members contribute to the stabilization of YAP, a notion that is strengthened by the observed increase in ENDOU, which was previously shown to be elevated in YAP knockdown cells [62]. In regard to specific Striatin proteins, it has been shown that SG2NA cooperates with MAP4K4 to promote growth and tissue invasion [47], and our data provides additional information about the function of the other Striatin proteins. ENDOU was also elevated following the depletion of the three Striatin family members, supporting our hypothesis of their YAP-stabilizing effect. Interestingly, the ubiquitination of YAP was not affected by Striatin silencing, suggesting ubiquitin-independent degradation. Although YAP is mostly degraded by proteasomal-mediated ubiquitination, it has been shown that it can also be degraded by ubiquitin-independent mechanisms [63]. One such example is the lysosome-mediated pathway, where IKKε, a member of the inhibitor of kappa B kinase (IKK) family, phosphorylates YAP, promoting its lysosome-mediated degradation [64]. In addition, a recent study has shown a ubiquitin-independent degradation involveing c-degrons [65]. It was also found that a unique YAP proteolysis mechanism is mediated by its βTrCP degron domain and does not require the LATS1/2 kinase [66]. These findings suggest that when Striatin is deleted, YAP may undergo an alternative degradation process which is independent of both LATS1/2 and protein ubiquitination. Although the levels of total YAP were unaffected by the striatin family protein knockdowns, there was downregulation of the target genes Slug and Axin2, indicating a downstream effect on Hippo pathway function. This accords with previous reports of decreased YAP target gene expression in SG2NA or zinedin-depleted cells [47]. Whether the negative effect on YAP signaling is due to reduced stability of the pYAP variants or to other unknown factors remains to be determined.

Overexpression of Flag-tagged Striatin was conducted in human keratinocytes (HaCat cells) to reinforce our shRNA results. The ectopic expression of Striatin led to membranous sequestering of YAP (Fig. S7; upper panel). Very similar results were shown with overexpression of PIP5Kα, which led to membranous expression of YAP, and it was suggested that PIP5Kα regulates the Hippo pathway via its catalytic activity [67]. The levels of KRT6, which is co-expressed with KRT16 [68] (shown by our data to be upregulated following striatin depletion), were reduced when Striatin was overexpressed (Fig. S7; middle panel). In addition, the levels of active β-catenin that are usually low in HaCat cells, were increased with overexpression of Striatin (Fig. S7; lower panel), which is in line with our striatin knockdown results.

Very little is currently known about the biological roles of Striatin family members and their unique role in various cell types and under different conditions. Our observations illuminate the complex relationships and interactions between the three striatin family proteins. We found no or only slight changes in the expression of the non-knocked down striatin family member in most compensatory experiments (not shown). This finding suggests that functional redundancy may occur through mechanisms beyond simple gene expression increases. Instead, other proteins with overlapping or complementary roles may adapt functionally to mitigate the loss. Alternatively, other signaling pathway may change in order to achieve parallel outcomes. Similar findings have been described in other gene families; for example, when certain PI3K isoforms (such as PI3Kα or PI3Kβ) are knocked down cells maintain some degree of downstream signaling, even though other isoforms (like PI3Kγ or PI3Kδ) are not upregulated. Such compensation often occurs through pathway rewiring or by leveraging alternative PI3K-independent pathways, such as those involving Akt or mTOR [69–76]. The HOX gene family members also exhibit partial compensation following a single HOX gene depletion without altering the expression levels of related HOX genes [77]. Similarly, knocking down Akt1 kinase does not necessarily lead to an increased expression of Akt2 or Akt3, which could compensate functionally to a certain extent [78], and knocking down specific Wnt ligands (such as Wnt3a) in certain cells may not lead to increased expression of other Wnt ligands. In the latter case, Wnt ligands supplied by neighboring cells may compensate for the decrease of Wnt activity. Thus, the exchange of Wnt3a ligands appears to compensate for the rapid decrease in Wnt activity in individual cells [79]. An alternative option for changes in function could be that the same catalytic subunit of PP2A may targeted by multiple subunits (including striatin), and different compositions of PP2A heterotrimers may exhibit altered functions in diverse signaling pathways [80].

The striatin family proteins and the conserved Hippo and Wnt signaling pathways play unique roles in regulating cell growth, migration, proliferation, apoptosis, and stem cell maintenance [81,82]. Understanding the interplay between these three biological elements offers a promising avenue for anti-cancer drug development. We propose that striatin family proteins act as regulatory hubs that may be targeted to either upregulate Hippo activity or inhibit Wnt signaling in cancer cells. Targeting both pathways simultaneously could result in a more robust inhibition of cancer growth while minimizing the effects on non-cancerous cells. In addition, if specific striatin family-Wnt-Hippo interactions are associated with aggressive or treatment-resistant cancers, these proteins could serve as biomarkers. Monitoring their levels or activity in tumors could provide insights into cancer progression and treatment response that can be used to develop more personalized therapeutic strategies. In conclusion, the shRNA knockdown approach reveals certain distinct functions for striatin, SG2NA, and zinedin, in addition to others that are common, such as those affecting cell migration. Importantly, we describe a potential novel role for Striatin proteins in stabilizing pYAP variants in the Hippo pathway. Notably, our results reveal a complex interplay between the three members of the striatin family that remains to be elucidated.

This research was supported by Grant No 2017173 from the United States-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) granted to Rina Rosin-Arbesfeld and David C. Pallas.