Although pervaporation (PV) desalination is a promising solution to global freshwater scarcity, membranes suffer from unstable separation performance. This study utilized resource recycling to prepare a porous ceramic membrane using solid waste fly ash as raw material, which was then combined with polyimide (PI) to produce a high-performance composite membrane (abbreviated to as PI/ceramic membrane). In this composite membrane, the ceramic membrane provides mechanical support and promotes rapid water passage, while the PI layer intercepts hydrated salt ions through size screening and electronic repulsion. Through their synergistic action, the composite membrane can preferentially adsorb and diffuse water molecules while retaining. Results indicate in addition to a retention efficiency of nearly 99.9%, the PI/ceramic membranes achieved a permeability of 10.88 L (m−2h−1), which is superior to other existing polymer-modified membranes. Simultaneously, the membrane demonstrates selective ion rejection (e.g., SO42−and Mg2+) while maintaining stable rejection performance at 90 °C. A 45-hour continuous operation test confirmed the composite membrane's stability, demonstrating consistent performance. This study provides a novel approach for the preparation of polymer-modified membranes for industrial wastewater desalination.

A high-performance and stable polyimide (PI)/ceramic composite membrane was prepared and used for pervaporation desalination.

Among many membrane-based desalination technologies, pervaporation (abbreviated as PV) operates under ambient or low pressure conditions, offering significant energy savings compared with reverse osmosis (RO) which requires high-pressure operation, while demonstrating superior capability in treating hypersaline brines.6Membrane distillation (MD), a comparable membrane technology, generally imposes more stringent temperature constraints, whereas PV maintains operational stability across a wider temperature spectrum (ambient to 100 °C).7Consequently, membranes for PV have been deeply studied.

In general, PV membranes can be designed and synthesized from dense polymeric materials, porous inorganic materials, or hybrid matrix membranes of both.8–10Polyimide (abbreviate as PI) is a kind of polymer materials whose molecular main chain contains the structural features of the imide ring, with excellent thermal stability and high temperature resistance.11,12Due to the hydrogen bonding between its imide groups and water molecules, it has high hydrophilicity, so PI can effectively separate the target substances at high temperatures while maintaining high permeability and high selectivity. Moreover, the excellent mechanical properties of PI enable its thin film to withstand high working pressure. With further research, the combination of PI with different emerging materials has also enabled the design and preparation of membrane materials with excellent properties according to specific needs.13–15For example, Baet al.16used PI membrane as a carrier and prepared PMDA/ODA PI membrane through interfacial polymerization with MPDA and TMC. The membranes were used in permeation evaporation desalination tests, which achieved a 98% retention rate and a flux of 1.1 m3per (m2day) for a 2.0 g per L NaCl aqueous solution; Xuet al.17amine crosslinked PI with bis (carboxylic acid hydrazide) (BTCH) to produce pervaporation desalination composite membranes with excellent stiffness and higher hydrophilicity for desalination; Dmitrenkoet al.18utilized PI and fullerenol crosslinked by a heat treatment at 140 °C for different durations (100–420 min) to form thinly crosslinked PI-fullerenol reactive layers on a porous UPM carrier for high performance of desalination. A thin crosslinked PI-fullerenol active layer was coated on UPM porous carriers to form ethanol dehydrated membranes for permeability testing; Zhanget al.19prepared PI/ATP composite membranes byin situpolymerization of nano-concavetite (ATP) functionalized with KH-550 silane coupling agent, which improved the gas separation performance by introducing nanoparticles into the polymer.

However, polymers are still characterized by low mechanical strength and susceptibility to swelling and aging.

Compared to conventional polymeric membrane materials, inorganic membrane materials exhibit superior chemical resistance, excellent mechanical strength, acid/alkali resistance and oxidation resistance, making them widely adopted as substrate membranes. These membranes are usually synthesized from porous inorganic materials, such as silica, alumina, and diatomaceous earth, which perform excellently in complex water treatment processes (such as radioactive-containing wastewater and high-salt waste water).20,21Ceramic materials have become a typical representative of inorganic membrane materials due to their outstanding characteristics, which are mainly composed of metal oxides (such as alumina, silica, and zirconia) as well as aluminosilicates.22The porous structure and high hydrophilicity of the ceramic membrane can not only provide mechanical support but also promote rapid water passage, while the nanoscale pores and polar groups of the separation layer can achieve preferential adsorption and diffusion of water molecules and strict interception of hydrated salt ions through size screening and electronic repulsion, respectively.23By modifying ceramic materials, it is possible to improve their pore size range, surface charge characteristics,etc.thereby broadening their application areas24For example, Xuet al.25prepared a high-performance polydopamine/graphene oxide composite membrane by loading a polydopamine/graphene oxide composite layer on a porous alumina ceramic substrate. The water flux of the membrane reached 8.50 L (m−2h−1) with a salt retention rate higher than 99.70%.

In this study, a porous ceramic-based membrane was prepared using solid waste fly ash and aluminum hydroxide, and surface modification by PI thermal cross-linking to prepare a novel PI/ceramic membrane for pervaporation desalination. The design simultaneously realizes the degree of mechanical support of the ceramic layer and the precise sieving function of the PI selective layer. Meanwhile, ceramic layer also provides the ability to assist in sieving, and the curing of the PI layer on the ceramic membrane increases its stability and reusability. And the successful modification of polyimide was confirmed by ATR-FTIR, SEM, BET, and AFM methods. The as-prepared polyimide/ceramic membranes retained sodium chloride almost completely and exhibited excellent water permeability, which was attributed to the Donnan repulsive effect on the membrane surface and the spatial site-barrier effect of the nanoscale pores.

Porous ceramic membranes were prepared with reference to our previous work.26In brief, fly ash (10 g), Al(OH)3(16.54 g), MoO3(5.31 g), and Na2SiO3·9H2O (10.62 g) were mixed with 60 ml of anhydrous ethanol, wet-ground, dried, sieved, pressed into tablets, and fired to obtain the porous ceramic membrane. For more information, please see Text S3 and Fig S1.

For more information, please see Text S4. The 8 wt%, 10 wt% and 12 wt% PAA solutions were prepared according to the above method for subsequent experiments.

For details of the preparation method,27–29please see Text S5 and Fig S2. 8 wt%, 10 wt% and 12 wt% of PAA were thermally imidized to produce composite membrane named as PI-X/ceramic membrane (X= 8, 10, 12).

The morphology, surface roughness, the chemical components, the zeta potential and hydrophilicity of the membranes were analyzed. The specific information, see Text S2.

The experimental performance tests were evaluated by means of a homemade device made in the laboratory (Fig. 1). Explicit explanation see Text S6.

The flux and salt rejection were calculated according toeqn (1)and(2), respectively.

whereR(%) is rejection,Cf(mg L−1) andCp(mg L−1) denotes the salt concentrations of the feed and permeated solution, respectively.

The phase composition of the porous ceramic membrane was analyzed by XRD, and the result was presented inFig. 2b. Thermal treatment induced the reaction between calcite in fly ash and corundum, forming mullite phase with a characteristic diffraction peak at 34.3°. The mullite phase exhibits characteristics of high hardness and compressive resistance, which helps to improve the overall mechanical strength and durability of the ceramic material. Simultaneously, during the sintering process at 1175 °C, both molybdenum trioxide (melting point 795 °C) present in the fly ash and calcium molybdate phase (melting point 965 °C) formed through high-temperature solid-state reaction between molybdenum trioxide and calcium oxide exhibited volatility, consequently inducing liquid-phase evolution and pore formation. This results in an intrinsically porous microstructure that facilitates water molecule transport.33,34Consequently, the ceramic matrix is composed of four crystalline phases: mullite, calcite, corundum, and calcium molybdate. The above distinctive multiphase structure results in membrane characteristics that with high mechanical strength and high porosity.

The pore characteristics and size distribution of both the porous ceramic membrane and PI/ceramic membrane were systematically investigated using N2adsorption–desorption analysis. From the results (Fig. 3a1), it can be seen that the porous ceramic membrane belongs to the type IV adsorption–desorption isothermal profile, which indicates that it is a nonporous or mesoporous material. And the relative average pore size distribution (Fig. 3a2) confirms that the porous ceramic membrane have a wide range of pore sizes ranging from mesoporous (<50 nm) to macroporous (100 nm). Complementary analysis of XRD demonstrated that the phase evolution during sintering produced mechanically robust mullite and corundum phases, while MoO3as a sacrificial pore-forming agent produces a heterogeneous pore structure due to its inherent thermal decomposition properties. As shown inFig. 3b1, the PI/ceramic membrane exhibits characteristic consistent with mesoporous material, and analysis ofFig. 3b2shows that the PI/ceramic membrane are mainly distributed with pore diameters of about 10 nm, demonstrating that the PI coating effectively modulated the pore architecture of the porous ceramic membrane. Meanwhile, the comparative analysis showed that the adsorption capacity of the modified PI/ceramic membrane was larger, which meant that it had more adsorption sites, richer pore structure and larger specific surface area (Table S1). SEM analysis revealed that the porous ceramic membrane surface comprises anisotropic lamellar aggregates (Fig. 4a1). The surface irregularity provides abundant sites for PI layer deposition, facilitating effective loading and enhanced stability. The PI-modified membrane surface (Fig. 4b1) exhibits a mildly corrugated dense structure, generating microscopic bumps that enlarge the effective contact area and enhance mass transfer pathways. Cross-sectional comparison (Fig. 4a2 and b2) revealed a distinct PI thin layer post-modification, confirming successful integration of the PI layer with the porous ceramic membrane. AFM analysis further demonstrated that the porous ceramic membrane exhibited high surface roughness (Ra= 322 nm), whereas PI layer deposition significantly reduced the composite membrane roughness (Ra= 30.2 nm) (Fig. 5and Table S1). The modulation of surface roughness exerts dual improvements on membrane performance: first by suppressing hydrodynamic perturbations to optimize filtration kinetics, and secondly by circumventing the contamination-enhancing effect induced by micron-scale depressions.

The PV process is driven by the transmembrane vapor pressure gradient and the chemical potential difference, and the vapor pressure increases exponentially with temperature. Consequently, increasing the feed temperature would accelerate molecular transport and significantly increase the water flux through the membrane.37In this experiment, we systematically evaluated the separation performance and permeability changes of PI-10/ceramic membranes in the temperature ranged from 60 °C to 90 °C.

The filtration performance of PI/ceramic membrane was evaluated across a salinity gradient to assess their application in different water bodies such as high salinity wastewater (Fig. 7b). Remarkably, the PI-10/ceramic membrane maintained exceptional salt rejection (>99%), and the water flux was kept at a relatively stable level across the entire concentration spectrum. This is mainly attributed to the efficient retention of the PI modified layer, where the PI polymer chains are tightly aligned and sufficiently stabilized after thermoimidization. The porous ceramic membrane can also be used as a second filtration layer to provide some assistance in the retention of highly saline solutions. Despite minor flux fluctuations under high salinity conditions, the membrane retained its superior separation capability, demonstrating remarkable stability against salinity shocks.

The PI-10/ceramic membrane was also tested in different concentrated salt solutions to make it flexible in various wastewater conditions. Therefore, different salt solutions containing SO42−, Mg2+, Na+and Cl−were systematically tested. The results (Fig. 7c) showed that the PI-10/ceramic membrane had excellent separation of both monovalent and divalent ions (R> 99%). By analyzing the permeate fluxes, it can be seen that they are in the order ofJ(NaCI) >J(MgCI2) >J(MgSO4) >J(Na2SO4). The change in water fluxes may be due to the different hydration diameters of different salt ions, which are approximately ranked as SO42−> Mg2+> Na+> Cl−.39–41Larger sized salt ions interact more strongly with membrane when passing through the membrane pores. The significant increase in mass-transfer resistance decreases the diffusion coefficients of the ions, thereby decreasing the permeate fluxes. Furthermore, the PI-10/ceramic membrane's negative surface potential (Fig. 2d) enhances electrostatic repulsion against anions while promoting the adsorption and deposition of cations with large hydration diameters onto the negatively charged PI layer. This selective interaction contributes to the membrane's ion rejection capability, although the adsorbed cations block the network structure and reduce water flux to some extent, this simultaneously reinforces both size-sieving and charge-repulsion mechanisms, thereby more effectively suppressing co-ion permeation.

Generally, the desalination mechanisms are mainly sieving effect and Donnan effect.42,43In this study, the small pore size (10 nm) PI layer interacts with the interface of the mesoporous (<100 nm) ceramic layer to form a gradient structure of pore sizes from small to large from the surface to the interior, which optimizes the desalination effect. Meanwhile, the negatively charged (Fig. 2d) surface of the PI/ceramic membrane can effectively repel more of the same ions through the Donnan effect, improving the desalination efficiency. When pumping pressure pushing the side of the membrane, water can easily through the hydrophilic PI/ceramic membrane while salt ions experience combined rejection from both steric and electrostatic barriers44(Fig. 8).

Compared with analogous polymer membranes (Fig. 9),45–51our PI-10/ceramic membranes demonstrate superior performance in the synergistic optimization of desalination efficiency and water flux. When the desalination efficiency of >99.9%, the PI-10/ceramic membrane achieved the highest water flux (10.88 L (m−2h−1)); when the water flux of >10 L (m−2h−1), the PI-10/ceramic membrane achieves optimal desalination performance.

An experiment with 45 hours of long-term desalination process by PI-10/ceramic membrane was operated. The results (Fig. 7d) showed that the PI-10/ceramic membrane almost maintained the desalination efficiency of above 99%, although the water fluxes slightly decreased, however, the fluctuation trend was not obvious. This indicates that the PI-10/ceramic membrane had a good stability. The SEM results of the PI-10/ceramic composite membranes after use showed (Fig. 4c) that little change was seen on the surface of PI-10/ceramic membrane, indicating a stable membrane surface structure after long-term operation. This further evidence that PI-10/ceramic membrane have excellent stability during long-term operation.

In this study, porous the PI-10/ceramic membranes were successfully developed by surface modification with PI thermal cross-linking. The modification has greatly improve both the surface roughness and the pore size range of the PI/ceramic membranes, which resulted in good desalination efficiency, high water permeability, and good stability. This study provides a new idea in the combination of polymer membranes with inorganic ceramic membranes, which shows great potential in the treatment of industrial wastewater desalination.