Bone marrow is the primary hematopoietic organ, playing a vital role in the production of blood cells. While the development of bone marrow in different canine bones has been studied, research on the skull bone marrow is lacking. This study aimed to assess the normal MRI appearance of the skull bone marrow development in dogs and establish a model for skull bone marrow conversion. A multicenter retrospective study was conducted on 40 dogs undergoing MRI for an idiopathic/unknown origin epilepsy diagnosis. Dogs were categorized into four age groups: <6 months, 6–11 months, 12–18 months, and 18 months–6 years. Signal intensity, homogeneity (with a grading system), and contrast enhancement of the calvarium, skull base, temporomandibular joint (TMJ), and maxillofacial bones were assessed. The calvarium and skull base were the earliest to reach a predominant fatty marrow at 6 months, while the TMJ and maxillofacial bones showed a later conversion, with a homogeneously fatty bone marrow present in most dogs at 12 months. A subjective rostro‐caudal tendency of conversion was identified in the calvarium, skull base, and maxillofacial bones. Age was a significant factor in the conversion process, while gender showed minor influences. Contrast enhancement was present in all dogs <6 months, with the pattern of contrast enhancement being in line with the bone marrow conversion, gradually disappearing with age. This study provides reference data on the normal MRI appearance of skull bone marrow development, aiding in the differentiation of normal and pathological conditions in clinical veterinary practice.

Bone marrow is the most important hematopoietic organ of the body, providing the circulating blood with platelets, erythrocytes, and leukocytes for coagulation, immunity, and oxygen transport. Bone marrow consists of cellular components (hematopoietic and fat cells) and supporting structures (cancellous bone, vascular, lymphatic, and nervous structures) [1]. At birth and throughout early developmental age in both humans and dogs, the marrow cavity is haematopoietically active (red) due to its large amount of erythropoietic cells. The adipocytes represent the major component of both red and yellow marrow; however, with aging, the red marrow gradually converts to yellow marrow, and the adipocytes increase in volume and numbers, becoming haematopoietically inactive [2,3,4,5]. Ultimately, the bone marrow has a dynamic nature that varies according to anatomical location, age, individuals, physiological needs, and pathological response [1].

Magnetic resonance imaging is considered the gold standard for diagnosing bone marrow abnormalities noninvasively [6,7]. This diagnostic approach is suitable for the investigation of bone marrow due to its ability to map the distribution of red and yellow marrow, as the signal intensity of the images reflects the ratio of the different components. The normal development of the bone marrow of the femur and pelvis in MRI has been studied, with bone marrow conversion occurring between 12 and 16 months of age in dogs [8]. The normal MRI appearance of the bone marrow in the lumbar spine, pelvis, and femur has also been described in adult dogs [4], and a canine model to define the extent of bone marrow lesions in stifle osteoarthritis has been established [9]. In contrast, there is a lack of published research on the normal MRI appearance and development of skull bone marrow in both young and adult dogs.

Pathologic processes often alter the cellular composition of bone marrow, resulting in abnormal MRI appearances [10,11]. In children, the standard course of cranial bone marrow development in MRI is used in the evaluation of potential pathologic processes specifically involving the skull bone marrow, such as acute lymphoblastic leukemia [12] and non‐Hodgkin lymphoma [13]. Considering the above, the development of an MRI canine skull bone marrow conversion model is essential to gain confidence in its assessment in puppies and adults.

This study aims to assess the normal development (signal intensity and homogeneity) of the skull bone marrow in the canine head MRI and establish a model for skull bone marrow conversion. We hypothesize that bone marrow conversion in a canine skull occurs in a young adult age, similar to the pelvis and femur, and that contrast enhancement of the bone marrow is present in puppies.

This is a multicenter, retrospective study, including three referral hospitals, and using their electronic medical database for case selection between January 2015 and December 2023. Considering the purely retrospective nature of the study, ethical approval was not regarded as necessary. The population selected consisted of dogs that underwent a 1.5 tesla MRI scan of the head and were diagnosed with idiopathic epilepsy with a Tier II confidence level according to the International veterinary epilepsy task force consensus proposal [14] and epilepsy of unknown cause (<6 months). All dogs received intravenous gadolinium‐based contrast medium as a contrast agent. Dogs were included if they had (1) complete medical records: including age, breed, gender; (2) a full neurological examination performed; (3) MRI of the brain: including at least transverse T2‐weighted (T2W) and transverse T1‐weighted (T1W) precontrast and postcontrast images; and (4) routine cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis. Dogs were excluded if suspected or diagnosed with systemic or infiltrative bone marrow disease, marked periodontal disease, a history of head trauma, chronic corticosteroid therapy, or had undergone previous treatment that might affect bone marrow (e.g., craniotomy, radiotherapy, chemotherapy). The only exception was dogs treated with phenobarbital. These were included in the study because the bone marrow effects are considered rare, and none demonstrated hematological abnormalities. Dogs were divided in four different groups according to age at the time of investigations: dogs <6 months of age (group named as “puppy1”), between 6 months to 11 months (group named as “puppy2”), between 12 months to 18 months (group named as “young adult”), and dogs between 18 months and 6 years of age (group named as “adult”).

A third‐year ECVN resident (G.C.) reviewed medical records and retrieved the following information: breed, age at time of MRI, gender, results of general physical and neurological examination, results of complete blood count (CBC) and biochemistry, and results of routine CSF analysis. Two European College of Veterinary Diagnostic Imaging board‐certified veterinary radiologists (B.G., C.M.) reviewed the MRI studies, blinded to the dog's signalment.

The radiologists were asked to describe the signal intensity of the bone marrow of the skull bones. Based on results from previous human publications and prenatal development of the skull bones, skull bones were divided in four groups: calvaria (including frontal, parietal and occipital bones), skull base (including presphenoid, basisphenoid, basioccipital), temporomandibular joint (TMJ) (including mandibular fossa of the temporal bone and mandibular condyle), and maxillofacial bones (including maxilla, zygomatic arch, mandibular body and mandibular ramus). The bones included in each group were assessed together, and in case of clear disparity, radiologists were asked to annotate the differences. The signal intensity of the bone marrow was compared with that of the adjacent skeletal muscle and retrobulbar and subcutaneous fat on T2W and T1W sequences. MRI signal intensity was characterized as low (predominantly isointense to muscle on T2W and hypointense to muscle on T1W), intermediate (predominantly hyperintense to muscle but hypointense to fat on T2W, and isointense to muscle on T1W), or high (predominantly isointense to fat on T2W and T1W). The presence or absence and the degree of contrast enhancement (mild, moderate, or strong) of the bone marrow were subjectively assessed.

Furthermore, bone marrow was classified based on its homogeneity according to a grading system established in people [15]. Bone marrow was graded from 1 to 3 on T1W images according to the following criteria: (1) homogeneously low (hypointense to muscle) or intermediate (isointense to muscle) signal intensity, a few areas of high signal intensity may exist, but never representing >20%, (2) mixed low or intermediate and high signal intensity areas, (3) homogeneously high signal intensity (approximately isointense to fat), a few areas of low signal intensity may exist, although never representing >20% of the bone marrow. If the assigned grades differed, the radiologists reached the final grading by consensus.

MRI 1.5 Tesla was used in the three UK‐based referral centers, including a Philips Intera (Philips, Best, The Netherlands), and a Siemens Magnetom Essenza (Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany) in the remaining two institutions. Patients were positioned in sternal recumbency on a flex coil (small and medium), extremity coil, or SAH brain coil. 2D sequences performed were transverse T2W, transverse T1W and T1W postcontrast, and sagittal T2W. Other brain sequences were also performed as part of the brain protocol, but were not used for the study. Gadolinium (Gadovist 1 mmol/mL, Bayer AG, Berlin, Germany) was administered intravenously at a dose of 2 mL/kg a few seconds to minutes prior to the postcontrast sequences. No pressure injector was used. More detailed information is provided in AppendixS1.

Initial data analysis assessed interobserver agreement using Cohen's kappa and Landis & Koch's quality categories (poor (<0), fair (0.01–020), slight (0.21–0.40), moderate (0.41–0.60), substantial (0.61–0.80), and almost perfect agreement (0.81–1)) for the interpretation of the results [16]. Then, the data analysis was on a scale agreed by the two imagers, and the three outcome variables (intensity in T1W and T2W images, contrast enhancement, and grading) resulted in some convergence problems and were modeled as linear mixed models with dog as a random effect and bone, age group, and gender as fixed effects. Permutation tests based on 999 permutations (using “permlmer”) on a leave‐one‐out basis were used to identify significance. Analysis was undertaken in R 4.3.3 and Minitab 21. Significance was taken asp< .05.

Forty dogs diagnosed with idiopathic epilepsy were included in the study. Dogs were equally divided into ten individuals for each group (“puppy1”, “puppy2”, young adult, and adult). Breeds included were French Bulldog (5/40), Border Collie (4/40), German Shepherd (4/40), Labrador (4/40), Beagle (2/40), Pug (2/40), and one of each Golden Retriever, Kelpie, Cocker Spaniel, Cavalier King Charles Spaniel (CKCS), West Highland White Terrier (WHWT), Alaskan Malamute, Miniature Schnauzer. The remaining 12 out of 40 dogs were crossbreed dogs, including Cocker Spaniel cross Poodle (4/40), CKCS cross Poodle (2/40), and one of each Cocker Spaniel cross Springer Spaniel, Labrador cross, Husky cross, Border Collie cross, and unknown breed cross (2/40). Ten out of 40 dogs were female entire, 5 of 40 were female neutered, 15 of 40 were male entire, and 10 of 40 were male neutered.

The general physical and neurological examination was considered normal in all cases but four, in which mild postictal signs were reported (mild obtundation, mild generalized ataxia, and mild postural reaction deficits). No clinically significant abnormalities were reported in the CBC, biochemistry, and routine CSF analysis in any of the cases.

Results showed that signal intensity and homogeneity in skull bone marrow (calvarium, skull base, TMJ, and maxillofacial) increased with age across different regions.

Calvarium: In the “puppy1” group, T2W images showed intermediate to high signal intensity (7 intermediate, 3 high), and T1W images mostly intermediate signal (5 intermediate, 4 low, 1 high). More than half of the cases were graded as 1. In the “puppy2” group, T2W images were mostly high (9 high, 1 intermediate), and all T1W images were high, with most cases graded as 3 (Figure2). In young adults and adults, all cases were classified as high in both T2W and T1W images, with all graded as 3 (Figure3).

Skull Base: In the “puppy1” group, T2W images were intermediate to high (6 intermediate, 4 high), while T1W images were mostly high (7 high, 3 intermediate). Grades were mostly 2, with some 3 (Figure1). In older groups (puppy2, young adults, and adults), the skull base was consistently classified as high in both T2W and T1W images, with all cases graded as 3 (Figures2and3).

TMJ: In the “puppy1” group, T2W images were mostly intermediate (9 intermediate, 1 high), while T1W images were also mostly intermediate (7 intermediate, 2 low, 1 high). Grades were mostly 1, with some 2 (Figure1). In the “puppy2” group, T2W images were INTERMEDIATE or low (7 intermediate, 3 low), and T1W images were mixed (5 low, 3 high, 2 intermediate), with all cases graded as 2 (Figure2). In young adults and adults, all cases were classified as high in both T2W and T1W images, with most graded as 3 (Figure3).

Maxillofacial bones: In the “puppy1” group, T2W images were mostly intermediate (8 intermediate, 2 high), while T1W images were mixed (5 low, 5 intermediate). Grades were mostly 1, with some 2. In the “puppy2” group, T2W images were mostly intermediate (7 intermediate, 3 high), and T1W images were mixed (3 high, 3 intermediate, 4 low), with grades ranging from 1 to 3 (mostly grade 2). In young adults and adults, all cases were classified as high in both T2W and T1W images, with most graded as 3.

MRI of a 7‐month‐old Husky crossed Malamute from the “puppy2” group. (A–C) Transverse T2W images. (D–F) Transverse T1W images precontrast. These images are at the level of the frontal (A, D), temporomandibular (B, F), and occipital (C, G) regions. On T2W images, the calvarium and the skull base were classified as high, and the TMJ was classified as intermediate. On T1W images, the calvarium and the skull base were classified as homogeneously high (grade 3), and the TMJ was classified as low, with a more heterogeneous appearance (grade 2). Note the difference in signal intensity between the mandibular fossa (arrows) and mandibular condyle (star), with areas of high intensity present in the mandibular fossa (B, E).

MRI of a 4‐year‐old Cocker Spaniel from the adult group. (A, B) Transverse T2W images. (C, D) Transverse T1W images precontrast. (A) and (C) are at the level of the TMJ, and (B) and (D) are at the level of the occipital region. All bones were classified as high in both T2W and T1W images and graded as 3 due to their homogeneous appearance. Note the good corticomedullary demarcation of the calvarium and temporomandibular bones (arrows and triangles), particularly on T1W images (C).

MRI of a 10‐week‐old crossbreed dog from the “puppy1” group. (A) Sagittal T2W image. (B) transverse T2W image. (C) Transverse T1W image precontrast. (D) Transverse T1W image postcontrast at the level of the TMJ. The calvarium (arrows), skull base (triangle), and TMJ (star) were classified as intermediate on T2W images (A, B). On T1W images (C), the calvarium (arrows) was classified as low, and the skull base (triangle) and TMJ (star) as intermediate. The calvarium and TMJ were graded as 1 (homogeneous), and the skull base as 2. All showing strong contrast enhancement (D) (arrows, triangle, and stars).

These results are summarized in Figures4and5and AppendixS2.

Bar charts of the signal intensity illustrating the number of cases of each skull bone category (calvarium, skull base, TMJ, and maxillofacial) classified as high, intermediate, and low intensity in T2W (A) and T1W (B) images, grouped by age (Puppy1, Puppy2, Young Adult, and Adult).

Bar chart of the grading illustrating the number of cases of each skull bone category (calvarium, skull base, TMJ, and maxillofacial) graded as 1 (homogeneously low or intermediate signal intensity), 2 (mixed low or intermediate and high signal intensity areas), and 3 (homogeneously high signal intensity), grouped by age (Puppy1, Puppy2, Young Adult, Adult). In grades 1 and 3, a few areas of high or low signal intensity were allowed, never representing more than 20% of the bone marrow.

The interobserver agreement found an almost perfect agreement between the observers on the intensity variable of all cases in the calvarium (0.925) and TMJ (0.868) in T2W images, and a substantial agreement for the skull base (0.725) and maxillofacial (0.662) in the same sequence. In T1W images, the interobserver agreement was substantial for the calvarium (0.735), TMJ (0.643), and maxillofacial (0.750) bones, and it was almost perfect for the skull base (1.000). The grading was almost perfect for each bone (calvarium (1.000), skull base (0.925), TMJ (0.960), and maxillofacial (0.960)) (TableS1). Age group and bone were both significant factors (p= .001; TableS2) in explaining the increased signal intensity and grading observed in the skull bone marrow. A significant correlation was observed between gender (female or male) and bone marrow intensity. However, due to the small and unequally distributed sample size, statistical tests for each particular group could not be performed. A general trend emerged, with low and intermediate intensities being more commonly detected in females across most age groups, while high intensity was more frequently observed in males. The variables neutered or entire were present only in the young adult and adult group; therefore, no observations or comparisons between groups were possible (TablesS1andS2‐ supporting information).

Overall, the presence of contrast enhancement of the bone marrow decreased with ageing. In the “puppy1” group, all cases but one (skull base) show contrast enhancement in all bone categories (Figure1). In the “puppy2” group, all cases show contrast enhancement of the maxillofacial and TMJ, 6 (6/10) cases of the calvarium, and 2 (2/10) cases of the skull base. Contrast enhancement of the maxillofacial bone marrow (3/10) and TMJ (1/10) was still present in some young adult dogs, while no contrast enhancement was identified in the remaining bone categories (calvarium, skull base) in young adults. In the adult group, no contrast enhancement of the bone marrow was noted in any bone category. The results are summarized in Figure6. While examining the contrast enhancement of the bone marrow, the observers noted periosteal enhancement in all “puppy1” group dogs (Figure7) and mild periosteal enhancement in some (3/10) “puppy2” dogs. No periosteal enhancement was seen in young adults or adult dogs.

Bar chart of the contrast enhancement illustrating the number of cases of each bone category (calvarium, skull base, TMJ, and maxillofacial), showing contrast enhancement, and grouped by age (Puppy1, Puppy2, Young Adult, Adult).

MRI of a 2‐month‐old Cockerpoo from the “puppy1” group at the level of the parietotemporal region. (A) Transverse T1W image precontrast. (B) Transverse T1W image postcontrast. Images illustrate the strong contrast enhancement of the mandible, skull base, and calvarium. Note the periosteal contrast enhancement at the level of the mandibular ramus (arrows, B).

As stated in the material and methods, observers were asked to specify the degree of contrast enhancement (mild, moderate, and strong). This was highly subjective, and the results varied widely between observers, particularly among similar groups (mild and moderate, and moderate and strong), so it was decided not to reach an agreement. As a result, only the presence or absence of contrast enhancement was finally determined. That said, it is interesting to highlight that, for the two observers, only dogs in the puppy1 group showed strong contrast enhancement (Figures1,7, and8), and when contrast enhancement was present in young adults, it was considered mild.

MRI of a 10‐week‐old crossbreed dog from the “puppy1” group. (A, C) Transverse T1W images precontrast at the level of the frontal (A) and occipital area (C). (B, D) Transverse T1W images postcontrast at the level of the same frontal (B) and occipital area (D). These images highlight the rostro‐caudal tendency of the skull conversion, with high‐intensity areas in the frontal bone (rostrally) and low‐intensity areas in the occipital bone (caudally). Note the marked contrast enhancement of the maxilla (arrows, B) and the calvarium (arrows, D).

The interobserver agreement found a moderate agreement for the variable contrast enhancement in the calvarium (0.548), and substantial agreement in the skull base bones (0.684), TMJ (0.797), and maxillofacial (0.750) (TableS1). Age group and bone were found to be significant statistical factors (p= .001; TableS2) in explaining the contrast enhancement observed in the skull bone marrow. Gender did not significantly impact the contrast enhancement in the bone marrow.

Further notes were reported by the radiologists on different cases while observing and evaluating the skull bones. In the “puppy1” group, a difference in the signal intensity was noted between the bones of the calvarium, with high‐intensity areas identified rostrally (frontal bone) in T1W and T2W images, and the parietal and occipital bones appearing intermediate or low (Figure8); inhomogeneity of the skull base was also noted in 4 (4/10) cases of “puppy1” group and 3 cases (3/10) of the “puppy2” group, with high‐intensity areas in the presphenoid and basisphenoid bones, and intermediate intensity of the basioccipital bone. Similarly, a difference in the signal intensity was noted between the mandibular fossa and the mandibular condyle in most (9/10) cases of the “puppy1” group and all cases of the “puppy2” group, with at least some areas of high intensity consistently present in the mandibular fossa on T1W images, while the mandibular condyle appeared intermediate or low (Figure2). Regarding the maxillofacial bones, the rostral maxilla was high in 3 cases (3/10) of the “puppy2” group, while the remaining bones (mandible and zygomatic arch) appeared intermediate.

Brachycephalic dogs were annotated as having a subjectively thicker cortex and subsequently a thinner bone marrow cavity than non‐brachycephalic dogs. Good cortico‐medullary demarcation was highlighted in some adult dogs (Figure3). Patchy T1W low‐intensity areas were present in the mandibular condyle of three adult dogs classified as high and graded as 3.

In our study, we aimed to assess the MRI appearance of the normal development of skull bone marrow in dogs. Our investigation focused on providing a detailed description of the physiological development of the marrow of skull bones (calvarium, skull base, TMJ, and maxillofacial) using standard spin‐echo sequences (T2W and T1W) along with a grading system to characterize the homogeneity of the bone marrow. These MRI sequences are pivotal in distinguishing between active red marrow, characterized by its hypercellularity, and yellow marrow, which is hypocellular [17]. Additionally, our study explored the presence or absence of contrast enhancement of the bone marrow. By comparing these findings, we have established patterns of skull bone marrow, laying the groundwork for future diagnosis of bone marrow disease in canines [8].

On T1W images, red bone marrow displays a signal intensity that is oflessor similar intensity than the normal musculature. In contrast, yellow bone marrow exhibits a significantly higher signal intensity compared with these structures, with a similar intensity to the subcutaneous fat [18]. As individuals age, the signal intensity of red marrow on T1W images progressively increases, indicating an increase in fat content. On T2W images, red marrow shows a low or intermediate signal intensity that is lower than that of yellow marrow [11]. By comparing the signal intensity in T2W and T1W images in a healthy skull, we can recognize the presence of fat content, which is hyperintense in both sequences. In our results, young adults (12–18 months) and adult dogs had a high intensity in both sequences in all skull bones; therefore, the yellow marrow prevails in their skulls. This finding is aligned with what has been reported in humans, showing an increased intensity of the skull bone marrow in most patients by the age of 15 [15].

Our results showed that calvarium and skull base bones are the earliest to reach a predominant fat bone marrow composition at 6 months of age, with a high intensity and homogeneous appearance (grade 3) of these bones in all dogs but one (grade 2). Therefore, the conversion from red to yellow bone marrow mostly happened over 0–5 months of age. Interestingly, a rostro‐caudal tendency of the conversion was annotated by the radiologists in the calvarium and skull base. This conversion has also been observed in human skulls, with the frontal bone typically undergoing early conversion relative to the occipital bone, much like the presphenoid converts earlier than the basioccipital [1]. In infants, one hypothesis suggests that the lower signal intensity observed in the basioccipital bone (compared with the basisphenoid and presphenoid bone) is due to a higher density of bone trabeculae, which then decreases as hematopoietic cells increase and the trabeculae become sparser in the marrow cavity [19].

In regard to the TMJ and maxillofacial bones, the bone marrow conversion happens slightly later than in the calvarium and skull base. In the puppy2 group (6–11 months), most cases were classified as intermediate or low intensity and as grade 2, indicating bone marrow reconversion. The bone marrow reaches a yellow bone marrow state mostly within 12–18 months of age, where marrow is classified as grade 3 (homogeneous) high intensity. In this age group, all dogs were classified as high‐intensity, but only one was graded as 2, suggesting that marrow reconversion can still happen at this age.

All the TMJ bone marrow showed a difference in intensity and timing of bone maturation between the mandibular fossa of the temporal bone and the mandibular condyle. The mandibular fossa appeared to have a faster conversion compared with the condyle, which still had red bone marrow within 6–11 months of age. Similar to the calvarium and skull base, a rostro‐caudal tendency of the conversion was also noted in the maxillofacial bones, with high signal intensities identified earlier in the maxilla than in the mandible. Three of the canine adult cases had the presence of areas of low intensity (<20%) in the TMJ. In people, the mandibular condyle contains red marrow at the age of 25, therefore suggesting that the presence of areas of red marrow can also be reported in adult dogs [20].

In previous literature, canine bone marrow conversion in the pelvis and long bones has been described within 12–16 months of age [8]. Our findings show that bone marrow conversion in the skull happens overall earlier in life. In humans, the conversion to yellow marrow occurs at different rates in different bones. The general view is that marrow in distal bones is converted more rapidly than marrow in proximal bones [3]. Red bone marrow is present in the clivus and calvaria in most infants less than 1 year old, but this number rapidly decreases during childhood. If active marrow is present in about 25.3% infants, only 11.6% are present at the age of 10 [15].

A grading system was used in this study to further classify the homogeneity of the bone marrow, and the results were combined with the bone intensity to better identify the conversion timings of the bone marrow. Grade 1 was only observed in the “puppy1” group (0–5 months), except for the maxillofacial bones (also in the “puppy2” group); the intensity of these bones was homogeneously low or intermediate, representing red bone marrow. Grade 1 was not identified in the skull base. The number of patients with grade 1 marrow decreased rapidly at an early age, while those with grade 2 marrow (exhibiting both low and high signal intensity) and grade 3 (uniformly high signal intensity) gradually increased with age, reflecting an increase in yellow fat components, then became absolute in adulthood.

Given that we allowed up to 20% of the area in the skull bones classified as grade 3 to exhibit lower intensity, a small area of red bone marrow could still be present in adult dogs. In adult dogs, patches of red marrow have also been previously reported in the lumbar spine, ilium, and femoral head and neck [4]. In normal human adults, red marrow is most frequently observed in the parietal bone [1]. Therefore, it is possible that throughout a canine's life, the distribution pattern of red/yellow bone marrow is continuously evolving; this represents a factor of consideration while evaluating bone marrow in older dogs.

Another variable considered in people is a phenomenon called reconversion from yellow to red bone marrow [18]. In humans, this is considered a physiological response to increased hematopoietic needs of the body, including smoking cigarettes, highly oxygen‐demanding sports, obesity‐related respiratory disorders, diabetes, anemia, and hematopoietic growth factor treatments [18]. Investigating this phenomenon in dogs, particularly in working breeds like Greyhounds or those affected by nonregenerative immune‐mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA), and in patients treated with drugs known for bone marrow toxicity, could offer valuable insights into how these factors influence marrow distribution [21,22].

The pattern of contrast enhancement of the skull bones was in line with the bone marrow conversion, with contrast enhancement present in all bones classified as low or intermediate intensity or graded as 1 or 2. No contrast enhancement was present in the bone marrow classified as high or graded as 3 (yellow marrow), except for the maxillofacial bones of two dogs, with equivocal to mild contrast enhancement noted. All bones in “puppy1” showed contrast enhancement, with the enhancement being predominantly strong in all but the skull base. These results are similar to those previously reported in the femur, pelvis, and lumbar spine [4]. The enhancement in a puppy's red bone marrow could merely reflect the normal physiological processes of rapid bone growth and remodeling. In contrast, yellow marrow, which is less active with lower vascular content and reduced hematopoietic function, is likely to exhibit minimal or no contrast enhancement.

All “puppy1” and a few “puppy2” showed periosteal enhancement. The periosteum is a highly vascularized two‐layered membrane (fibrous and cambial) derived from the mesodermal cells. It envelops the nonarticular surfaces of the bones and contains osteoprogenitor cells [23,24]. Decreased periosteal fibroblast number, fibrous layer thickness, osteoblast number, collagen formation, osteoid zones, and vessel density are reported as age‐related changes within the periosteum in humans [24,25]. In young rats, a high degree of vascularization has been observed in both cambial and fibrous periosteum layers, whereas in adult rats, blood vessels are predominantly observed in the fibrous layer. These vascularization changes might suggest a periosteum role in nutrient and osteoprogenitor cell supply in young rats, a function that diminishes with age. This reduction could explain the decreased contrast enhancement seen during aging.

Fat‐suppression sequences reduce or eliminate fat signals by using chemically selective pulses [26]. This technique is essential for differentiating between diseased and healthy fatty marrow and offers clearer distinctions between red and yellow marrow compared with T2W and T1W sequences [8], which would have been advantageous in our study. Unfortunately, these sequences are not typically included in standard brain imaging protocols, limiting their availability in this retrospective study. Including fat saturation sequences in future studies would provide valuable additional information and insights.

In our study, there was a tendency for female dogs to have a higher prevalence of low/intermediate intensity in both T1W and T2W images compared with males, with a higher prevalence of high‐intensity bones. However, in light of the low number of dogs, we recommend verification of these results in a larger‐scale survey. In people, it has been suggested that females have a larger amount of hematopoietic tissue than males in early adulthood, likely due to menstrual blood loss and the influence of sex hormones [11]. Given the tendency to neuter our pets at an early age, this discrepancy between hematopoietic tissue and gender might be difficult to observe in dogs. No previous studies have ever reported any gender differences related to bone marrow conversion in dogs.

Dogs exhibit considerable variation in skull shape, and no research has yet investigated the link between skull bone marrow and skull shape differences. In this study, radiologists noted that the cortical bone appeared subjectively thicker in brachycephalic breeds compared with non‐brachycephalic breeds, resulting in a thinner bone marrow. This made it more difficult to assess intensity and interpret findings. Considering the limited number of brachycephalic dogs in each age group, a statistical analysis was not conducted. Additional evaluation is needed to assess skull bone marrow variations across canine breeds and their influences on skull bone marrow conversion.

There is currently a lack of information on skull bone marrow in dogs; therefore, our results interpretation is based on and compared with human literature and on MRI descriptions of canine bone marrow, focusing on other body sites, such as the femur, pelvis, and lumbar vertebrae. Limitations of the study include the small number of dogs, consisting of different breeds and sizes, thus limiting conclusions on breed/size‐related differences. As specified above, the thick cortex and small bone marrow cavity of brachycephalic dogs and the thin/small‐sized skull bones of small breeds made their classification (intensity and grading) challenging in some cases. Another factor that made the interpretation challenging in some cases was the presence of suture and cartilage. Occasionally, the rostral‐most mandible was not included, also limiting the assessment of this bone. Due to the small number of dogs included in each group and the lack of information in a few cases, the body weight could not be examined as a possible factor influencing bone maturation. Furthermore, incorporating fat suppression sequences would be beneficial in future research, allowing a better distinction between red and yellow marrow.

Bone marrow toxicity has been described as a rare adverse reaction in epileptic patients administered phenobarbital [22]. In our study, most of the patients enrolled were not administered any antiepileptic drugs at the time of the MRI scan, and none of them demonstrated cytopenia on hematology. Although toxicity was deemed unlikely in the cases that received the treatment, it could not be entirely dismissed, as hematological abnormalities can occur within the first three months of initiating treatment [22].

Our study described for the first time the MRI appearance of the normal development of the canine skull bone marrow, providing the first skull bone marrow conversion model over the first 18 months of a canine's life. The calvarium and skull base were the earliest to reach a predominant yellow bone marrow composition at 6 months of age, while TMJ and maxillofacial bones showed a later conversion (6–11 months), with a homogeneously yellow bone marrow present in most dogs at 12 months. A subjective rostro‐caudal tendency of conversion was identified for the calvarium, skull base, and maxillofacial bones. Strong contrast enhancement of the bone marrow and periosteal enhancement were normal findings in early life, with the pattern of contrast enhancement being in line with the bone marrow conversion and gradually disappearing in adulthood. The state of the conversion was dictated by age group and possibly influenced by gender. Our description can be useful in distinguishing between normal and abnormal MR images throughout canine skull development.