Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

Revised 2025 Jun 26; Received 2025 Jan 30; Accepted 2025 Jul 14; Collection date 2025 Aug.

This is an open access article under the terms of thehttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

Central nervous system (CNS) involvement in multiple myeloma (MM) is a rare complication associated with poor prognosis and a median overall survival (mOS) between 2 and 7 months.1,2CNS involvement is characterized by plasma cell infiltration of the CNS parenchyma, meninges, or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).1,3B‐cell maturation antigen (BCMA)‐directed chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T‐cell therapies have significantly improved the treatment options for patients with relapsed/refractory (r/r) MM.4,5Currently, two CAR T‐cell products have been approved for r/r MM, ide‐cel (idecabtagene vicleucel) and cilta‐cel (ciltacabtagene autoleucel). With ide‐cel being the first approved CAR T‐cell therapy in r/r MM, it offers the longest clinical experience to date.4Previous experience with CD19‐directed CAR T‐cells in patients (pts) with r/r large B‐cell lymphomas and CNS involvement has demonstrated their ability to cross the blood–brain barrier, as well as to expand and persist in CNS compartments.6,7,8In contrast, for r/r MM pts with a history of CNS disease (MM‐CNS), real‐world evidence with respect to the efficacy and safety profiles of CAR T‐cells remains limited, as these pts were excluded from the pivotal studies.4,5To address this gap, we sought to evaluate the efficacy and toxicity profiles of BCMA‐directed CAR T‐cell therapy in MM‐CNS pts in a real‐world context.

We conducted a multicenter retrospective study including r/r MM pts undergoing ide‐cel treatment between March 2022 and May 2024 at seven German/Swiss tertiary care centers. Pts were grouped by the presence of CNS disease before ide‐cel infusion. Only pts with intradural and/or intraparenchymal lesions by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)/computed tomography (CT) brain/spine or detection of myeloma cells in the CSF were regarded as MM‐CNS pts. Descriptive and survival analyses, including propensity score matching (PSM) between MM‐CNS and non‐MM‐CNS pts (optimal matching with 1:3 ratio; age at ide‐cel, number of prior therapy lines, and IMWG response at ide‐cel as covariates), were performed. Clinical data were gathered from the medical records.

Before CAR T‐cell infusion, all patients received lymphodepleting chemotherapy with fludarabine and cyclophosphamide in accordance with guideline recommendations. Grading of cytokine release syndrome (CRS) and immune effector cell‐associated neurotoxicity syndrome (ICANS) was performed according to the American Society for Transplantation and Cellular Therapy consensus grading for CRS and ICANS.9The CNS response to CAR T‐cell therapy was classified as complete remission (CR), partial remission (PR), stable disease (SD), and progressive disease (PD). The serologic response was assessed according to the established IMWG criteria.10The toxicity management guidelines were consistently applied for all pts, irrespective of the presence of CNS manifestations.

This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Muenster (2024‐068‐f‐S). Overall survival (OS) was calculated as the time from CAR T‐cell infusion to death or last follow‐up (FU). Progression‐free survival (PFS) was calculated as the time from CAR T‐cell infusion to disease progression, death, or last FU.

In total, 150 r/r MM patients underwent ide‐cel therapy in the participating study centers during the study period. Ten (6.7%) pts from five centers met the criteria for CNS disease before CAR‐T treatment. Median time from diagnosis to ide‐cel infusion for MM‐CNS pts was 5.6 years (range: 3.6–13.6), and median time from leukocyte apheresis to CAR‐T treatment was 61 days (range: 47–112).

The median age of MM‐CNS pts at CAR‐T infusion and the median number of therapy lines before ide‐cel were 61 years (range: 47–71 years) and 5 (range: 2–8), respectively. Triple‐ and penta‐refractoriness was documented in 9/10 and 7/10 of the patients, respectively. All patients developed secondary CNS involvement during the disease course, after a median of 3 (range: 1–7) therapy lines. CNS manifestation was detected in one patient during bridging therapy 2 weeks before ide‐cel.

CNS manifestations were characterized by parenchymal lesions (5/10) and/or leptomeningeal manifestations (6/10). CNS myeloma was diagnosed by MRI (3/10), CT (1/10), both MRI and CT (4/10), or a combination of imaging and CSF diagnostics (2/10) (Supporting Information S1: Table1). Before ide‐cel infusion, seven pts received CNS‐penetrating systemic myeloma therapies, including immunomodulatory drug (IMiD)‐containing regimens (5 pts), anti‐CD38 antibody treatments (5 pts), and MTX‐based therapies (2 pts). Additionally, radiation therapy was applied in 3/10 cases. Intrathecal therapy was administered to 4/10 of MM‐CNS pts. Two pts received a combination of radiation and surgery (Table1). Supporting Information S1: Table2shows applied specific treatments and outcomes of the 10 MM‐CNS pts in detail.

Outcomes and toxicities of central nervous system (CNS) myeloma patients.

Abbreviations: cCT, cranial computed tomography; cMRI, cranial magnetic resonance imaging; CR, complete remission; CRS, cytokine release syndrome; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; HDCT/ASCT, high‐dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation; ICANS, immune effector cell‐associated neurotoxicity syndrome; ide‐cel, idecabtagene vicleucel; MM, multiple myeloma; PD, progressive disease; PR, partial remission; pts, patients; SD, stable disease; VGPR, very good partial remission.

At the time of ide‐cel treatment, CR in CNS was documented in 2/10 of pts, 6/10 had a PR, and 2/10 had PD as assessed by MRI/CT brain/spine with or without CSF diagnostics. Serologic response rates at ide‐cel infusion were CR in 3/10, VGPR/PR in 5/10, and PD in 2/10 pts (Table1, Supporting Information S1: Table2).

At first response assessment one month post‐CAR‐T, best serologic responses were as follows: 4/10 CR, 5/10 pts with VGPR/PR, and 1/10 in PD. Regarding CNS disease, 3/10 pts maintained response until last FU (CR: 2, PR: 1), whereas 5/10 pts improved response to CR (4/10) and PR (1/10), respectively. In the two remaining pts, SD (1/10) or PD (1/10) as best response was documented post‐ide‐cel (Table1; Figure1A). Information on CAR T‐cell persistence and CSF plasma cell clearance was available in one patient (Patient 8). T cells were detected in CSF taken 30 days post‐infusion with approximately 2.8 T cells/µL and 17.9% CAR expression (Supporting Information S2: Figure1). Along this line, this patient achieved a CR of the spinal CNS manifestation coming from a PR, as evaluated by MRI, along with a serological CR (Figure1A; Supporting Information S2: Figure1). Overall, 4/10 pts experienced relapse post‐CAR‐T. Among these, two pts showed PD/relapse of the CNS disease and serologic relapse (pts #6 and 9), while the remaining two pts (#7 and 5) developed serologic PD/relapse only (Figure1A).

Clinical courses after treatment with ide‐cel (idecabtagene vicleucel). (A)Swimmer plot depicting clinical courses after chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)‐T treatment for all 10 patients, with systemic (upper line) and central nervous system (CNS)‐specific disease status (lower line) shown for each patient separately. With respect to subsequent therapies after CAR‐T failure, Patient 5 was treated with talquetamab in systemic relapse, whereas Patient 7 received salvage therapies with bortezomib, dexamethasone, cisplatin, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, etoposide (VD‐PACE), teclistamab, epirubicin, etoposide, ifosfamide (IEV), and allogeneic stem cell transplantation (alloSCT). Patient 6 received a stem cell boost and salvage therapy with pomalidomide, dexamethasone, and selinexor after CAR‐T failure. Patient 9 opted for best supportive care following refractory disease post‐CAR‐T and declined any further therapy.(B)Kaplan–Meier estimates for patients (pts) with confirmed CNS myeloma showing overall survival (OS) and progression‐free survival (PFS).(C)OS and PFS after propensity score matching with a matched cohort of 24 pts without CNS myeloma. Abbreviations: CR, complete remission; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; PD, progressive disease; PR, partial remission; SD, stable disease; VGPR, very good partial remission.

Figure1Bdepicts Kaplan–Meier estimates for all MM‐CNS pts. With a median FU of survivors of 11 months, a median OS of 12.9 months and a median PFS of 10.5 months were observed. To compare outcomes between pts with and without CNS manifestations, we applied PSM, identifying a matched cohort of 24 pts without CNS myeloma. After matching, survival outcomes and serologic response rates were comparable for the MM‐CNS cohort and non‐CNS cohort (median OS: 13 months [MM‐CNS] vs. not reached [non‐CNS myeloma], P = 0.52; median PFS: 10.5 vs. 11.3 months, P = 0.76) (Figure1C). Overall response rates (CR/VGPR/PR) were 75% for both MM‐CNS and non‐MM‐CNS pts (P = 1.00) (Supporting Information S1: Table3). Nine patients experienced CRS, of which 3 pts (3/9) had CRS Grade 1, 4 pts (4/9) Grade 2, and 2 pts (2/9) Grade 3. Only 2 pts (2/10) developed ICANS, both Grade 1 (Table1). Of note, no high‐grade (3‐4) ICANS was documented among MM‐CNS patients, which was consistent with the matched cohort of non‐CNS pts (0/24) (Supporting Information S1: Table4). All four deaths occurred due to r/r disease (Figure1A).

This real‐world analysis evaluates the safety and efficacy of BCMA‐directed CAR T‐ cell therapy in MM pts with CNS disease. There were three main findings. First, we observed that CAR T‐cell therapy achieves encouraging response rates in MM‐CNS pts, with 8/10 patients showing continued CNS response. Second, our results suggest that outcomes of CAR T‐cell therapy in a MM‐CNS patient cohort appear to be comparable to a matched cohort of classical non‐CNS myeloma pts after CAR‐T ide‐cel treatment. Nevertheless, statistical non‐significance as well as the low number of patients analyzed do not necessarily imply equivalence, and larger studies are needed to validate these findings. Finally, BCMA‐directed T‐cell lymphocytes measurement in the CSF was performed in one patient, aligning with the rapid clinical and documented radiologic response and confirming their ability to penetrate the blood–brain barrier as well.

Conventional approaches to treat CNS myeloma include radiotherapy, intrathecal and/or systemic chemotherapy, IMiDs, and anti‐CD38 directed agents, such as daratumumab, which are capable of crossing the blood–brain barrier.13,14,15Although being effective in some CNS myeloma cases, the response duration of these agents is often limited to weeks or a few months only.13These treatment approaches are unlikely to achieve long‐term remissions, highlighting the potential role of CAR T‐cells as a consolidation strategy in this setting.

In fact, Gaballa et al. recently reported 10 r/r MM pts with CNS disease from five centers treated with either ide‐cel (n= 6) or cilta‐cel (n= 4), whereas two of these pts were diagnosed with CNS myeloma shortly post‐CAR‐T infusion.11For the 8 pts with confirmed CNS disease before CAR T‐cell infusion, the median OS and PFS were 13.3 and 6.3 months, respectively.11Regarding the development of CAR‐T‐related adverse effects, we and Gaballa et al. both report a few high‐grade CRS/ICANS.11Solely two pts in our cohort had CRS Grade 3, compared to none in the Gaballa cohort. We report no high‐grade ICANS, whereas Gaballa et al. reported one case with ICANS Grade 3.11A strength of our study is the use of PSM with non‐CNS MM patients undergoing ide‐cel treatment, which confirmed comparable survival outcomes. Together, our findings and those of Gaballa et al. highlight encouraging response rates to BCMA‐directed CAR T‐cell therapy among patients with MM and CNS involvement.

However, we acknowledge that other important potential confounders, such as cytogenetic risk profile, performance status, and prior BCMA exposure, were not included in the PSM analysis but could influence outcomes. Additionally, the FU time was relatively limited, thereby reducing the capability to draw long‐term conclusions about the safety and efficacy of CAR T‐cell therapy in patients with CNS myeloma.

Our findings suggest that CAR T‐cell therapy can be effective in MM pts with CNS involvement, improving response with a toxicity profile comparable to non‐CNS pts. Thus, CNS manifestations in r/r MM should not preclude the use of CAR T‐cell treatment for these patients.