Eosinophilia is a hallmark of allergic disorders, including asthma, allergic rhinitis, and atopic dermatitis. The onset and maintenance of allergic inflammation in atopic adults involves the activation of selective hemopoietic processes and the migration of mature and immature eosinophils to allergic tissue, where these cells release mediators of inflammation that participate in the regulation of inflammation. Eosinophils function in close cooperation with basophils and mast cells in allergic tissue, where crosstalk between these central effector cells regulates the inflammatory process. This chapter will review the cellular events leading to the accumulation of eosinophils and their progenitors in the airways in allergic asthma, with a particular focus on models of allergen‐induced allergic inflammation. Inhaled allergen challenges in allergic asthmatics have advanced understanding of the pathogenesis of allergen exposure leading to early and late asthmatic responses and the associated airway hyperresponsiveness and type 2 airway inflammation. This chapter will also discuss the mechanisms of commonly used asthma therapies on allergen‐induced eosinophilia and compare the effects of novel therapies targeting specific immune pathways for a better understanding of how to regulate airway eosinophil levels in patients with asthma.

Eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells are integral to the body's response to allergens and play critical roles in innate and adaptive immune responses. Derived from a common hematopoietic progenitor stem cell, these cells are closely linked by their shared lineage, overlapping receptor expression, and responsiveness to similar growth factors. This shared origin and developmental pathway highlight the interconnected nature of their functions in inflammation. Through complex signaling and crosstalk, eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells work in unison to release a variety of mediators that activate neighboring eosinophils/basophils/mast cells, recruit additional immune cells, and propagate the immune response to pathogens. The synchronized actions of these cells are vital in mounting a robust type 1 hypersensitivity reaction to pathogens, a hallmark of allergic diseases such as asthma, allergic rhinitis, and atopic dermatitis.

Eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells originate from uncommitted hemopoietic progenitor stem cells that give rise to all bone marrow and peripheral blood cell types [1]. Hemopoietic stem cells differentiate into multipotent progenitors and then into the common myeloid progenitor. These CD34+ hemopoietic progenitors reside in the blood and bone marrow at different stages of lineage commitment, responding to environmental signals, such as hematopoietic cytokines, to be directed to differentiate along specific pathways. In the case of eosinophils and basophils, the common myeloid progenitors differentiate into a common granulocyte/monocyte progenitor, which further develops into an eosinophil/basophil colony‐forming unit in response to T‐helper type 2 (Th2) cell cytokines granulocyte‐macrophage colony‐stimulating factor (GM‐CSF), interleukin (IL)‐3, IL‐5, and GATA‐1 transcription expression [2,3]. Mast cells differentiate directly from these common myeloid progenitors in response to the stroma‐cell‐derived cytokine stem cell factor, also termed c‐kit ligand or mast cell growth factor, to produce a separate cell lineage of mast cell precursor cells [4,5]. The stem cell factor is unique for differentiating and activating human mast cells [6,7].

The common CD34+ hemopoietic progenitor stem cell contributes to eosinophil and basophil recruitment in tissues during allergic inflammation [8]. Since eosinophils and basophils differentiate from a shared CD34+ hemopoietic progenitor cell, similar Th2 cytokines are responsible for the growth and maturation of both cells. The increased prevalence of CD34+ cells in the blood and bone marrow of atopic asthmatics is correlated with disease severity and level of airflow obstruction [9,10]. The Th2 cytokines GM‐CSF, IL‐3, and IL‐5 highly regulate the migration and accumulation of eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells, all of which signal through a specific high‐affinity common β chain receptor [3,11]. Mast cells are also known to produce IL‐5, which induces the expression of the membrane‐bound IL‐5 receptor subunit α (IL‐5Rα) on CD34+ bone marrow cells, promoting further response to IL‐5 and lineage skewing of CD34+ cells within the bone marrow and the subsequent development of blood and tissue eosinophils [12,13]. IL‐5 is often considered a critical growth factor for eosinophil differentiation and trafficking from the bone marrow to the airways, as airway, nasal, and blood eosinophilia is completely inhibited through neutralizing IL‐5 [14] or deletion of the gene encoding IL‐5 [15]. In a similar context to IL‐5 being crucial for eosinophil differentiation, IL‐3 plays a pivotal role in the growth and differentiation of basophils from the shared CD34+ hemopoietic progenitor cells [16]. Although IL‐3 is a key regulator of basophil development and functional effect, it is only one component of a larger network of cytokines that mediate basophil differentiation and proliferation [17]. Recently, TSLP has also been shown to promote basophil differentiation at levels comparable to IL‐3 [18], and these IL‐3‐independent TSLP‐elicited basophils produce more IL‐4 and IL‐13 than IL‐3‐elicited basophils [19].

Traditionally, eosinophils were thought to mature and terminally differentiate in the bone marrow before entering the circulation. However, it is now apparent that both CD34+ hemopoietic progenitors and CD34 + IL‐5Rα + eosinophil progenitors are found in the bronchial mucosa [20], nasal polyps [21] and atopic dermatitis lesions [22], and these cells can differentiate and mature in these tissues in response to local IL‐5 [20,23]. Compared to healthy controls, there are increased numbers of double‐positive cells for CD34 and IL‐5Rα mRNA in nasal and lung biopsies of allergic asthmatic subjects [20,23]. In these allergic asthmatics, IL‐5‐dependent differentiation of eosinophil progenitors can be stimulated by allergen provocation in the nasal mucosa to decrease CD34+IL‐5Rα+mRNA cells and increase major basic protein (MBP) positive cells [23]. Additionally, human airway smooth muscle cells have been shown to trigger eosinophil differentiation [24]. Furthermore, inhalation of IL‐5 by allergic asthmatics leads to the development of peripheral blood and sputum eosinophilia [25], which is accompanied by increased airway hyperresponsiveness [26]. In contrast, successive studies show IL‐5 alone was not robust enough to increase eosinophilia and airway hyperresponsiveness [27,28,29]. IL‐5 can induce chemokinesis of bone marrow eosinophils, but the mobilization of mature eosinophils involves multiple chemoattractants, including eotaxin [30]. Basophils complete their differentiation in the bone marrow and enter the circulation after maturation, homing to sites of inflammation in response to chemoattractants [18]. Interestingly, one report showed that when a precursor to basophil and mast cells migrates to the spleen without differentiating, it maintains the capacity to return to the bone marrow and further develop into a basophil [18]. In contrast, mast cell precursor cells undergo differentiation and maturation in extramedullary organs [31].

Under baseline conditions, only a small number of eosinophils are released from the bone marrow and localize in the thymus, gastrointestinal tract, uterus, and mammary glands, contributing to homeostatic functions [32]. During allergic inflammation, eosinophil differentiation and maturation, a process called eosinophilopoiesis, dramatically increases as eosinophil and eosinophil progenitor cells infiltrate the tissues. Eosinophil progenitors can mature within the bone marrow or be trafficked directly to sites of inflammation, where they are found alongside mature eosinophils [33] and undergo in situhematopoiesis, contributing to the development of immunity at mucosal sites [34]. Eosinophil progenitors express the IL‐33 receptor (ST2) and the TSLP receptor (TSLPR), which can upregulate IL‐5Rα expression and regulate eosinophil progenitor homing and hematopoietic decisions [35,36].

Eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells are central effector cells in allergic diseases, with an overlap in their regulation and effector functions (Figure1). Since eosinophil and basophil development is so closely linked based on similar developmental pathways and responses to cytokines and chemoattractants, eosinophils and basophils are often found in proximity in the tissues [37]. In addition to eosinophils and basophils shared expression of GM‐CSFRα, IL‐3Rα, IL‐5Rα, and CCR3, eosinophils and basophils share markers CD63 and CD69. CD34+ hemopoietic progenitor cells express CCR3, and this receptor expression is carried throughout basophil differentiation as it is expressed on the surface of mature basophils [38]. Like eosinophils, basophils express many C‐C motif receptors, with CCR3 being the most prominent [38,39], and eotaxin is a potent inducer of eosinophils and basophils influx into the airways [38,40].

Cell mediators and their receptors expressed by eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells in allergic airways, illustrating redundancy of cytokine expression and broad expression of their cognate receptors contributing to bidirectional regulation of cellular effector functions.

Mast cells are often the first to react in IgE‐dependent immediate hypersensitivity reactions, releasing histamine and other mediators that initiate the allergic cascade. Antigen‐presenting cells, such as dendritic cells, present allergens to Th2 cells, causing the release of IL‐4 and IL‐13, which induces isotype switching in B cells to produce IgE. IgE binds to mast cells, cross‐linking with FcεRI to activate mast cells [41]. Similarly to mast cells, FcεRI and IgE‐mediated crosslinking induce basophils to produce histamine, leukotrienes, IL‐4, and IL‐13 [42,43]. In contrast, eosinophil expression of FcεRI is minimal and not associated with eosinophil activation, and it is unclear if there is a functional significance. Unlike mast cells and basophils, which activate and degranulate in response to IgE, only activated eosinophils have FcεRIα. However, IgE was found to directly promote eosinophil migration by upregulating CCR3 expression [44]. Activated mast cells release performed mediators including histamine, serotonin, and serine proteases (tryptase and chymase), as well as lipid mediators, including prostaglandins and leukotrienes. Activated mast cells release a plethora of cytokines and chemokines, including tumor necrosis factor (TNF)‐α, transforming growth factor (TGF)‐β, macrophage inflammatory protein 1a (MIP‐1a), monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP)‐1, VEGF, IFN‐α/β/γ, GM‐CSF, IL‐1α/β, IL‐2, IL‐3, IL‐4, IL‐5, IL‐6, IL‐8, IL‐9, IL‐10, IL‐11, IL‐12, IL‐13, IL‐15, IL‐16, IL‐18, IL25, and more [45]. GM‐CSF, prostaglandin (PG) D2, and leukotriene (LT) E4released from mast cells directly recruit and activate eosinophils and basophils [46,47,48]. Tryptase induces eosinophil influx and the release of EPO, IL‐6, and IL‐8 from eosinophils [49,50,51]. Mast cells also promote eosinophil migration and activation through the release of histamine, PGD2, and eotaxin via the H4receptor, the chemoattractant receptor‐homologous molecule on Th2 (CRTH2), and CCR3, respectively [52,53,54,55]. TNF‐α, IL‐4, and IL‐13 are released from the mast and help to modulate the differentiation of naïve T cells to Th1 and Th2 subsets, indirectly recruiting and activating eosinophils and basophils through the release of GM‐CSF, IL‐4, and IL‐5 from Th2 cells [56]. However, eosinophils also activate mast cells by releasing major basic protein (MBP) and eosinophil peroxidase (EPO), causing mast cells to release histamine [57,58]. Due to their resemblance to mast cells, basophils have often been considered insignificant and function as a surrogate for tissue‐dwelling mast cells. However, the infiltration of basophils and not mast cells during the late‐phase allergic response is pivotal for the continuation and sustained severity of the inflammatory response. At this phase, most histamine‐positive cells are found to be basophils, and there is a noted absence of mediators exclusively secreted by mast cells, such as tryptase [59]. Additionally, the release of IL‐4 and IL‐13 by basophils can regulate the infiltration of eosinophils, as described in a basophil‐deficient mice [60]. Basophils can further promote eosinophil influx by releasing various chemoattractants, including IL‐8 [61] and CCL5 (RANTES) [62].

Not only do mast cells and eosinophils release mediators to activate each other in the initial stages of inflammation, but eosinophils and mast cells coexist abundantly in inflamed tissues during the late and chronic phases of inflammation, engaging in physical and soluble crosstalk in a bidirectional manner. This bidirectional interaction between mast cells and eosinophils has been termed “the allergic effector unit” [63]. Cell‐to‐cell contact is mediated through cell surface receptors such as the CD2‐family molecule CD48 and its high‐affinity ligand 2B4, the adhesion molecules DNAM‐1 and Nectin‐2 [63,64,65,66], which convey stimulatory signals through their respective ligands and through the release of specific granular mediators, arachidonic acid metabolites, cytokines, and chemokines [63,67]. The activating receptor CD48 on mast cells engages CD244/2B4 on eosinophils, activating both cells to produce important mediators, including SCF, IL‐3, IL‐5, TNF‐α, PGD2, and tryptase, further enhancing the activation status of both cells [63,68].

The “allergic effector unit” interaction results in short‐ and long‐term proinflammatory effects on eosinophils and mast cells. This crosstalk induces the release of tryptase, β‐hexosaminidase from mast cells, and Lyn and Syk phosphorylation within 1–2 h after eosinophil‐mast cell engagement [69]. Additionally, this causes eosinophils to release eosinophil peroxidase, increase expression of LAMP‐1, and chemotaxis within 1–3 h after engagement [69]. This interaction causes both eosinophils and mast cells to markedly increase the release of TNF‐α and GM‐CSF and the prolonged survival of both cells 1–7 days after the initial engagement [69,70]. This eosinophil and mast cell interaction may also involve immunoregulatory receptors Siglec 7 and Siglec 8 with CD300a as inhibitory receptors on both cells [70,71,72,73]. The novelty of this physical and soluble communication may be a process for the prolonged survival of both eosinophils and mast cells in tissues and their continuation of chronic inflammation.

The appearance of eosinophils in the circulation involves processes in the bone marrow leading to the efflux of both mature and immature eosinophil populations into the circulation, with differentiation and proliferation of the latter eosinophil lineage‐committed hemopoietic progenitors at tissue sites. The accumulation of eosinophils within the airway tissue occurs as a response to locally generated signals, which induce the production of eosinophils in the bone marrow, continued migration of eosinophils and their progenitors, and increased survival and effector functions of these cells. Eosinophils are found in the bronchial submucosa and intraepithelial in the airways of asthmatics, together with a thickened basement membrane and hypertrophy of the underlying airway smooth muscle (Figure2).

Bronchial tissue of allergic asthmatic stained with hematoxylin and eosin (left panel) highlighting (A) intraepithelial and submucosal eosinophilic infiltrate (black arrow), (B) thickened basement membrane (black arrow), (C) smooth muscle hypertrophy (black arrow), and (D) intraepithelial and submucosal eosinophilic infiltrate (black arrows) and goblet cell hyperplasia in the epithelium (red arrows).

Accumulation of eosinophils in airways occurs in response to signals generated by local cells that can induce various outcomes including the expansion of eosinophil populations in the bone marrow and in the local microenvironment, migration of eosinophils and their progenitors from the bone marrow, and enhanced survival and effector functions of these cells at the site of inflammation. Hemopoietic progenitor cells can be found in the circulation under steady state and disease conditions, and in the bone marrow, they are present at various stages of lineage commitment. In the bone marrow, progenitor cells differentiate into specific lineages based on signals received in response to ambient stimuli such as growth factors and occur under the influence of stromal cells and microvascular endothelial cells. In the tissue, progenitor cells can differentiate in response to cytokines released from epithelial cells. These resident cell populations respond to triggers, thereby changing the transcription and translation rates of hemopoietic growth factors and/or cytokines to accelerate the production of eosinophils for release into the circulation or to augment local tissue eosinophilic inflammation [74,75].

Eosinophils and basophils are hematopoietic cells that differentiate from CD34+ multipotential myeloid progenitors in the bone marrow. These myeloid progenitors can develop into cells that express transcription factors and receptors to growth factors necessary for the development of specific cell lineages [76,77]. The CD34+IL‐5Rα+ progenitor cells are eosinophil‐committed and undergo further development in response to growth factors IL‐3, GM‐CSF, and IL‐5, which are the most lineage‐specific of the cytokines involved in eosinophil hematopoiesis [76,78].

Non‐adherent mononuclear cells or purified CD34+ cell populations from blood or bone marrow that are seeded and grown together with hemopoietic growth factors result in the formation of clusters of immature cells derived from a single progenitor. Progenitor cell colonies grown in cultures indicate the potential for hemopoietic cell differentiation and provide a functional measure of viable clonogenic cell numbers. The earliest techniques used to assess the role of hemopoietic processes in allergic inflammation were colony‐forming assays performed by plating non‐adherent mononuclear cells or purified CD34+ cell populations from blood or bone marrow liquid culture for 14 days. In these clonogenic assays, the progenitor cells are defined as colony‐forming units (CFUs) because of their ability to generate clonally derived aggregates of daughter cells in vitro. These CFUs can be classified by light microscopy based on distinct morphological features and categorized as either eosinophil and basophil (Eo/B)CFU or as granulocyte‐macrophage (GM)CFU [79,80].

Eo/B CFU are nascent eosinophils and basophils derived from single progenitors [79,81,82]. Morphologically, these clusters revealed the existence of distinct colony types, some containing predominantly eosinophils, others consisting of all basophils, and another type containing mixtures of basophils and eosinophils, as shown by the presence of histamine, Charcot–Leyden crystal protein, and major basic protein [82] (Figure3).

Image of eosinophil and basophil colony forming units (Eo/B CFU) grown from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) and enumerated after 14 days of culturing in methylcellulose under the influence of growth factors IL‐5, GM‐CSF, and IL‐3. Eo/B CFU are identified as tight, granular clusters of ≥ 40 cells under inverted light microscopy.

The presence of immature eosinophils and basophils found in the same colony indicates there is a common precursor and shared pathway of differentiation for both cell types [82]. The commitment of progenitor cells to the Eo/B lineage is regulated by a group of growth factors, including IL‐3, IL‐5, and GM‐CSF [83,84,85] which are present in the mixture of pro‐inflammatory cytokines in the airways of asthmatic patients [86,87,88,89]. IL‐5 acts on the myeloid‐committed progenitor to induce specific differentiation along the Eo/B lineage, in contrast to IL‐3 and GM‐CSF, which have been shown to grow populations of more primitive progenitor cells [85,90].

Patients with various allergic airway disorders, including asthma, allergic rhinitis, and nasal polyposis, have significantly higher numbers of Eo/B CFU in circulation [91] and these numbers of circulating progenitors can be shown to exhibit fluctuations during an allergen pollen season in association with an increase in tissue eosinophils [92,93]. The kinetics of circulating progenitors are dependent on the length of exposure, with an initial increase in circulating Eo/B CFU occurring at the beginning of seasonal allergen exposure followed by a significant decline at the peak of the season. The reduction in circulating Eo/B CFU is coincident with the onset of symptoms and inflammation, suggesting a migration of progenitor cells from the blood to the inflamed tissue where they differentiate in situ and contribute to the accumulation of effector cells [92,93,94].

When comparing patients with asthma, by flow cytometry we have shown there are greater numbers of CD34+ cells detected in the blood and bone marrow of atopic compared with non‐atopic patients. These CD34+ cell numbers are positively related to higher numbers of Eo/B CFU grown from the blood and marrow of these subjects [9], suggesting that increases in the number of CD34+ cells indeed reflect viable colonogenic cell numbers. Hence, the higher levels of CD34+ cells and IL‐5‐responsive Eo/B CFU in atopic subjects indicate a functional role for Eo/B progenitors in allergic diseases, such as asthma.

The growth of Eo/B CFU in vitro is influenced by exposure to specific antigen in vivo. Exposure to inhaled allergen in patients with allergic asthma initiates a cascade of events leading to a stimulatory effect on the bone marrow to produce and release newly formed inflammatory cells [95,96,97]. This increase in Eo/B CFU has also been demonstrated in the blood of patients after asthma exacerbation [98,99], leading to further investigations finding higher numbers of bone marrow [95] and circulating [100] Eo/B CFU measured at 24 h after inhaled allergen challenge in patients with allergic asthma. Using bromodeoxyuridine, a marker of proliferating cells, experiments have been conducted in animal models of allergic asthma to investigate the trafficking of cells from bone marrow. These studies have reported that inhaled allergen challenges cause an increase in proliferating cells that traffic through the circulation into the lungs, thereby confirming that allergen‐induced airway inflammation is associated with increased numbers of newly formed cells in the blood and airways [101,102]. Hemopoietic processes contributing to eosinophilic airway inflammation occur rapidly after allergen challenge. In mouse models of allergic rhinitis and/or asthma, we observe changes in bone marrow eosinophilopoiesis as early as 2 h after airway allergen challenges accompanied by elevations in growth factors and chemokines including IL‐5, GM‐CSF, and eotaxin in airways and blood [103,104,105,106,107].

Studies assessing changes in cytokine levels in the bone marrow of allergic asthmatic patients following inhaled allergen challenge have shown increases in IL‐5 levels, and the timing of this IL‐5 expression is consistent with the kinetics of eosinophil‐lineage commitment [88,89,96,97,108]. Bone marrow progenitor cells collected after allergen challenge from allergic asthmatic patients that have developed allergen‐induced late‐phase responses and associated airway eosinophilia were shown to be more responsive to IL‐5 than cells from subjects without these allergen‐induced responses [12]. Subsequently, it was demonstrated that in these patients there is a time‐dependent change in the levels of growth factors and cytokines in the bone marrow, whereby patients having elevated levels of airway and circulating eosinophils post‐challenge also had increased numbers of IL‐5‐responsive progenitors that were coincident with increased IL‐5 levels in the bone marrow [96]. These studies highlight the relationship between bone marrow IL‐5 levels and regulation of eosinophil production from bone marrow progenitor cells. Furthermore, our data provide evidence for the involvement of activated T cells that may migrate from the airways to the bone marrow and release cytokines such as IL‐5, thereby contributing to the hemopoietic events during an allergic inflammatory response [15,97,109].

Sputum levels of EoP are increased in asthmatics after inhaled allergen challenge [110] suggesting an exaggerated eosinophilopoietic environment in the asthmatic airways. Accurate estimates of EoP and HPC numbers can be determined by fluorescence activating cell sorting using multi‐parametric gating analyses of cell‐specific surface markers. Hemopoietic progenitors express the cell stage‐specific antigen, CD34, a cell surface glycoprotein that is now widely recognized as a marker of hematopoietic progenitor cells. As such, CD34 is present at the highest levels on early hemopoietic myeloid progenitors, and during terminal differentiation, this receptor is progressively lost [24]. We have applied methodology to stain for surface expression of CD34 in combination with sorting for small size and low granularity determinants to accurately count HPC in samples of cord blood, peripheral blood, bone marrow, and expectorated sputum [9,12,36,111] (Figure4).

Flow cytometry gating of eosinophil progenitor cells (EoP). Cells were gated as singlets, live, CD45+ cells. Hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPC) were gated as CD34+SSClow, CD45dim, and FSClowSSClow. Eosinophil progenitor cells (EoP) were gated as CD34+SSClow, CD45dim, and FSClowSSClow, CD125+.

Using this flow cytometry analysis to study patients with allergic diseases, including asthma, we and others have provided evidence that CD34+ hemopoietic progenitor cells contribute to the ongoing recruitment of eosinophils and basophils to sites of allergen challenge. The number of CD34+ cells, as well as immature eosinophils and mature eosinophils, has shown to be significantly higher in the blood and bone marrow of atopic subjects compared with non‐atopic controls [9,112], suggesting that the mechanism for eosinophilia in atopic individuals is driven by elevated CD34+ cells. Important findings demonstrated that patients with severe asthma have higher levels of circulating CD34+ cells than those with milder disease and that CD34+ cells negatively correlate with the level of airflow obstruction [10]. These observations led to further experiments examining the regulation and efflux of eosinophil progenitor cells from bone marrow into circulatory and airway compartments in allergic asthma.

During the course of allergic inflammatory responses, it has been shown that CD34+ cells and T cells are sources of IL‐5 cytokine production within the bone marrow [15,97,109,113,114]. Several groups have been investigating autocrine sources of growth factors.

Furthermore, in vitro stimulation of CD34+ cells from blood and bone marrow with calcium ionophore and phorbol‐12‐myristate‐13‐acetate stimulation induces the release of IL‐5 at a higher per cell amount compared to CD3+T‐lymphocytes [115], demonstrating the potential of progenitor cells to produce an autocrine source of growth factor in the bone marrow compartment. To explore the potential of autocrine growth factors in circulation, we examined the expression of IL‐5 and GM‐CSF in differentiating Eo/B colony cells grown from peripheral blood NAMC of normal and atopic individuals, and atopic asthmatics before and after allergen‐inhalation challenge [100]. In this study, we found a significantly higher percentage of differentiating eosinophils were immunopositive for GM‐CSF in atopic individuals versus normal controls, and in mild allergic asthmatics after inhaled allergen versus pre‐challenge, and these observations were confirmed in carbocol chromotrope 2R+ cells through combined in situ reverse transcription‐polymerase chain reaction for GM‐CSF mRNA and cytochemistry. We did not observe a shift in IL‐5 expression suggesting that differentiating eosinophils in blood provide an autocrine source of GM‐CSF but not IL‐5. Our early work investigating CD34+ cells from sputum samples of mild allergic asthmatics shows that these cells also contain IL‐5, with numbers increasing after inhaled allergen challenge [114]. In the airways of asthmatic patients, the level of IL‐5 is elevated compared to non‐asthmatic controls [116,117]. Our work has shown that IL‐5 levels are driven higher in the airways post‐allergen challenge as measured in sputum fluid phase [89] and sputum immunopositive cells [88]. These observations suggest that IL‐5 in asthmatic airways, including autocrine expression in progenitor cells, could support the observed eosinophilia.

It has been reported that CD34 + IL‐5Rα + cells circulate at higher levels in patients with asthma compared to controls and correlate with asthma severity [10]. Furthermore, the observed upregulation of IL‐5Rα on CD34+ cells from the bone marrow of atopic asthmatics indicates the cells are primed and ready to respond to IL‐5 [10,118]. Sehmi et al. [12] reported that while inhaled allergen challenge in patients with mild allergic asthma had no effect on the number of CD34+ cells in bone marrow, there was a significant increase in CD34 + IL‐5Rα + eosinophil progenitor cells obtained from bone marrow aspirates collected 24 h after challenge, as assessed by in situ hybridization of IL‐5Rα mRNA colocalization in cells immunopositive for CD34 + IL‐5Rα+. Collectively, these data suggest an upregulation of IL‐5Rα on CD34+ cells occurring following allergen challenge, and the higher number of eosinophil progenitor cells contributes to the corresponding robust eosinophilia observed in the blood and airways post‐challenge. Eosinophil growth and maturation is dependent on IL‐5 signaling through IL‐5Rα; after inhaled allergen challenge, we also observe a significant increase in IL‐5 mRNA on bone marrow CD3+ cells [97], providing a mechanism whereby T lymphocytes that are activated in airways traffick to the bone marrow where they release IL‐5 to induce differentiation of CD34 + IL‐5Rα + eosinophil progenitor cells.

In addition to the expansion of mature and immature cells in bone marrow, the mobilization of hemopoietic progenitor cells from the bone marrow is a feature of inflammatory asthmatic responses. This includes increases in levels of chemotaxins and cell responsiveness to them, to facilitate the egress of cells from bone marrow to the peripheral circulation. The CCR3 receptor is critically important for the chemotaxis of eosinophils and basophils to the potent chemoattractant eotaxin. The CCR3 receptor is expressed not only on mature eosinophils and basophils but also on CD34+ progenitor cells [119] where the level is upregulated by Th2 cytokines [120]. This regulation by inflammatory cytokines can explain the elevated expression of CCR3 on mature and immature bone marrow eosinophils in allergic asthmatic patients after inhaled allergen challenge [119,121,122]. Together with the allergen‐induced increase of eotaxin in the airways [89], CCR3 expression provides a coordinated mechanism to enhance the migration of CCR3+ eosinophils and CCR3+ eosinophil/basophil progenitors from bone marrow to the site of inflammation [30,119]. We have also observed alterations to factors that tether cells in the bone marrow after inhaled allergen challenges. At 24 h post‐challenge, there is a significant decrease in the expression of the beta1‐integrin, very late antigen (VLA) 4, on bone marrow CD34+IL‐5Rα+ eosinophil progenitor cells, and this reduced expression was accompanied by functional changes observed by a reduced adhesion to fibronectin [123]. That there was no change in the expression of beta‐2 integrin suggests a preferential downregulation of beta‐1 integrins. We have also reported downregulation in the expression of CXCR4 on bone marrow CD34+ progenitor cells after allergen challenge in addition to a reduced level of its ligand, SDF‐1α, in bone marrow [122] which together may reduce progenitor cell retention in bone marrow stroma, thereby facilitating the egress of progenitor cells to the circulation.

IL‐5 is not the only growth factor that can initiate eosinophil differentiation. Eotaxin may play a role in the migration and differentiation of CD34+ cells since these cells are found to express the eotaxin receptor C‐C chemokine receptor 3 (CCR3), possibly allowing for progenitor cells to differentiate into eosinophils in a pathway that is independent of GM‐CSF, IL‐3, and IL‐5 [119,120,121]. IL‐9 has also been shown to play a supportive role in both mast cell and Eo/B differentiation [74,124].

TSLP, IL‐25, and IL‐33 are alarmin cytokines that are released from epithelial cells, thereby providing a local source of these cytokines in the airways of patients with severe asthma [125,126]. These cytokines are found at higher concentrations in the airways of asthmatic patients, and the concentrations of TSLP, IL‐25, and IL‐33 have each been shown to correlate positively with disease severity in patients with asthma [127,128]. Levels of these alarmins are further elevated after inhaled allergen challenge [129,130,131], in association with increased airway eosinophil levels, suggesting they may play a role in driving eosinophilia. In mature eosinophils, IL‐33 stimulation upregulates the expression of its own receptor, ST2, as well as increases the intracellular expression of IL‐5 [130]. Mature eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells express receptors for alarmin cytokines and demonstrate a higher level of activation after stimulation [130,132,133,134,135]. CD34+ progenitor cells have also been shown to express receptors for TSLP and IL‐33 that can be upregulated in airway progenitor cells following inhaled allergen challenges [36,114]. Stimulation with alarmin cytokines activates CD34+ progenitor cells through mechanisms involving lineage commitment and by promotion of eosinophilopoiesis/basophilopoiesis [114,136,137,138]. Interestingly, TSLP and IL‐33 have now been shown to act directly on CD34+ HPCs to stimulate basophilopoiesis in mice [136] and lineage commitment [137]. Collaborators at McMaster University have demonstrated the outgrowth of eosinophil/basophil colony‐forming units cultured from enriched human CD34+ HPCs was enhanced when TSLP was added to the growth factor IL‐3 [138], and histochemical analysis of these colonies revealed increases in cells with eosinophilic granular cytoplasm or metachromatic granules, morphologically consistent with eosinophils and basophils, respectively. We repeated these experiments in methylcellulose cultures of blood‐derived non‐adherent mononuclear cells that were incubated together with IL‐5 plus primary bronchial epithelial cell culture supernatants from healthy and asthmatic patients [139]. The results of these experiments demonstrated higher levels of Eo/B‐CFU outgrowth when cells were co‐cultured with the supernatants from asthmatic donors, with significant attenuation by TSLPR‐blockade. In contrast, ST2 blockade had no effect on colony growth, suggesting that the expansion of Eo/B CFU was mediated through TSLP but not IL‐33. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that factors released by BEC, such as TSLP, in addition to IL‐5 [140] can promote eosinophil‐lineage commitment and differentiation. Interestingly, we also demonstrated that stimulation of HPCs with TSLP and IL‐33 significantly increased their production of IL‐5 [36], thereby enhancing the autocrine source of a key growth factor required for eosinophil differentiation.

We have reported a significant increase in the expression of the TSLP receptor subunits TSLPR and CD127, as well as the IL‐33 receptor, ST2, on sputum HPC but not EoP after allergen inhalation challenge in patients with mild allergic asthma [36]. These observations suggest that undifferentiated HPCs become more responsive to alarmin cytokines post‐challenge.

To understand the functional role of alarmin cytokines on HPC, subsequent in vitro experiments demonstrated that preincubation of HPC with TSLP and IL‐33 primed their migration to SDF‐1 [36], a potent progenitor cell chemoattractant that is highly expressed by endothelial cells, macrophages, and T lymphocytes in bronchia mucosa of asthmatic patients [129,130,131], and this effect was mediated through HPC production of IL‐13. Taken together, these data suggest that alarmin cytokines contribute to local eosinophilia by promoting the migration of HPCs to the site of inflammation in airways in asthmatic patients, where these cells can undergo differentiation into mature cells as directed by signals from the local microenvironment.

Our understanding of the processes involved in the amplification of eosinophilic inflammation through progenitor differentiation in local tissue has evolved through the work of Denburg and others. Localized differentiation of hemopoietic progenitors is reasoned from experiments showing that in vitro IL‐5 stimulation of CD34+ cells extracted from human nasal polyp tissue undergo proliferation and differentiation into Eo/B‐CFU [21]. These findings were supported by experiments in nasal explant tissue from allergic rhinitics showing increases in mature major basic protein‐positive eosinophils in conjunction with reduced progenitor CD34+IL‐5Rα+mRNA cells after antigen challenge and after exposure to IL‐5 ex vivo, thereby indicating a local maturation process was occurring [23]. Cells examined from Eo/B CFU also have been shown to constitute autocrine sources of IL‐5 and GM‐CSF [100,141], which could further amplify the process of differentiation and proliferation.

In vivo, we have documented the presence of CD34 + IL‐5Rα+ progenitor cells entering the airway lumen through measurements of induced sputum and describe significantly higher levels in those with more severe asthma [142]. Interestingly, these progenitor cells found in sputum also stain intracellularly for cytokines crucial for the differentiation and survival of eosinophils and basophils. This was first reported by Allakhverdi et al. from experiments showing that circulating CD34+ cells could be stimulated to rapidly release high levels of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, and that CD34+ cells containing IL‐5 and IL‐13 could be detected in the sputum of individuals with allergic asthma [114]. The notion of CD34+ effector cells was further described in experiments demonstrating that severe asthmatics have higher numbers of blood and sputum eosinophil progenitors expressing IL‐5 and IL‐13 [142]. We also reported that the number of eosinophil progenitor cells increasing in asthmatic airways after allergen challenge coincides with higher concentrations of IL‐5 [110], with similar kinetics suggesting EoP may be an important source of IL‐5 release into airways. Further evidence supporting a role for in situ eosinophilopoiesis in asthma includes our work showing the presence of eosinophil‐committed CD34 + IL‐5Rα+ progenitor cells present in the airway submucosa of patients with mild allergic asthma at approximately 30 cells/mm2(unpublished data). These eosinophil progenitor cells have also been reported in airway tissue from nonallergic asthma, nasal polyposis, and in the skin of patients with atopic dermatitis [20,21,22,115,143,144,145,146], indicating the potential for in situ expansion of eosinophils is not limited to the lower airways of asthmatic patients.

Eotaxin is a potent eosinophil‐specific chemoattractant [147,148,149] that is released from structural lung cells, trafficking eosinophils to the lung and increasing after allergen provocation [150]. In a mouse model, eotaxin‐1 and eotaxin‐2 were shown to induce migration for CD34 + CCR3+ cells from the bone marrow and blood [151], and the receptor for eotaxin, CCR3, is upregulated on CD34+ cells after allergen challenge [119,122]. Altogether, this suggests that the eotaxin/CCR3 pathway facilitates progenitor cell mobilization from the bone marrow to the peripheral blood as the first step toward the accumulation of eosinophil progenitor cells in tissue and subsequent eosinophilia.

In addition to IL‐5 and eotaxin, there are other pro‐inflammatory mediators that have been shown to induce chemotactic responses in both mature eosinophils and Eo/B progenitors. Other chemoattractants for mature eosinophils and basophils include bioactive lipids such as PAF, prostaglandin D2, and LTE4[152,153,154,155] which are generated in allergic tissues from the metabolism of polyunsaturated fatty acids. These bioactive lipids are found at elevated levels in the airways of asthmatic individuals and are further enhanced by inhaled allergen [156,157].

To address the potential role of cysteinyl leukotrienes in eosinophil accumulation into airways, we conducted experiments administering inhaled LTD4and LTE4to allergic asthmatics and found that airway eosinophil levels increased only following LTE4inhalation, thereby demonstrating the potency of LTE4on airway eosinophils [158]. We have also demonstrated a role of the cysteinyl leukotrienes in the differentiation of Eo/B CFU in experiments [153]. Others have described a role for LTD4in the induction of chemotaxis and in vitro transendothelial migration of Eo/B progenitors [159]. We examined the effect of blocking LTD4signaling by administering the cysLT1 inhibitor pranlukast to asthmatics undergoing inhaled allergen challenges. Compared to placebo, treatment with pranlukast significantly attenuated the allergen‐induced number of bone marrow Eo/B CFU, reduced the number of bone marrow CD34+ cells expressing CCR3, in addition to reduced sputum eosinophil counts and reduced frequency of sputum cells immunopositive for EG2, eotaxin, IL‐5, and RANTES [160]. Together, this body of work illustrates the supportive role of cysteinyl leukotrienes in the accumulation of eosinophils and basophils in allergic airway tissue.

Mature eosinophils are terminally differentiated leukocytes that accumulate in tissues as effector cells in inflammatory processes including allergic diseases [161]. Movement of these cells from bone marrow to inflamed tissue is regulated by chemokines and cytokines through binding to their cell surface receptors, as well as through upregulated expression of adhesion molecules [162]. Cytokines that drive and support eosinophilia are largely Th2 cell products. Interleukin (IL)‐3, IL‐5, and GM‐CSF signal through specific high‐affinity cell surface receptor subunits that are linked to a common β‐chain. Each of these cytokines behaves as an eosinophil growth factor to stimulate the development of Eo/BCFU that can be found in functional assays [3,96,100]. The common β‐chain is especially important for Eo/B proliferation, production of cytokines from eosinophils, and eosinophil migration to effector sites [163,164]. IL‐5 is essential for the mobilization of eosinophil progenitors from the bone marrow as well as their terminal differentiation [165]. Aside from these growth factors, other T2 cytokines found to be elevated in allergic diseases, such as IL‐4 and IL‐13, indirectly regulate the transmigration of eosinophils and basophils from the vasculature into the tissue through the upregulating expression of adhesion molecules on the endothelium [166], and by inducing the release of the potent chemokines eotaxin and RANTES from immune and structural cells in the airways [88,167,168,169].

Progenitors are also responsive to the eosinophil chemoattractants CRTH2 [170] and PPARγ [171]. We demonstrated that low concentrations of the PPAR agonist rosiglitazone increased chemokinesis of eosinophils as well as SDF‐1α‐induced migration of immature eosinophils, and this effect on eosinophil migration and chemokinesis appears to be through modification of calcium signaling, alluding to a novel PPAR‐mediated mechanism to modulate eosinophil function [171]. In the allergen challenge model, we observe attenuation of SDF‐1α receptor expression on bone marrow CD34+ cells of mild asthmatic subjects, as well as a reduction in SDF‐1α levels in the bone marrow, demonstrating a mechanism whereby reduced retention of progenitors in the bone marrow permits egress of these cells into the blood [122].

Interleukin‐25 (IL‐25; IL‐17E) is a pro‐inflammatory alarmin cytokine that contributes to maintaining type 2 immune responses in airways [172]. IL‐25 has been shown to directly activate eosinophils through upregulation of ICAM‐1 and by stimulating the release of pro‐inflammatory chemokines and cytokines from eosinophils [173,174]. In asthmatics who developed allergen‐induced early and late asthmatic responses, we have demonstrated that in the presence of increased plasma IL‐25 levels, there was elevated expression of intracellular IL‐25 and membrane expression of IL‐17RB and IL‐17RA/B on mature eosinophils collected 24 h post‐challenge [175]. We also observed a significant increase in circulating EoP expressing the IL‐25 receptor, IL‐17RB, at 24 h after inhaled allergen inhalation challenge [135]. We then performed in vitro experiments to explore these findings and demonstrated that pre‐exposure of EoP to IL‐25 in vitro primed the migrational response of EoP to the chemoattractant, stromal cell‐derived factor 1α. This series of experiments suggests that upregulation of IL‐17B, together with exposure to IL‐25 in airways, contributes to allergen‐induced trafficking of EoP to the asthmatic airways. In separate experiments, we evaluated the effects of TSLP and IL‐33 on the migration of hematopoietic progenitors. HPC were assessed in transwell chambers for their response to the chemokine SDF‐1. Although TSLP and IL‐33 did not directly stimulate the migration of HPCs, we found that priming of these enriched CD34+ cells with TSLP and IL‐33 significantly enhanced their migratory response to SDF‐1 [36] but not to other chemoattractants, including eotaxin, RANTES, or MCP‐1.

Allergic asthma is the most common asthma phenotype of all asthmatic patients [176] and the weight of evidence strongly supports that the inhalation of environmental allergens plays an important role in the initiation and persistence of asthma in a majority of patients. Birth cohort studies have shown a significantly higher risk of diagnosed asthma and AHR in atopic children [177] especially when sensitized to allergens from cats and dogs and house dust mite (HDM) [178]. Seasonal asthma that is associated with specific plant pollen exposure is well described [179] and asthma morbidity and mortality have been associated with inhalation of allergens across different countries and continents [180,181,182]. Accordingly, avoidance of allergens can improve asthma control, reduce AHR, and lessen treatment requirements [183,184]. Occupational asthma caused by inhalation of allergens in the workplace can be cured by removal of the patient from this environment [185]. Collectively, these studies show that environmental allergens are an important cause of persistent asthma and asthma exacerbations and suggest that an improved understanding of the mechanisms and their regulation could lead to better management of asthma in patients with allergic asthma.

Controlled experimental allergen challenges are established models of allergic diseases in sensitized individuals that mimic short‐term high‐dose allergen exposure, or prolonged low‐dose allergen exposure. These models include challenges to upper or lower airways in individuals allergic rhinitis and asthma, respectfully [186,187], and lead to accumulation of eosinophils at the site of challenge [88,188] (Figure5). Allergen exposures in non‐airway diseases such as intradermal challenges in skin of sensitized individuals also leads to an acute accumulation of eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells in the papillary dermis [111,189]. Asthma, allergic rhinitis, and atopic dermatitis are common disorders that can coexist and represent manifestations of the same (systemic) inflammatory process [190]. Having both asthma and allergic rhinitis is referred to as “one airway disease” within the context of the “united airways concept” [191]. In addition to the shared pathophysiology, there is evidence of crosstalk between these airway compartments whereby challenging one induces inflammatory responses both locally and within other compartments [191,192]. Allergen instillation into a lung segment of non‐asthmatics with AR has been shown to induce a local inflammatory response locally in the upper airway mucosa as well as systemically in the circulation [193] and nasal allergen challenges induce upregulation of inflammatory mechanisms and eosinophilia in both the upper and lower airways in non‐asthmatic subjects with seasonal allergic rhinitis (AR) [194,195].

Bronchial tissue of allergic asthmatic stained with hematoxylin and eosin from biopsies collected (A) pre‐inhaled allergen challenge and (B) post‐inhaled allergen challenge showing increased submucosal eosinophilic infiltration (black arrows).

High‐dose allergen inhalation by allergic asthmatics results in many of the physiological and inflammatory manifestations of asthma, including reversible airflow obstruction and AHR in association with increased eosinophilic and basophilic airway inflammation [88]. The first description of allergen‐induced bronchoconstrictor responses identified two distinct constrictor components, the early (EAR) and late asthmatic responses (LAR) [196]. The early bronchoconstriction response develops rapidly within 10–15 min after inhalation, reaches a maximum within 30 min, and generally resolves by 1–3 h. Some individuals go on to develop a late bronchoconstriction response that recurs after 3–4 h and reaches a maximum over 6–12 h [88].

We and others have demonstrated that allergen‐induced airway responses are followed by an enhanced AHR to inhaled histamine or methacholine, which can last several days to weeks [88,197] and which is greater in patients who develop allergen‐induced LAR compared to those who develop isolated early responses [198,199]. Inflammatory changes after upper or lower airway allergen challenge consistently demonstrate local increases in effector cells central to the pathophysiology of asthma. Inhaled allergen challenge of the lower airways elevates levels of eosinophils in the bronchial tissue compartment, as well as in BAL fluid and induced sputum sampled from the lumen of lower airways [87,88,89,108]. Work from our laboratory and others describes the effect of allergen challenge to the upper airways, resulting in significant increases in eosinophils, basophils, and evidence of mast cell activation in post‐challenge samples from nasal lavage fluid [188,200,201], in conjunction with physiological changes such as reduced PNIF and increased symptoms. Intradermal allergen challenge causing late‐phase reaction in skin also results in the elevation of eosinophils, mast cells, and basophils [111,202,203], though in different proportions than the airway compartments [111,203].

These localized allergen exposures cause reproducible changes in early and late responses [188,204], AHR [205], and inflammation [188,206] that allow for the study of the pathobiology of allergic disease and therapeutic regulation of inflammatory mechanisms. Inhaled allergen challenges have been used as proof‐of‐concept studies to support larger clinical trials to evaluate the efficacy of novel therapeutics in patients with moderate‐to‐severe asthma, with the hypothesis that inhibition of allergic responses is a predictor of the clinical success of the drug. The LAR, due to its association with rapid and severe T2 airway inflammation, has been the most frequent endpoint of clinical trials evaluating anti‐inflammatory therapies, whereby inhibition of LAR demonstrates blockade of a critical pathway. Also, of value for drug development, investigational medications that do not inhibit the allergen‐induced late asthmatic response have never been subsequently proven to be effective in asthma treatment. As such, the model has an excellent negative predictive value [207].

The ability of purified human eosinophils to synthesize large quantities of bronchoconstrictive LTC4after stimulation with either the calcium‐ionophore A23187 or opsonized zymosan [208] provided early evidence to suggest that the eosinophil may play an active role in causing the late‐phase asthmatic reaction. Furthermore, the accumulation of eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells in airways is temporally associated with physiological changes in airways, including bronchoconstriction and AHR, leading us to believe causal relationships may exist.

The introduction of noninvasive sampling of airways by sputum induction facilitated experiments characterizing the kinetics of airway inflammation throughout the period of allergen‐induced increase in AHR. In allergic asthmatics selected to have early and late‐phase allergen‐induced bronchoconstriction, we measured eosinophils and mast cells/basophils (metachromatic cells) in sputum using chemical staining Diff Quik and toluidine blue, respectively. Sputum samples were collected before allergen challenges and at regular time intervals for 7 days afterward, and measures of sputum inflammatory cells were accompanied by AHR assessed by methacholine PC20. We reported peak allergen‐induced sputum eosinophil levels were reached within 24 h, and recovery approached pre‐challenge levels over a period of 1 week [88] (Figure6). Similarly, the metachromatic cells peaked by 7 h post‐allergen with normalization toward pre‐allergen levels over the next 7 days. Allergen‐induced AHR persisted throughout the week post‐allergen, as described previously [197], and we discovered the reduction in methacholine PC20was significantly and negatively correlated with eosinophils (r= −0.41) and metachromatic cells (r= −0.38), demonstrating an association between these effector cells and worsening airway responsiveness. The results of this study also described the kinetics of elevated chemoattractants, eotaxin and RANTES, and of IL‐5‐positive cells in the airways which followed a pattern similar to eosinophils and metachromatic cells. In a recent pilot study, we examined the kinetics of eosinophil accumulation in the airways post‐challenge and found sputum eosinophils significantly increased already by 2 h after allergen inhalation, likely involving migration of eosinophils sequestered in extravascular sites for an initial and rapid response to allergic triggers. In addition to the accumulation of mature eosinophils in lower airways of allergic asthmatics after allergen inhalation, we also have shown corresponding increases of mature and immature eosinophils in bone marrow post‐allergen challenge, and eosinophil progenitors are found in higher numbers in blood, sputum, and bronchial mucosa [96,97,110] (Figure7). This composite summary of the shift in levels of immature and mature eosinophils across hemopoietic, systemic, and end organ compartments highlights the dynamic changes to eosinophil expansion and migration resulting from a single exposure to allergen in lower airways of allergic asthmatics.

Response to inhaled allergen and diluent challenges in allergic asthmatics. (A) Airway hyperresponsiveness assessed by methacholine PC20, (B) sputum eosinophils, (C) and metachromatic cells (MCC) shown as number per milliliter (mL) of sputum were measured at baseline with repeated sampling until 7 days post‐challenge. (D) Forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1). Adapted from reference [88].

Allergen‐induced changes in mature and immature eosinophils measured in (A) bronchial tissue (B) airway lumen, (C) circulation, and (D) bone marrow before and after inhaled allergen challenge in allergic asthmatics. Adapted from reference [209].

Further characterization of the inhaled allergen challenge model consistently exhibited a positive relationship between the worsening of allergen‐induced LAR and AHR and increased airway eosinophils. The initial studies incorporating sputum eosinophil readouts examined the effect of regular treatment with the ICS budesonide on allergen‐induced airway inflammation and the association with changes in lung function. We demonstrated that budesonide treatment inhibited allergen‐induced eosinophils across many compartments including blood, bone marrow, and airways of allergic asthmatics [210,211] in addition to reducing the number of circulating eosinophil progenitors [141]. Sputum eosinophil levels post‐allergen were inhibited by approximately 50%, with a larger effect on activated eosinophils measured by immunostaining of the activated form of ECP. These changes in eosinophil levels were associated with a significant inhibition of the LAR and improvement in AHR. The post‐allergen level of metachromatic cells (basophils and mast cells) was reduced by 30% with budesonide treatment. The association between allergen‐induced airway eosinophil levels and inhibition of LAR and AHR was further explored in a clinical trial that evaluated these outcomes across a range of doses of the ICS mometasone furoate [212]. The results of this study demonstrated a clear association between the magnitude of effect on LAR and the 24 h post‐challenge eosinophil levels, as observed in a dose–response fashion (Figure8). The reduction in allergen‐induced eosinophilia by glucocorticoids can occur through several mechanisms including repression of IL‐5 transcription [213] leading to the inhibition of the terminal differentiation of eosinophil progenitors. Eosinophils could also be removed from circulation by induction of death through upregulation of pro‐apoptotic genes [214], or by induction of CXCR4‐regulated homing of peripheral eosinophils to the bone marrow [215]. Through its association with a reduction in eosinophils and to some extent metachromatic cells, it was hypothesized that these cells were at least partially responsible for the worsening of lung function post‐allergen challenge. This idea was further tested in a study that treated allergic asthmatics for 1 week with inhaled SABA (salbuterol/albuterol) at a dose of 200 mcg four times daily followed by inhaled allergen challenge [216]. In contrast to the ICS studies, SABA treatment significantly increased the LAR, and this heightened response to allergen was accompanied by higher levels of eosinophils measured during the LAR (Figure9). These studies demonstrated a clear association between therapeutic shifts in LAR and airway eosinophils, although mechanistically we have no evidence that eosinophils are the cause of LAR or increased AHR after allergen challenges. Collectively, however, these studies revealed that allergen‐induced LAR as an indication of lung function and sputum eosinophil levels as biomarkers of asthma severity could be used as proof of concept to evaluate new therapies for the management of asthma. Supporting data showing that steroid treatment reduces eosinophil, basophil, and mast cell markers after nasal and intradermal allergen challenges together with improvement in measures of PNIF and wheal size, respectively [188,217,218], suggest common inflammatory pathways at least in part contribute to the pathophysiology observed after allergen exposure in skin and airways.

Dose response to the inhaled corticosteroid mometasone furoate at doses of 50 μg BID, 100 μg BID, and 400 μg BID compared to placebo treatment shown by (A) allergen‐induced changes during the early and late asthmatic response maximum percent fall in forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), and (B) and sputum eosinophils levels pre‐ and post‐allergen challenge in allergic asthmatics. Adapted from reference [212].

Contrasting effects of inhaled corticosteroid and inhaled short‐acting beta2‐agonist on allergen‐induced responses in allergic asthmatics (A) forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) shown as percent change from pre‐allergen baseline, and (B) sputum eosinophils measured at baseline and 7 h post‐allergen challenge after treatment with placebo, budesonide 200 μg BID and salbutamol 200 μg QID.

Early studies have demonstrated the importance of the IL‐5 pathway to the development of eosinophilia. Inhalation of IL‐5 in asthmatics has been shown to increase eosinophils in peripheral blood and sputum [25], and this eosinophilia was accompanied by increased airway responsiveness (AHR) [26], suggesting an effect of the eosinophil on airway smooth muscle. IL‐5 inhalation in allergic asthmatics has also been reported to reduce the number of CD34+/IL‐5Rα+ mRNA cells within the bronchial mucosa and the number of CD34+ CCR3+ cells in the bone marrow of atopic asthmatics [27,28,29], findings that can be explained by enhanced in situ eosinophil differentiation [23] and by work in our laboratory suggesting that lung‐derived IL‐5 induces a population of T lymphocytes to traffic to the bone marrow [97] where they can locally induce the efflux of CD34+/CCR3+cells from the bone marrow. Through their dependence on IL‐5 for terminal differentiation, eosinophil progenitors are also a relevant target of anti‐IL‐5/anti‐IL‐5Rα therapy. Progenitor cells from the bone marrow of allergic individuals have shown enhanced responsiveness to IL‐5 [9], likely due to increased levels of bone marrow CD34 + IL‐5Rα + cells, which appear to be a distinctive feature of allergic disease [112]. After inhaled allergen challenge in allergic asthmatics and the resultant elevated IL‐5 levels, CD34+ cells from the bone marrow synthesize mRNA transcripts and protein for IL‐5Rα [12], thereby enabling a heightened response to IL‐5. The higher proportion of CD34+IL‐5Rα+ in the bone marrow after allergen challenge is associated with airway eosinophilia as well as increased AHR [12,95], demonstrating a direct relationship between eosinophil lineage‐skewing of CD34+ cells in response to an allergic stimulus and the development of eosinophilia in airways. Enhanced production of Eo/B‐lineage committed progenitors in the bone marrow and the subsequent development of blood and tissue eosinophilia have been linked to the maintenance of allergic inflammation in allergic individuals [9] and to the regulation of baseline Eo/B CFU by anti‐inflammatory treatment [211]. Collectively, these studies provide evidence that eosinophilia is driven by the expansion of the eosinophil progenitor population in addition to the release of mature eosinophils into the circulation, both of which are dependent on IL‐5 signaling.

Other biologically important effector cells found in high numbers in allergic tissues express IL‐5Rα, including basophils [219] which are primed by low concentrations of IL‐5 to enhance their release of histamine and generation of LTC4in response to established basophil agonists. We have recently reported the expression of membrane‐bound IL‐5Rα on ILC2 in circulation and mast cells in the papillary dermis of patients with atopic dermatitis [111]. Hence, blockade of the IL‐5 pathway in allergic diseases may have beneficial effects in addition to those leading to inhibition of eosinophilia. Given the positive relationship between eosinophils and severity of asthma [220,221] and the importance of the IL‐5 pathway to eosinophil production, antibodies to IL‐5 or its receptor, IL‐5Rα, were developed as a novel asthma therapeutic.

To improve our understanding of the mechanisms of cellular infiltration to airways and the role of these cells, we have carefully characterized the inflammatory events that occur during allergen challenges. Whether in the airways or skin, the acute response to allergen challenge is an IgE‐mediated inflammatory process initiated by the cross‐linking of antigen on allergen‐specific IgE molecules bound to high‐affinity IgE receptors on mast cells and basophils. Figure10depicts events occurring in airways following allergen inhalation by allergic asthmatic individuals. IgE‐mediated activation of mast cells and basophils causes the release of pro‐inflammatory mediators, including degranulation of the preformed mediators histamine and proteases, increases synthesis and release of arachidonic acid products that are rapidly metabolized to produce prostaglandins and leukotrienes [222,223,224]. These rapidly released mediators from mast cells and basophils cause acute changes to airways that characterize the early phase allergic response. In upper airways, we have reported a reduction in peak nasal inspiratory flow rate within minutes of nasal allergen challenge, and this response occurs in association with rapid activation of mast cells as indicated by concurrent tryptase release into nasal secretions [188]. We and others have shown that LTD4and LTE4cause maximal bronchoconstriction within 2–3 min of inhalation [158,225]. Furthermore, we demonstrated that inhalation of LTE4increases the number of eosinophils and basophils in the bronchial mucosa of asthmatics [158], providing a mechanism whereby cysteinyl leukotrienes play a role in eosinophil and basophil migration to airways. In our studies of asthmatic airways, we have also shown that allergen inhalation upregulates cytokine receptors for IL‐25 (IL‐17RB and IL‐17RA/B) and IL‐33 (ST2) on circulating eosinophils, which promotes their degranulation [175] and enhances the expression of T2 cytokines IL‐5 and IL‐13 [130,175]. Inhaled allergen expression also causes a significant increase in activation marker CD203c, higher intracellular levels of T2 cytokines IL‐4 and IL‐13, and upregulation of receptors for TSLP, IL‐3, and eotaxin in basophils found across several compartments including blood, bone marrow, and sputum [133]. These changes to basophils may result in priming and enhanced responsiveness of the effector function of these cells when exposed to the corresponding ligand.

Immunopathogenesis of early and late‐phase asthmatic responses to inhaled allergen in the allergic asthmatic lung. Adapted from reference [226].

The late‐phase response is likely partially driven by events resulting from the IgE‐mediated early response, as suggested by the positive relationship between the fall in FEV1measured during the early and late asthmatic responses [227]. The development of the late‐phase airway response to a specific allergen begins when an inhaled allergen is presented by dendritic cells (DCs), the professional antigen‐presenting cells, to naïve T‐cells. In the presence of TSLP, naïve T‐cells are polarized to develop into Th2 cells, and ILC2 are activated [228], and both produce a variety of T2 cytokines, including IL‐4, IL‐5, IL‐9, and IL‐13, which are crucial for promoting the production of IgE, driving eosinophilopoiesis, mast cell development, and goblet cell hyperplasia and AHR, respectively.

The late‐phase response can also occur independently of the early response. The induction of the late asthmatic response has been demonstrated following the administration of allergen‐derived T‐cell peptide epitopes delivered by intradermal injection [229] or by inhalation [230], with a similar time course of onset and resolution as late‐phase responses induced by whole allergen extract. This illustrates the effect of direct activation of allergen‐specific airway T cells by peptide inhalation leading to increased AHR and elevated airway CD3+ and CD4+ cells and TARC; interestingly, in the absence of significant changes in eosinophils or basophil and mast cell products [231]. The results of these experiments align with clinical trials that show a dissociation between allergen‐induced eosinophilia and the development of LAR and AHR [89,232] and suggest that eosinophils and their products are unrelated to allergen‐induced changes in airway tone and responsiveness.

The association of airway eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells with allergen‐induced LAR led to a series of studies examining the potential contribution of these cells to allergen‐induced airway pathophysiology in allergic asthma. Notably, while the development of LAR is a reproducible outcome of inhaled allergen challenges within individual allergic asthmatics, it is noted that a group of individuals routinely develop isolated early responses without the subsequent LAR sequelae [233]. The different responses to inhaled allergen were not explained by the type or concentration of inhaled allergen [234] or by baseline characteristics, including FEV1or baseline airway inflammation [235]. These naturally occurring groups with identical baseline characteristics present an opportunity to compare and contrast allergen‐induced changes to inflammatory pathways to evaluate differences that could be driving the more clinically relevant late‐phase response. The results of these comparisons reflected our earlier observation that eosinophils were positively related to LAR by showing that the LAR group had a higher eosinophilic response to inhaled allergen. Compared to isolated early responders, the LAR group had higher post‐allergen eosinophils and eosinophil progenitor levels in sputum [110,198]. These differences are in part driven by the bone marrow response to allergen because the LAR group also exhibited higher numbers of IL‐5 mRNA+ cells, IL‐5 mRNA+ CD3+ cells [97], higher IL‐3 and IL‐5‐responsive progenitors, and elevated IL‐5 levels [96] post‐allergen. Furthermore, Eo/B CFU grown from bone marrow collected post‐allergen were responsive to lower levels of IL‐5 [95], likely due to elevated expression of IL‐5Rα [12]. However, despite these consistent findings of an enhanced eosinophil pathway, treatment with mepolizumab or benralizumab to block IL‐5 function and deplete IL‐5Rα+ cells, respectively, was completely ineffective in reducing LAR or AHR in these allergic asthmatics [89,232]. It has been shown that mepolizumab and benralizumab treatment depletes circulating eosinophils, but a low level of these cells remains in the tissue [89,236,237]. As such, it is unknown whether these remaining eosinophils represent a subset of IL‐5 independent cells that contribute to pathophysiological responses post‐allergen inhalation or whether different cell populations, such as mast cells and/or basophils, that correlate more strongly with allergen‐induced LAR and AHR [198] are responsible for allergen‐induced pathophysiology.

Comparisons of isolated early and dual responders to inhaled allergen challenge also revealed differences in other cellular inflammation. Using antibodies specific for mast cells (tryptase) and basophils (2D7), we demonstrated that LAR was associated with an increase in sputum mast cells 7 and 24 h post‐allergen that was not present in those without LAR [198] and had a significant negative relationship with the magnitude of LAR. We also measured significantly higher levels of sputum basophils at 7 and 24 h post‐allergen in asthmatics with LAR, and the allergen‐induced shift in basophils showed a significant positive relationship with the shift in AHR. Basophils can produce histamine and cysteinyl leukotrienes which suggests that basophils are, at least in part, involved in causing the LAR. Collectively, the results of this study suggest that mediator release from airway mast cells and basophils activated by inhaled allergen contribute to the late‐phase fall in FEV1and to the development of AHR post‐challenge. These observations are supported by clinical trials showing that treatment with antihistamine plus anti‐leukotriene almost completely abolishes allergen‐induced LAR, AHR, and sputum eosinophils [238,239]. Other cellular pathways shown to be different between isolated early and dual responders include the T‐cell subpopulations. In dual responders, we have shown at 24 h post‐allergen challenge that the sputum CD4+ T cells significantly increase, with a corresponding decrease in Tregs that is proportional to the magnitude of the LAR, and this is in contrast to no changes in isolated early responders [240]. The lower ratio of sputum Treg: CD4+ [240] together with a lower frequency of blood IL‐10‐producing CD4+ and CD8+ T cells [240] measured post‐allergen in dual responder asthmatics suggests that dual responders may have a diminished regulatory response that impedes inhibition of allergen‐induced responses and a corresponding accumulation of central effector cells in airways.

Another mechanism important for allergic airway inflammation involves dendritic cells (DC), which are potent lung antigen‐presenting cells that initiate primary and secondary immune responses [95]. In humans, different types of DCs are distinguished by their different expression of cell surface antigens and function; plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) derived from lymphoid precursors, and myeloid dendritic cells (mDC) are derived from myeloid precursors [241]. mDC consist of two subsets, mDC1s and mDC2s [242]. After allergen challenge in asthmatics, there is a rapid reduction in the numbers of circulating mDCs within 3 h [243], with trafficking of immature mDCs from blood into the airway [244], while trafficking of mDCs from the airways into the regional lymph nodes likely occurs through the lymphatic system. Allergen inhalation is also shown to increase the number of classical DCs in airway biopsy samples [245], which is reflected in sputum by higher levels of mDCs and pDCs 24 h after challenge [246]. We have also shown that inhaled allergen increased the number of classical DCs and plasmacytoid DCs in bone marrow aspirates 24 h after allergen [245]. The increase in mDC2s in the sputum suggests this subtype is involved in the regulation of allergen responses in the lung [247] and, through well‐described interactions with T cells, drives a type 2 response that supports the accumulation of eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells in the airways.

We sought to identify other inflammatory pathways that are activated by inhaled allergens to improve the identification of treatment targets for the regulation of allergen‐induced LAR and corresponding asthma pathophysiology. Although clinical trials blocking the IL‐5 pathway have suggested that the predominant population of eosinophils is not a major driver of allergen‐induced LAR and AHR [89,232], these therapeutics have been proven effective for reducing exacerbations in patients with severe eosinophilic asthma [248], thereby establishing the eosinophil as one of the relevant targets for drug development in asthma. Inhaled allergen challenges induce rapid and intense airway eosinophilia [187] that develops through established immune pathways [209,228]. Furthermore, we have shown that allergen‐induced eosinophilia serves as an excellent biomarker of airway pathophysiology [207,249], making the model useful for testing anti‐eosinophil and anti‐inflammatory therapies. Using the inhaled allergen challenge model, we have tested dozens of investigational medications in proof‐of‐concept studies. In most of these studies, asthmatics were being treated for the first time with these medications, and sputum eosinophil levels were assessed as secondary end points to support a primary analysis of the LAR. A comparison of the effects of experimental therapies on allergen‐induced eosinophil levels is shown in Table1.

Inhibition of allergen‐induced sputum eosinophilia measured 24 h post‐challenge.

Some of the earliest studies adding asthma therapies to inhaled allergen challenges examined the benefits of inhaled corticosteroids as a broad anti‐inflammatory treatment for the regulation of allergen‐induced outcomes, as discussed previously. These studies consistently demonstrated inhibition of early and late‐phase responses, lower levels of allergen‐induced eosinophils and metachromatic cells, and reduced the shift in AHR post‐challenge [210,211,212,258,267]. Newer iterations of ICS also have been tested. For example, ciclesonide, a nonhalogenated ICS that remains inactive until cleaved by esterases in the lung, attenuated the early and late asthmatic responses, sputum eosinophils, and serum eosinophil cationic protein measured at 24 h post‐challenge [268]. We also observed attenuation of allergen‐induced decrease in circulating IFN‐γ positive CD4+ lymphocytes and a correlation between CD4+ cells IFN‐γ/IL‐4 ratio and peripheral blood eosinophils, suggesting lymphocyte subsets are involved with the regulation of allergen‐induced eosinophilia [260]. Other approaches for broad anti‐inflammatory inhibition have been tested, including inhaled nonsteroidal glucocorticoid receptor agonists, which effectively reduced all allergen‐induced responses [269]. Interestingly, allergen‐induced sputum eosinophilia is significantly reduced by ICS/LABA combination treatment to a greater extent than by ICS alone, and measurements in airway biopsies suggested this effect on eosinophils could be attributed to a greater attenuation of allergen‐induced changes in myofibroblast numbers and smooth muscle area [259]. It is evident that eosinophilic airway inflammation is regulated by many different and sometimes opposing mechanistic pathways.

Our studies with inhaled allergen challenge have explored direct mechanisms of eosinophil accumulation that were originally described in animal models and subsequently tested for their contribution to eosinophilia in this allergic model where several pro‐inflammatory pathways are activated by exposure to allergen. A number of investigational therapies have aimed to inhibit eosinophil and basophil chemotaxis by blocking the function of CCR3, the receptor for potent chemoattractants, eotaxin and RANTES. AXP1275, an oral, small‐molecule inhibitor of CCR3, significantly improved baseline AHR but had no effect on eosinophil levels in blood, sputum, or effects on LAR [270]. Taken together with the small non‐statistically significant improvement of EAR, this suggests there may be other cellular mechanisms mediated by CCR3, such as recruitment of basophils, that contribute to EAR through release of histamine and cysteinyl leukotrienes, and to airway hyperresponsiveness as supported by earlier associations between sputum basophils and AHR [198]. Our studies examining the effects of blocking cysteinyl leukotriene receptors demonstrate attenuation of EAR, LAR, and allergen‐induced sputum eosinophils, but no effect on shift in AHR [238,262], possibly indicating that cysLTs are not potent chemoattractants for cells, such as basophils, that might be contributing to AHR. Therapies with broader targets that inhibit activation and/or accumulation of eosinophils, basophils, and mast cells have demonstrated more complete inhibition of allergen‐induced responses. Treatment with TPI ASM8, a combination of antisense oligonucleotides that reduced post‐allergen levels of the beta subunit of the IL‐3, IL‐5, GM‐CSF receptors, and the chemokine receptor CCR3 [261], was shown to attenuate post‐allergen EAR, LAR, AHR, sputum eosinophils and eosinophil progenitors, and ECP with a > 75% reduction in sputum basophils [271,272]. These results suggest that in addition to IL‐5 blockade, CCR3, IL‐3, and GM‐CSF are also important targets for the management of asthma through effects on central effector cells including basophils and mast cells. Other approaches for inhibiting activities of these effector cells, albeit with results that are difficult to interpret, include blockade of the complement factor C5 with eculizumab, to prevent the production of C5a, which is a potent chemoattractant of eosinophils and basophils, and causes degranulation of basophils and mast cells [273,274,275]. We demonstrated that a single dose of eculizumab had an unexpectedly prolonged effect in attenuating allergen‐induced airway responses, resulting in a significant period effect in the crossover study design [276]. Further broadening of target cells for the control of asthma can be achieved through blockade of common pathways, such as the adhesion molecule LFA‐1 expressed on cells including eosinophils, basophils, and T lymphocytes to enable adhesion to vascular epithelium during extravasation [252]. In the allergen challenge model, we reported that efalizumab, an antibody directed against CD11a (the LFA‐1 alpha chain), significantly reduced the allergen‐induced accumulation of airway eosinophils and metachromatic cells (mast cells and basophils) [277]. However, the effect of efalizumab on EAR, LAR, and AHR was not statistically significant, thereby providing another example of the dissociation between airway eosinophilia and allergen‐induced changes in pulmonary function.

There has also been significant progress made toward approaches that more broadly target airway inflammation for the treatment of asthma by inhibiting very specific pathways. IL‐13 is a pleiotropic cytokine produced by many cells found in asthmatic airways, including Th2 cells, mast cells, and basophils [250]. Animal models have shown that IL‐13 is potentially involved in many aspects of asthma pathobiology; however, finding the best target in humans has required testing of several mAbs. We conducted a series of clinical trials to evaluate IgG1mAbs blocking IL‐13. IMA‐638 is specific for the IL‐13 epitope that binds IL‐4Rα, and IMA‐026 is specific for the IL‐13 epitope that binds IL‐13Ra1 and IL‐13Ra2. The effects of these anti‐IL‐13 mAbs were modest and inconsistent, with neither having an effect on LAR or allergen‐induced AHR or sputum eosinophils [278]. Lebrikizumab, an IgG4 mAb that neutralizes IL‐13 by blocking its interaction with IL‐4Ra, had a modest effect on LAR, but in subsequent phase 3 clinical trials with moderate to severe asthmatics, the drug did not demonstrate consistent reduction in exacerbations [253]. Several other compounds directed against IL‐13, including tralokinumab, GSK679586, QAX576, and AMG317, failed to demonstrate clinical efficacy in early phase 2 clinical trials, providing consistent evidence that blocking IL‐13 is not an effective approach for asthma treatment. In contrast, dupilumab, an IgG4 mAb that targets the IL‐4R and blocks both IL‐4 and IL‐13 signaling, has been clinically effective for the reduction of asthma exacerbations and prednisone‐sparing [279,280]. To this end, pitrakinra, an IL‐4 variant that inhibits the binding of interleukin‐4 and interleukin‐13 to interleukin‐4Rα receptor complexes, demonstrated significant effects on allergen‐induced LAR [281]. As such, it is possible that due to redundancy in the pathobiology of asthma, IL‐13 blockade alone may be insufficient, and the additional effects of blocking IL‐4 and the associated reduction of airway eosinophils, as shown with dupilumab treatment [282], are required for asthma intervention to be effective.

Other approaches to broadly target airway inflammation have included blockade of pathways upstream of T2 inflammation, including blockade of IgE. The first mAb approved for treatment of asthma, Xolair, was initially tested in the allergen challenge model. These early studies demonstrated that systemic administration of this anti‐IgE monoclonal antibody, which inhibits binding of IgE to its receptor, effectively reduced serum IgE levels as well as significantly reduced the early and late‐phase responses to inhaled allergen challenge [283,284]. Subsequent studies demonstrated the effects of anti‐IgE treatment on airway inflammation. Inhibition of early and late asthmatic responses was paralleled by lower post‐allergen eosinophil levels in sputum and airway biopsies, together with a decline in airway tissue IgE‐bearing cells [285]. Our work evaluating a new formulation of anti‐IgE confirmed the previously reported inhibitory effects of IgE‐blockade on allergen‐induced early response, and we extended these findings to show dose‐dependent changes in basophil surface levels of IgE and FcεRI [286]. Collectively, these findings suggest that the benefits of anti‐IgE in asthma may be explained at least in part by a decrease in eosinophilic inflammation driven by reduced responsiveness of FcεRI‐bearing cells to IgE stimulation. Although we only measured surface levels of IgE and FcεRI on basophils in our study, downregulation on mast cells and dendritic cells would further explain reductions in eosinophils reported in other anti‐IgE studies. Other novel approaches to reduce IgE have included depletion of IgE‐switched B cells via the M1 prime segment of membrane‐bound IgE, with the mAb quilizumab. This treatment provided a prolonged reduction in total IgE and blocked the new production of allergen‐induced challenge‐specific IgE [287]. This was associated with a significant reduction of the allergen‐induced EAR; although the LAR and eosinophils in blood were reduced by quilizumab treatment, these differences were not statistically significant when compared with placebo. Notably, treatments blocking IgE had no effect on the allergen‐induced shift in AHR to methacholine [285,287].

A myriad of other inhibitors have been tested for their effects on allergen‐induced responses. Some have targeted very novel pathways that were previously demonstrated in animal models to drive allergic inflammation, including inhibition of the nicotinic acetylcholine α7 receptor (ASM024) [256], inhibition of inflammatory cell adhesion (AIM‐102), IL‐9 mAb [288,289], or for characterization of unique formulations such as antisense IL‐4Ra and a non‐steroidal glucocorticoid receptor antagonist [269,290]. Other investigational medications have been developed to target neutrophilic inflammation in addition to eosinophils and have been tested in the inhaled allergen challenge model, including IL‐6 blockade with tocilizumab, CXCR2 and CRTH2 antagonism, PGE2inhalation, PDE4 inhibition, and immunostimulatory sequences developed to activate TLR9 [257,263,264,266,291,292,293,294]. These investigational therapies have not been continued either due to a lack of effect on allergen‐induced responses or an unsatisfactory adverse event profile. A summary of the effects of these therapies on allergen‐induced sputum eosinophil levels is shown in Table1.

A more comprehensive understanding of airway inflammation regulation, including the role of dendritic cells and epithelial cell interactions on the immunopathobiology of asthma, has led to the development of drugs targeting key pathways upstream of T2 cytokines and IgE. Blockade of OX40L is one such approach that has been tested in recognition of the important role of its expression by dendritic cells polarizing naïve T cells to Th2 effector cells and its role in TSLP‐driven allergic inflammation [254,265]. OX40L blockade in the allergen challenge model had a small but significant effect on reducing total IgE, and by approximately 4 months after the initiation of treatment, there was a reduction in sputum eosinophils [295]. We saw no effect on any allergen‐induced outcomes, including EAR, LAR, and AHR, and redundancy in the regulation of Th2 inflammation may diminish the impact of targeting OX40 signaling alone. On the other hand, blocking TSLP, which is known to upregulate expression of OX40L on DCs in addition to directly activating a host of effector cells, including ILC2, mast cells, and basophils, has been shown to successfully inhibit all allergen‐induced responses. Studies using IV tezepelumab as well as the inhaled TSLP fragment, ecleralimab, resulted in the reduction of EAR, LAR, eosinophils in sputum, and FeNO levels [251,255]. The reduction in EAR, in particular, suggests that TSLP, through direct or indirect activation of mast cells and/or basophils, contributes to this acute bronchoconstriction response. We have shown that TSLP receptors, as well as receptors for other alarmin cytokines IL‐25 and IL‐33, increase on basophils post‐allergen inhalation and that TSLP stimulation activates basophils collected from allergic donors [133]. Systemic but not inhaled anti‐TSLP also inhibited blood eosinophils [251], as the inhaled formulation would not be expected to have any effect outside the airways. These inhaled allergen challenge studies have led us to understand the relevant impact of various allergic pathways on the recruitment of central effector cells to the airways and the corresponding effects on allergen‐induced pathophysiology. In these studies, inhibition of allergen‐induced airway eosinophils has emerged as an important biomarker for assessing the efficacy of new therapeutics.

There is an increasing appreciation for the multifunctional role of effector cells. It has been well documented that mature cell populations are not structurally, functionally, or immunologically homogeneous, and they are characterized by their localization, expression of surface receptors, function, and hence contribution to the pathogenesis of diseases like asthma.

Human mast cells have traditionally been identified as tryptase‐positive cells and divided into two subtypes based on the presence (MCTC) or absence (MCT) of the protease granule chymase [296,297]. These mast cell subtypes are location‐specific, with those expressing both tryptase and chymase located mainly in the airway submucosa in contrast to mast cells that mainly express tryptase but not chymase located mainly in the airway mucosa. More recently, another population of mast cells, characterized by high expression of carboxypeptidase A3 but not chymase (MCT/CPA3) has been identified in the airway epithelium and lumen of asthmatics [298,299,300], and these intraepithelial mast cells have been associated with AHR and T2 airway inflammation [301]. With the introduction of biologics that target specific inflammatory pathways, we can begin to deplete subgroups of mast cells, for example, as observed by a significant reduction of IL‐5Rα positive mast cells in the skin of patients with AD following treatment with benralizumab [111]. Improved technology to measure a higher number of proteins has permitted the demonstration of considerable heterogeneity in basophil populations from healthy donors, with the identification of 4 unique subpopulations [302]. Interestingly, with this same methodology, there was minimal heterogeneity seen in eosinophils and neutrophils. Furthermore, we have shown that surface receptor expression of blood and sputum basophils is regulated by external stimuli such as inhaled allergens [303], possibly through upregulation of receptors for alarmin cytokines [133].

The literature examining eosinophil subsets has been growing rapidly, and generally adopted nomenclature developed from murine studies classifies eosinophils as resident (rEos) and inflammatory (iEos) eosinophils based on the expression of receptors for IL‐3 (CD123) and L‐selectin (CD62L) [304,305]. This seminal paper demonstrated higher expression of several proinflammatory genes in iEOS, whereas rEOS express several genes implicated in tissue homeostasis. Our work measuring differential expression of cell surface receptors, including IL‐5, Siglec 8, and CRTH2 on iEos and rEos in the blood of asthmatics supports the proposed functions of these eosinophil subsets (unpublished data). Furthermore, we have also shown that the frequency of iEos differs across respiratory diseases, across peripheral and airway compartments [306] and also shifts in response to exposure to inhaled allergens [307], further suggesting that eosinophil subsets may be fulfilling different functions. Evidence for allergen‐induced increases in activated eosinophils has been described by elevated EG2+ eosinophils in the sputum of asthmatics [88] and in the skin of patients with atopic dermatitis [111]. Furthermore, we have shown that benralizumab treatment significantly inhibits the allergen‐induced accumulation of EG2+ eosinophils in the skin of atopic dermatitis patients, but with no effect on MPB+ eosinophils [111], suggesting there is an IL‐5‐independent subset of eosinophils that remains in tissue even after circulating levels have been depleted by benralizumab. Studies examining the responsiveness of eosinophil subsets to therapy are ongoing, testing the hypothesis that central effector cells in allergic disease can be divided into subsets capable of responding differently to therapeutic intervention or to environmental stimuli. These studies will improve our current understanding of the immunopathogenesis of asthmatic responses to inhaled allergens [226].

Clinical trials evaluating the effects of novel anti‐inflammatory medications on allergen‐induced inflammation have demonstrated consistent associations with the corresponding airway responses, including bronchoconstriction and AHR. Although the role of mast cells and basophils in the immunopathobiology of asthma has been under investigation for many years, the introduction of novel medications that specifically deplete these cells will be required for a full appreciation of their respective roles. What is certain is that patients with severe eosinophilic asthma benefit from anti‐IL5/IL5Rα treatment, suggesting that IL‐5 dependent eosinophils, at least in part, drive the immunopathobiology of asthma exacerbation. The regulation of eosinophil accumulation into allergic airways continues to be a useful biomarker to gauge the anti‐inflammatory activity of investigational medications developed for the treatment of asthma. Additional studies into the function of eosinophil subsets will help to define the roles of these cells in disease.