Sensorimotor adaptation is critical for learning and refining voluntary movements. One common assumption is that the number of practice trials fully determines the amount of adaptation. It is possible, however, that for some tasks the sensorimotor system continues to learn during the time in-between executed movements as long as there is no evidence that the environment has changed. The amount of time spent in the altered environment (total exposure time) then would be more important than the number of practice movements performed during that time. In the current study, we investigated adaptation and de-adaptation as a function of practice trials versus exposure time using speech articulation as the model system. Four separate groups of 14 participants read out loud monosyllabic words at a rate of either 18 words per minute or only 6 words per minute during the adaptation and de-adaptation phases of a speaking task with formant-shifted auditory feedback. The data demonstrate that both auditory-motor adaptation and de-adaptation depend more on exposure time than amount of practice. COIN model simulations suggest that this common effect is consistent with de-adaptation constituting active re-learning of the unaltered environment rather than forgetting of the learned behavior.

Speech auditory-motor adaptation to a formant-shift perturbation and de-adaptation after the perturbation is removed both depend more on total amount of time spent in the corresponding environment than on the number of practice trials.

Humans adjust the planning of voluntary movements based on sensory feedback experienced during previous movements. From an infant’s early babbling1,2or first steps3to an elderly adult’s speaking with dentures4or walking with a cane5, the central nervous system (CNS) continuously learns an updated internal model of the involved sensorimotor transformations necessary to perform accurate movements. Over the last several decades, this ability to adapt to changes in the environment or effectors has been intensively studied with sensorimotor adaptation paradigms in which sensory feedback is experimentally perturbed across practice trials (e.g., speech6; upper limb reaching7,8).

Given that adaptation is driven by the sensory errors experienced during each movement, it is usually assumed that the number of executed movements (i.e., the number of trials in case of a laboratory study) determines the amount of adaptation. It is also possible, however, that for at least some tasks, the CNS continues to update or consolidate its internal models during the time in between executed movements, as long as there is no evidence that the environment has changed with respect to its applicable sensorimotor transformations. In this case, the amount of time spent in the altered environment might be equally or even more important than the actual number of movements performed during that amount of time.

If so, this phenomenon would be akin to observations that the mere passage of time may facilitate other forms of motor learning that are not based on sensorimotor adaptation, such as the acquisition or improvement of motor skills. Previous work on motor skill learning found an enhanced learning effect of overall duration in two different types of studies. The first type of studies compared massed versus distributed practice schedules (implemented as a manipulation of the duration of rest between training blocks that each consisted of many practice trials) and found that distributed practice schedules enhance motor skill learning9. Other studies varied the amount of time between successive practice trials (i.e., manipulating inter-trial interval or ITI) and found that longer ITIs benefit the acquisition of new motor skills10.

In the context of sensorimotor adaptation, however, the effect of environment exposure time (defined here as the total duration of time spent in an altered environment) remains largely unknown. There is evidence that more rest breaks (i.e., distributed practice schedules) benefit upper limb visuo-motor adaptation11. In addition, a very short (0.5 s) ITI resulted in reduced learning rate and extent as compared with longer ITIs (e.g., 5–20 s) in upper limb reach adaptation to a force-field perturbation12. However, the latter study also found no difference among the set of longer ITIs, despite their wide range of interval durations. Using a similar upper limb adaptation paradigm, Huang and Shadmehr13reported that a longer ITI (14 s) increased the initial rate of learning as compared with a shorter ITI (4 s) but that there was no effect on the final extent of learning. For upper limb reach adaptation to a visual feedback perturbation, Kim et al.14reported that the rate of adaptation did not differ between shorter and longer ITI (5.2 s and 18.4 s) conditions, consistent with McDougle et al.’s15report that different ITIs (0, 15, and 30 s) did not affect visuo-motor adaptation rate or extent. Possibly due to these inconsistent results, ITI (or total exposure time in general) is not considered as a parameter in most computational models of adaptation across different effector systems (see ref.13for a rare exception).

Further study of the effect of ITI in altered sensory environments is likely to elucidate not only processes involved in adaptation but also those involved in the subsequent phase of de-adaptation. De-adaptation occurs when, after a period of sensorimotor adaptation, the perturbation is removed and the subject’s behavior gradually returns to baseline performance (i.e., after-effects phase or wash-out phase). In motor skill learning, studies have reported longer learning retention (i.e., less forgetting of the skills learned) after practicing with longer ITIs10. A similar finding has also been reported in sensorimotor adaptation: adapting with a longer ITI resulted in more retention during a no-feedback after-effects phase14. However, whether exposure time during the de-adaptation phase itself affects the extent of behavioral change during this phase remains poorly understood. This question is particularly intriguing as the mechanisms underlying de-adaptation continue to be elusive: some have considered it to constitute passive forgetting while others have suggested that it may actually be another form of learning (e.g., re-learning, see ref.16).

Here, we investigated both adaptation and de-adaptation as a function of the number of practice trials versus the amount of exposure time (operationally defined as the total time spent in the altered environment, regardless of whether active movements are being performed or not). Specifically, we asked participants to speak monosyllabic words at a rate of either 18 words per minute or only 6 words per minute throughout a perturbation phase in which all vowel formant frequencies in the real-time auditory feedback (heard through insert earphones) were shifted upward and throughout an after-effects phase during which auditory feedback was no longer perturbed. In speech, formants are resonance frequencies that depend on articulatory positions (vocal tract configurations) and that are the primary acoustic targets during vowel production. Therefore, acoustic measures were made of the first (F1) and second (F2) formants in each participant’s produced utterances, and adaptation was quantified by individual-participant normalization of the produced F1 and F2 frequencies to a preceding unperturbed baseline phase and then averaging across F1 and F2 for each trial. Similarly, de-adaptation was quantified after individual-participant normalization of F1 and F2 to the end of the preceding perturbation phase and averaging across the two formants for each trial. Adaptation and de-adaptation in participant groups with different practice schedules were then examined both with inferential statistics and with simulations generated by a widely used two-rate state-space model17as well as an alternative model, COIN (COntextual INference18).

Fifty-six native speakers of American English, ranging from 18 to 44 years of age (mean = 23.95, SD = 5.51 years), initially participated in the study. Based on self-reporting, there were 28 male and 28 female participants. The participants were randomly assigned to four different subgroups (Fig.1). As is common in studies of speech auditory-motor adaptation, a small subset of participants showed “following” behavior rather than adaptation (i.e., changes in speech output followed the direction of the perturbation rather than opposed it). In this study, if a participant’s average F1 or F2 during the adaptation phase increased by more than or equal to 20 cents compared to the baseline, the participant was considered a “follower.” Using this operational definition, “following” was identified in 5 participants (1 male participant in Group 1; 2 female participants and 1 male participant in Group 2; 1 female participant in Group 4), and these participants were replaced in order to avoid artificially decreasing one group’s mean adaptation data. The “followers” were replaced with five new participants matched for age and sex (followers, 25.84 ± 8.14 years; replacements, 26.00 ± 5.52 years). All presented data are based on the exclusion of the “followers” and inclusion of the replacement participants. Note that, retrospectively (after analysis of all data), the fact that most of the “following” participants were in the groups with intensive adaptation schedule indicates that their inclusion would have only increased the effects observed in this study (at least in terms of adaptation, see Fig. S1in Supplementary Information).

ASchematic representation of the experimental setup.BExample spectrogram of a single trial for the target word “Tuck” with first (F1) and second (F2) formant frequency tracks for the vowel selection superimposed (plum = participant acoustic output, blue = effects of +250 cents shift perturbation heard in the auditory feedback).CPractice schedules for four experimental groups who experienced different combinations of intensive and non-intensive trial presentation in the adaptation and de-adaptation phases. All groups completed the same number of trials in each phase: 54 trials (18 of each word) baseline, 108 trials (36 per word) adaptation, and 108 trials (36 per word) de-adaptation. ITI inter-trial interval.

All participants self-reported as right-hand dominant, except for 4 participants who reported being left-handed (3 male participants) and 2 who reported being ambidextrous (both male participants). Participants were screened for hearing or speech impairments and were tested to have normal pure tone audiometric hearing thresholds within the range of 250–8000 Hz (≤25 dB Hearing Level). The experiment was approved by the University of Washington’s Institutional Review Board (STUDY00001367), and informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to the experiment. In accordance with the approved protocol, participants were recruited through various forms of local advertisements and were provided with monetary compensation.

A simplified overview of the experiment setup is shown in Fig.1A. Participants were seated inside a large 17'0” × 7'5” sound-attenuated booth (Industrial Acoustics Company, North Aurora, IL), facing a computer monitor which was used to present speech stimuli during the experiment. Speech output was transduced with a boom-mounted microphone (SM58, Shure, Niles, IL) placed 15 cm from the speaker’s mouth. The acoustic speech signal was amplified (DI/O Preamp System II, Applied Research and Technology, Niagara Falls, NY) and routed to both one channel of a CD recorder (XL-R5000BK, JVC, Yokohama, Japan) and a digital voice processor (VoiceOne, TC Helicon). The processor was used to implement an auditory feedback perturbation consisting of an upward shift of all formant frequencies in the vowels of the produced words. Auditory feedback was played back to the participant via a headphones amplifier (Samson Technologies, Hicksville, NY) and ER-3A insert earphones (Etymotic Research, Elk Grove Village, IL) in near real-time (i.e., around 10 ms delay when measured with the method recommended in ref.19). The feedback signal heard by the participant was also recorded on the second channel of the CD recorder.

All digital speech recordings were stored for offline analyses. Before each experiment session, the experimental setup was calibrated using a sound level meter (Type 2250A Hand Held Analyzer with Type 4947 ½” Pressure Field Microphone, Brüel and Kjӕr) with a 2cc coupler such that a speech signal with an intensity of 75 dB sound pressure level (SPL) at a distance of 15 cm from the participant’s mouth resulted in an output of 72 dB SPL in the earphones (input-output ratio based on data from ref.20). Participants were also provided with colored visual feedback to maintain their voice amplitude at 75 ± 3 dB SPL throughout the experiment.

Participants were instructed to produce the target words “tech,” “tuck” and “talk” as they were presented visually on the monitor in front of them. Each word was produced 90 times (270 utterances total), with the presentation order pseudo-randomized so that each word appeared at least once in each block of three trials. A pre-exposure (baseline, unperturbed feedback) phase consisted of 54 trials (18 per word) in which speakers received unperturbed auditory feedback of their own voice. The subsequent adaptation phase (perturbed feedback) consisted of 108 trials (36 per word) during which the formant frequencies in the auditory feedback were raised by 250 cents (2.5 semitones) without changing other acoustic parameters such as the fundamental frequency (Fig.1B). Lastly, there was a de-adaptation or after-effects phase (unperturbed feedback) with 108 trials (36 per word) during which the formant shift was removed and unaltered feedback was heard.

Participants were divided into four groups that experienced different combinations of Intensive (18 trials per minute, 3.33 s ITI) and Non-Intensive (6 trials per minute, 10 s ITI) practice schedules during the adaptation and de-adaptation phases (Fig.1C). All groups experienced the same intensive trial schedule for the baseline phase. Assignment to the groups was pseudo-random such that mean age and sex distribution were similar among the groups. Group 1 (Intensive:Intensive;n= 14, 7 male participants, 23.9 ± 6.2 years) had intensive practice schedules for both the adaptation and de-adaptation phases (15 min total). Group 2 (Intensive:Non-Intensive;n= 14, 7 male participants, 23.7 ± 4.0 years) had the intensive practice schedule for adaptation and the non-intensive schedule for de-adaptation (27 min total). Group 3 (Non-Intensive:Intensive;n= 14, 7 male participants, 24.29 ± 4.0 years) had the non-intensive schedule for adaptation and the intensive schedule for de-adaptation (27 min total). Group 4 (Non-Intensive:Non-Intensive;n= 14, 7 male participants, 24.1 ± 7.0 years) had the non-intensive schedule for both adaptation and de-adaptation (39 min total).

Data were pooled across groups with matching practice schedules in the adaptation phase (Intensive: Groups 1 and 2; Non-Intensive: Groups 3 and 4) and de-adaptation phase (Intensive: Groups 1 and 3; Non-Intensive: Groups 2 and 4). Between-group comparisons of the extent of behavioral change (adaptation or de-adaptation) were performed on both time- and trial-dependent measures of extent (see “Data extraction and outcome measures” section for details). These comparisons assessed whether it is the total amount of time in the environment or the number of practice trials that is the most important determinant of the extent of adaptation and de-adaptation. The study was not preregistered.

The stored digital recordings of the utterances were analyzed offline to extract the first (F1) and second (F2) formant frequencies of the vowels produced in each trial. The voiced portion of each vowel was first selected using a combination of custom scripts in Praat21. A custom GUI-based Matlab program was then used to visualize spectrograms of the selected vowels, and an order-optimized Linear Predictive Coding (LPC) method described by Vallabha and Tuller22automatically extracted the formant frequencies for 30 ms Hamming windows centered at 10% time points along the voiced segment. The values of F1 and F2 were then calculated by averaging the 40 and 50% LPC tracked points of the selected vowel (see Fig.1Bfor example spectrogram and LPC formant tracking). Each utterance was visually inspected and, if necessary, vowel selection and formant tracking were manually corrected (e.g., when F2 was incorrectly identified as F1) and occasionally rejected in cases of behaviors such as yawning or coughing (<1% of collected data). In the rare case of a rejected trial, a replacement data point was calculated by interpolating the 4 nearest neighboring trial values for F1 and F223.

in whichFHzrefers to either the F1 or F2 value for a given trial (in Hz) andBaseHzrefers to a baseline reference value (in Hz) which was the median production from either the baseline phase (trials 6–18 of each word) or end of the adaptation phase (final 13 trials for each word) for analysis of the adaptation and de-adaptation data, respectively. The normalization of de-adaptation data to the end of the adaptation phase was implemented to control for inter-individual variations in the extent of behavior change by the end of the adaptation phase.

We examined adaptation and de-adaptation extent with both time-based and trial-based comparisons. For the time-based analyses, we determined the averaged F1 and F2 behavioral change after a fixed amount of time (6 min), but different number of completed trials, in the specific sensory environment (perturbed for adaptation, unperturbed for de-adaptation). To avoid these measures being based on a single trial, a decision had to be made about how many trials to include for this comparison. We used the last 9 trials (3 per target word) for the Intensive group, and the corresponding 3 trials (1 per target word) for the Non-Intensive group (Fig.1C) such that the data captured the groups’ performance over the exact same time window (9 trials with the intensive schedule and 3 trials with the non-intensive schedule both took ~30 s). For the trial-based analyses, we determined the averaged F1 and F2 behavioral change in the final 9 trials (i.e., final 3 trials of each word) in both groups. This analytical approach made it possible to separately assess adaptation extent as a function of total time spent in the environment (time-dependent) and the number of practice trials (trial-dependent).

For the statistical analyses of the adaptation data, we constructed linear mixed effects models using thenlmepackage24in R25. In all of the models, we set Group (Intensive vs. Non-Intensive) and Vowel (“tuck” vs. “tech” vs. “talk”) as fixed effects, whereas participants were treated as a random effect. For de-adaptation data, an additional fixed effect, AdaptPractice (Intensive vs. Non-Intensive adaptation practice schedule), was added to the models to examine whether the adaptation schedule in the preceding phase influenced de-adaptation. All interactions among the fixed effects were examined in each model (e.g., Group × Vowel, Group × AdaptPractice, Group × AdaptPractice × Vowel).

For all the models, we chose a correlation structure that offered the lowest Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) of the compatible standard correlation structures offered in thenlmepackage. A general correlation matrix with no additional structure (corSymm) was chosen for the adaptation data models, whereas for de-adaptation data, there were several correlation structures that offered the same AIC with nearly the same statistical results. Thus, for de-adaptation data, we chose a commonly used structure,AR1, an autocorrelation structure of order 1.

We conducted post hoc tests for significant interactions through pairwise comparisons using theemmeansR package26. Thep-values were adjusted using the Tukey method for comparing a family of 6 estimates. For all pairwise comparisons, we also calculated Cohen’s d effect sizes and their 95% confidence intervals (CI) using the eff_size function in the same package (emmeans).

Pdenotes the amount of perturbation, which was set to 250 during the perturbation phase (i.e.,250−xtotal). On the other hand, the baseline or after-effects phase during which there is no perturbation,eis simply defined as the total state (i.e.,xtotal) given thatPis set to 0.

which ensured that the slow retention factor would be larger than the fast retention factor and the fast error sensitivity would be larger than the slow error sensitivity in each fit. The initial condition was set to be 0.8, 0.05, 0.99, 0.007 forAf,Bf,As,Bsrespectively. In addition, the lower and upper bounds were [0.001, 1] for all of the parameters. In addition to generating 5000 values of each model parameter (i.e.,Af,Bf,As, andBs) fitted to the Intensive and Non-Intensive bootstrapped samples, thebootcifunction computed the 95% bias-corrected accelerated percentile confidence intervals for those values. For each model parameter, we examined whether the 95% confidence intervals of the Intensive vs. Non-Intensive groups overlapped (i.e., no group difference) or not (i.e., group difference). It should be noted that changing these initial conditions did not result in the overall average fit parameters (TableS1in Supplementary Information).

Given the iterative nature of the state-space modeling, it is not possible to generate de-adaptation simulation without simulating adaptation (i.e., slow and fast states from adaptation determine initial de-adaptation states). Hence, we used the average parameters from the adaptation fit and generated a de-adaptation simulation for all four groups (Groups 1–4). The de-adaptation simulation in each group was normalized based on the last 13 epochs of the perturbation phase (epoch 42–54), which was the same procedure applied to the experimental data (see “Data extraction and outcome measures”). Lastly, we computed an average simulation for the Intensive De-Adaptation (Groups 1 and 3) and Non-Intensive De-Adaptation groups (Groups 2 and 4).

wherextjdenotes the state at a given trialtand context (j).ajis the state retention factor that is multiplied by the previous statext−1j, similar to the two-rate state-space model. It is important to note, however, that COIN samples the retention parameter from a prior distribution defined with a mean parameter (μa) to allow Bayesian inference. In addition to the previous state, however, COIN also accounts for drift (dj) and noise (wtj). For all simulations,twas defined as an epoch (i.e., 3 trials).

We assumed that our formant shift of 250 cents corresponded to a small size perturbation in terms of the unitless perturbation configured in the model (i.e., 0.1). Because single-context adaptation occurs when the size of the perturbation is relatively small, even though the maximum number of contexts was set to 10, the simulations were determined by only one context throughout adaptation and de-adaptation (as opposed to the common assumption of transitioning into a previously established memory state or learning a new memory state). The single-context adaptation and de-adaptation simulations were consistent with our experimental data in that both adaptation and de-adaptation were gradual rather than quick and abrupt behavior changes that can be observed with context switching between multiple contexts18. Given the perturbation size conversion mentioned above, the motor output in the simulations was later converted to cents by multiplying −2500 (i.e., 1 in terms of the model unit is equivalent to 2500 cents). It should be noted that the negative sign was inserted in this conversion because COIN assigns the sign of the perturbation to the adaptation (i.e., positive perturbation results in positive adaptation), contrary to our data, in which negative cents (compared to baseline) are reached during adaptation.

wherebis the bias parameter that reflects misalignment between different sensory modalities (here, auditory vs. proprioception, analogous to visual vs. proprioception for arm reaching movements). The bias parameter’s average is originally set to zero, but it can shift towards a positive value during adaptation because the sensory system has been calibrated during adaptation to perceive adapted state feedback as “normal.” Because of the positive bias term, even when the predicted state (xt) became negative, the predicted state feedback (yt) remained positive as it was decreasing towards zero during de-adaptation. This is important to note because the motor output is defined as the mean of the predicted state feedback distribution, which explains why the motor output in the simulation did not flip its sign (i.e., it remained positive, which is equivalent to producing negative formants relative to baseline) during de-adaptation, even when the predicted state distribution became negative.

The prior mean of retention (μa) was changed across adaptation and de-adaptation based on the practice schedule. For adaptation, the prior mean was set to 0.70 for intensive and 0.77 for non-intensive schedule. For de-adaptation, the prior mean was set to 0.70 and 0.92 for intensive and non-intensive schedules, respectively. It is important to note that we did not fit COIN using algorithms such as Bayesian Adaptive Direct Search, as in ref.18. Instead, based on our hypothesis, we simply changed the retention factor to examine whether larger retention can enhance de-adaptation and adaptation (see TableS2in Supplementary Information for more detailed parameter values). Nonetheless, these proof-of-the-concept simulations were mostly a better fit for our experimental data compared to the simulations generated by the two-rate state-space models (see Fig. S2and TableS3in Supplementary Information for more details).

It should be noted that COIN simulations can model individual participants’ data (i.e., each simulation run corresponds to individual participant data). Thus, the number of observations was configured to be 14 for each practice schedule, which yielded in14 independent simulations, consistent with our sample size in the experimental data. We then averaged the motor output across the simulations for each group. The simulations’ de-adaptation was calculated through the same normalization procedure used for our experimental data.

COIN computes both implicit and explicit components, and the model assumes that participants have access to the state. Thus, the explicit component of learning is defined as the state mean, and the model computes implicit component as the remaining portion of the motor output (i.e., motor output − explicit component). However, because speech adaptation is entirely implicit27, we assumed that the participants cannot access the state, and that the motor output is entirely implicit. Thus, all our simulations were the model’s “motor output,” which is defined as the average of the states and novel contexts, weighted by their predicted probabilities.

Further information on research design is available in theNature Portfolio Reporting Summarylinked to this article.

As illustrated in Fig.2A, Intensive Adaptation and Non-Intensive Adaptation showed a similar amount of learning after 6 min of perturbation, even though, at that time, the former group had already completed all perturbation trials and the latter group had completed only one-third as many trials. A linear mixed model was constructed with fixed effects Group (i.e., Intensive vs. Non-Intensive) and Vowel (i.e., one of three different target vowels used to create three different words for production) to examine the amount of adaptation at 6 min into the perturbation. The model revealed no significant fixed effect of Group at that time point, F = 0.001,p= 0.982.

Shaded areas indicate 1 standard error for each group (n= 28 participants per group).AGroup average formant frequencies, after individual normalization relative to baseline, for Intensive Adaptation (green) and Non-Intensive Adaptation (orange), expressed by time spent in the perturbation phase. The Intensive Adaptation group completed all 36 perturbed epochs (3 trials per epoch) in 6 min, whereas the Non-Intensive Adaptation group completed these same epochs in 18 min. Both groups achieved a similar extent of learning after 6 min of perturbation (despite the different number of practice trials), but the Non-Intensive Adaptation group continued to adapt more during the remaining time.BWhen comparing the same data by number of epochs, the Non-Intensive Adaptation group showed a larger final extent of learning (last three epochs).CGroup average formant frequencies, after individual normalization to the end of the perturbation phase, for Intensive De-Adaptation (light blue) and Non-Intensive De-Adaptation (plum) across the after-effects phase. After 6 min, when the Intensive De-Adaptation group had completed all 36 epochs (3 trials per epoch), both groups achieved a similar extent of de-adaptation, but the Non-Intensive De-Adaptation group continued to de-adapt during the remaining time.DWhen comparing the same data by number of epochs, the Non-Intensive De-Adaptation group showed a larger final extent of de-adaptation (last three epochs).

The Non-Intensive Adaptation group continued to show additional learning after the initial 6 min of exposure to the perturbation (Fig.2B). As a result, the amount of adaptation in the final three epochs of the perturbation phase (i.e., 3 epochs × 3 words = 9 trials), when both groups had completed all trials, was significantly larger in the Non-Intensive Adaptation group than in the Intensive Adaptation group, F(1,54) = 4.922,p= 0.031 (also see Figs. S3, S4in Supplementary Information for individual data in both groups). It should be noted that in the linear mixed effects models (i.e., one with the data at 6 min and one with the data at the end of completing all perturbation trials), there was a significant fixed effect of Vowel but no significant interactions between fixed factors (although Vowel effects were not a main focus of the study, details of all statistic results related to Vowel are presented below in the separate section “Vowel effects during adaptation and de-adaptation”).

De-adaptation analyses were based on data from two groups of participants who completed the intensive schedule in the after-effects phase (Intensive De-Adaptation combined group) versus two groups of participants who completed the non-intensive schedule in the after-effects phase (Non-Intensive De-Adaptation combined group). To also check whether practice schedule in the preceding perturbation phase influenced subsequent de-adaptation, we included an additional fixed effect which represented the adaptation practice schedule (Intensive or Non-Intensive).

The de-adaptation data are shown in Fig.2C. The linear mixed effects model revealed that 6 min after the perturbation was removed, when the Intensive De-Adaptation group had already completed all after-effects trials but the Non-intensive De-Adaptation group had completed only one-third of those trials, the extent of de-adaptation was not significantly different between the two groups, F(1,52) = 0.110,p= 0.742. There was no significant effect of practice schedule during the preceding Adaptation phase, F(1,52) = 0.199,p= 0.657. Interestingly, after the 6-min time point, the Non-Intensive De-Adaptation group then continued to de-adapt further throughout the remaining unperturbed trials. As a result, when all trials had been completed (Fig.2D), the Non-Intensive De-Adaptation group’s extent of de-adaptation (across the last three epochs) was significantly greater (i.e., closer to baseline) as compared with that of the Intensive De-Adaptation group, F(1,52) = 4.060,p= 0.049 (also see Figs. S5, S6in Supplementary Information for individual data). The practice schedule from the preceding adaptation phase was not a significant fixed effect for these trial-based measures of de-adaptation, F(1,52) = 0.928,p= 0.340.

In both linear mixed models constructed for de-adaptation analyses (i.e., at 6 min and after completion of all trials), there was a significant fixed effect of Vowel. We also found a significant interaction between Group and Vowel at the time point 6 min into the after-effects phase (see the section “Vowel effects during adaptation and de-adaptation” below for statistics). All other interactions were not statistically significant (p> 0.05).

For adaptation measured at 6 min into the perturbation phase, there was a significant fixed effect for Vowel, F(2,443) = 4.908,p= 0.008, and a post hoc pairwise comparison revealed that participants adapted more for “tuck” than for “tech,” t(443) = −3.097,padj= 0.006, d = 0.326 (95% CI 0.115 to 0.538). The difference between “talk” and “tech” did not reach significance, t(443) = −2.215,padj= 0.070, d = 0.345 (95% CI 0.033 to 0.657), and the difference between “talk” and “tuck” was smallest and thus also not significant, t(443) = 0.142,padj= 0.989, d = 0.019 (95% CI −0.245 to 0.282). After completion of all adaptation trials, the fixed effect for Vowel was also significant, F(2,442) = 3.539,p= 0.030. Post hoc pairwise testing showed that there was more adaptation for “talk” than “tech,” t(442) = −2.608,padj= 0.026, d = 0.428 (95% CI 0.105 to 0.751). Adaptation for “tuck” was not statistically different from “tech,” t(442) = −2.214,padj= 0.070, d = 0.275 (95% CI 0.031 to 0.520), or “talk,” t(442) = 1.179,padj= 0.466, d = 0.153 (95% CI −0.102 to 0.408). Thus, overall, there was more adaptation for “talk” and “tuck” than for “tech,” consistent with our previous work with the same target productions and the same perturbations28,29.

De-adaptation also showed significant Vowel effects. De-adaptation measured at 6 min into the after-effects phase showed a significant fixed effect for Vowel, F(2,439) = 4.433,p= 0.012. Post hoc pairwise testing revealed that there was more de-adaptation for “talk” than for “tech,” t(439) = 2.866,padj= 0.012, d = 0.329 (95% CI 0.098 to 0.559). In contrast, “tuck” did not statistically differ from “tech,” t(439) = 2.083,padj= 0.095, d = 0.239 (95% CI 0.009 to 0.469), or “talk,” t(439) = −0.766,padj= 0.724, d = 0.090 (95% CI −0.145 to 0.325). At the end of de-adaptation, the fixed effect for Vowel was also significant, F(2,440) = 7.307,p= 0.001. Post hoc pairwise comparisons showed that de-adaptation was greater for “talk” than “tech,” t(440) = 3.822,padj< 0.001, d = 0.452 (95% CI 0.219 to 0.686). De-adaptation for “tuck” did not significantly differ from that for “tech,” t(440) = 1.751,padj= 0.188, d = 0.207 (95% CI −0.026 to 0.440), or “talk,” t(440) = 1.952,padj= 0.126, d = 0.245 (95% CI −0.002 to 0.492).

Across all mixed effects models reported in this study, there was only one significant interaction between Group and Vowel, namely for the amount of de-adaptation at 6 min into the after-effects phase, F(2,439) = 3.054,p= 0.048. The post hoc pairwise comparisons showed only one significantly different pair: the Intensive group’s de-adaptation for “tech” was significantly smaller than the same group’s de-adaptation for “talk,” t(439) = −3.258,p= 0.015, d = 0.528 (95% CI 0.209 to 0.848). Thus, overall, there was no systematic statistically significant interaction of Vowel with the practice schedules for adaptation or de-adaptation.

To investigate which mechanism may have led to the practice schedule effects during both adaptation and de-adaptation, we fitted a multi-rate state-space model with both slow and fast learning processes using 5000 bootstrapped samples. The model includes a slow retention factor, slow error sensitivity, fast retention factor, and fast error sensitivity (see ref.17for details on multi-rate state-space models). The model simulation generated by the average parameter values of the bootstrapped samples closely matched the adaptation data (Fig.3, left). Of the four parameters, only the slow retention factor showed a significant group difference in the bias-corrected and accelerated 95% confidence intervals (i.e., the interval for Non-Intensive group, [0.999999…, 0.999999…] did not overlap with the interval for Intensive group, [0.812, 0.999998]): the slow retention factor was larger for the Non-Intensive Adaptation group than for the Intensive Adaptation group (Fig.3, right). It should be noted that both groups retained most of the learning from previous trials (i.e., large slow retention factors), but the Non-Intensive Adaptation group retained even more learning, as a majority of the bootstrapped sample fits showed slow retention factors very close to the specified maximum value of 1. This result is surprising given that, intuitively, one would assume that more time between successive trials would increase the amount of “forgetting” (i.e., less retention). Instead, our finding that the Non-Intensive Adaptation group showed a larger slow retention factor suggests that the practice schedule with longer ITIs enhanced memory consolidation.

Left: The state-space model simulations (lines) generated by the average parameter values of 5000 bootstrapped model parameters show good fits to the group average empirical data (dots). Right: The Non-Intensive Adaptation group showed larger slow retention factors than the Intensive Adaptation group as determined by 95% percentile confidence intervals.

A second surprising result from the state-space modeling is that the framework could not provide an explanation for our de-adaptation data. Given that state-space models’ de-adaptation simulations rely on the preceding adaptation simulations, due to the models’ iterative nature (i.e., the slow and fast states from adaptation determine the initial de-adaptation states), we generated simulations using the average parameters determined from our fitting of the adaptation data. However, these simulations did not accurately represent the de-adaptation data (Fig.4, left). In fact, the simulation for the Intensive De-Adaptation group closely resembled the empirical data from the Non-Intensive De-Adaptation group and vice versa. Further analyses revealed that this discrepancy was related to the slow retention factor: the respective slow retention factors would need to be swapped between the two groups (while leaving the other three parameters unchanged) for the resulting simulations to match the experimental data (Fig.4, middle). We confirmed that swapping any of the other three parameters between groups did not result in noticeable changes in the simulations. These findings demonstrate that the slow retention factor is key for explaining the empirically observed effect of ITI on de-adaptation, but the state-space model framework did not yield appropriate slow retention factors for the two different practice schedules during the de-adaptation phase.

Left: The average state-space model parameters used for the adaptation data—with a larger slow retention factor (As) for Non-Intensive practice than for Intensive practice—generated simulations (lines) that did not fit the empirical data for de-adaptation (dots). Middle: Swapping the slow retention factors between the de-adaptation two groups’ models results in simulations that do fit the empirical data. Right: The COIN model simulation with a large prior mean of retention (μa) was similar to the Non-Intensive de-adaptation data, whereas the simulation with a smaller prior mean of retention was similar to the Intensive de-adaptation data.

If more time spent in the perturbed environment yielded a larger retention factor for adaptation, why did more time spent in the unperturbed after-effects phase reduce the retention factor for de-adaptation? This seemingly contradictory result is due to the fact that the retention factors influence adaptation and de-adaptation in an opposite manner within the state-space model framework. A larger retention factor enhances adaptation but reduces de-adaptation. This is because the framework assumes that de-adaptation is partially aided by “forgetting,” and the retention factors during de-adaptation are designed to reflect the extent of retention of the adaptation memory state. Thus, a larger retention factor is associated with less “forgetting” during de-adaptation, thereby reducing the extent of de-adaptation.

Based on that perspective, it could be argued that our modeling result of the Non-Intensive De-Adaptation group (with longer ITIs in the after-effects phase) being best fit by a smaller slow retention factor is consistent with the state-space model framework. However, the interpretation that longer ITIs lead to more forgetting is incompatible with our above-reported empirical finding that such longer ITIs resulted in increased learning during the adaptation phase. Furthermore, it needs to be considered that adaptation and de-adaptation were affected in the same manner by experimentally manipulating total time in the environment (perturbed and unperturbed, respectively). That is, spending more time in an environment characterized by a particular sensorimotor transformation facilitated change toward the most environment-appropriate motor behavior in both cases.

We found that a recently developed computational model, COIN (COntextual INference18), offers a potential explanation for our empirical results. COIN applies Bayesian inference on state dynamics in which each state retention factor (a) is sampled from a prior probability distribution with a given mean (μa). When we increased the prior mean of the state retention factor (μa), this adjustment enhanced de-adaptation in the simulations (Fig.4, right).

In the COIN model, increasing the mean of the state retention factor has two consequences. First, the retention factor,a, is multiplied by the predicted state distribution (xt). In our simulations, the predicted state distribution maintained positive values during adaptation, reflecting the learned state (i.e., equivalent to lowered formants in our data). However, it decreased due to prediction errors during de-adaptation (i.e., equivalent to increasing formants towards baseline), eventually changing its sign to negative. From this moment, the state became more negative faster if there was more retention (i.e., a greateracan make the subsequent states more negativext=axt−1+…). When the predicted state became negative more rapidly due to the larger retention factor, the final motor output behavior also showed faster de-adaptation (see “Methods” regarding the difference between predicted state vs. motor output). Second, greater retention of the state also increased state variance, which resulted in a larger Kalman gain, eventually leading to enhanced updating of the state (i.e., enhancing learning). Importantly, increasing the prior mean of the state retention factor also enhanced adaptation (see Fig. S4in Supplementary Information), demonstrating the possibility that adaptation and de-adaptation may involve a similar learning mechanism that is enhanced by more time in the perturbed environment (note that, in order to appropriately fit the empirical data, the retention factors differed for Non-Intensive adaptation and de-adaptation—see “Methods” for more details).

Consistent with this perspective, when the empirical de-adaptation data are vertically inverted and overlaid on the empirical adaptation data (after normalizing the last baseline trial to 0 for all data), substantial similarity in the profiles is very clear for both the Intensive and Non-Intensive groups (Fig.5left and right, respectively). In sum, our empirical and modeling results for speech articulatory motor behavior align best with the view that de-adaptation, just like adaptation, may primarily reflect active sensorimotor learning. Further work will need to validate whether de-adaptation should indeed be modeled as an active learning process that is aided by memory retention rather than by forgetting.

After the de-adaptation data were normalized to a new baseline (i.e., starting near 0 cents) and vertically inverted (i.e., changing in the same direction as adaptation), the resulting de-adaptation profile was similar to Intensive De-Adaptation. Shaded areas indicate 1 standard error for each group.

We investigated the effect of the number of practice trials versus the total amount of time spent in the practice environment on speech auditory-motor adaptation and de-adaptation. Participants spoke with different practice schedules (either 18 words per minute [Intensive] or 6 words per minute [Non-Intensive]) in the perturbation phase and after-effects phase, with the schedule for each phase determined separately. Thus, there were four groups: Intensive during both the perturbation phase and after-effects phase; Intensive during the perturbation phase but Non-Intensive during the after-effects phase; Non-Intensive during both the perturbation phase and after-effects phase; and Non-Intensive during the perturbation phase but Intensive during the after-effects phase. Statistical analyses of the extent of adaptation and de-adaptation were conducted after pooling the data from the two groups of participants who followed the same practice schedule during respective phases of the study. In addition, the two-rate state-space model and COIN were fitted to determine which parameters were affected by the different practice schedules.

The first main finding was that more time spent in the perturbed environment enhanced adaptation. When the Non-Intensive Adaptation group reached the same number of trials but after more time spent in the perturbed environment, they showed significantly more sensorimotor learning than the Intensive Adaptation group. Moreover, when adaptation in both groups was measured after the same amount of time in the perturbed environment (6 min), the Non-Intensive Adaptation group that had completed only 1/3 as many trials already showed just as much learning as the Intensive adaptation group. In other words, the amount of speech auditory-motor adaptation depended on the total amount of time in the environment rather than on the number of practice trials completed in that environment.

Whether this effect is specific to speech remains to be determined. In a prior study on reach movements performed in a force field, Huang and Shadmehr13found that a practice schedule with longer ITI (14 s) resulted in a faster initial learning rate as compared with shorter ITI (4 s), but that the final adaptation extent for the two conditions was not different as they both reached a plateau near the “theoretical limit” (about 83% of the perturbation size, see ref.13). Moreover, also for reach movements in a force field, Francis12found that although a very short (0.5 s) ITI resulted in a reduction of learning rate and extent compared to longer ITI (5, 10, and 20 s), there was no difference among the longer ITI conditions despite the wide range. Similarly, a few studies of reach movements with perturbed visual feedback also found no significant effects of practice schedule14,15. One possibility is that the striking discrepancy with the effect observed in our own study relates to ceiling effect that occurs in limb adaptation but not speech adaptation: speech auditory-motor adaptation is always more incomplete, plateauing at only 20–40% of the perturbation size (see ref.23). Given the incomplete nature of speech adaptation, it may allow more opportunity for further learning with increased time in the perturbed environment. It may therefore be interesting to identify or create limb adaptation tasks that lead to less complete counteracting of the perturbation, and then re-examine the ITI effect that is present in our speech data. Alternatively, given that adaptation appears to rely on neural plasticity mechanisms that are in part effector system specific23, it is plausible that the effect of practice schedule on learning does indeed apply only to speech and not limb adaptation.

Interestingly, the notion that learning can vary depending on time rather than the number of trials is well-established in other types of learning outside the context of motor learning30. For example, a recent study examining cue-reward associative learning (i.e., a type of reward-based learning) in mice found that the group with a longer ITI learned faster than the control group with a shorter ITI. The same study found that the amount of learning scales with the duration of ITI in a linear manner (i.e., a group with 10 times longer ITI learned 10 times more per trial31). Although our current study did not include multiple ITI conditions to examine such linear scaling, the similar finding that the total amount of learning was increased when trials were distributed over a large time period suggests the possibility that some forms of adaptation, too, may be enhanced by providing more time for memory consolidation (see below).

A second main finding from the present study was that the two-rate state-space model fitting indicated that, during adaptation, the slow retention factor was larger for the Non-Intensive group (longer ITI) as compared with the Intensive group (shorter ITI). This result conflicts with the previously reported finding that error sensitivity (but not retention factors) is larger in conditions with longer exposure time in upper limb force-field adaptation13. One potential reason for such a discrepancy between ref.13and our finding may be that the former examined their data with a single-rate model as opposed to a multi-rate model. Another potential reason is, of course, that the obvious differences in the task and effector system23.

Our finding that longer ITI resulted in a larger retention factor may seem counterintuitive, given that more time between trials should increase “forgetting” (thus, predicts a smaller retention factor). Nonetheless, it is possible that adaptation requires sufficient time in between trials to allow consolidation of the motor memory state. That is, spending more total time in the new environment, for a given number of practice trials, may effectively enhance this consolidation process. Indeed, the view that motor learning reflects a consolidation process in human motor memory has previously been proposed8,32–34.

Previous studies have suggested that such a learning-enhancing effect of longer ITI may reflect long-term potentiation (LTP) processes that involve remodeling and enlarging postsynaptic dendritic spines13,35. Although the exact cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying such consolidation processes remain unclear, several ideas have been put forth35. One prominent hypothesis is that long-term potentiation (LTP) may require refractory periods during remodeling and enlarging postsynaptic dendritic spines, and more exposure time allows passing of the refractory periods before further remodeling36. An alternative, but not mutually exclusive, hypothesis is that more exposure time helps “prime” spines for future remodeling and enlargement in subsequent trials36,37. Regardless of the exact molecular and cellular mechanisms involved in memory consolidation, our finding is consistent with these accounts that learning involves time-dependent mechanisms that benefit from lengthened inactive time.

A third main finding is that behavioral change during the after-effects phase, when participants were re-exposed to the unperturbed auditory environment, followed the same pattern as during exposure to the perturbed environment. That is, participants who completed this phase of the task with a longer ITI and thus spent more total time in the restored unperturbed environment showed more de-adaptation. After spending the same amount of time in the after-effects phase (i.e., 6 min), but completing only 1/3 as many trials, the Non-Intensive De-Adaptation group showed the same amount of de-adaptation as the Intensive De-Adaptation group. And when reaching the same number of trials at the end of the task, the Non-Intensive De-Adaptation group had de-adapted to productions that were closer to baseline as compared with those of the Intensive De-Adaptation group. Thus, much like adaptation, de-adaptation was also dependent on total exposure time rather than the number of practice trials. To our knowledge, this study is the first demonstration of such an effect, which highlights that total time in the unperturbed environment affects de-adaptation in the same manner as total time in the perturbed environment affects adaptation.

State-space model fitting again pointed to an important role of the slow retention factor in this result. Specifically, it showed that the empirical data from participants who completed de-adaptation with a non-intensive schedule—these are the participants who de-adapted the most—were best fitted by simulating de-adaptation with a smaller retention factor (Fig.4, left). At first glance, this finding seems consistent with the idea that de-adaptation is largely “forgetting,” given that less memory retention should enhance “forgetting.” However, this interpretation contradicts our results from fitting the preceding adaptation data, where a non-intensive schedule was found to be associated with a larger retention factor. The contradictory result (i.e., exposure time influenced the slow retention factor in opposite direction for adaptation and de-adaptation) can be attributed to the state-space model framework’s assumption that adaptation and de-adaptation are fundamentally different processes. Specifically, the framework assumes that adaptation is aided by retaining the newly learned adaptation memory, whereas de-adaptation is aided by forgetting the previously learned adaptation memory.

On the other hand, application of the COIN model demonstrated that larger retention may enhance de-adaptation through increasing prior state retention and memory state updating, both of which also enhance adaptation. Therefore, based on our combined findings that (1) more exposure time enhanced both adaptation and de-adaptation in a similar manner, (2) processes that are enhanced during de-adaptation may also reflect learning from the COIN perspective, and (3) de-adaptation profiles very closely resembled the adaptation profiles (Fig.5), it can be suggested that adaptation and de-adaptation may involve similar underlying processes. Additionally, if de-adaptation involved mostly forgetting of the adaptation memory state, as the state-space framework suggests, then one would expect the adaptation schedule to affect de-adaptation. For example, the better consolidated adaptation memory state established with our non-intensive adaptation schedule (i.e., Groups 3 and 4) presumably would lead to less forgetting and thus slower or reduced de-adaptation. Our statistical analyses, however, indicated that de-adaptation performance was not affected by the adaptation schedule. Considering the totality of these observations, we argue that de-adaptation may need to be modeled as an active learning process. If de-adaptation does indeed reflect largely an active learning process just like adaptation, then more exposure time in the restored unperturbed environment may enhance de-adaptation through increased memory retention of the sensorimotor transformations in effect in this phase, rather than forgetting of the previously learned transformations.

The literature contains several other lines of evidence consistent with this view. For example, the rate of de-adaptation is not always faster than the rate of initial adaptation. In a study of upper-limb movements, after participants’ upper limb reaching movements adapted to a force-field (i.e., 12 N), the rate of de-adaptation to the null-field (0 N) was even slower than the rate of adaptation to a second new environment (4 N)38. Kitago et al.16also showed that visuo-motor de-adaptation in response to error-clamped feedback or no feedback is much slower than de-adaptation to the unperturbed feedback. Likewise, in a reach adaptation study in which sensory errors could not be observed during the after-effects phase (i.e., the cursor and target were each replaced by an arc covering a larger area rather than a single point), the de-adaptation response was mostly absent, suggesting that it is an active process39.

Recent studies have found that acquisition of a new motor skill (e.g., movement sequence learning) can benefit from a few seconds of rest, a phenomenon referred to as micro-offline gains (MOG40,41). Some have argued that MOG may benefit learning by essentially providing time for neural replay of the trained movement sequence during the rest42, others have suggested that such results may represent a performance benefit driven by additional time for motor pre-planning rather than offline learning43. Either of these two explanations may apply to our present findings that were obtained in the context of sensorimotor adaptation rather than skill acquisition (enhanced adaptation and de-adaptation in the Non-Intensive groups). However, the present study was not designed to distinguish between these two alternative interpretations. Future studies are warranted to investigate the possibility that more extensive adaptation/de-adaptation with the Non-Intensive practice schedules resulted from the longer ITIs merely providing more time for movement preparation, despite the fully implicit nature of speech auditory-motor adaptation23,27.

One limitation of the present study is that we tested only two different practice schedules. As a result, the effect of exposure time on adaptation and de-adaptation outside of the tested practice schedules remains unknown. On the one hand, it is unlikely that adaptation and de-adaptation would continue to be enhanced with an extremely long exposure time (e.g., several hours or longer), given that memory consolidation would eventually require experiencing errors (i.e., practice trials). On the other hand, Huang and Shadmehr13reported that learning was enhanced with an ITI (24 s) substantially longer than that used for our Non-Intensive schedule (10 s), leaving open the possibility that the effect may generalize, at least to some extent, outside the range of practice schedules tested in the present study.

It should also be noted that even though the state-space model framework was selected in our study because it had already been used to model the effect of practice schedule13, other computational models exist that may provide different interpretations44–46. However, these models also assume that learning primarily depends on the number of practice trials, and they do not account for practice time or schedule. Developing a comprehensive model that can fully capture how exposure time affects adaptation and de-adaptation was beyond the scope of this investigation, but our results warrant future work to investigate whether our findings reflect a general shortcoming of the model in its current form. In addition, given the poor model fitting of our de-adaptation data, future computational work should also examine whether de-adaptation should be modeled as a form of active learning.

Further empirical work will be necessary to inform the implementation of time-dependent (rather than trial-dependent) sensorimotor learning into existing or new computational models. Although the present study revealed a time-dependent effect in the context of speech auditory-motor learning, our results may not apply to other motor systems and, importantly, they cannot distinguish between a number of possible mechanisms that would need to be modeled differently. That is, different mechanisms (either alone or in combination) may lead to the same learning enhancement. For example, motor memory consolidation may depend specifically on the amount of time after each individual trial (i.e., after experiencing error), akin to the mechanism suggested by Huang and Shadmehr13. Even in this view, however, time may affect either error sensitivity13or memory retention (as suggested by our own modeling in the present study). Alternatively, it is also possible that the sensorimotor system benefits from the total amount of time that accumulates across all trials with error, as long as there is no sensory information indicating that the environment has changed. Future empirical studies dissociating individual ITI durations and overall practice duration need to determine the most plausible mechanism(s) and, relatedly, the best approach to implementation in a computational model.

The current study provides several important implications for future studies. First, the current study emphasizes the importance of taking exposure time into consideration when designing an adaptation study, comparing data from different studies, and documenting results for increased scientific rigor. Second, future computational models of sensorimotor adaptation should account for practice schedule. Third, if de-adaptation is a distinctive form of sensorimotor learning rather than forgetting, interpretations of existing data may need to be adjusted. For example, Jansen-Osmann et al.47found that de-adaptation back to a null-field after reaching movements in a force field took longer in children 6–10 years of age versus adults. If de-adaptation reflects forgetting, this would lead to the interpretation that children have better motor memory retention than adults. Based on our findings, we propose, instead, that the Jansen-Osmann et al. result is due to children being slower learners, perhaps because the neural systems underlying the formation of internal models are not fully mature.

This research was supported by Grants R01DC014510, R01DC017444, and R01DC020707 from the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders awarded to L.M. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish or preparation of the manuscript.