Alkaline proteases are hydrolytic enzymes that play a crucial role in various biological processes. Proteases produced by halophiles showed exceptional efficiency in breaking down the complex structures ranging from pigments to extracellular proteins, tissue proteins to tumors, and thrombin clots. There is a huge global demand for naturally occurring thrombolytic proteases to treat intravascular thrombosis, as they are cost-effective and have minimal detrimental effects, making them widely used in the biomedical applications.

The production of thrombolytic protease from the rare halophileBrachybacterium paraconglomeratumstrain M4 and its in-vitro thrombolytic activity is investigated for the first time. On skim milk agar, a distinct zone of casein hydrolysis was observed, in submerged fermentation a substantial protease production was noted. The enzyme was purified through a four-step purification process following an initial precipitation with 60% ammonium sulfate, subsequent ion-exchange chromatography using DEAE-cellulose, and final gel-filtration chromatography utilizing Sephadex G-100. As a result, a protein with a specific activity of 300 ± 32 U/mg was obtained with a purification fold of 19 and a recovery percentage of 38.2%. The molecular mass of the purified enzyme was 14.4 kDa via SDS-PAGE while MALDI/MS analysis further revealed a 131 amino acid sequence with an isoelectric point of 8.55 and on comparison, the strain M4 alkaline protease aligns with the proteasome subunit alpha. The protease is classified as a serine protease based on the inhibition by PMSF and its activity profile. The in-vitro thrombolytic assay revealed that the purified enzyme achieved a clot lysis rate of 65 ± 3%, performing effectively in comparison to the standard.

The findings indicate that strain M4 is an efficient producer of thrombolytic protease and the purified form effectively dissolves thrombin clots. Currently, the studies are underway to explore its potential for biomedical applications and industrial-scale production.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12896-025-00967-5.

The major complications such as deep vein thrombosis (DVT), pulmonary embolism (PE), and ischemic strokes in the global population are due to the formation of blood clots (thrombosis) in the vascular system. The risk factors for this illness include hypertension, smoking, corticosteroids, physical inactivity, oral contraceptives and low awareness about thrombosis in the general population [1]. The alkaline proteases sourced from microbes are used more than 40% in hydrolyzing blood clots from the blood vessels and their stability in physiological conditions, making them ideal for various biomedical applications [2]. The research is ongoing to optimize or develop low molecular weight thrombolytic proteases to treat this illness because of their reduced side effects, better distribution, and faster clearance from the vessels.

The studies proved that the halophilic bacteria that thrive in unique biological niches within marine ecosystems can produce extracellular, thermostable proteases with distinct characteristics and capabilities. Therefore, researchers have turned their attention to the enzymatic potential of halophiles, intending to discover low molecular weight proteases as a significant challenge [3,4]. Notably, alkaline proteases derived from halophiles, such asBacillussp. andPseudomonassp., are known for their high molecular weight but have been explored across various sectors, including food, agriculture, and pharmaceuticals due to their robust activity under alkaline conditions [5,6].

Microbial thrombolytic proteases, such as streptokinase (SK) and staphylokinase (SAK), have been extensively studied for their efficacy in clot dissolution. Despite their proven effectiveness, several gaps remain in fully understanding and harnessing their potential [7]. While these enzymes are associated with minimal side effects, challenges persist in optimizing their efficacies in clinical application, particularly in conditions like myocardial infarction and deep vein thrombosis. Key gaps include a need for improved delivery methods to enhance efficiency, better characterization for long-term effects and expanded research on enzyme penetration activities.

The underlying mechanisms of thrombolysis were fibrinolysis and plasminogen activation have been explored however, more research is needed to unravel the nuances of these mechanisms in different pathological conditions [8]. Furthermore, microbial proteases are increasingly employed in treating myocardial infarction, ischemic stroke, and targeted thrombolytic therapies in combination with other treatment modalities, but this is still in its infancy [9,10]. Other widely known plasmin-like proteins include lumbrokinase from earthworms [11] and fibrolase from snake venom [12] both of which face limitations such as reduced stability under physiological conditions and in-vivo inhibition. Addressing these gaps is essential for the successful integration of microbial proteases into broader clinical, veterinary, and other biomedical applications.

Therefore, the key objectives of this study were to bioprocess the protease from the strain M4, evaluate its stability, identify the enzyme through sequence based analysis, and assess its robustness in thrombolytic applications. The study also sought to address the crucial problem of improving the stability of the enzyme in harsh conditions, underscoring its potential for use in both clinical and industrial settings.

All chemicals and reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. The substrates, buffers, and other laboratory chemicals were sourced from Hi Media and SRL Chemicals, Mumbai, India. The reagents of SDS-PAGE, DEAE-cellulose and Sephadex G (100,200) and streptokinase (positive control) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich chemicals, Benguluru, India. The matrix reagents and standards of the MALDI-TOF analysis were procured from Bruker online, Mumbai, India.

Several halophilic bacteria were isolated from the estuarine mangrove region of the Bay of Bengal near Suryalanka, India (15.858952°N, 80.511521°E). The objective was to study their diversity and investigate novel applications in human health and environmental sustainability. During the biochemical screening, the strain M4 demonstrated the highest proteolytic activity among the isolates, leading its selection for further investigation of thrombolytic proteases. The strain M4 was subjected to 16S rRNA gene sequencing and identified asBrachybacterium paraconglomeratumby CSIR-IMTECH, India, and assigned with the accession ID: MTCC 13074. The 16S rRNA gene sequence was subsequently deposited in the NCBI GenBank under the accession ID:MW899045. Following isolation, the isolate was lyophilized, for further research and analysis.

In the biochemical tests, the isolate M4 demonstrated the highest casein hydrolytic activity. To validate this, the enzyme producing strain M4 was cultured on sterilized skim milk agar (SMA) medium prepared with 0.5% peptone, 1.0% powdered skimmed milk, 5% NaCl, and 2.5% agar-agar, adjusted to pH 8. Following 24 h of incubation at 37 °C, the plates were examined for a clear zone of hydrolysis [13].

The isolate was cultivated in 500 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 250 mL sterile optimized media that include glucose,1.5% (w/v); peptone, 1.0% (w/v); 1% NaCl (w/v); inorganic salt solution, 5% (v/v) [(MgSO₄, 0.5% (w/v); KH2PO4, 0.5% (w/v); and FeSO4, 0.01% (w/v)] and adjusted to pH 8.0. For the production, 1% inoculum was introduced and cultured in a shaking incubator (Remi, Mumbai, India) at 160 rpm for 48 h. To obtain a clear supernatant, the broth was centrifuged at 705 g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was stored at 2–8 °C for further investigations [14].

The supernatant was subjected to protease activity following the Tsuchida et al. method [15]. A 200 µL aliquot of crude enzyme extract was incubated with 0.5 mL of 1% (w/v) casein in 50 mM phosphate buffer for 20 min at 40 °C, pH 7.8. The reaction was halted by adding 1 mL of 10% (w/v) TCA and was left for 15 min at 37 °C. After centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 5 min, the supernatant was mixed with 2.5 mL of 0.44 M Na2CO3and 1 mL of 2-fold diluted Folin-Ciocalteu’s phenol (FC) reagent. After 30 min of incubation, the absorbance was measured at 660 nm against a reagent blank. A standard graph was created using tyrosine (0–100 µg/mL). Under standard conditions, the enzyme unit of protease activity was defined as the amount of enzyme required to liberate 1 µg of tyrosine per minute per milliliter.

Additionally, the total protein content was determined using the Lowry et al. [16] method with bovine serum albumin (BSA) as the reference protein. The specific activity (U/mg) and relative activity (U/mL) were also calculated, as these metrics are crucial for characterizing the protease.

The enzyme purification followed a four-step method as described by Lakshmi et al. [17]. Initially, the crude enzyme extract is gradually saturated with ammonium sulfate (10–100%) followed by dialysis against a Tris-HCl buffer (pH 7.5) to remove excess salt. Subsequently, the dialyzed sample was subjected to ion-exchange chromatography using a DEAE-cellulose column (30 × 2.0 cm). Glycine-NaOH buffer (pH 10.0) was used to pre-equilibrate the column. Fractions of 5 mL were collected at a flow rate of 60 mL/h. The unbound active fractions were combined, concentrated, dialyzed against distilled water at 4 °C and lyophilized. Following that, the bound protein was eluted via a linear gradient of 0.1 to 1.0 M NaCl, with 5 mL fractions collected at a flow rate of 60 mL/h. The fractions were dissolved in Glycine-NaOH buffer (pH 10.0), and loaded onto a sephadex G-100 column (30 × 1.5 cm) pre-equilibrated with Glycine-NaOH buffer (pH 10.0). The fraction (2 mL) was eluted with the same buffer and collected at a flow rate of 12 mL/h. At every level the protein content of these fractions was determined at 280 nm absorbance and the enzyme was assayed using casein as the substrate [18,19].

The protein samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE (sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis) according to the Laemmli (1970) method [20], using a discontinuous buffer system consisting of a stacking gel and a resolving gel. Following electrophoresis, the gel was stained with coomassie brilliant blue R-250 and destained with methanol, acetic acid, and water in the ratio 50:10:40 to visualize the separated protein bands.

The Nicodeme et al. (2005) method was used to create the activity gel, with some changes. Co-polymerization of 10% polyacrylamide gel was done with 1% casein [21]. The samples were run at 100 V in a non-reducing buffer with no denaturation. To remove SDS, the gel was washed twice in 2.5% Triton-X-100 for 30 min before being incubated in Glycine- NaOH buffer, pH-10.0 for 1 h at 37 °C. The gel was stained for 30 min, with 0.5% coomassie brilliant blue R-250 followed by destaining with methanol, acetic acid, and water in the ratio of 50:10:40. Glycoprotein staining was also done simultaneously.

The molecular mass of the enzyme was determined by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE under both reducing (with 10% 2-mercaptoethanol) and non-reducing conditions, with some modifications, using a recombinant protein marker (puregene protein) as a reference. The migration distances of standard proteins were plotted, enabling the calculation of molecular weight of the strain M4 protease [22].

The method of Anderson et al. [23] for molecular sieve chromatography with sephadex G-200 was used to estimate the molecular weight of the strain M4 protease. Sephadex was swelled in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.6, and packed in a 1.65 × 94 cm column (bed volume 185 mL). The same buffer was used to equilibrate and develop the column. Blue Dextran was used to calculate the void volume (Vo). Collected 1 mL fractions were analyzed, and the elution volume (Ve) was plotted against log molecular weight.

The stability of protease produced by the strain M4 was evaluated under various biochemical conditions. Substrate specificity was determined on different substrates, including casein, gelatin, ovalbumin, and bovine serum albumin. The effect of pH on protease activity was analyzed across a broad pH range (2.0–12.0) using appropriate buffer systems. Additionally, the enzyme’s thermal stability was assessed at temperatures ranging from 30 °C to 80 °C [14].

Enzyme inhibition studies were conducted by pre-incubating the enzyme with specific inhibitors, including phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF), iodoacetic acid (IAA), β-mercaptoethanol, and ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), at concentrations of 5 mM and 10 mM. The metal ion stability was evaluated by incubating the enzyme with various metal ions (CuCl2, CaCl2, MnCl2, ZnCl2, NiCl2, HgCl2, MgCl2, CoCl2, and PbCl2) at the same concentrations. In all experiments, an untreated enzyme control was maintained, and the residual activity percentage was determined for comparison [17].

MALDI-TOF/MS ULTRAFLEX III (Bruker Daltonics, Germany) was utilized for the rapid and precise analysis of peptide sequences. Gel bands containing protein samples underwent peptic digestion with trypsin as per the method described by Gao et al. [24]. The sample preparation involved mixing 1.5 µL of the digested sample with 1.5 µL of α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid matrix, and 1.5 µL of the resulting mixture was then spotted onto the MALDI plate. Following air drying, analysis was conducted and external calibration was performed using standard peptide (PEPMIX) supplied by Bruker. Subsequent analysis was carried out using FLEX ANALYSIS SOFTWARE (Version 3.3) in reflectron ion mode. Masses obtained in the PMF were then submitted for mascot search to identify the protein sequence.

Utilizing the p-BLAST programme and CLUSTAL W software, the protease sequence of the strain M4 was evaluated by comparing it to the various protease sequences found in the protein database. The tree was created using the neighbor-joining algorithm [25] and the other methods, used in building the phylogenetic tree were the minimum evolution method used to infer the evolutionary history, and the maximum composite likelihood method to calculate the evolutionary distances.

An in-vitro clot lysis model was developed to investigate the thrombolytic activity of protease extracted from the strain M4 [26]. Freshly collected chicken blood from processing units was transferred into pre-weighed vials, approximately 500 µL per vial. The tubes were then incubated at 37 °C for 45 min for the formation of the clot. Then the residual serum was washed away, leaving only the clot in the tubes. The initial clot weight was recorded. Next, 100 µL of the purified enzyme was added to each tube. The tubes were then incubated at 37 °C for 90 min for clot lysis. After the incubation period, the fluid obtained as a result of clot lysis was separated, and the remaining clot was weighed once more. For calculation, the same procedure was conducted simultaneously using streptokinase as a positive control and phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) alone as a negative control. To determine the percentage of clot lysis, the difference between the weights recorded before and after clot disruption was taken into account. By contrasting with streptokinase and PBS, the percentage of weight loss in each tube was taken into consideration as proof of the thrombolytic activity of the purified enzyme.

All determinations were performed in triplicates, and the activities are presented as the mean standard deviation (mean ± SD). Statistical analysis was performed using excel and origin data analysis tool (Origin 2023).

The biological properties and other potential applications ofB. paraconglomeratumstrain M4 have been published previously [27,28]. The isolate M4 demonstrated proteolytic activity on skim milk agar, as indicated by a clear proteolytic zone around the colony (Fig.1A and B). The isolate M4 was subsequently subjected to submerged fermentation for protease production.

The submerged fermented broth was centrifuged and the supernatant was used as the source of enzyme. The filtrates’ aggregate protein content was (13 ± 1 mg/mL), total activity (216 ± 3 U/mL) and the specific activity (16 ± 16 U/mg) was determined.

The purification of protease from the strain M4 is detailed in Table1. Using 60% ammonium sulfate saturation, maximum protein precipitation with high specific activity was achieved. Ion-exchange chromatography on a DEAE-cellulose column resulted in 8.82-fold purification with 48.2% yield and specific activity of 143 ± 06 U/mg. The DEAE-cellulose and G-100 elution profiles pointed to the fractions 20–45, which exhibited the greatest enzyme activity, were chosen for further study. Following G-100 filtration, the enzyme achieved an 18.56-fold purification, with a 38.2% yield and a specific activity of 300 ± 32 U/mg, resulting in an overall ~ 19-fold purification and 38% enzyme recovery from the supernatant.

The purification was confirmed by a single protein band found in the Sephadex G-100 fraction on a 10% gel (Fig.2A,S1A). A Coomassie Blue stained band was observed in the zymogram, showing a clear zone of casein hydrolysis around the protein band corresponding to the protease (Fig.2A). PAS staining showed no reaction, confirming the absence of carbohydrate moieties in the protease (Fig.2A). The apparent molecular mass of the purified protease was 14.4 kDa (Fig.2B,S1B) via reducing and non-reducing conditions of SDS-PAGE whereas it was estimated at approx. 14.4 kDa by Sephadex G-200 gel filtration. The molecular weight of the enzyme was calculated from the elution volume ratio (Ve/Vo, whereVeis the elution volume of the enzyme, andVois the void volume of the column) versus the log molecular weight.

The protease produced by the strain M4 demonstrated the highest substrate specificity towards casein, exhibiting an activity of 216 ± 0.84. The optimum pH for their activity was determined to be pH 10.0, with 98% relative activity. Among the tested temperature range of 30–80 °C, the maximum activity was observed at 70 °C. The presence of divalent metal ions, including Ca²⁺, Mg²⁺, Mn²⁺, and Cu²⁺ at a concentration of 10 mM, enhanced the enzyme’s activity. In contrast, PMSF at a concentration of 5 mM completely inhibited the activity, while other inhibitors had minimal impact on the enzyme activity. The results were compared with the prior studies and are summarized in Table2, which thus classifies the strain M4 protease as serine kind of protease.

The MALDI-TOF analysis of the purified alkaline protease revealed a molecular mass of 14.4 kDa, as expected mass for this enzyme. The mass spectra (Fig.3) showed a prominent peptide peaks between 500 and 1500 Da confirming the molecular weight obtained from SDS-PAGE analysis.

The PMF revealed partial homology with proteasome subunit alpha of theArthrobactersp. with a score of 42 in the PMF database. The total amino acids are 131 and the isoelectric point was determined to be 8.55. The identified peaks and their corresponding masses provided insights into the enzyme’s sequence, confirming it as a serine protease.

The amino acid sequence of the strain M4 protease is as follows: >MKDRADFARKGIARGRSVVKIAFAVGKYNEFESLQAGVRYADVRGSYDREDVTAGLASIADEKFIVMGGQADKVAETVEGGQIPASALEVAVLDRASESTRGSRRAFRRLGDDEAALLSKEN.

The PIR information on the amino acid sequence and residue specific data for the enzyme characterization are highlighted in the Fig.4.

The phylogenetic analysis of the strain M4 alkaline protease was constructed using the data from ClustalW, protein database searches and p-BLAST, revealing approximately 57% sequence homology with the unclassifiedArthrobacterproteasome subunit alpha (Fig.5). However, further analysis is needed to confirm functional similarities with the establishedArthrobacterproteins.

The in-vitro thrombolytic activity of the strain M4 protease was assessed through blood clot lysis in three separate vials, as shown in Fig.6. The results indicated that purified protease achieved 65 ± 3% clot lysis, while the positive control, streptokinase (Std), showed 82 ± 5%, and the negative control (PBS) exhibited less than 10 ± 4% clot lysis, as shown in Fig.7. Based on these results, the purified protease of the strain M4 demonstrates promising potential and is expected to perform comparably to the standard after optimizing the thrombolytic conditions.

Alkaline proteases in halophiles are typically produced as a response to the high-salt environments, aiding in nutrient acquisition, stress adaptation, and the breakdown of complex proteins under extreme conditions. This study reports the production of thrombolytic protease from rare halophileB. paraconglomeratumfor the first time. Under the controlled conditions, the strain M4 efficiently demonstrated the hydrolytic activity. In purification, ammonium sulfate precipitation was used effectively to purify the protease, a common method for protein concentration across animal, plant, and microbial sources. Similar precipitation approaches have been applied to various proteases, including extracellular protease fromSerratia marcescens[29] and venom-derived proteases fromNemopilema nomurai[30]. Likewise,Actinomadura viridiluteaDZ50’s keratinolytic protease exhibited comparable precipitation rates and high enzyme activity [31].

Similarly, DEAE-cellulose and Sephadex G-100 help to refine the enzyme and achieve higher purity, yielding consistent results across different microbial sources involvingBacillus halodurans[32],Bacillus caseinilyticus,Aspergillus flavus[33], andStenotrophomonas maltophilia[34]. The reports on serine protease fromPeriplaneta americanaandBacillus alveayuensisshowed yields from 12 to 46%, highlighting the need to optimize conditions for each strain and column gel size [35,36]. In total a 19-fold increase in protein purity, aligned with Lakshmi et al. [17,37] confirms the reliability and reproducibility of the purification methods across various studies.

The activity profile of the strain M4 protease closely aligns with the activities of protease produced by theSerratiaandBacillusspecies [14,17]. When compared with the existing data presented in Table2, the strain M4 protease demonstrates higher activity under extreme temperature and pH. The observed enzymatic activity in the presence of divalent metal ions further supports its versatility, while its complete inhibition by PMSF strongly indicates that it belongs to the serine type protease.

The homogeneity and molecular weights of alkaline proteases ranging from 15 to 44 kDa were obtained from various studies and evaluated via complementary techniques such as SDS-PAGE and gel filtration (G-200) [36,38].B. paraconglomeratumproduced a 14.4 kDa subunit of proteolytic complex, similar to the serine protease fromB. cereus[17]. The precise mass peaks were identified for the peptide fragments of the subunit alpha proteasome complex using MALDI-TOF and once again confirmed the molecular mass of the enzyme [17,39]. Over the past three decades, the combination of MALDI/PMF and MASCOT, PROFOUND tools has proven highly effective for peptide identification [40]. The amino acid sequence and functional domain conservation together showed 57% sequence homology with the unclassifiedArthrobacterproteasome subunit alpha, suggesting a shared ancestry and potentially similar functions [41]. Hence, the biochemical analysis, G-200 gel filtration findings, MALDI analysis and PMF data were in complete agreement in unveiling the enzyme’s key characteristics.

The observations of in-vitro activity are consistent with previous reports on therapeutic agents fromB. cereus[42,43] andIndigofera cassioidesextracts [44], indicating that the protease could have applications in preventing myocardial infarction. The strain M4 protease, as a bacterial activator similar to streptokinase, functions by converting plasminogen into plasmin, leading to the dissolution of fibrin clots. This mechanism firmly places the extracted protease within the category of first-generation thrombolytic agents [45]. The strain M4 protease exhibits impressive clot lysis activity on par with the commercial proteases as highlighted in Table3. Gene ontology predicts that the strain M4 protease retains endopeptidase activity, essential for breaking down of internal peptide bonds [46] during proteolysis and cellular protein degradation.

In this study, the halophilicB. paraconglomeratumproduces an alkaline protease of low molecular weight, making it an ideal candidate for therapeutic applications. The further research will delve into the detailed enzyme kinetics, strain improvement for better yield of enzyme, optimization of thrombolytic conditions and progressive exploration of toxicity and preclinical studies.

This research highlights a novel source for safer and more effective thrombolytic agent. We are the first to demonstrate the thrombolytic potential of the proteasome complex from rareB. paraconglomeratumstrain M4. The proteolytic activity was validated on skim milk agar. The enzyme purified through the chromatography process exhibited strong purity levels and reached a final specific activity of 300 ± 32 U/mg. The molecular mass analysis confirmed the protease to be 14.4 kDa, aligning structurally and functionally with known proteasome subunit alpha proteins. MALDI–TOF and PMF analysis identified 131 amino acids in the alpha peptide. In-vitro, the alkaline protease demonstrated significant clot lysis (65 ± 3%) which was comparable to streptokinase thereby classifying it as a first-generation thrombolytic agent. This in-vitro study demonstrates that after optimization, toxicity and in-vivo studies this low molecular weight protease can effectively use as therapeutic agent for cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

All the authors are extremely grateful to the Department of Biotechnology and Analytical Laboratory (DST) at Andhra University for providing the necessary facilities to complete this work.