Prevention and control are two complementary strategies for disease management. In the absence of disease, prevention could be viewed as wasteful. On the contrary, control requires efforts, only in the presence of the disease. But in some cases, control strategies are implemented a long time after the disease started, when irrevocable damages could be already observed. Deciding how much efforts are dedicated to prevention and control is a difficult problem in practice. In this work, we formulated a simple mathematical model to balance the trade-off between prevention and control efforts, with the expected loss due to disease. We derived an analytical form of the optimal prevention and control efforts and showed that the amount of control and prevention efforts depends on the relative values of the control and prevention efficacy, weighted by the probability of disease occurrence. We illustrated our framework for the management of gastro-intestinal nematodes in small-ruminants. In particular to discuss the use of different common management methods, such as systematic or targeted anthelmintic treatments, and mixed grazing. We proposed simple decision rules that could help designing future management practice and research efforts in this area. For examples, we computed the minimal anthelmintic efficacy for treatment to be economically viable. We also discussed the optimal cost and efficacy of a monitoring method for implementing targeted selective treatment, or the maximal cost of mixed grazing implementation. This framework is particularly useful to discuss the cost of new management strategy, and to ensure that new management designs are economically viable.

Agriculture is one of many domains where a (r)evolution is essential to meet the challenge of pressing and variable environmental constraints, as well as increasing demographic pressure. Several paradigms initiated the transformation of our food and agricultural systems, such as agroecology, which proposes to apply ecological principles in agriculture1. Most changes are driven by the need to efficiently cope with the constraints surrounding agricultural activities: resources are finite and all ecosystems are dynamic and interconnected. Since the green revolution initiated in the 1960s, research in agriculture has been compartmentalized, with the dominant idea that there exists a human-made solution to every environmental constraint, mainly relying on the use of synthetic molecules, the artificialization of the production environments, and with plant and animal breeding goals focused only on production performances. Unfortunately, the broad impact of these solutions on ecosystem health, including the food systems and human health, has been largely underestimated2. Indirectly, this eradication strategy created a new set of constraints, probably stronger3–5. Fundamentally, the paradigm shifting toward the development of control methods that aim to reach favorable equilibrium for agricultural production is a necessity. Productivity could not be the only variable while designing new agricultural practices; ecosystems, animal, and human health must be considered too, requiring collaborative, transdisciplinary, and intersectoral approaches in accordance with the One Health concept6,7.

Gastro-Intestinal Nematodes (GIN) are a major threat for ruminants at pasture worldwide8. It is a meaningful example of how the management strategies shift from total eradication based on anthelmintic (AH) chemical treatments to management of the GIN populations in order to maintain a sustainable equilibrium favorable for animal production9. The 1960-1980s was the golden era for AH treatments10and other strategies were ignored. Necessarily, the systematic use of AH created a selection pressure driving the apparition of AH resistant GIN strains worldwide. Nowadays, the rise of AH resistance is one major concern of small ruminant husbandry8,11. It is now accepted by most parasitologists that integrated GIN management is the only sustainable solution9,12–15, however clear and general guidelines are still needed, to change management in practice, which still often relies on systematic AH use.

Formally, the current challenge for health management in agriculture is to consider a set of broader, multidisciplinary objectives and constraints (e.g. ecosystem, animal and human health, biodiversity, productivity), under great uncertainty (e.g. climate change, availability of curative treatments and resources). Rationalizing decisions, with the available knowledge and expertise, could help in reaching this goal16.

In this article, we present a mathematical model to balance the impact of prevention and control in disease management. This simple framework allows to highlight and discuss the key parameters of a disease management problem, making it particularly useful for engaging stakeholders with diverse backgrounds. The model facilitates the classification of potential management actions and explores their relationships to the disease from an economic perspective. The optimality results guide decision-making by identifying which actions are worth implementing, the ideal balance between prevention and control, the required level of efficacy, and the associated costs. It is suited to support generic discussions about a disease management problem, at a global scale. Although it is a small step considering the challenge of health management listed earlier, generic frameworks are needed to help the adoption of alternatives and more integrated methods in practice.

This framework differs from previous studies in its capacity to incorporate simultaneously the effects of prevention and control strategies, allowing discussion of the optimal trade-off between both. It is illustrated in a practical case, the management of gastrointestinal nematodes, a worldwide sanitary constraint for small ruminants, where more integrated management is needed to prevent drug resistance. The framework is used to discuss the economic feasibility of alternative methods, to help in their use and development in practice.

The use of mathematical models to optimize decisions is well-suited to various areas of animal and human health management16,18–20, as well as ecosystem management21–23. Quantifying the impact of prevention is often challenging because the outcomes of preventive actions are not always straightforward to estimate20.

In human health, cost-effectiveness or cost-utility ratios are commonly used. These metrics represent the cost of a preventive action divided by an estimate of health outcomes, such as quality-adjusted life years (QALYs)24,25, which takes into account both life expectancy and quality of life. However, this approach is difficult to transfer to the animal health context, where quantitative metrics for animal welfare remain underdeveloped. Nevertheless, the underlying principle remains the same: using data to inform decisions by balancing the relative benefits of management actions against their costs.

The use of mathematical models for disease-control decision-making has been reviewed in16for livestock or more recently in17,32for human health. In the former, they classified quantitative modeling into two categories: statistical and/or epidemiological models, and economic models. Economic models are further divided into five categories: (i) mathematical programming, (ii) network analysis, (iii) decision analysis, (iv) simulation, and (v) cost-benefit analysis. Most modeling works on disease management strategies fall under the fourth category, simulation models27–29. In these cases, decisions are not optimized per se; rather, the objective is to estimate the potential effects and utility of a given management strategy. A model of disease dynamics is first developed, and then the costs and benefits of the strategy are estimated by running the model under the proposed management scenario. This approach is particularly suitable for evaluating whether a management strategy, such as vaccination, is worthwhile28, but it does not necessarily identify the optimal strategy among all possible alternatives.

The work presented in this article belongs to the fifth category30–32, as it frames the challenge of identifying an optimal disease-control strategy as a resource allocation problem. Utility is based on estimates of the benefits and costs associated with the management strategy. We followed the fundamental steps recommended for developing quantitative models to aid decision-making16,26. Our process involved developing a conceptual model, formulating a mathematical representation of the decision problem, and designing an algorithmic procedure to optimize the decision. It is an extension of the works presented in31,33, with the particular case of a unique population and where we explicitly propose a utility function in the case of gastrointestinal nematodes in small ruminants. A major difference also comes from the fact that we both include prevention and control simultaneously, unlike in the original work, where only prevention was included.

Our approach is particularly innovative in the field of animal health management, as it focuses on identifying an optimal disease management strategy through an optimization procedure. This approach is more common in health economic34,35and ecosystem management/quantitative ecology, where mathematical modeling and optimization have been widely used to address issues such as managing invasive species or conserving threatened populations21–23. This work draws particular inspiration from21, where the objective was to determine an invasive species surveillance strategy, while minimizing management costs.

Mathematical models offer a valuable tool for analyzing the impact of decisions on dynamic systems. Here we provide a simple framework capturing the key elements of a disease affecting a farming production system. Management strategies are compared in terms of farmer’s profit, denotedG, a common variable to compare the effect of management strategies. For examples,Gcould be the gain after selling an animal product (e.g. meat, milk, eggs) or after harvesting the crop field. It could also be based on a biodiversity or a durability index, or on ecosystem services in other applications. One constraint is to be able to compareGwith the management effort, and thus need to be on the same currency, which could be difficult.Gis a random variable, meaning that at the start of production, its value is unknown and will only be determined at the end when the production is sold.

It is however useful to discuss management decisions before implementing them, considering the expected value ofG, based on the chosen strategy. In essence, defining a probability distribution for the variableGallows for a more informed decision-making process.

We considered a generic situation applicable to both plant and animal production system. We considered two scenarios, depending either a sanitary problem occurred or not, with a probability. When no sanitary problem occurred, with probability, the farmer’s gain is optimal, denoted, indicating that production remains unaffected by the sanitary problem. When stress occurs, with a probability of, some losses are expected, i.e., resulting in a final gain lower than the optimal.

Two scenarios are considered after the occurence of the health issue. Firstly, production may cease entirely, resulting in complete loss. This occurs, for example, when an animal dies. Letdenote the survival probability, indicating the likelihood of the animal or production system surviving the health stress. Thus, with a probability of,, signifying no gain is derived from the production system.

Secondly, the production system may not cease completely but rather be affected by the health stress. Consequently, only a proportionof the optimal gain will be obtained from the production.

To summarize, the variableGis equal to, with probability, is equal towith probability, and to 0 with probability.

This framework aims to describe the disease management problem using only four variables: the optimal gain, the frequency of stress occurrence, the survival probability of the production system in the event of a health stress, and the system’s recovery capacity after the stress occurs. The framework is illustrated in Fig.1.

Illustration of the disease management framework: possible trajectories of the monetary value (MV) of the system over time. In normal situation, MV is an increasing function, as illustrated by the gray dotted lines. In a context of animal sold for meet for example, the monetary value mostly depends on the animal weight, which increases with time. Three scenarios are considered: (red) no sanitary stress occurred, with probabilityand the optimal gainis received. (black) the stress occurred, the production is affected, but did not stopped, with probability, and onlyis received. (purple) the stress occurred and totally stopped the production, no gain are received. For this last two scenarios, it can be for example the case of a fruit tree. A disease happened and some fruits are lost (decreasing monetary value). The farmer then applied some treatment. The purple line indicates a case where the treatment does not work, all the fruits are lost. The black line is another possible scenario, the treatment worked, although the lost fruits will not be sold and thus represent losses (i.e.), some other fruits developed (the line slightly increased after treatment), and not all fruits were lost (). In this illustration, the monetary value slightly increase after decreasing, for example due to posterior production of fruits. But this might not necessarily be the case, and the black line might stay constant after decreasing. This does not affect the framework, as far as this is just the valuethat matters. Note that for simplicity, we considered that the monetary value already reached its maximum, at the time of stress occurrence, but this might not be the case, and again, only the final values matter in the framework, not the entire trajectory.

The decision problem involves examining various management options and their impact on the final gainG.

Generally, there are two classes of management options: prevention and control. Prevention encompasses any management strategies implemented at the beginning of the production system, regardless of whether a health stress occurs or not. On the other hand, control strategies are only implemented upon detecting a stress.

Initially, control may seem like the optimal option because investments are only made in response to a health stress. Conversely, investments in prevention are lost if no stress occurs. This article aims to mathematically derive the situations in which it is optimal to use one or both of these management options and to discuss the practical implications of these decisions.

Prevention encompasses actions aimed at limiting the occurrence of health stress, thereby reducing. It also includes measures to detect stress as early as possible, thereby increasing the survival probabilityor enhancing the recovery capacity. Control, on the other hand, does not affect the frequency of stress occurrence, but onlyand.

is the notation for the mathematical expectation of a random variable.represents the anticipated loss resulting from stress when no management action is taken, or in other words, it’s the expected disparity between the optimal benefitand the farmer’s actual benefitG.is the initial value of the management problem, anddenotes the expected ultimate loss in case of stress occurrence.

Integrated Health Management (IHM) strategy aims to reducethrough various means.

The expressionrepresents the updated expected loss resulting from the stress, considering the implementation of certain management effortsand.

And the termrepresents the expected reduction attributed to prevention, whilesignifies the expected reduction attributed to control efforts. The expressiondenotes the anticipated management cost, or simply, the expected loss solely due to management expenses. Sinceis associated only with the occurrence of stress, its anticipated cost is scaled by the probability of stress,. The valueVrepresents the anticipated loss post-management, encompassing both stress-related losses and management expenses. UtilizingVenables the comparison of different strategies, with the objective of minimizing this value.

The efficaciesandquantify the rate at which the expected lossdecreases for a given amount of preventionand control efforts. Efficacy is used to model the fact that different strategy might not be as efficient than other. Or in other words, that for the same amount of effort,or, we might not have the same loss reduction for all possible strategies. We used an exponential relationship to model diminishing marginal returns, implying that a small amount initially gives the biggest payoff in cost reduction21. Alternative increasing functions, such as logit or piecewise linear functions, could also be employed. However, they might introduce complexity in determining the optimal solution, although computing numerical solutions might be feasible.

The optimal integrated health management (IHM) strategy is the one allowing the optimal trade-off between loss reduction and management costs, i.e minimizesV. Then, the disease management problem can be reformulated as an optimization problem to determine the optimal IHM strategies based on the problem’s parameters.

The following rules of thumb can be derived from the computation of the optimal management strategy.

Management decisions should primarily depend on our ability to achieve measurable impacts on the situation, which is determined by the efficacy of our management actions. Efficacy refers to the relative value of the effects of our actions (decreasing) compared to their costs.

An expensive management action that has little effect on the sanitary problem, i.e., on stress occurrence frequency, individual survival when the stress occurs, or recovery capacity, is considered of low interest.

For prevention strategies, efficacy should be compared to the expected loss of the sanitary problem (). Prevention becomes worthwhile, i.e., it creates a positive trade-off between management cost and stress expected loss, when.

Control efficacy should be compared to the loss when the stress occurs (). Control measures are considered worthwhile when.

If the efficacies fall below these thresholds, it is not worth implementing any management action, as the investment does not justify the expected reward.

On the other hand, when the control efficacy exceedsand is higher than the prevention efficacy, control measures should always be prioritized.

If we achieve better results with the same investment using control measures, it is not justified to allocate resources to prevention efforts. To be the optimal strategy, the efficacy of prevention measures should significantly surpass that of control measures.

Expressing, whererepresents the difference in efficacy between prevention and control, it can be shown thatmust exceedfor prevention to be the optimal choice.

The termapproaches zero asapproaches 1. In other words, the requirement for additional prevention efficacy relative to control decreases as the frequency of the sanitary problem increases.

The optimal effort allocation is summarized in Fig.2.

Decision tree summarizing the optimal effort allocation. Nodes represent the efficacy parameters and each branch their possible values. Final nodes are the optimal effort allocation. For example, the left part of the tree indicates that whenand, then it is optimal to do nothing, i.e..

Several examples of theVfunction as well as optimal and sub-optimal management strategies are provided Fig.3.

Examples of theVfunction. For each example, the functionVis displayed in color, while the planeis displayed in gray. Thexandy-axis are the amount of prevention and control efforts. Efforts are normalized with. Thez-axis is the valueVof a management strategy, for the corresponding amount of prevention and control. All the parameters (prevention and control costs andV) are normalized by. WhenVis under the plane, the trade-off between management effect and cost is positive. Each row, (a), (b), (c), (d) of figures gives examples whenand, i.e. when a positive trade-off can be expected. Each figure gives three examples, with the same value of,and, but various values of: under (left), equal (center) or above (right). Finally, the optimal management efforts are displayed with red points on theVfunction. For each row, the left figure is for. In these cases the functionVstretch out in the prevention direction, meaning that prevention allows realizing the best trade-off between management efficacy and lost. Investing on control could also result in a positive trade-off (e.g. all the points under the plan), but the optimal management strategy is obtained with no control at all. The central figures are for, and in this case, there is an infinity of solutions, with bot non-zeros prevention and control efforts. The right figures are for(the opposite cases of the left figures). All the examples are obtained for, a different value ofGwill just change the value on thezaxis, but will not change the shape of theVfunction.

GIN have two main life stages: the free-living phase39, where they reside on the pasture ground, and the parasitic phase, where the parasites inhabit their host’s intestinal tract after being ingested during grazing.

Preventing GIN infestation primarily relies on two pillars: (i) reducing the probability of ingesting infective larvae by the host and (ii) increasing host resistance.

The first pillar, centered on pasture management, can be implemented in various ways. Rotational grazing40aims to diminish the parasite load on the pasture during animal grazing. Parasites can also be removed directly from the pasture using insects41or nematophagous fungi42, although further developments are still necessary. Another possibility is to implement a mixed-grazing system43(i.e. more than one species of ruminant on the same pasture, or the same species at different physiological status). An alternative approach consists of increasing parasite mortality on pasture by either mowing or reducing irrigation. Mixed-grazing systems and rotational pasture management are the main methods investigated in recent decades.

The second pillar, based on genetic selection, nutrition, and vaccination, aims at improving the host immune response against parasites. Genetic selection44–46for prevention aims at breeding resistant animals capable of ingesting or removing parasites from pasture without being impacted. Nutrition can effectively enhance host immune defenses and resistance47–49. A vaccine exists only forHaemonchus contortus50, which needs to be administered monthly to ensure protection. However, this solution is currently available only in South Africa and Australia.

Control also relies on two main pillars: (i) removing the parasite population within the host and (ii) increasing host resilience. The first pillar relies on anthelmintic treatments, although plants containing secondary metabolites can offer an interesting alternative51,52. Nowadays, it is important to reduce the use of anthelmintics to maintain their efficacy9,13–15. This reduction is achieved by implementing targeted selective treatments53,54, which involve selecting animals on an individual basis for treatment.

Finally, the second pillar relies on improved host nutrition, as well as genetic selection for resilience.

Note that resistance aims at decreasing the probability, while resilience aims at increasing the recovery capacity.

We illustrated our framework using the case ofHaemonchus contortusand Creole goats under a tropical climate in Guadeloupe. Data from the PTEA INRAE experimental farm, as well as from previous studies, were utilized to estimate the model parameters.

In our flock, the pedigree of each animal is available since the foundation generation of 1979. The breeding flock consists of two sub-flocks of female Creole goats, with kids and does sharing the same pasture and being separated after weaning. All animals are reared outdoors. Kids are typically sold around 11 months of age for meat consumption. Some animals serve as substitutes for culled breeding females or male Creole Goats but are not considered in this study.

The flock of Creole bucks is smaller and reared indoors. They are allowed to graze only during the reproduction period. Breeding females alternate between two grazing areas, depending on the gestation or parturition period.

The farm collaborates with a parasitological laboratory to regularly assess the level of GIN infestation in the animals using coproscopy, particularly for the growing kids. Faecal samples are collected at 7 and 11 months of age for genetic evaluation of resistance to GIN, averaging 2 faecal egg counts (FEC) measures since 1995.

These data, along with the economic data of the farm, were used to illustrate the framework and derive the initial value of the health management problem.

We considered the case of kids sold for meat at 11 months of age and the sanitary stress is defined as an animal with more than 500 eggs per grams of faeces. Under this threshold, the parasites population does not impact significantly animal health and welfare. The probability of an animal exceeding this threshold during its lifetime is. After this threshold, the probability that the animal will survived without management is, and a proportion ofof the optimal gain will be received. The optimal gain is the average gain obtained when selling the animal (134.93 €), minus the expenses (85.39 €),.

The initial value of the health management problem is thus€, which is the average loss due to parasitism. We also have€, meaning that when an animal gets infected, the expected loss if 16.65 €.

In practice, control using anthelmintic treatments is the most common method and a major concern is the raise of anthelmintic resistance. We use our framework to discuss the economical impact of anthelmintic resistance. We consider that anthelmintic efficacy is related to the animal survival after infestation, but also to the loss due to the infestation when the animal survive. Ifis the anthelmintic efficacy, we defined it as the expected proportion of the optimal gain received after infestation, or similarly thatwhen anthelmintic are used. In other words, after infestation and the use of anthelmintic,is expected to be received. Then, when the anthelmintic is totally efficient, no loss is observed from parasitism and. In the presence of parasites resistant to anthelmintic, these parasites can survive the treatment and thus restrained growth or even lead to death.

Thus,is a function of the treatment cost and AH efficacy, it is then possible to use the previous results to derive the case where AH treatment are optimal or not. We considered the common case of systematic AH treatments, i.e. animals are treated regularly, even if they are not infested. In this case, AH treatment is used as a prevention method. We accounted for 4 treatments post-weaning and 1 treatment at weaning,€. Given the optimality results of the previous section, if systematic treatments is the only available solution, it is worth using it when. From rearanging Eq. (3), we can show that systematic treatment is economically viable only if the AH efficacy%. Beyond this threshold, in average, the final gain will be higher without spending money into systematic treatment.

In practice, this threshold can be used to determine whether or not to stop using an anthelmintic due to resistance. Each time animals are sold to the slaughter, farmer can compute the average weights of the animal, including the dead one, with a weight of 0. This average weight can then be compared to a theoretical one, corresponding to the weight of an healthy animal, without any problem due to parasitism. When the difference is greater than 27% then, it is not economically viable to continue using this anthelmintic.

Although systematic treatment is commonly used, it is evident that it contributes to the spread of anthelmintic resistance among the parasite population. One alternative is the adoption of targeted selective treatment (TST), which involves administering anthelmintic treatment only to the infested animals. An example of this approach is the Famacha score55, which assesses the color of the animal’s conjunctiva to determine the level of anemia, thereby correlating it with the degree of infestation by Haemonchus. While anemia can theoretically have various causes, it is most often, and in many cases almost exclusively, attributable to parasitism, such that false positive detection could be excluded.

Thus, we can determine the value, and, as a consequence, ofusing Eq. (7), for a given value of,and.can be estimated from the farm data, as the expected control cost of the TST strategy, equals to 1.01 €.

The value of the optimal prevention cost as a function of AH efficacy and probability of detection of the monitoring method is available Fig. (4).

Optimal amount of monitoring () as a function of the probability of detecting the infestation and the efficacy of the AH treatment, under the targeted selected treatment strategy.

As one can expect, the optimal amount of monitoring effort increases with the probability of detection and AH efficacy, until a certain threshold, where the monitoring effort slightly decrease. In this case, either the AH efficacy or probability of detection is high enough such that the expected loss due to either a failure from AH or monitoring, constraints to decrease monitoring cost. In any case, the maximal individual monitoring cost is equal to 4.45 €, for an AH efficacy of 94.2% and a probability of detection of the monitoring method of 74.6%. As an example, today, an accelerometer can be found at around 150 €, meaning that they will have to last for more than 30 years to be optimal in terms of economical value, or equivalently, used by more than 33 animals during 11 months.

Finally, a common strategy consists in managing the pasture in order to limit the probability that an animal ingests parasite. It is the case for example with mixed or rotational grazing. This type of management corresponds to prevention method and we can derive the optimal economical value of prevention in the case of GIN.

Pasture management decreases the probability that an animal gets infested, or in other decreases. Let’s denotethe new probability that an animal gets infested under a pasture management strategy.

Figure (5) show the value of the maximal pasture management effort, as a function of the probability of getting infested under the pasture management strategy. For illustrative purpose, we used the work from59, which discuss the effect of stocking rate on the GIN infection levels. In this study, goats were associated to heifer that are naturally resistant to GIN. As a consequence, heifer decreases the parasite population without any impact on their health and welfare. Animal grazed in a leader goat and follower heifer design. Different design were tested, depending on the number of goats and associated heifers, insuring, however, a constant overall stocking rate between each design. In particular, they showed that the level of infection decrease with the goat stocking rate. For illustration we used the data for the design with half goats and half heifers and with 1/4 goats and 3/4 heifers. In theses cases, we can show that the probability of getting infected is respectivelyand. Using Fig. (5), mixed grazing with 50/50 goats and heifer is economically viable when the individual cost is lower than 7.56 €. And for the 1/4 case, lower than 11.01 €.

Optimal pasture management effort, in euros, as a function of the probability of getting infested under the pasture management strategy.

Health management is a complex decision problem, where the decisions are made at multiple scales, from the country, which define legislative constraints, to the farmer, who is choosing his own health management practices. Our simplified framework aims at discussing possible improvement of health management practices, by accounting for the trade-off between reducing loss due to health problem and management cost. It can be used to guide the design of new management actions, by allowing to explore the space for which action cost and reduction loss leads to a positive trade-off. It could be particularly useful to explore and visualize the potential of prevention actions, that might be hardly used in practice as far as their impact is not necessarily easily visible. Finally, it can be used to determine futur research program effort.

The simplicity of the mathematical representation of the health management problem is particularly useful to highlight the important parameters to account for when discussing IHM strategies. First, what is the probabilitythat a stress occurs and when it occurs, what are the expected losses? Second, what are the available management options, for both prevention and control? If management actions exist, what are their cost and how much losses are expected when they are implemented? Then, using this framework, one can easily illustrate the trade-off between using this action or doing nothing. If no management action exists and one wants to design a new one, then the framework could be used to explore the management cost and efficacy range for which a positive trade-off between loss reduction and management cost could be expected.

Our framework could be extended to account for environmental and human health constraints. More generally,Gcould be any quantity of interest, as far as it can be scaled with the management costs. Future developments should include temporality, especially related to the efficacy of the management actions, which could decrease with the number of times they are implemented, as it is for example the case for anthelmintic resistance.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first mathematical model specifically designed to balance prevention and control efforts in animal health management. Although our mathematical formulations extend previous models33, direct comparisons remain challenging. In31, which is also an extension of33, they conclude that prevention is worthwhile for diseases with higher probability of occurrence or larger severity. Here, they did not include the possibility of choosing between prevention and control, a common decision in livestock management. It is important to consider the effects of control when discussing the use of prevention, as some diseases could have high severity, but be cured with high success.

The mathematical formulations are deliberately simple, yet they offer the significant advantage of enabling the computation of mathematically optimal management strategies. This is particularly valuable for informing decision-makers. The similarity between our framework and the concept of dynamic resilience37,38is noteworthy. The black line in Fig. (1) is often employed to illustrate this concept. Furthermore,36suggested using resilience as a universal health criterion applicable across various domains, such as the health of animals, soils, and humans. From this perspective, the model presented here offers potential for comparing the health, or resilience, of different agricultural systems. Historical data could be utilized to estimate disease parameters (e.g.,, etc), possibly integrating data from multiple diseases to account for all sanitary stress factors collectively. This approach enables a comparative analysis of system parameters to identify key differences and suggest potential improvements in resilience and overall health. Additionally, the optimality results derived from the model can inform strategies to optimize system management, thereby enhancing resilience and promoting global health outcomes.

Within the context of gastrointestinal nematodes (GIN), the question of optimal management is rarely addressed through mathematical modeling. Existing models, such as61for the dynamics of GIN infestations or62for the dynamics of the free-living stages, are primarily simulation models. These models have the potential to inform management decisions through further analysis and could be used as simulation tools to compare various management strategies. However, deriving mathematically optimal “rules of thumb” from these models is likely infeasible. On the contrary, we illustrated how to use this model in the context of GIN management. We first proposed a new guideline to assess whether it is economically viable to continue using an anthelmintic or if it would be better to discontinue its use due to high levels of resistance, based on animal weights. Second, we showed how to use the model to determine the maximal price of a management action. This is particularly useful, for example in the context of development of automatic monitoring method, such as accelerometers. The maximal per animal price (4.45 €  in the example) can be used as a constraint when developing this type of method, or any of them. Note that the numerical values described in this study were computed for the case of the experimental farm only. Numerical values of the health management problem and estimated costs, would be different under other context, and these parameters would have to be re-estimated to deal with a new farm/environment. However, the several examples and estimation method describe in this article can easily be generalized to other farm.

It is rare that studies abord the problem of prevention vs control, it is more often, does prevention is worth it? But not balance between prevention and control. However, this is an interesting question as far as the availability, efficacy, and cost of a control method can change the decision of using prevention or not. This was actually the case with anthelmintics, which were a low-cost and highly efficient method at the beginning. With anthelmintic resistance, this paradigm has to be changed by discussing the potential effect of alternative methods.

Whereis the prevention effort,the prevention efficacy. Andthe control effort,the control efficacy.

According to conditions (C.5) and (C.6), eitherorequal to zeros and eitherorare equal to zeros.

For this first scenario, there exists an infinity of solutions.

We first start with the estimation of the health management problem parameters. We mainly relied on the work presented in57, where they studied two scenarios, one where the animals are treated in a systematic way, 4 times during their lifetime, with effective AH treatments. And a second scenario, where no anthelmintic treatments were used. Thus, in scenario 1, the production value are in a case where parasitism is not a problem and whereis reached at the end of the animal lifetime. On the contrary, in scenario 2, it is expected that production could be lower, due to parasitism. By comparing this two scenarios, we were able to derive most of our model parameters.

Starting with the mortality. In the first scenario, pre and post weaning mortality were 18% and 12%. The combined mortality is thus equal to. In the second scenario, pre and post weaning mortality were 29% and 19%. In this case, the combined mortality is equal toThe difference in mortality,, is due to parasitism. In other words, we have, or.

For the estimation of the optimal gain, we updated the data from the reference article57with the economical data of the farm, computed in 2024. Otherwise, the economical conclusion of our article would be outdated. We used a carcasse price of kids at 11 months of 7.70 €, instead of 11.96 €  in the reference article. In scenario 1, the average carcasse weight at 11 months was equal to 17.9kg, then the average price was€. We deducted national taxes, at 2.10%, to estimate the average income to 134.93 €. In scenario 2, the average carcasse weight at 11 months was down to 13.9kg, consequently with an average price of€. Then, we can estimate the proportion loss due to parasitisme. The expense were estimated as follows. First, we accounted for a management cost of 83.52 €  for the adults. It includes 39.32 €  for hay, 36.48 €  for concentrate, 2.43 €  for treatment against ticks and 5.29 €  for GIN. We accounted for an average litter size of 2.3, and thus, the management cost for the dam is€. For the kids, we accounted for 20.76 €  for hay, 14.61 €  for concentrate, 2.43 €  for ticks treatment, 7.75 €  for Coccidies, 1.53 €  for Taenia, and, 2 €  for the animal national identification. In total, the production costs was estimated to€  and thus€.

For the estimation of, the probability that an animal gets infested by the parasitism, we used the following method. First we used a dataset containing the results of 245 coproscopies, made on 129 different animals in 2022-2023. A coproscopie is a method used to determine the level of infestation of the animals. More precisely, to estimate the number of GIN eggs per gram (EPG) of feces. Theoretically, an animal is infected as soon as its EPG is higher than 0. But in practice, we considered that animals with EPG, were healthy, as far as there is no impact on their health and welfare. The coproscopies were realized at 4 or 7 months of age. They were realized for genetic evaluation of the animal’s level of genetic resistance to GIN. This dataset is not publish at this time. The EPG of the animals was estimated multiple time, spaced from 5, 7 or 9 days. For each animal, we used the average value of the estimated EPG. To summarize, we have the infestation level (EPG) of 129 animal, at 4 or 7 months of age. We used this dataset to answer this first question: what is the probability that an animal that a raised on pasture is infected (i.e. EPG > 500) at a given day? This probability is simply the number of infected animal in our dataset, divided by the number of animals in the dataset. It is equal to 0.34. In other word, in the experimental farm, if we choose an animal randomly, for a given day, there is 34% chance that this animal is infected. Note that the coproscopies were realized at different periods of the year, in January, May, or September, thus with various climate conditions (more or less dry). But also with animals from various levels of genetic resistance to the parasites. The previous probability is an estimate with average climatic conditions and genetic backgrounds.

Then, we asked the following question: if an animal is infected at a given time (i.e. EPG > 500), when did the animal ingest larvae? We used the work from60, where 11 months old Creole kids were infected experimentally with a daily dose of 1000 larvae ofHaemonchus contortusduring 10 days. Trickle infections were used to better mimic natural infection condition on pasture. We used this dataset, containing 29 animals, to compute the average time where the animal get an EPG > 500, or in our definition, gets infected. The estimation showed that, in average, EPG was higher than 500 after 50.6 days. In other words, when an animal is exposed to larvae, it will be infected (EPG > 500) at least 50.6 days after. Mathematically, let’s define the following Bernoulli trial: at the end of a period of 50.6 days during the animal’s lifetime, the animal is either infected (success) or non-infected (failure). Then the probability of success is 34%.

Our aim was to compute the probability that an animal gets infected during its entire lifetime, i.e. before 11 months. The potential infection period was reduced to 9 months, as far as before 2 months of age, the animals were essentially fed with milk from the dam. We then approximately derive the lifetime of the animal into 6 periods of 50.6 days and we defined, as the probability that the animal gets infested in at least one of this period. To compute this probability, we can delete the first period, as far as if the animal is exposed to larvae during this period, it will get infected (EPG > 500) in the next period. Then,can be viewed as the probability of at least one success, in a sequence of 5 Bernoulli trials, with success probability of 0.34. In this terms,can be easily calculated using the binomial probability, and is equal to.

The only extra parameter to estimate was the anthelmintic treatment cost. We used the anthelmintic price at the experimental farm in 2024, and accounted for 1 treatment (0.53 €) at weaning and 4 treatments after weaning (2.38 €), for a treatment cost of.

whereis the binomial probability ofssuccesses for 5 Bernoulli trials with a success probability of 0.34.

The author thanks Remy Arquet, the manager of the experimental farm, for fruitful discussions and parameter estimates.