In response to an emerging need for the development of advanced analytical methods to guarantee food quality and safety, this study presents a novel medicine dropper‐assisted SBME (MD‐SBME) that was developed. The technique uses a meltdown layer of a facemask (MLF) as a holder of the extraction solvent. A hydrophobic natural deep eutectic solvent (NADES) made from thymol and menthol was used as the extraction solvent during the MD‐SBME analysis of imidacloprid pesticide in fruit samples. Characterization of the NADES was done using Fourier‐transform infrared spectroscopy (FT‐IR), and the experimental results confirmed that it was successfully synthesized. The MD‐SBME parameters, like ionic strength, sample pH, elution solvent type, elution solvent volume, type of DES and extraction solvent volume, were studied and optimized using both the univariate and multivariate approaches. The greenness of the MD‐SBME technique was evaluated using the Complementary Modified Green Analytical Procedure Index (ComplexMoGapi) algorithm, and the total score was 85. A total score of 65 was obtained when the practicality of the MD‐SBME procedure was evaluated using the blue applicability grade index (BAGI) metric tool. HPLC‐PDA was used for the analysis of imidacloprid residues in fruit samples using the developed MD‐SBME technique. Under the optimum conditions, limits of detection and quantification were in the range of 0.007–0.02 and 0.02–0.069μgg−1, respectively. The correlation of determinations (R2) for pineapple, pear and apple samples were 0.9986, 0.9982 and 0.9973, respectively. The extraction recoveries of these fruit samples ranged from 72% to 110%. Good precision was obtained when the MD‐SBME technique was used to analyse imidacloprid residues in real sample, as all the percentage relative standard deviation (%RSD) were below 5%.

The rapid growth of the agricultural sector has caused a tremendous increase in the use of pesticides during the last decade [1]. Imidacloprid [1‐(6‐chloro‐3‐pyridylmethyl)‐N‐nitroimidazolodin‐2‐ylideneamine], a neonicotinoid insecticide, is among the pesticides that have been extensively used in recent years [2]. It is less toxic to mammals, but it has high toxicity to insects [3]. Consequently, its worldwide use in the agro‐industry is increasing daily. Imidacloprid acts as an inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase, thereby causing massive interruption of the insect's central nervous system [4]. This has the effect of paralysing the insect and subsequently cause its death. Imidacloprid residues in food products, such as fruits, may also affect non‐target organisms [5]. The effects of imidacloprid on non‐target organisms include interfering with energy metabolism [6], cardiorespiratory toxicity [7] and disruption of the endocrine system [8]. In addition, imidacloprid may cause the production of reactive oxygen species that induce protein oxidation, DNA damage and disruption of antioxidant defences in non‐target organisms [9]. Therefore, it is mandatory that the concentration levels of imidacloprid residues in fruits be monitored effectively.

The analysis of neonicotinoid pesticides, with imidacloprid included, from fruit samples is usually done using chromatographic techniques, such as HPLC [10,11,12] and GC [13,14]. The use of GC during analysis of neonicotinoids usually involves the process of derivatization, as most of them have very low volatility [15]. Sometimes the concentrations of imidacloprid residues in food products is lower than the limits of detection (LOD) and quantification (LOQ) of some of these chromatographic instruments. As a result, there is a need for enrichment prior to chromatographic analysis. Some of the techniques used to pre‐concentrate pesticide residues in fruit samples include dispersive solid‐phase extraction (DSPE) [16,17,18,19], QuEChERS [20,21,22], dispersive liquid–liquid micro‐extraction (DLLME) [23,24,25,26,27,28], solid‐phase micro‐extraction (SPME) [29,30,31], thin film micro‐extraction (TFME) [32,33] and solvent bar micro‐extraction (SBME) [34]. The use of SBME is slowly gaining traction during the enrichment of emerging pollutants such as pesticides in recent years [35,36,37].

SBME is an alternative configuration of hollow fibre‐liquid phase micro‐extraction (HF‐LPME). The HF‐LPME technique is very useful during the enrichment of pesticide residues [38,39,40]. However, it has its own limitations outlined below. The extraction fibre should be supported during micro‐extraction using the HF‐LPME technique [41,42]. This hampers the concurrent extraction of many samples. The support also makes the extraction device for HF‐LPME to be fixed at one position, and this limits its contact with the sample. In addition, the acceptor phase may leak from the hollow fibre at the point of attachment of the support [43,44]. Consequently, the SBME technique was developed in order to overcome these limitations of the HF‐LPME configuration. In the SBME format, leakages of the acceptor phase are minimized by sealing both ends of the extraction fibre. There is enhanced contact between the SBME extraction device and the donor phase, as the extraction fibre can move freely in the sample [45,46]. The enrichment of analytes using SBME is easy to perform and relatively cheap as compared to other pre‐concentration techniques such as HF‐LPME.

The enrichment of imidacloprid residues in complex matrices using SBME is still in its infancy. Consequently, very few research studies are found in literature that utilize the SBME technique for the enrichment of pesticide residues in complex matrices. For instance, Wu et al. [33] used magnetic SBME during the enrichment of organophosphorous pesticides from fruit samples. Zuluaga et al. [47] utilized the SBME procedure for the enrichment of pesticides in blood samples prior to GC analysis. On the other hand, Zhang et al. [48] used ionic liquid‐based SBME for the enrichment of organophosphorous pesticide residues in water samples. There is still room for researchers to explore the application of SBME‐based enrichment of pesticides in food samples. This article uses the medicine dropper‐assisted SBME (MD‐SBME) for the enrichment of imidacloprid residues in fruit samples using the meltdown layer of a facemask (MLF) as a natural deep eutectic solvent (NADES) holder. This pre‐concentration technique involves the use of an environmentally friendly hydrophobic NADES made from thymol and menthol. In addition, readily available materials such as facemasks and medicine droppers were used, thereby making the technique accessible to many researchers. The green character and sustainability of the MD‐SBME method were evaluated using the Complementary Modified Green Analytical Procedure Index (ComplexMoGAPI) metric tool, whereas its practicality was determined using the blue applicability grade index (BAGI) metric tool. To the best of our knowledge, this modified SBME technique is being used for the first time in this article. Moreover, this is the first article to utilize the MLF as an extractant holder during the SBME enrichment of imidacloprid residues in fruit samples.

The adhesive glue as well as the facemasks was bought from a local supermarket. The medicine droppers were bought from a local pharmacy. The hydrophobic NADES, utilized for extracting the analyte in this study, was synthesized using menthol (Merck, Johannesburg, South Africa) and thymol (Merck, Johannesburg, South Africa) mixed in the molar ratio 1:3. The sample pH was adjusted using analytical grade sodium hydroxide (Merck, Johannesburg, South Africa) and hydrochloric acid (Merck, Johannesburg, South Africa). Sample ionic strength plays an integral part during the micro‐extraction techniques, and it was adjusted using sodium chloride (Merck, Johannesburg, South Africa) during the SBME procedure. A stock solution of imidacloprid (Merck, Johannesburg, South Africa) with a concentration of 1000 mg L−1was prepared, and lower concentrations were obtained by appropriate dilutions. The fruit samples used during this study were bought from a local supermarket.

The edges of a facemask were cut so as to remove its meltdown layer. The MLF was then cut into thin strips (1 cm × 10 cm). A thin film of a strong adhesive glue was placed onto a medicine dropper about 2 mm above its nozzle. One end of the MLF strip was carefully pasted to this section of the medicine dropper with glue. The MLF strip was then loosely and completely wound over the medicine dropper. A small drop of the glue was subsequently placed on the other end to securely attach it to the MLF (Figure1A).

(A) Preparation of the extraction device, and (B) steps during the MD‐SBME procedure.

A procedure proposed in previous literature was slightly modified and then used to synthesize the hydrophobic NADES used in this study [49]. Menthol and thymol (1:3 molar ratio) were added to a 15 mL centrifuge tube (Merck, Johannesburg, South Africa). The centrifuge tube was shaken thoroughly prior to ultrasonication for about 30 min with the water bath of the sonicator (Merck, Johannesburg, South Africa) at 60°C until a homogenous solution was formed.

A Bruker Tensor 27 Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer (Bruker Corporation, Billerica, Massachusetts, USA) was used to characterize the synthesized menthol:thymol NADES. The characterization results were used as confirmation of the interactions between menthol and thymol during the formation of the NADES. During the Fourier‐transform infrared (FT‐IR) analysis, the adsorption measurements were done between 400 and 4000 cm−1.

The fruit samples (apple, pear and pineapple) were prepared using a method in literature with some slight modifications [50]. The fruit samples were cut into small pieces, followed by homogenization using a blender bought from a local supermarket. After homogenization, 1.0 g of each fruit sample was added to a 15 mL centrifuge tube containing 3 mL of HPLC water. The mixture was thoroughly agitated using a vortex (Merck, Johannesburg, South Africa) for 1 min and then centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 6 min. A micropipette was used to remove the supernatant from the mixture, which was then used in subsequent steps.

Impurities were removed from the MLF by washing it with distilled water three times, followed by sonication for 5 min in 5 mL of acetone. The extraction device was then dipped into the hydrophobic NADES and was left there for 1 min to allow the MLF to become saturated with the solvent. After that, the NADES‐saturated MLF was dipped into a container with 3 mL of the fruit sample. The sample was agitated by repeated aspiration and dispensing using the medicine dropper, in order to facilitate mass transfer. The enriched extraction device was then taken out of the sample and placed into the desorption solvent (acetonitrile), followed by repeated aspiration and dispensing so as to cause agitation of the mixture. After desorption, a 0.22 µm membrane filter (Stargate, Johannesburg, South Africa) was used for the filtration of the eluent. Thereafter, the eluent was then analysed using HPLC‐PDA (Figure1B).

A Shimadzu HPLC‐PDA (LC‐2030C) fitted with a Shim‐pack GIST column (150 mm × 4.6 mm, particle size 5.0 µm) was used for chromatographic analysis. During analysis, the column oven was set at a constant temperature of 30°C. A binary solvent mixture consisting of 0.1% formic acid in water (Eluent A) and 0.1% formic acid in methanol (Eluent B), bought from Merck (Johannesburg, South Africa), was used as a mobile phase. The injection volume of the mobile phase was 20 µL, and the flow rate was 0.8 µL min−1during the analysis. Isocratic elution was employed with the ratio of eluent B: eluent A being 80:20. The elution of the imidacloprid pesticide was monitored using a wavelength of 271 nm.

In this study, SBME parameters were optimized using both univariate and multivariate optimization. The univariate approach was used to select the elution solvent as well as to optimize the size of the MLF. Multivariate optimization was used for the other parameters (sample pH, elution solvent volume, ionic strength, type of elution solvent and extraction solvent volume) using STATISTICA software. The first step during the multivariate optimization was the conduction of screening experiments in order to identify significant parameters. After the screening experiments, further optimization of the significant parameters was done using central composite design (CCD).

The ComplexMoGAPI is an effective algorithm for the evaluation of the greenness as well as the sustainability of micro‐extraction methodologies [51]. Consequently, the ComplexMoGAPI metric tool was used to assess the greenness of the MD‐SBME procedure used in this article. In addition, the practicability of the MD‐SBME analytical procedure was evaluated using the BAGI metric tool.

The functional group interactions between thymol and menthol in the NADES were confirmed using FT‐IR. An O–H vibrational band is found at 3260 cm−1in the FT‐IR spectrum of menthol (Figure2A). On the other hand, the FT‐IR spectrum of thymol had a corresponding vibrational band at 3212 cm−1(Figure2B). After the synthesis of the hydrophobic NADES, the resultant FT‐IR spectrum exhibited a shift of these O–H vibrational bands to 3361 cm−1(Figure2C). Hydrogen bonds are formed between thymol and menthol during the synthesis of the hydrophobic NADES, and this caused the shifting of the O–H vibrational band in the NADES spectrum. In addition, a broader O–H vibrational band occurred in the NADES spectrum, and this is confirmation of the interaction of the OH groups in thymol and menthol [52].

Fourier‐transform infrared (FT‐IR) spectra for (A) menthol, (B) thymol and (C) thymol:menthol DES. NADES, natural deep eutectic solvent.

The MD‐SBME extraction solvent should be hydrophobic in order to enable it to be firmly embedded into the pores of the MLF fibres [53]. In addition, hydrophobicity will make the extractant immiscible with the aqueous sample, and this facilitates the transfer of the imidacloprid residues from the donor phase into the acceptor phase [38]. In this study, the effects of four DESs as extraction solvents for imidacloprid residues were investigated (Figure3A). These DESs were choline chloride:salicylic acid (1:1) (DES‐1), choline chloride:urea (2:1) (DES‐2), menthol:thymol (1:2) (DES‐3) and choline chloride:thymol (2:1) (DES‐4). The results showed that menthol:thymol (1:2) (DES‐3) had the highest extraction recovery. This can be attributed to the fact that DES‐3 may be more hydrophobic as compared to the other extraction solvents used in this study. Consequently, DES‐3 could interact well with the hydrophobic MLF fibres, and this facilitated efficient extraction of the imidacloprid residues. Thus, DES‐3 was a suitable solvent for the extraction of imidacloprid pesticide in subsequent experiments.

Optimization of MD‐SBME parameters, (A) effects of type of DES on MD‐SBME efficiency (n= 3), (B) effects of type eluent on MD‐SBME efficiency (n= 3), (C) Pareto chart for the determination of MD‐SBME significant parameters, (D) 3D plot for significant factors and (E) profiles for predicted values and desirability. ACN, acetonitrile; ETA, ethyl acetate; EtOH, ethanol; MeOH, methanol.

The acquisition of reliable and reproducible results during the enrichment of pesticide residues utilizing the MD‐SBME technique hinges on the selection of the appropriate elution solvent [53]. The elution solvent should have a very high affinity for the pesticide residues to ensure their efficient removal from the DES‐impregnated MLF. The effectiveness of ethyl acetate (ETA), acetonitrile (ACN), methanol (MeOH) and ethanol (EtOH) as eluents was studied (Figure3B). These solvents were of analytical grade and were bought from Merck (Johannesburg, South Africa). The experimental results showed that acetonitrile was the most suitable eluent for the imidacloprid residues adsorbed onto the DES‐impregnated MLF. This may be attributed to the fact that imidacloprid pesticide and ACN have compatible structures and polarity [54]. In addition, ACN is more hydrophobic than the other solvents used in this study. Consequently, there were strong and effective interactions between the eluent (ACN) and the imidacloprid pesticide. ACN is among the common solvents that are used for the elution of imidacloprid pesticides from a wide variety of adsorbents during sorptive micro‐extraction. For example, Hosseinian et al. [31] used ACN as an eluent during the TFME enrichment of imidacloprid and other pesticides using a metal organic framework‐based adsorbent. Nazari Koloujeh et al. [55] used ACN as an eluent during the covalent organic framework‐based dispersive solid phase micro‐extraction of imidacloprid residues from food samples. In the same vein, Sengane et al. [56] utilized ACN as an eluent during magnetic solid phase micro‐extraction of imidacloprid residues from vegetable oils. ACN is a versatile solvent that has good penetrating ability into many adsorbents and has maximum interaction with the imidacloprid residues. In addition, ACN has a relatively low volatility, and this minimizes its rate of evaporation during the desorption process [31]. ACN was, therefore, a better elution solvent as compared to the other solvents used in this study.

In this article, a full factorial design was utilized to investigate the parameters that have a bearing on the extraction efficacy of the MD‐SBME procedure. The full factorial design is an efficient and widely used method during screening experiments that are performed to determine the significant factors during analytical procedures [42]. In this study, 11 experiments were constructed (using STATISTICA software) to evaluate four independent variables (sample pH, extraction time, volume of elution solvent and ionic strength) at two levels. The significant parameters were then determined using a Pareto chart at a 95% confidence level (Figure3C). In the Pareto chart, a parameter has a significant effect ifpis effect ifp>0.05[57]. Analysis of the Pareto chart revealed that only volume of elution solvent was the significant parameter (p>0.05)during the extraction of imidacloprid using the MD‐SBME technique. On the other hand, ionic strength, extraction time and sample pH had no significant effects (p<0.05). However, sample pH was considered for CCD optimization, as its bar in the Pareto chart was relatively close to thep= 0.05 demarcation line at 95% confidence level.

The effects and interactions of the significant factors (independent variables) on peak area (dependent variable) were investigated using CCD. The CCD experimental results were used to construct 3D surface plots that showed how peak area varied with changes in sample pH and elution solvent volume (Figure3D). The 3D surface plot revealed that the peak area gradually increased with an increase in the volume of the eluent up to 600 µL. Thereafter, an increase in the volume of the elution solvent caused a decrease in recovery. Lower volumes of acetonitrile might have caused incomplete elution of the imidacloprid pesticide from the MLF fibres, thereby resulting in lower peak areas. On the other hand, volumes of acetonitrile higher than 600μLcould have resulted in the dilution effect causing a negative impact on the extraction recovery of the developed method.

A similar trend was observed when the 3D surface plot was analysed for the impact of pH changes on the efficiency of the MD‐SBME methodology (Figure3D). The extraction recovery of the MD‐SBME technique increased when the sample pH was increased up to a value of 6. There was a noticeable decrease in peak area at pH values greater than 6. Generally, the micro‐extraction of imidacloprid pesticide is usually effective at pH values that are neither strongly acidic nor alkaline. For instance, Hasani et al. [31] successfully enriched imidacloprid residues in fruit and vegetable samples at a pH of 7.1. In the same vein, Zareiyan et al. [58] obtained an optimum sample pH of 6 during the DLLME micro‐extraction of imidacloprid and other neonicotinoid pesticides in fruit and vegetable samples. Moderate pH values are usually applicable during its micro‐extraction, as strongly acidic or alkaline conditions may result in the hydrolysis and degradation of the imidacloprid residues [59]. Aggressive pH conditions not only affect the analyte (imidacloprid) but may have destructive effects on the structures of both the NADES and MLF used during the developed method. Strongly acidic and alkaline conditions may cause protonation and deprotonation of the functional moieties in the menthol:thymol NADES, causing the alteration of their hydrogen bonding network. This will significantly affect the structure, reactivity and solvation capabilities of the NADES, rendering the extraction process less efficient. On the other hand, an increase in acidity or alkalinity may cause degradation of the MIF. This may, subsequently, change the hydrophobic properties of the MLF fibres with detrimental effects on the extraction efficiency of the MD‐SBME technique.

The desirability function was used for the simultaneous determination of the optimum conditions for the significant factors (Figure3E). The values used in the desirability function range from 0 to 1.0. The least desirable result has a value of 0, whereas the most desirable result is depicted by a value of 1.0 [60]. Red dashed lines in the desirability profiles indicate the optimum values of the independent variables that result in the highest extraction recovery of the analyte from the sample [61]. The MD‐SBME optimum conditions for the enrichment of imidacloprid residues in fruit samples, based on the desirability function, a sample pH of 6 and an elution solvent volume of 600μL. This is in agreement with the information from the 3D surface plot. These optimum conditions were used in subsequent investigations. During the MD‐SBME enrichment of imidacloprid residues in fruit samples, extraction time and ionic strength were kept at constant values of 10 min and 5%, respectively. The selection of the values of these parameters was informed by preliminary experimental results and values commonly used in previous literature.

The MD‐SBME technique was validated (Table1). The linearity of the MD‐SBME procedure was examined by plotting matrix‐matched calibration curves using concentrations that ranged from 0 to 800 µg g−1. The linear ranges were found to be 0.02‒200, 0.04–100 and 0.06‒200 µg g−1for pineapple, pear and apple samples, respectively. The correlation of determinations (R2) for pineapple, pear and apple samples were 0.9986, 0.9982 and 0.9973, respectively.

Analytical performance of medicine dropper‐assisted SBME (MD‐SBME)/HPLC‐PDA for the determination of imidacloprid in fruit samples (n= 3).

Abbreviations: LOD, limits of detection; LOQ, limits of quantification; ND, not detected; N/A, not applicable.

The calculation of the LOD and LOQ was done using matrix‐matched calibration curves. The data used to plot the matrix‐matched calibration curves was subjected to regression analysis in order to obtain the standard error (SE) of the intercept, followed by the calculation of the standard deviation (SD) of the intercept (Equation1).

whereNis the number of concentration levels used to plot the matrix‐matched calibration curve. The LOD and LOQ were then calculated using Equations (2) and (3), respectively [6].

The LOD were found to be in the range of 0.007–0.02 µg g−1, whereas the LOQ ranged from 0.02 to 0.069 µg g−1for the fruit samples analysed. The MD‐SBME/HPLC‐PDA technique had good precision, as the percentage relative standard deviations (%RSDs) were less than 5% (Table1).

The developed MD‐SBME‐HPLC‐PDA technique was used to determine the imidacloprid residues in fruit samples (pineapple, pear and apple) to evaluate its applicability to real samples [62]. The experimental results showed that imidacloprid residues were not detected in these fruit samples (Table1). In addition, the enrichment factors (EFs) and extraction recoveries (ERs) of the MD‐SBME method were found by spiking the fruit samples with a known imidacloprid pesticide. Each fruit sample was spiked with imidacloprid pesticide at three concentration levels (2.5, 5 and 10 µg g−1). Subsequently, these spiked fruit samples were subjected to the MD‐SBME extraction process under the established optimum conditions. The EFs were then calculated as a ratio of the concentration of the imidacloprid in the extraction solvent (Cext) to its initial concentration (Cinitial) in the spiked sample, as shown in Equation (1) [63,64].

The EFs were found to be between 3.7 and 5.5 (Table1), and this is an indication that the developed technique can successfully pre‐concentrate imidacloprid residues in fruit samples. On the other hand, the % ERs were calculated as shown in Equation (5) [63].

The calculations, on the basis of the experimental results, showed that %ERs ranged from 72% to 110% (Table1). These are acceptable ERs that point to the efficiency of the MLF‐based MD‐SBME technique. The intraday %RSDs were in the range of 1.62%–3.20%, whereas the interday %RSDs ranged from 2.76% to 5.27%. These relatively low %RSD values are an indication of good precision associated with the MD‐SBME extraction protocol.

The green character of the MD‐SBME procedure was assessed using the ComplexMoGAPI metric tool. The ComplexMoGAPI score of the MD‐SBME procedure was 85 (Figure4A). This relatively high score serves to show the low environmental footprint of the developed MD‐SBME method. The use of recycled materials coupled with small volumes of green solvents is the main contributing factor towards this relatively high green profile. The BAGI algorithm was used to assess the practicality of the MD‐SBME technique (Figure4B). An overall BAGI score of 65 was obtained, and this is an indication that the method is practical.

Green profile evaluation of the MD‐SBME procedure, (A) ComplexMoGAPI pictogram for the MD‐SBME technique, and (B) BAGI pictogram for the evaluation of the practicality of the MD‐SBME technique.

The MD‐SBME method was compared to other enrichment techniques, and Table2gives a summary of the results. The results indicate that MD‐SBME compares favourably with other techniques that are used for the enrichment of pesticides in fruit samples. The MD‐SBME method has good precision and relatively low LOD, and the MLF‐based extraction device can be easily recovered. The MD‐SBME technique has a better green profile as compared to some of the pre‐concentration methods in the literature. The major limitations of the techniques evaluated in Table2are a lack of in situ sample preparation and a lack of automation. The techniques, however, have their general strengths. These include the use of small volumes of solvents, owing to their miniaturized nature, as well as relatively small sample volumes. The developed MD‐SBME extraction protocol has an edge over most of the pre‐concentration techniques evaluated in Table2, as evidenced by its relatively high ComplexMoGAPI overall score of 85. This can be attributed to the use of cheap, recyclable materials as well as the low energy input required during the MD‐SBME extraction protocol. In addition, the developed MD‐SBME technique has a very low environmental footprint, as it does not generate a lot of waste during the extraction process.

Medicine dropper‐assisted SBME (MD‐SBME) compared with other techniques.

Abbreviations: ComplexMoGAPI, Complementary Modified Green Analytical Procedure Index; DLLME, dispersive liquid–liquid micro‐extraction; HF‐LPME, hollow fibre‐liquid phase micro‐extraction; LOD, limits of detection.

The reusability of the MD‐SBME extraction device was investigated by performing repeated extraction and desorption of the imidacloprid pesticide using the developed extraction procedure (Figure5). The MD‐SBME extraction device was repeatedly used to extract imidacloprid pesticide from each spiked fruit sample (3 mL) at a concentration of 20 mg L−1. The regeneration experiments showed that the extraction device could undergo a series of five extraction‐desorption cycles without major loss of its extraction efficiency. Notably, the extraction recovery decreased during the sixth cycle, and this may be attributed to the degradation of the MLF fibres due to their excessive exposure to the slightly acidic conditions used during the developed MD‐SBME technique. The extraction device was washed well with methanol (5 mL) after each extraction/desorption cycle so as to ensure the absence of residual imidacloprid in it.

Investigation of the effects of repeated adsorption/desorption cycles on the performance MD‐SBME extraction device (n= 3).

The study successfully used an MLF‐based extraction device during the MD‐SBME enrichment of imidacloprid pesticide in fruit samples. This innovation facilitated the development of a vortex‐free and inexpensive SBME procedure to rapidly enrich imidacloprid residues in fruit samples and their subsequent HPLC‐PDA analysis. The developed method exhibited good repeatability and sensitivity, primarily due to the effective micro‐extraction of the imidacloprid residues from the fruit samples by the NADES‐impregnated MLF extraction device. The low energy consumption, simplicity and high speed of the MD‐SBME technique enhanced its greenness and practicality. In addition, the use of minimal extraction solvents and environmentally friendly solvents, as well as reduced extraction time, gave the technique an edge over other enrichment techniques. The environmental footprint of the MD‐SBME technique was further reduced by the use of biodegradable and readily available materials such as facemasks. The developed MLF‐based MD‐SBME technique provides a possible method for the valorization of facemask waste. The use of cheap medicine droppers for the agitation of the sample during extraction by repeated aspiration and dispensing rendered vortexing and magnetic stirring unnecessary. Thus, the MD‐SBME extraction protocol has a very low energy consumption. As a result, the developed MD‐SBME technique has a relatively high ComplexMoGAPI total score of 85 as well as an acceptable BAGI score of 65, which is a measure of the practicality of the analytical procedure. The performance parameters of the developed MLF‐based MD‐SBME extraction protocol compare favourably with other pesticide enrichment techniques.