Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are among the most common bacterial infections, yet they are both frequently misdiagnosed and inappropriately treated. We aimed to determine whether a machine learning model could accurately predict bacteriuria by using only the data that are readily available during the emergency department (ED) patient encounter. We retrospectively identified records of 62,963 patient encounters at our EDs that included results from a urinalysis and urine cultures. Encounters occurred from January 1, 2017, through December 31, 2021. We used a logistic regression classifier, k-nearest neighbors, random forest classifier, extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost), and a deep neural network to determine how well they predicted 3 urine culture outcomes: (1) no microbial growth vs. any microbial growth, including mixed flora; (2) ≥10,000 colony-forming units per milliliter (CFU/mL) for ≥1 organism vs. < 10,000 CFU/mL for all organisms; and (3) ≥100,000 CFU/mL for ≥1 organism vs. < 100,000 CFU/mL for all organisms. XGBoost had the highest area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) for all outcomes assessed: 86.1% for no microbial growth, 89.1% for ≥10,000 CFU/mL for ≥1 organism, and 93.1% for ≥100,000 CFU/mL for ≥1 organism. For encounters where the treating healthcare provider diagnosed with patient with a UTI before urine culture results were known and urine cultures showed either no microbial growth or ≥100,000 CFU/mL, the AUROC was 91%. XGBoost could accurately predict bacteriuria by using only data that were available during the ED patient encounter. These findings suggest that machine learning algorithms could be valuable tools in clinical settings by helping predict culture results and guiding decisions on whether to initiate empiric antibiotic treatment.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-16677-z.

Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are among the most common bacterial infections diagnosed in the emergency department (ED), with an estimated 150 to 250 million UTIs occurring annually worldwide1,2. Although the US Food and Drug Administration has defined UTIs for drug development and approval purposes (Box)3, no clinical definition of a UTI has been universally accepted to date. A recent systematic review of 47 therapeutic and prophylactic studies of adult patients with UTI3showed that only 28% of studies required the presence of pyuria in their definition of UTI. Further, 42% of studies reporting colony-forming units per milliliter (CFU/mL) values used 103CFU/mL to define a positive urine culture, but others have described perimenopausal women as having UTI symptoms, even though midstreamEscherichia colicounts were as low as 102CFU/mL3,4. Asymptomatic bacteriuria has been defined as 100,000 CFU/mL without signs and symptoms of a UTI in nonpregnant patients3,5–7, but the European Association of Urology (EAU) defines bacteriuria as 103CFU/mL or any detectable microbial growth with a suprapubic aspiration.

US food and drug administration definitions for uncomplicated and complicated UTI.

Data from Complicated Urinary Tract Infections: Developing Drugs for Treatment. Silver Spring, MD: US Food and Drug Administration, 2018; and Uncomplicated Urinary Tract Infections: Developing Drugs for Treatment. Silver Spring, MD: US Food and Drug Administration, 2019.

Abbreviations:CFU/mLcolony-forming units per milliliter,UTIurinary tract infection.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) defines a UTI as a positive leukocyte esterase test or pyuria plus ≥ 50,000 CFU/mL of pathogenic bacteria from an appropriately collected urine specimen, 100,000 CFU/mL from a clean catch, or 103CFU/mL from suprapubic aspiration8. However, children may have culture-negative pyelonephritis, and the AAP definition misses UTIs8–10. Among pediatric patients with urine markers of inflammation who underwent testing for UTI, the sensitivity of using 103CFU/mL as a cutoff value was 98% and the specificity was 99%, but a cutoff value of 100,000 CFU/mL had a sensitivity of 70%11. The EAU defines a positive urine culture for children as follows: a monoculture of 1000–10,000 CFU/mL, any bacterial growth from a suprapubic aspiration, and 1000 CFU/mL for febrile children younger than 4 months12.

For catheter-associated UTIs (CAUTIs), the Infectious Disease Society of America requires having signs and symptoms attributable to a CAUTI plus a urine culture growing ≥1000 CFU/mL of ≥1 bacterial species in a single specimen obtained through a catheter or a midstream-voided specimen from an individual whose catheter was removed within the past 48 h13,14. The EAU also defines a CAUTI as a culture with 1000 CFU/mL, but the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Healthcare Safety Network use a value of 100,000 CFU/mL to define a CAUTI14–16.

Adherence to the recommendations from professional societies (for diagnosing and managing UTIs) is poor3,5–7,13,15–19. Screening and treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria is rarely recommended, except for pregnant patients7. Furthermore, diagnosing UTIs can be challenging with children, older adults, patients with an indwelling urinary catheter, and patients with certain neuromuscular diseases, neuropsychiatric concerns, or intellectual disability because the signs of UTI may be nonspecific20.

Because UTIs are among the most common reasons for antibiotic use in the United States21, they are also among the most common reasons for inappropriate antibiotic use (i.e., UTI diagnosed but urine cultures ultimately are negative; UTI misdiagnosed as another condition and treated with an antibiotic; or a UTI is treated with non-first-line recommended antibiotics)22–27. The objective of our study was to determine whether a machine learning model could accurately predict the degree of microbial growth in urine cultures by using only the data that are available during the ED patient encounter. If the degree of bacteriuria can be accurately predicted, then this additional information could be used by a clinician to improve the management of UTIs, potentially by reducing antibiotic use for patients who are likely to have a negative urine culture, as well as by reducing the number of urine cultures ordered for patients without clinically significant bacteriuria.

The Mayo Clinic institutional review board approved this study, which was conducted in accordance with the relevant guidelines (e.g., TRIPOD + AI (Transparent Reporting of a Multivariable Prediction Model for Individual Prognosis Or Diagnosis + Artificial Intelligence)) and regulations28. Only patients who authorized the use of their health records for research were included in the analysis, and the need to obtain informed consent was waived by the Mayo Clinic institutional review board. We retrospectively searched our institution’s electronic health record system (Epic Corporation) to identify patients seen in seen at EDs on any of Mayo Clinic’s 3 campuses (Rochester, Minnesota; Jacksonville, Florida; and Phoenix, Arizona) and the Mayo Clinic Health System (various locations in Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Iowa)EDs at [blinded institution name, geographic location] from January 1, 2017, through December 31, 2021.

We created a data set of ED encounters that initially included all ED patients who had a urinalysis or a urine culture result. No age restrictions were applied. For inclusion in the study, records needed to have documentation of ED arrival and departure (dates and times) and ED encounter diagnoses listed. The urinalysis and urine cultures had to be ordered 4 h before to 8 h after the ED arrival. For urine cultures, the collection date and time had to be recorded, and the results documented within 10 days after sample collection. All encounters included documented event start and end dates and times, admit and discharge dates and times, encounter admit and discharge dates, and diagnosis dates (as per the terminology used in the electronic health record). We included only encounters that reported values for all the following urine studies: red blood cells, white blood cells, nitrite, bilirubin, leukocyte esterase, glucose, specific gravity, protein, pH, ketone, and urobilinogen.

Each patient had a unique clinic number that enabled analysis of data over time, and each encounter in the data set received a unique identifier. From each patient’s health record, we extracted data regarding demographic characteristics, medical history (including past ED urine culture results, allergies, and reproductive health information), and social history. We also collected temperature, laboratory and radiologic studies, diagnoses before the urine culture result was known, medications ordered before and during the ED encounter, hospital admission and disposition, genitourinary nursing procedures and flowsheets, and nurse-assessed fall risk. When relevant data were available, we calculated established estimators of inflammation (e.g., urinary inflammatory index, systemic immune-inflammation index, neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio, platelet-lymphocyte ratio), as well as ratios and mathematical formulas, based on laboratory test results, that we developed (Supplement 1)29.

No microbial growth vs. any microbial growth (including mixed flora).

≥10,000 CFU/mL for ≥1 bacterial species vs. < 10,000 CFU/mL for all organisms (including no microbial growth).

≥100,000 CFU/mL for ≥1 bacterial species vs. < 100,000 CFU/mL for all organisms (including no microbial growth).

For our secondary analyses, we used extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) to determine how well the model predicted likely false-positive UTIs, in which a UTI was diagnosed before urine culture results were known and no growth was reported for the urine culture. XGBoost is a machine learning approach that combines prediction models to create a more robust model. We also examined how well the model predicted potentially true-positive UTIs, in which a UTI was diagnosed before urine culture results were known and cultures showed ≥100,000 CFU/mL for ≥1 bacterial species.

We identified encounter diagnoses, including ED and any inpatient diagnoses, by searching the data set forInternational Classification of Disease,Tenth Revisioncodes and text strings (Supplement 2). We included diagnoses in our algorithms only if the ED discharge and departure date and time, event end date and time, encounter discharge date, and diagnosis date were all before the date and time that urine culture results were known.

Each outcome was binarized to 1 foryesand 0 forno. If a particular diagnosis was not made during the encounter, then it was coded asno. Likewise, if the urine culture result was known before the date and time of ED discharge and departure, event end date and time, encounter discharge date, or diagnosis date, the diagnosis outcome also was coded asno. Missing data were accounted for by labeling it asnot availablefor categorical data and using the median value for continuous variables. All available data were considered in the analysis (e.g., average microbial growth for all available urine cultures). Depending on the algorithm used, the same data could be entered as either a continuous or categorical variable. For example, urine leukocyte esterase data could be input as a range (e.g., values from 0 to 4), as qualitative descriptors (e.g.,none,trace,small,moderate, orlarge), or as a binary variable (presentvs.absent). Categorical outcomes were one-hot encoded.

Data were characterized as either features or target variables. The data were then randomly split into training and testing sets, with 20% in the testing set. Synthetic minority oversampling was applied to create synthetic samples for the minority class (to resolve class imbalance). A standard scalar was applied, and a series of models were then fitted: logistic regression classifier, k-nearest neighbors classifier, random forest classifier, XGBoost classifier, and a deep neural network classifier. Default hyperparameters were applied for each model. The XGBoost model was configured with default settings and early stopping rounds with a logloss evaluation metric. The neural network was configured with three dense layers with 128 neurons (relu activation), 64 neurons (relu activation), and 1 neuron (sigmoid activation), with dropout layers between layers 1 and 2 and between layers 2 and 3 to prevent overfitting. Early stopping was applied, and the model was compiled with an adam optimizer with binary_cross entropy as the loss function.

The reported performance metrics included accuracy, area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC), class-positive precision, recall, and F1 score. The model with the best performance was selected for additional analysis. Shapley additive explanation (SHAP) values were calculated on the test set to explain the model’s output. The 25 variables with the highest SHAP values were selected for additional analysis, and models were rerun by using a data set with only those 25 variables.

Of the initial 246,712 ED encounters that occurred during the study period, 62,963 encounters from 48,069 unique individuals were included in the analysis. The median (IQR) patient age was 64 (39) years; pediatric patients (age < 18 years) accounted for 3942 encounters (6.3%). Most patients self-identified as female (40,582 encounters [64.5%]). White patients accounted for 56,286 encounters (89.4%); Black, African, or African American patients, 2919 encounters (4.6%); Asian patients, 1241 encounters (2.0%); and patients who either did not disclose race information or indicatedother, 2517 encounters (4.0%). Laboratory test values and demographic characteristics are summarized in Supplements 3 and 4. There were 14,261 (22.6%) encounters diagnosed with a UTI before the urine culture result was known; of these, 4096 (28.7%) encounters showed bacterial growth < 10,000 CFU/mL, suggesting that these patients could have been inappropriately diagnosed with a UTI.

No microbial growth was reported for 18,128 urine cultures (28.8%). For encounters with diagnoses established before the urine culture results were known and had no growth in the urine culture, 14,261/62,963 (22.6%) had a UTI or cystitis diagnosis by the treating clinician and 15,326/62,963 (24.3%) had a UTI, cystitis, pyonephrosis, pyelonephritis, ureteritis, or kidney abscess diagnosis by the treating clinician.

Of all the models tested, XGBoost had the highest AUROC of 86.1%, plus an accuracy of 80.9% (Table1, Supplement 5). The 25 variables with the highest SHAP values for the outcome are listed in Table2; Fig.1, which include findings from the urinalysis and demographics. Urinalysis findings, self-identified gender, recent antibiotic use, orders for blood cultures, source of urine culture samples, and diagnosis of a UTI or cystitis were among the highest predictors of no microbial growth in urine culture. When only the 25 variables with the highest SHAP values were used, the AUROC was 84.6% and the accuracy was 79.0%.

Characteristics of models predicting no bacteria growth in urine culture.

Abbreviations:AUROCarea under the receiver operating characteristic curve,SHAPshapley additive explanation,XGBoostextreme gradient boosting.

Variables with highest SHAP values predicting no bacteria growth in urine culture (n= 25).

Abbreviations:EDemergency department,OB/Gynobstetrics and gynecology,RBCred blood cell,SHAPshapley additive explanation,UTIurinary tract infection,WBCwhite blood cell.

aFeature names were based on terminology used in in the electronic health record.

Variables with the highest SHAP values predicting no bacteria growth in urine culture (n= 25). SHAP indicates Shapley additive explanation.

We identified 26,999 urine cultures (42.9%) with bacterial growth of ≥10,000 CFU/mL for ≥1 organism. For encounters with diagnoses established before urine culture results were known and had ≥10,000 CFU/mL bacterial growth of ≥1 organism in the urine culture, 10,165/62,963 (16.1%) had a UTI or cystitis diagnosis by the treating clinician, and 10,977/62,963 (17.4%) had a UTI, cystitis, pyonephrosis, pyelonephritis, ureteritis, or a kidney abscess diagnosis by the treating clinician.

Of all the models tested, XGBoost had the highest AUROC of 89.1%, plus an accuracy of 81.2% (Table3, Supplement 6). The 25 variables with the highest SHAP values for the outcome are listed in Fig.2and Supplement 7. Urinalysis findings, self-identified gender, recent antibiotic use, source of urine culture samples, diagnosis of a UTI, cystitis, pyonephrosis, pyelonephritis, ureteritis, or a kidney abscess, and diagnosis of nephrolithiasis, urolithiasis, kidney calculi, or kidney stones were among the highest predictors of ≥10,000 CFU/mL for ≥1 bacterial species in urine culture. When only the 25 variables with the highest SHAP values were used, the AUROC was 88.1% and the accuracy was 80.0%.

Characteristics of models predicting ≥10,000 cfu/ml of ≥1 bacterial species in urine culture.

Abbreviations:AUROCarea under the receiver operating characteristic curve,CFU/mLcolony-forming units per milliliter,SHAPshapley additive explanation,XGBoostextreme gradient boosting.

Variables with the highest SHAP values predicting ≥10,000 CFU/mL of ≥1 bacterial species growing in urine culture (n= 25).CFU/mLindicates colony-forming units per milliliter,SHAPshapley additive explanation.

We identified 16,703 urine cultures (26.5%) with bacterial growth of ≥100,000 CFU/mL for ≥1 organism. For encounters with diagnoses established before urine culture results were known and had ≥100,000 CFU/mL bacterial growth of ≥1 organism in the urine culture, 7625/62,963 (12.1%) were diagnosed with a UTI or cystitis, and 8271/62,963 (13.1%) were diagnosed with a UTI, cystitis, pyonephrosis, pyelonephritis, ureteritis, or a kidney abscess.

Of all the models tested, XGBoost had the highest AUROC of 93.1%, plus an accuracy of 88.3% (Table4, Supplement 8). The 25 variables with the highest SHAP values for the outcome are listed in Table5; Fig.3. Urinalysis findings, self-identified gender, recent antibiotic use, history of UTI, and diagnosis of a UTI, cystitis, pyonephrosis, pyelonephritis, ureteritis, or a kidney abscess were among the highest predictors of ≥100,000 CFU/mL for ≥1 bacterial species in urine culture. When only the 25 variables with the highest SHAP values were used, the AUROC was 92.5% and the accuracy was 87.8%.

Characteristics of models predicting ≥100,000 cfu/ml of ≥1 bacterial species in urine Culture.

Abbreviations:AUROCarea under the receiver operating characteristic curve,CFU/mLcolony-forming units per milliliter,SHAPshapley additive explanation,XGBoostextreme gradient boosting.

Variables with highest SHAP values predicting ≥100,000 cfu/ml of ≥ 1 bacterial species in urine culture (n= 25).

Abbreviations:CFU/mLcolony-forming units per milliliter,EDemergency department,negnegative,pospositive,SHAPshapley additive explanation,UTIurinary tract infection,WBCwhite blood cell.

Variables with the highest SHAP values predicting ≥100,000 CFU/mL of ≥1 bacterial species growing in urine culture (n= 25).CFU/mLindicates colony-forming units per milliliter,SHAPshapley additive explanation.

We examined a subset of our cohort (n= 14,261) who received a diagnosis of complicated or uncomplicated UTI before urine culture results were known and had either no growth (i.e., likely false-positive UTI diagnosis) or ≥100,000 CFU/mL (potentially a true-positive UTI diagnosis). For this subgroup, the XGBoost model had an AUROC of 91% and an accuracy of 89%.

Our algorithm’s ability to predict a negative urine culture result may ultimately be most clinically useful. Previous studies have shown that ED clinicians do a poor job of accurately predicting which patients have a UTI, as compared with urine culture positivity24–26. Our study confirms these findings; among those diagnosed with a UTI, cystitis, pyonephrosis, pyelonephritis, ureteritis, or a kidney abscess, 24.3% of patients had no growth in urine cultures and 17.4% had ≥10,000 CFU/mL of ≥1 bacterial species in urine cultures.

No ED data, such as the patient’s history and physical examination findings, were included in our data set, and it is unclear whether adding these data would improve our model because urinary symptoms are not considered strong predictors of a positive urine culture33,34. One study reported that dysuria had a sensitivity of 65% (95% CI, 61–69%), specificity of 53% (95% CI, 49–57%), positive likelihood ratio of 1.39 (95% CI, 1.24–1.54), and negative likelihood ratio of 0.65 (95% CI, 0.56–0.75), but these parameters varied by age such that women with dysuria who were younger than 45 years were less likely to have bacteriuria, whereas bacteriuria was more likely for those older than 75 years35.

Many variables identified by the XGBoost algorithm as having the most predictive power were already known to be predictors of a positive urine culture. However, when we incorporated data from the patient’s previous ED encounters (i.e., patient-specific history), some variables became the most predictive of our primary outcomes. Because 76.4% of patients were in the data set once, we anticipate that the accuracy of the XGBoost algorithm will improve with time, as more patients have repeat ED encounters (with a urinalysis and urine cultures) and patient-specific information is incorporated. We also used laboratory test data to create variables, based on ratios and mathematical formulas, that were among the best predictors of our outcomes. For example, we showed that urine cultures from prior ED encounters were strongly associated with predicting the current urine culture, as previously reported36.

Urinalysis results were among the variables most predictive of a positive urine culture, which is consistent with findings of a pediatric study about predicting UTI that reported interval likelihood ratios for leukocyte esterase (7.32 [95% CI, 6.36–8.42]); hemoglobin (2.59 [95% CI, 2.32–2.90]); protein (2.16 [95% CI, 1.90–2.47]); nitrite (25.35 [95% CI, 15.00–42.00]); and bacteria (2.75 [95% CI, 2.51–3.03])9. In another study, a recursive partitioning decision-tree algorithm showed that leukocyte esterase, urine white blood cells, and bacteria were the urinalysis findings that best predicted a positive urine culture (AUROC, 77–79%)37. An XGBoost model, trained with an ED data set and validated with a primary care data set, could predict ≥ 100,000 CFU/mL bacterial growth in urine culture (AUROC, 85–88%) with the following variables: self-identified gender, age, nitrites, leukocytes, clarity, and protein; glucose and blood; dysuria; abdominal pain; and history of UTI33. A logistic regression model was created using age, self-identified gender, bacteria, leukocyte esterase, and nitrate, and the AUROC for bacteriuria was 88%38. A large ED data set evaluated 211 variables with XGBoost to predict UTI (urine culture with > 10,000 CFU/mL) and had an AUROC of 90%; when this model was reduced to using only 10 variables, the AUROC was 88%32. Both models outperformed clinical judgment, and the authors suggested that the algorithm would reclassify 1 in 4 patients with false-positive results to true-negative results and 1 in 11 patients with false-negative results to true-positive results32.

Taken together, we believe that machine learning holds promise in predicting urine culture results and improving the diagnostic accuracy of UTIs30–33,37−39. Future studies could assess whether the model helps identify urine samples that do not require formal culture based on predicted growth40,41and whether the model outperforms the current standards of care that rely more heavily on clinical judgment. Additional studies will be needed to verify that implementing this algorithm does not increase the prescription of antibiotics for asymptomatic bacteriuria5.

Our data set contained urinalysis and urine culture data obtained during the ED encounter, so incorporating additional outpatient and inpatient results into the algorithm potentially could improve its performance. We did not have access to the text documentation of the patient’s ED history and physical examination findings, so we do not know how our algorithm would perform with outpatient practice data. Patients in our data set were generally older, had limited racial diversity, and were geographically restricted, thus limiting the generalizability of these findings (e.g., to populations with a higher percentage of pregnant patients or patients with sexually transmitted infections).

Standard hospital urine cultures do not identify all bacterial species or all bacterial growth. Molecular diagnostic tests identify more bacterial species than traditional culture techniques, but it is unclear whether this additional information would improve clinical care42. Additionally, we are uncertain whether some or all patients with classic UTI symptoms but negative urine culture results and no other known genitourinary pathology would benefit from antibiotic therapy. We recognize that clinically meaningful bacteriuria could be present at < 10,000 CFU/mL and acknowledge the ambiguity in the literature about the definition of a UTI. For these reasons, our algorithm was designed to help diagnose bacteriuria and not UTIs.

XGBoost accurately predicted urine culture microbial growth by using only the data that are readily available during an ED encounter. It is possible that machine learning algorithms could be valuable tools in clinical settings, helping predict culture results and guiding decisions on whether to initiate empiric antibiotic treatment. This approach has the potential to ultimately enhance antibiotic stewardship.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

June Oshiro, PhD, ELS, Mayo Clinic, provided editorial suggestions on an earlier draft of the manuscript.