The structural asymmetry of Janus transition metal dichalcogenides gives rise to physical properties distinct from those of their symmetric counterparts. When Janus transition metal dichalcogenides are vertically stacked, their resulting heterostructure exhibits novel and enhanced electronic properties due to interactions between interfacial atoms, changes in electric dipole moments, and van der Waals interlayer interactions. In this study, we employ first-principles calculations based on density functional theory using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package to investigate the electronic properties of MoSSe-WSSe vertical Janus transition metal dichalcogenides heterostructures. By analyzing the density of states, charge density distribution, formation energy, bandgap, band alignment, and dipole moment, we identify key factors governing the electronic behavior of these heterostructures. Our calculation identifies the most favorable interfacial configuration and stacking type for synthesis. Furthermore, while the bandgap type is primarily dictated by the composition of interfacial atoms irrespective of the stacking type, its magnitude is influenced by both the interfacial atomic composition and stacking configuration. Notably, the total dipole moment is not merely the arithmetic sum of the dipole moments of the individual layers; rather, it is influenced by the interlayer coupling between the two layers. This trend can be explained by variations in the charge density distribution as a function of interlayer spacing. These findings suggest that the electronic properties of Janus heterostructures can be effectively tuned by modifying the interfacial atomic composition, stacking configuration, and interlayer distance, highlighting their potential for next-generation nanoelectronic applications.

Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), such as, were initially explored for their lubricating properties and catalytic applications from the 1960 s to the 1980s. However, interest in TMDs was amplified significantly after the discovery and isolation of graphene in 20041,2, which highlighted the potential of other two-dimensional (2D) materials for a range of novel applications. TMDs have an X-M-X sandwich structure, where M represents a transition metal atom (such as Mo, W, Zr, or Hf) ordered on a triangular lattice, and X is a chalcogen atom (S, Se, or Te) arranged on a triangular lattice of alternating hollow sites. This structure has been widely investigated owing to its peculiar electronic, optical, and mechanical properties. Unlike graphene, which is a zero bandgap material, TMD monolayers have direct bandgaps within the optical range of the energy spectrum and large spin-orbit interactions. These properties provide a possible path to device applications such as light emitting diodes, photodetectors, photovoltaic cells, gas sensors, and low-power, high-performance transistors3–12. Research has also led to heterostructures designed by stacking TMDs either with themselves or with other 2D materials, providing improved control over their electronic properties13–17.

Since the first Janus TMD, MoSSe, was experimentally synthesized in 2017, research on Janus materials has expanded rapidly. With the successful synthesis and characterization of monolayer Janus MoSSe18–21, studies have begun to reveal the unique properties of Janus TMDs, such as their built-in out-of-plane dipole22–24, enhanced catalytic properties for reactions such as hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)25–27, and distinctive optical and electronic behavior28–31. As the name suggests, Janus TMDs (with an X-M-Y sandwich structure) are a special class of TMDs in which the two chalcogen layers (typically X,Y = S, Se, or Te) on either side of the transition metal layer (such as M = Mo or W) differ (XY). Due to the different physicochemical properties on each side, an intrinsic electrostatic dipole is created in the out-of-plane direction22–24and Rashba effects appear, which are absent in symmetric TMDs31–35. Janus TMDs have been extensively studied for applications in practical devices such as photodetectors, transistors, and catalysts. Their built-in out-of-plane dipole, large Rashba effect, and unique optical responses make them ideal for next-generation nanoelectronics, optoelectronics, and energy storage. Similarly to TMDs, research on stacked heterostructures22,28,29,36–40and twisted heterostructures41–43in Janus TMDs is also of great interest.

This paper focuses on Janus TMD heterostructures in which the layers are individually synthesized, exfoliated, and then vertically stacked. The interfacial atoms can be precisely controlled by flipping layers during the stacking process. Furthermore, the distance between two layers and the strength of the binding can be adjusted more flexibly than by applying pressure44, allowing exploration of various types of stacking and expanding the scope of potential research. Because the Janus heterostructure is tuned by interlayer coupling and interfacial atoms, we investigated the effects of interfacial atoms and stacking types on its electronic properties, including the formation energy (), bandgap (), and dipole moment (P) in WSSe-MoSSe heterostructures, which are formed by vertically stacking two distinct mechanically exfoliated Janus TMDs. Among the various Janus TMDs, WSSe and MoSSe were chosen because their lattice mismatch is less than a few percent, according to previous studies40.

In Fig.1, we introduce the structural and electronic behaviors of Janus structures. We present top and side views of the optimized geometries for monolayer MoSSe and monolayer WSSe in Fig.1(a) and (b), respectively. The top view shows a honeycomb structure formed by Mo (W), Se, and S atoms. The primitive cell formed by the basis vectorsandis shown as the blue area in each top view. The corresponding optimized lattice parameters are3.255 Å for monolayer MoSSe and 3.262 Å for monolayer WSSe. We choose WSSe and MoSSe because their lattice mismatch is less than one percent. The side view has a sandwich structure, where the Mo (W) plane is sandwiched between the Se and S layers with unequal distances. The unequal distances between the WSSe atoms (1.71 Åand 1.53 Å) are slightly larger than those of MoSSe (1.70 Åand 1.52 Å) because the W atom is larger than the Mo atom. The band structures, the corresponding density of states of each atom, and the projected density of states of thedorbitals of a transition metal are shown for monolayer MoSSe in Fig.1(c) and monolayer WSSe in Fig.1(d) with SOC. Both band structures have direct bandgaps with=1.457 eV (MoSSe) and 1.377 eV (WSSe), respectively. Becauseis about 2.6 times larger than, the spin splitting at the K point in the WSSe valence band maximum (VBM) is clear. The purple (gray), yellow, and green dots show the projected band and density of states of the Mo (W), S, and Se atoms, respectively. The size of the dots in the band indicates the weight of different contributions. Fig.1(c) and (d) confirm that the transition metals (Mo, W) make a major contribution at the conduction band minimum (CBM) and the VBM at the K-point. The contributions of S and Se are similarly small. According to the projected density of states of the orbitalsdof a transition metal, the CBM at the K-point is mainly composed of out-of-planestates, while the VBM has both in-planeand out-of-planecontributions.

The structural and electronic behavior of Janus structures. Top and side views of the optimized geometry of (a) monolayer MoSSe and (b) monolayer WSSe with the primitive cell in the blue area, where thex-axis is along the armchair edge and they-axis is along the zigzag edge. The purple, yellow, green, and gray balls represent Mo, S, Se, and W atoms, respectively. The band structures, corresponding projected density of states of atoms, and projected density of states ofd-orbitals of (c) monolayer MoSSe and (d) monolayer WSSe. The sizes of the dots in the band represent the contribution weights of atoms corresponding to each color.

In the vertical Janus TMD MoSSe-WSSe heterostructures, the interfacial atomic combinations have three possible patterns, denoted as S–Se, Se–Se, and S–S structures. The Se-Se atomic combination appears to correspond to SWSe/SeMoS (lower/upper) and SMoSe/SeWS. The S-S atomic combination case corresponds to the SeWS/SMoSe and SeMoS/SWSe types. However, because of the mirror symmetry of chalcogen atoms along thexyplane, each pair of types can be treated as a single distinct case. The cases of SMoSe/SWSe and SWSe/SMoSe appear to involve the same S-Se atomic combination. However, they can be considered distinct because they break the mirror symmetry. We analyze the effects of interfacial atoms on their electronic properties by categorizing them into four groups: I: SMoSe/SWSe, II: SWSe/SMoSe, III: Se-Se, and VI: S-S. Hereafter, we use the notation System I, System II, etc. to represent each interfacial atomic combination when necessary to avoid the repetitive use of long expressions.

In Fig.2, we show the side and top views of three stacking types: (a) AA, (b), and (c) AB. Among the four interfacial atomic combinations, system I: SMoSe/SWSe is shown for demonstration purposes. Depending on the interfacial atomic combinations, the visible atoms in the top view change, but the overall lattice structure remains unchanged. The black arrow, labeledd, represents the relaxed distance between layers in thezdirection. The valuedvaries depending on both the stacking types and the interfacial atomic combinations. In the case of AA stacking, the upper- and lower-layer atoms are aligned, while they are misaligned in other cases. Forand AB stacking, we predict that the value ofdmay be reduced as a result of diagonal accumulation in a stable structure. For, the S and Se atoms are not aligned, but considering the lattice size and the atomic size of the transition metal in the upper layer, the top view appears to have a honeycomb structure. W and Se atoms are seen in the top view. However, the actual constituent atoms are rotated by 60compared to AA stacking.

A visualization of the stacking types. Side views and top views of the (a) AA, (b), and (c) AB stackings of system I: SMoSe/SWSe. The black arrow representsd, the relaxed distance between two layers perpendicular to thexyplane along thezdirection. Thedvalue varies depending on the stacking type.

In Fig.3, we show the detailed band structures for 12 cases, combining four interfacial atomic combinations with three stacking types. The first row presents the AA stacking band structures for interfacial atomic combinations (a) I: SMoSe/SWSe, (b) II: SWSe/SMoSe, (c) III: Se-Se, and (d) VI: S-S. The second and third rows correspond to theand AB stacking types, respectively. Compared to the direct bandgaps of both layers, with=1.457 eV (MoSSe) and 1.377 eV (WSSe), only II (the second column) and III (the third column) exhibit a direct bandgap, while I and IV have indirect bandgaps. System II has the smallestamong all stacking types. The blue (red) represents the spin-up (spin-down) state, while purple indicates a mixture of both spin states. When we investigate spin states in TMD materials, there are two major aspects to consider. First, the spin states in the K andvalleys are reversed because of time-reversal symmetry. This is observed in all 12 cases. Second, the SOC constant is larger in the valence band than in the conduction band, resulting in noticeable spin splitting in the valence band. In the conduction band, the splitting is almost negligible, making the spin-up and spin-down states appear nearly degenerate. This trend is also observed in all 12 cases.

Band structures of vertically stacked MoSSe-WSSe heterostructures. The first row presents the band structures of stacking type AA for the (a) I: SMoSe/SWSe, (b) II: SWSe/SMoSe, (c) III: Se-Se, and (d) VI: S-S interfacial atomic combinations. The second and third rows correspond to the stacking typesand AB, respectively.

Systems I:SMoSe/SWSe and II: SWSe/SMoSe have the same interfacial atomic combination, Se/S, but are treated differently because of the breaking of mirror symmetry. As expected, these two cases show significantly different energy band structures. Apart from the type of bandgap, they also exhibit different spin splitting. Compared to system I, system II exhibits more significant spin splitting in the valence band and less spin splitting in the conduction band.

In thestacking case (second row), the spin behavior differs from that of AA and AB stacking. In particular, for the III: Se-Se and IV: S-S interfacial combinations, the spin states in the K andvalleys of the VBM are inverted. Meanwhile, in the (systems I and II, the spin states in the K andvalleys below the VBM are converted. The spin inversion of the K andvalleys can be explained by the fact that the K andvalleys are swapped as the honeycomb shape rotates by 60, as mentioned previously. In Fig.4, we analyze the projected density of states of the transition metals and examine the spin-resolved energy band structure of Mo and W to determine which transition metal contributes to the spin states of the VBM and CBM at each symmetric point in the heterostructure’s energy band. It is evident that the spin state of the transition metal that contributes most near the VBM determines the overall spin states near the VBM of the heterostructure. Here, we focus on the properties at the K point near the VBM, where spin splitting is most pronounced. The CBM region and other symmetric points can be analyzed using the same reasoning applied to the K point. The first column shows the energy band of the heterostructure between the M andpoints, while the second column lists the projected density of states for Mo and W atoms. The third and fourth columns provide the energy bands of the Mo and W atoms, respectively. In system I, the Mo atom determines the spin state of the VBM, while in systems II, III, and IV, it is determined by the W atom. This is indicated by the blue circle in Fig.4(a). The spin conversion below the VBM for system I is determined by the W atom, whereas for systems II, III, and IV, it is determined by the Mo atom. This is indicated by the red circles in Figs.4(b)–(d). These findings match the projected density of states of the transition metals in the second column well. It is not easy to intuitively determine which atom, Mo or W, contributes more to the VBM or CBM before calculating the projected density of states of the transition atoms. The result is influenced by a combination of factors, including the intrinsic dipole between the upper and lower layers due to the atomic interface and the stacking type, the electric field generated by the dipole, and the interactions between the atoms constituting the upper and lower layers within the electric field.

The projected density of states and energy band structure of each transition metal for the (a) I: SMoSe/SWSe, (b) II: SWSe/SMoSe, (c) III: Se-Se, and (d) VI: S-S interfacial combinations forstacking.

In Table1, we summarize the key parameters, that is, the formation energy (), the relaxed layer distance (d), the bandgap (), and the intrinsic electric dipole moment (P). The unit ofPis meÅ(CÅ). As predicted,dis smaller for the AB andstacking types than AA, regardless of the interfacial atoms. The smallestis −0.929 eV, obtained for stacking typeand system III. It is expected that this heterostructure will be relatively easy to synthesize. In this case,dis 3.158 Å,is 1.140 eV, andPis 3.62 meÅ for SMoSe/SeWS and −3.62 meÅ for SWSe/SeMoS. System III includes two cases: SMoSe/SeWS and its structural mirror-symmetry counterpart, SeWS/SMoSe. However, these configurations exhibit opposite dipole directions. The dipole moment of MoSSe (WSSe) monolayer is obtained as 37.4 meÅ (36.4 meÅ) in our calculation. The direction of an electric dipole is conventionally defined as the direction from the negative charge to the positive charge. Because Se (2.55) is less electronegative than S (2.58), leading to an uneven charge distribution, the direction of the electric dipole is from the S atom to the Se atom in monolayer MoSSe and WSSe. As expected, the dipole direction of system III aligns with the relatively larger dipole of monolayer MoSSe, and its magnitude is greater than the difference obtained by subtracting the dipole value of monolayer WSSe. For system III, the dipole directions of the upper layer and the lower layer are opposite to each other. The maximumPis 71.3 meÅ for AA stacking with system I. For system I, both dipoles in the upper and lower layers point upward. The magnitude is smaller than the 73.8 meÅ obtained by adding the dipole values of monolayer WSSe and monolayer MoSSe. This suggests that the total dipole value is not solely determined by a simple algebraic summation or subtraction of the dipole values of the two layers. Instead, it is strongly influenced by interlayer interactions (the van der Waals force) and interactions between interfacing atoms (charge redistribution), which depend on the type of stacking. Systems I and II are recommended for heterostructures that require a large dipole value.

The formation energy, interlayer distanced, bandgap, and dipole momentPof the WSSe-MoSSe heterostructure for different interfacial atomic combinations and stacking types. The symboldis the relaxed layer distance perpendicular to the x–y plane along thezdirection, as in Fig.2.

The stacking type that produces the maximumfor any interfacial combination varies case-by-case. Among the 12 cases, thestacking in system III has the maximum, and the bandgap is direct. Here, quantitatively, we investigate the effect of the stacking type onwithin a given category of interfacial atoms. The largest change indue to the stacking type occurs in system IV, with a 31change, while the smallest change is seen in system III, with only a 3change. When the interface atoms are the same, and the dipoles of the lower and upper layers face outward, the bandgap is more affected by the stacking type than when dipoles are either aligned or facing inward. The bandgap type remains consistent as long as the interfacial combination is the same, even when the stacking type is changed. However, this conclusion is limited to the case wheredis a relaxeddvalue. The bandgap type can vary even for the same interfacial atom combination, depending on the distance between the upper and lower layers. This will be discussed in detail in the next section.

In our investigation, the layers are individually synthesized, exfoliated, and then vertically stacked. In addition to controlling the interfacial atoms by flipping layers during stacking, the interlayer distance and binding strength can be easily tuned. In this section, we study the effect of the distance between layers onandP. Among the three stacking types, we choose, which has the smallestand the biggestin system III: Se-Se. This type of stacking showed spin state inversion between K andvalleys in its energy band structures.

In Fig.5, we show the interlayer distanced-dependence ofandPand the charge distribution difference. Figure5(a) illustrates the dependence ofon the distance between layersd. Here,dno longer represents the relaxed layer distance but instead is mechanically adjusted to shift the upper layer downward or upward. In systems I: SMoSe/SWSe and IV: S-S,increases asdincreases, whereas in systems II: SWSe/SMoSe and III: Se-Se,reaches its maximum near the relaxed distance between layers (marked by a red boundary line) and decreases asdincreases. From the calculation of the energy band structure, we confirm that systems I: SMoSe/SWSe and IV: S-S have an indirect bandgap (solid line) in alld-value ranges shown in the graph, while for systems II: SWSe/SMoSe and III: Se-Se, the type of bandgap changes from indirect (solid line) to direct (dashed line) whendbecomes close to the relaxed distance. As thedvalue changes, the interatomic interactions are modified, leading to energy changes at the symmetric point.

Thed-dependence of (a) bandgapand (b) dipole momentP. A schematic of the geometry of two layers in a unit cell and the charge density difference for systems (c) II: SWSe/SMoSe and (d) IV: S-S at relaxeddandd=3.5 Å.

Figure5(b) illustrates the dependence ofPon the distance between layers,d. The dipole is formed along thezdirection. The upper panel shows the results for systems I and II, where the dipoles of the lower and upper layers align in the same direction, causing the total dipole to increase asdincreases. This behavior is expected because the dipole moment is proportional to the separation between the positive and negative charge distributions, resulting in a net increase in the total dipole. However, whendis large enough to have no interlayer interaction, the total dipole saturates to 73.8 meÅ, which is the sum of the dipoles from the upper and lower layers. The lower panel presents systems III: Se-Se and IV: S-S, where the dipoles from the lower and upper layers are aligned in the opposite direction, causing the total dipole to decrease asdincreases. The dipole of III converges to 0.1 meÅ. In system IV, the dipole values of the upper and lower layers were expected to algebraically add up to a negative value. However, in the results, a positive value is observed for smallddue to interlayer interactions. When the distance between layers increases, a negative value is obtained and is expected to converge tomeÅ.

To explain the dipole value saturation in II and the dipole sign change in IV, we show the charge density distribution differences for two differentdin Fig.5(c) and5(d).. The unit ofis me/(=1.6C/), where Bohr is the Bohr raius. The blue (negative) region represents the induced hole depletion, while the red (positive) region shows the induced electron accumulation. Figure5(c) illustrates the case of system II. The schematic geometry of two layers in the unit cell is shown, with the difference in the charge density distribution for the relaxed distance andd=3.5 Å. The upper layer is mechanically shifted upward, anddis larger than the relaxedd. The charge redistribution is growing smaller. Figure5(d) shows the case for a relaxed distanced=3.02 Å, where the dipole has a positive value ofP. This is not the expected sign of the dipole sum of the upper and lower layers. However, whend=3.50 Å and the charge redistribution is very small, indicating a weaker interlayer interaction, the dipole value becomes the negative of the resulting dipole sum of the upper and lower layers.

We have investigated the effects of interfacial atoms and different stacking configurations for vertically stacked WSSe-MoSSe heterostructures. Unlike previous studies that primarily focused on optical properties or general trends across various Janus or conventional TMD heterostructures, our work provides a detailed systematic understanding of how interfacial atomic configurations and stacking types govern key electronic properties, including band gap, spin-splitting behavior, interfacial charge redistribution, and dipole variation. Using a first-principles calculation, the bandgaps of heterostructures with four different interfacial atomic combinations (I: SMoSe/SWSe, II: SWSe/SMoSe, III: Se-Se, and VI: S-S), three stacking types (AA,, AB), and different interlayer distancesdwere investigated. Our results indicate that the Se-Se interfacial combination with thestacking type is relatively easy to synthesize due to its minimal. For thestacking type, due to the 60rotation of the top layer (see the lattice), the spin states in the K andvalleys in the VBM are inverted in III: Se-Se and VI: S-S interfacial atoms. And the spin states in the K andvalleys lower than VBM are inverted in I: SMoSe/SWSe, II: SWSe/SMoSe interfacial atomic combinations. The bandgap and band alignment are tunable depending on interlayer distance, interfacial atoms, and stacking types. However, the type of bandgap remains consistent as long as the interfacial combination is the same with the relaxed interlayer distance, even when the stacking type is changed.

The built-in out-of-plane dipole moments in each layer can align or oppose each other. However, the total dipole moment is not simply the sum or difference of these individual values. Instead, the totalPstrongly depends on the interlayer distance due to the strength of the interlayer coupling. The largestPappears in system I with SMoSe/SWSe and the AA stacking type. The enhanced dipole moment of the Janus TMD heterostructure can further enrich the application of next-generation nanoelectronics.

In these simulations, all first-principle calculations are performed by density functional theory (DFT) using the commercially available Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP)45. The generalized gradient approximation (GGA) parameterized by the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) functional is used to describe the exchange-correlation function46. The projector augmented wave (PAW) potentials47generated based on the PBE type of exchange-correlation functional, are used to treat valence electrons with a cutoff energy of 550 eV. For the monolayer Janus structure and the vertical Janus heterostructure with itszdirection perpendicular to thexyplane, a vacuum region of more than 25 Å is used to avoid the effects generated by the periodic boundary conditions. The Brillouin zone is sampled with a Monkhorst mesh of 23231 k-points48. The ionic relaxation stops when the residual force on each atom is less than 0.01 eV/Å, and the electronic optimization stops when the total energy difference is smaller than 10eV. A Gaussian smearing method with a width of 0.05 eV is employed. The formation energy () is calculated as, where,, andrepresent the total energies of the MoSSe-WSSe heterostructures and monolayer MoSSe and monolayer WSSe, respectively.

Although the PBE functional has well-known limitations, such as underestimating bandgaps and not including non-local interactions, it is widely used because it allows efficient calculations and still captures the overall trends in electronic properties. Considering the van der Waals (vdW) interactions in Janus heterostructures, we include the Grimme DFT-D2 correction with the GGA-PBE functional for atomic relaxation49. To investigate the Rashba effect and determine the spin distribution, spin-orbit coupling (SOC) calculations are performed. The SOC parameters=168 meV,=449 meV,meV, and=28 meV are used.is much larger thanfor both materials. The differential charge density along the (110) plane is calculated as. This calculation is performed using the VASPKIT package50. The geometrical structures and the differential charge density are visualized using VESTA51.

This work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (Grant No. RS-2023-NR076439) and by the Ministry of Education (Grant No. RS-2021-NR060140).