Mosquitoes are important vectors of several diseases that significantly impact public health globally. This multi-district mosquito survey revealed the diversity and distribution of mosquito species across varied agroecological areas in Kerala, India. Immature and adult mosquito collections were carried out using standard, appropriate sampling methods and the mosquitoes were identified using morphological characters. A total of 108 species belonging to 28 genera were identified from 12,535 specimens.Stegomyia albopictawas the predominant species (54.82%), followed byCulex quinquefasciatus(6.92%). Fourteen known disease vectors were taxonomically identified. Artificial (anthropogenic) habitats such as discarded plastic containers, tyres and latex collection cups contributed to the vector diversity compared to natural ones. Species richness and mosquito species diversity varied across districts, with Wayanad showing the highest diversity. Rarefaction analysis and species-area relationships revealed complex patterns of mosquito biodiversity in agroecological areas. Several rare species were recorded, including a newly described species,Heizmannia rajagopalani. This comprehensive surveillance provides valuable insights into the ecology of mosquitoes in various diverse ecological settings of Kerala, with significant implications for biodiversity conservation and efforts to control vectors.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-16357-y.

Mosquitoes belonging to the phylum Arthropoda and family Culicidae comprise 3726 species categorised into two subfamilies and over 217 genera1. Despite their profound ecological importance, a few mosquitoes act as primary vectors for several vector-borne diseases (VBDs) that significantly affect global human, livestock, and wildlife health2,3. Various mosquito species transmit VBDs, such as malaria, dengue, chikungunya, Zika, Japanese encephalitis, and lymphatic filariasis, which significantly impact global public health and economic challenges4,5. Various factors, including alterations in climate and land use, increased globalisation, and the extensive movement of people and goods, influence the worldwide expansion of emerging or re-emerging diseases6. World Health Organization (WHO) reported that VBDs constitute 17% of all infectious diseases, with mosquitoes serving as the main vectors7,8. The yearly global fatality burden from mosquito-borne diseases (MBDs) surpasses 700,000, establishing mosquitoes as the most lethal animal on the planet9,10. Ranking fifth globally in mosquito biodiversity, India boasts substantial diversity, with over 400 species accounting for approximately 10% of the world’s total mosquito taxa, underscoring India’s significance in global mosquito research11. The eco-geological and climatic conditions of a country largely determine the distribution of these species. Despite the vast number of mosquito species, fewer than 10% are recognised as disease vectors, with 31 species specifically identified as known pathogen carriers3,11,12.

Notably, India is the region most strikingly affected by MBDs, where the incidence of arboviral diseases, particularly dengue, is increasing and is prevalent in almost all states of India. Outbreaks of dengue cases have been reported predominantly during the monsoon and post-monsoon seasons in both urban and rural areas13. Malaria also contributes to a substantial number of cases, but as of now, the cases have declined and are restricted to a few states in the country14. The National Center for Vector Borne Diseases Control (NCVBDC) has reported significant reductions in malaria cases, alongside an increasing frequency of annual dengue and chikungunya cases. In 2024, over 2,00,000 cases of malaria and 1,86,567 dengue cases were reported, along with 12,587 cases of chikungunya15. Additionally, a total of 151 Zika virus disease (ZVD) cases were reported from three states (Gujarat, Karnataka, and Maharashtra) in India16. In India, the interplay among climate, population density, and travel patterns further complicates the distribution of MBDs6. Kerala state has experienced the outbreaks of many MBDs particularly arbovirus diseases and is recognized as a low-endemic area for malaria17. Significantly, during the 2007 chikungunya virus (CHIKV) outbreak in India, Kerala was the most severely affected state, experiencing significant acute and chronic morbidity. The CHIKV isolated in Kerala in the latter part of 2007 was found to have undergone a critical “A226V” mutation, which is associated with an enhanced transmission potential throughSt. albopicta (Ae. albopictus), which is abundantly present in the state18. Kerala’s high dengue burden, corresponding to population size, underscores the significant public health challenge faced by the state. The 2017 outbreak, with 21,993 reported cases and 165 deaths, highlighted the severity of the dengue problem within the state but also emphasized its substantial contribution to India’s overall dengue cases, accounting for 10.6% of the country’s total reported cases19. A few cases of Zika have also been reported recently, with vector control programmes undertaking a laborious task to contain the spread owing to ecological and climatic factors conducive to vector breeding of these arboviral diseases20–22.

This study elaborates on the results of the extensive mosquito survey undertaken, indicating a rich and diverse mosquito fauna, with 108 species identified across 28 genera (Supplementary file no. 1) from a total mosquito sample of 12,535, highlighting significant biodiversity within the districts. The sunburst chart illustrates the hierarchical distribution of species within each genus, with vectors and non-vectors (Fig.1). A total of 14 vectors27of different MBDs were collected during this study. From the genera collected,Culexexhibited the highest species richness (25.0%), contributing a substantial proportion to the total diversity, followed by other genera such asAnopheles(12.9%),Stegomyia(10.2%) andUranotaenia(9.3%).

Distribution of mosquito and vector species status: the chart illustrates the hierarchical structure of mosquito species, categorizing them by genus and species and also highlighting with distinct colours for vectors and non-vectors.

The majority of specimens (67.92%) were obtained by immature collection from a total of 777 habitats, and the remaining 4,021 (32.1%) were adult mosquitoes collected from 422 sites using various adult collection techniques. Of the total mosquitoes collected (adults and emerged mosquitoes) from all five districts, 49.6% were male and 50.4% were female (Supplementary file no. 3). From these collections, 47 (43.51%) species were collected exclusively through immature sampling techniques, suggesting that these species may be more prevalent and easy to collect in their immature stages rather than in the adult stages, when they would rest in dark and damp, cryptic hideouts, as only 25 (23.15%) species could be collected using adult collection methods. Notably, 36 (33.33%) species were captured using both methods, indicating their presence across multiple life stages and potentially suggesting a more stable or extensive population within the study areas. This dual sampling approach allowed a more comprehensive representation of the mosquito community, evidenced by the higher number of species identified through immature sampling (83 species) compared to adult collection methods (71 species).

Of the 12,535 mosquitoes collected by both immature (emerged to adult specimens) and adult sampling techniques,Stegomyia albopictawas the predominant species (54.82%), followed byCulex quinquefasciatus(6.92%),Hulecoeteomyia chrysolineata(6.33%), andArmigeres subalbatus(5.03%). A relatively low number of primary disease vectors was observed among the collected mosquito species, exceptSt. albopicta.St. aegypti, a primary vector which transmits dengue, chikungunya, Zika, and yellow fever, comprised only 1.43% of the total collection, mostly in towns/cities.Cx. tritaeniorhynchus, the vector of Japanese encephalitis, represented even a smaller proportion (0.85%).Anopheles stephensi, andAn. culicifacies, the primary malaria vectors, were found in extremely low numbers, accounting for 0.06% and 0.01% of the collections, respectively.Mansonia uniformis, the lymphatic filariasis vector in the study area, was rarely encountered (0.03%).

District-wise abundance also revealed thatSt. albopictawas the predominant species in all surveyed districts, with a very high proportion in the Thiruvananthapuram district, accounting for 77.29% of the collected mosquitoes. However, the second dominant species varied in the districts.Cx. quinquefasciatuswas found to be the second most prevalent species in the Ernakulam, Idukki, and Thiruvananthapuram districts, whereasFredwardsius vittatuswas found in Pathanamthitta andHl. chrysolineatain Wayanad (Fig.2). The prevalence of these vectors underscores the importance of deploying selective and tailored vector control strategies, as the same vector control method may not be effective in tackling them.

Heatmap showing the distribution of prevalent mosquito species across five districts of Kerala. The colour gradient indicates the species count, with darker shades representing high abundance. The x-axis lists various mosquito species, while the y-axis represents the districts.

The distribution of mosquito species across the five surveyed districts in Kerala, India, revealed a complex spatiotemporal distribution pattern with varying levels of biodiversity (Fig.3). Wayanad district was observed to be the hotspot of mosquito species diversity, hosting 14 unique species, which can be attributed to its diverse ecological niches, including forests, plantation areas with more vegetation coverage, comparatively with less human interference, and high altitude. This rich biodiversity is followed by Ernakulam and Pathanamthitta districts, with 11 and 9 unique species, respectively, suggesting that these districts also possess favourable geo-environmental conditions for supporting a wide range of mosquito species. However, Thiruvananthapuram district showed moderate diversity with five mosquito species, whereas Idukki had the lowest diversity, comprising only one species. The presence of 19 species across all five districts indicated eco-environmental determinants that favour the distribution pattern with more or less similar mosquito breeding habitats. A strong species overlap was noticed between Ernakulam and Pathanamthitta (5 species) and between Wayanad and Thiruvananthapuram districts (6 species), suggesting similar habitat profiles and niche characteristics between these district pairs.

Venn diagram depicting mosquito species distribution and overlap across the five districts of Kerala, India. The numbers in each section represent the count of mosquito species unique to or shared among the respective districts. The central overlapping region indicates mosquito species found in all five districts, while non-overlapping sections show species unique to each district.

The analysis of mosquito diversity across different districts revealed distinct patterns in species richness (Fig.4). From adult collection, Thiruvananthapuram exhibited the highest adult mosquito species richness, with an observed richness of 38 and a Chao1 estimate of 104.618 (CI: 56.23–281.448), suggesting a high likelihood of undetected species. Similarly, Pathanamthitta had a Chao1 richness of 47.963 (CI: 29.71–124.569) with an observed richness of 24. In contrast, Idukki recorded the lowest adult mosquito diversity, with an observed richness of 15 and a Chao1 estimate of 22.978 (CI: 15.985–79.644), suggesting a limited range of species.

Diversity indices of adult and immature mosquitoes in surveyed districts of Kerala. Boxplots represent variation in Chao and observed richness, along with Shannon and Simpson indices for adult and immature. Coloured points indicate the district-wise distribution of data, with notable differences in richness and diversity indices reflecting spatial ecological variation.

From immature collection, Pathanamthitta exhibited the highest species richness, with an observed richness of 49 and a Chao1 estimate of 64.989 (CI: 52.017–133.735). Wayanad and Thiruvananthapuram also displayed high richness estimates, with observed values of 48 and 42, and Chao1 estimates of 53.059 (CI: 49.153–70.201) and 46.164 (CI: 42.673–67.756), respectively. Ernakulam followed with an observed richness of 38 and a Chao1 estimate of 42.498 (CI: 38.495–78.896). Idukki consistently exhibited the lowest richness for both adult and immature mosquitoes, with an observed richness of 31 and a Chao1 estimate of 31.666 (CI: 31.057–38.802).

The analysis of adult mosquito diversity across districts did not show any significant variation in alpha diversity (F = 0.092,p= 0.983). Similarly, the diversity of immature mosquitoes also exhibited no significant differences across districts (F = 0.036,p= 0.997), indicating a relatively uniform distribution of mosquito diversity among the studied regions.

The rarefaction curve analysis of adults and immatures of mosquitoes across the five districts in Kerala provided valuable insights into species diversity and sampling efficiency (Fig.5). Wayanad district emerged as the most biodiverse district for both adult and immature mosquito populations, with the steepest curves and highest species counts (55 for adults and 50 for immatures). This suggests a rich ecological landscape that supports a wide variety of mosquito species. Thiruvananthapuram district followed closely behind Wayanad in terms of diversity, particularly for the adult population. The steep initial rise in the curves for these two districts indicates the potential for the possible identification of more new species with further sampling, especially in unexplored or less explored habitats. In contrast, Ernakulam and Idukki districts observed lower species richness, with their curves plateauing earlier. This pattern is consistent across both adult and immature populations, suggesting that these districts have been adequately sampled but consist of fewer mosquito species. Pathanamthitta district occupied an intermediate position, showing moderate species diversity.

Rarefaction and extrapolation curves showing the species diversity of adult (top) and immature (bottom) mosquitoes across five districts of Kerala, India. The figure depicts both observed (rarefaction) and predicted (extrapolation) species diversity.

The mosquito richness map revealed a complex and varied distribution of mosquito species across the districts (Fig.6). The Wayanad district has emerged as a hotspot for mosquito species diversity, having the highest species richness, with 64 different species identified. This was closely followed by the Thiruvananthapuram and Pathanamthitta districts, which exhibited similarly high levels of mosquito diversity, with 60 and 59 species, respectively. In contrast, the Idukki district represents a different pattern in species diversity. Despite adequate sampling efforts, the district observed significantly lower species richness, with only 34 mosquito species. However, Ernakulam district falls in between these two extremes, with 54 recorded mosquito species, indicating a moderate level of species diversity.

Map depicting mosquito species richness in five study districts of Kerala: The colour gradient represents species richness, with blue colour indicating higher and amber colour indicating lower species richness.

The species-area relationship analysis revealed that mosquito species richness was negatively associated with the logarithm of area (S = 80.46–3.92 log AREA, where 80.46 is the fitted intercept and − 3.92 is the fitted slope), which represented the best-fitting model for this relationship (ΔAICc = 0.00, Fig.7). This model demonstrated a strong explanatory power (pseudo-R² = 0.83) and was statistically significant (p= 0.004), indicating a robust inverse relationship between mosquito richness and area. These findings emphasise the importance of spatial scaling in determining mosquito species richness across sampled geographical areas.

Species-area relationship between log area and mosquito richness found and mosquito species richness across different ecological districts of Kerala.

The statistical parameters employed in this study reveal collective information about the mosquito species composition and biodiversity across the surveyed districts. The species richness estimator (Chao1) provides an estimate of the total number of species present, including the mosquito species that may not have been directly observed during sampling. This estimator is particularly useful in biodiversity studies where complete sampling of all species is challenging. Rarefaction analysis further supports meaningful comparisons of species richness between different sample sizes, ensuring that differences in sampling constraints do not skew the interpretation of biodiversity patterns. The diversity indices, Shannon and Simpson, further enhance our understanding of the mosquito species composition. The Shannon index calculates both species richness and evenness, providing insight into the relative abundance of different species, while, Simpson index, on the other hand, emphasizes the dominance of species, giving more weight to common species in the sample. Together, these indices give a detailed picture of biodiversity, revealing not just the number of species present but also their relative abundances and distribution patterns. This ecological information is crucial for identifying mosquito biodiversity hotspots. This will help public health officials to implement targeted vector control strategies, optimizing resource allocation and improving the effectiveness of interventions to mitigate mosquito-borne disease risks.

The execution of both immature and adult sampling techniques proved crucial for capturing a wholesome range of mosquito diversity, with immature sampling yielding a higher number of species. The dominance ofSt. albopictain all the surveyed districts, along with the varying second dominant species across the districts, highlights the complex and dynamic nature of mosquito populations and their diversity in these ecologically sensitive and hotspot areas. A recent study reported the high seroprevalence of dengue (30.9%) among 9-12-year-old children in Kerala, surpassing even that of Singapore, which underscores the critical importance of addressing this public health concern22. In the past, Kerala state has encountered multiple outbreaks of the chikungunya virus34. The increasing magnitude of arboviral diseases and the detection of chikungunya virus in wild-caughtSt. albopictamosquitoes34during the major chikungunya outbreak in the affected districts of Kerala in 2007 indicated thatSt. albopictacould be the primary vector of chikungunya in this region, as they were found abundantly. Besides, studies have shown thatSt. albopictasignificantly contributes to the rapid transmission of new chikungunya virus strains, which have developed adaptive mutations in their viral genome35. The history of chikungunya outbreaks, combined with widespread dengue virus exposure and the predominance ofSt. albopictain the state, is a matter of concern, as it suggests a significant risk of severe arboviral cases and potential future outbreaks. Although this study found a relatively low prevalence of primary disease vectors exceptSt. albopicta, it is crucial to recognize that even small numbers of these vectors can pose a threat. This highlights the critical link between mosquito biodiversity and public health, emphasizing that even vector species occurring in low densities can maintain pathogen transmission cycles under favourable ecological conditions. Factors such as seasonal rainfall, temperature fluctuations, land-use changes, and microclimatic conditions can cause sudden increases in these populations, leading to unexpected outbreaks of VBDs. Therefore, continuous monitoring of all vector species, including the less abundant species, is essential to accurately predict outbreak risks and implement timely vector control strategies.

Mosquito species likeSt. krombeiniand thealbopictussubgroup species (St. subalbopicta,St. novalbopicta,St. pseudalbopicta), closely related toSt. albopicta, were reported for the first time in these areas during this study. Species within thealbopictussubgroup need to be monitored for their potential role in disease transmission in nature, as at least 12 species from the Scutellaris group of mosquitoes are responsible for numerous arboviral transmissions36. Future research should focus on exploring the factors driving these diversity patterns and investigating the potential roles of the new species in disease transmission.

The multi-district entomological survey has revealed Wayanad’s prominence in mosquito diversity and highlights the impact of its varied and distinct ecological niches, with extensive forested areas with minimal human interference and absence of major landscape changes, and also the presence of more natural habitats and coffee plantations that support a variety of mosquito breeding. The notable species richness in Ernakulam, Thiruvananthapuram and Pathanamthitta districts further emphasises the conducive environmental conditions that support mosquito breeding. Minimal mosquito diversity in the Idukki district suggests the influence of specific localized factors, such as the predominance of tea plantations, which generally do not support mosquito breeding. Unlike other vegetation types, such as coffee plantations (Wayanad), Pineapple plantations (Pathanamthitta and Ernakulam), and Rubber plantations (Thiruvananthapuram and Pathanamthitta), tea plants have small stems that prevent water accumulation, thereby limiting suitable breeding habitats for mosquitoes and also, potential sampling constraints are added to the cause. The overall species overlap among the districts indicated shared climatic and environmental determinants of all districts. Richness analysis revealed significant variations in species richness and diversity indices among districts, with Wayanad showing high diversity for both adult and immature stages of mosquitoes and Thiruvananthapuram being moderate. The close alignment between the observed richness and Chao estimates in these areas indicated that the sampling methods were effective in capturing most of the species present. However, the slightly lower observed richness compared to the Chao estimates suggests the possibility of some elusive species remaining undetected. The rarefaction curves and species-area relationships further support these findings.

Although the research study provides useful information on the diversity and spatiotemporal distribution of mosquito species in five different agro-ecological districts of Kerala, it has a few limitations. The study faced challenges, particularly in the Idukki district, due to the extensive geographical area and its challenging terrain, which hindered accessibility to certain locations through road networks, thus limiting sampling opportunities and increasing the time required for sampling. Additionally, the research was unable to conduct seasonal collections or perform Xeno-monitoring on the gathered mosquito specimens. Trapping methods could not be used to collect adult mosquitoes in the forest fringe areas, which would have collected a wide range of anophelines in the study areas.

This research investigation provides valuable insights into the diversity and geographical spread of mosquito species, including the presence of 14 known disease vectors, across five districts in Kerala, India. The presence of multiple vector species within more or less the same ecosystem, such as primary vectors of arboviruses, malaria, and filariasis, is a cause of concern as it can lead to several disease outbreaks, considering the risk of a favourable ecosystem and climate change pattern. The co-existence of primary and secondary malaria vectors further complicates the transmission profile and pattern. The current study, for the first time, led to the description of thealbopictussubgroup species (St. subalbopicta,St. novalbopicta,St. pseudalbopicta), closely related toSt. albopicta, in these districts of Kerala. The high seroprevalence of dengue among children in Kerala, also with the widespread presence ofSt. albopictaalong withAlbopictusandScutellarissubgroup species, morphologically very similar toSt. albopicta, raises significant public health concerns. Generally, very little or no effort has been made to identify these species, as accurate morphological identification is crucial for understanding their ecological roles and vectorial capacity.St. albopictademonstrated remarkable adaptability to a wide range of habitat characteristics, breeding in natural and artificial breeding sites, posing significant challenges for ongoing vector control efforts. The presence of rare species from the generaHeizmanniaandVerrallina, exhibiting anthropophilic behaviour, represents an important area for future research. Notably, the study identified a new species,Hz. rajagopalini, and also provided the first complete description ofTo. aureoventer. These findings will contribute significantly to our understanding of mosquito ecology in Kerala and provide a foundation for future mosquito surveillance for faunal diversity studies and vector control efforts in the state.

Based on the diverse ecotypes and vast geographical area, five districts in Kerala were chosen for the survey: Wayanad, Ernakulam, Pathanamthitta, Idukki, and Thiruvananthapuram. Wayanad, the northernmost district, is part of the Western Ghats, a UNESCO World Heritage site and a biodiversity hotspot. Spanning 2130 sq km and altitude ranging from 700 to 2100 m, it is 40% forested, with agriculture and tourism driving its economy, plantation areas comprising coffee, tea, coconut and arecanut palms, bamboo, and cardamom cultivation. Over the past five years, the district has recorded an average temperature range of 18–29 °C, with an annual mean precipitation of 2322 mm43. Ernakulam is centrally located and a coastal district that borders the Thrissur, Kottayam, Alappuzha, and Idukki districts, and the Arabian Sea. The district spans 2407 sq. km with an altitude range from 0 to 584 m above sea level. This district comprises highlands, midlands, and lowlands, with its eastern edge in the Western Ghats. The district is known for plantations of nutmeg, pineapple, and cocoa, with rubber plantations and receives 3450 mm annual rainfall44. Idukki, with an area of 4612 sq. km, is known for tourism and extends into the Western Ghats, with 97% forest and mountainous terrain, predominantly with cultivation of tea, and the altitude of this district ranges from 15 to 2700 m above sea level. Idukki experiences an average annual temperature of 24.4 °C and receives a yearly mean rainfall of 2226 mm45,46. Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala’s southernmost district, and the state capital with 2912 sq. km, features Western Ghats forests, coastal areas, and urban zones and the highest altitude is 1869 m above mean sea level47. Its western part stretches along the Arabian Sea and includes substantial rural regions. The annual mean temperature ranges from 30 °C to 35 °C and receives a mean annual rainfall of 2000 mm48. Pathanamthitta, which has an area of 2642 sq. km and elevation ranges from 30 m to 300 m above sea level. Some areas of this district are a part of the Western Ghats and share a climate with Thiruvananthapuram district. The district has various crops such as paddy, tapioca, cardamom, and pepper, alongside extensive rubber and pineapple plantations49.

The study, conducted from February 2016 to September 2017, involved the convenient sampling of immature and adult mosquitoes from various ecotypes by undertaking an extensive survey in the study areas. All water-holding wet habitats in the study areas were thoroughly checked for immature mosquitoes. If the habitat was found breeding with mosquito immatures (larvae and pupae), they were then collected using appropriate and standard sampling methods (dipping, pipetting, and siphoning). Adults were collected outdoors during dawn using sweep nets in bushes /vegetation areas and resting collection by an oral/mouth aspirator. Data on habitat names, date of surveillance and locations with district names were recorded, and the surveyed sites were georeferenced using a GPS device (GPS-Garmin V. 2.40) and plotted using QGIS V. 3.40 (Fig.8).

Geospatial mapping of study sites with georeferenced data points indicating mosquito sampling sites in each district.

All statistical analyses and visualizations were conducted in R (4.4.2)55using appropriate packages to assess mosquito species diversity and distribution. Sunburst analysis was done usingplotlyand related packages. A Venn diagram, created using theVenn diagrampackage, illustrated species distribution and overlap among districts, highlighting shared and unique species. Rarefaction analysis, species richness, and diversity indices, including Shannon and Simpson indices, were calculated using theiNEXTpackage to evaluate the ecological variation across districts. Heat maps were generated usingggplot2and related packages to visualise the spatial distribution and abundance of mosquito species in all the districts. The species-area relationship was analysed usingVeganto explore the correlation between species richness and the sampled geographic area. The surveyed sites were plotted using QGIS version 3.34.3.

Clearance to conduct the scientific study on mosquito surveillance in the study sites was approved by the Scientific Advisory Committee of ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research, New Delhi (NIMR/IDVC/2011/128) and ICMR-Vector Control Research Centre, Puducherry (EM-1504/2016).

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

The authors acknowledge the assistance rendered by Mr. E. Elumalai, Former Field Attendant, ICMR-National Institute of Malaria Research, Chennai field unit and Mr. Juvin Jose, Mr. Krishnaraj N, Mrs. Kanimozhi K and Mrs. Sukanya P from the Division of Vector Biology and Control, ICMR-Vector Control Research Centre, Puducherry for assisting the team in immature and adult collections during the field. We would like to gratefully acknowledge the suggestions and encouragement by late Prof. M.K.K. Pillai and late Padmashree Dr P.K. Rajagopalan as advisory members, which led to the initiation of the project proposal. The support and technical guidance of late Dr. A.R. Rajavel, former Scientist-E of ICMR-VCRC, during the initiation of the project as Co-Principal Investigator is also gratefully acknowledged. The authors wish to acknowledge Mr. Sellamuthu R, Mr. Sivakumar N, and Mr. Sathishkumar G of ICMR- NIMR field unit, for their assistance in data entry and cleaning process. We also thank the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), New Delhi, for financial support in conducting this study.