Previous studies have indicated that C-C class chemokine ligand 22 (CCL22) is involved in the pathogenesis of tuberculous pleural effusion and malignant pleural effusion. However, the diagnostic role of pleural fluid CCL22 levels in patients with undiagnosed pleural effusions remains to be elucidated.

We prospectively recruited patients with undiagnosed pleural effusion who visited two centres (Hohhot and Changshu) in China. Pleural biopsy, microbiological culture and effusion cytology were used to verify the cause of pleural effusion. Pleural fluid CCL22 levels were measured using an ELISA. The diagnostic accuracy of CCL22 for identifying heart failure (HF) was evaluated using a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, and the net benefit of CCL22 was evaluated using decision curve analysis (DCA). Net benefit was defined as the benefit associated with true positives minus the harms associated with false positives at various threshold probabilities.

We enrolled 153 and 58 patients in the Hohhot and Changshu cohorts, respectively. The cohort included 28 patients with HF and 183 patients with non-HF. Patients with HF had significantly lower pleural fluid CCL22 levels than non-HF patients. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) of CCL22 was 0.85 (95% CI: 0.77 to 0.93) in the Hohhot cohort and 0.87 (95% CI: 0.75 to 0.98) in the Changshu cohort. The AUC in the combined cohort was 0.85 (95% CI: 0.79 to 0.92), with a sensitivity of 0.82 (95% CI: 0.68 to 0.93) and a specificity of 0.73 (95% CI: 0.67 to 0.79) at the threshold of 150 ng/mL. DCA revealed a potential net benefit of pleural CCL22 determination in patients with undiagnosed pleural effusions.

Pleural fluid CCL22 may be a potential diagnostic marker for HF-related pleural effusion. Owing to the small sample size of this study, further studies with larger sample sizes are needed to validate our findings.

C-C class chemokine ligand 22 (CCL22) is implicated in the pathogenesis of both tuberculous pleural effusion and malignant pleural effusion.

This study compared the CCL22 levels in pleural fluid from different types of pleural effusion and found that patients with heart failure (HF) had the lowest CCL22 levels. Furthermore, the diagnostic accuracy of pleural fluid CCL22 for HF was comparable to that of N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide.

Pleural fluid CCL22 may serve as a potential diagnostic marker for HF-related pleural effusion.

Pleural effusion is a common clinical sign that can be caused by more than 60 diseases.1Heart failure (HF), malignancy, tuberculosis and pneumonia are the four major causes of pleural effusion.2 3Prompt and accurate identification of the cause of pleural effusion is a prerequisite for treatment and is crucial for improving prognosis. Identifying patients with HF among those with pleural effusion is particularly challenging because there are no specific signs or symptoms of HF. In clinical practice, HF is diagnosed using clinical reference standards, including pleural fluid and serum biochemistry, echocardiography and response to diuretics.2Among laboratory tools, N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) in pleural fluid or serum is highly accurate for HF diagnosis and is endorsed by guidelines.4,7However, many factors can affect the diagnostic accuracy of NT-proBNP, including age, renal function and body mass index.8 9Therefore, the development of novel diagnostic markers for HF is of great importance.

C-C class chemokine 22 (CCL22), also termed macrophage-derived chemokine, is released by active macrophages that function in T cell chemotaxis.10CCL22 is involved in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease. For example, patients with ischaemic cardiovascular disease have higher serum CCL22 levels than healthy individuals.11Additionally, pleural fluid CCL22 is associated with the pathogenesis of tuberculous pleural effusion (TPE)12and malignant pleural effusion (MPE).13 14These findings suggest that pleural fluid CCL22 may have diagnostic and prognostic potential in patients with pleural effusion. This study aimed to explore the utility of pleural fluid CCL22 as a diagnostic indicator in patients with undiagnosed pleural effusion.

We report this work following the Standards for Reporting of Diagnostic Accuracy Studies guidelines.15The participants in this study were recruited from SIMPLE, a prospective, preregistered, double-blind diagnostic test accuracy study.16SIMPLE aimed to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of pleural fluid and serum biomarkers in patients with undiagnosed pleural effusions. The inclusion and exclusion criteria, diagnostic criteria and framework of the SIMPLE study have been described in our previous studies.17 18In short, we recruited patients with undiagnosed pleural effusions who visited the Affiliated Hospital of Inner Mongolia Medical University between September 2018 and July 2021 (Hohhot cohort) and those who visited the Affiliated Changshu Hospital of Nantong University between June 2020 and July 2021 (Changshu cohort). The exclusion criteria for the Hohhot and Changshu cohorts were as follows: (1) unclear cause of pleural effusion at the time of discharge, (2) pregnancy, (3) age <18 years, (4) pleural effusion that developed during hospitalisation and (5) trauma-induced pleural effusion.

Patients and members of the public were not involved in the design, conduct, reporting or dissemination of this study.

HF-induced pleural effusion was diagnosed using clinical reference standards, including transudative effusions, echocardiographic features (eg, cardiomegaly and decreased left ventricular ejection fraction), chest X-ray features (bilateral pleural effusions), biochemical tests (eg, serum natriuretic peptide levels) and response to diuretics. MPE was defined as positive pleural biopsy or effusion cytology. In some patients with negative cytology who were unwilling or unable to undergo pleural biopsy, MPE was defined by the presence of late-stage primary cancer, consistent clinical features and exclusion of benign conditions. The diagnosis of TPE was based on typical pleural biopsy findings or isolation ofMycobacterium tuberculosisfrom pleural samples. In patients with a high clinical probability of TPE but negative microbiological and/or histological findings, the diagnosis of TPE was established based on the response to anti-tuberculosis treatment and exclusion of other causes of pleural effusions. Parapneumonic pleural effusions (PPE) were defined as those occurring in conjunction with pneumonia, bronchiectasis or lung abscess and typically required the administration of antibiotics and/or chest tube drainage. Two senior clinicians, Z-DH and LY, made the final diagnoses, and any disagreements were resolved by consensus.

After admission, we collected pleural fluid specimens in anticoagulant-free tubes and recorded the participants’ characteristics. The pleural fluid specimens were centrifuged, and the supernatant was aliquoted into EP tubes within 4 hours of collection. Pleural fluid specimens were stored in a refrigerator at −80°C to −70°C. CCL22 concentrations were measured using an ELISA kit (R&D Systems) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

This was a double-blind study. The laboratory technicians who measured CCL22 concentrations were blinded to the participants’ clinical information. Likewise, the investigators who made the final diagnosis were blinded to the CCL22 concentrations.

Continuous variables are presented as medians and IQRs, and normality was determined using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. We used the t-test or one-way analysis of variance to compare data with a normal distribution. We used the Mann-Whitney or Kruskal-Wallis test to compare skewed distributed data. Categorical data were compared using the χ2or Fisher’s exact probability test. The diagnostic accuracy of CCL22 for HF was evaluated using a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, and the net benefit was evaluated using a decision curve analysis (DCA).19Given that a data-driven selection of the optimal threshold may overestimate the diagnostic accuracy of an index test,20we selected a prespecified threshold of 150 ng/mL before performing ROC curve analysis. We used the Spearman method to evaluate the correlation between serum NT-proBNP and pleural CCL22 levels. A logistic regression model was used to combine CCL22 and serum NT-proBNP, and the probability was calculated for each patient. We also evaluated the diagnostic accuracy of the model by analysing the calculated probability using the ROC curve. The net benefit can be calculated using the following formula:Netbenefit=TPn-FPn×(pt1-pt), where TP and FP represent the numbers of true positives and false positives, respectively. Ptrepresents the probability of a target disease at a given threshold. The probability is calculated using a logistic regression model. The net benefit can be calculated using different probabilities to form a decision curve. R (V.4.3.2) was used for data analysis and graphing. Statistical significance was set at p<0.05.

A total of 232 participants were recruited, including 170 from the Hohhot cohort and 62 from the Changshu cohort. 21 participants were excluded, and 211 were included in the data analyses, comprising 28 patients with and 183 patients without HF.Table 1presents the participants’ basic characteristics.

The sample sizes for serum NT-proBNP levels in the HF and non- HF groups were 21 and 95, respectively.

ADA, adenosine deaminase; HF, heart failure; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; MPE, malignant pleural effusion; NT-proBNP, N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide; Others, other types of pleural effusion; PF, pleural fluid; PPE, parapneumonic pleural effusion; TPE, tuberculous pleural effusion; WCC, white cell count.

Figure 1shows the pleural fluid CCL22 levels in patients with different aetiologies of effusion. Patients with HF had decreased pleural fluid CCL22 levels in the Hohhot (figure 1A), Changshu (figure 1B) and combined cohorts (figure 1C) (all p<0.05).

Figure 2Ashows the ROC curves for CCL22 in the Hohhot and Changshu cohorts. The area under the ROC curve (AUC) of CCL22 in the Hohhot cohort was 0.85 (95% CI: 0.77 to 0.93), and in the Changshu cohort, it was 0.87 (95% CI: 0.75 to 0.98). In addition, the AUC of CCL22 in the combined cohorts was 0.85 (95% CI: 0.79 to 0.92).

Table 2shows the diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of the CCL22. At a threshold of 150 ng/mL, CCL22 had a sensitivity of 0.83 (95% CI: 0.65 to 0.96) and specificity of 0.68 (95% CI: 0.60 to 0.76) in the Hohhot cohort. In the Changshu cohort, the sensitivity and specificity were 0.80 (95% CI: 0.40 to 1.00) and 0.85 (95% CI: 0.75 to 0.94), respectively. In the combined cohort, CCL22 had a sensitivity of 0.82 (95% CI: 0.68 to 0.93) and specificity of 0.73 (95% CI: 0.67 to 0.79).

AUC, area under the curve; CCL22, C-C class chemokine ligand 22.

Figure 2Bshows the ROC curves for pleural fluid CCL22, serum NT-proBNP and their combination. The AUCs (95% CIs) of CCL22, NT-proBNP and their combination were 0.85 (0.79 to 0.92), 0.83 (0.74 to 0.91) and 0.84 (0.75 to 0.93), respectively. The AUCs did not differ significantly (p>0.05). In addition, CCL22 was negatively correlated with serum NT-proBNP (n=116), with a coefficient of −0.26 (p=0.005) (figure 2C).

Figure 3shows the DCA findings for pleural fluid CCL22 in the combined cohort. CCL22 had a net benefit between probabilities of 0.1 and 0.4.

This study investigated the diagnostic accuracy of pleural fluid CCL22 for HF in two cohorts. We found that CCL22 had moderate diagnostic accuracy for HF. In addition, DCA revealed a potential net benefit of CCL22 in patients with undiagnosed pleural effusion. These results suggest that pleural fluid CCL22 may be an auxiliary diagnostic tool for HF-related pleural effusion. To our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the diagnostic role of pleural fluid CCL22 in patients with undiagnosed pleural effusion.

Although Light’s criteria are commonly used to differentiate transudates from exudates, and HF is a primary cause of transudate, previous studies have shown that 20%–30% of HF-related transudates may be misclassified as exudates.21 22Moreover, approximately 15% of transudates are caused by non-cardiac conditions such as liver cirrhosis or renal disease. These limitations indicate that Light’s criteria alone may be insufficient for the accurate identification of HF-related pleural effusion. Therefore, pleural biomarkers such as CCL22 may serve as useful adjuncts in improving diagnostic precision, particularly in ambiguous cases.

Meta-analyses have demonstrated that pleural fluid or serum BNP and NT-proBNP had high diagnostic accuracy for identifying HF-induced pleural effusion.4 5 23Given the high correlation between serum NT-proBNP and pleural fluid NT-proBNP,24their diagnostic utility tends to overlap significantly. Considering that serum collection is more convenient than pleural fluid collection, serum NT-proBNP is recommended by the British Thoracic Society guidelines.6 7Our previous study with the SIMPLE cohort revealed that serum NT-proBNP has high diagnostic performance, with an AUC of 0.83,8which is close to the AUC of pleural fluid CCL22 (0.85) in the present study. Therefore, pleural fluid CCL22 levels have a diagnostic performance comparable to that of serum NT-proBNP levels.

The AUC, sensitivity and specificity are the most widely used metrics for estimating the diagnostic accuracy of an index test.19However, these metrics do not indicate whether the index test is worth using because they do not incorporate information on the consequences caused by the index test.19If an index test is introduced into the diagnostic flow chart of a target disease, a negative result will have no impact on subsequent diagnostic procedures. However, a positive result may alter the diagnostic pathway for the target disease. For example, a positive CCL22 (<150 ng/mL) result in this study may indicate that a pleural biopsy is unnecessary. Positive results can be categorised as false or true positives. The former is harmful to patients (misdiagnosis), whereas the latter is beneficial. Net benefit is a metric that combines true and false positives, adjusted by threshold probability estimated via logistic regression. Our study revealed that the decision curve of CCL22 was above the reference lines, indicating that although false-positive CCL22 results are harmful for some patients with non-HF, its benefit generally outweighs its harm and thus has a net benefit.

The mechanism underlying the decreased pleural CCL22 levels in HF-induced pleural effusion remains unclear. Here, we propose possible explanations for these findings. Previous studies have shown that CCL22 is constitutively expressed in macrophages and dendritic cells,25,27and its expression can be further enhanced by lipopolysaccharide stimulation or inflammatory factors (TNF-α and IL-1).28Pleural effusion induced by malignancy, pneumonia or tuberculosis is associated with inflammatory responses in the pleural cavity. The local inflammatory response increases pleural vascular permeability and promotes the migration of immune cells (eg, monocytes and lymphocytes) from the peripheral blood into the pleural cavity.29,31Meanwhile, the high inflammatory response in pleural fluid contributes to the release of CCL22 from macrophages and monocytes that migrate there. Previous studies have found that CCL22 levels in the pleural fluid of patients with PPE and TPE are significantly higher than those in serum CCL22, which also supports this hypothesis.12In contrast, the development of HF-induced pleural effusion is not related to the local pleural inflammatory response.23 32Therefore, it is reasonable that pleural fluid CCL22 levels are lower in patients with HF-induced pleural effusion than in those with MPE, PPE and TPE.

In conclusion, our study indicates that CCL22 is an auxiliary diagnostic marker of HF in patients with undiagnosed pleural effusion. Moreover, DCA indicated that CCL22 has potential net benefits. Considering the small sample size of this study, future studies with larger sample sizes are required to validate our findings.