There are structural and functional modifications that occur to the neonatal heart immediately after birth. While a number of studies recently have assessed cardiac function in the newborn, there is a dearth of data on diastolic function in the neonatal period during transition and into infancy. The objective of this study is to assess diastolic function in a large cohort of infants to provide normative reference values and to assess the influence of predefined maternal and infant characteristics.

This is a single-centre observational study of babies born at 35 weeks of gestation and above, involving echocardiography in the first 2 DOL and longitudinal follow-up of these infants up to 18 months of age. The echocardiographic measurements to assess diastolic function used in this study include conventional echo measures, novel echo measures using tissue Doppler imaging and deformation measures using 2D speckle tracking echocardiography.

The protocol was approved by the Clinical Research Ethics Committee of the Cork Teaching Hospitals. The findings from this study will be disseminated in peer-reviewed journals and during scientific conferences.

One of the strengths ofDiastolicFunction during the transitional period and infancy usingSerialEchocardiography is that it will have a large sample size in each of the cohorts and has been powered to assess if there is an influence of different infant and maternal characteristics on diastolic function in this population.

The longitudinal aspect of the study means that any changes found can be followed to see when or if they normalise.

A limitation of this study includes the risk that participants may be lost to follow-up.

There are structural and functional modifications that occur to the neonatal heart immediately after birth. Due to the sudden drop in pulmonary vascular resistance and increase in systemic vascular resistance, there is a progressive decrease in right ventricular (RV) wall thickness and growth in left ventricular (LV) mass after birth.3Endomysial collagen type I decreases with increasing gestation; however, the term neonate still has a relatively high total collagen content when compared with the paediatric and adult population.7This has a significant impact on ventricular compliance, affects all three filling phases of diastole (early filling, diastasis and atrial filling) and is reflected as decreased myocardial velocity measured on TDI during the transitional period.7 8A study assessing diastolic function in a small cohort of preterm infants found that the peak flow velocity of early diastole (Evmax) at the mitral valve at 6 hours of life was similar to that of fetal values of the same gestational age and progressively increased over the next 48 hours.7This intrinsic diastolic dysfunction (DD) during transition results in a limited ability to increase cardiac output (CO), which occurs predominantly by increasing heart rate. This may paradoxically decrease CO by reducing the end-diastolic ventricular filling time and preload.9Therefore, understanding the mechanism of cardiac (dys)function is necessary to optimise management.

The objective of this study is to assess diastolic function parameters in a consecutive sample of late-preterm and term neonates and to assess the influence of predefined antenatal, intrapartum, maternal and neonatal factors on cardiac function, both in the first few days of life (the transitional period) and longitudinally, over the first year of life in these infants.

Infants enrolled in the study will be assigned to one of the following groups based on their presentation, antenatal history, clinical exam and/or diagnosis within the first 18 hours of life.

Controls (infants who do not fit into any of the below groups).

Maternal gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) or pre-existing diabetes mellitus (DM).

Moderate and severe NE receiving therapeutic hypothermia.

The six groups are mutually exclusive, meaning that infants can only be assigned to one group. The control group includes only infants who do not meet the criteria for any of the other five groups (ie, no TTN, no maternal GDM/DM, no SGA and no NE). Infants in any of the condition-specific groups (groups 2 to 6 above) must not have any of the conditions that define the other groups.

To assess whether diastolic functional parameters on DOL 1 and 2 are lower in each of study groups two to six when compared individually to the control group. No comparisons will be made between groups two and 6.

Mode of delivery: vaginal delivery (VD), VD with instrumentation, emergency/elective caesarean section.

To assess whether any differences in diastolic functional parameters found during DOL 1 and 2 persist into infancy (6–9 months of life, 12–18 months of life).

To assess if there are differences in clinical parameters (growth, hospital admissions) between the study groups in infancy (6–9 months of life, 12–18 months of life).

This is a single-centre longitudinal prospective observational cohort study, which will take place in the neonatal unit and post-natal wards of Cork University Maternity Hospital (CUMH), a tertiary neonatal centre in Ireland. Recruitment for this study will take place over an approximate 18 month period from February 2024 until July 2025. This timeframe ensures that a large number of participants will be captured, and it also allows time for the longitudinal follow-up of all the recruited participants. Follow-up will continue for approximately 12 to 18 months beyond the date that new recruitment has ceased. The longitudinal follow-up scans will take place in the outpatients’ department of CUMH and in the Irish Centre for Maternal and Child Health Research (INFANT) centre in Cork University Hospital. We expect to enrol approximately 250 neonates during the 18 month recruitment period based on annual deliveries at CUMH. The study timeline and timing of the echos are outlined infigure 1.

All neonates meeting the inclusion criteria and who do not meet any of the exclusion criteria (table 1) will be recruited consecutively during the study period. Informed consent will be obtained from the parent prior to inclusion.

ASD, atrial septal defect; PDA, patent ductus arteriosus; PFO, patent foramen ovale; VSD, ventricular septal defect.

When a potentially eligible neonate is identified, his/her parent(s) or legal guardian(s) will be approached by study personnel, either antenatally or within the first 18 hours after birth if possible. A parent information leaflet will be given, and the study will be explained to them in full. Ample opportunity will be given to discuss any queries/questions regarding the study. Once the parent(s)/guardian(s) indicate their willingness for their infant to participate, written informed consent will be obtained, and the neonate will be enrolled in the study.

There will be no direct compensation provided to the participants or their parents for participating in this study. On returning for the 6–9 months and 12–18 months echoes, parents are provided with a parking voucher for free parking in the hospital car park. There will be no cost implications to the health service executive or to the participants.

Participation is voluntary, and parents may withdraw their infant from the study at any time and for any reason. All withdrawals will be documented, and the reasons recorded where possible. Parents will be informed that their decision not to continue participation at any stage will not restrict their own/baby’s access to healthcare services normally available to them.

Echocardiographic scans will be completed using the Vivid E95 ultrasound machine using a 6-MHz or 12-MHz transducers (GE Vingmed Ultrasound AS, Horten, Norway). Post-procedure analysis will be completed using EchoPACs software.

Birth details: date and time of birth, gestation, mode of delivery, septic risk factors, BW and centile.

Maternal details: antenatal complications, antenatal scans, maternal co-morbidities including medications.

Neonatal details: feeding method, clinical exam details and diagnosis, respiratory support details and results of investigations.

Details of any interim hospital admissions, serious illnesses or medical issues.

Both hardcopy and electronic data will be stored for this study, which will be coordinated by INFANT and UCC at CUMH. Pseudonymised data will be stored for data analysis in password-protected excel spreadsheets on a secure web-based database on UCC/INFANT servers. Computers used to collate the data will have limited access measures by encryption codes, username and passwords.

Mitral and tricuspid E/A ratios and deceleration times.

TDI: peak velocity of myocardial wall movement in diastole (e’ and a’) for the RV and LV free walls and the interventricular septum (IVS).

Measures to assess the myocardial twist of the LV.

Other echo factors to be recorded are measurements of the sizes of the ventricles and vessels and relevant z-scores, measures to assess systolic function, pulmonary hypertension assessment, patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) evaluation and degree of shunting through either PDA or patent foramen ovale, as all of these can influence diastolic functional assessment.

The primary outcome for this study is the peak velocity of myocardial wall movement in diastole e’ for the LV free walls (LV TDI e’).

The secondary measures are all other echocardiographic measurements to assess diastolic function (described below). They will also include other infant details such as growth measures and details of any hospital admissions or illnesses obtained at the follow-up visits (6–9 months and 12–18 months).

TDI can be used on apical four-chamber view to assess the systolic and diastolic myocardial velocities across the IVS, RV free wall and LV free wall, moving from the base to the apex.8 27Assessment of myocardial muscle velocity using pulsed-wave TDI (pwTDI) has allowed for a non-invasive measure of diastolic function, by using the principles of Doppler to measure the peak velocity of myocardial wall movement in systole (s’) and diastole (e’ and a’).8 27 28The e’ wave is a measure of the ventricular relaxation and has been shown to be a good early marker of DD in adults and found to correlate well with invasive measurements.25 29 30It has been shown to more accurately detect LV DD than conventional pulsed-wave Doppler in term infants with perinatal asphyxia.29It also allows calculation of the isovolumic relaxation time (IVRT)—a component in the myocardial relaxation process—and the isovolumic contraction time (IVCT).7Pulsed-wave TDI will be used to obtain peak myocardial wall velocities and obtain s’, e’ and a’ measurements for the RV and LV free walls and the IVS.

Deformation imaging has come into practice in neonatology in the last decade and refers to a change in shape of the myocardium in multiple planes from its baseline shape at end-diastole to its deformed shape at end-systole.8The two measures calculated are myocardial strain (ε) and strain rate (SR). The strain is expressed as a percentage change from the baseline. SR is defined as the speed at which deformation occurs and is thought to be a more accurate representation of intrinsic myocardial contractility.32SR can be used as a measure of diastolic function by measuring the rate at which the deformed myocardium returns to the baseline.27Two-dimensional (2D) STE will be used to calculate strain and SR in theDiastolicFunction during the transitional period and infancy usingSerialEchocardiography (DiFuSE) study.

At each timepoint separately, 95% reference intervals will be constructed for the primary outcome and the secondary outcomes assessing diastolic function using the normal distribution method. Unadjusted and adjusted linear regression models will be used to compare the primary outcome (and continuous secondary outcomes) between the study groups. Binary secondary outcomes will be compared between the study groups using unadjusted and adjusted logistic regression models. Regression models will also be used to investigate the effect of maternal and infant characteristics on outcomes in the control group. Linear and logistic mixed models will be used to investigate if there are changes in the primary and secondary outcomes over time and if those changes depend on the study group or maternal/infant characteristics. All tests will be two-sided and a p value ≤0.05 will be considered to be statistically significant. Statistical analysis will be performed using the latest versions of IBM SPSS Statistics and Stata.

This study will be one of the first to assess diastolic function using conventional and novel echocardiographic methods on such a large scale in this population. This knowledge could help establish what is considered to be normal in different settings in the neonatal population and thus what is abnormal. The longitudinal aspect of this study will help to add to the whole clinical picture of these infants by establishing whether these changes in the neonatal period persist over time.

Recruitment for the study has been ongoing since 12 February 2024; however, no data has been analysed. Prospective recruitment is anticipated to continue for another 18 months (until end of June 2025). The end of the study will be after completion of Echo No four for the last participant; approximately 12–18 months after their recruitment.

The study is conducted following the version Fortaleza, Brazil, October 2013 of the Declaration of Helsinki 1964. The Protocol, Patient Information Leaflet and the Informed Consent Form have been approved by the Clinical Research Ethics Committee of the Cork Teaching Hospitals (CREC) before commencement (approval letter ECM 4 (o) 24/10/2023 & ECM 5 (2) 07/11/2023 & ECM 3 (ff) 05/12/2023). On 8 November 2023, protocol version one was approved by the CREC (approval letter ECM 4 (o) 24/10/2023 & ECM 5 (2) 07/11/2023), and on 29 November 2023, an amendment to the Patient Information Leaflet was approved by the CREC (ECM 4 (o) 24/10/2023 & ECM 5 (2) 07/11/2023 & ECM 3 (ff) 05/12/2023).

The scans will be reviewed within a reasonable time period by a consultant paediatric cardiologist, in compliance with the recommendations of the ASE, EAE and AEPC. The trial is sponsored by University College Cork (College Road, Cork T12 K8AF, Ireland, +353 (0)21 490 3000). The sponsor is not involved in study design; collection, management, analysis and interpretation of data; writing of the report; and the decision to submit for publication. The findings from this study will be disseminated in peer-reviewed journals and during scientific conferences.