Interplay between topological electrons and magnetic ordering enables efficient electrical control of magnetism. We extend the Kane-Mele model to include the exchange coupling to a collinear antiferromagnetic (AFM) order, which allows the system to exhibit the quantum anomalous Hall and quantum spin Hall effects in the absence of a net magnetization. These topological phases support a staggered Edelstein effect through which an applied electric field can generate opposite non-equilibrium spins on the two AFM sublattices, realizing the Néel-type spin-orbit torque (NSOT). Contrary to known NSOTs in AFM metals driven by conduction currents, our NSOT arises from pure adiabatic currents devoid of Joule heating, while being a bulk effect not carried by the edge currents. By virtue of the NSOT, the electric field of a microwave can drive the AFM resonance with a remarkably high efficiency, outpacing the magnetic field-induced AFM resonance by orders of magnitude in terms of power absorption.

Spin-orbit torques are a well-established method for the control of magnetization, the key ingredients for conventional spin-orbit torques being a conductive material with a strong spin-orbit interaction. Here, Tang, Zhang and Cheng show that in antiferromagnetic insulators, the topological phase can support a unique form of Neel spin-orbit torque driven by adiabatic currents, which suppresses joule heating.

Harnessing topological materials to manipulate magnetism and magnetic dynamics has opened unique opportunities for energy-efficient spintronics. Recently, a new twist in this direction is inspired by the study of intrinsic magnetic topological insulators (iMTIs), in which topological electrons are highly entangled with the magnetic states1–11. Thanks to the synergy of electronic and magnetic degrees of freedom, an iMTI could be operated simultaneously as an electric actuator and a magnetic oscillator without the aid of foreign systems12, forming a mono-structural setup to achieve spintronic functionalities that would otherwise rely on engineered heterostructures.

Meanwhile, because of the insulating nature of iMTIs, the spin-orbit torque (SOT) and the associated internal spin-transfer processes are not driven by Ohm’s currents (extrinsic); instead, they arise from the voltage-induced adiabatic currents carried by topological electrons in the valence band (intrinsic)13–16. Because adiabatic currents do not incur Joule heating, they can convert 100% of the input electric power into magnetic dynamics17, leveraging an unprecedented boost of energy efficiency compared to established solutions. While we have recently demonstrated such lossless intrinsic SOT and its ensuing physical effects in a widely recognized iMTI–MnBi2Te4of a few layer thick12, the obtained results only revealed the tip of an enormous unexplored iceberg.

In particular, we identify five outstanding questions beyond what could be answered by the iMTI family of materials. First, what non-trivial topological phases are compatible with a given magnetic order, especially the compensated antiferromagnetic (AFM) state? Second, can these topological phases afford the lossless SOT? Third, will the SOT prevail down to the monolayer limit? Fourth, will a strong Néel-type SOT (NSOT), i.e., contrasting fields acting on different sublattices, be supported by symmetry? Finally, what are the dynamical implications of the NSOT in a chosen material? The known case of MnBi2Te4only provides us with limited information. For instance, the material becomes a compensated AFM (ferromagnetic) system only if there are an even (odd) number of layers, which corresponds to an axion (quantum anomalous Hall) insulator. In either phase, however, the SOT vanishes identically in the monolayer limit while the NSOT is forbidden by symmetry12,18within the linear response regime.

To answer these open questions, we investigate a previously overlooked scenario of insulating magnets which could potentially host topological electrons on their own and support intrinsic NSOT. Transition-metal trichalcogenides (TMTs), in their AFM phase, can be effectively described by an extended Kane-Mele model19,20including the exchange coupling of electrons and the AFM background. Depending on the spin-orbit coupling (SOC) and a staggered sublattice potential, such a system can exhibit the quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) effect21,22and the quantum spin Hall (QSH) effect23,24within the same magnetic phase characterized by a fully compensated collinear AFM order. Moreover, we find that both the QAH and QSH phases support a staggered Edelstein effect, by which an applied electric field can generate opposite non-equilibrium spins acting on different sublattice magnetic moments, realizing the desired intrinsic NSOT without incurring Joule heating as conduction electrons are eliminated.

In stark contrast to the previously reported extrinsic NSOT driven by dissipative charge currents25–30, our intrinsic NSOT is dissipationless and does not incur Ohm’s conduction because only the adiabatic motions of valence electrons are involved. From the perspective of topological materials, our findings distinguish from previous studies by claiming the NSOT, rather than the widely-found SOT, in the topological nontrivial phases. To demonstrate the physical significance, we study the NSOT-induced AFM resonance and benchmark the result against an ordinary AFM resonance. Remarkably, the NSOT renders the electric field of a microwave the dominant driving force, which could overwhelm the direct coupling to the magnetic field, thus enhancing the AFM resonance amplitude by more than one order of magnitude. The high efficiency of this counter-intuitive electric field-driven AFM resonance is quantified by the dynamical susceptibility. Operational-wise, our findings unravel a unique mechanism to leverage the sub-terahertz AFM dynamics devoid of Joule heating by exploiting magnetic topological materials.

whereci†(ci)is the electron creation (annihilation) operator on sitei, with the spin index omitted for succinctness. In Eq. (1), the first term represents the nearest neighbor hopping. The second term is the intrinsic SOC which affects the next-nearest neighbor hopping, whereνij=2/3(d^1×d^2)z=±1withd^1andd^2being the two unit vectors along the 120∘bonds connectingiandj. The third term is the Rashba SOC arising from the broken mirror symmetry (withznormal), whered^ijis the unit vector connecting the nearest-neighboring sitesiandj, andsis the vector of Pauli matrices for the spin degree of freedom. The fourth term is the staggered potential whereξi= ±1 flips sign on the A and B sublattices as shown in the Fig.1, breaking theC2symmetry about thexaxis. The last term represents the exchange coupling between the electrons and the local magnetic moments, wheremi=±z^is the unit magnetic vector on sitei.

The wavy potential well represents the staggered potential on A and B sublattices. The intrinsic SOC and Rashba SOC introduce extra phases in the nearest neighbor (white dashed line) and next nearest neighbor hopping (black dashed line), respectively. The coordinates axis are shown on the left.

If the exchange couplingλexvanishes, the Hamiltonian preserves the time-reversal symmetry. Then for a sufficiently largeλsoc, the system can exhibit the QSH phase characterized by theZ2number19. Now, with a finiteλex, the time-reversal symmetry is broken so theZ2number becomes ill-defined. Moreover, the QSH phase has a vanishing Chern number (C= 0), so it could only be distinguished from the normal insulator (NI) phase by the spin Chern numberCs= (C↑−C↓)/231,32.

We first draw the phase diagrams of the Chern numberCin Fig.2a, b by navigatingλsoc,λvandλR. To ensure a proper quantization of the topological invariant, we impose an upper limit of 0.1tfor the values ofλsoc,λR,λexandλvso as to maintain a global band gap. We find three distinct phases on these two diagrams. The QSH state only appears at largeλsoc. Atλv= 0, the threshold of QSH is aboutλsoc= ±0.03t. Two observations are in order. First, different from the QSH state, the QAH state requires a nonzero staggered potentialλv. This is because the staggered potential breaks thePTsymmetry (combined inversion and time reversal), enabling a non-zero Berry curvature33–35. Second, while the Chern number flips sign when eitherλvorλsocflips sign, it remains the same regardless ofλR, because  +λRand  −λRare related by a mirror reflectionz→ −z, which does not change the sign ofC. In Fig.S1, we also provide the phase diagrams for other combinations of parameters (e.g.,λsocandλex). We conclude that the sign of the total Chern number is determined by sign[C] = sign[λsoc]sign[λv]sign[λex].

Chern number (a,b) and spin Chern number (c,d) with respect to intrinsic SOC strengthλsocfor different staggered potential and Rashba SOC strengthλR. Ina,c,λRis fixed to be 0.05t. Inb,d,λvis fixed to be 0.05t. Band structure of a finite system, with 40 unit cells in theydirection, foreλsoc= 0.02tandfλsoc= 0.05t. In bothe,f,λR= 0.025tandλv= 0.05t. The edge states in the bulk band gap are colored blue or red depending on the spin polarization.a0is the lattice constant. In all cases,λex= 0.1t.

We next plot the phase diagrams of the spin Chern numberCsin Fig.2c, d, corresponding to the results in Fig.2a, b, respectively. As expected,Csin the QSH state is quantized to be  ±1. In the QAH state, however,Csis quantized to be  ±0.5, which indicates that the chiral edge electrons only carry one spin species (see Fig.S2for further details). It is important to note that the spin Chern number near the phase boundaries is not exactly quantized or half quantized, because the spin is not a strictly conserved quantity in the presence of a finite Rashba SOC. Concerning the sign flip ofCs, we observe a quite different pattern as compared toC. For example,Csis even inλvwhile being odd inλsoc. This can be understood from definition of spin currents: if the spin polarization and the flowing direction both flip sign, a spin current will remain unchanged.

To further confirm the system topology revealed by the phase diagrams, we plot in Fig.2e, f the band structures of our Hamiltonian truncated in theydirection withN= 40 unit cells (i.e., a nanoribbon periodic only in thexdirection). Forλsoc= 0.02t, the system is in the QAH state, where only one pair of chiral edge states with the same spin polarization but opposite group velocities emerges in the band gap. Forλsoc= 0.05t, the system transitions into the QSH phase, where two pairs of chiral edge states appear in the bulk gap with opposite spin polarizations.

wherevis the velocity operator andΓis the energy broadening due to disorder. The average spin accumulationδSfollows a similar formula with the pseudo-spin Pauli matrix (acting on the sublattices)τ3replaced by the identity matrix. Unlike the Fermi-level contribution, hereδNdoes not diverge even in the clean limitΓ→ 0 where Eq. (2) reduces to a formula similar to the spin Chern number [see Eq. (8)]. In the following, we will take representative values for the exchange interactionλex= 0.1t= 100 meV and for the band broadeningΓ= 20 meV.

where 〈 ⋯ 〉 =Vuc/(2π)2∑n∫d2kf[εn(k)]( ⋯ ) denotes the average over the first Brillouin zone withVucthe unit cell volume (area) and thefthe Fermi distribution. ForΓ≠ 0, the Berry curvature is dressed by the broadeningΓ, becoming the integrand of Eq. (2). Forλv= 0, the Berry curvature assumes a staggered patternΩμνkmA=−ΩμνkmB, henceδSA= −δSB. A non-zeroλvwould render∣δSxA∣≠∣δSxB∣owing to the introduction of staggered potentials on the sublattices (see Fig.S3), which leads to a finiteδSon top of theδN, hence inducing a nonzero SOT besides the NSOT.

a,bPhase diagrams ofδSper unit cell (in units ofℏ/2) for each sublattice induced byEx= 1V/μm forλv= 0. The dashed lines mark where the global band gap is reduced to 1 meV with an increasing ∣λR∣. Illustrative comparison between:cordinary SOT induced by a uniform spin accumulationδSA=δSB, anddNSOT induced by a contrasting spin accumulationδSA= −δSB.

In the phase diagram, the dashed lines mark where the global gap reduces to 1 meV. For a large ∣λR∣ beyond these boundaries, the global gap will be smaller than 1 meV, making it difficult to restrictεFin the gap and, more seriously, less practical to guarantee the adiabatic condition (to be clear in the next section). Therefore, we should focus on the central region of Fig.3a, b enclosed by the dashed lines to safely ignore the Fermi-surface contribution toδSA(B).

The NSOT is known for being able to switch the Néel ordern= (mA−mB)/2 in non-centrosymmetric AFM metals25–30. But previous experimental studies are limited to current-induced NSOT. By contrast, our predicted NSOT is in principle free of dissipation because it is mediated by the adiabatic motions of valence electrons, incurring no Ohm’s current as no conduction electrons are involved in the generation of spin torques. The adiabatic origin of the NSOT, similar to the SOT previously claimed in iMTIs, is also reflected by its Berry-curvature origin discussed above. We emphasize that the Berry curvature Ωkmrelevant to the NSOT is physically distinct from the momentum-space Berry curvature Ωkkthat determines the band topology12,16.

To better clarify this subtle point, we plot in Fig.4a the sublattice spin accumulationsδSAandδSBas functions ofλsocwith vanishingλv= 0, i.e., a vertical cut atλR= 0.02tin Fig.3. As a comparison, we also plot the results with a non-vanishing staggered potentialλv= 0.04tin Fig.4b. The NI, QAH and QSH regions are shaded in light green, purple and orange, respectively. Three key observations are in order. First, althoughδSA,Bturn out to be slightly larger in the QAH and QSH states, they remain finite even in the topologically trivial phase, suggesting that the NSOT cannot be fully characterized by the band topology. Second,δSA,Bexhibit sudden jumps at the QAH-NI and QSH-NI transitions. These jumps would formally diverge in the clean limitΓ→ 0 due to gap closing; but in our plots, a finiteΓ= 20 meV is added to suppress the divergence. Third, the hallmark NSOT signature,sgn(δSA)=−sgn(δSB), is most robust in the QSH phase. While a finiteλvenables a QAH phase interpolating the QSH and NI phases in Fig.4b, it also imbalances the potentials on the two sublattices, renderingδSAandδSBdifferent in magnitude. Specifically, we haveδSxA/δSxB≈−1.28atλsoc= 0.05t, whereas in Fig.4a withλv= 0 we have exactlyδSxA/δSxB=−1for allλsoc. The dependencies ofδSA,BonλRandλexare shown in Fig.S3.

δSper unit cell (in units ofℏ/2) for each sublattice as a function ofλsocwithaλv= 0 andbλv= 0.04t. For each topological nontrivial regions, the corresponding Chern number or spin Chern number are labeled in the bottom. In both figures, we adoptλR= 0.02t,λex= 0.1t= 100 meV,Ex= 1V/μm.

whereγ> 0 is the gyromagnetic ratio,HJis the AFM exchange field (summed over all nearest neighbors),H∥is the anisotropy field for the easy axise∥,H0is the external static field, andα0is the Gilbert damping constant. For simplicity, lete∥be thezaxis andH0be applied alonge∥, lifting the degeneracy of the AFM resonance modes.

produced by the electric fieldErf, wheremsis the sublattice magnetic moment. According to Eq. (2),δSA/B= (δS±δN)/2 decreases monotonically with an increasingλexbecause the topological band gap in our model is primarily determined byλex. Consequently, the NSOT field determined by Eq. (5), with a linear dependence onλexin its front factor, remains insensitive to the change ofλex. Of the two mechanisms,hrf(hNS) is perpendicular (parallel) toErfand is the same (opposite) on each sublattice. Based on Maxwell’s equations, a microwave with ∣Erf∣ = 1V/μm has a magnetic field ∣hrf∣ = 33 Gauss. The same electric field can generate a maximum non-equilibrium spin of 0.85 × 10−5ℏper sublattice according to Fig.3, which converts to an effective NSOT field ∣hNS∣ = 59 Gauss forms= 5μB. While we are not able to locate a specific material on the phase diagram Fig.3, it is instructive to chose a point where ∣hrf∣ = ∣hNS∣, so we can determine how their distinct symmetry (uniformhrfversus oppositehNSon the two sublattices) could lead to dramatically different microwave absorptions with the onset of AFM resonance.

To this end, we focus on the point atλsoc= 0.05t,λR= 0.072t, andλv= 0, which lies in the QSH phase. Here, an electric field of 0.5V/μm will produce a staggered spin accumulationδSxA=−δSxB=−2.4×10−6ℏper unit cell (about 64% of the maximum capacity on the phase diagram), which corresponds tohNS= 16.5 G, matching the real magnetic fieldhrfof the same electromagnetic wave. We then consider a linearly polarized microwave incident from theydirection with eitherhrforErf(hence thehNS), but not both, parallel to thexaxis, as illustrated in Fig.5a, b, respectively. Such experimental conditions can be typically realized with the Voigt geometry rather than the Faraday geometry42. Under the device geometry in Fig.5a [Fig.5b], the electric fieldErf(magnetic fieldhrf) is collinear with the magnetic moments so that onlyhrf(Erf) drives the AFM dynamics, separating the NSOT-induced resonance from the ordinary AFM resonance.

Time evolution of the Néel ordern(t) at the resonance of the left-handed mode (withf= 51.9 GHz set by a bias fieldH0= 1.5 T) forahrf-driven configuration, andbErf-driven configuration.c,dare the corresponding amplitude (red, left axis) and phase (blue, right axis) of the dynamical susceptibilityχ~⊥nas a function of driving frequencyf, where the low-frequency mode is left-handed (inset). Parameters:HJ= 35 T,H∥= 0.16 T,α0= 0.005, andErf= 0.5V/μm (corresponding tohrf= 16.5 Gs).

Next, we study the time evolution of the Néel vectorn(t) by numerically solving the LLG equations (4), where parameters are given typical values in 2D honeycomb TMTs (such as MnPS3and its variances43,44):ms= 5μB,HJ=35T andH∥=0.16T. Figure5a, b plot the transverse componentsnx(t) andny(t) for the two distinct cases under the resonance condition of the low-frequency mode:f=γH∥(H∥+2HJ)−γH045, whereH0= 1.5 T is applied along the  +zdirection, yielding the low-frequency mode left-handed as illustrated by the inset of Fig.5d. With our chosen parameters, thisH0field is well below the spin-flop threshold while separating the left-handed and right-handed modes by 84 GHz. We emphasize that the vertical axis in Fig.5b has a scale 15 times larger than that in Fig.5a, and the amplitude of AFM resonance is about 20 times larger in Fig.5b where the magnetic dynamics is activated by theErffield (through the NSOT). To further confirm this point, we plot in Fig.S5the case of a vertically incident microwave (i.e., the Faraday geometry) where bothhrfandErfcan drive the magnetic dynamics. The result is hardly distinguishable from Fig.5b, indicating that the NSOT overwhelms the Zeeman coupling in driving the AFM resonance.

If the driving frequencyf(in energy scale 2πℏf) is comparable with the band gap18,46, Eq. (2) as a Berry phase result will become invalid because the adiabatic condition is broken and the transitions from the valence band to the conduction band become substantial. But the typical AFM resonance frequency we are considering is at most in the sub-terahertz range, where 2πℏf~0.2 meV is much smaller than the band gap so long as we stay fairly far away from the phase transition point.

whereh~D=h~rffor the geometry in Fig.5a, whereash~D=h~NSfor the geometry in Fig.5b. For simplicity, we set the initial phase ofh~Dzero, so the phase difference betweenn~andh~Dis embedded in the phase ofχ~⊥n(ω). We numerically plot the amplitude∣χ~⊥n∣≡∣χ~xn∣2+∣χ~yn∣2and the phaseArg[χ~⊥n]≡Arg[χ~xn]−Arg[χ~yn](in different colors) as a function of the frequency for thehrf-driven resonance and theErf-driven resonance in Fig.5c, d, respectively. Similar to the time-domain plots, here we intentionally adopt very different scales for the ordinates in Fig.5c, d, which clearly shows that∣χ~⊥n∣(hence the microwave absorption) is about 20 times larger whenErfactivates the resonance (via the NSOT), as compared with the ordinaryhrf-driven mechanism (via direct Zeeman coupling). Basing onArg[χ~⊥n], we can further tell that the low-frequency mode indeed exhibits a left-handed precession of the Néel vector while the high-frequency mode is right-handed.

For ferromagnetic resonances47, the power absorption rate at the resonance point is simply proportional to the amplitude of the dynamical susceptibility, given a fixed strength of the driving field. However, the case is subtly different when we turn to AFM resonances and look into the dynamical susceptibility of the Néel vectorχ~⊥n(ω). Even though we have considered a particular case wherehrf=hNS, the actual power absorption rate under theErf-driven mechanism is not naïvely proportional to∣χ~⊥n∣ascribing to the staggered nature of the NSOT field (hNSA=−hNSB). In “Method” (Sec. B), we rigorously derive the time-averaged dissipation power for each mechanism, which allows us to quantify the ratio of the microwave power absorption rate under the two mechanisms asP¯E/P¯H≈438.5. The significantly enhanced microwave power absorption rate will greatly facilitate the detection of spin-torque excited AFM resonance.

To intuitively understand the pronounced difference in microwave absorption between the two mechanisms, we resort to the symmetry of NSOT. In contrast to the uniform Zeeman fieldhrftending to kickmAandmBtowards opposite directions, the NSOT field is itself opposite on the two sublattices,hNSA=−hNSB[see Fig.3d], which drives the two magnetic moments towards the same direction, thus amplifying their non-collinearity. Consequently, the strong exchange interaction betweenmAandmBis leveraged to enhance the efficiency of magnetic dynamics, resulting in a much stronger absorption of the microwave.

In summary, we have studied the exotic topological phases, and the spin-torque generations in these phases, based on a G-type AFM material with a honeycomb lattice in the presence of the intrinsic SOC, the Rashba SOC and a staggered potential. We find that the highly non-trivial Néel-type SOT can not only be induced by an applied electrical field without producing Joule heating but also be utilized to drive the AFM resonance at a remarkably high efficiency, which, even under a conservative estimate, is more than one order of magnitude larger than the traditional AFM resonance relying on the Zeeman coupling. Our significant findings open an exciting way for exploiting the unique spintronic properties of AFM topological phases to achieve sub-terahertz AFM magnetic dynamics.

whereJ^xs=ℏ(szv^x+v^xsz)/4is the spin-current operator alongxwith the spin polarization alongz. The numerical calculation of the band structure and the spatial distribution of the scattering states are performed by Kwant50.

upon time averaging, whereVucis the unit cell volume (area).

which is maximized forϕ+=π/2 (at the resonance peak). Phenomenologically,ϕ+=π/2 indicates thathrf(t) ⋅mA(B)(t) = 0 so thathrf(t)∥m°A(B)(t).

withD±(ω) defined in Eq. (13). Comparing withχ~x+(ω), an extra term 2ωJappears in the front factor ofη~x−(ω), which overwhelms iωα−ωAin absolute value. Similar to the previous case,P¯Eis maximized forφ−=π/2 (at the resonance peak).

A final remark: even in materials with much weaker SOC such that the NSOT field is, for example, an order of magnitude smaller than the magnetic field (i.e.,∣h~NS∣/∣h~rf∣=0.1), the above ratioP¯E/P¯His 4.385—well above unity—indicating the robustness of the NSOT’s enhanced efficiency in driving the AFM dynamics.

The authors acknowledge fruitful discussions with E. del Barco, S. Singh, A. Kent and K. Deng. This work is supported by the National Science Foundation under Award No. DMR-2339315.