Between 2000 and 2019, data of hospitalizations with lower lumbar spinal metastasis were extracted from six medical centers in China. A total of 505 patients were identified in this study. Peak patients occurred in the group aged from 60 to 69 years, the age at diagnosis of female patients was 2.62 years earlier than that of male patients, and the proportion of male patients aged over 60 years was higher than that of females. Three most prevalent primary tumor were lung cancer, unknown origin tumor, and breast cancer. Solitary L4 metastases were nearly same as solitary L5 metastases. In terms of intervention, 347 patients (68.71%) received systemic treatment, while 158 patients (31.29%) underwent surgical therapy comprised of minimally invasive surgery (28 cases, 17.72%) and open surgery (130 cases, 82.28%). According to multivariate logistic analysis, SINS score, medical center, CCI, and segment of involved vertebrae were four independent predictors of surgical decision-making. This study represents the largest series of patients with lower lumbar metastases in the literatures. Due to several unique anatomic and biomechanical considerations with respect to metastases to the lower lumbar region, some characteristics are not completely commensurate with other spinal segmental metastases, which reinforces the significance for translation to regular clinical practice.

Spine ranks as the third most common site of metastasis behind the lung and liver. Metastatic spinal disease is frequently characterized by spinal cord compression, nerve root compression, vertebral destruction, and vascular compromise1. With an increased prevalence of cancer patients, their prolonged survival, and improved local control of primary malignancies, the incidence of metastatic spinal disease is rising. Broadly speaking, spinal metastases account for 40–70% in patients with malignant neoplasia2,3.

The lower lumbar spine, including the fourth lumbar spine (L4) and the fifth lumbar spine (L5), is a unique zone in the spine where the mobile lumbar spine connects to the relatively fixed sacrum and pelvis. The lower lumbar region is the second common site of symptomatic spinal metastases behind the thoracic region. Due to the wider epidural space in this region compared to the proximal parts of the spine and more tolerable to compression of the cauda equina4pain is the chief presenting symptom in patients with the lower lumbar spinal metastasis, rather than neurologic dysfunction manifesting with the bowel or bladder incontinence, sexual dysfunction, and lower extremity weakness. Furthermore, its special anatomy and biomechanical features, contributing to enormous challenge in managing the lower lumbar spinal metastasis, especially surgical resection followed by stability reconstruction5–7. In brief, the unique anatomic characteristics of the lower lumbar spine, including the morphology of the vertebrae and neurologic structures, as well as different technical considerations with respect to surgery, support the need to perform investigations focused on metastatic disease in this region.

Up to date, some previous reports have described the epidemiology of spinal metastases1–3,8–15. In North America, Mak et al.8performed a population-based survey in incidence, management, and costs of patients with malignant spinal cord compression in the United States. In the study of Horn1the national trends in the diagnosis and surgical treatment of spinal metastases in the pediatric population of United States were analyzed. In Europe, Zaikova et al.15described a population-based incidences of spinal metastatic disease requiring local treatment in South-east Norway. Van den Berg et al.12presented the incidence rates, tumor location and type, distribution by spinal level, and neurological status of patients with spinal cord injury due to tumor or metastasis in Northeaster Spain. In Asia, Sohn et al.10,11continuously published two articles related to nationwide epidemiology of spinal tumors and spinal metastasis in adult Korean population, respectively. The two studies explained the demographics, incidence rate, hospital stays, medical use, and survival rate of patients with spinal neoplasia. Zhang et al.3and Wang et al.2conducted a multicenter epidemiologic survey of the clinical features of spinal metastases and described the epidemiological characteristics of patients with spinal metastatic disease in China, respectively. Of note, the selection bias of populations contributes to diverse epidemiological characteristics in different countries and nations, and being impossible to directly compare data from different publications.

Unfortunately, literatures on topic of lower lumbar spinal metastases (LLSM) commonly are retrospective case reports or case-series lack of demographical data, which mainly focus on clinical features and omit a potential epidemiological perspective6,7,16–19. To our knowledge, there is no specialized publications to depict the epidemiology of LLSM. As Schiff et al.20described that the distribution of spinal epidural metastases was proportionate to the volume of vertebral bone and was not eventually throughout the spine. Hence, we pose a hypothesis that LLSM has unique epidemiological characteristics differed from other segments. The purposes of this study were to: (i) identify the characteristics of LLSM hospitalizations by documenting the gender, age, level and number of vertebral involvements, and type of primary tumor. (ii) to explore the predictors of surgical treatment decision.

A total of 2150 patients with spinal metastases were identified according to inclusion and exclusion criteria. Of which, 505 patients (23.49%) with the lower lumbar spine involved were selected as the samples in the study, including 266 males and 239 females, with a male to female ratio of 1.11: 1. In total, mean age at diagnosis was 59.30 ± 12.34 years, with a median age of 60 years, and the proportion of male patients aged over 60 years was higher than that of females (57.74% vs. 42.27%). Among the 5 tested age groups, peak patients occurred in the group aged from 60 to 69 years (Fig.1). In terms of times, the largest number of patients emerged between 2017 and 2019, and the number of patients with LLSM increased with years (Table1). With regard to regional distribution, 235 patients (47.57%) lived in urban area and 259 patients (52.43%) lived in rural area. The regional information of 11 patients were lost.

The figure dipicted the distribution of age and gender in patients with lower lumbar spinal metastasis. In total, the male to female ratio was 1.11: 1, and peak patients occurred in the group aged from 60 to 69 years.

Distribution of time and primary tumor types of 505 patients.

aUnknown system include tumors of unknown origin, liposarcoma, osteosarcoma, and melanoma.

Based on subgroups, mean age at diagnosis of males and females was 60.54 ± 13.18 years and 57.92 ± 11.21 years, respectively. The age at diagnosis of female patients was 2.62 years earlier than that of male patients (p< 0.05). Whereas, the gender distributions in decades and region had no statistically significance (p> 0.05).

Overall, lung cancer (210 cases, 41.65%) was the most prevalent primary tumor, followed by tumor of unknown origin (72 cases, 14.26%), breast cancer (38 cases, 7.52%), kidney cancer (25 cases, 4.95%), myeloma (23 cases, 4.55%), and prostate cancer (23 cases, 4.55%) (Fig.2). According to Tomita score, 216 patients (42.77%) had rapid growth tumors, 202 patients (40.00%) had moderate growth tumors, and 87 patients (17.23%) had slow growth tumors. In the light of body systems, the most 3 common origins of primary tumor were respiratory system (215 cases, 42.57%), unknown system (84 cases, 16.63%), and glandular systems (79 cases, 15.64%) respectively, and this trend did not change significantly with times (Fig.3).

The figure demonstrated the primary tumor types of the lower lumbar spinal metastases. Lung cancer (210 cases, 41.65%) was the most prevalent primary tumor, followed by tumor of unknown origin (72 cases, 14.26%), breast cancer (38 cases, 7.52%), kidney cancer (25 cases, 4.95%), myeloma (23 cases, 4.55%), and prostate cancer (23 cases, 4.55%).

The figure exposed the relationship between times and primary tumor type in the light of body systems. The most 3 common origins of primary tumor were respiratory system (215 cases, 42.57%), unknown system (84 cases, 16.63%), and glandular systems (79 cases, 15.64%) respectively, and this trend did not change significantly with times.

In this cohort, solitary L4 metastases occurred in 54 patients (10.69%), solitary L5 metastases occurred in 55 patients (10.89%), L4 accompanied by L5 metastases occurred in 23 patients (4.55%), and the lower lumbar vertebrae combined with other spinal segments involved occurred in 373 patients (73.86%). Overall, 26% of the patients had metastases exclusively in the lower lumbar region with the remainder exhibiting involvement in other locations within the spine. Patients with segmental number less than 3 and more than or equal 3 were 248 (49.11%) and 257 (50.89%), respectively. In addition, respiratory tumors and glandular tumors were more likely invade single L5 rather than L4 accompanied by L5, which was opposite to the presentation of hematopoietic and unknown system tumors. The distribution of primary tumor types in segment of vertebral involvement was shown in Fig.4.

The figure showed the distribution of primary tumor types in segment of vertebral involvement. Respiratory tumors and glandular tumors were more likely invaded single L5 rather than L4 accompanied by L5, which was opposite to the presentation of hematopoietic and unknown system tumors.

There were 327 patients (64.75%) diagnosed with extra-spinal osseous metastases, 114 (22.57%) patients diagnosed with visceral metastases and 134 (26.53%) patients diagnosed with lymphatic metastases. Pathological fracture of vertebrae occurred in 169 patients (33.47%). The overall mean Charlson comorbidity index was 0.82 ± 1.72. Through the subgroup analysis, there were 449 patients (88.91%) with a mean age of 59.23 ± 12.28 years in the subgroup of scores < 3, and the mean age was 59.82 ± 12.92 years in the remaining 56 patients (11.09%). No significant relationship was found between the Charlson comorbidity index and age.

According to the Frankel grade, patients with grade A, B, C and D were considered to have neurological injury, while grade E was described as normal. 255 patients (51.10%) had different severity of neurological injury, and grade E was found in 244 patients (48.90%). The neurological status of remaining 6 patients were not documented in medical records.

In terms of the SINS score, there were 65 patients (13.60%) in the stable group (0–6 points), 377 patients (78.87%) in the potentially unstable group (7–12 points), and 36 patients (7.53%) in the unstable group (13–18 points). The mean SINS score was 8.86 ± 2.31. There were 27 patients without evaluation of spinal stability.

With regard to the VAS score, there were 85 patients (17.03%) with mild pain (0–3 points), 230 patients (46.09%) with moderate pain (4–6 points), and 184 patients (36.87%) with severe pain (7–10 points). Overall, the mean VAS score of patients with LLSM was 5.60 ± 1.96. Similarly, The VAS score was not available in the remaining 6 patients.

In light of the KPS score, there were 214 patients (42.89%) with condition A (80–100 points), 280 patients (56.11%) with condition B (40–70 points), and 5 patients (1.00%) with condition C (0–30 points). In general, the mean KPS score was 70.91 ± 12.69 in 499 patients whose medical records were complete.

In this study, 347 patients (68.71%) received systemic treatment, while 158 patients (31.29%) underwent surgical therapy comprised of minimally invasive surgery (28 cases, 17.72%) and open surgery (130 cases, 82.28%) (Table2). In addition, the six facilities are provincial regional medical centers and use the same electronic medical record system, hence, the diagnostic criteria and surgical indications of metastatic spinal tumors are unified. And no matter patients come from urban and or areas, they can receive the same medical services.

aSystemic therapy includes chemotherapy, targeted therapy, bisphosphonate therapy, and immunotherapy.

A logistic regression analysis was conducted to explore the potential variables which might be associated with therapeutic modality of LLSM. Based on univariate analysis, number and segment of involved vertebrae, Frankel grade, SINS score, VAS score, clinical center, CCI, and times were found to have significant effects on the surgical treatment, Further multivariate analysis demonstrated that SINS score (OR 3.313, CI 95% 1.080–10.160,p< 0.05), medical center (OR 15.397, CI 95% 5.298–44.749,p< 0.001), CCI (OR  0.329, CI 95% 0.131–0.826,p< 0.05), and segment of involved vertebrae (OR 0.303, CI 95% 0.092–0.992,p< 0.05) were independent predictors (Table3). Patients with spinal instability were nearly 3 times likely to receive surgical treatment compared to patients with a stable spine. Patients hospitalized in medical center 5 were nearly 15 times more likely to undergo surgery than patients in medical center 1, while patients hospitalized in medical center 6 had a disposition to receive systemic therapy. Patients with more comorbidity (CCI ≥ 3) and patients with L4 companied by L5 involvement were only one third as likely to undergo surgery compared with patients with CCI < 3 and patients with solitary L4 involvement, respectively. In addition, surgical treatment of LLSM became less popular with times though there was no significance in multivariate analysis.

Univariate and multivariate analyses of predictors for surgicaltreatment.

To understand the variables which had influence on selection of minimally invasive surgery, a separate analysis of surgical samples was performed. Univariate logistic analysis showed that KPS score and medical center affect the decision-making of minimally invasive surgical methods, while multivariate analysis denied the significance of both predictors (Table4).

Univariate and multivariate analyses of predictors for minimallyinvasive surgery.

This prospective study contributes the following new findings. Patients with LLSM accounted for 23.49% in the spinal metastasis population. In general, peak patients occurred in the group aged from 60 to 69 years. The age at diagnosis of female patients was 2.62 years earlier than that of male patients, and the proportion of male patients aged over 60 years was higher than that of females. The six most prevalent primary tumor were lung cancer, unknown origin tumor, breast cancer, kidney cancer, myeloma, and prostate cancer. Solitary L4 metastases were nearly same as solitary L5 metastases, L4 accompanied by L5 metastases were least, and the lower lumbar vertebrae combined with other spinal segment involvement occupied most of the proportion. In terms of intervention, 347 patients (68.71%) received systemic treatment, while 158 patients (31.29%) underwent surgical therapy comprised of minimally invasive surgery (28 cases, 17.72%) and open surgery (130 cases, 82.28%). According to multivariate logistic analysis, SINS score, medical center, CCI, and segment of involved vertebrae were four independent predictors of surgical decision-making.

In current study, 505 patients (23.49%) with the lower lumbar spine involvement were identified from 2150 spinal metastases population. The male to female ratio was 1.11: 1. Mean age at diagnosis was 59.30 ± 12.34 years (range 15–90), with a median age of 60 years, and peak patients occurred in the group aged from 60 to 69 years. The age at diagnosis of female patients was 2.62 years earlier than that of male patients, and the proportion of male patients aged over 60 years was higher than that of females (57.7% vs. 42.3%). The number of patients with LLSM increased with times.

A retrospective study of 1002 patients with spinal metastatic disease was performed in Norway by Zaikova and colleagues15reported that there were 600 males and 402 females with a male to female ratio of 1.49:1, and the median age of 68 years. In the study of Wang2a total of 1196 patients with spinal metastases consisted of 717 males and 479 females with a male to female ratio of 1.50:1. The mean age was 58.6 ± 11.6 years and the median age of 59 years. Another large retrospective cohort study of 2148 patients with spinal metastases across two decades and three continents described that there was little variation in the male to female ratio and mean age at diagnose across regions14.

Though the direct comparability of demographics of LLSM with other literatures is problematic due to lack of specialized epidemiological study on LLSM. The distribution of gender and age in current study are similar to previous articles of spinal metastases. Of note, With the improvement of diagnostic methods and prolonged survival of cancer patients, the largest number emerged in recent times of 2017 and 2019. The high proportion of male patients aged over 60 years may be related to the 2.62 years earlier onset for female patients.

The most common type of primary tumors differed in previous reports. Holman et al.21performed surgeries in 139 patients with lumbar metastases and found that the 6 most common primary tumors were renal cell carcinoma, sarcoma, breast cancer, lymphoma, prostate cancer, and lung cancer. A study performed in Norway described that the 6 most prevalent tumor sites were prostate, lung, breast, myeloma, lower gastrointestinal, and kidney15. Another nationwide study of patients with spinal metastases in Korean showed that the 6 most common primary tumor sites were lung, liver and biliary tract, breast, colon, stomach, and prostate11. In our study of 505 patients with LLSM, the six most prevalent primary tumor were lung cancer, unknown origin tumor, breast cancer, kidney cancer, myeloma, and prostate cancer. We firstly classified the tumor based on body system, and the most 3 common origins of primary tumor were respiratory system, unknown system, and glandular systems. This difference may be due to the differences in the types of primary tumors in various regions and the heterogeneity of the study populations in several studies. As we know, prostate cancer and breast cancer are the most common malignant tumor among male and female patients in western countries, while lung cancer is the most prevalent malignant tumor in both males and females in China2. In addition, the economical level of regions or countries did affect the incidence of different primary tumor3.

Solitary L4 metastases were nearly same as solitary L5 metastases, L4 accompanied by L5 metastases were least, and the lower lumbar vertebrae combined with other spinal segment involvement occupied most of the proportion. Patients with segment number < 3 were equal to that with segment number ≥ 3. This result was different from two literatures on topic of spinal metastases in China2,3indicating that the LLSM had a trend to multi-level vertebral involvement. An interesting phenomenon, respiratory tumors and glandular tumors were more likely invade single L5 rather than L4 accompanied by L5, which was opposite to the presentation of hematopoietic and unknown system tumors. This manifestation and clinical significance need to be validated by an ongoing large samples size.

Due to metastases to the lumbar region commonly involved cauda equina rather than directly threatened the spinal cord22, Pain often precedes neurologic symptoms by several months in lumbar spinal metastases23. The high weight-bearing demand borne by the lower lumbar vertebrae contributed to increase the risk for biomechanical instability24. At the time of diagnosis, 51.10% of patients had different severity of neurological injury, whereas 86.40% of patients had potential or actual spinal instability and 82.96% of patients described moderate to severe pain, which proves that the much more common presentation for lower lumbar spinal metastasis is nonspecific axial back pain or symptomatic instability rather than neurological disfunction.

The unique anatomic characteristics of the lower lumbar spine, including the morphology of the vertebrae and neurologic structures, as well as different technical considerations with respect to surgery, support the need to perform investigations focused on the treatment of metastatic disease in this region. Of note is the fact that the multidisciplinary team is optimal for formulating the algorithms of LLSM. As an indispensable treatment method of LLSM, surgery can to a great extent mitigate pain, improve deformity and neurologic function, control tumor growth, and restore spinal instability3,25. In this study, there were 158 patients (31.29%) who underwent surgical therapy, comprised of minimally invasive surgery (28 cases, 17.72%) and open surgery (130 cases, 82.28%).

SINS score, medical center, CCI, and segment of involved vertebrae were four independent predictors of surgical decision-making in multivariate logistic analysis. Patients with spinal instability were nearly 3 times likely to receive surgical treatment compared to patients with a stable spine because spinal stability could not be restored by solitary radiation therapy or systemic treatment26. Patients hospitalized in medical center 5 were nearly 15 times more likely to undergo surgery than patients in medical center 1, while patients hospitalized in medical center 6 had a disposition to receive systemic therapy. Maybe several situations can explain the varieties in different medical centers. On one hand, patients with LLSM are admitted by spinal surgeon in medical center 5, while medical 6 is a professional oncology institution, and the treatment strategies are in part related to the preference of clinicians. On the other hand, because medical center 5 is located in the southeast of China with a higher level of economy than others, patents have more ability to afford the cost of surgical treatment. In addition, systemic therapy is susceptible to manage the LLSM in teaching hospital such as medical center 6, which is in accordance with results from a previous study. Mak et al.8used logistic regression to examine treatment by hospital characteristics in patients with malignant spinal cord compression, and concluded that Odds of inpatient radiotherapy were greater at teaching hospitals.

In study of Sohn et al.11the annual incidence rate of spinal metastases increased significantly with the number of comorbidities increased, indicating that patients with spinal metastases had a tendency to be more seriously ill. Patients with more comorbidity (CCI ≥ 3) were only one third as likely to undergo surgery compared with patients with CCI < 3. We attribute it to the selection of healthier patients for surgery and less-healthy patients for systemic therapy8,27. Patients with L4 companied by L5 involvement were less likely to undergo surgery, because tumor resection of L4 or L5 metastases, especially corpectomy or spondylectomy are quietly challenging for surgeons due to complex anatomy and biomechanics6,7,16,19. Furthermore, L4 and L5 metastatic surgeries are even more difficult to be performed simultaneously and restore spinal stability. Surgical treatment of LLSM became less popular with times though there was no significance in multivariate analysis. Aside by the mentioned above, the advancement of systemic therapy, such as radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and targeted therapy, is related to the decreasing surgery. Wright et al.14described that due to advances in medical therapy and radiation techniques, the survival of patients with spinal metastases was enhanced though without any change in surgical management. The time trends of LLSM surgery are not in accordance with that of spinal metastases surgery from previous studies1,3,8.

Surgical treatment of spinal metastases is frequently palliative. Minimally invasive surgery is thought to produce early pain relief and stability resume with less physiological insult in selection patients, allowing for early mobilization and optimisation of function28. Exploring clinical predictors of minimally invasive surgery is particularly noteworthy to spinal surgeons. Unfortunately, in our further logistic analysis of the surgical group, we found no independent variables which significantly influenced the decision-making of minimally invasive surgical techniques. Small sample size is a plausible interpretation, because there were only 28 patients received minimally invasive surgeries, accounting for 17.72% in 158 surgery population.

Several limitations of this study should be noted. First, the retrospective study design is susceptible to selection and recall bias, this is due to the characteristics of retrospective study. However, we have minimized the risk of patients’ omissions through system retrieval in database, cross-entry of data, and post-checking methods. In addition, most of the information in this study comes from electronic medical documents, so recall bias can be considered almost non-existent. Second, in order to ensure the homogeneity of the study population, we only included patients with lower lumbar metastases, which resulted in a relatively low sample size. However, as far as we know, this study is an epidemiological investigation of lower lumbar metastases with the largest sample size. In addition, the lack of survival information is another disadvantage. We are following up the patients in this cohort and hope to add contents about survival prognosis in our next study.

This study includes 505 patients, which represents the largest series of patients with lower lumbar metastases in the literature. It provides insight into the epidemiology of LLSM and predictors affecting surgical management. Due to several unique anatomic and biomechanical considerations with respect to metastases to the lower lumbar region, some characteristics are not completely commensurate with other spinal segmental metastases, which reinforces the significance for translation to regular clinical practice.

The patients in the study were screened from six medical centers located in five provinces of China from June 2000 to August 2019. By using disease codes according to the International Classification of Disease, Tenth Revision (ICD-10), Patients with spinal metastases were identified and the information were extracted from electronic patient records. Subsequently, a unified database was established consisted of the gender, age, habitation, comorbidities, type of primary tumor, segment of involved vertebrae, extra-spinal metastases, pathological fracture, neurological function, spinal stability, local pain, Karnofsky performance status (KPS) score, and treatment patterns.

Inclusion criteria: (i) patients diagnosed with spinal metastases through clinical symptoms, radiographic or histopathological examination; (ii) hematological malignancies contains lymphoma and myeloma; (iii) variables in research complete.

Exclusion criteria: (i) primary spinal tumor; (ii) metastases in the paravertebral region without the vertebrae involved; (iii) out-patients.

This study followed the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the medical ethics committee of Binzhou Medical University Hospital (Ethics Number: 20000403-07). All experiments were performed in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. Due to the retrospective nature of the study, the need of obtaining informed consent was waived.

Demographic characteristics mainly included gender, age at diagnosis and habitation of patients, which commonly reflected the distribution of spinal metastases in population and regions.

Clinical features were defined as type of primary tumor, segment of involved vertebrae, extra-spinal metastases, pathological fracture of vertebrae, and comorbidities. Base on Tomita score, primary tumors were divided into three groups: rapid growth tumors, moderate growth tumors, and slow growth tumors29. With regard to segment of involved vertebrae, we divided them into four categories: solitary L4 metastasis, solitary L5 metastasis, L4 accompanied by L5 metastases, and L4 or L5 vertebrae combined with other spinal segments involved. Comorbidities were classified using the Charlson comorbidity index (CCI)30. Extra-spinal metastases consisted of extra-spinal bone, visceral and lymphatic metastases.

Condition of patients contained metastasis related symptoms including neurological functions, spinal stability, and local pain, which were evaluated by Frankel grade15, spinal instability neoplastic score (SINS)26and visual analogue scale (VAS)31, respectively. While Karnofsky performance status (KPS) score32was used to assess the general condition of patients.

The management of spinal metastases contained surgical and systemic treatments. The former generally included minimally invasive surgery and open surgery. In our study, all surgical patients meet the standards outlined in the guidelines for surgical treatments of metastatic spinal tumors formulated by Chinese Medical Association Society of Orthopaedics Bone Oncology Group. Specifically speaking, when patients experienced unbearable pain in the diseased vertebral segment, or symptoms of nerve compression such as the bowel/ bladder incontinence, and sexual dysfunction, or lower extremity weakness caused by pathological fractures or spinal instability, they were scheduled for surgery. A crucial prerequisite is that the patient’s expected survival time exceeds three months. percutaneous vertebroplasty, microwave therapy, radiofrequency ablation, and endoscope procedure were major methods of minimally invasive surgery, aiming to alleviate pain and resume stability. The tumor curettage, separation surgery, laminectomy, vertebrectomy or en bloc resection belong to open surgeries that require pedicle screw and rod systems or titanium mesh to establish segmental stability. Systemic treatments, such as radiotherapy, chemotherapy, targeted therapy, immunotherapy, and bisphosphonate treatment, were the supplements or substitutes to the surgical management.

Continuous variables were described as mean ± standard deviation, and categorical variables were described as proportions. The Student’s t-tests (continuous variables) and chi-square tests (categorical variables) were used to confirm any statistical differences between means and proportions. In order to identify the influencing factors for surgery, a univariate logistic regression analysis was performed first, and then variables significant at the P value less than 0.2 were included in a multivariate logistic regression analysis to screen for independent risk factors. Data analysis was carried out using SPSS software 25.0 (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) and a two-tailedP< 0.05 was statistically significant.