Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is one of the leading causes of premature death globally. CVD is expensive to treat and therefore carries a significant cost for public healthcare systems and the people in them. Those most likely to develop CVD often report co-occurring mental health concerns such as depression and anxiety, in addition to behavioural factors (e.g. physical inactivity) and physical health conditions (e.g. hypertension, high cholesterol, obesity and diabetes). Due to these inter-connecting issues, healthcare provision for CVD patients necessitates a joined-up care pathway providing holistic, person-centred support. Despite the rapid emergence and growth in attempts to deliver such care, evidence concerning how it is experienced and how to promote engagement is fragmented. This review aims to capture the experiences and factors that influence integrated care engagement, reported by adults with CVD risk factors and mild-to-moderate mental health concerns.

This systematic review protocol will be reported according to the updated Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA-P) guidelines. Proposed database searches will include Emcare, MEDLINE, PsycINFO (via OVID), CINAHL and preprint databases for grey literature. Articles of interest will include adults’ experiences of and factors that influence engagement with integrated care in the UK, specifically for support with CVD risk and mild-to-moderate mental health concerns. Any study design reporting qualitative primary data will be included (excluding conference abstracts). Data on study population (actors/targets), what they do (behaviours) care setting (context), care format (time) and participant experiences and perspectives will be extracted. Where appropriate, thematic synthesis of extracted data will be coded to the Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF), updated Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research (CFIR) and Action, Actor, Context, Target and Time (AACTT) framework.

Findings from this review will provide foundation evidence for a behavioural systems map and recommendations for policymakers, commissioners and those involved or interested in integrated care for people at risk of CVD with mental health concerns. Such evidence can be used to develop future intervention strategies to assist the optimisation of integrated care.

Systematic review registration:PROSPERO (CRD42024554282.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13643-025-02903-2.

Globally, cardiovascular disease (CVD) is predicted to be one of the leading causes of premature death in 2025, responsible for up to 7.8 million deaths [1]. CVD has been identified by the National Health Service (NHS) in their long-term plan [2] as one of the key clinical conditions requiring urgent attention to save lives. Behavioural factors such as physical inactivity, smoking and alcohol misuse can increase CVD risk, alongside health conditions such as hypertension, high cholesterol, obesity, diabetes and a history or family history of heart disease [3]. Common mental health conditions such as anxiety and depression, referred to in the literature as “mild-to-moderate mental health concerns” [4], are frequently reported by people with CVD risk factors [5]. Furthermore, mental health problems can exacerbate CVD risk [6,7] and adversely affect treatment outcomes [8]. For instance, medication prescribed for a mental health condition can predispose a person to poor physical health, and poor mental health can lead to behaviours that precipitate CVD risk (e.g. inactivity, high consumption of sugary/fatty foods). Holistic support for people with CVD risk factors and mental health concerns has historically struggled to gain traction, despite evidence of benefit [9], suggesting an area in need of further research [10].

Particularly in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been increasing recognition that better connections within health and care services can support optimised functioning of the health system across Europe [11], which benefits the people and families using their services. As part of the Health and Care Act 2022 in the UK, the NHS announced significant changes in their delivery of physical and mental health services, including the establishment of 42 Integrated Care Systems (ICSs) across England [12]. ICSs are partnerships of organisations that come together to plan and deliver joined-up healthcare services to improve the lives of people who live and work in their area [13]. The related policy has a vision of pooling budgets, resources and guiding principles from the NHS, public health and adult social care to assist in joined-up services. While these are new organisational structures, the concept of integrated care has been around for some time. Variation in understandings of what integrated care is has been observed frequently in the literature [14]. Integrated care is often referred to interchangeably as holistic, coordinated or comprehensive care [15] and involves a range of connected health services including health promotion, disease prevention or management and rehabilitation [16]. For the integrated care system to “see the whole picture” when supporting people with physical and mental health conditions, it is important to understand the barriers experienced by those within the system, that prevents this from occurring.

A growing body of evidence has been emerging on delivery and management of integrated care to support people living with complex conditions and multimorbidity. Previous research on healthcare professional experiences found direct barriers to seamless delivery of integrated care systems, which included lack of funding, poor relationships and limited information sharing between services [17]. People with chronic healthcare needs can also face multiple “invisible” barriers that indirectly affect their ability to utilise integrated care, including loss of confidence to engage with services and lack of interdisciplinary coordination between service providers [18]. To support optimal, ongoing delivery of integrated care services, exploring service user perspectives on what influences their experience and engagement is essential [19]. Broadening the evidence base on how integrated care can be used to support patients at risk of CVD and with mild-to-moderate mental health concerns, could help to inform the future delivery of integrated care more generally. To date, no systematic review has examined service user experiences associated with integrated care in the UK for physical and mental health using a behavioural science lens. Use of behavioural and social sciences can help target elements of service provision that work well and highlight areas that need attention.

Several theoretical approaches can help to guide investigations into influences of health experiences, service use and engagement. The Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) can provide detailed insights into aspects of health-related behaviours that are advantageous for understanding implementation challenges [20,21]. The TDF has 14 conceptual domains, namely: “knowledge”, “skills” (cognitive/interpersonal and physical), “social/professional role and identity”, “beliefs about capabilities”, ‘”optimism”, “beliefs about consequences”, “reinforcement”, “intentions”, “goals”, “memory, attention and decision processes”, “environmental context and resources”, “social influences”, “emotions” and “behavioural regulation”. A second framework that is beneficial for highlighting contextual factors that affect intervention implementation is the Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research (CFIR; 19). Finally, the Action, Actor, Context, Target and Time framework (AACTT; [22]) can also assist with identifying key behaviours of people within a system to inform intervention evaluation. The framework is used by defining components of an intervention, includingAction: behaviours that can be changed such as referral to an exercise prescription;Actor:the person/people with the potential to enact behaviour change, such the NHS or a GP;Context: the location of the action, such as a GP clinic;Target: the people or group of people that action is intended for, such as adults experiencing CVD risk factors such as obesity/diabetes and low mood; andTime: when the behaviour occurs, such as during a routine blood pressure check). Here, triangulating these frameworks enables the synthesis and analysis of existing evidence to generate understanding spanning implementation challenges, the influence of context and potential points for intervention.

In sum, this systematic review will generate evidence to inform the development of a behavioural system map of key actors, actions, influence factors and settings in an integrated care system. It will use the TDF, CFIR and AACTT, to generate evidence from patient-centred research on the behavioural influences of their engagement with integrated care in the UK.

This systematic review protocol has been developed according to Cochrane best practice guidelines [24] and the updated Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA-P) [25,26]. The protocol has been registered on the International Prospective Register for Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO ID: CRD42024554282).

Specific study inclusion and exclusion criteria were developed based on the population, intervention, context, outcome and study design (PICOS) criteria [27] for systematic reviews (see Table1).

The review will focus on experiences and perspectives regarding engagement with integrated care in the UK, reported by adults with CVD risk factors and mild-to-moderate mental health concerns (including their carers/family members where reported).

For the purposes of this review, the search strategy will focus on evidence from integrated care studies. Integrated care is defined as joined-up care pathways for people requiring more than one type of care, service or intervention for their physical and/or mental health.

The present review search strategy will focus on evidence gathered from people engaging with any form of integrated care provided in the UK in primary care, secondary care, local authorities, third sector and voluntary services.

The main outcomes of interest in the review are the factors that influence service user or public engagement with integrated care by those with CVD risk factors and mild-to-moderate mental health concerns. The secondary outcomes will be identification of the key actors (i.e. who is involved) and/or actions (i.e. what they do) involved with integrated care for adults living with CVD risk and mild-to-moderate mental health concerns.

The review will include qualitative and mixed-methods study designs reporting qualitative primary data on influences of adults’ engagement and experiences of integrated care for CVD risk factors and mild-to-moderate mental health concerns. Solely quantitative study designs, editorials, opinion pieces, conference abstracts and systematic reviews will be excluded.

Information sources will include searches within OVID (including MEDLINE, Emcare, PsycINFO), CINAHL, and searches for grey literature in PsyArXiv and the Healthcare Management Information Consortium (HMIC).

The search strategy has been developed from consultations with the research literature, subject librarian, and key stakeholders (see Appendix Table2) and based on a previous review and research conducted by members of the team [28]. Key concepts will be combined using Boolean operators (AND between concepts and OR within concepts). A criterion paper has been identified [29] and will be used during search strategy pilots to ensure successful deployment of search terms within each database.

The researchers will use the Covidence platform [30] recommended by Cochrane for managing the review search process. All selection processes will be undertaken by one researcher, who will complete one full round of screening against the eligibility and inclusion criteria. Between them, two additional researchers will carry out screening of 100% of the list to review screening quality. As age is a non-modifiable risk factor for CVD [31,32], studies that include primary data from participants aged over 65 with a mild-to-moderate mental health concern will be considered for inclusion even in the absence of reporting CVD risk factors.

A data extraction tool will be developed by the study team using Microsoft Excel. Data items for extraction will include the following: Publication details (such as authors/publication year/location), methods (including general study, population characteristics, setting), study findings (including influences on engagement, reported behaviours in the system conceptualised using the AACTT), and, if reported, any patient health outcomes (e.g. patient satisfaction, shorter waiting times). The findings of each included study will be extracted and transferred verbatim into a data extraction table. All text contained under the heading “findings” or “results” in included studies will be considered as data, including both participant quotations and author interpretations, in addition to information regarding study findings reported in the abstract or discussion. For mixed-method studies, only qualitative findings will be extracted. All extracted data will be imported into NVivo [33], a data management software programme that can support coding of qualitative research.

Data synthesis will primarily be carried out by a small core research team, and findings will be discussed with the wider research team to ensure the synthesis appropriately reflects the original data. Data will be analysed and framed using the TDF and CFIR as a guiding set of frameworks, based on work conducted by the research team on a similar topic [34].

Extracted data will be deductively mapped to the TDF [20,21], CFIR [23] and AACTT [22] by three authors, each independently coding a sample of studies. At least 20% of the data will be double coded by two researchers for accuracy. The three authors will meet once completed to discuss mapping agreement until consensus is reached. The authors will present the mapped data to the immediate research team to ensure accuracy and agreement before sharing with the wider research team. Discrepancies will be discussed and tweaks made until 100% agreement is reached that justifies the data.

The finalised TDF [20,21], CFIR [23] and AACTT [22] data reporting factors that influence service user engagement with integrated care will be presented to colleagues with experience in behavioural science, healthcare and policy partners supporting this research. Feedback from this final step will be taken into consideration in the final write-up of the data synthesis.

The researchers will use the Critical Appraisal Skill Programme qualitative research checklist [35]. Three researchers will divide the included articles, and 20% of the papers will be independently evaluated by two researchers, with consensus meetings held and any disagreements resolved through discussion. Although no studies will be excluded based on the quality assessment results, this will serve as a useful tool to assist with data interpretation (e.g. where contradictory findings could be a result of poor-quality studies), and quality of the evidence base will be reflected upon when considering overall study implications.

This work is being undertaken by the NIHR-funded Policy Research Unit in Behavioural and Social Sciences (PRU BaSS), which is supported by a Patient, Public Involvement and Engagement (PPIE) Strategy Group, made up of patient and public representatives. All projects including this review are discussed by the PPIE Strategy Group at their monthly meetings. Group feedback on the progress of this review will be sought during these monthly meetings and reported to the research team. Additionally, a dedicated PPIE expert member works within the study team as an equal contributor and co-author. They will provide input and advice regularly throughout the review as any other member of the research team, based on their lived experience. For instance, during protocol development, a decision was made to use the phrasing “mental health concerns” instead of “illness” or “diagnosis”. This is because in practice, many people experiencing symptoms relating to anxiety or depression may not receive a formal diagnostic label but can equally be affected on a day-to-day basis by their experience. This decision was made to be as inclusive of these experiences as possible in this evidence review. Our policy partners who form part of the PRU-BaSS oversight group and OptICS advisory group have also had to opportunity to feedback on this work, and will be consulted during the review process.

The recent introduction of integrated care systems within the NHS represents one of the biggest changes of the past 10 years [12], meaning the provision of robust evidence concerning its effective implementation and operation is timely. There is a pressing need to provide evidence-based, joined-up care for people with comorbidities, which will also result in savings for the healthcare system as a whole. To the authors’ knowledge, this will be the first review investigating influences of adults engaging with integrated care for CVD risk and mild-to-moderate mental health concerns. The review will include an evidence synthesis using well-established empirical tools for implementation research, including the TDF, CFIR and AACTT. The aims of this research are to identify influences of engagement with integrated care for CVD risk and mild-to-moderate mental health concerns, so as to inform policy and future implementation efforts in this area. The findings can be used by policymakers, commissioners, healthcare professionals, researchers and the public concerned with the optimisation of physical and mental health care for complex conditions.

We would like to acknowledge Francine Wood, subject liaison librarian from the UCL library, for their input and expertise during review protocol development. The authors wish to thank our policy partners at the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC), including the Behavioural and Social Sciences Team (BeSST) at the Office for Health Improvement and Disparities (OHID), who provided helpful feedback throughout the research.

This review forms part of the study entitled Optimising Integrated Care Services (OptICS), a PRU-BaSS project led by AMC. AMC, FL, DO, AoD, EO, IV, MK, FFS and SM conceived the study design and funding acquisition. AMcK wrote the first draft of this manuscript, with contributions from VA, NH, FL, LMcG, AMC, AO, EO, MK, CK, SM, YP, GR, EM and NA. All authors reviewed and commented on the final draft of this manuscript.

This project is funded by the National Institute for Health and Care Research and Care (NIHR) Policy Research Unit Behavioural and Social Sciences (project reference NIHR206241). This report presents independent research commissioned by the NIHR. The views and opinions expressed by authors in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the National Health Service (NHS), the NIHR, Medical Research Council (MRC), Central Commissioning Facility (CCF), the NIHR Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating Centre (NETSCC), the Policy Research Unit programme, or the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC).