Successful cancer immunotherapy requires novel approaches that overcome intratumoral immunosuppression and peripheral tolerance. In a recent manuscript describing intravenously administered mRNA-loaded lipid particle aggregates (RNA-LPAs), we demonstrate the ability to reprogram both the tumor microenvironment and periphery enabling cancer-specific immunity simultaneously generated to compete against immunologically ‘cold’ malignancies like glioblastoma.

Recently our group described a new platform technology involving use of multilamellar mRNA lipid aggregates (RNA-LPAs).1The technology allows greater loading of mRNA payloads which could be advantageous for gene or immunotherapeutic modulation. Aggregation of cationic lipid particles has traditionally been perceived as disadvantageous due to undesired transfection of stromal cells in reticuloendothelial organs. Previously, it has been shown that viral clusters are profoundly immunogenic in bloodstream and spirited design of novel mRNA immunotherapeutics. In the work by Mendez et al., we demonstrate that mRNA lipid aggregates can mediate profound changes in immunologic signatures in both the periphery and within the tumor microenvironment necessary for immunotherapeutic activity against immune refractory tumors. Since RNA-LPAs are not pegylated, they rapidly become entrapped in lymphoreticular organs eliciting rapid release of cytokines/chemokines that redirect peripheral blood mononuclear cells to sites of particle localization. In this manner immune cells can be recruited to sites of RNA-LPA localization instead of therapeutic localization to immune cells. This enables RNA-LPAs to deliver therapies body-wide to immune cells without being explicitly engineered to target antigen presenting cells.

Since RNA-LPAs form larger aggregates >200 nm they transfect stromal cells in lymphoreticular organs which are undesired cell types for mRNA localization in cancer immunotherapy; however, we found these cells can release copious amounts of cytokines and mononuclear cell recruiting chemokines. Moreover, stromal fibroblasts have unique immune functions that include antigen exchange with immune cells. Taken together, our data implicate stromal cells as integral for eliciting cellular alarms that recruit professional immune cells uptaking antigens and priming adaptive responses. These results mimic human pathogens that infect the blood and localize, often predominantly, to nonimmune cell types. These nonimmune cell types must have a means of informing immune cells of imminent danger achieved through activation of pattern recognition receptors such as retinoic acid inducible gene-I (RIG-I) releasing type I interferons and related cytokines/chemokines. RNA-LPA harness these natural processes and in so doing activate a plethora of danger response pathways implicated in clearing viral reservoirs from stromal and parenchymal cells. These rapid responses were observed in different mouse models and translated into pet dogs with naturally formed gliomas.

Large animals were enrolled onto trial following owner’s consent, and similar to mice, we observed rapid mobilization of mononuclear cells following RNA-LPA administration. In canines, kinetics of peripheral white blood cell count mobilization was clearer following serial sampling in the same animal. We observed that within 2 h of infusion, monocytes nadir first (within 2 h) followed by lymphocytes at 6 h. These data suggest that monocytes marginate to lymphoid organs torapidly uptake RNA-LPAs entrapped in the reticuloendothelialium. In the presence of local inflammation, these monocytes can mature into more professional antigen presenting cells such as macrophages or dendritic cells, which we observe to be increased in the spleens of small animals. Following margination of monocytes, lymphocytes are recruited for antigenic education and adaptive immune priming and these cells appear to nadir in the peripheral blood at 6 h. As these effects are taking place in the peripheral blood, there are tandem changes in the tumor microenvironment, which is actively being remodeled into a proinflammatory microenvironment with increased gene signatures for antigen presentation, interferon signaling and cytotoxicity. It remains unclear if these tandem changes are a direct effect of RNA-LPA localization to the brain tumor, as minor amounts do translocate, or whether these effects are secondary to the systemic inflammatory response.

The large animal testing validated our findings in murine systems and allowed us to extrapolate toward a starting dose for first in human trials. Further, the large animal model allowed real-time discovery of timelines necessary to receive tumor material, manufacture mRNA products, qualify and release them to the veterinary clinics for care of subjects on trials. Taken together, the data obtained as part of the conduct of large animal testing simultaneously assuaged feasibility and immunogenicity of RNA-LPAs while generating validation data necessary for an FDA investigational new drug (IND) application.

Based on significant effects in murine models and a naturally occurring canine model, we advanced our findings following FDA-IND approval (BB-19304) into a cohort of human patients with newly diagnosed MGMT unmethylated glioblastoma (GBM). This cohort was also necessary to enable launch of pediatric studies for high-grade glioma, which are expected to launch soon. We chose this subset of patients with a more aggressive form of GBM to avoid adjuvant cycles of temozolomide. Since RNA-LPAs are massive modulators of immune cells, we worried that combination with chemotherapy could be deleterious. The trial was designed to initiate intervention with RNA-LPAs after patients completed surgery followed by chemoradiation allowing ample time for personalized product manufacturing. Personalization was achieved by manufacturing an individualized mRNA transcriptome from biopsied tumor samples. Following tumor biopsy, total RNA is extracted followed by RT-PCR to enable creation of a cDNA library that can be in vitro transcribed to generate high-quality tumor mRNA. This personalized product was mixed 1:1 with pp65, a CMV matrix protein, that is expressed in human GBM. The initial cohort of patients were treated under an accelerated titration design with staggered enrollment. Surprisingly, even at what was believed to be very low doses, all patients developed evidence of immune activation at all doses tested. In one patient, there was a significant inflammatory response in the tumor microenvironment initially believed to be progression but following resection proved to be a reactive inflammatory response. These findings in mice, canines and humans illustrate RNA-LPAs as a unique platform to rapidly reprogram intratumoral immunosuppression and peripheral tolerance enabling therapeutically active anti-cancer immunity.

Elias Sayour, MD, PhD is a board-certified pediatric oncologist and Professor of Neurosurgery and Pediatrics. He serves as the Stop Children’s Cancer/Bonnie R. Freeman Professor of Pediatric Oncology Research, Assistant Dean of Clinical Research in the UF College of Medicine and Program Co-leader of the UF Health Cancer Center’s Immuno-Oncology and Microbiome (IOM) Program.

EJS has funding support from R37CA251978, R01CA266857, and R01FD007268 (FDA – OOPD, Office of Orphan Products Development) awards; National Institutes of Health.

The manuscript discusses patented technologies/patent applications some of which are licensed to iOncologi, Inc. HM-G and EJS receive royalty payments from iOncologi, Inc. EJS serves as a paid consultant on the advisory boards of NTX (Nature’s Toolbox) and Siren Biotechnology. EJS has stock options in NTX. APG serves a paid consultant on the advisory boards of Monteris Medical, Neosoma, Novocure, OnoPharma USA, and Servier.

Ethical approval obtained as previously described.