This work uses the Darcy–Forchheimer model in porous media to study the thermal and flow behaviour of such hybrid nanofluids, monitoring the combined impacts of viscous dissipation, porosity, Forchheimer number, Eckert number, and changing water temperatures. Velocity, temperature, and heat transfer profiles are examined using the BVP4C numerical scheme, which has better accuracy in solving nonlinear boundary value problems. Response Surface Methodology (RSM) is used to optimize system performance, including analysing multi-parameter interactions and how these factors affect the effectiveness of heat transfer to complement the numerical approach. Certain parameter settings resulted in a notable improvement in the hybrid nanofluids’ thermal performance. The results indicate that the increasing values of porosity and inertial resistance, instead of accelerating the flow velocity, slow it down, but at the same time, their effect enhances the thermal distribution profile. Viscous dissipation significantly affects thermal energy, and the Eckert number () is essential for figuring out the temperature profile of fluid flows. The increase in kinetic energy to thermal energy, with increasing Eckert number, is also evident, as demonstrated by the increased fluid temperatures. Optimal configurations delineated through RSM reveal improvements in the Nusselt number contingent on specific parametric combinations. Moreover, the study fills the gap in knowing the thermal behaviour of hybrid nanofluids under varied temperature conditions in porous structures. The results provided in this article offer valuable guidelines for designing and operating thermal systems in applications that include advanced cooling technologies, heat exchangers, biomedical devices, and renewable energy systems. A mathematical approach that integrates numerical and statistical methodologies offers a robust framework for advancing the field of hybrid nanofluid research and its emerging applications.

Recent studies have focused on enhancing thermal transfer efficiency using hybrid nanofluids within numerous thermal systems. Nanofluids are made through the integration of a single nanoparticle with a base fluid. Hybrid nanofluids are synthesised through the combination of two different nanoparticles in a base fluid.The thermal conductivity of these diminutive nanoparticles is exceptional. Augmentation of fluid thermal transport capabilities, through their distribution within a base fluid, is significant. Due to their improved thermal properties, hybrid nanofluids are now being investigated and applied in various industrial and scientific fields. Göksu et al.1also realised that in the case of heat sinks, the single-phase nanofluids in water showed better cooling performance than the two-phase nanofluidsin water. Haque et al.2improved the heat transfer coefficient when contrasted with the single-phase water and-Water nanofluids within the recto trapezoidal cavity. Gaur et al.3depicted that the Brick-Blade hybrid nanofluid in the heat exchanger with three concentric tubes yields thermal performance factors comparable to different nanoparticle shapes. In addition, Azizi et al.4established that in the shell-and-conical coil heat exchanger, the/Water hybrid nanofluid outperformed other hybrid nanofluids, where higher concentrations were generally linked to better thermal yields. The Darcy-Forchheimer model was examined with concern for numerous fluid flow situations. Managing porous media is considered a space to address heat transfer and control the fluid velocity during different manufacturing processes (such as hydrocarbon extraction and management of radioactive waste). Although the modified Darcy–Forchheimer model addresses issues with high-velocity flow, the basic Darcy’s rule is still employed to define the features of this medium. Nihaal et al.5showed that the model effectively predicts the flow scenario in porous media and explored when it is valid, such as in heat exchange and filtration procedures. Zhu et al.6also assessed the influence of rough fractures on the fluid flow when in shear conditions; the Forchheimer equation is shown to incorporate nonlinearity. For the flow types occurring in architectures with high Reynolds numbers in both SRM and LSM arrangements, an extended Darcy-Forchheimer model, which imitates the inertial flow distortion, was studied by Aghaei-Jouybari et al.7. In studying MHD hybrid nanofluid flows, Ramana et al.8found that the Forchheimer number reduced velocity in the x and y direction with an enhancement in the concentration profile of hybrid nanofluids. The Darcy-Forchheimer model for micropolar nanofluid flow over a flexible surface incorporating bioconvective and chemical reaction effects is studied by Khan et al.9. Collectively, these investigations highlight the versatility and importance of the Forchheimer effect when employed in broadening our understanding of complex flow phenomena at substantially large scales of interest for a broad range of applications and scenarios. When flows are moving at high speeds, viscous dissipation is important in the field of convective heat transfer, the fluid viscosity is high, or the Prandtl number is high. In situations where the thermal gradients between the wall and the fluid are small or where the heat fluxes at the walls are small, however, this phenomenon becomes much more important, influencing the energy exchange within the fluid and, consequently, the thermal distribution in the fluid region. To accurately predict heat transfer behaviour in a wide range of fluid flow scenarios, a thorough understanding of the ramifications of viscous dissipation is essential. Recent publications have focused on exploring the diverse impacts of viscous dissipation under varied flow circumstances.

In the simulations of rotating, layered convection in a stratified plane, Lance et al.10found that viscous dissipation is not contingent on viscosity or thermal diffusivity whenever convection is strong enough. Khedher et al.11measured the fluid flow over a horizontal circular cylinder under the magnetic field effect and pointed out that viscous dissipation strongly affects it. Sahu Vocale et al.12noted that at low Knudsen numbers and steep angles, the convective heat transfer coefficient is strongly influenced by the viscous forces, acute angles in the analysis of the rhombic microchannels. Furthermore, Zhang et al.13studied foil journal bearings and analysed that thermal influence due to viscous dissipation changed the shear flow aerodynamics and dynamic characteristics of the elastic foils at higher speeds of rotation and eccentricity ratios. The morphological effects and hall current on non-Newtonian fluid are examined by Rauf et al.14. Sohail et al.15examined the use of ternary hybrid nanoparticles in a porous sheet to increase the temperature of a pseudo-plastic liquid.The unsteady magnetic-driven convective transport in porous materials of a binary fluid with micropolar characteristics over an oblique surface, investigating the impact of viscous dissipation by Hossain et al.16. In many thermal exchange processes, heat transfer optimisation is of paramount importance. Mathematically, one can realise this objective through various methodologies. Response Surface Methodology (RSM), on the other hand, is one such technique that combines mathematical principles and statistical analysis for the design, improvement, and optimisation of processes. The optimisation of nanofluid flow systems has been the focus of recent research, which utilises sensitivity analysis and response surface methodology (RSM). RSM was used by Ajaykumar et al.17to examine entropy optimisation in Casson-Williamson nanofluid movement along a curved sheet, and by Basit et al.18to study bioconvective nanofluid flow over wavy cylinders. This study shows that RSM can model complex fluid dynamics and optimise system parameters. Furthermore, Farouk et al.19modelled solar stills’ thermal efficiency, incorporating nanoparticle-added phase change materials using the RSM approach. Apart from RSM, a study in which Nasir et al.20integrated computational intelligence techniques, including neural networks, with numerical methods for analysing trihybrid nanofluid flow in porous media is also reported. Response surface methodology was applied by Shao et al.21to improve the thermal transfer rate of flow through a pharmaceutical delivery system.

Bikash and Ahmed22used a Darcy-Forchheimer porous medium to investigate the effects of single-walled carbon nanotube (SNT) nanoparticles in the base fluid, ethylene glycol, through hydrodynamic steady exchanges and thermal transfers of the overstretching plate. Das et al.23developed a comprehensive mathematical model to determine how essential parameters affect the temperature field and the dynamical characteristics of a nanofluid’s flow across an inclined cylinder in a non-Darcy porous constrained situation. The Lewis number, Peclet number, volume fraction, and angle of inclination are some of these factors. Sahin and Das24investigated the kinematics of molecules in a Williamson micropolar fluid through a stretchy sheet in a porous field, accounting for microrotation in a magnetic field and the Darcy-Forchheimer premises.

combines the Darcy–Forchheimer porous model with hybrid nanofluids at different base fluid temperatures, which is not often done.

combines the effects of Eckert numbers and viscous dissipation to capture the conversion of kinetic energy into thermal energy.

Uses a hybrid approach that combines Response Surface Methodology (RSM) and BVP4C numerical simulation for accuracy and optimisation.

Assists in the design of heat exchangers, biomedical devices, and renewable energy systems by offering application-specific thermal insights.

To simulate and examine the effects of variations in water temperature, porosity, Forchheimer number, and viscous dissipation on the flow and heat transmission of hybrid nanofluids.

To use BVP4C to solve nonlinear boundary value problems with temperature and flow fields.

To use RSM to find the best pair of parameters for improved thermal performance.

To use kinetic-to-thermal energy conversion to examine the effects of Eckert number on temperature profiles.

There aren’t many investigations on hybrid nanofluids in porous media that contain base fluids that change temperature.

It’s crucial for system design to comprehend how various physical effects—such as porosity, viscous dissipation, and inertia—interact to affect heat transmission.

The ineffective performance of thermal systems is caused by the’ lack of multi-parameter optimisation in traditional methods.

A combined numerical-statistical framework must be created in order to maximise thermal systems and increase accuracy.

The study of Darcy–Forchheimer’s electrically conducting magnetohydrodynamic flow of an incompressible unsteady hybrid nanofluid flowpast a sheet is examined with the effects of magnetic, Forchheimer, porous and viscous dissipation. Figure1shows the mathematical formulation and coordinate system; a constant magnetic field is applied.

The boundary conditions from Eq. (4) were transformed using Eq. (5).

The primary physical parameters of concern, specifically the coefficient of skin frictionand Nusselt numberare written as.

Using MATLAB’s BVP4C computational approach, the reformulated system of nonlinear ordinary differential equations (ODEs) given in Eqs. (6) and (7), with appropriate boundary conditions supplied by Eq. (8), is rigorously proven. Using the methods listed below, the BVP4C solution used in our analysis has been implemented with unparalleled performance. Using MATLAB’s BVP4C computational approach, the reformulated system of nonlinear ordinary differential equations (ODEs) given in Eqs. (6) and (7), with appropriate boundary conditions supplied by Eq. (8), is rigorously proven.The following techniques, which are described below, were used to carefully implement the BVP4C solution that we used in our analysis.

Equations (6) and (7) demonstrate how more variables are added in the case of a higher-order nonlinear ODE system.

The system of higher-order nonlinear ODEs written in Eqs. (6) and (7) is simplified.

In addition, the BVP4c approach was used to solve a system of nonlinear ODEs given in Eqs. (6) and (7) and covered by the boundary conditions expressed in Eq. (8). Far-field scenario-specific boundary conditions are rigorously obtained via comprehensive bulk computations up toCovering all the required parameters. Afterwards, the BVP4c shooting scheme method is implemented during the integration process, for which a finite value of () is used to fix. In particular, this methodological approach is critical in the integration framework to determine the step size (h) at which an appropriate selection has been made. The findings show how various dimensionless parameters affect velocity and temperature profiles. The shooting methodology is performed iteratively to achieve the convergence criterion, set at (). The solutions are provided to the given problem graphically and in tabular form.

Minsta-Gherasim Hybrid Nanofluid for hybrid nanofluids are listed in Fig.2.

Table1. illustrates thermophysical properties of hybrid nanofluids, Figs.2,3,4,5,6,7,8and9depicts the effect of porosity, Forchheimer, Eckert, and unsteadiness parameters on both velocity and temperature profiles for Case 1, ​ in water, solid lines and Case 2in water at, dashed lines. Figure3shows how the porosity parameter affects the velocity profile. The velocity profile is inversely impacted by the porosity parameter when fluid flows through a porous medium, meaning that an increase in porosity causes a decrease in. Asincreases, the medium resistance is increased, frustrating the motion of the fluid more efficiently and therefore requiring the fluid to commit more energy for the fluid at a given velocity. Consequently, this augmented resistance will decelerate fluid velocity, and its associated velocity profile will become smaller throughout the medium. Case-2 exhibits slightly higher velocity than Case-1, emphasizing the influence of elevated fluid temperature and porosity on velocity behaviour. As seen in Fig.4, increasing the porosity parameter causes the temperature profile to rise.When there is an increment in the porosity parameter(), Consequently, the convective heat transmission inside the porous medium is effectively undermined by the decrease in fluid velocity. At the same time, conductive heat transfer is enhanced further through this transition to achieve greater temperature gradients. In conclusion, an increase generates a more restrictive thermal regime, leading to a more significant temperature fluctuation across the medium. Case-2 shows better heat dissipation than Case-1 due to the elevated fluid temperature. Figure5demonstrates how the Forchheimer number affects the velocity profile. The Forchheimer number in porous media flow has a major impact on the flow’s velocity, considering inertial effects beyond those included in Darcy’s law. With an ascending Forchheimer number, inertia resistance becomes essential compared to the viscous resistance, which is why an increasing drag for a specified pressure gradient leads to a decrease in the flow velocity. Additionally, Case 2 exhibits slightly higher velocities compared to Case 1. In Fig.6, the temperature profile is affected by Forchheimer, with an improvement in the temperature profile being the primary outcome. The reduced velocity impairs the convective heat exchange, making the temperature distribution mainly dependent on conduction. This is associated with increasing values of the Forchheimer parameter with more pronounced gradients in temperatures and enhanced temperature profiles.

Thermophysical properties of hybrid nanofluids, Parida et al.27.

Moreover, Case 2 shows higher temperature gradients compared to Case 1. Viscous dissipation significantly affects thermal energy, and the Eckert number () plays a vital role in determining the temperature profile in fluid flows. The increase in kinetic energy to thermal energy, with increasing Eckert number, is also evident, as demonstrated by the increased fluid temperatures illustrated in Fig.7. Case 2 exhibits higher temperature values than Case 1. Forecasting of porous media flow by time-dependent forces results in the decrement of velocity for the growth of the unsteadiness parameter (A) shown in Fig.8. Higher values given in physical terms indicate temporal variations of larger magnitude, which cause instability in fluid motion and at the same time increase effective resistance to fluid flow. These momentary effects call upon more energy against oscillatory forces, reducing the flow’s average velocity. Subsequently, the raised unsteadiness parameter generates greater turbulence and resistance inside the environment, lowering the overall flow velocity. Additionally, Case-2 consistently exhibits slightly higher velocity values compared to Case-1. Figure9shows that an increasing unsteadiness parameter exacerbates the temporal fluctuations in the flow.Acause the flow’s temperature profile through the porous medium to decrease. As far as the body is concerned, higherAvalues further disturb the stability of convective heat transfer, which is not efficient in thermal energy transport. Such compromised convective capacity translates into average lower temperatures throughout the medium. Therefore, an elevated performanceAproduces a far more active environment, thereby preventing effective heat distribution, resulting in a lower temperature profile. In addition, Case 2 exhibits slightly higher temperature gradients than Case 1. The study assumes a porous medium with constant porosity and permeability, ignores the adoption of nanoparticle agglomeration and thermophoretic migration at high concentration levels, and limits itself to steady and two-dimensional flow without considering radiative heat transfer or change in the pressure-dependent properties.

When modeling and optimizing a process with numerous interacting factors, Response Surface Methodology (RSM), a very advanced statistical technique, is employed.Such a system provides a systematic structure that helps design experiments, develop predictive models, and study the relationship between the input variables and the corresponding resultant outcomes. The importance of RSM in fluid dynamics is articulated by its use in optimising complex phenomena, optimising both heat transfer and drag reduction and the refinement of flow characteristics. The RSM successfully envelops the nonlinear interdependency amongst parameters of Reynolds number, flow velocity, and geometric characteristics of the shrinking sheet, employing second-order polynomial equations. This methodology eliminates the need for extensive experimental or computational work to identify ideal conditions of system performance. The reason for the attractiveness of RSM is its efficacy, mainly when the traditional trial and error approaches are unsuitable because of too much cost or complexity.

This investigation encompasses three principal components, porosity effect (), Forchheimer effect () and Eckert number (). Analyses of these parameters are carried out meticulously to reveal the maximum values that increase the heat transfer rate. Each variable is evaluated at three distinct levels. Table2represents the primary variables, their variables, and their related levels using coded values. Consequently, along the design response, twenty experimental trials are shown in Table3. The number of levels for each factor and the number of factors are taken from the formula..

Figures10,11,12,13,14,15illustrates the Nus-1 (in water) and Nus-2 (in water at) with the effect of porosity (), Forchheimer effect () and Eckert number (). In Fig.11, the surface plot for Nus-1 shows an increasing trend against the Forchheimer effect, which proves heat transfer enhancement, and a decreasing trend with the Eckert number, indicating heat transfer reduction. This observation is corroborated by the contour plot in Fig.12, where high values are seen to generate an increase in Nus-1 and high values are seen to create a decrease in Nus-1. It is found that, in general, the Forchheimer effect enhances heat transfer while the Eckert number has an adverse effect. Figures13and14Surface and Contour plots show that an increase in heat transfer of Nus-2 is observed with an increase in the values of the Forchheimer effect, suggesting that enhanced heat transfer is possible due to augmented inertial effects for larger. But when the Eckert number () rises, the Nusselt number falls, highervalues reduce the efficiency of heat transport by thickening the thermal boundary layer.This forms the basis for an additional influence on the heat transfer rate because heat transfer is promoted for a positive Forchheimer effect. In contrast, a positive Eckert number promotes the opposing effect and decreases the heat transfer rate as its values increase. Figures13and14illustrate the contour and surface plots of Nus-1 and Nus-2 vs. porosity () and Forchheimer effect (). The decreasing trend of the Nusselt number (Nus-1) against porosity () and the Forchheimer effect is shown in such a way that as it the Forchheimer effect is shown in such a way that as it increases, there is a decrease in heat transfer efficiency. Similarly, the Forchheimer effect () reduces Nus-1 by a marginal amount, but this effect is much smaller than that caused by the porosity. An enhanced porosity and the Forchheimer effect are causing a decrease in heat transfer efficiency, with porosity being more influential. A decrease of Nusselt number (Nus-2) as the Forchheimer effect () and porosity () increase suggests that, at high values of these parameters, heat transfer efficiency is reduced. A reduction of Nu under the effort of an increase inandis evident in the surface plot, and low Nusselt numbers are near highandare illustrated in the contour plot, signifying deterioration of heat transfer with bothand. Figures15and16illustrate the Surface and Contour plots of Nus-1 and Nus-2 vs. Eckert number () and porosity (). As the Eckert number () and porosity (), increase, the Nusselt number (Nus-1) decreases in the surface and contour plots, signifying lesser heat transfer efficiency occurs in the case of larger values of these parameters. The contour plot is seen to reproduce the observation by the surface plot that Nu decreases with the increase in and, suggesting that both hurt heat transfer. The Nusselt number (Nus-2) increases with the Eckert number () and porosity () in both surface and contour plots, meaning that additional levels of these parameters permit better heat transfer. Surface plots show an increasing trend in Nu with increasing values ofEcand, while the contour plots of Nusselt number byandfurther strengthen the dependency as regions with higher values ofandare associated with higher values of Nusselt number confirming that bothandhave positive impacts on the heat transfer efficiency.

The grid independency test is shown in Fig.16; the current results, which are drawn at grid points 100 and 200, match, demonstrating that the BVP4C study methodology is grid independent. The accuracy and precision of the current study’s model are demonstrated in Fig.17, which compares the results of the current study with those of prior studies by taking certain effects into account.

Comparison of the present study and Lund et al.25results.

The Darcy–Forchheimer paradigm is used in this work to analyse the flow and thermal behaviour of hybrid nanofluids moving through porous media. In this study, the BVP4c numerical scheme and the Response Surface Methodology (RSM) are used in tandem to model and optimise the effects of critical parameters on velocity, temperature, and heat transfer profiles, including porosity, Forchheimer number, Eckert number, and water temperature variation. Advanced cooling systems, heat exchangers, medicinal devices, and renewable energy technologies can all benefit from these discoveries. By combining numerical and statistical approaches, a strong framework for future study in this area is provided, offering precise prediction and performance optimization for hybrid nanofluid systems.

The porosity parameter () affected the velocity profile oppositely in that a higher porosity level leads to a lower fluid velocity. Still, it improved the temperature profile because of reduced convection heat transfer and increased heat transfer conduction.

An increase in the Forchheimer parameter () lowered the velocity profile due to higher inertial resistance and enhanced the thermal profile by facilitating a transition in heat transfer dominance from convection to conduction.

It was determined how viscous dissipation affected the temperature profile.as the Eckert number () increased, and the temperature profile increased by converting kinetic energy into thermal energy, reducing heat transport effectiveness and thickening the thermal boundary layer.

The unsteadiness parameter (A) decreased temperature and velocity profiles at higher values due to the system’s enhanced energy dissipation and temporal instability.

Fluctuation in water temperature illustrated that high temperatures resulted in better heat transfer and velocity profiles because of the thermal dependency of the hybrid nanofluid.

The numerical analysis was supported by Response Surface Methodology (RSM)and justified system performance enhancement by determining the significant parameters of heat transfer efficiency.

Future work: Further research will then extend the numerical model to non-Newtonian hybrid nanofluids using a scale porous-medium system to confirm results in the setting of a magnetic field, electric field, transient flow, and pulsatile flow through porous medium and apply multi-objective surrogate-based machine-learning techniques to optimise thermal performance and minimise energy consumption.

Limitations: The study assumes a porous medium with constant porosity and permeability, ignores the adoption of nanoparticle agglomeration and thermophoretic migration at high concentration levels, and limits to two-dimensional flow without considering radiative heat transfer or change in the pressure-dependent gradient.

This work was supported by Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korea government (MOTIE) (20202020900060, The Development and Application of Operational Technology in Smart Farm Utilizing Waste Heat from Particulates Reduced Smokestack).