Spreading depolarization (SD) is the most likely cause of migraine aura and may be linked to trigeminal nociception. Using minimally invasive optogenetic SD induction (opto-SD), we previously showed that SD triggers acute periorbital mechanical allodynia-like behavior, supporting SD-induced activation of migraine-relevant trigeminal pain pathways. Here, we tested whether selective oral calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) receptor antagonist, atogepant, could ameliorate SD‐evoked pain and anxiety phenotypes.

Thirty‐two adult male and female Thy1‐ChR2‐EYFP transgenic mice (3–5 months, 18–30 g) housed in 12/12‐hr light/dark cycles were used. Under brief isoflurane anesthesia, a thin glass panel was placed on intact skull one week before the experiment to achieve translucency. A single SD was evoked using 10 s, 10 mW blue light stimulation over the motor cortex. One hour before SD or sham stimulation, atogepant (ato; 30 mg/kg in 100% PEG400) or vehicle (veh; 100% PEG400) was administered by oral gavage (4 mL/kg). Mechanical periorbital thresholds were measured 1 h after SD using von Frey monofilaments. Mouse grimace was then quantified using PainFace, an open convolutional neural network platform. Lastly, anxiety‐like behavior was examined in an open field. Groups were randomly assigned and the investigator blinded to group allocation (n= 8/group, balanced by sex),p< 0.05 was considered significant.

There was a significant main effect of SD (p< 0.001) and atogepant (p= 0.015) on the periorbital threshold with an interaction (p< 0.001). A single opto-SD lowered periorbital threshold compared with sham (veh sham vs. veh SD:p< 0.001). SD also increased the total grimace score compared with sham (veh sham vs. veh SD:p= 0.014). Oral atogepant (30 mg/kg) alleviated SD-induced periorbital allodynia-like behavior (veh SD vs. ato SD:p< 0.001) but did not completely reverse SD-induced periorbital allodynia-like behavior (ato sham vs. ato SD:p< 0.001). Atogepant abolished the SD-induced facial grimace (ato sham vs. ato SD:p= 0.238). SD increased thigmotaxis score compared with sham (veh sham vs. veh SD:p= 0.016). Following atogepant treatment, there was no difference in thigmotaxis score in SD versus sham groups (ato sham vs. ato SD:p= 0.200).

These data suggest SD provokes a reproducible and robust facial pain phenotype in mice that is alleviated by pre-administration with atogepant. There was also improvement in SD-induced anxiety-like behavior following atogepant.

Migraine is among the top three most burdensome neurological disorders in the U.S. based on disability-adjusted life years [1]. Migraine with aura (MwA) affects a large subset of the population. While it occurs in 20–30% of the migraine population [2], given the high prevalence of migraine, it is projected that there are between 1–1.5 million new cases of MwA every year [1]. Despite the recent development of selective abortive and preventive treatments for migraine [3], advances in migraine treatment discovery rely on the robust phenotyping and refinement of preclinical translational models, which remains a headache research priority [4].

Cortical spreading depression (SD) is an intense wave of neuronal and glial depolarization and the most likely electrochemical event underpinning migraine aura. Preclinical evidence suggests SD is linked to trigeminal nociception. Indeed, SD increases firing of trigeminal nociceptors [5] and increases fos expression and sensitization of medullary dorsal horn neurons [6,7]. Moreover, SD induces trigeminal pain behavior [8–10]. We previously demonstrated, using minimally invasive optogenetic SD induction (opto-SD), that SD triggers acute periorbital mechanical allodynia-like behavior that is reversed by 5HT1B/1Dreceptor agonist sumatriptan [11], indicating SD-induced activation of migraine-relevant trigeminal pain pathways in mice. These data suggest SD can be used as a robust translational model for MwA.

Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) antagonists are effective and well-tolerated first-line therapies for the abortive and preventive treatment of migraine [3]. Compelling clinical [12–14] and preclinical [13,15,16] evidence led to the discovery of CGRP antagonists for migraine therapy. Moreover, pivotal clinical trials demonstrate atogepant, an oral CGRP receptor antagonist, is effective in reducing mean monthly migraine days for the treatment of episodic migraine [17], episodic migraine in those who previously experienced preventive treatment failure [18] and in those with chronic migraine [19]. Despite the overwhelming success of CGRP antagonists, still, approximately 40% of patients given atogepant with episodic migraine did not achieve a 50% or more reduction in mean monthly migraine days [17]. For this reason, there remains considerable scientific interest to improve the profile of existing and pipeline antimigraine therapies.

To provide further validation of our opto-SD mouse model and to determine if the opto-SD model can be used in future experiments to expand the translational potential of antimigraine therapy, we tested whether atogepant ameliorates opto-SD‐evoked pain and anxiety phenotypes.

Thirty-two male and female adult transgenic mice (3–5 months, 18-30 g) expressing channelrhodopsin-2-YFP fusion protein under the thymus cell antigen-1 promoter [ChR2+; B6.Cg-Tg(Thy1-COP4/EYFP)9Gfng/J – Line 9], housed under 12/12-h day/night cycles in temperature-controlled rooms were used. Food and water were freely given. All experiments were performed at the Massachusetts General Hospital after receiving approval from the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and were conducted in accordance with the NIH Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and ARRIVE guidelines.

Single optogenetic SD (opto-SD) induction was performed as previously described [20]. Briefly, under short duration isoflurane anesthesia (5.0% induction followed by 2.0% maintenance in a gas mixture of 70% N2O and 30% O2), mice underwent scalp incision, and a glass coverslip was adhered to the intact skull using cyanoacrylate and C&B Metabond one week prior to SD induction. Mice were housed 2–4 per cage prior to coverslip placement. After coverslip placement, mice were singly housed to prevent vigorous allogrooming. On the day of SD induction, mice were again briefly anesthetized using the same isoflurane induction and maintenance dose as above, and a single SD was evoked with a 10mW, 470 nM square light pulse for 10 s over motor cortex using a 400 µm fiberoptic light source. Single SD was confirmed with intrinsic optical signal difference webcam images (OT-HD, Opti-TekScope, Chandler, AZ, USA) using MATLAB. Sham mice underwent the same procedure except no light stimulation was delivered.

One-hour prior to SD or sham stimulation, either atogepant (30 mg/kg, 4 mL/kg) or the same dose of vehicle was administered via oral gavage. This dose was selected because in a recent study using a nitroglycerin migraine model, atogepant 30 mg/kg produced facial and hindpaw analgesia [21]. Working solution of atogepant was freshly prepared each day by dissolving 7.5 mg of atogepant in 1 mL of 100% PEG400. Mice were gently scruffed at the shoulders, an 18-gauge gavage needle attached to a 1 cc syringe was advanced without resistance to the level of the sternum to deliver 70-120 μl of drug or vehicle.

Physical dependence study in rats with atogepant 10 mg/kg p.o. b.i.d produced Cmax values of 707 ng/ml. Exposure (Cmax) following atogepant at 60 mg orally in humans is 740 ng/ml. Thus, the Cmax values for atogepant (30 mg/kg) in this study was likely in the range of human exposure after 60 mg dose (unpublished data).

One-hour after opto-SD (2 h after drug treatment), predefined behavior outcomes were tested. Mice were tested in blocks of 4. All mice underwent the same behavioral tests. Behavioral tests were performed in the mid to late afternoon (between the hours of 1-4PM). Mice were acclimated to the behavior room 30 min prior to behavior testing. Mice were not habituated to restrainer devices prior to the day of periorbital mechanical threshold testing as repeat restraint stress may alter behavioral responses [22]. Mice were placed tail first with face positioned in the opening of a wide entry funnel shaped restrainer device that allowed head and forepaw mobility as mice were gently held by the tail (Millipore Sigma, Rockville, MD, USA; Z756903) for up to 5 min prior to the start of von Frey monofilament testing which lasted approximately 10 min. Evoked pain was examined under ambient lighting (125 lx) using mechanical periorbital threshold testing with sequential ascending calibrated von Frey monofilaments (0.008 to 0.4 g, Stoelting Co, Wood Dale, IL, USA) applied to the superior-medial area of the right and left eye with just enough force to create a curved bend of the filament, as previously reported [23,24]. The minimal force that evoked brisk head withdrawal, head turn, vocalization or scratching > 50% of 5 trials was considered a threshold response [11]. The right and left threshold values were averaged.

Spontaneous pain was assessed using grimace scores. PainFace, a cloud-based 3 kernel size machine learning algorithm (MLA) platform for C57BL/6 background mice, was used to score the following facial action units: orbital tightening, nose bulge, whisker position, and ear position with ratings of 0 (not present), 1 (moderate), and 2 (severe). Five-min videos (30 fps) of mice placed in a behavior chamber (5.5 cm wide × 14.0 cm deep) illuminated (~ 600 lx) to prevent shadowing and for visibility of facial features were captured after periorbital mechanical testing. For grimace testing, mice were not habituated to the test chamber as there was no difference in grimace scores in mice previously tested with or without habituation [25]. Images were analyzed at 1 frame/s [25]. Images in which the MLA was able to generate scores for each facial action unit were included for further analysis (average 93 ± 12 images per mouse). Confidence values were > 0.9 for identification of orbital (0.962 ± 0.002), nose (0.968 ± 0.002), whisker (0.929 ± 0.002), and ear (0.949 ± 0.002) face units (mean ± SEM, Fig.1C). The average total grimace scores were compared between groups.

Anxiety-like behavior was measured by allowing mice to explore a dimly lit (16 lx) 30.48 cm × 35.56 cm open field apparatus for 10 min as previously described [11]. Path tracings, inner and outer zone times, and immobility time were analyzed using Any-maze (Stoelting Co, Wood Dale, IL, USA). Thigmotaxis score was calculated as the fraction of time spent exploring the outer perimeter/total time. Cumulative distance traveled was calculated in 60 s time bins and plotted over time (s). The total distance travelled (m) was compared between groups.

Following behavior, mice were euthanized with isoflurane anesthetic overdose followed by decapitation.

Mice were randomly assigned to one of four experimental groups (atogepant SD, vehicle SD, atogepant sham, vehicle sham) using an online random number generator (https://www.graphpad.com/quickcalcs/randomize1/). For behavior testing, the investigator was blinded to group allocation and drug being administered and unblinded only after the completion of data collection. There are no missing data. Sample size determination was empirical using existing variability of prior data (σ 0.014–0.12), a sample size ofn= 8 per group was estimated assuming power ≥ 80%, α = 0.05 for periorbital mechanical threshold testing. Males and females were balanced per group (n= 4/sex). Two-way ANOVA was used to test the effect of SD stimulation and drug administration on behavioral outcomes with Fisher’s post-hoc testing for group comparisons. Multiple linear regression (MLR) was used to determine the effect of male versus female sex, SD versus sham group, and atogepant versus vehicle drug administration on rank transformed periorbital mechanical threshold. Statistical analyses were conducted using GraphPad Prism 10.0 (La Jolla, CA, USA). For all testing, two-tailedp< 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Parametric data analysis was performed on raw data unless data were not normally distributed. Periorbital threshold data and immobility time were rank transformed prior to parametric analysis. Data are presented as mean ± SEM.

To investigate if oral atogepant can block SD-induced allodynia-like behavior, periorbital mechanical thresholds were examined following SD or sham stimulation in the presence of atogepant 30 mg/kg or vehicle (n= 8/group; Fig.1). Two-way ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of SD (p< 0.001) and atogepant administration (p= 0.015) on periorbital thresholds and a significant interaction between variables (p< 0.001). Consistent with prior observations [11,20,26], single opto-SD significantly lowered periorbital thresholds compared with sham, suggesting SD provokes a reproducible and robust periorbital allodynia-like behavior (veh sham vs veh SD: 0.355 ± 0.022 vs 0.029 ± 0.003 respectively,p< 0.001). Oral atogepant (30 mg/kg) relieved SD-induced periorbital allodynia-like behavior (veh SD vs ato SD: 0.029 ± 0.003 vs 0.119 ± 0.024 respectively,p< 0.001). However, atogepant did not completely reverse SD-induced periorbital allodynia-like behavior since there was still a difference between the atogepant treated sham and SD groups (ato sham vs ato SD: 0.334 ± 0.025 vs 0.119 ± 0.024 respectively,p< 0.001). Atogepant resulted in a range of 21.47–85.89% improvement in allodynia-like behavior.

Regression analysis was used to account for sex, SD versus sham group, and atogepant versus vehicle administration. Consistent with the above results, there were significant main effects of atogepant and SD on periorbital mechanical thresholds. Atogepant increased periorbital mechanical thresholds (effect estimate 3.50, 95% CI 0.12 to 6.88,p= 0.043) and SD lowered periorbital mechanical thresholds (effect estimate −15.50, 95% CI −18.88 to −12.22,p< 0.001). However, there was no effect of female sex on periorbital mechanical thresholds (effect estimate −0.06, 95% CI −3.44 to −3.31,p= 0.970). There was a two-way interaction between atogepant treatment and SD reflecting the improvement in periorbital mechanical threshold in the SD group (effect estimate 10.00, 95% CI 4.13 to 15.87,p= 0.002). However, there remained no two-way interaction between female sex and SD (p= 0.696) or female sex and drug effect (p= 0.965) on periorbital threshold.

SD significantly increased average total grimace score compared with sham (veh sham vs veh SD: 1.458 ± 0.100 vs 2.056 ± 0.123 respectively,p= 0.014). Atogepant reduced the SD-mediated increase in grimace. In the vehicle treated groups, there was a 41.0% increase in grimace score in the SD compared with the sham mice. In the atogepant treated groups, there was an 18.5% increase in grimace score in SD compared with sham mice. There was no difference in facial grimace observed in SD versus sham atogepant treated mice (ato sham vs ato SD: 1.493 ± 0.206 vs 1.769 ± 0.193 respectively,p= 0.238) suggesting atogepant prevented SD-induced spontaneous pain behavior.

Single SD significantly increased anxiety-like behavior as measured by an increase in thigmotaxis score compared with sham (veh sham vs veh SD: 0.819 ± 0.015 vs 0.911 ± 0.030 respectively,p= 0.016; Fig.2). There was no difference in thigmotaxis score in SD versus sham in atogepant treated mice (ato sham vs ato SD: 0.810 ± 0.012 vs 0.858 ± 0.037 respectively,p= 0.200). These data suggest a decrease in SD-induced anxiety behavior by atogepant in mice.

SD produced nonsignificant trends towards increased immobility time compared with sham (veh sham 158.5 ± 22.7 s; veh SD 291.9 ± 60. 7 s,p= 0.109; ato sham 134.0 ± 12.6 s; ato SD 259.3 ± 64.1 s,p= 0.08; Fig.2). SD significantly reduced total distance traveled compared with sham (veh sham vs veh SD:p= 0.041), which was not observed in atogepant treated groups (ato sham vs ato SD:p= 0.109).

Here, we demonstrate that atogepant alleviates opto-SD-induced evoked and spontaneous pain phenotypes and ameliorates anxiety-like behavior. These data indicate that opto-SD-induced robust trigeminal allodynia-like behavior is susceptible to CGRP antagonists. These data also contribute to the existing body of evidence that opto-SD can be used as a screening model for the development of abortive and preventive migraine therapeutics.

Similar to previous data, we show that opto-SD produces mechanical trigeminal allodynia-like behavior [11,26] used to model acute and chronic aspects of migraine-relevant trigeminal pain phenotypes in mice. These results are comparable to findings using more invasive methods of SD induction [8–10]. SD can activate meningeal nociceptors and provoke central sensitization. Indeed, allodynia and hyperalgesia are mediated by central sensitization of second and third order nociceptive neurons [7,27,28]. In approximately 48% of trigeminal ganglion single unit recordings, SD triggered sustained increases in Aδ- and C-fibre unit firing [5]. Additionally, SD increases fos staining in trigeminal nucleus caudalis neurons which is prevented by meningeal afferent transection suggesting SD-induced activation of second order trigeminal nociceptors is dependent on meningeal afferent input [6]. Consistent with these findings, SD increased firing in dura-sensitive lamina I-II and lamina V central trigeminovascular neurons [7].

We also observed an SD-induced increase in spontaneous pain measured by face grimace. Noxious moderate intensity stimulation of deep tissues is more likely to produce a pained face or grimace [29]. Recent advances in the cloud-based PainFace MLA platform were validated for grimace testing of black-coated mouse strains [25]. MLAs have the advantage of being less labor intense compared to manual scoring and can be used as a high-throughput platform for examining spontaneous pain behavior [25]. However, single SD variably produces grimace response [11,30]. In this study, we use a brightly lit chamber (~ 600 lx) which is needed for the MLA to distinguish face units in mice with black fur. This illumination could enhance SD-induced grimace response due to photosensitivity [10,30]. As a result, while we refer to MLA based grimace testing as a measure of spontaneous pain, we acknowledge this readout may reflect a bright light-evoked grimace given the conditions of the test chamber. Additionally, handling related to oral gavage may have introduced stress which could enhance trigeminal pain responses [22]. Similarly, while we balance sex in the sham and SD groups, estrus cycle stage was not determined which could also influence trigeminal pain [30]. It is possible that a combination of these factors and their interactions may lead to increased grimace in the SD group or produce variability in the expression of grimace in published reports. Despite this variability, it is most likely that SD-induced grimace directly or indirectly reflects engagement of affective or limbic neural circuits involved in expression of emotional, unpleasant or distressing components of pain [29].

Interestingly, we also observed SD induced increases in immobility time and a nonsignificant trend towards reduced distance traveled. This observation could be related to oral gavage, vehicle or drug exposure, though this is less likely as sham mice also received gavage and were exposed to similar doses of drug or vehicle administration. Instead, it is more likely that this is related to increased pain, discomfort or increases in freezing behavior.

There is ample evidence that CGRP release is integral in migraine pain initiation. CGRP is elevated in the cranial circulation of migraine patients and slightly higher in those with MwA during the beginning phase of a migraine attack [12]. Similarly, in animal models, CGRP is increased in cranial circulation following stimulation of the trigeminal ganglion [13] or superior sagittal sinus [15]. Furthermore, if CGRP is exogenously administered, it can trigger migraine attacks [14]. In both clinical [13] and preclinical models [13,16], migraine abortive treatments limit increases in CGRP. Taken together these data suggest CGRP release is central to migraine pain initiation.

We previously demonstrated SD-induced periorbital allodynia-like behavior is susceptible to triptan abortive therapy. In this study, the clinical congruence of the opto-SD model is expanded to include susceptibility to atogepant. We demonstrate atogepant alleviates SD-induced pain behavior in both male and female mice. We not only demonstrate atogepant alleviates evoked pain but also spontaneous pain. These results are consistent with older CGRP antagonists including olcegepant which reduced heat hyperalgesia and MK-8825 which reduced periorbital allodynia-like behavior in a KCl model of repeated SD [8,10]. Interestingly, we observed that while atogepant 30 mg/kg significantly ameliorated the SD-induced periorbital allodynia-like behavior, it did not completely abolish periorbital allodynia-like behavior. However, in rats, atogepant was tested at a dose range of 3-30 mg/kg and at the highest dose 30 mg/kg, there was an 80–98% improvement in periorbital allodynia-like behavior between days 0 and 9 using a nitroglycerin (NTG) migraine model [21]. Differences in the degree of atogepant analgesia between studies could be explained by differences in the number of doses administered (although even after acute administration on Day 0 of NTG, atogepant produced an 80% improvement in rat), species differences in dose response, differences in the model used or a combination of these factors. Indeed, in our prior observations using the opto-SD model, SD produced trigeminal but not spinal allodynia-like behavior. However, in the NTG model, a widespread allodynia-like behavior ensues after repeated NTG administration [31–33]. Other potential explanations could be related to differences in neuropeptides involved in signaling migraine with compared to migraine without aura [12]. SD is used to model MwA while NTG is widely accepted as a robust model of migraine without aura. In clinical studies, MwA subtypes may have greater CGRP release along with release of other neuropeptides including vasoactive intestinal peptide that may contribute to slight differences in efficacy of CGRP targeted medications. Following SD in rats, atogepant administered at lower doses (5 mg/kg) did not completely prevent activation of trigeminal nociceptors with time dependent differences in Aδ versus C-fibre inhibition [34]. Taken together, these data raise the possibility that while CGRP antagonists are highly effective for both populations [17–19], there may be an opportunity to refine CGRP targeted therapy in migraine subpopulations.

In this study, atogepant ameliorated SD-induced anxiety-like behavior in an open-field test. These data differ from MK-8825 data demonstrating no effect on time spent in the closed arm of an elevated plus maze in rats following KCl evoked SDs [8]. The differences in study results could be explained by species differences, timing of administration of CGRP antagonist, and SD induction methods. Additionally, there may be differences in behavior between elevated plus maze which may be more anxiogenic than open field. There may also be differences in drug effect related to disparate antagonist potency at CGRP and AMY1 receptors [8]. Another study found CGRP antagonist (CGRP8-37) produced anxiolytic effects when administered centrally. However, there was a confounding effect of increased locomotion as CGRP antagonist also increased total arm entries [35]. In our study, it is possible that reduced locomotion affected the thigmotaxis score, particularly in the SD group leading to an overall decrease in exploratory behavior. However, the differences in locomotion between groups were not significant, likely related to the variability between groups. Despite the differences in study design and findings, our data are consistent with an SD-evoked pain-affective phenotype supporting activation of trigeminal nociceptive pathways as well as neurolimbic neural circuits. These data also raise the possibility that CGRP nociceptor activity can drive dysregulation of affective neural circuits involved in anxiety-like behavior.

Increased activity in the amygdala may be responsible for fear and anxiety and the emotional aspects of pain [36]. The amygdala receives both indirect multimodal nociceptive input from the cortex and thalamus as well as direct trigeminal nociceptive input via the parabrachial nucleus [37]. As a result, ascending nociceptive information can alter emotional states and heighten anxiety [37]. It is conceivable that CGRP antagonist mediated inhibition of nociceptive input may reduce amygdala activation and subsequent pain-evoked anxiety behavior. We therefore hypothesize that the anxiety behavior is likely a nociceptor driven response and the impact of atogepant on anxiety behavior is a peripherally mediated effect. Indeed, atogepant likely acts peripherally between SD induction and trigeminal nociceptor activation since atogepant administered to rats had minimal brain penetration [21]. However, pharmacokinetic data in rat brain tissues suggests some BBB penetration (about 1% of plasma) [21]. Considering the very high potency of atogepant at CGRP receptors with (Ki = 0.7 nM in rodents), this degree of brain penetration may be sufficient to modulate brain-derived behaviors like anxiety.

The mechanism of atogepant action is likely peripheral [21]. It is unclear if increasing central access of atogepant would lead to further increases in atogepant efficacy. Several studies demonstrate atogepant mediated inhibition of primary afferent nociceptors and central trigeminal neurons. Oral atogepant (5 mg/kg) administered 1 h before SD produced a modest inhibition of SD-evoked C-fibre trigeminal nociceptors within 60 min of SD induction. However, atogepant inhibited Aδ nociceptors in a delayed manner, starting 1.5 h and lasting 3 h post SD induction [34]. Recent data demonstrate atogepant blocks activation of high threshold but not wide dynamic range neurons in the spinal trigeminal nucleus and can inhibit sensitization of both high threshold and wide dynamic range neurons. The divergent effect on activation versus sensitization is proposed to reflect the preference of atogepant for inhibition of Aδ over C-fibre nociceptors [38]. It is important to note that in this study we did not examine the impact of atogepant on SD susceptibility but rather its downstream effect on SD-induced pain behavior. While atogepant was given prior to opto-SD, there were no SD failures. For every experiment SD was confirmed with optical intrinsic signal imaging so atogepant inhibiting SD is not a possibility. and SD threshold was not determined as SD stimulation was suprathreshold (10mW).

There are several study limitations. This study examined single SD. However, MwA is a disorder of recurrent bouts of visual disturbance and head pain. Repeated SD may allow for the ability to test drug efficacy using a more severe migraine pain model. Similarly, because we used single SD, atogepant was dosed once. We also used higher doses of atogepant than used in prior studies and did not include a dose response. This was based on a recent rodent study demonstrating a robust effect of 30 mg/kg dose. There are also shortcomings related to the SD model including the use of brief anesthesia during induction and that it is a holohemispheric SD model which may intensify the pain phenotype as compared to the human condition. Nonetheless, that this model produces compelling and reproducible activation of trigeminal nociceptors and pain behavior that responds to multiple migraine specific abortive and preventive medications suggests its relevance as a migraine model [11,39–41].

Atogepant ameliorates opto-SD induced evoked and spontaneous pain and anxiety phenotypes. Our data support SD as a model for migraine given its ability to activate trigeminal nociceptive pathways and provoke pain behaviors in rodents and provide evidence that the opto-SD model has translational resonance and can be used for drug discovery to expand current migraine therapies and test future pipeline treatments.

We would like to thank Yuichi Sasaki for his technical support during this study in blinding mice.

Authors contributed the following to the study—M.Z.K. data collection, data analysis, preparation of figures, writing manuscript, P.B. methodology, data analysis, manuscript review & editing, C.A. methodology, manuscript review & editing, conceptualization, fund acquisition, A.M.H. methodology, conceptualization, data analysis, preparation of figures, writing manuscript, manuscript review & editing.