In this study, organic compounds such as coordinate organic polymers (COPs) and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have been investigated as a known technology for CO2and nitrogen (N2) adsorption at low and high pressures. The combination of MOFs and COPs is an important innovation in porous materials for gas adsorption and separation. By exploiting the complementary properties of both, this approach improves adsorption performance, stability, and selectivity. This approach reduces the limitations of each material and opens up new opportunities for developing efficient and sustainable adsorbents. These compounds are efficient and cost-effective. First, the COP and COP@ZIF-8 core–shell were synthesized by solvothermal method and then characterized using famous techniques FT-IR, XRD, BET, TEM, HR-TRM, SEM, EDX/Mapping, TGA, and XPS to determine their physicochemical properties. Nanosorbents were tested for adsorption and separation of CO2/N2. The results showed that the modification of COP with ZIF-8 increased its CO2adsorption capacity from 0.209 to 3.425 mmol g−1at 1 bar and 300.15 K. In addition, the adsorption selectivity of COP@ZIF-8 (20%) and COP@ZIF-8 (30%) core–shells is significantly (207.752 and 200.592 in ambient conditions, respectively) improved compared to pure COP (14.824).

In this study, organic compounds such as coordinate organic polymers (COPs) and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have been investigated as a known technology for CO2and nitrogen (N2) adsorption at pressures of 1–10 bar.

All materials used in this work such as poly-vinylpyrrolidone (PVP), hydrofluoric acid (40%, HF), ethanol (99%, EtOH), methanol (99%, MeOH), zinc nitrate hexahydrate (Zn(NO3)3·6H2O), aluminum chloride anhydrous (95%, AlCl3), 2-methylimidazole (2-MeIM), benzene (99.5%), 1,2-dichloroethane (99.0%, DCE), dichloromethane (99.5%, DCM), chloroform (99.5%) were purchased from Merck.

For COP synthesis,16,26the solvothermal method was used (Fig. 1). First, 10 g of AlCl3was added to a beaker containing 66.67 mL of DCE and 3.34 mL of benzene and stirred at room temperature for 45 min. Then, the stirring was stopped due to the significant accumulation of particles around the stirring bar. The mixture was aged for 24 h. The reaction mixture was quenched by mechanically breaking the aggregate pieces and slowly adding the MeOH/ice mixture (66.67 mL). The resulting mixture was filtered, and the precipitate obtained was stirred twice with distilled water (85 °C, 4 h), four times with EtOH (60 °C, 6 h), four times with chloroform (60 °C, 6 h), and two times with DCM (25 °C, 6 h). The yellow powder was transferred to a vacuum oven and dried at 100 °C.

In a beaker containing 19 mL pure MeOH, 100 mg COP was added and sonicated at room temperature for 1 h (Fig. 1). Then, 20 mg of PVP was dispersed in the resulting mixture and stirred for 12 h under ambient temperature. Next, mg of Zn(NO3)3·6H2O (200 mg) was added to the above. Thereafter, 8 mL of MeOH solution, including 250 mg of 2-MeIM, was added to the combination and agitated for 45 min. The resulting mixture was centrifuged for 5 min at a rate of 9000 rpm. Eventually, the solid samples were washed with MeOH (30 mL, 3×) and 12 h dried in an oven at 90 °C.26This sample is 20 wt%. The synthesis method of other composite samples with different amounts of ZIF-8 (10 and 30 wt%) on COP was similar to the preparation method of (20 wt%), and only the ratio of raw materials (amount of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O and 2-methylimidazole) was adjusted according to the desired weight percentage. Other steps were performed similarly, including sonication, stirring, centrifugation, washing, and drying.

Fig. 2represents the schematic of the in-house volumetric setup for gas adsorption. This unique setup became capable of measuring the equilibrium adsorption potential of gases such as CO2and N2at 1–10 bar and different temperatures. First, the weighed adsorbent was transferred to the adsorption cell and completely sealed. The adsorption cell was tested with high-pressure (≥50 bar) helium gas. Then, the adsorbent was degassed using the pressure–temperature swing method (200 degrees Celsius and vacuum pressure) to remove the undesirable molecules adsorbed from the atmosphere. A vacuum pump, a heater, and a temperature controller provided the vacuum pressure and temperature of the adsorption cell, respectively. After 4 h, the heater was turned off, the pump was vacuumed, and the cell was cooled down to the adsorption temperature with a smooth ramp. A circulator kept the temperature of the gas and the adsorption cell constant during the adsorption process. To measure the equilibrium adsorption capacity of the gas on the weighted adsorbent, the pressure of the gas cell was set to the desired pressure by opening V-3 and V-4, but V-5 was closed. Then, by opening V-5, the desired gas enters the absorbed cell, and the pressure of the gas cell decreases. The constant pressure of the adsorption cell represents the state of equilibrium, and the difference between the initial and equilibrium pressures observed is the basis for volumetric adsorption calculations. The pressure drop is due to the gas adsorption on the surface and the dead volume of the setup. Since helium molecules are not adsorbed on the adsorbent, helium adsorption was performed to reduce the dead volume from the calculations. The total CO2or N2adsorption amount was calculated using the eqn (S1)–(S5).

In this study, composite materials with different weight ratios of ZIF-8 (10, 20, and 30 wt%) were synthesized on COP to investigate the effect of ZIF-8 content on carbon dioxide absorption. After the adsorption experiments, the sample containing 20 wt% ZIF-8 showed the best performance in terms of CO2absorption and was selected as the optimal sample. Therefore, all characterization analyses (including FT-IR, XRD, BET, TEM, HR-TRM, SEM, EDX/Mapping, TGA, and XPS) were performed on this optimal sample to investigate its structural and chemical properties accurately.

The FT-IR spectra of COP, ZIF-8 NPs, and COP@ZIF-8 are depicted inFig. 3A. All the peaks observed in these samples are detailed inTable 1. Upon comparing the FT-IR spectra of the COP@ZIF-8 core–shell with those of pure ZIF-8 NPs, distinct peaks are observed that correspond to aromatic C–H stretching at 385 cm−1, aromatic C–C stretching at 1600 cm−1, and aromatic C–H bending characteristic of COP within the range of 600–900 cm−1.

The XRD patterns for COP, ZIF-8 NPs, and COP@ZIF-8 are shown inFig. 3B. The XRD analysis of ZIF-8 NPs (Fig. 3B-a) reveals high crystallization. The appearance of planes 002, 112, 022, 013, and 222 in this sample corresponds to peaks observed at 2θvalues of 10.35°, 12.70°, 14.80°, 16.40°, and 18°, respectively.27These values are consistent with those reported in the literature. The XRD pattern inFig. 3B-bshows a broad peak at 2θvalues of 22° (002),28indicating the presence of graphitic carbon and confirming the amorphous structure of COP. Also, the appearance of several small peaks in this pattern indicates that alumina is present in the COP structure. Upon comparing the XRD patterns of COP@ZIF-8 with those of pure ZIF-8, it is clear that the peak intensities are lower, which can be attributed to the reduced crystallinity caused by the presence of amorphous COP within the composite.

Also, TEM (Fig. 5A) and HR-TEM (Fig. 5B) images corroborate the core–shell formation of the COP@ZIF-8 structure. The central part of the particles, which is seen as denser and with higher contrast, constitutes the core, which is made of the COP material. Around this core, a uniform layer with a different contrast, known as the shell, is observed, which is made of ZIF-8 NPs. This layered structure and the clear separation between the core and the shell indicate the successful loading of ZIF-8 NPs onto the COP. These results confirm that the ZIF-8 NPs are uniformly coated on the COP surface, and this core–shell structure can help improve the physical and chemical properties of the composite.

Based on the elemental mapping presented inFig. 6, the distribution of Al and Zn elements in the COP@ZIF-8 structure is uniform and homogeneous. The aluminum element is related to the COP matrix, while the Zn element indicates the successful loading of ZIF-8 NPs into the composite structure. This uniform distribution of both elements confirms the proper dispersion of NPs and the structural integrity of the sample, which can affect the improvement of the material's physical and chemical properties.

EDX analysis is a powerful method for identifying and determining the distribution of chemical elements in samples. This study used EDX to demonstrate the presence and uniform distribution of Al and Zn elements in the COP@ZIF-8 structure (Fig. 7). This analysis shows that ZIF-8 NPs were successfully loaded onto the COP matrix, and the distribution of elements was homogeneous throughout the sample. Therefore, the EDX results confirm the structural integrity and proper dispersion of NPs in the composite, which can positively affect the material's functional properties.

BET analysis was performed accurately and in accordance with the methods presented in the SI to determine the specific surface area and adsorption properties of the sample. The surface area values for COP and the COP@ZIF-8 core–shell were determined to be 7.845 m2g−1and 1356.942 m2g−1, respectively. As observed, the pore diameter decreases with the formation of core–shell. According to the standard IUPAC classification, pore sizes are divided into three categories, including micropores (<2 nm), mesopores (2 to 50 nm), and macropores >50 nm.16,33–35COP with 2–50 nm pore sizes, are classified as mesoporous. According to the IUPAC classification, the adsorption isotherm of COP@ZIF-8 (Fig. 8C) is of type I. It has a hysteresis loop of type H4, indicating the presence of a combined micro- and mesoporous structure in this adsorbent.36–38The presence of micropores could be demonstrated from the rapid increase of gas adsorption at relative low pressure. Meanwhile, the rapid upturn and hysteresis loop at relative high pressure suggests the presence of mesopores.39A more detailed analysis of the adsorption–desorption isotherms shows that the studied COP@ZIF-8, besides having a mesoporous structure, also contains a significant percentage of microporosity; this is entirely consistent with the high values of the reported specific surface area. Therefore, the classification of these materials is not limited to being mesoporous only, and their structure is a combination of microporous and mesoporous networks, which can provide more optimal adsorption and transport properties. The shape and type of the adsorption–desorption isotherm usually indicate the type and size of the pores. Parts of the isotherm corresponding to adsorption at low relative pressures indicate the presence of micropores, while adsorption at medium to high relative pressures indicates mesopores. Therefore, a detailed analysis of the isotherm curve confirms the composition of micro- and mesopores.

The adsorption isotherm of COP-150 (Fig. 8A) is of type III according to the IUPAC classification, indicating weak interactions between the adsorbate and the adsorbent surface, as well as monolayer to multilayer adsorption on non-porous or coarsely porous surfaces. This type of isotherm is usually observed when the adsorption is mainly due to interactions between adsorbate molecules and the adsorbent surface lacking strong adsorption sites.26The observed hysteresis loop is of type H3, indicating the presence of slit-shaped pores or aggregation of plate-shaped particles that do not limit adsorption at high partial pressures. According to the IUPAC standard, type H3 hysteresis is usually observed in materials with mesoporous porous structures and specific pore geometries, which are consistent with the structure of zeolites and similar materials such as COP-150.40,41Based on the BJH (Barrett–Joyner–Halenda) plots shown inFig. 8B and D, the particle distribution falls within the range of 2–50 nm, confirming that the particles are mesoporous.Table 2summarizes the essential parameters associated with the porosity of the COP and COP@ZIF-8 samples, including total pore volume, surface area, pore diameter, and BJH values.

Fig. 9Ashowst-plot of COP. The external surface area (Sext) of the COP sample was 6.70 m2g−1. A good correlation was observed between the total surface area determined by the BET method (7.84 m2g−1) and the sum of the external and mesosphere surface areas obtained through thet-plot (6.70 m2g−1). The mesosphere surface area (Smes) is calculated by subtracting the external surface area from the total surface area (SBET). In other words, theSmesequals the difference between theSBETand theSextdetermined by thet-plot. For the COP sample, theSmeswas obtained to be 1.14 m2g−1.42The external surface area was first determined from thet-plot to calculate the micropore surface area of COP@ZIF-8. The use of thet-plot method for calculating the surface area of micropore (Smic) materials is discussed, and only the calculation of the external surface area using the high-pressure (or high layer thickness) fitting is recommended. Thet-plot of COP@ZIF-8 was determined (Fig. 9B), andSextwas calculated for COP@ZIF-8 (67.22 m2g−1). The total surface area from the BET method is 1356.94 m2g−1. TheSmicof COP@ZIF-8 was then obtained by the difference betweenSBETandSext,42which gave a value ofSmic= 1289.72 m2g−1.

According to the results of TGA analysis, which show extraordinary thermal stability for adsorbent materials, including COP and COP@ZIF-8 core–shell at temperatures above 500 °C, these nanosorbents can be classified as the most stable porous materials (Fig. S1-A-b). The significant peaks of TGA analysis were related to the decomposition of ZIF-8, which occurred because of the burning of organic linker molecules in the framework.43This phenomenon has led to the formation of zinc oxide, or the final product of ZIF-8 NPs.43As shown in Fig. S1-A-a, the decomposition of Al3+has occurred with a decrease in the weight of COP at a temperature of 445 °C. The first weight loss occurred at a temperature lower than 100 °C, related to the loss of water or residual/remaining evaporation,44evident in Fig. S1-A-b. Also, the second decomposition at a temperature of 230 °C is related to removing oxygenated functional groups from the surface and destroying volatile substances in the sample.

The XPS survey spectrum shows four prominent peaks of C 1s, N 1s, O 1s, and Zn 2p (Fig. S1-B). Also,Table 3reports the C, N, Zn, and O content of COP@IF-8 core–shell. The sharp Zn 2p spectrum confirms the presence of two different chemical states of Zn, including 61.1% of Zn 2p3/2and 38.9% of Zn 2p1/2(Fig. 10A), which indicate interactions of Zn with carbon atoms in different chemical environments or with different oxidation states. The high-resolution O 1s spectrum confirmed the presence of four different carbon groups, including 32.4% of Zn–O, 24.5% of CCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019O, 28.3% of Zn–OH/C–OH, and 14.8% of H2O (Fig. 10B). The high-resolution C 1s spectrum was fitted by four peaks, suggesting the existence of three carbon species on the surface of the sample: 51.95% of C–C, 41.98% of C–N (28.25%), 6.06 of CCreated by potrace 1.16, written by Peter Selinger 2001-2019O (Fig. 10C). The high-resolution N 1s spectrum was fitted by three peaks suggesting the existence of nitrogen species on the surface of the sample: 54.6% of pyridinic N, 20.62% of graphitic N, and 24.78% of pyrrolic N (Fig. 10D).

A volumetric in-house setup (Fig. 2) was used to measure the equilibrium uptake capability of CO2and N2on COP, COP@ZIF-8 (10–30%) samples at 0–10 bar and 300.15 K, and the results are indicated inFig. 11. As may be observed fromFig. 11A, COP has the bottom CO2adsorption capability inside the variety of 0–10 bar because its porosity and surface area are lower than the ones of other nanosorbents. At low pressures, due to the integration of ZIF-8 NPs with COP, an increase in CO2adsorption capacity is observed. It can be said that the presence of amine functional groups in the pores of COP@ZIF-8 samples strengthens the interaction between the nanosorbent surface and the CO2molecule. Since the polarizability of CO2is high (26.3 × 10−25cm3),45–50it increases the electrostatic attraction towards the amine-containing surface groups of COP@ZIF-8 nanosorbents and thus improves CO2adsorption. In addition, by increasing the ZIF-8 NPs mass ratio from 10–30%, the CO2adsorption capacity increased significantly (2.509–3.425 mmol g−1at 1 bar and 300.15 K).Fig. 11Bshows the N2adsorption isotherms of the nanosorbents. COP@ZIF-8 (10%) has the highest N2adsorption capacity, followed by COP@ZIF-8 (30%), COP@ZIF-8 (20%), and COP, which is because the uptake loading of N2, as an inert gas, is mainly affected by the textural properties of the adsorbent (i.e., the higher the porosity, the higher the N2adsorption capacity). The low adsorption value of N2by the surface of COP and synthesized nanocomposites is due to its inert nature (i.e., the polarizability of 17.6 × 10−25cm3),45,51which prevents its interaction with the surface of the absorbers.

To better investigate the adsorption behavior of N2and CO2and the adsorbents used, the experimental data were evaluated using Langmuir (eqn (1)), Langmuir–Freundlich (eqn (2)), Dual-Site Langmuir (DSL) (eqn (3)), and Dual-Site Langmuir–Freundlich (DS-LF) (eqn (4)) equations. The regression coefficient (R2) and parameters of these isotherms are presented inTables 4and5. The DSL model had excellent accuracy for all samples (Fig. S2 and S3).

in these equations,Pis the total gas pressure in the bar,qis maximum adsorption capacity or single layer capacity of the adsorbent in mmol g−1, andn(p) is the adsorption capacity in mmol g−1.q1, andq2are the maximum adsorption capacities (mmol g−1) corresponding to two different types of adsorption sites and are not necessarily equal and should not be considered the same. Also,k1andk2are the adsorption coefficients or affinity constants (1 bar−1), andn1andn2are parameters indicating the deviation from the ideal homogeneous surface.

Fitting N2adsorption data with different isotherm models (Table 4) shows that the adsorption of this gas on the studied adsorbent is complex and involves several types of adsorption sites with different energies and capacities. The Langmuir model with a high coefficient of determination (R2≈ 0.99) describes monolayer adsorption and homogeneous surface to some extent, but the difference in parameters compared to CO2adsorption is due to the molecular characteristics of nitrogen. Dual-site models such as DSL and DS-LF withR2close to 1 better reflect the surface heterogeneity and the presence of adsorption sites with different energies. In particular, thenparameters in LF model reflect the heterogeneity's intensity and the adsorption energy's distribution. In general, the best description of nitrogen adsorption is related to the two-site and LF models, which will express the complexity of the surface structure and the diverse adsorption mechanisms and are consistent with similar findings in the scientific literature on the importance of surface heterogeneity in the adsorption of nonpolar gases.

The results of fitting the CO2gas adsorption data with different isotherm models (Table 5) indicate the studied adsorbent's complex and multimodal adsorption behavior. The Langmuir model with a highR2(more than 0.99) shows that the monolayer adsorption and homogeneous surface are described to an acceptable extent. However, significant fluctuations in the values of theqandkparameters indicate the heterogeneity of the surface and the diversity of adsorption sites. The DSL model, which has a coefficient of determination close to 1, confirms the existence of two adsorption sites with different capacities and energies. The significant difference between the parametersq1andq2as well ask1andk2indicates the different contribution of each site to the adsorption process, especially very large or small values of the equilibrium constants indicating a substantial difference in the adsorption propensity of molecules to each site, which is common in complex and multiphase adsorbents.57The LF model, which is used to describe adsorption on surfaces with heterogeneous energy distribution of adsorption sites, also explains the data well with anR2above 0.998; a parameternless than 1 in most cases indicates surface inhomogeneity and non-uniformity of adsorption energy. Finally, the DS-LF model, which combines two adsorption sites with heterogeneous energy distribution, provides the best fit with anR2close to 0.999. The values of the parametersn1andn2, which are close to or higher than 1 in some cases, indicate the difference in the intensity of heterogeneity of each site and indicate that the adsorption at each site is differently affected by the surface energies.58,59Therefore, the analysis of the obtained parameters confirms that the gas adsorption on the studied adsorbent does not only involve monolayer adsorption on homogeneous sites, but also there are multiple sites with different energies and significant heterogeneity on the surface, which are best described by the two-site and Freundlich models.

The parametersS,x, andyrepresent the selectivity of one gas over another gas, the mole fraction in the solid phase, and the mole fraction in the gas phase, respectively. In general, the selectivity of an adsorbent is determined by the adsorption mechanism employed, whether it is based on chemical or physical adsorption. Chemical interactions between gas molecules and adsorbents are crucial for gas separation when chemical adsorption is the dominant process. In the case of physical adsorption, the physical characteristics of the gas molecule, such as kinetic diameter, polarizability, and dipole moment, should be considered.61The results of CO2/N2selectivity (15 : 85) by pure COP nanosorbents, COP@ZIF-8 (10–30%), at 300.15 K temperature are shown inFig. 12. As the figure shows, the adsorption selectivity of COP@ZIF-8 (20%) and COP@ZIF-8 (30%) nanosorbents is significantly (207.752 and 200.592 in ambient conditions, respectively) improved compared to pure COP (14.824). The presence of amine functional groups in the structure leads to an increase in CO2adsorption capacity and a decrease in N2adsorption capacity. This is due to the more significant interaction between CO2molecules and the amine functions of the adsorbent, which reduces the N2adsorption capacity, which is exclusively controlled by physical adsorption. Another critical factor in this regard is the increase in mesoporosity in the COP@ZIF-8 structure, effectively reducing the physical adsorption of N2.

This study used a very efficient and cost-effective adsorbent with easy and rapid synthesis to achieve CO2/N2selectivity. Compared to other adsorbents in the literature, prepared nanosorbents showed a significant amount of adsorption capacity and selectivity (Table 6).

In this research, COP and COP@ZIF-8 (10–30%) core–shell was prepared using the solvothermal method. The synthesized nanosorbents are used for the selective adsorption of CO2/N2. The results of the COP@ZIF-8 (20%) sample showed the highest gas adsorption capacity (7.271 mmol g−1) under a pressure of 10 bar at 300.15 K. The synthesized COP@ZIF-8 core–shell showed excellent surface area (1356.942 m2g−1) with a pore volume of 0.734 cm3g−1, and mean pore diameter of 2.137 nm. Calculations were done with the IAST method, and it was observed that the COP@ZIF-8 (20%) sample had the highest selectivity rate (207.752 at 300.15 K and 1 bar) among all samples. Therefore, it can be said that COP-based porous nano sorbents are promising adsorbents for the selective adsorption of CO2gas from the CO2/N2mixture due to their nitrogen content, high porosity, stability, and high economic efficiency.