Bama Huoma is a high-value cash crop because its seeds are known as the “holy seeds of longevity”. However, its seed yield is restricted by dioecism, and information about flower sex differentiation in this plant is lacking.

In this study, anatomical analysis and dynamic transcriptome profiling were performed to explore the mechanism of sex differentiation in Bama Huoma. The results revealed that female and male flowers undergo independent developmental processes and that sex differentiation occurs at an early stage before flower development. Illumina sequencing revealed that MADS-box genes play crucial roles in pistil and stamen development. qRT‒PCR and RNA in situ hybridization were subsequently performed to determine the spatiotemporal expression patterns of genes related to sex determination. The results revealed that eight MADS-box genes and two MYB genes were expressed in a sex-biased and tissue-specific manner in male or female flowers. Among these genes, MYB35, PMADS2, TM6 and AGL104 were specifically expressed in male flowers and found to regulate callose metabolism, pollen sac formation, tapetum development, and microspore maturation. In contrast, AGL11, FBP24, AGL16 and two CAL were restricted to female flowers, where they regulate pistil formation, ovary development, and stigma differentiation. These genes play distinct and essential roles in the sex differentiation of Bama Huoma, as well as in the development of floral organs.

Our findings provide a comprehensive gene expression profile of flower sex differentiation in Bama Huoma as well as new clues and information for further study in this field.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12870-025-07096-3.

Plant dioecism is a phenomenon in which female and male flowers grow on different individuals. This phenomenon is widespread in plants, occurring in approximately 10% of flowering plants [1]. Dioecism provides not only favorable conditions for promoting cross-pollination and heterosis utilization in crops but also ideal materials for investigating the mechanisms involved in sex expression and the origin and evolution of sex-determining regions (SDRs) and sex chromosomes. SDRs and the evolution of dioecy have been studied in many species [2–4], and the mechanisms of sex determination are complex and diverse in dioecious plants. In diploid persimmon, dioecism is determined by two genes, MeGI and OGI. The Y-encoded candidate sex determinant OGI displays male-specific conservation among Diospyros species and encodes a small RNA that targets the autosomal MeGI gene, resulting in separate male and female individuals [5]. However, in the hexaploid persimmon Diospyros kaki, developing male buds exhibit higher methylation levels across the MeGI promoter than developing female flowers do, and a DNA methylation inhibitor induced developing male buds to form feminized flowers [6]. Cytokinin is an essential plant hormone and is known to be involved in numerous plant growth and developmental processes [7]. Previous studies have revealed that the cytokinin signaling pathway is important for sex determination in several species [8–10]. The Y-encoded sex-determining candidate gene SyGI in kiwifruit is a type-C cytokinin response regulator and suppresses carpel development [11]. The sex-determining candidate genes LOG in date palm trees and APRT3 in grapes are also involved in the inactivation of cytokinin [12,13]. Additionally, many species have sex determination systems that are regulated by epigenetic mechanisms, including the modification of genomic loci in males and females at the transcriptional level, by histone modification or DNA modification, or at the post-transcriptional level by RNA-mediated regulation [14,15]. In melon, the integration of transcriptional control between the sex-specific genes ACS7, ACS11, and WIP1 through genetic interactions as well as the recruitment of H3K9ac and H3K27me3 epigenetically determines sex expression overall [16]. In maize, sex determination is regulated by noncoding small RNAs through DNA methylation to restrict the function of the pistil-protecting factor silkless1 [17], and sex expression in cucumber is regulated by methylation under different light and temperature conditions [18].

Nevertheless, the sex determination mechanisms of dioecious species are complex and diverse, and the genes involved in sex determination in dioecious species are still being debated. In recent years, RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) has emerged as an effective method for studying flower development and sex determination, and SDRs and genes have been identified in numerous plant species [19,20]. Previous studies have shown that transcription factors (TFs), such as MYB-type, MADS-box, NAC, WRKY, and bHLH TFs, play crucial roles in sex determination in dioecious plants [9,21,22]. For example, MADS-box family TFs are critical for sex determination in plants: ZaMADS70 interacts with ZaMADS42 and ZaMADS48 to facilitate the loss of petals in Zanthoxylum armatum, and the ZaMADS92/ZaMADS40 heterodimer could be responsible for accelerating flowering [23]. In litchi, the MADS-box gene LcMADS51 may positively regulate carpel formation, whereas six MADS-box genes, including LcMADS42/46/47/75/93/100, may play roles in stamen development [24]. In cucumber, two MADS-box genes, AGAMOUS and CAULIFLOWER A, are regulated by promoter methylation to mediate the photoperiod-dependent regulation of sex expression [18]. In Solanum lycopersicum, the TM8 gene, which shares homology with CAL (LOC115704295) in hemp, is hypothesized to function as a negative regulator of anther development [25]. CsTM8 (LOC115704295) is considered a potential target gene downstream of genes involved in female flower development in hemp [26]. In Asparagus officinalis, the male-specific gene MYB35 is tightly linked with the Y chromosome and is indispensable for tapetal cell development; this gene is specifically expressed in males and has lost its function on the X chromosome [27,28].

Bama Huoma (Cannabis sativa subsp. sativa), belonging to the Cannabis genus of the Cannabaceae family, is an annual herbaceous plant. This plant is widely grown in Bama Yao Autonomous County, Guangxi Province, China, a famous longevity-associated region worldwide. The seeds of this plant are commonly used as a traditional medicine and food and are considered potential contributors to the longevity and health of indigenous people. The dehulled seeds of Bama Huoma are not only rich in vegetable protein, phosphatidylinositol, and essential trace elements such as selenium, zinc, manganese, and germanium, but also contain α-linolenic acid-often referred to as “plant brain gold” ‒which has been shown to inhibit allergic responses and exhibit antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and antibacterial properties [29,30]. These seeds present major market prospects for applications in medicine and food. As a typical dioecious plant, sex determination in Bama Huoma is controlled by the X and Y chromosomes, and the female and male karyotypes are XX and XY, respectively [31]. Male plants are unable to produce seeds, resulting in a dramatic decline in the yield of Bama Huoma seeds. For this reason, elucidating the molecular genetic mechanism of sex differentiation in Bama Huoma will provide insights for targeted breeding of all-female varieties and increasing seed yield. However, little is known about the molecular basis and regulatory mechanisms underlying sex differentiation in Bama Huoma.

In this study, for elucidation of the flower development process, the anatomical structures of male and female flowers were observed at different developmental stages. Whole-transcriptome strand-specific RNA-seq analysis was employed to identify the candidate genes involved in sex determination in Bama Huoma. Moreover, for confirmation of the reliability of the sequencing results, several differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were selected for quantitative real-time PCR (qRT‒PCR) verification, and tissue-specific expression profiles of candidate sex determination genes in female and male plants were investigated. The results lay a foundation for further research on the genetic mechanisms of sex differentiation and provide a theoretical basis for increasing Bama Huoma seed yield.

Bama Huoma (C. sativa subsp. sativa) is a locally cultivated species in Bama Yao Autonomous County, Guangxi, China. It is a typical dioecious plant, and its sex determination is controlled by the X and Y chromosomes [31]. The flower buds undergo differentiation into male and female flowers during the flowering process (Fig. S1). In the present study, Bama Huoma seeds were sown in a field at the Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences in Nanning, China (22°50′N, 108°14′E). Each plot covered an area of 48 m2 (32 m × 1.5 m), with a row spacing of 45 cm and plant spacing of 15 cm, and was randomly replicated three times. The total number of individual male and female plants in each replicate was counted after flowering (Table1).

Bama Huoma is characterized by an infinite inflorescence. The morphology of the female and male flower buds of Bama Huoma at various developmental stages was observed under a stereomicroscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) during the full-bloom stage. Images of the pistillate inflorescence and staminate inflorescence were captured with a digital camera (Canon, Tokyo, Japan). For characterization of the developmental processes of flower buds, floral buds of varying sizes were separately collected from female and male plants. The female floral buds were collected at stages with immature stigmas, protruding stigmas, and two unequally elongated stigmata. The male floral buds were collected and sorted according to their diameter: < 0.5 mm, 0.5–1 mm, 1–1.5 mm, 1.5–2 mm, 2–3 mm, 3–4 mm and > 4 mm. All of the buds were fixed with Carnoy’s fixation solution (ethanol: acetic acid = 3:1) for 24 h at 4 ℃. The fixed floral buds were further dehydrated with an ethanol gradient (75%, 80%, 85%, 90%, 95%, and 100%), with 1 h per wash. The dehydrated floral buds were embedded in paraffin wax. After one month, serial sections with a thickness of 10 μm were prepared with a Leica microtome. The sectioned floral buds were then mounted on glass slides, stained with 1% safranin, and observed and photographed with a Carl Zeiss Imager M2 microscope (Zeiss, Germany).

Female and male floral buds at different developmental stages were also collected for electron microscopy. The samples were fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde for 12 h at 4 °C, washed with 0.1 M PBS (pH 7.4) 3 times and then postfixed in the dark with a 1% (w/v) aqueous solution of OsO4 in 0.1 M PB (pH 7.4) for 2 h at room temperature. After being washed three times with PBS (pH 7.4), the samples were dehydrated in an ethanol gradient (30%, 50%, 70%, 80%, 95%, and 100%), with 20 min per wash, and embedded in EMbed 812 resin (90,529–77–4, SPI, USA). The floral buds were cut into 60-nm thin sections on an ultramicrotome, collected on 150 mesh copper grids, stained with a 2% uranium acetate saturated alcohol solution in the dark for 8 min, rinsed in 70% ethanol three times and then rinsed in ultrapure water three times. The sections were subsequently stained with 2.6% lead citrate for 8 min and rinsed with ultrapure water three times. After drying with filter paper, the copper grids were placed onto the grid board and dried overnight at room temperature. The copper grids were observed and imaged with a Hitachi HT7800 transmission electron microscope (Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan). The female and male flower buds at various developmental stages were prepared for scanning electron microscopy (SEM) following the techniques of Ashfaq et al. [32]. The acetolyzed pollen grains were suspended in 90% ethanol and then placed on stubs. The samples were sputter-coated with gold and then viewed and photographed using a Hitachi SU8100 scanning electron microscope (Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan) by the Wuhan Servicebio Technology Company.

According to cytological observations, the development of female flowers can be divided into three stages: initial differentiation of the flower bud (T1 buds of female flowers, T1F), formation and development of bract and pistil primordia (T2 buds of female flowers, T2F), and formation and development of ovule primordia (T3 buds of female flowers, T3F). The development of male flowers can be divided into three stages: initial differentiation of the male flower bud (T1 buds of male flowers, T1M), formation and development of brace primordia and stamens (T2 buds of male flowers, T2M), and formation of anthers and pollen grains (T3 buds of male flowers, T3M). For determination of the expression levels of genes, flower buds at developmental stages T1 and T3 from females and males of Bama Huoma were collected individually, followed by rapid freezing in liquid nitrogen. The samples were subsequently stored at −80 ℃ until total RNA isolation for RNA-seq analysis. Three replicates of each sample were obtained.

Total RNA from each sample was isolated and purified using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The RNA content and purity of each sample were quantified using a NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (NanoDrop, Wilmington, DE, USA). RNA integrity was assessed with an Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent, Palo Alto, California, USA) on the basis of an RNA integrity number (RIN) > 7.0. DNase I was used to degrade double-stranded and single-stranded DNA contaminants within the RNA samples. The RNA samples were ultimately divided into two groups for library construction and RNA-seq validation. Approximately 5 μg of total RNA was subjected to ribosomal RNA depletion according to the manufacturer’s instructions for the Ribo-Zero™ rRNA Removal Kit (Illumina, San Diego, USA). After ribosomal RNA was removed, the remaining RNA was fragmented into small pieces using divalent cations at high temperature. Then, the cleaved RNA fragments were reverse-transcribed to cDNA with reverse transcription reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), which was subsequently used to synthesize U-labeled second-strand DNA with Escherichia coli DNA polymerase I, RNase H and dUTP. An A-base was then added to the blunt ends of each strand, preparing them for ligation to the indexed adapters. Each adapter contained a T-base overhang for ligation to the A-tailed fragmented DNA. Single- or dual-index adapters were ligated to the fragments, and size selection was performed with AMPure XP beads. After heat-labile UDG enzyme treatment of the U-labeled second-strand DNA, the ligated products were amplified by PCR under the following conditions: initial denaturation at 95 °C for 3 min; eight cycles of denaturation at 98 °C for 15 s, annealing at 60 °C for 15 s, and extension at 72 °C for 30 s; and a final extension at 72 °C for 5 min. The average insert size for the final cDNA library was 300 bp (± 50 bp). Finally, we performed paired-end sequencing on the Illumina NovaSeq™ 6000 platform (LC Sciences, Hangzhou, China) following the vendor’s recommended protocol.

For clean reads, the raw reads that contained adapter contaminants, low-quality bases and undetermined bases were removed according to the Cutadapt method [33]. The sequence quality was subsequently verified using FastQC (http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/). In addition, the percentages of reads with Q-scores of Q20 and Q30 and the GC contents and sequence duplication levels of the clean reads were also estimated. The clean paired-end RNA-seq reads (150 nucleotides) were then aligned to the C. sativa reference genomes obtained from the NCBI database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/datasets/genome/GCF_029168945.1/) using Bowtie2 [34] and HISAT2 [35]. The mapped reads of each sample were assembled using StringTie [36]. All the transcriptomes of the Bama Huoma samples were subsequently merged to reconstruct a comprehensive transcriptome using Perl scripts. The annotation of gene functions among the assembled transcripts was then performed on the basis of searches of multiple databases, including the Gene Ontology (GO) (http://www.geneontology.org), KEGG (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/), and KO (https://www.kegg.jp/kegg/ko.) databases, and EC numbers were obtained from the BRENDA enzyme database (http://www.brenda-enzymes.info).

After the final transcriptome was generated, StringTie [36] was used to determine the expression levels of mRNAs by calculating fragments per kilobase per million reads (FPKM) values [37]. The differentially expressed mRNAs were selected on the basis of a log2 [fold change (FC)] > 1 or log2 (FC) < −1 and statistical significance (pvalue < 0.05) using the R package edgeR [38]. Genes showing specific expression only in female or male flower buds were identified by creating a Venn diagram of all DEGs at the two developmental stages for female and male flowers of Bama Huoma, and the corresponding GO enrichment analysis of the DEGs was performed using OmicStudio tools athttps://www.omicstudio.cn/tool. By comparison with the genome background, gene numbers for every GO term were calculated, and a hypergeometric test was then performed to identify significantly enriched GO terms.

The open reading frames (ORFs) and amino acids associated with sex differentiation in this study were predicted via the online ORF Finder software (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/orffinder/). The orthologous protein information was obtained through pairwise sequence alignment using the BLASTp tool (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) with default parameters. A phylogenetic tree was constructed via the maximum likelihood method with MEGA X software on the basis of the JTT matrix-based model [39]. The conserved motifs were analyzed using the online program Multiple Em for Motif Elicitation (MEME), which is available athttps://meme-suite.org/meme/tools/meme. The parameters were set as follows: a maximum of 10 motifs, a minimum width of 6, and a maximum width of 50. The conserved domains were analyzed using the NCBI Conserved Domain Database (CDD), which is available athttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/bwrpsb/bwrpsb.cgi. Finally, the phylogenetic tree, protein domain, structure, and conserved motifs were visualized using TBtools software [40].

Total RNA from the same samples employed for the RNA-seq analysis and from different tissues and development periods of flower buds was extracted using a modified CTAB method [41]. One microgram of total RNA was subjected to reverse transcription with the HiScript III 1 st Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (+ gDNA wiper) (Vazyme, Nanjing, China) to obtain 20 μL of cDNA solution. The validation of the RNA-seq data was performed by randomly selecting thirty genes on the basis of their FPKM values, with 21 genes being upregulated and 9 genes being downregulated. The gene-specific primers for qRT‒PCR were designed using Primer Premier 5.0 software. The actin housekeeping gene of Bama Huoma served as the internal reference. The qRT‒PCR system consisted of 1 × TB Green® Premix Ex Taq™ (Tli RNaseH Plus) (TaKaRa, Dalian, China), forward/reverse primers at a concentration of 0.4 μM, and 20 ng of cDNA template. An LC480 Real Time PCR Detection System (Roche, Germany) was used to perform qRT‒PCR, and the PCR cycling conditions were as follows: denaturation at 95 °C for 3 min and 40 cycles of 95 °C for 10 s, 60 °C for 20 s and 72 °C for 30 s. For each sample, three biological and technical replicates were performed. Relative gene expression levels were calculated according to the 2 − ΔΔCt method [42]. The primers used for qRT‒PCR are shown in Supplementary Table S1.

The relative gene expression data from the female and male Bama Huoma plants were statistically analyzed according to the appropriate procedure for one-way analysis of variance using SPSS 17.0 software. Additionally, Duncan’s test was employed to determine significantly distinct groups.

Probes were designed via Primer Premier 5.0 (Table S1). The probes were subsequently labeled with CY3 and synthesized by Servicebio, a biotechnology company based in Wuhan, China. RNA in situ hybridization was performed as described previously [43,44]. Fresh flower buds at different developmental stages were fixed in plant-specific in situ hybridization fixative (Servicebio, Wuhan, China) for a minimum of 12 h. The tissues were dehydrated through a graded ethanol series prior to paraffin embedding. Sections of 6 μm thickness were prepared using a Leica RM2016 microtome (Leica Microsystems, Germany) and baked at 62 °C for 2 h. The sections were dewaxed in transparent liquid (Servicebio, Wuhan, China) for 15 min, which was repeated once, followed by rehydration through a descending ethanol series (100%, 85%, and 75% ethanol, 5 min each). After the samples were rinsed with DEPC-treated water, protease K (20 μg/mL) was added dropwise for digestion at 37 °C for 10 min, followed by washing with distilled water and three PBS washes (5 min each). Prehybridization solution was added, and the mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Hybridization was performed overnight at 40 °C using probe-containing hybridization buffer. The hybridization mixture was washed with 2 × SSC at 37 °C for 10 min, followed by two subsequent washes with 1 × SSC at 37 °C for 5 min each, and finally, the mixture was rinsed with 0.5 × SSC at room temperature for 10 min. Blocking was carried out with rabbit serum at room temperature for 30 min, followed by incubation with an anti-DIG-AP antibody at 37 °C for 40 min. The samples were then washed four times with TBS (5 min each). BCIP/NBT color development solution was added, and positive signals were visualized under a microscope. Finally, the samples were rinsed with distilled water and imaged using an optical microscope (Nikon Eclipse CI, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with an imaging system (Nikon DS-U3, Tokyo, Japan).

The number of male and female plants in each duplicate was counted after the flowering of Bama Huoma on the basis of the morphology of the floral organs. As shown in Table1, the population of female plants was larger than that of male plants in each duplicate. However, the separation ratio between males and females was not significantly different according to the chi-square test (p> 0.05), indicating that the proportions of males and females fit a 1:1 separation ratio.

Bama Huoma is a dioecious species in which individuals producing female or male flowers occur at a 1:1 ratio and are randomly distributed in the population. However, little is known about its floral development. In this study, we observed the development of female and male flowers in Bama Huoma on the basis of phenotypic features, histological analysis, SEM and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The female inflorescence is composed of compacted branchlets, resulting in the formation of a compound raceme (Fig. S1a). As shown in Fig.1, the inflorescence meristem differentiated from the shoot apical meristem in the reproductive growth stage of female flowers. The inflorescence subsequently underwent further development to transform into the female inflorescence. During early flower differentiation, the female flower consists of a carpel and bract that surrounds the carpel (Fig.1a, k-n). As the flower matured, two uneven stigmata elongated and emerged from the bract, while the tepals underwent complete degradation (Fig.1b, c, o). At a later stage, the stigma extended further, and papilla cells developed and covered the stigma from the tip to the basal parts (Fig.1d, e, p; Fig. S2a-c), which could be favorable for pollination. During flower development, numerous non-glandular trichome hairs and glandular trichomes developed on the bract that enveloped the ovary (Fig.1a-e, k-p; Fig. S2a). The male flowers were clustered at the leaf axils, and each flower was pedicellate, with individual stalks (Fig. S1b). In the early stages of staminate inflorescence development, the male flower buds were fan shaped and had pilose surfaces with many non-glandular trichome hairs (Fig.1f, g, q, r). During stamen development, the anther expanded and extended into an oval shape. The outer bract was also elongated, and the non-glandular trichome hairs that covered the outer surface gradually degenerated (Fig.1g-i, s-u). The anthers underwent further expansion and elongation as the pollen grains matured, accompanied by the outward spread of the perigona bract, exposing five stamens each attached to a filament that dangled the anther (Fig.1j). Many mature pollen grains were released through the longitudinal groove of the anther (Fig.1j, v; Fig. S2d-f).

To further elucidate the developmental characteristics of male and female flowers, paraffin sectioning and TEM were performed to analyze morphological differentiation and cytological changes in Bama Huoma. The development of female flowers can be divided into three stages according to key morphological and histocytological changes. The stages included the initial differentiation of the flower bud (Fig.2a), the formation and development of the pistil and bract primordia (Fig.2b, c), and the formation and development of ovule primordia (Fig.2d-h). At the initial stage of female flower bud differentiation, the apex of the flower bud primordium had a cone-like shape (Fig.2a). The apical growth point became wider and flatter following the anticlinal division and periclinal division of the meristem cells. During the formation and development of the gynoecium and bract primordia, apex meristem cells underwent continuous division, resulting in a growth pyramid with semicircular protuberance. This process led to increases in both the width and height of the floral apex, which subsequently differentiated into gynoecium primordia. Additionally, the gynoecium primordium margin slightly bulged and gradually developed into the bract primordium, which underwent continuous differentiation on both sides to give rise to the perigonal bract (Fig.2b, c). The gynoecium primordium continued to develop to form ovule primordia, which were characterized by a small size, compact arrangement and dense cytoplasm (Fig.2d). The upper part of the ovule primordia developed into the stigma primordium, which continued to elongate and develop into the stigma, and the protrusions on both sides differentiated to form the perianth (Fig.2e), whereas the lower part developed into the ovary, which surrounded the ovule and then expanded. At this point, the morphological differentiation of the female flower buds was complete, while the perianth gradually degenerated during ovary development (Fig.2f-h). The TEM results revealed that all the cells of the female flowers were highly vacuolized, and the nucleus was pushed to the edge. The nucleolus was enlarged, and the chromatin disintegrated during the differentiation of female flowers, which indicated that the cells were in the active stage of division at all stages of the formation of female flowers. In addition, except for a few proteasomes found in vacuoles and a few cytoplasmic organelles, such as mitochondria and the endoplasmic reticulum, most of the organelles were dissolved, which could provide energy and nutrients for the development of female flowers (Fig. S3 a-i).

The staminate flowers exhibited anatomical distinctions from the pistillate flowers and were divided into three developmental stages: the initial differentiation of the male flower bud (Fig.3a), the formation and development of brace primordia and stamens (Fig.3b), and the formation of anthers and pollen grains (Fig.3c-h). During the reproductive growth stage, the flower bud primordia at the top began to differentiate into stamen primordia, which continued to differentiate and form brace primordia and stamens via anticlinal division (Fig.3a, b). The young anther was oblong and consisted of homogeneous meristem cells that divided continuously to form archesporial cells (Fig.3c). TEM revealed that the archesporial cells contained many starch grains and proteasomes, providing important nutrients for microspore development (Fig. S4 a-d). The archesporial cells differentiated into primary parietal cells and primary sporogenous cells. The primary parietal cells differentiated into the endothecium, epidermis and middle layers, whereas the primary sporogenous cells further developed into microspore mother cells (Fig.3d). The epidermal cells became enlarged and vacuolized with the development of the anther, and the middle layer cells began to compress and disintegrated gradually to be absorbed. The tapetum cells were large, square shaped and neatly arranged, with condensed chromatin and prominent nucleoli, while the nucleus of the microspore mother cell was enlarged, and the nucleolus disintegrated (Fig. S4 e, g). Many organelles, such as mitochondria, the endoplasmic reticulum, starch grains and the proteasome, which provide necessary substances and energy for pollen development, were found in tapetum cells and microspore mother cells (Fig. S4 f, h). Callose deposition was observed after the formation of microspore mother cells, and microspore mother cells then underwent meiosis to form tetrads (Fig.3e). The epidermal cells continued to undergo vacuolation, and the intracellular material was dissolved by lysosomes. Tapetum cells were also vacuolized, expanded laterally and radially and increased in size, and the intracellular substances further concentrated and then gradually degraded. Various substances were secreted through the tangential plane of the tapetal cell to provide nutrients for microspore development (Fig. S4 i-l). Callose dissociated and released the tetrads to form free mononuclear microspores following the completion of meiosis (Fig.3f). At the mononuclear stage, the microspore cell nuclei were gradually squeezed to the cell edge by the large central vacuole, and the tapetum degraded further (Fig.3g). The microspores underwent two rounds of mitosis to form mature pollen, and the remaining tapetum degraded and was absorbed to provide nutrients for pollen development (Fig. S4 m‒p). At the later stage of pollen development, epidermal cells developed into flat fibrous layer cells until they were dry. The endothecium developed into fiber bundles and left behind a long, narrow strip outside the junction of the two pollen sacs. When the anthers matured, they broke open and dispersed their pollen (Fig.3h).

For further elucidation of the potential regulatory mechanism of sex determination in Bama Huoma, whole-transcriptome strand-specific RNA-seq of female and male Bama Huoma plants at two flower developmental stages [initial differentiation of female/male flower buds (T1F or T1M), formation and development of ovule primordia in female flowers (T3F) and formation of anthers and pollen grains in male flowers (T3M)] was performed on the Illumina HiSeq 4000 platform with three biological replicates. A total of 165.34 Gb of raw data were obtained from twelve libraries by high-throughput sequencing. After raw read quality filtering, a total of 10,54,505,254 clean reads were generated, with each sample producing at least 76,917,286 clean reads. The average percentage of valid reads was ≥ 95.65%. The percentages of Q20 bases and Q30 bases were greater than 99.98% and 98.40%, respectively, in our sequencing results, with a GC content of at least 49% (Table S2). The sequencing results revealed good quality of the original data for subsequent analyses. The clean reads were subsequently mapped to the C. sativa reference genome using Bowtie2 [34] and HISAT2 [35]. On average, more than 86.9% of the valid reads were mapped to C. sativa reference genomes via this sequencing procedure. A total of 748,692 transcripts and 392,316 genes were identified from the twelve cDNA libraries, and 40,439 genes were mapped to the reference genome (Table S3). In this study, the total number of expressed genes in the mature stage of flowering was greater than that in the initial stage. For example, approximately 33 thousand genes were expressed in the stage of ovule primordium formation in female flowers (T3F), whereas ~ 30,000 were expressed in the stage of initial flower bud differentiation (T1F) (Table S3). We also found that the total number of expressed genes in the anther formation stage was greater than that in the initial differentiation stage of the male flower bud (Table S3). Detailed information on the total mapped, uniquely mapped, multimapped, nonspliced, and spliced reads for each library is presented in Table S4. The Spearman correlation coefficient test for biological repetitions in the twelve libraries revealed a strong correlation between samples with values above 92% (Fig. S5). In different flower organs, the similarity value between T1F and T3F was greater than that between T1M and T3M. Moreover, the values of T1F and T1M were greater than those of T3F and T3M at different floral development stages (Fig. S5).

To analyze and interpret the DEGs in the transcriptome effectively, we used FPKM values to measure the different mRNA expression levels in each sample. The DEGs between samples were selected according to a p value < 0.05 and log2 (FC) > 1 or log2 (FC) < − 1, and the overall distribution of the DEGs was visualized via pairwise comparisons (Fig.4A). The number of DEGs showed very high variance among the different developmental stages. The greatest number of DEGs was found between T3M and T1M, and more than 7072 DEGs were identified: 2905 upregulated genes and 4167 downregulated genes. Similarly, 6816 DEGs were observed between T3M and T3F: 2564 upregulated and 4252 downregulated genes (Fig.4A). However, the T1M vs. T1F and T3F vs. T1F libraries presented 3936 and 1728 DEGs, respectively: 1818 and 816 upregulated DEGs and 2128 and 912 downregulated DEGs, respectively (Fig.4A). The number of downregulated DEGs was greater than that of upregulated DEGs during the development of both female and male flower buds, as revealed by pairwise comparisons (Fig.4A). The number of DEGs in the T3M stage was greater than that in the other stages, suggesting that the T3M stage may be a key stage for pollen development.

To determine the main transcriptional dynamics related to sex differentiation in the dioecious plant Bama Huoma, we used a Venn diagram to analyze the numbers of DEGs in each pairwise comparison. Among the DEGs, a total of 253 common DEGs were identified through pairwise comparisons among these four sequenced samples, indicating their involvement in the growth and development processes of floral organs in Bama Huoma (Fig.4B, Table S5). GO enrichment analysis based on three GO categories, namely, biological process, molecular function, and cellular component, was performed for the DEGs. The GO enrichment analysis results revealed that most of these DEGs were enriched in the regulation of transcription (DNA dependent), except for some genes involved in the extracellular region and chitinase activity (Fig. S6 A, B). Heatmap analysis further revealed that the expression of most DEGs enriched in the regulation of transcription decreased in both female flowers and male flowers of Bama Huoma during floral development, suggesting that these genes associated with transcriptional regulation assume negative regulatory functions in the development of Bama Huoma floral organs (Fig. S6C). However, the expression of DEGs related to the extracellular region varied during the development of female and male flowers. Some of these genes were upregulated, whereas others were downregulated, but the expression trend was the same in both female and male flowers during flower development (Fig. S6D). These results suggested that these DEGs have the same functions in regulating the development of female and male flowers.

Additionally, the common DEGs at the T1 and T3 developmental stages between female and male flowers were further analyzed to identify genes associated with sex differentiation in Bama Huoma. Upon comparative analysis, 981 common DEGs were identified between the T1M vs. T1F and T3M vs. T3F comparison groups, among which 326 genes were upregulated and 655 were downregulated (Fig.4B). The expression patterns of the common DEGs between T1M vs. T1F and T3M vs. T3F were predicted using STEM software. We established 15 model profiles, among which five were identified as significant (Fig.4C). Genes of the same type were included in the same cluster, where the shaded part is significant. We found that Profile 2 was the most significantly enriched of the four samples and had the smallest p value (Fig.4C, Table S6). In addition, for further analysis of the functions of common DEGs between T1M vs. T1F and T3M vs. T3F, the GO database was used to annotate DEGs according to three major categories: biological process, cellular component, and molecular function (Fig.4D). The GO classification analysis revealed that the genes involved in biological processes were enriched mainly in the categories of regulation of transcription (accounting for 81.61% of the total genes), transcription, and DNA-templated (accounting for 67.15% of the total genes) (Fig.4D). The genes related to cellular components were enriched in the nucleus, plasma membrane, and cytoplasm. The enriched molecular functions were protein binding, DNA-binding TF activity and DNA binding. The GO functional enrichment scatter plot revealed that many DEGs were related to DNA-binding TF activity (GO: 0003700), cell differentiation (GO: 0030154), transcription regulation (GO: 0006355), and transcription, DNA-templated (GO: 0006351) (Fig.5A). A comparative analysis of the DEGs through GO functional enrichment and STEM analysis revealed that genes associated with transcriptional regulation were predominantly enriched in the top four gene clusters identified by STEM, especially in Profile 2 (which accounted for 64.65% of all the pathways related to transcriptional regulation) (Table S6). These findings suggest the high significance of these genes in the sexual differentiation of Bama Huoma, which warrants further analysis.

For analysis of the expression intensity of these DEGs related to the regulation of transcription, a heatmap was generated to illustrate the expression levels of female and male flowers in Bama Huoma at different developmental stages. The expression profiles of enriched pathway categories in two pairwise comparisons (T1M vs. T1F and T3M vs. T3F) were also examined. Most DEGs in the enriched categories were downregulated in male flowers compared with female flowers (Table S7). TFs are thought to be key regulators of transcription and have been previously reported to play important roles in sex differentiation in dioecious plants [45]. In the present research, a total of 55 TFs belonging to 18 TF families were identified from these specific DEGs, including MYB, MADS-box, GATA, AP2/ERF, and WRKY TFs (Fig.5B, Table S7). Notably, MYB TFs accounted for 25% of the total number of TFs. Heatmap analysis and hierarchical clustering revealed that the expression patterns of these 55 TFs could be divided into four clusters (C1, C2, C3 and C4) between female and male flowers (Fig.5C). The genes in the C1 cluster included three MYB, two ARF and three MADS genes whose expression was in female flowers, especially the INAPERTURATE POLLEN1 gene (LOC115716968), whose expression peaked at T3M (Fig.5C). The expression of the TFs in the C2 and C4 clusters was upregulated in the female flower of Bama Huoma. However, the expression level of the C2 cluster in T3F was greater than that in T1F, particularly with respect to the preferential expression of MYB29 (LOC115708954) during the T3F stage. Conversely, the expression level of the C3 cluster in T1F was greater than that in T3F, with preferential expression observed for TCP13 (LOC115701300) and CAULIFLOWER (LOC115704295) during the T1F stage (Fig.5C, Table S7).

MYB-type TFs, which belong to one of the largest families in plant biology, play pivotal roles not only in plant growth and development but also in floral development. In the present study, we observed that the expression of MYB TFs in Bama Huoma was associated with a sex preference. A majority of the MYB TFs presented higher expression levels in female flowers than in male flowers (Fig.5D). Furthermore, the expression of these genes was greater in the T3 development stage than in the T1 stage, suggesting that MYB plays a critical role in floral development in Bama Huoma (Fig.5D). Interestingly, we also observed specific expression of the TF MYB35 (LOC115711316 and LOC115700367) in male flowers, whereas its expression was minimal in female flowers (Fig.5D, Table S7). These findings strongly suggest that MYB35 plays a pivotal role in the development of male flowers.

In plants, MADS-box TFs are involved in various developmental processes, such as floral development and flowering control [46]. In this study, the expression of the MADS-box TF in Bama Huoma exhibited a sex bias (Fig.5E). We subsequently performed phylogenetic evolution, conserved motif, and domain organization analyses to identify closely related members of the MADS-box gene family associated with sex differentiation in Bama Huoma (Fig. S7). Three MADS-box TFs, namely, TM6 (LOC115714657, AP3-like), PMADS2 (LOC115699531, homologous to PI), and AGL104 (LOC115713471), were found to be specific to male flowers during various stages of development, whereas little expression was detected in female flowers (Fig.5E). However, the MADS-box TFs CAULIFLOWER A (LOC115698549, homologous to AP1), AGL16 (LOC115709034), CAL (LOC115704295, CAULIFLOWER A-like in other plants) (Fig. S7), FBP24 (LOC115700907), and AGL11 (LOC133031811) exhibited specific expression in female flowers but showed minimal expression in male flowers at various developmental stages (Fig.5E, Table S7).

In addition to these TFs, several crucial functional and structural domain proteins, such as ERF, WRKY, NAC domain proteins, TFIIH C1-like domain proteins, and zinc-finger proteins, may be involved in flower organ development in the dioecious plant Bama Huoma. Heatmap analysis and hierarchical clustering revealed that a majority of these functional and structural domain proteins were upregulated in female flowers compared with male flowers (Fig. S8 A-C). The results of our study indicate that flower development is a complex process in plants that is controlled by intricate gene regulatory networks.

To evaluate the reliability and reproducibility of the transcriptome data, we used qRT‒PCR analysis was used to further confirm the RNA-seq data. A total of 20 genes, eight upregulated genes and twelve downregulated genes, were randomly selected for qRT‒PCR analysis. The FCs in gene expression between T1 buds and T3 buds of both female and male flowers of Bama Huoma, as determined by qRT‒PCR, were compared to those obtained through RNA-seq analysis. Our results demonstrated congruity between the expression profiles of these genes and those depicted by RNA-seq data, with relative R2 values of 0.8765 and 0.9278 in T1M vs. T1F and T3M vs. T3F, respectively, confirming the reliability of our RNA-seq results (Fig. S9).

TFs such as MYB and MADS-box proteins play a critical role in the growth and development of plants. On the basis of transcriptomic data, we found that numerous TFs were expressed in a sex-biased manner in male or female flowers of Bama Huoma. Therefore, we conducted qRT‒PCR analysis to examine the expression patterns of these sex-biased genes, including two MYB genes and eight MADS-box genes, in different tissues of female and male Bama Huoma plants. The relative expression level in the T1 buds of female flowers was used as a control. Three MADS-box genes (PMADS2, TM6, AGL104) and two MYB35 genes were specifically expressed in male flowers (Fig.6A, D, G, J, M), whereas five MADS-box TFs (AGL11, FBP24, AGL16, and two CAL genes) were specifically expressed in female flowers (Fig.7A-E). Among them, the expression of three genes, PMADS2, TM6 and AGL104, increased during male flower development, with a high expression level (≥ 103) in the T3 bud development stage, indicating the key roles of these genes in male flower formation in Bama Huoma (Fig.6G, J, M). However, the expression of two genes, AGL11 and FBP24, increased with female flower development, suggesting their involvement (Fig.7A, C), and the expression of three other genes, AGL16 and two CAL genes, increased in the early stages of female flower development, suggesting that these genes regulate the differentiation of female floral organs (Fig.7B, D, E). Furthermore, MYB35 genes (LOC115711316 and LOC115711316) exhibited much greater expression in male flowers, especially LOC115711316, which was specifically expressed in male flowers (Fig.6A, D). In conclusion, the development of dioecious flower organs is a complex process, and genes involved in the determination of floral organ identity may act in a combinatorial manner during sex differentiation in Bama Huoma.

To determine the spatiotemporal expression patterns of genes exhibiting sex-biased expression across various organs and developmental stages of Bama Huoma flowers, we employed qRT‒PCR and RNA in situ hybridization. Previous studies have shown that MYB35 is involved mainly in anther development and tapetum cell formation [28,47,48], and the MADS-box TFs TM6 and PMADS2 are involved in the pathway specification of floral organ identity [49]. In the present study, the expression levels of MYB35 were significantly greater in flower buds than in other tissues. In contrast, relatively lower expression levels were detected in pollen grains, mature anthers, pollen sacs, and perianth bracts (Fig.6B, E). Spatiotemporal expression analysis revealed distinct patterns for the two MYB35 genes during anther development. Specifically, LOC115700367 exhibited peak expression at the tetrad stage, followed by a progressive decline. In contrast, LOC115711316 expression gradually increased, peaking at the binucleate stage, and subsequently sharply decreased at the mature pollen grain stage (Fig.6C, F). In accordance with the qRT‒PCR results, RNA in situ hybridization confirmed that MYB35 was expressed ubiquitously across various developmental stages of the male flower, except the mature pollen grain stage (Fig.8A‒F). The highest expression level was detected in the tapetal layer during the anther tetrad stage (Fig.8C).

The spatiotemporal expression patterns of the other three MADS-box genes, PMADS2, TM6, and AGL104, exhibited variability across different developmental stages of male flowers and among various floral organs. The expression levels of TM6 and PMADS2 progressively increased during anther development, reaching a peak at the uninucleate stage, and subsequently declined to their lowest levels at the mature pollen grain stage (Fig.6I, L). In contrast, the expression of AGL104 consistently increased throughout anther development, peaking at the mature pollen grain stage (Fig.6O). In different floral organs, TM6 and PMADS2 presented significantly greater expression in pollen sacs than in mature anthers, perianth bracts, and pollen grains (Fig.6H, K). Conversely, AGL104 was highly expressed in pollen grains, pollen sacs, and anther bracteoles (Fig.6N), suggesting that it plays a key regulatory role in anther maturation through constitutive expression. Consistent with the qRT‒PCR results, RNA in situ hybridization analysis revealed that TM6 and PMADS2 displayed discernible hybridization signals throughout various stages of anther development, except mature pollen grains (Fig.8G‒R). Notably, TM6 presented a particularly strong hybridization signal in the pollen sac (Fig.8J), indicating its potential importance in pollen sac formation. In addition, the hybridization signal of AGL104 consistently increased throughout all stages of anther development (Fig.8S-X). In contrast to other genes, AGL104 also presented strong hybridization signals in mature pollen grains, highlighting its essential role in regulating pollen grain maturation.

Furthermore, the spatiotemporal expression patterns of the other five MADS-box TFs specifically expressed in female flowers revealed that the expression levels of AGL11 and FBP24 progressively increased during female flower development (Fig.7F, H). Notably, compared with those of other tissues, the expression of FBP24 was significantly greater in the ovary, whereas it was barely expressed in the stigma (Fig.7H). Conversely, AGL11 exhibited markedly elevated expression in both the stigma and ovary relative to the perigonal bract (Fig.7F). RNA in situ hybridization analysis revealed a progressive intensification of hybridization signals for AGL11 and FBP24 as female floral organs developed, which is consistent with the results obtained from qRT‒PCR analysis (Fig.9A-H). Notably, hybridization signals were detected exclusively for the AGL11 gene within the stigma tissue, whereas no such signals were detected for the other genes examined in this tissue (Fig.9). These results demonstrate that AGL11 not only plays a regulatory role in the development of female flowers but is also a crucial factor in stigma formation. Additionally, both qRT‒PCR and RNA in situ hybridization revealed that the expression levels of AGL16 and two CAL genes gradually decreased throughout female flower development (Fig.7G, D, E; Fig.9I-T). Specifically, CALA expression was significantly elevated in the ovary relative to other tissues (Fig.9I-T). In contrast, the AGL16 and CAL genes presented relatively low expression levels in the stigma, ovary, and perigonal bract. Additionally, during the T1F and T2F stages, AGL16 and CAL presented markedly greater hybridization signals than did the T3F period (Fig.9M-T). The differential expression patterns of the five MADS-box genes in female flowers suggest their distinct roles in the development of this organ. Thus, we hypothesized that AGL16 and CAL may play critical roles in the differentiation of female floral organs, whereas AGL11, FBP24, and CALA predominantly regulate female flower development and ovary formation. In conclusion, the development of dioecious flower organs is a complex process, and genes involved in the determination of floral organ identity may act in a combinatorial manner during sex differentiation in Bama Huoma.

Unisexual flowers in monoecious and dioecious species have evolved from hermaphroditic ancestors [1]. The conversion of hermaphrodite flowers into unisexual flowers is always achieved by suppressing the development of one of the sex organs (carpels or stamens) [16,28]. In most dioecious angiosperm species, including Diospyros lotus [5], Silene latifolia [50] and A. officinalis [51], flowering is initiated with hermaphroditic primordia, followed by abortion or arrest of sex organ development. The present study provides a comprehensive illustration of the anatomical features of female and male flowers in Bama Huoma. The observations clearly demonstrated distinct and independent developmental processes between female and male flowers, indicating that sexual differentiation occurs from flower initiation and that morphological sex differentiation occurs at an early stage prior to the establishment of floral organ identity. This finding aligns with previous research suggesting that the sex determination pathway may be activated during the vegetative stages in hemp [26].

In the present study, during the initial stage of female flower bud differentiation, the apical meristem was completely enveloped by bracts (Fig.1k-m); however, in the medicinal cultivar Cannabis NB140, the apical meristem was exposed and not covered by bracts, allowing clear visualization of the flower primordium, leaf primordium, and carpellary primordium under SEM [52]. In male plants, the anthers are produced in clusters of staminate inflorescence that develop at the leaf axils. Substantial quantities of pollen grains are released through the longitudinal groove or stomium located on the back of the anther upon flower maturation. This finding is consistent with previous findings that male flowers in marijuana and Mercurialis annua produce significantly greater quantities of pollen than do hermaphroditic flowers [53,54]. Each individual male flower has the capacity to generate up to 350,000 pollen grains [55]. These findings suggest that male flowers in dioecious plants exhibit greater pollen activity than hermaphroditic flowers do, indicating an adaptive evolutionary response from monoecy to dioecy in plants.

Flower development is the core of higher plant ontogenesis and is controlled by complex gene regulatory networks. In this study, in addition to TFs, several important proteins, such as NAC domain proteins, B3 DNA-binding domain proteins, and zinc-finger proteins, were shown to be involved in flower organ development in dioecious Bama Huoma. Previous studies have indicated that NAC domain proteins are involved in plant growth and development and play a regulatory role in flower development [56,57]. In Arabidopsis, TAPNAC is specifically expressed in the tapetum and directs tapetal gene expression [58]. CUC1 and CUC2, which are important members of the NAC family, act as negative regulatory factors in carpel fusion in the apical gynoecium [59,60]. CUC2a and miR164a synergistically regulate the development of flower organs and inflorescences in strawberry [61]. In addition, previous studies have shown that NAC domain proteins may work together with the MYB, DYT1, TDF1 and AMS proteins to regulate plant pollen development [62,63]. In this study, the NAC domain protein level in female flowers was greater than that in male flowers, suggesting that NAC positively regulates the development of female flowers.

Zinc-finger proteins, which include C2H2-type, CCHC-type, Dof-type and WIP2-like proteins, constitute one of the largest TF families and are highly involved in the transcriptional regulation of flowering induction, floral organ morphogenesis, and pollen and pistil maturation [64–66]. In Arabidopsis, the transcriptional repressor SUP, which contains a C2H2-ZF DNA-binding domain and an ERF-associated repression (EAR) domain, can repress the expression of APETALA 3 (AP3) and PISTILLATA (PI, PMADS2-like) [67]. This study revealed that all the DEGs encoding ZFP domain-containing proteins were upregulated in female Bama Huoma flowers, whereas TM6 (LOC115714657, AP3-like) was not expressed in female flowers, which suggests that ZFP domain-containing proteins could repress the expression of AP3 in female Bama Huoma flowers.

The B3 DNA-binding domain is an important region in the AP2/ERF and auxin response factor (ARF) genes. These genes are transcriptional regulators with a variety of functions involved in reproductive, developmental and physiological processes in plants [68–71]. In Arabidopsis thaliana, the reproductive meristem gene family encodes TFs belonging to the B3 DNA-binding domain superfamily, and its members are preferentially expressed during flower, ovule, and seed development [72–74]. The auxin response factor ARF3 is expressed in various parts of hazel plants, including the ovary primordium and structures such as the funiculus, integument, endosperm, and cotyledon. This protein is believed to play a role in regulating genes induced by auxin and MADS, AP2/ERF, TCP, and LFY TFs [75]. In this study, the expression of AP2/ERF TFs and B3 DNA-binding domain proteins in female flowers was significantly greater than that in male flowers, suggesting that B3 DNA-binding domain proteins play a key role in regulating the development of female flowers. However, in rice, the miR167d-ARF module regulates the elongation of stamen filaments and stigma size. The overexpression of miR167d or mutation of ARF results in failed elongation of stamen filaments and increased stigma size. The expression level of the ARF gene (LOC115706063) in male flowers was significantly greater than that in female flowers, suggesting that ARF is an important regulator of stamen filament formation in Bama Huoma. Taken together, these results indicate that hormone signal transduction and floral homeotic TFs act in a combinatorial manner during sex differentiation in Bama Huoma.

Floral organ identity genes play important roles in floral sex differentiation. The combined control of organ identities by MADS-box genes is central to the ABCDE model of flower formation [76]. In Arabidopsis, the A function, which specifies sepals and petals, is mainly mediated by AP1 and is involved in floral meristem specification. The B function is exerted via AP3 and PI and is responsible for petal and stamen identity, whereas the C function is exerted by AGAMOUS (AG) and controls stamen and carpel identity. Additionally, class D functions, related to ovule identity, are mediated by SEEDSTICK (STK/AGL11), SHATTERPROOF1 (SHP1/AGL1), and SHATTERPROOF2 (SHP2/AGL5). The SEPALLATA1 (SEP1), SEP2, SEP3 and SEP4 genes, which mediate class E function, are required for the formation of all four types of floral organs. In floral organ determination, class A + E genes specify sepals, A + B + E specify petals, B + C + E specify stamens, C + E specify carpels and C + D + E specify ovules; these functions are mediated by protein interactions with each other and the formation of tetrameric complexes [48,77]. The heterodimeric protein complexes formed by AP3 and PI play crucial roles in regulating petal and stamen development [78,79]. In Quercus suber trees, the interaction between QsPI and QsAP3 specifically promotes stamen development [76]. The formation of dimeric protein complexes involving AP3-like and AP1-like proteins is essential for petal development in Z. armatum [23]. These findings indicate that the heterodimerization of AP3 with flower organ homologous genes represents a conserved mechanism during plant male organ development. In the present study, the expression of the MADS-box genes AGL11, CAL, and AGL16 (homologous to AGL1 in Morus notabilis, Fig. S7) and FBP24 was found to be exclusively limited to female flowers but was completely absent in male flowers, which may be tightly interconnected with the lack of male organs in these flowers. Although TM6 (AP3-like) and PI exhibit male-specific expression, CAL (homologous to AP1, Fig. S7) appears to be suppressed in male flowers, suggesting that the inability to form heterodimeric proteins between TM6 and CAL leads to a loss of petals in the male flower of Bama Huoma.

Previous studies have reported that MYB35 is specifically expressed in males of A. officinalis and has a loss of function on the X chromosome [27,28]. MYB35 plays a vital role in tapetal differentiation and function. In Arabidopsis, MYB35 is a key component involved in controlling callose dissolution and acts downstream of DYT1 and upstream of AMS and AtMYB103 in the transcriptional regulatory networks that regulate tapetal development [47]. In the present study, MYB35 was highly expressed in male flowers and might interact with MADS-box genes to regulate male flower development in Bama Huoma. Our findings suggest that the identities of different types of floral organs are specified by homeotic MADS elements that interact in a combinatorial manner, and the regulatory mechanisms involved in sex determination are being further investigated. In summary, we propose a simple model for the regulation of flower organ identity in the dioecious species Bama Huoma by the modulation of MADS-box and MYB TF functions (Fig.10). Elucidating the mechanism of sex determination in Bama Huoma is economically important for improving the seed yield of Bama Huoma and provides a theoretical basis for understanding the mechanism of sex determination in other dioecious plants.

Bama Huoma is a typical dioecious plant whose sex determination is controlled by the X and Y chromosomes; the female and male karyotypes are XX and XY, respectively. In the present study, we observed the development of female and male flowers by optical microscopy, SEM and TEM, and whole-transcriptome sequencing analysis was employed to identify the candidate genes involved in sex differentiation in Bama Huoma. The results revealed that the developmental processes of the female and male flowers were independent, implying that sex differentiation occurred before flower development. Transcriptome analysis and qRT‒PCR revealed that the MADS-box and MYB genes were expressed in a sex-biased and tissue-specific manner in female or male flowers. Among these genes, AGL11, CAL, FBP24 and AGL16 were specifically expressed in female flowers, whereas MYB35, PMADS2, TM6 and AGL104 were specifically expressed in male flowers, suggesting that the identities of different types of floral organs act in a combinatorial manner to regulate sex differentiation in Bama Huoma. Taken together, our findings provide a comprehensive gene expression profile of floral organ sex differentiation in Bama Huoma and a theoretical foundation for further research on the genetic mechanisms of sex determination in dioecious plants.

X.L. conducted the experiments and drafted the manuscript. J.Z. assisted in figure drawing. W.H., X.T., B. H. and J.T. assisted with the experiments. K.T. performed bioinformatic analysis and edited the manuscript. Y.Z. revised the manuscript.

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (32260521 and 32401817) and the Basic Business Expenses Project of Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences (Guinongke 2024YP054, Guinongke2021YT061, GuinongkeJZ2025KJ001, and GuiTS2022019).