Abnormalities in copper metabolism are implicated in colorectal cancer (CRC) progression and unfavorable survival outcomes. Although there has been a recent surge of studies on cuprotosis-related genes, most have not elucidated the relationship between copper and tumors from the perspective of copper metabolism in tumors. This study explores the prognostic value of copper metabolism-related genes (CMGs) in CRC and their molecular characteristics within the tumor immune microenvironment.

We investigated the expression profile of 112 copper CMGs which were obtained from MSigDB in 1340 CRC patients from four independent datasets (TCGA-COAD/READ,GSE17536,GSE40967, andGSE103479). Cox regression analysis was used to identify CMGs related to prognosis genes. Then, we used consensus unsupervised clustering analysis to classify the 1340 patients into different CMGs subtypes. Differences in prognosis, clinicopathological features, tumor microenvironment score, abundance of immune cells, and DEGs between different CMGs subtypes were systematically analyzed. Further we classified patients into different gene subtypes based on the expression of DEGs in different CMGs subtypes. The Lasso Cox regression algorithm was used to calculate CMGs risk scores which was used to stratify CRC patients into high and low-risk groups. The OS time, clinicopathological features, stromal-immune score, abundance of immune cells, expression of immune checkpoints and drugs sensitivity between the two groups were compared. Finally, the nomogram incorporating CMGs risk scores, patient age, and TNM staging was constructed and validated.

1340 CRC patients were classified into 3 distinct subtypes: CMGs subtype A exhibited the most active copper metabolism, followed by CMGs subtype B, with CMGs subtype C being the least active. Notably, patients in CMGs subtype A exhibited reduced overall survival (OS) compared to subtypes B and C, with an immune microenvironment enriched in TAMs and TANs, a paucity of CD8+T cells and plasma cells. The expression of immune checkpoints was highest in CMGs subtype A, including PD1, PDL1, TIGIT, and B7H3. Based on the DEGs between different CMGs subtypes, we identified two gene subtypes and gene subtype A demonstrated a strong association with poor survival outcomes and shared a similar tumor microenvironment with CMGs subtype A. CRC patients were further stratified into high and low-risk groups based on median CMGs risk scores. Patients in the high-risk group were associated with shorter OS, unfavorable survival outcomes and most of them were in advanced stages. Moreover, the high-risk group showed elevated stromal-immune scores, greater prevalence of TAMs and TANs, and higher expression of immune checkpoints, including PD1, TIM3, B7H3, and SIGLEC15. Significantly, high-risk group also had a higher incidence of microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H), tumor mutational burden (TMB) and somatic mutation, suggesting enhanced responsiveness to immunotherapy. Finally, The AUC values of the nomogram at 1, 3, 5, 10 years were 0.769, 0.745, 0.730, and 0.799. The calibration curves demonstrated substantial concordance with the ideal model in OS predictions.

Heterogeneity in copper metabolism exists within CRC, and abnormalities in copper metabolism levels influence CRC progression and the immune microenvironment. CMGs are effective biomarkers for predicting the prognosis of CRC patient and guiding immunotherapy.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s12672-025-03183-x.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) currently stands as the third most prevalent malignant tumor worldwide, with the second-highest mortality rate, posing a significant challenge to the global population’s health [1,2]. Despite substantial progress in the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of CRC over the past few decades, the absence of effective early diagnostic methods leads to the majority of patients being diagnosed at advanced stages [3]. Therefore, there is an ongoing need for more in-depth research to explore the molecular and pathological mechanisms of CRC, seeking reliable and potent therapeutic approaches to further improve patient survival rates and quality of life [4].

Metabolic abnormalities are fundamental characteristics of tumors, influencing their tumorigenesis and progression [5]. In recent years, metal ions such as manganese, zinc, and calcium have garnered widespread attention for their regulatory roles in the proliferation, apoptosis, invasion, metastasis, and immune modulation of tumors [6–13]. In 2022, Tsvetkov and his colleagues unveiled the specific mechanism of cuprotosis that copper directly binds to the lipoylated components of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle, resulting in the aggregation of lipoylated proteins and loss of iron-sulfur cluster proteins [14]. This study forced the world’s attention to focus on copper once again, revisiting the function of copper metabolism in tumors. Copper, as one of the essential metal elements in the human body, is intricately linked to growth, development, and disease states [15–18]. For healthy adults, the recommended daily dietary copper intake is 0.9 mg [15]. However, an excess or deficiency of copper within the body can lead to diseases such as Wilson’s disease or Menkes disease, resulting in associated pathological changes and functional impairments in the brain, liver, kidneys, and muscles [15,19]. The current findings indicate that the concentration of copper within CRC is significantly higher than in normal tissues [16,20], and it is closely associated with clinical prognosis [21–24]. Consequently, the active metabolism of copper emerges as a fundamental mechanism promoting the progression of CRC. Ongoing studies elucidate that copper profoundly influences tumor biology, including proliferation, migration, metastasis, energy metabolism, and angiogenesis [16]. Copper promotes tumor growth by activating the MAPK signaling pathway [25] and induces tumor autophagy through the mediation of ULK1/2 [26]. Acting as a crucial catalytic cofactor for the activation of LOX and LOXL, copper participates in the cross-linking of collagen and elastin [27]. This engagement enables the reshaping of the extracellular matrix and facilitates epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) [28,29]. Furthermore, by inhibiting the activity of phosphodiesterase 3B (PDE3B), copper suppresses the degradation of intracellular cAMP to regulate lipolysis [30]. Moreover, activated by copper, various pro-angiogenic factors (such as VEGF, angiogenin, basic fibroblast growth factor, TGF-β) are released through the NF-κB or HIF-α pathways, influencing the generation of neovascularization around the tumor [31,32].

Although copper can promote tumor progression through a variety of pathways, there are still many key issues that have not yet been investigated. For example, copper activates signaling pathways by directly binding to MEK1 and ULK1/2, which may be one of the bases for the function of copper, but the specific mechanism remains unknown. Furthermore, the role of copper in tumor immunity is also poorly understood. Although it has been shown that copper plays a crucial role in maintaining normal immune function, such as enhancing T cell proliferation and cytotoxic function, improving neutrophil phagocytosis, and reducing plasma cell antibody secretion, studies in the field of tumor immunity are limited [18]. With the discovery of the mechanisms underlying cuprotosis, there has been a recent surge in studies about cuprotosis-related genes and tumor development. However, these studies have not been grounded in the context of copper metabolism in tumors, thus lacking a more comprehensive perspective to interpret the influence of copper metabolism on tumors’ biological behaviors, particularly concerning the tumor immune microenvironment.

Consequently, we applied copper metabolism-related genes (CMGs) as prognostic indicators for CRC, with exploration of their intrinsic relationships, metabolic pathways, and assessment of immunotherapeutic responsiveness. This approach holds immense promise for practical application. In this study, we comprehensively evaluated the expression of CMGs in CRC using consensus unsupervised clustering analysis to classify 1340 patients into 3 CMGs subtypes, and then further classified them into 2 gene subtypes based on differential genes (DEGs) between the CMGs subtypes. Using the CIBERSORT and ESTIMATE algorithms, the immune landscapes among CMGs subtypes and between gene subtypes were evaluated. Finally, a CMGs risk score model was constructed from the prognostic DEGs, which, combined with clinical characteristics to predict the survival prognosis, immune landscape features, and responsiveness to immunotherapy in CRC patients.

Figure1illustrates the workflow of this study. Gene expression data (fragments per kilobase million, FPKM), along with relevant prognostic and clinical pathological data, were obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) (https://portal.gdc.cancer.gov/) and the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/). A total of three GEO datasets (GSE17536,GSE40967,GSE103479) and TCGA (colon adenocarcinoma/rectum adenocarcinoma) data were included in the analysis. Patients with incomplete clinical information or unclear survival status were excluded. Only treatment-naive primary tumor samples were included to ensure consistency. The FPKM from TCGA was transformed into transcripts per kilobase million (TPM) and merged with the GEO gene expression data after batch effect removal using the “ComBat” package, resulting in a gene expression matrix containing 1373 samples. Prognostic data and clinical pathological characteristics were extracted from all four datasets, including survival status, overall survival (OS) time, age, gender, stage, TP53 mutation, KRAS mutation, and BRAF mutation. Data with incomplete prognostic information were excluded, resulting in a clinical dataset comprising 1340 patients.

Tengenesets(GOBP_CELLULAR_RESPONSE_TO_COPPER_ION,GOBP_COPPER_ION_HOMEOSTASIS,GOBP_COPPER_ION_IMPORT, GOBP_COPPER_ION_TRANSMEMBRANE_TRANSPORT,GOBP_COPPER_ION_TRANSPORT,GOBP_INTRACELLULAR_COPPER_ION_HOMEOSTASIS,GOBP_RESPONSE_TO_COPPER_ION,GOMF_COPPER_CHAPERONE_ACTIVITY,GOMF_COPPER_ION_BINDING,GOMF_COPPER_ION_TRANSMEMBRANE_TRANSPORTER_ACTIVITY) were downloaded from MSigDB (https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/) to obtain CMGs. The gene sets were merged to remove duplicate genes, and the intersection with the gene list from the gene expression data was taken, resulting in 112 CMGs included for further analysis (TableS1). After conducting univariate Cox regression analysis on CMGs, Spearman correlation analysis was employed to calculate the r-values of CMGs, which were then visualized using Cytoscape (v3.9.1). The R package “ConsensusClusterPlus” was used for consensus unsupervised clustering analysis to classify the 1340 patients into different CMGs subtypes. The clustering procedure adhered to the following criteria: Firstly, the cumulative distribution function (CDF) curve exhibited a gradual and smooth increase. Secondly, none of the groups were characterized by a small sample size. Finally, following clustering, an increase in intra-group correlation and a decrease in inter-group correlation were observed. To further validate the clustering of CMGs subtypes, the expression of the 112 CMGs was dimensionally reduced using the R package “Rtsne”. Finally, Gene set variation analysis (GSVA) was performed using the hallmark gene set (c2.cp.kegg.v7.2) sourced from the MSigDB database.

Using the R package “pheatmap”, the expression of CMGs or DEGs in CRC patients, molecular subtypes, TP53 mutation, KRAS mutation, BRAF mutation, stage, gender, survival status, and OS time were displayed in heatmap format. The “survival” and “survminer” R packages were utilized for Kaplan-Meier analysis to calculate differences in OS time between different molecular subtypes.

We utilized the “ESTIMATE” algorithm to derive stromal and immune scores for each CRC patient. Moreover, employing the “CIBERSORT” algorithm, we computed the infiltration abundance of 22 distinct immune cell types in CRC patients. Based on molecular subtypes, we conducted a comparison of immune checkpoint molecule expressions, including PDL1, PD1, CD276 (B7H3), TIGIT, and others.

DEGs among distinct CMGs subtypes were identified using the “limma” package in R, with a fold-change of 1.5 and an adjusted p-value of < 0.05. Following DEGs identification, functional enrichment analyses were conducted to elucidate potential functions, identify associated gene functions, and reveal enriched pathways. These analyses were performed using the “clusterprofiler” package in R.

To better investigate the relationship between CMGs and clinical prognosis, we initially subjected the obtained CMGs-related DEGs to univariate Cox regression analysis. Subsequently, based on the expression of prognostic DEGs, patients were grouped into different gene subtypes using an unsupervised clustering method, followed by further analysis of the differences in TME and expression of immune-related molecules. Then, the “caret” package in R randomly divided all CRC patients into a training set (n= 938) and a test set (n= 397) in a 7:3 ratio.

The Lasso Cox regression algorithm was employed to identify CMGs-related prognostic genes, aiming to minimize the risk of overfitting. This analysis was executed using the “glmnet” package in R. Finally, based on the minimum partial likelihood deviance, a group of candidate genes was subjected to a multivariate regression analysis to obtain the coefficient (coef) for each gene. The calculation of the CMGs risk score followed this formula: CMGs risk score = Σ(Expi * coefi).

After obtaining the CMGs risk score for each patient in the training set through the formula, the 938 patients were divided into high and low-risk groups based on the median. Subsequently, Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed on the OS time of the two groups. Finally, the “timeROC” package in R was utilized to calculate the area under the time-dependent receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve for the high and low-risk groups at 1-, 3-, 5-, and 10-years. The same analysis steps were applied to the test set data.

24 pairs of CRC and adjacent non-tumor tissue samples were collected from CRC patients at Shunde Hospital of Southern Medical University. A portion of the samples was preserved at −80 °C using RNAlater (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), while the remaining samples were fixed in formalin and embedded in paraffin.

Total RNA was extracted from CRC patient tissues using TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). Complementary DNA (cDNA) was synthesized from the extracted RNA using the HiScript Q RT SuperMix reagent kit (Vazyme, Nanjing, China). RT-qPCR was performed using ChamQ Universal SYBR qPCR Master Mix (Vazyme) on a 7500 RT-qPCR System (Applied Biosystems, Waltham, MA, USA). The data were normalized using ACTIN as the internal control and analyzed with the 2^(-ΔCt) method. Statistical comparisons were conducted using paired Wilcoxon tests and data visualization was performed with the “ggpubr” R package. The primer sequences used for qRT-PCR in this study are provided in Table S6.

IHC staining analysis was performed on paraffin-embedded tissues to detect the protein expression of SLC2A3 and HOXC6 in 24 tumor tissues and adjacent normal tissues according to the standard immunoperoxidase staining procedure. All slides were incubated with anti- SLC2A3 (1:1000; 20403-1-AP, Proteintech) and anti- HOXC6 (1:500, ab41587, Abcam) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The expression score was independently assessed in a blinded manner by two pathologists using the immunoreactivity score, which incorporates both the proportion of positively stained cells and staining intensity. A third pathologist was asked to re-evaluate the slides, when discrepancy occurred between the two pathologists. The percentage of positive cells was graded as follows: 0 (negative), 1 (< 10%), 2 (10–50%), 3 (51–80%), and 4 (> 80%). The intensity of staining was graded as follows: 0 (no color reaction), 1 (mild reaction), (moderate reaction), and 3 (intense reaction). The percentage of positive tumor cells and the staining intensity were multiplied to produce a weighted score for each sample. Immunoreactivity score of 8–12 was defined as high expression level and immunoreactivity score of 0–7 was defined as low expression. McNemar’s test was used to statistical analysis.

Chi-square tests were employed to examine the relationships between the CMGs risk groups and various clinical characteristics, including age, gender, stage, TP53 mutation, KRAS mutation, and BRAF mutation. Wilcoxon tests were utilized to compare CMGs risk scores between different groups based on the aforementioned clinical characteristics. Furthermore, a stratified Kaplan-Meier analysis was performed to assess whether the CMGs risk score maintained its predictive efficacy across diverse subgroups based on clinical characteristics.

To assess the proportions of tumor-infiltrating immune cells in the TME, CIBERSORT was performed to quantify the abundance of 22 infiltrating immune cells in heterogeneous samples within the low and high-risk groups. We assessed the stromal score and immune score in low and high-risk groups by the ESTIMATE algorithm, and the results were visualized with a jitter boxplot. The correlation between the fractions of the 22 infiltrating immune cells and the CMGs risk score as well as the expression of 11 CMGs were explored. The expression of immune checkpoints between the low and high-risk groups was visualized using boxplots. We utilized the “cBioPortalData” package to acquire MSI data (MANTIS score) for CRC. The MANTIS score is a predictive measure of a patient’s MSI status, as introduced in an article by Bonneville et al. [33]. The CSC index was obtained through the “synapser” package fromwww.synapse.org. Subsequently, we processed the data, extracted the expression matrix, and then used the “gelnet” package to construct a model and predict the CSC index of the CRC expression matrix. Lastly, we evaluated the correlations between the CMGs risk score and MSI, as well as CSC.

To identify somatic mutations in CRC patients between high and low-risk groups, we utilized the Mutation Annotation Format (MAF) extracted from the TCGA database, by using the “maftools” R package. Furthermore, the TMB score was computed for each CRC patient in the two groups. To investigate different therapeutic responses to chemotherapeutic drugs among CRC patients in the two groups, the half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) values were calculated using the “pRRophetic” package.

Clinical characteristics and CMGs risk scores were utilized to formulate a predictive nomogram through the “rms” package, aligning with the results of independent prognosis analysis. In this nomogram scoring system, each variable was assigned a corresponding score, and the cumulative score was calculated by summing the scores across all variables for each sample. Time-dependent ROC curves for 1-, 3-, 5-, and 10-years survivals were used to evaluate the nomogram’s performance. Calibration plots of the nomogram were generated to illustrate the predictive accuracy concerning the anticipated 1-, 3-, 5- and 10-year survival outcomes in comparison to the ideal model.

All statistical analyses were performed using R version 4.3.2. Statistical significance was set atp< 0.05.

The workflow of our study is illustrated in Fig.1. To fully understand the expression profile of CMGs, 1340 patients from four eligible cohorts (TCGA-COAD/READ,GSE17536,GSE40967,GSE103479) were included for further analysis. Detailed information on the 1340 CRC patients is presented in TableS1. Univariate Cox regression was performed to reveal the prognostic values of 112 CMGs (p< 0.05). 27 prognostic CMGs were selected for analysis using Multivariate Cox regression, 8 of which were identified as independent predictive factors (Fig.2A). The correlation analysis of prognostic CMGs is shown in Fig.2B.

For further exploration of the expression profile of CMGs in CRC, we used the consensus unsupervised clustering algorithm to classify CRC patients according to the expression of the 112 CMGs. The optimal number of clusters was determined as k = 3, based on the gradual increase and subsequent plateau of the cumulative distribution function (CDF) curve, distinct separation between clusters, and sufficient sample size within each group (Fig.S1). Detailed selection criteria are provided in the Materials and Methods section. As a result, 1340 CRC patients were classified into 3 unique subtypes and significant differences in the expression of CMGs were demonstrated by t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (t-SNE) analysis (Fig.2C and D). The Kaplan-Meier curves showed that patients in CMGs subtypes A had a shorter OS time compared to those in CMGs subtypes B or C (log-rank test,p= 0.019; Fig.2E). Kruskal-Wallis test revealed significant differences (p< 0.05) among 97 out of 112 CMGs in three subtypes. The expression of 45 CMGs was highest in CMGs subtype A, 30 CMGs were highest in CMGs subtype B, and 22 CMGs were highest in CMGs subtype C, based on the comparison of mean rank. (TableS2). Furthermore, scoring based on mean rank (the highest mean rank is assigned 3 points, medium is assigned 2 points, and the lowest is assigned 1 point), CMGs subtype A also scored higher than CMGs subtype B and CMGs subtype C (TableS2). Collectively, these findings show that CMGs subtype A have the most active copper metabolism, followed by subtype B, while subtype C have a copper metabolism that was considerably less active. Expression of CMGs, BRAF mutation, KRAS mutation, TP53 mutation, and clinical characteristics in the three subtypes are shown by heatmap (Fig.2F).

GSVA enrichment analysis showed that three CMGs subtypes display distinctive differences in KEGG pathways (TableS3). As shown in Fig.3A, CMGs subtype A is significantly enriched in glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis chondroitin sulfate, focal adhesion, extracellular matrix (ECM) receptor interaction, leishmania infection, cell adhesion molecules cams, viral myocarditis, regulation of actin cytoskeleton, pathways in cancer, leukocyte transendothelial migration, and chemokine signaling pathway compared to the other two subtypes. Using the CIBERSORT algorithm, we assessed the 22 human immune cell subsets in each CRC sample to gain insights into the function of CMGs in the TME of CRC. Among the three subtypes, there were clear differences in the infiltration of most immune cells in TME (Fig.3B). Gamma delta T cells, neutrophils, M0 macrophages, M1 macrophages, and M2 macrophages, as well as resting mast cells, were more prevalent in CMGs subtype A than subtype B or subtype C (Dunn-Bonferroni test, adj.p< 0.05). Meanwhile, CMGs subtype A contains fewer plasma cells, CD8+T cells, resting and activated memory CD4+T cells, regulatory T cells (Tregs), resting NK cells, monocytes, resting and activated dendritic cells, and activated mast cells (Dunn-Bonferroni test, adj.p< 0.05). CMGs subtypes B and C exhibit similar immune cell compositions in plasma cells, Tregs, M0 macrophages, as well as resting and activated dendritic cells. CMGs subtype C demonstrates the highest immune cell composition in plasma cells, resting and activated memory CD4+T cells, resting NK cells, monocytes, and resting and activated dendritic cells. However, it notably lacks follicular helper T cells, gamma delta T cells, eosinophils, neutrophils, M0 macrophages, M1 macrophages, and M2 macrophages compared to the other two subtypes (Dunn-Bonferroni test, adj.p< 0.05).

We further analyzed the expression of immune-related molecules in the three subtypes. PDL1 exhibited the highest expression in subtype A, followed by subtype B, and was lowest in subtype C (Fig.3C). Additionally, the expressions of PD1 in subtypes A and B was significantly higher than in subtype C. The expression of LAG3 in subtypes A and B were higher than in subtype C, with its ligands LGALS3 and CLEC4G showing higher expression in subtype B (Fig.S2A). The distribution of TIGIT, TIM3, and B7H3 was similar to that of PDL1, with higher expression observed in subtype A compared to the other two groups (Fig.S2B-S2D). The expression of TIGIT ligand (PVR), TIM3 ligands (HMGB1, LGALS9), HVEM and its ligand (BTLA), Siglec15, B2M, TAP1, and TAP2 varied significantly among the three subtypes (Fig.S2B-S2G).

By using the R package “limma”, we identified the DEGs based on the three CMGs subtypes. There are 98 DEGs between CMGs subtype A and subtype B, 32 DEGs between CMGs subtype B and subtype C, and 213 DEGs between CMGs subtype A and subtype C (Table S4). In total, 250 DEGs were included for further analysis. GO and KEGG enrichment analyses were performed to explore the potential biological functions. The GO enrichment analysis results of CMGs subtype A-B had 26 identical enrichments with the results of CMGs subtype A-C (Fig.4A and B), and most of these identical enrichment results were related to extracellular matrix composition, cell-extracellular matrix attachment, and titanase activity, which implies that copper metabolism in CRC may be involved in biological behaviors such as extracellular matrix remodeling, metastasis, and invasion. It is noteworthy that in CMGs subtype A (highly active copper metabolism) compared to CMGs subtype C (inactive copper metabolism), the GO results were enriched in neutrophil and granulocyte chemotaxis, migration, complement components, chemokine, and cytokine activity, suggesting that copper metabolism may have a significant influence on the immune response in CRC. Similarly, in the KEGG analysis, similar immune-related pathways are displayed (Fig.4D). However, in CMGs subtype A (highly active copper metabolism) compared to CMGs subtype B (moderate active copper metabolism), there is no such similar enrichment in GO and KEGG results (Fig.4A and C). Subsequently, we conducted univariate Cox regression analysis on 250 DEGs, resulting in 152 OS-related DEGs (p< 0.05, Table S5). To further analyze the potential functions and mechanisms of copper metabolism related DEGs, we employed the consensus unsupervised clustering algorithm to classify CRC patients into two gene subtypes based on the 152 prognostic DEGs (Fig.4E, Fig.S3). Kaplan-Meier curves demonstrated that the OS time of gene subtype A was significantly lower than that of gene subtype B (log-rank test,p= 0.007; Fig.4F). Moreover, the expression of most CMGs was significantly higher in gene subtype A compared to gene subtype B (Fig. S4). This observation suggests a strong correlation between active copper metabolism and unfavorable clinical outcomes. There were significant differences between gene subtype A and gene subtype B in terms of BRAF mutation, TNM stage, gender, survival time, and outcome (Wilcoxon test,p< 0.05; Fig.5A).

Additionally, significant differences were observed in immune cells and immune-related molecules between gene subtype A and gene subtype B. Plasma cells, CD8+T cells, resting CD4+memory T cells, activated memory CD4+T cells, helper follicular T cells, activated NK cells, monocytes, activated dendritic cells, and activated mast cells were more abundant in the TME of gene subtype B, while gamma delta T cells, M0 macrophages, M1 macrophages, M2 macrophages, resting mast cells, eosinophils, and neutrophils were more abundant in the TME of gene subtype A (Wilcoxon test,p< 0.05; Fig.5B). Immune-related molecules such as PDL1, PD1, LAG3, LGALS3, CLEC4G, TIGIT, PVR, B7H3, TIM3, HVEM, BTLA, B2M, TAP1, and TAP2 showed significantly higher expression in gene subtype A compared to gene subtype B (Fig.5C, Fig. S5). According to the CIBERSORT algorithm, stromal scores, immune scores, and estimate scores were significantly higher in gene subtype A compared to gene subtype B (Fig.5D).

To explore the relationship between CMGs and their prognostic value in CRC, we utilized 152 prognostic DEGs to construct a prognosis-related model. Initially, CRC patients were divided into a training set (n= 962) and a test set (n= 411) at a ratio of 7:3 using the “caret” package. Subsequently, an analysis of the 152 prognostic DEGs was conducted using Lasso regression and multivariate Cox regression in the training set. Following Lasso regression analysis, 21 OS-associated prognostic genes were determined based on the minimum partial likelihood deviance (Fig. S6). Finally, after performing multivariate Cox regression analysis, we identified 11 prognostic genes (MT2A, SLC2A3, FABP4, PXDN, CXCL13, HOXC6, SCG2, THBS4, CRYAB, SPARCL1, and CCDC80), consisting of seven high-risk genes (MT2A, SLC2A3, FABP4, HOXC6, SCG2, CRYAB, and SPARCL1) and four low-risk genes (PXDN, CXCL13, THBS4, and CCDC80) (Fig.6A). According to the results of the multivariate Cox regression analysis, the CMGs risk score was constructed as follows: CMGs risk score = (0.1437023 *expression of MT2A) + (0.238056 *expression of SLC2A3) + (0.1567226 *expression of FABP4) + (−0.26443 *expression of PXDN) + (−0.1650416 *expression of CXCL13) + (0.1692485 *expression of HOXC6) + (0.2083284 *expression of SCG2) + (−0.198839 *expression of THBS4) + (0.1904191 *expression of CRYAB) + (0.2497736 *expression of SPARCL1) + (−0.2458789 *expression of CCDC80).

Through the CMGs risk score model, patients within the training set were stratified into high and low-risk groups based on the median CMGs risk score. Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated that patients in the high-risk group exhibited lower OS time compared to those in the low-risk group (log-rank test,p< 0.001; Fig.6B). Furthermore, the 1-, 3-, 5-, and 10-year survival rates associated with the CMGs risk score were indicated by Area Under the Curve (AUC) values of 0.712, 0.681, 0.658, and 0.698, respectively (Fig.6C). To validate the prognostic performance of the CMGs risk score, we calculated CMGs risk scores across the test set and validation set (GSE87211). Based on the median CMGs risk score of the training set, both datasets were stratified into high and low-risk groups. The ROC and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis results were consistent with the results observed in the training set (Fig. S7A-S7D). Besides that, we extracted total mRNA from tumor tissues and adjacent normal tissues from 24 clinical samples and detected the mRNA expression levels of SLC2A3, HOXC6, and CXCL13 by using RT-qPCR. The results showed that SLC2A3 and HOXC6 were highly expressed in tumor tissues (Wilcoxon test,p< 0.05, Fig.6D and E), while the expression of CXCL13 showed no significant difference between tumor and adjacent normal tissues (Fig.6F). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed to assess the expression of SLC2A3 and HOXC6 in paired tumor and adjacent normal tissues from 24 clinical specimens. Both SLC2A3 and HOXC6 demonstrated significantly higher expression in tumor tissues compared to adjacent normal tissues (Fig.6G and H,p< 0.05). Due to sample limitations, only three genes were validated by RT-qPCR, further validation in larger patient cohorts is warranted in future studies.

The CMGs risk score significantly varied across different subtypes. Figure7A illustrates the distribution of patients based on CMGs subtypes, gene subtypes, CMGs risk groups, and survival outcomes. Among the CMGs subtypes, subtype A displayed the highest CMGs risk score, followed by subtype B, with subtype C exhibiting the lowest score (p< 0.001; Fig.7B). Similarly, within the gene subtypes, gene subtype A had a significantly higher CMGs risk score than gene subtype B (p< 0.001; Fig.7C). The rank dot plot revealed the distribution of patients with ranked CMGs risk scores (Fig.7D). Patients with higher CMGs risk scores had lower survival time and a higher probability of unfavorable survival outcomes (Fig.7E and F). We also analyzed the differences in clinical characteristics between the high and low-risk groups. There were no differences in age, gender, KRAS mutation, or TP53 mutation between the high and low-risk groups. However, the percentage of stage 3–4 and BRAF mutation was significantly higher in the high-risk group compared to the low-risk group (chi-square test,p< 0.001; Fig. S8A-S8F). Subsequently, stratified Kaplan-Meier survival analysis was conducted based on clinical characteristics (Fig. S8G-S8K). The results indicated that the high-risk group with age > 60 years had the lowest survival time, followed by the high-risk group with age < 60 years, the low-risk group with age > 60 years, and the low-risk group with age < 60 years (log-rank test,p< 0.001; Fig. S8G). Additionally, the survival time of the high-risk group with stage 3–4 was significantly shorter than that of the high-risk group with stage 1–2, the low-risk group with stage 3–4, and the low-risk group with stage 1–2 (log-rank test,p< 0.001; Fig. S8I). By performing univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses of patients’ age, gender, TMN stage, and CMGs risk score, we found that age, TNM stage, and CMGs risk score were independent risk factors (p< 0.001, Fig. S9).

To analyze the relationship between CMGs risk score and tumor immunity, we utilized the CIBERSORT algorithm to assess the correlation between CMGs risk score and the abundance of immune cells in each sample. The high-risk group positively correlated with the infiltration of resting CD4+T cells, gamma delta T cells, activated mast cells, monocytes, M0 macrophages, M2 macrophages, and neutrophils (Fig.8A). Moreover, the high-risk group demonstrated higher stromal score and immune score in comparison to the low-risk group (Fig.8B). Continuing our exploration into the influence of CMGs risk score on tumor immunity, we performed a Spearman correlation analysis between the 11 prognostic genes and immune cell infiltration abundance, uncovering notable correlations between these genes and most immune cell abundances (Fig.8C), especially with M0 macrophages, M1 macrophages, and neutrophils. Particularly noteworthy was the significant positive correlation between CXCL13 and CD8+T cells, follicular helper T cells, and M1 macrophages. Moreover, the expression of HAVCR2 (TIM3), LAIR1, CD274 (PDL1), CD276 (B7H3), SELPLG, TNFSF9, NRP1, SIGLEC15, TNFSF4, CD86, and COLEC12 were higher in the high-risk group, whereas CTLA4, TNFRSF14, LGALS9, PDCD1, HMGB1, and PVR exhibited lower expression (Wilcoxon test,p< 0.05; Fig.8D).

Tumors with higher MSI tend to generate neoantigens, leading to increased infiltration of immune cells, thereby making them more likely to benefit from immunotherapy and suppress tumor progression [34]. We designated MANTIS scores greater than 0.4 as MSI-H (high MSI), while those less than or equal to 0.4 were classified as MSI-L/MSS (low or microsatellite stable) [33]. The results indicated a significantly higher proportion of MSI-H in the high-risk group compared to the low-risk group (chi-square test,p< 0.05; Fig.9A). Additionally, the CMGs risk score in the MSI-H group was markedly higher than that in MSI-L/MSS (p< 0.001, Fig.9B). Patients were stratified into four groups based on CMGs risk group and MSI, and Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed significantly lower OS times in the high-risk group compared to the low-risk group, with the lowest survival time observed in the high-risk + MSS-H subgroup (Fig.9C). However, a notable negative correlation was observed between CMGs risk score and CSC index (r= −0.35,p< 0.001), indicating a higher presence of cancer stem cell characteristics in tumors with low CMGs scores and a lower degree of differentiation (Fig.9D).

TMB serves as a crucial biomarker for evaluating the potential benefit of immunotherapy, with higher TMB associated with increased neoantigen production, thus affecting the efficacy of immunotherapy [4]. We observed a significant positive correlation between CMGs risk score and TMB (Fig.9E and F). Further analysis of somatic mutation data in tumors from the high and low-risk groups revealed significant disparities in mutated genes between the two cohorts. Firstly, among the top 10 mutated genes in both groups, TP53, APC, TTN, KRAS, SYNE1, MUC16, FAT4, and DNAH5 were commonly observed, while OBSCN and ZFHX4 were more prevalent in the high-risk group, and the low-risk group exhibited more mutations in PIK3CA and DNAH11 (Fig.9G and H). Secondly, the number of mutations in genes such as KIAA1671, TBC1D9, BRAF, SRCAP, UNC6B, PCNXL3, WDR33, IGSF5, LRRTM1, and SAFB was significantly higher in the high-risk group compared to the low-risk group, whereas mutations in APC and NPAP1 were more prevalent in the low-risk group (Fig.9I). These results suggest that tumors in the high-risk group have a significantly higher TMB and somatic mutation rate, indicating a potential for better response to immunotherapy. Subsequently, we analyzed the relationship between CMGs risk score and IC50 of anti-tumor drugs to identify drug susceptibility in tumors across different risk groups. The high-risk group showed significantly lower IC50 for Elesclomol (Fig.9J,p< 0.001), but higher IC50 for Rapamycin and Doxorubicin (Fig.9K and L,p< 0.001). These findings suggest that tumors with different CMGs risk scores exhibit varying susceptibility to different drugs.

To better utilize the CMGs risk score in guiding clinical treatment, we integrated it with the TNM stage and developed a nomogram to predict the survival probability at 1-, 3-, 5-, and 10-years (Fig.10A). Initially, we evaluated the AUC curves for 1-, 3-, 5-, and 10-years using training, testing, internal validation (GSE40967), and external validation (GSE87211) datasets (Fig.10B and E). Compared to utilizing TNM stage or age alone, as well as their combination as a predictive indicator, the combined model demonstrated superior performance (Fig. S10A-S10L). The AUC values for the nomogram in the training set were 0.769, 0.745, 0.730, and 0.799 for 1-, 3-, 5-, and 10-years, respectively. In comparison, the AUC values for both age and TNM stage were 0.691, 0.671, 0.670, 0.731 (Fig. S10C). In the external validation set, the AUC values for the nomogram were 0.731 0.705, 0.726 and 0.582 for 1-, 3-, 5- and 10-years respectively, while for both age and TNM stage, the AUC values were 0.649, 0.672, 0.573, 0.530 (Fig. S10L). Compared to the ideal model, the multiple calibration curves for the training, testing, internal validation, and external validation sets showed good performance (Fig.10F and I).

Beyond its physiological roles, copper plays an important role in tumor progression. Numerous studies have demonstrated elevated copper levels in the serum and tumor tissues of patients with various cancers, including colorectal cancer (CRC), breast cancer, lung cancer, and ovarian cancer, compared to normal tissues [16,17,35]. Notably, elevated serum copper was observed to correlate with advanced TNM stage and progression of CRC and breast cancer [21,24]. The concentration of copper in CRC was also determined to be higher than in normal tissues, while the concentration of zinc decreases in progressive CRC [21,23,36]. Thus, the Cu/Zn ratio emerges as a crucial prognostic indicator for CRC. Experimental studies have discovered that copper can regulate tumor progression through various pathways, including proliferation, metastasis, angiogenesis, and energy metabolism [15–17,20]. Despite studies confirming the role of copper in maintaining immune regulation, its direct effects on tumor immunity remain underexplored [18]. Recent research found that copper can promote the expression of PDL1 in tumors to induce immune evasion [37]. This research provides a foundation and direction for exploring the correlation between copper and tumor immunity, as well as for developing new drugs to enhance immunotherapeutic responsiveness. Following the discovery of cuproptosis [14], numerous studies have focused on elucidating the prognostic implications of cuproptosis-associated genes and their modulatory roles within the tumor microenvironment [38]. However, these researchers have not interpreted the findings from the perspective of copper metabolism in tumors. In our study, we meticulously scrutinized the expression patterns of 112 CMGs across CRC cohorts. Based on the expression profiles of CMGs, CRC patients were methodically stratified into three discernible CMGs subtypes. Subsequent identified the prognostic DEGs between CMGs subtypes, we further classified CRC into gene subtypes A and B and elucidated substantial variations. Additionally, a CMGs-risk scoring model was constructed based on prognostic DEGs after affirming its robust predictive efficacy. By utilizing this model, CRC patients were dichotomized into categories of high-risk group or low-risk group. Patients in different groups showed significantly distinct prognoses, clinicopathological characteristics, TME, immune checkpoint expression, mutation profiles, MSI, CSC index, and drug susceptibility. Finally, by integrating the CMGs risk score, age and tumor stage, we constructed a quantitative nomogram, further enhancing the performance of the CMGs risk score and facilitating its clinical application. This comprehensive analysis has revealed the profound regulatory influence of copper metabolism on biological pathways, TME formation, and drug susceptibility in CRC, providing a novel perspective and groundwork for understanding the interplay between copper metabolism and tumor immunity.

The level of active copper metabolism correlates with the progression of CRC. In this study, CRC patients were categorized into three different CMGs subtypes based on the expression of CMGs (Fig.2C-D). Most CMGs exhibited the highest expression in CMGs subtype A, yet the OS time was the shortest among the three subtypes (Fig.2E). CMGs subtype B demonstrated higher expression compared to CMGs subtype C, and the OS time of CMGs subtype B was shorter than that of CMGs subtype C (Fig.2E). Similarly, the OS time of gene subtype A with high expression of DEGs was also significantly shorter than that of gene subtype B with low expression of DEGs (Fig.4F). Using prognostic DEGs, we constructed a CMGs risk score with robust clinical predictive efficacy. The CMGs risk score was consistent with the distribution trends of CMGs subtypes and gene subtypes (Fig.7B-C), manifesting a positive correlation with the levels of activation in copper metabolism. Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed that patients with high CMGs risk scores had significantly worse OS than those with low scores (Fig.6B), and higher TNM stages were significantly associated with elevated CMGs scores (Fig. S8C). Notably, patients with both a high CMGs score and advanced TNM stage (Stage 3–4) had the worst survival outcomes (Fig. S8I), consistent with previous findings that active copper metabolism is a poor prognostic marker in CRC.

CRCs with varying levels of copper metabolism displayed distinct molecular functions and metabolic pathways. GSVA analysis revealed that CMGs subtype A had elevated activity in pathways associated with extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling, such as glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis, focal adhesion, ECM-receptor interaction, and cell adhesion molecules (Fig.3A). Specifically, glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis chondroitin sulfate, focal adhesion, ECM receptor interaction, and cell adhesion molecules were involved in the activity of ECM. Similar results were observed for GO and KEGG enrichment results for DEGs of CMGs subtypes (Fig.4A-D). The ECM is composed of fibrous proteins (e.g., collagen, elastin, fibronectin) and glycosaminoglycans (e.g., hyaluronic acid, chondroitin sulfate) [39]. It plays a key role in tumor proliferation, invasion, angiogenesis, and immune regulation [39,40]. Previous studies have identified that copper promotes the remodeling of ECM by lysyl oxidase (LOX) and lysyl oxidase-like proteins (LOXL). The LOX and LOXL families are recognized as copper-dependent enzymes that facilitate the crosslinking of collagen and elastin, thereby promoting tissue stiffness [41]. In addition to serving as a catalytic cofactor for the LOX and LOXL families, copper also regulates the hypoxic environment in TME by promoting the expression of LOX family proteins through the activation of HIF-1α, such as LOX, LOXL2, and LOXL4 [42,43]. It was found that LOX promoted the expression of HIF-1α, thereby establishing a positive feedback loop that facilitated tumor development [42]. Researchers have demonstrated that LOX is associated with the progression of CRC, contributing to invasion and metastasis. IHC demonstrated that the expression of ECM and LOX were positively correlated with the TNM stage of CRC [44]. RT-PCR analysis of tumor samples revealed that the expression and nuclear translocation of LOX were associated with the invasion and metastasis of CRC [45,46]. LOX and LOXL facilitate the invasion and metastasis of CRC through various pathways involving IL-6, FAK/SRC, and EMT [28,29,47–49].

Another important copper-related regulator of ECM remodeling is the COMMD family (Copper Metabolism MURR1 Domain-containing), which maintains copper homeostasis [50]. COMMD1 deficiency leads to intracellular copper accumulation [51] and reduced ATP7B expression, limiting copper efflux [52,53]. CTR1 knockdown has also been shown to decrease COMMD1, XIAP and NF-κB levels [54]. Recently, Hancock et al. found that loss of COMMD3 increases copper burden in tumors and enhances the ability of tumors to remodel the ECM, thereby promoting tumor growth and invasion [55]. In our study, we observed that the proportion of stage 3–4 patients in the high-risk group was significantly higher than that in the low-risk group and the OS time was shortest for patients with Stage 3–4 in the high-CMGs group (Fig. S8C, Fig. S8I). In summary, these results suggest that active copper metabolism plays an important role in regulating invasion and metastasis in CRC by remodeling the ECM.

Active copper metabolism promotes the formation of immunosuppressive TME in CRC. Utilizing the ESTIMATE package, we discovered that CMGs subtypes A had significantly higher stromal and immunity scores than the other subtypes (Fig.3E). Despite elevated immune cell infiltration, this group also showed increased expression of immune checkpoints including PDL1, PD1, B7H3, TIGIT, TIM3, and LAG3 (Fig.3C-D, Fig.S2). The gene subtypes and CMGs risk groups showed a similar immune landscape (Fig.5C-D, Fig. S5, Fig.7B, and Fig.7D). These collective results suggested that the majority of infiltrating immune cells in CMGs subtype A, gene subtype A, and the high-risk group could be in a functionally inhibitory state. Voli et al. discovered that copper promoted the expression of PDL1 in tumors to induce immune evasion [37]. This finding elucidates one of the underlying mechanisms contributing to the high expression of immune checkpoints in CRC with active copper metabolism. TME is classified into three main types: Infiltrated-excluded, Infiltrated-inflamed, and Infiltrated-TLS [56]. Infiltrated-inflamed TME is characterized by abundant infiltrating lymphocytes expressing PD1 and tumor cells expressing PDL1. While these tumors have high immunogenicity, the functionality of immune cells is diminished, and they are termed “Hot Tumors”. The TME of CMGs subtype A, gene subtype A, and high-risk group resembles the Infiltrated-inflamed TME, implying that these types of tumors have good responsiveness to PD1/PDL1 or other immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs). Therefore, drugs targeting copper metabolism may have the potential to become sensitizers for immunotherapy.

Besides that, we also observed a significantly positive correlation between the CMGs risk score and the proportion of M0 macrophages, M2 macrophages, and neutrophils. In contrast, there was a negative correlation with the proportion of M1 macrophages, CD8+T cells, and activated NK cells (Fig.7A). Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) are a group of immune cells with phagocytic, antigen-presenting, and cytokine-secreting [57]. M1 macrophages exert anti-tumor effects, whereas M2 macrophages promote tumor growth and immunosuppression [57–60]. Our results suggest that active copper metabolism skews macrophage polarization toward the M2 phenotype, contributing to poor prognosis. Previous studies have shown that copper metabolism regulates the polarization of TAMs in direct or indirect manners. Copper directly promotes M2 polarization by increasing oxidative stress, modulating glutathione synthesis, and inhibiting the arginase pathway in Macrophages [61–63]. Secondly, Copper can upregulate intratumoral ROS levels, which indirectly serve as crucial factors in the activation and functionality of M2 macrophages [64,65]. However, studies based on the crosstalk between copper metabolism in tumors and TAMs are relatively insufficient, and further studies are needed to explore the underlying mechanisms. The effectiveness of anti-PD1/PDL1 therapies was initially believed to be primarily attributed to their regulation of T cells. However, in recent years, it has been revealed that TAMs are one of the targets for ICIs. TAMs expressing PDL1 exhibited a positive correlation with survival outcomes and emerged as independent prognostic factor in cancer [58,66]. CRC promotes M2 polarization and upregulates PDL1 expression by secreting miR-21-5p and miR-200a [67]. Conversely, the blockade of PDL1 promotes the proliferation of TAMs and upregulates multiple macrophage inflammatory pathways [68]. Gordon et al. demonstrated in vivo that blocking the PD1/PDL1 increased phagocytosis of macrophages, consequently suppressing tumor growth [69]. The combination of anti-PDL1 with PD1-IL2v has been observed to prolong the response phase, enhancing therapeutic efficacy by the reprogramming of immunosuppressive TAMs [70]. We found that PD1 and PDL1 were highly expressed in CMGs subtype A and gene subtype A. PDL1 was significantly upregulated in the high-risk group and was accompanied by a high proportion of M2 macrophage infiltration. We hypothesize that M2 macrophages with high expression of PD1/PDL1 were present within the TME of CRC with active copper metabolism, and that treatment with anti-PD1/PDL1 may exert its effect through these immune cells.

In addition to TAMs, neutrophils are also immune cells worthy of our attention. In our study, we observed a positive correlation between active copper metabolism (CMGs subtype A, gene subtype A, and high CMGs risk group) and the presence of neutrophils in TME. Blood neutrophils serve a critical function within the immune system, defending against pathogens, orchestrating inflammation, and impacting a range of immune and non-immune processes [71]. However, Tumor-associated neutrophils (TANs) with distinctly different functions are widely believed to promote tumor progression, such as tumorigenesis, proliferation, metastasis, angiogenesis, formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), and immunosuppression [71,72]. TANs inhibit CD8⁺ T cell proliferation and IFN-γ production, as well as induce T cell apoptosis [72,73]. Gr1+neutrophils were reported to reduce T cell homing and alter angiogenesis, consequently inducing hypoxia and sustained Snail expression to promote tumor proliferation and metastasis [74]. Moreover, NETs have emerged in recent years as crucial molecules discovered to play a significant role in facilitating tumor progression by TANs. NETs are adhesive, mesh-like structures secreted by neutrophils during the defense against external pathogens, serving the function of capturing and eliminating extracellular pathogens [75]. However, researchers have found that NETs promote tumor proliferation, migration, and metastasis through various mechanisms [75,76]. NETs activate the Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) pathway and facilitate the process of EMT to promote the migration and invasion of tumors [77–80]. Furthermore, NETs can create an immunosuppressive TME by inhibiting the recruitment and activation of T cells and NK cells, and promote the differentiation of regulatory Tregs [75]. Additionally, TANs share similar functionalities and expression profiles with polymorphonuclear myeloid-derived suppressor cells (PMN-MDSCs), collectively exerting immunosuppressive effects [71]. Nevertheless, there is still a notable scarcity of investigations regarding the connection between copper metabolism genes and the infiltration and activation of tumor-associated neutrophils (TANs). Further studies are needed to elucidate and validate these findings. In conclusion, CRC with active copper metabolism may establish an immunosuppressive TME by upregulating the expression of immune checkpoints, promoting the M2 polarization, increasing the infiltration of TANs or MDSCs and decreasing the infiltration of CD8+T cells.

Copper metabolism is also associated with microsatellite instability (MSI), which is driven by defects in the mismatch repair (MMR) system [34]. Consequently, a deficient MMR (d-MMR) system is prone to MSI-H. Approximately 15% of CRCs exhibit MSI-high (MSI-H) status, which is linked to increased immunogenicity and favorable responses to immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) [81,82]. Due to the favorable response to ICIs therapy, d-MMR and MSI-H are considered biomarkers for a favorable prognosis in CRC. We found that high CMGs risk scores correlated with MSI-H status (Fig.8A-B). This finding aligns with the higher expression of PD1 and PDL1 observed in the high- risk group. Stratified analysis revealed that low-risk MSS/MSI-L patients exhibited the most favorable prognosis, while high-risk MSI-H patients had the poorest outcomes (Fig.8C). Therefore, as previously stated, we believe that ICIs have the potential to significantly improve survival rates in the high-risk group. In addition, we found that CRCs with different CMGs risk scores had different susceptibility to antitumor drugs (Fig.9J-L). Additionally, drug sensitivity analysis showed that CRCs with high CMGs scores were more responsive to Elesclomol—a copper ionophore that induces copper-mediated oxidative stress and cell death [83,84]. Thus, CRC with active copper metabolism can potentially benefit from the use of copper ionophores to enhance anti-tumor effects. Although our model predicts immunotherapy responsiveness based on immune checkpoint expression and TMB/MSI, the absence of datasets from patients who have received immunotherapy limits direct validation of its predictive accuracy. However, the combination therapy of copper-modulating agents and ICIs for CRC holds crucial research significance, requiring extensive exploration in this domain.

This study has several limitations. Firstly, all analyses are based on retrospective data from public databases, and all samples used in our study are retrospective. Therefore, inherent case selection bias may have influenced the results. Large-scale prospective studies and additional in vitro and in vivo experiments are needed to confirm our findings. Additionally, some crucial clinical variables, such as surgical, neoadjuvant chemotherapy, and radiotherapy data, were unavailable for analysis in most datasets, potentially impacting immune response and the status of copper metabolism. Although a nomogram was constructed based on the risk score and clinical characteristics of CRC patients, the current method for obtaining an accurate risk score remains costly and technically challenging. Additionally, the cutoff used to distinguish high- and low-risk groups was based on the median value of the CMGs risk score in the training cohort. Therefore, further optimization of the model is necessary to enhance its clinical feasibility and applicability. Future studies should explore clinically actionable thresholds through prospective validation.

We innovatively unveiled the heterogeneity in copper metabolism within CRC through the comprehensive analysis of multiple cohort data based on currently known CMGs. This analysis allowed us to investigate the variation in physiological pathways, TME, clinicopathological characteristics, and drug susceptibility across CRC with different statuses of copper metabolism. This study emphasized the CMGs as promising biological targets for antitumor therapy and immunotherapy, thereby laying the groundwork for the development of relevant targeted drugs or combination therapies. Additionally, we established a predictive model based on CMGs, which can be utilized for the evaluation and personalized treatment of CRC patients, ultimately enhancing the efficiency of clinical treatment.

We thank Foshan Gastrointestinal Tumor Diagnosis and Treatment Engineering Technology Research Center, Foshan City’s 14th Five-Year Key Specialty Project. Funded by the key medical talents training project of Shunde District, Foshan.