Novel pyrylium-based fluorescent DNA-binding dyes were developed, containingp-aminoaryl groups at theαpositions of the pyrylium moiety. The amines are substituted with aminoalkyl groups to enhance the dye's water solubility and DNA binding affinity. With this structural modification triarylpyryliums exhibit up to 7.6 times higher fluorescence enhancement upon binding to DNA, rendering them promising candidates for fluorogenic DNA sensors. The photochemical characteristics of the dyes, including the radiationless deexcitation pathways necessary for the DNA-induced fluorogenicity were studied using both spectroscopical experiments and theoretical calculations. Particular attention was given to the possibility of twisted intramolecular charge transfer (TICT) states as a quenching pathway in the unbound state. These findings support the rational design of structurally dynamic, environment-sensitive fluorophores for nucleic acid detection and molecular diagnostics.

A series of novel fluorescent DNA-binding pyrylium dyes is developed, and the mechanism of their fluorogenicity is explored computationally.

Our objective was to design and synthesize pyrylium-based compounds that are well-suited for the detection of minute quantities of DNA and exhibit favourable aqueous solubility. The latter required the incorporation of polar auxiliary groups; considering the structural resemblance of triarylpyryliums to other donor–acceptor–donor type DNA-binding dyes, such as Miami Yellow and Green,17N′-methylpiperazine-N-yl groups were chosen as a starting point in the substituent optimisation.

The 2,4,6-triarylpyrylium salts were synthesized from the corresponding ketones and aldehydesviacondensation in methanesulfonic acid (Fig. 1a). During this condensation a dihydropyran ring is formed, which is oxidized to pyryliumin situ, presumably by atmospheric oxygen. The 4-dialkylamino-substituted benzaldehyde and acetophenone intermediates were prepared from the SNAr-type reaction of secondary amines and 4-fluorobenzaldehyde or 4′-fluoroacetophenone. An exception is the ketone intermediate of 2,6-Ind-4-DMA, synthesized from indoleviaa three-step route (Fig. S2 in SI). The asymmetrically substituted pyrylium, 2,4-NMP-6-Ph was prepared in a one-pot reaction where the aldehyde and one of the ketones were reacted at 40 °C and the resulting chalcone was reacted with the other ketone at 80 °C. Diarylpyryliums were synthesized in the acid-catalysed condensation of 4-dialkylamino-substituted acetophenones with acetic anhydride, as previously reported.13In one of the asymmetrical derivatives a (3-methylbenzo[d]thiazol-2(3H)-ylidene)methyl donor group – also present in thiazole orange dyes – was incorporated into the fluorophore, replacing one of the aryl donor groups (2,4-DMA-6-BTA). This molecule was prepared from the diarylpyrylium 2,4-DMA-6-Me by reacting it with 3-methyl-2-methylthiobenzothiazoliump-toluenesulfonate. All synthesized pyrylium dyes were obtained as trifluoroacetate salts following purification with preparative HPLC.

The absorption and emission spectra of the pyrylium dyes were recorded in Tris–EDTA (TE) buffer (pH = 7.4). The dependence of fluorescent emission on the concentration of dsDNA (CDNA) was measured by titrating a solution of each dye in TE buffer with a stock solution of cloned plasmid DNA (6882 base pairs). Fluorescence quantum yield of the DNA-bound form (ΦfDNA) was measured in the presence of 50 μM plasmid DNA (Table 1andFig. 2). Furthermore, the emission of 2,4,6-DMA, 2,6-DMA-4-NMP, 2,6-NMP-4-DMA were recorded in various organic solvents (Fig. 1e).

The simplest of the model compounds, 2,4,6-DMA exhibits little variation in absorption maxima in organic solvents: the absorption peak generally shifts in the hypsochromic direction with the increase of solvent polarity (from 534 nm in tetrahydrofuran to 526 nm in acetonitrile), with the exception of DMSO (λabs= 542 nm) and 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP), where the main absorption peak splits into two. In water, this compound aggregates above 1 μM, as demonstrated by the concentration dependence of its area-normalized absorption spectra (Fig. S143 in SI). The lack of significant solvatochromism implies that the dipole moment of the molecule does not change significantly during vertical excitation. Fluorescence quantum yield decreases with increasing solvent polarity, from 12.2% in THF through 2–4% in more polar organic solvents to 0.06% in TE buffer (although aggregation might influence this latter result). This renders triarylpyryliums promising candidates forin vivopolarity sensing.18,19The dye exhibits large Stokes shift (Δλ= 150–200 nm) and despite this and the varyingΦfvalues, the emission maxima are distributed in a relatively narrow range (677–713 nm). This implies that in each of the investigated solvents the excited molecule (and its solvent environment) undergoes significant geometry reorganization before the emission occurs from an intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) state. The fluorescence lifetime of 2,4,6-DMA was also measured in methanol and THF. In both cases biexponential fitting provided the lowestχ2values (Table S10 in SI). While in methanol the average lifetime of the two components are in the hundred-picosecond range (τ1= 331 ps,f1= 93% andτ2= 670 ps,f2= 7%), in THF both increase over 1 ns, while the fractional contribution of the long component increases (τ1= 1.19 ns,f1= 47% andτ2= 1.48 ns,f2= 54%).

Measurements ofΦfin mixtures of MeCN and ethylene glycol (a pair of solvents with different viscosity and almost identical relative permittivity21) demonstrated that while viscosity influences theΦfof 2,4,6-DMA minimally, the influence of viscosity is larger for 2,6-DMA-4-NMP and even larger for 2,6-NMP-4-DMA and 2,4,6-NMP (Fig. S140 in SI).

During this measurement the concentration of the dye is fixed at 1 μM. The second factor of the product was approximated by linear regression in the 0–0.8 μM range. Sinceε·ϕfis expected to be proportional to the flux of the emitted light (i.e.the measured parameter in a fluorescence-based quantification ofCDNA), the ratio of AFE values gives us the relative sensitivity provided by different fluorescent dyes in a given experimental setup.

Compared to the previously known reference compound 2,4,6-DMA, the introduction of amine-containing side groups provides 2.7–12.3 times largerΦfDNAand similarΦ0f. The highest AFE, RFE, andΦfDNAamong NMP-substituted triarylpyryliums were measured for 2,6-NMP-4-DMA, which provides an order of magnitude lower limit of detection for DNA sensing than 2,4,6-DMA (see Table S9 in SI). These values are not increased by the introduction of further cyclic ether or tertiary amino groups on the C ring's substituent (2,6-NMP-4-Morph, 2,4,6-NMP), nor by introducing only one NMP substituent on the C ring (2,6-DMA-4-NMP). Tethering the diamino substituents of the B and D rings to the aromatic ring through an ethylene linkage to prevent excited state rotations of the amino groups (2,6-Ind-4-DMA) results in similar Φf0 and AFE values, but lowerΦfDNAcompared to 2,6-NMP-4-DMA. However, changing the tertiary amino groups to quaternary dimethylpiperazinium (2,6-NdMP-4-DMA) slightly increases the AFE, and due to its fainter fluorescence in the absence of DNA its RFE is also higher. Changing the 4-amino substituent of the C ring to less electron-donating substituents (2,6-NMP-4-OMe, 2,6-NMP-4-OEt, 2,6-NMP-4-OH, 2,6-NMP-4-2MeOPh) leads to lowerεand AFE. Changing the NMP group of the latter compound to 1-piperidinyl (2,6-Pip-4-2MeOPh,Fig. 2b) results in lower AFE, but its RFE is still higher than that of 2,4,6-DMA. Two further asymmetrical derivatives, 2,4-NMP-6-Ph, and the benzothiazole-bearing 2,4-DMA-6-BTA have also been synthesized and measured, but their AFE and RFE fall short of those of most other pyrylium dyes.

The previously known13diarylpyrylium dye, 2,4-DMA-6-Me exhibits higher AFE and RFE than the triarylpyryliums, mostly due to its larger fluorescence quantum yield in DNA (ΦfDNA= 3.79%). Unlike in triarylpyryliums, here the change of dimethylamino groups to NMP (2,4-NMP-6-Me) does not ameliorate its DNA sensing ability. These results indicate that the best-performing pyrylium dyes (2,6-NMP-4-DMA, 2,6-NdMP-4-DMA, 2,4-DMA-6-Me) are applicable for the spectroscopical detection of minute quantities of DNA, although they compare unfavourably to thiazole orange-based DNA dyes22according to these metrics (Table S8 in SI).

The Scatchard plots obtained from the DNA titration experiments do not follow the McGhee-von Hippel model of DNA binding (Fig. S163 in SI). This deviation from the expected behaviour is probably due to multimodal binding,23as implied by the somewhat irregular concave shape of some of the DNA titration curves (e.g.2,6-NMP-4-DMA, seeFig. 2a). The only exception from this is 2,4-DMA-6-Me, where the binding constant was determined to beKb= 2.5 × 105M−1with a binding site size of 1.4 base pairs.

The applicability of the fluorescent pyrylium dyes as gel stains was tested on DNA samples. PCR products were run on an agarose gel with 2,4,6-DMA, 2,6-NMP-4-DMA, 2,6-NdMP-4-DMA, 2,6-Pip-4-2MeOPh, and SYBR Safe (as reference). As observed in the agarose gel electrophoresis images, the tested dyes did not exhibit any nonspecific background fluorescence, but they provided lower emission intensity compared to SYBR Safe (I2,6-Pip-4-2MeOPh/ISYBR Safe= 0.082–0.11 in different lanes, see Fig. S168–169 in SI). 2,6-NMP-4-DMA and 2,6-NdMP-4-DMA were deemed unsuitable for DNA visualization, as they restricted the migration of DNA fragments. However, 2,6-Pip-4-2MeOPh and 2,4,6-DMA did not interfere with gel electrophoresis quality, therefore validating their use for DNA visualization in agarose gels (seeFig. 3and S165–168 in SI).

In ground state (S0) the energy barriers of both aryl rotations (B and C) are calculated to be within the range of 15–40 kJ mol−1, with an energy maximum atθi= 90°, referring to a weakly hindered rotation. At the optimal geometry theθB,θCandθDdihedral angles range between 10° and 20° with the exception of 2,6-NMP-4-2MeOPh, where the steric repulsion between the methoxy group and the pyrylium C–H forces the A and C ring into a more twisted conformation (θC= 34°,Table 1). Likewise, the energy optima inT1lie close to a planar geometry and the perpendicular twisted conformation of the aryl groups is energetically unfavorable (Table S19–21 in SI).

This is not the case, however, inS1where the global minimum of ΔE(θC) atθC= 90° predicts an energetically favorable TICTCgeometry for four of the modeled molecules: 2,6-NMP-4-DMA, 2,6-NMP-4-Morph, 2,6-NdMP-4-DMA, and 2,4-NMP-6-Me. Zero calculated oscillator strengths predict these TICT states to be non-emissive. For the perpendicular rotation of the B (or D) rings, the calculations do not predict any global energy minima at aroundθB= 90°, although the two diarylpyryliums (2,4-DMA-6-Me, 2,4-NMP-6-Me) and 2,6-NMP-4-OMe exhibit small local minima with almost negligible energy barriers (Fig. 4). The simultaneous rotation of two aryl rings, as well as rotations about the aryl–N bonds (θB’ andθC’), were also investigated for 2,4,6-DMA, but no further energy minima were found (see Table S23 and Fig. S174–S179 in SI). The latter finding is in accordance with the experimental observation that conformationally locking the arylamine groups does not enhanceΦ0fsignificantly (Φ0f= 0.061% for 2,6-Ind-4-DMA in comparison to 0.024% for 2,6-NMP-4-DMA), which suggests that aryl-N rotations play a negligible role in fluorescence quenching.

The effect of solvent polarity was also investigated for 2,4,6-DMA using PCM method to model the effect of four media (water, THF, toluene, and vacuum). The obtained ΔE(θi) curves indicate that by decreasing the polarity of the environment (from water to vacuum) both the TICTBand TICTCconformations become favorable, with the latter being a global energy minimum in THF, toluene, and vacuum (Fig. 5).

If TICT quenching is hypothesized to be the dominant radiationless relaxation pathway of di- and triarylpyryliums, one should expect higher fluorescence quantum yields (Φ0f) for the non-bound compounds where TICT is energetically unfavoured. However, the experimentally measuredΦ0fvalues of 2,4,6-DMA, 2,4,6-NMP, 2,6-NMP-4-OMe, 2,6-NMP-4-2MeOPh, and 2,4-DMA-6-Me are comparable to those of the compounds where TICT is predicted to be favoured. Another counterargument to TICT-based quenching concerns the calculated S1potential surface of 2,4,6-DMA in different media. While the formation of a TICT intermediate is predicted to become less favourable with increasing solvent polarity, the spectroscopical results display almost the opposite tendency, with the highestΦfmeasured in the least polar solvent (THF). However, it must be noted that our computational approach employs a simple model of the possible solvent interactions (polarisable continuum model: PCM) and excited state dynamics. Effects unaccounted for include specific solvent–fluorophore interactions (e.g.hydrogen bonding), as well as the effect of the excited state intramolecular charge shift on hydrogen bonding and protonation equilibria.

Assuming that the applied computational model is reliable, we are prompted to conclude that TICT is likely not the dominant fluorescence quenching mechanism. In this case the overwhelming majority of excited-state molecules must de-exciteviaother relaxation pathways, a significant part of which involves aryl–aryl torsion (as implied by the largeΦfof rotationally locked derivatives11).

Apart from TICT, other possible radiationless deexcitation pathways were also considered. Attributing the high radiationless relaxation rate in aqueous media to intramolecular PET seems implausible as the pyrylium compounds without potential PET donor groups (e.g.2,4,6-DMA, 2,6-Pip-4-2MeOPh) do not exhibit higherΦ0fand theΦ0fdoes not significantly decrease with the number ofN-methylpiperazinyl groups (Φ0f= 0.061, 0.117, 0.074, 0.131% for 2,4,6-DMA, 2,6-DMA-4-NMP, 2,4-NMP-6-DMA, and 2,4,6-NMP, respectively). Moreover, at pH = 7.4 tertiary aliphatic amino groups are mostly protonated, and therefore unable to act as PET donors. A further counterargument against PET quenching comes from the theoretical modelling of 2,4,6-NMP. Even if none of the amino groups are protonated, the highest-energy occupied orbital with considerable electron density on the aliphatic amino groups is HOMO-2, therefore electron transfer from this orbital to HOMO (or HOMO-1) would not be favourable (Fig. S172 in SI). Collisional quenching with dissolved oxygen was also considered as a potential contributor for the high radiationless deexcitation rates. However, since theΦfof 2,6-NdMP-4-DMA does not depend significantly on the presence or absence of oxygen (see Fig. S160 in SI), collisional quenching must play only a complementary role. Therefore, the most probable explanation for such radiationless de-excitation mechanisms is internal conversion involving aryl–aryl torsion.

In conclusion, 14 novel pyrylium-based DNA chemosensors were synthesized and characterized, including 10 symmetrical and one asymmetrical 2,4,6-triarylpyryliums (mostly easily accesible by a one-pot reaction), one 2,4-diarylpyrylium, and one benzothiazole-cyanine-like pyrylium derivative. These dyes fluoresce weakly in aqueous solution and exhibit a fluorescence enhancement upon DNA binding that allows their use as DNA chemosensors (e.g.in gel electrophoresis). Their red emission and large Stokes shifts (90–150 nm) are advantageous for fluorescence-based bioimaging by minimizing interference.

The mechanism of their fluorogenicity was studied by DFT methods to investigate the mechanism of fluorescence quenching necessary for the DNA-induced fluorescence enhancement. Although TICT-mediated quenching was initially considered dominant in di- and triarylpyryliums, our computational model did not support this, suggesting TICT plays only a complementary role.