Methamphetamine use is associated with frequent emergency department (ED) utilization, but factors associated with drug-related ED re-attendance are understudied. We aimed to characterize the pattern of 30-day drug-related ED re-attendance and evaluate the impact of the severity of acute toxicity and psychosocial interventions on such re-attendances.

We conducted a secondary analysis of 815 episodes of acute methamphetamine toxicity reported to the Hong Kong Poison Control Centre from all local public EDs between January 1, 2010, and December 31, 2019. We defined the index attendance as the first ED presentation related to methamphetamine within the study period, and drug-related ED re-attendance as a presentation directly related to the acute toxicities or sequelae of drug misuse. The primary outcome was 30-day drug-related ED re-attendance after hospital discharge. We performed univariate and multivariable Cox regression analyses to identify factors associated with the primary outcome.

Within 30 days of hospital discharge, 131 (16.1%) patients re-attended the ED for drug-related problems, with 119 re-attendances (90.8%) involving methamphetamine and 76 (58.0%) for psychiatric complaints. In multivariable Cox regression analysis, failed previous detoxification treatment (HR 1.61, 95% CI 1.08–2.39,P= 0.019) and a history of drug-induced psychosis (hazard ratio [HR] 1.76, 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.16–2.68,P= 0.008) remained significantly associated with the primary outcome.

Drug-related ED re-attendance is common among methamphetamine users. Failed previous detoxification treatment and drug-induced psychosis are factors significantly associated with such re-attendances. The limited impact of the severity of acute toxicity and psychosocial interventions underscores the importance of primary prevention of methamphetamine misuse through public education and drug-control policy, and early multidisciplinary interventions before progression to drug-induced psychosis.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12873-025-01325-6.

Methamphetamine misuse is associated with increased rates of utilization of emergency department (ED) and hospital resources [1,2], especially among users with frequent injection [3,4]. In the United States (US), amphetamine-related hospitalizations, which were primarily associated with methamphetamine, increased from 55,447 in 2008 to 206,180 in 2015 and totaled USD 2.17 billion in hospital costs [5]. In 2021, methamphetamine accounted for 811,464 ED visits in the US [6]. In Hong Kong, the annual number of methamphetamine users reported to the Central Registry of Drug Abuse of the Narcotics Division by law enforcement agencies, treatment and welfare institutions, hospitals, and clinics ranged between 864 and 2,495 from 2014 to 2024 [7]. The median annual incidence of acute methamphetamine toxicity reported to the Hong Kong Poison Control Centre (HKPCC) from all the public EDs was 5.64 per 100,000 ED attendances and 1.63 per 100,000 population between 2010 and 2019 [8]. Mental illness, trauma, behavioral disturbances, and skin- and dental-related problems are common ED presentations in methamphetamine users [2,9–11]. There is a need to reduce methamphetamine-related ED utilization, especially drug-related ED re-attendances after hospital discharge.

Understanding the pattern and factors associated with drug-related ED re-attendance is important for identifying modifiable factors for ED healthcare professionals to intervene to reduce such re-attendances. Gender, poor physical or mental health, lower socio-economic status, and substance misuse have been associated with frequent ED use; however, they are not specific to methamphetamine [12,13]. Marshall and colleagues reported that frequent methamphetamine injection (≥ once per day) was independently associated with increased ED utilization among street-involved youths [3]. However, the sample size was small, and it is unclear whether there are additional factors associated with ED utilization in places with a low prevalence of intravenous methamphetamine use. In Hong Kong, methamphetamine smoking is far more prevalent than intravenous injection, which accounted for 59.9% and 0.5% of the related acute toxicities reported to the poison center, respectively [8]. Furthermore, published studies on the impact of the severity of acute toxicity and that of psychosocial interventions, such as psychiatrist consultation, psychiatry unit admission, long-acting depot antipsychotics, motivational interview, referral to social workers or voluntary drug treatment and rehabilitation services, and direct hospital discharge to residential drug treatment hostels, on subsequent ED re-attendance are lacking.

Kelly and colleagues showed that even among methamphetamine users, there was some recognition of risk, which included concerns about the physical effects of methamphetamine [14]. However, it is unclear whether the severity of acute toxicity might affect the users’ awareness of the harmful effects of methamphetamine and alter their perceived risk and behavior. The impact of psychosocial interventions during the hospital stay on subsequent drug-related ED re-attendances is also uncertain. In the literature, unplanned hospital readmission within 30 days of discharge is often used as a quality indicator regardless of the patient group and condition [15]. ED re-attendance within 30 days is more likely connected to the index presentation. Therefore, we conducted this study and aimed to (1) characterize the pattern of 30-day drug-related ED re-attendance after hospital discharge in patients with acute methamphetamine toxicity and (2) evaluate whether the severity of acute methamphetamine toxicity and psychosocial interventions during the hospital stay were associated with 30-day drug-related ED re-attendance.

We conducted a secondary analysis of the data collected in a territory-wide retrospective study on the epidemiology of psychoactive substances, including methamphetamine, in Hong Kong. The study included consecutive cases reported to the HKPCC from January 1, 2010, to December 31, 2019. The details of the study, including the definitions of variables and the methods of case identification and data collection, have been reported elsewhere [16]. HKPCC is the only poison control center in Hong Kong that provides telephone consultation services to healthcare professionals and receives regular and voluntary reporting of poisonings irrespective of the severity from all 18 public EDs in the city. Data from each consultation or report are prospectively collected by emergency physicians, clinical toxicologists, or trainees under their supervision and entered into the Poison Information and Clinical Management System (PICMS). Weekly audits and case reviews are conducted to ensure data quality [17]. The consultation and reporting system had remained consistent throughout the study period.

The Institutional Review Board of The University of Hong Kong/Hospital Authority (HA) Hong Kong West Cluster (reference no. UW 20–597) and the Research Ethics Committee of the Kowloon Central/Kowloon East Cluster of the HA (reference no. KC/KE-20-0270/ER-2) approved this study. Informed consent from the included patients was waived because of the retrospective design of the study, anonymized data analysis, and full compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki. We reported the research findings according to the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) guidelines [18].

ED patients with acute methamphetamine toxicity related to recreational use reported to the HKPCC within the study period were included in the study. Drug use was defined based on clinical diagnosis with confirmation either by urine toxicology immunoassay or laboratory toxicology screen with liquid chromatography or mass spectrometry. We excluded patients with: (1) no exposure to methamphetamine; (2) intentional overdose of other drugs; (3) unintentional exposure to methamphetamine; (4) malicious exposure; (5) “body packers” who concealed drugs in one’s body with the aim of smuggling instead of using methamphetamine (“body stuffers” who had swallowed drugs hastily to avoid arrest by law enforcement were included as they were more likely to be methamphetamine users); (6) clinical presentations that could be explained by alternative medical or psychiatric diagnoses or social reasons; (7) a lack of objective evidence of methamphetamine exposure, such as a negative laboratory toxicology screen, that refuted the initially suspected methamphetamine exposure; (8) uncertain time of death; (9) uncertain hospital discharge time; (10) incomplete medical record; 11) death during hospitalization or within 30 days of hospital discharge; or 12) incarceration within 30 days of hospital discharge. Both early deaths and incarcerations were excluded as they were competing events that would have reduced ED re-attendance. We also excluded non-ED cases as the original study focused on the ED presentations of acute methamphetamine toxicity. Furthermore, we excluded tourists or non-local residents, as their inclusion would have falsely lowered the ED re-attendance rate if they left the city after hospital discharge. For patients with multiple ED attendances within the study period, subsequent attendances after the first ED presentation were excluded to avoid over-representation of these patients in the cohort.

We identified eligible cases in the PICMS using the in-house poison codes in HKPCC, which have been published online along with the original study [16]. Electronic medical records of eligible cases were then retrieved from the HA Clinical Management System (CMS) for review. The CMS contains the clinical, laboratory, and outcome data of every patient treated in all public hospitals in Hong Kong, which provide around 80% of in-patient healthcare services for the whole city. This data collection method has been used in similar territory-wide studies on the impact of psychiatric interventions [19]. Since HKPCC and all public hospitals are under the same HA administration in Hong Kong, clinical toxicologists at HKPCC and the study team had full access to the CMS electronic health records and laboratory data of all the included cases.

To ensure accuracy in data collection of clinical features, two research assistants performed medical chart review and collected data in duplicate using a standardized data entry manual after completing lectures and data entry training on 100 recreational drug poisoning case samples. The research assistants were blinded to each other during data entry. Since neither the research assistants were trained to interpret psychiatrists’ notes, data on prior psychiatric diagnosis, social worker and non-governmental organization (NGO) drug treatment service follow-up, and detoxification treatment were collected by the first author directly. In addition, we were not able to perform parallel data entry for the ED re-attendances due to limited time and resources. The first author performed a manual chart review of all ED notes within 30 days of hospital discharge of every included case to identify drug-related ED re-attendance based on clinical presentation. All data were cross-checked by the first author, who resolved all discrepancies in data entry.

We defined the index attendance as the first ED presentation related to acute methamphetamine toxicity within the study period. Drug-related ED re-attendance was defined as a presentation directly related to the acute toxicities or sequelae of drug use, such as drug-induced psychosis, acute withdrawal, injuries or behavioral problems during intoxication, which was not necessarily limited to methamphetamine. The following data were collected: patient demographic characteristics; current drug use history, including the time, route, and co-ingestion; clinical features, including medical and psychiatric history, signs and symptoms; laboratory test results, including blood tests and toxicology screening; medical and psychosocial interventions; clinical outcomes such as survival and disposition; and ED re-attendance after the index presentation, including the time, reason(s), and the drugs involved. Individual clinical features or interventions were defined as absent if they were not documented in the medical records.

The first author, who is an emergency medicine specialist with post-graduate training in clinical toxicology, evaluated the whole clinical course and laboratory data from the index ED registration to hospital discharge of each case and graded the severity of toxicity using the Poisoning Severity Score (PSS), which classifies the severity of poisoning into five categories: (0) none, (1) minor, (2) moderate, (3) severe, and (4) fatal poisoning, based on the most severe clinical features. To assign a severity grade for each case, the occurrence of a particular symptom or sign was checked against the PSS chart [20]. This method of retrospective PSS determination has been commonly used in other clinical toxicology studies.

Psychosocial interventions during the index presentation that were specifically evaluated in this study included psychiatrist consultation initiated during hospital stay, psychiatry unit admission, use of long-acting depot antipsychotics, motivational interview by psychiatrists, arrangement of outpatient psychiatry, social workers, or voluntary drug treatment and rehabilitation services, and direct hospital discharge to residential drug treatment hostels. In Hong Kong, most voluntary residential drug treatment and rehabilitation programs and community-based drug counselling services are run by NGOs under subvention of the Social Welfare Department or the Department of Health. These services are easily accessible at low costs either through referral by healthcare professionals or social workers, or self-referral.

In this study, social allowance status was used as a surrogate for the socio-economic status. In Hong Kong, approximately 4% of the population receives the Comprehensive Social Security Assistance Scheme, which provides a safety net for citizens who cannot meet their basic needs financially [21]. For able-bodied applicants, the total assessable household income must be insufficient to meet their total needs, and their total household assets should be less than HKD$24,000–96,000 (UDS$3,077 − 12,308) depending on the household size [22].

The primary outcome was 30-day drug-related ED re-attendance.

There is a lack of studies in the literature that have specifically evaluated 30-day drug-related ED re-attendance and provided an effect size (hazard ratio [HR]) to inform sample size calculation for Cox regression analysis. We analyzed the distribution of characteristics in the study population using descriptive statistics, with categorical variables reported as numbers and proportions and continuous variables reported as mean ± standard deviation or median with interquartile range (IQR), as appropriate. The proportion of missing data ranged from 0 to 0.6% among the variables, and no imputation of the missing values was performed. We followed up all the included patients until 30 days or the first drug-related ED re-attendance, whichever came sooner, after hospital discharge, and calculated the time interval in days between hospital discharge and the first drug-related ED re-attendance. Drug-related ED re-attendance that had not occurred by day 30 was censored. To determine the cumulative incidence of ED re-attendance after hospital discharge from the index presentation, we used the Kaplan–Meier method to generate the hazard function of methamphetamine users with different characteristics of interest. We used Cox proportional hazards regression models to evaluate the association between each variable and the primary outcome, including age, sex (male vs. female), socio-economic status (receiving social allowance or not as a surrogate), past medical history (presence of comorbidities or not), history of drug misuse, drug-induced psychosis, schizophrenia, antisocial or borderline personality disorder, depression, anxiety disorder, needs for psychiatrist, social worker, NGO drug treatment service follow-up, failed previous detoxification treatment, the year of the index attendance, PSS, and psychosocial interventions during the index attendance. The assumption of proportional hazards across different covariates was tested using interaction terms with time in Cox regression models. The HRs and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of individual variables were determined. Variables with aPvalue < 0.05 in the univariate analysis were included in the multivariable Cox regression model to identify factors significantly associated with 30-day drug-related ED re-attendance.

We used the Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS) for Windows version 27.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA) for data analysis, with a two-tailedPvalue < 0.05 considered statistically significant.

During the study period, 1,905 episodes of psychoactive substance toxicity were identified from the PICMS, in which index ED presentations of 815 patients related to methamphetamine were analyzed based on the pre-defined inclusion and exclusion criteria (Fig.1). The total follow-up time was 21,844.1 person-days. Table1summarizes the demographic and clinical characteristics of the whole patient cohort and those of the subgroups with and without 30-day drug-related ED re-attendance. The median age of the patients was 33.0 years. Most patients were men, and 20.7% received social allowance. Polysubstance use was common, with alcohol, ketamine, and cocaine being the three most common substances used concurrently. Among drug users, 41.5% had no comorbidities, 9.1% had schizophrenia, and 7.2% had depression. Borderline personality disorder, antisocial personality disorder, and anxiety disorder were infrequent. Before the index attendance, 25.0%, 24.5% and 7.2% of the included patients had been followed up by social workers, psychiatrists, and NGO drug treatment service providers, respectively. Notably, 19.1% had failed detoxification treatment before.

During the index ED presentation, most patients in both subgroups had moderate severity of acute methamphetamine toxicity (median PSS 2). Psychiatrists were consulted in 74.5% of the cases, and 33.1% required psychiatry unit admission. Depot antipsychotics and motivational interviews were provided to 6.3% and 5.4% of the patients, respectively. Upon hospital discharge, 51.8% were offered outpatient psychiatry services, 22.6% were referred to social workers, 5.3% were referred to NGO drug treatment and rehabilitation services, and 2.5% were directly discharged to residential drug treatment hostels. Of note, 13.3% of the patients discharged themselves from the hospital against medical advice or left before completion of medical assessment or treatment.

Table2presents the characteristics of drug-related ED re-attendance at day 30. In total, 131 (16.1%) of the patients re-attended the ED for drug-related problems. Methamphetamine was the most common drug involved (90.8%), with positive psychotic symptoms being the most common presentation, followed by acute intoxication. No deaths occurred in these re-attendances. However, psychiatry unit admissions and self-harm behaviors were frequent during these re-attendances.

In the Cox regression analyses, the assumption of proportional hazards was not violated for all covariates (Additional file1). Univariate analysis showed that receiving social allowance, a history of drug misuse, drug-induced psychosis, schizophrenia, antisocial personality disorder, needs for psychiatrist or social worker follow-up, and failed previous detoxification treatment before the index ED presentation were associated with a higher risk of 30-day drug-related ED re-attendance (Table3). In contrast, age, sex, presence of comorbidities, borderline personality disorder, depression, anxiety disorder, NGO drug treatment service follow-up, the year of the index attendance, PSS of acute toxicity, psychotic features in the index presentation, psychiatrist consultation, psychiatry unit admission, depot antipsychotics, motivational interview, arrangement of outpatient psychiatry services, referral to a social workers or NGO drug treatment service, direct hospital discharge to residential drug treatment hostel, discharge against medical advice, and hospital length of stay during the index presentation were not associated with the primary outcome.

In multivariable Cox regression analysis, failed previous detoxification treatment (HR 1.61, 95% CI 1.08–2.39,P= 0.019) and a history of drug-induced psychosis (HR 1.76, 95% CI 1.16–2.68,P= 0.008) remained significantly associated with 30-day drug-related ED re-attendance, after adjusting for the confounding effects of other factors in the model. Figures2and3show the respective Kaplan–Meier curves of the 30-day drug-related ED re-attendance hazard rate of patients with failed previous detoxification treatment and a history of drug-induced psychosis as compared with those without.

Substance abuse, in general, is a risk factor for frequent ED utilization [23,24]. However, the pattern and risk factors specific to methamphetamine users are less well reported in the literature. Richards and colleagues showed that Asian ethnicity was associated with ED re-attendance in methamphetamine users [25]. This study adds to the literature by identifying factors associated with 30-day drug-related ED re-attendance in a predominantly Chinese cohort of methamphetamine users in Hong Kong. Our findings show that such re-attendances are common, with most re-attendances involving methamphetamine and psychiatric complaints. The severity of acute toxicity and psychosocial interventions during the index presentation were not associated with such re-attendances.

In contrast to the previous finding of an association between female methamphetamine users and frequent ED utilization [25], biological sex was not significantly associated with drug-related ED re-attendance in our predominantly Chinese cohort. This finding indicates the need for further studies to clarify the role of biological sex in shaping help-seeking behavior and ED utilization of methamphetamine users in different populations. Likewise, a lower socio-economic status is consistently associated with frequent ED use in general ED populations [23,24,26,27]. However, it was associated with drug-related ED re-attendance only in univariate but not in multivariable analysis in our study. One possible explanation of this inconsistent association in different analyses is the confounding effect of psychiatric comorbidities in methamphetamine users, which might affect both the socio-economic status and ED utilization.

Mounting evidence shows that methamphetamine users exhibit impaired cognitive function and altered decision-making with less focus on the riskiness of behavior [28–30], which might contribute to continued drug misuse and drug-related ED re-attendance even after experiencing acute toxic effects of methamphetamine. Given the lack of impact of acute toxicity on drug-related ED re-attendance, communicating risks and identifying the right teaching moment to educate current methamphetamine users on drug harms remain challenging. Notably, we found that psychosocial interventions during the index presentation were not associated with 30-day drug-related ED re-attendance, which might be explained again by the confounding effect of psychiatric comorbidities that affect both the need for psychiatrist consultation or psychiatry unit admission during the index presentation and drug-related ED re-attendance. In addition, the number of patients who received depot antipsychotic medications, motivational interview, social worker or drug treatment referrals, or direct residential detoxification hostel transfer upon discharge was also too small. The statistical power might not have been adequate to reveal a significant association. Furthermore, a standardized referral protocol is lacking in most EDs, and clinicians’ practice of psychosocial interventions and referral varies considerably. Without a standardized and integrated referral pathway to these services, it is not possible to properly evaluate their true impact on ED re-attendances. Therefore, caution is advised when interpreting these findings.

In our study, failed previous detoxification treatment and a history of drug-induced psychosis were significantly associated with 30-day drug-related ED re-attendance in both univariate and multivariable analyses. Patients with failed previous detoxification treatment before the time of ED presentation might have more severe or chronic methamphetamine misuse and are more resistant to standard hospital psychosocial interventions. Those with drug-induced psychosis might have impaired insight into their drug use, leading to more frequent ED re-attendances for psychosis, agitation, suicidality, and drug intoxication. Previous studies have shown that, in general, patients with mental illness [2,12,23,24,26,27,31] and those with substance abuse disorder and psychiatric comorbidity are also more likely to utilize ED frequently [32]. Specifically, methamphetamine users with concurrent psychotic disorders have higher levels of psychiatric symptomatology across multiple domains over time and increased health service utilization [33]. Sara and colleagues showed that two years before their first hospital admission with amphetamine-related psychosis, 41% of patients had presented to the ED for other complaints, and the likelihood of ED contacts increased throughout that period [34]. This highlights the importance of early screening and referral of methamphetamine users in the ED to drug treatment services before they progress to the stage of psychosis.

Based on our observations, none of the factors identified in this study are easily modifiable in the ED. In the absence of effective pharmacological and non-pharmacological treatment of methamphetamine use disorder, primary prevention through public education and drug-control policy to reduce methamphetamine exposure is important, especially among youths. Regarding secondary prevention, we may draw on the existing literature on general frequent ED attendees. Previous systematic reviews have shown that multidisciplinary case management with a single contact point (e.g., a case manager who links patients to necessary services beyond the normal continuum of the ED) is effective in reducing ED visits [35,36]. Specific to methamphetamine users, incentive-based contingency management [37] and strengths-based case management may be useful in reducing drug use [38]. Given the poor compliance of methamphetamine users with outpatient psychiatry and community drug treatment services, methamphetamine users should be linked with these services in the ED and managed with a case manager as the single contact point.

Existing ED care models in the US to address opioid use disorder offer useful insights into facilitators of and barriers to the implementation of a similar care model for methamphetamine users [39]. Such a care model should include taking a patient-centered, low-barrier approach to promote uptake of treatment, having a passionate champion with knowledge of substance use disorder treatment and a reliable connection with community partners, and a strong structure with health system support to facilitate communication across different service providers. Barriers such as stigma, concern about ED workflow, and how to finance the program should be anticipated and managed in program design. This care model would require prospective studies to evaluate the relative risk reduction in future drug-related ED re-attendances after implementation.

The strengths of this study include territory-wide data from all public EDs in Hong Kong with complete follow-up of the trajectory of ED utilization of individual cases through manual search of all ED re-attendance records. Methamphetamine use was confirmed in all patients either by urine immunoassay or laboratory toxicology screen.

There are, however, several limitations of this study. First, we were unable to reliably retrieve non-clinical data that might have influenced ED re-attendance, such as incarceration and travel records, due to local privacy regulations. Incarcerations or travels after hospital discharge that were not documented in the medical record might be missed. Methamphetamine users might have more extensive criminal records than other drug users [40], and incarceration after hospital discharge would have falsely lowered the ED re-attendance rate. From medical notes, we knew that 15 patients were incarcerated within 30 days of hospital discharge, but the exact date of incarceration was not clearly documented, making censoring for incarceration not possible for cause-specific hazard model analysis. To keep the analysis simple, we chose to exclude incarcerations within 30 days, together with episode or early deaths, instead of including them as competing events. Given the small number of excluded incarceration cases and the relatively short follow-up period of 30 days after hospital discharge, we believe the impact of incarceration on ED re-attendance was limited.

Second, information bias might exist from incomplete clinical documentation, misinterpretation of clinical information, and missing data. While assuming the absence of individual clinical features or interventions if they were not documented helped reduce data missingness, we might have misclassified some undocumented features that were less important to the treating clinicians.

Third, we were unable to ascertain whether patients who were referred to social workers or voluntary drug treatment and rehabilitation services attended them. Moreover, for patients who were not referred upon discharge, they might have self-referred to social workers and voluntary drug treatment services. It was also not possible to evaluate the quality of psychosocial interventions, which might vary across agencies and influence ED re-attendance.

Fourth, we were unable to retrospectively quantify the severity of addiction using validated tools, such as the Addiction Severity Index [41]. The cohort contained a mixture of casual drug users and patients with drug dependence disorder who might have had significantly different trajectories for future drug use and outcomes.

Finally, most patients in this study were Chinese in Hong Kong. The results may not be generalizable to other populations with different patterns of drug use and access to health care services.

Drug-related ED re-attendance is common among methamphetamine users, and most such re-attendances involve methamphetamine and psychiatric presentations. The severity of acute toxicity and psychosocial interventions have limited impact on subsequent drug-related ED re-attendance, which is significantly associated with failed previous detoxification treatment and drug-induced psychosis. These findings underscore the importance of primary prevention of methamphetamine misuse through public education and drug-control policy, and early multidisciplinary interventions before progression to drug-induced psychosis. Multidisciplinary ED care models with case managers and standardized protocols that link methamphetamine users with psychiatrists, social workers, and detoxification service providers in the ED should be explored in future studies.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

We would like to thank the Beat Drugs Fund Association in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region for funding this research, Ms Annie Chan and Ms Agatha Ho for their efforts in data collection, and the staff in HKPCC for their help in data retrieval.