To map the international methods used to measure energy expenditure of adults living with motor neuron disease (MND) and to highlight discrepancies when indicating hypermetabolism in the MND literature.

A decline in the nutritional status of patients is associated with exacerbated weight loss and shortened survival. Assessments of energy expenditure, using a variety of methods, are important to ensure an adequate energy intake to prevent malnutrition-associated weight loss. Assessments of energy expenditure are also commonly used to indicate hypermetabolism in MND, although these approaches may not be optimal.

A protocol based on the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses extension for Scoping Reviews Guidelines was developed. Three electronic databases (Medline [Ovid], CINAHL [EBSCO], and Web of Science) were exhaustively searched. Identified publications were systematically screened according to predefined PICOS eligibility criteria. The primary outcome was the identification of methods used to measure energy expenditure in MND. The secondary outcome was the identification of applications of energy expenditure assessments to indicate hypermetabolism in MND.

Thirty-two observational primary research publications were identified. Thirteen (40.6%) were longitudinal in design, with data on repeated measurements of energy expenditure presented in 3 (9.4%). Thirteen (40.6%) were case-control studies, of which 11 use a matched control group. Pulmonary function was used to assess eligibility in 10 publications. Energy expenditure was measured using indirect calorimetry (IC) in 31 studies. Discrepancies in the durations of fasted, measurement, and washout periods were observed. Of all included publications, 50% used assessments of resting energy expenditure to identify hypermetabolism. Bioelectrical impedance analysis was used to assess body composition alongside energy expenditure in 93.8% of publications.

Resting energy expenditure is most frequently measured using an open-circuit IC system. However, there is a lack of a standardized, validated protocol for the conduct and reporting of IC and metabolic status in patients with MND.

Motor neuron disease (MND) encompasses a heterogeneous group of progressive neurodegenerative motor syndromes with a global prevalence of 3.37 per 100 000 people.1MND is incurable, with death typically occurring from respiratory failure approximately 2–3 years after diagnosis.2,3Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the most common MND phenotype, comprising 65%–85% of MND cases.4The terms MND and ALS are often used interchangeably in the international literature.

TDEE can either be measured directly or derived using independent assessments of REE, physical activity levels,19,20and dietary-induced thermogenesis (TDEE = REE + physical activity levels + dietary induced thermogenesis).21,22The doubly labelled water (DLW) method is considered to be the gold standard for directly measuring TDEE and total body water. Because fat mass (FM) is free of water, and the hydration of FFM remains constant (73%–80%) in healthy individuals,23,24measurements of total body water using DLW can be used to estimate the proportion of FFM of an individual.25,26The DLW method involves the oral or percutaneous administration of heavy hydrogen (2H) and oxygen (18O) isotopes followed by the subsequent analysis of carbon dioxide (CO2) as a urinary byproduct.26However, the limited availability and high costs associated with the use of isotopes, as well as the complex and arduous process of urinary collection, processing, and analysis, mean this approach is less than ideal in a clinical setting.

Our aim for this scoping review was to map the international methods used to measure energy expenditure in adults living with MND, as well as to highlight the fundamental discrepancies when indicating hypermetabolism in the MND literature.

This scoping review was conducted following the 5-step framework outlined by Arksey and O’Malley45: (1) identification of the research question; (2) identification of primary research literature; (3) study selection; (4) data extraction; and (5) data synthesis.

We considered articles reporting on studies that measured energy expenditure in adults living with MND. This included articles on randomized controlled trials and analytical observational studies, prospective and retrospective cohort studies, case-control studies, cross-sectional studies and longitudinal studies. An exhaustive search of 3 major biomedical and health sciences databases (MEDLINE via Ovid, CINAHL via EBSCO, and Web of Science) was undertaken to identify primary research articles on the topic. The final database search was concluded on April 17, 2024. The search strategy, including all identified keywords and index terms, was developed in MEDLINE and subsequently adapted for CINAHL and Web of Science (Table S2). Keyword terms were optimized using wild cards and truncations and combined with Medical Subject Headings using Boolean operators. Only articles reporting on studies conducted with humans and published in the English language were included. Search results were not limited by publication date. Reference lists of key articles were screened by hand, and “cited by” articles on PubMed were used to identify additional articles.

All identified citations were collated and uploaded into Mendeley Reference Manager (version 2.107.0) and duplicates removed. One member of the research team systematically screened titles, abstracts and full text for eligibility according to the PICOS eligibility criteria (Table S1). To minimize bias, a second member of the research team also assessed all titles and abstracts. Discrepancies were resolved by discussion within the research team.

Because of the variability of terminology used across the articles included in this review, estimations, calculations or predictions of REE will be referred to as pREE. Any terminology related to determining the accuracy or bias of predictions against measurements of REE are referred to as REE variation. All information relating to identifying the threshold (ie, cutoff point) of hypermetabolism (ie, change in REE, REE variation, metabolic index) is presented using the term metabolic index (MI). Presentation of the MI thresholds in this review is dependent on the specific equation applied to examine the ratio of mREE and pREE: for example, some may calculate this as [(mREE – pREE)/pREE] × 100 at a threshold of ≥10% or as (mREE – pREE) × 100 at a threshold of ≥110%.

The search and study inclusion process is presented in a Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses extension for Scoping Review (PRISMA-ScR) flow diagram (Figure 1).

PRISMA Flow Diagram of the Study Selection Process. MND, motor neuron disease.

A total of 32 primary research articles were identified that met the acceptance criteria and were highly relevant to the research question (Table 1).7,17,36–40,47–71Data were extracted using a data extraction tool developed by the authors, including study population demographics, study design, aims, and key findings relevant to the research question. In all instances, data were extracted only if explicitly stated within the text.

Data presented as mean ± SD or median (IQR), as reported in the primary literature.

It is worth noting that Kasarskis et al55detail the use of bioelectrical spectroscopy; however, for purposes of this review, all bioelectric impedance analyses are grouped under BIA.

Abbreviations:ADP, air displacement plethysmography; ANTH, anthropometric measurement; BIA, bioimpedance analysis; Ctrl, control; DEXA, dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry; DLW, doubly labelled water; F, female; FEV, forced expiratory volume; FVC, forced vital capacity; IC, indirect calorimetry; M, male; MND, motor neuron disease; NIV, noninvasive ventilation; pCO2, partial pressure of carbon dioxide; PEFR, peak expiratory flow rate; Pt, participant; SNIF, sniff nasal-inspiratory force; SVC, slow vital capacity; TIPPV, tracheostomy and intermittent positive pressure ventilation; VC, vital capacity; Yes+, sex and age-matched control group; UK, United Kingdom; USA, United States of America; –, data not reported.

The included articles were published over a 29-year span (1995–2024) across settings in 13 countries, with approximately one-third of the included literature published in France (n= 10 of 32; 31.3%).17,37,39,40,49,54,58,59,62,65It should be noted that 3 of these articles40,58,59were published from the same study; however, different data from this study were presented in each article. This review, therefore, refers to data extracted from individual articles, rather than studies. All studies reported in the included articles were observational in design. Thirteen articles (40.6%) were longitudinal; however, cross-sectional data relating to energy expenditure were reported in the majority of articles, with longitudinal energy expenditure data presented in 3 articles.37,49,50Thirteen articles (40.6%) were about case-control studies,17,38,39,47,50,57,60–62,66,68,69,71of which 11 used an age- and/or sex-matched control group.38,39,47,50,57,60,61,66,68,69,71Matched control participants were healthy individuals except in one instance where the metabolic state of patients with sporadic ALS was compared with sporadic ALS cases.39Individual study characteristics are outlined inTable 1. Twenty-four articles (75%) included an assessment of pulmonary function, of which 10 articles included an assessment of pulmonary function as an exclusion criterion (Table 1).

Thirty-one articles (96.9%) measured energy expenditure using IC: 30 used open-circuit systems, and 1 used Douglas bags (Table 1).53Table 2details the reported characteristics of the open-circuit IC devices (type and style of calorimeter), protocol (fasted period, body position, duration of recording) and outcome measurements (mREE, volume of carbon dioxide expired [VCO2], volume of oxygen inspired [VO2], and respiratory quotient [RQ]). Data were extracted from citations in the included articles that referenced standardized protocols published elsewhere, if appropriate.

Abbreviations:CV, coefficient of variation; fALS, familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mREE, measured resting energy expenditure; NIV, noninvasive ventilation; VO2, volume of oxygen consumed; VCO2, volume of carbon dioxide expired; RQ, respiratory quotient; sALS, sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; –, data not reported.

Nine different devices were referenced across the 30 publications reporting on studies in which an open-circuit system was used (Table 2). Of note, 3 multicenter studies used different devices at each site.62,65,71Where reported (n= 25), the majority of articles (n= 20; 80%) used a ventilated canopy hood setup, as opposed to an oronasal mask. Of the articles that reported fasting ahead of IC measurements (n= 26 of 30; 86.7%), the reported fasted periods ranged between 3.5 and 12 hours. The 8 articles (26.7%) that stated the occurrence of an overnight fast could not be quantified in terms of their duration in hours).7,37,48,54,55,63,64,69Fourteen articles reported a rested period ahead of the calorimetry measurements,17,36–39,49,50,54,60,61,63–65,68which ranged between 10 and 60 minutes (Table 2). The reported duration of calorimetry assessment varied between 10 minutes and 1 hour, with washout periods (where data were discounted) reported in 11 articles, ranging between 5 and 10 minutes.36,38,48,50,52,60,61,65,66,68,71To demonstrate that data were collected over a steady state, the coefficient of variation (CV) value, reported in 6 articles, ranged from <3% to 10%;36,48,50,51,54,68and 7 articles stated that a stable plateau or steady state was reached but did not state the CV.7,17,37,39,49,65,66Of the 22 articles that provided information on body position, 6 provided the angle of the participant’s body during the measurement; this ranged between 30° and 45°.36,38,60,61,65,71At least 1 outcome measurement (ie, VO2, VCO2, mREE, or respiratory quotient) was reported in 23 of the 30 articles (76.7%). However, there was no consistency when reporting the measures of central tendency (eg, the mean [SD], or median [IQR]) of these data.

Continuous data are presented as mean ± SD or median (IQR).

Abbreviations:mREE, measured resting energy expenditure; REE, resting energy expenditure; TDEE, Total daily energy expenditure;2H, heavy hydrogen;18O, oxygen isotope; –, data not reported.

Abbreviations:FAO/WHO/UNU, Food and Agriculture Organization/World Health Organization/United Nations University; HB, Harris-Benedict; mREE, measured resting energy expenditure; MSJ, Mifflin-St Jeor; pREE, predicted resting energy expenditure; REE, resting energy expenditure.

In 20 articles, the MI was calculated by comparing pREE and mREE values (Table 5).17,36–40,49,57,59–68,70,71Participants were classified as hypermetabolic or not depending on the selected metabolic index threshold chosen by the authors. Hypermetabolism was indicated in 6.4%–100% of the study populations included in these 20 articles, with prevalence varying depending on the predictive equation used and the chosen MI threshold. The majority of these articles (n= 14; 70%) compared mREE to pREE derived by the HB equation.33Use of the HB33equation at a metabolic index threshold of >10/110% indicated the prevalence of hypermetabolism varied between 37.5% and 100% across 9 articles (45%).36,37,39,40,49,57,59,62,65When the MI threshold was increased to 20/120%, still using the HB equation,33the prevalence of hypermetabolism ranged between 23.1% and 45.2% in 2 articles.59,66Comparisons could not be drawn across articles in which the MI threshold was not stated.

Continuous data are presented as mean ± SD and/or median (IQR).

Abbreviations: HB, Harris-Benedict; fALS, familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; FAO, Food and Agriculture Organization; LSTM, lean soft-tissue mass; mREE, measured resting energy expenditure; MSJ, Mifflin-St Jeor; pREE, predicted resting energy expenditure; UNU, United Nations University; WHO, World Health Organization.

Steyn et al38assessed body composition using ADP to determine the effect of FM and FFM on the metabolic status of people living with MND. The acquired FM and FFM values in this study were subsequently entered into the Nelson predictive energy equation35to predict REE. As a result, 41% of this cohort (n= 24 of 58) was classified as hypermetabolic (metabolic index: 115% [SD ± 21] at a threshold of 120%) (Table 5). This is lower than the proportion of study participants identified as hypermetabolic by Jésus et al59(n= 168 of 315; 53.3%) when the same equation and metabolic index threshold were applied (Table 5).

This review identified that IC using open-circuit systems is the most commonly used approach to assess REE in the current MND literature. Notwithstanding, there is a distinct lack of consistency in the reporting of IC protocols and related outcome measures in articles about people living with MND (Table 2). Although generic recommendations exist for the conduction of IC in healthy populations,88,89these may not be applicable to MND cohorts, and robust evidence is lacking. In reality, it may be practically challenging to meet the generalized recommendations when conducting IC in patients with MND. For example, achieving a steady state (CV ≤10%) may not be possible because of disease-associated muscle rigidity, although this has not been reported in the MND literature.90In addition, although it is important to facilitate a rested period ahead of IC measurement, an individual with a more severe disability will use more energy than an individual without mobility restrictions will when moving or transferring, increasing the mREE. Finally, the recommendation of a 5-hour fasted period as a minimum may be contentious, with evidence to suggest that the thermogenic influence wanes by 2–3 hours after eating.91,92Although a shorter fasted period would be beneficial for IC studies by reducing participant burden and increasing the practicality of conducting IC, the evidence for this is not specific to MND, and further investigation is required to reduce additional variations and bias before modification in future study designs.

The lack of consistency when reporting measures of central tendency reduces the ability to compare measurements of REE across different cohorts of patients with MND. For example, of the 23 articles that reported values of mREE following IC, 14 presented the mean and SD, 7 presented the median and IQR, and 2 presented both (Table 2). Moreover, differences in the reporting of IC outcome measurements enables differential calculations and interpretations of mREE. For example, because mREE is derived from measurements of VO2and VCO2(mL/minute) using the Weir equation,28VO2is considered the more accurate outcome measurement from IC and should be presented alongside mREE. VO2was reported alongside mREE in 2 of 32 articles (6.3%). Standardization of the reporting of these measurements would allow comparisons of mREE between articles, increasing transparency and allowing flexible analysis of multicohort articles. Moreover, reporting of participant characteristics, including sex, weight, height, and body composition (where assessed), would enable flexibility when retrospectively calculating the MI with different predictive energy equations across study populations. This is particularly pertinent when comparing international study populations in which demographics and body compositions influence the accuracy of pREE, as presented and discussed by Holdom et al.71This should be a priority for all researchers investigating metabolic state in MND. The provision of data sharing would potentially enable the creation of a comprehensive, international database that could be used to perform meta-analysis and critically examine changes in mREE with disease stratification, for example.

Further challenges with IC are associated with respiratory complications such as a weakening of the diaphragmatic and intercostal muscles, which is exacerbated in a supine position.93Twenty-four articles (75%) in this review accounted for pulmonary function. Of these, 10 reported on studies that excluded participants with reduced respiratory function by either FVC score or ALSFRS-R respiratory subdomains. One study excluded participants unable to lie in a supine position for 1 hour.69The “respiratory hypothesis” originates from a study conducted with 11 patients receiving mechanical ventilatory support and living with ALS who presented with weight gain and hypometabolism.94It was hypothesized that energy requirements were decreased after alleviation of respiratory demands. This study did not meet the inclusion criteria (it was not published in English) defined for this scoping review (Table S1). Kasarskis et al7suggested that an increasing metabolic index observed toward end of life was a result of increased energy demand from respiratory muscles, which may be decreased in those receiving noninvasive ventilation (NIV). This hypothesis was debated further when Sherman et al48and Georges et al54compared the mREE of patients with MND who were receiving NIV (mREENIV) with those who were breathing spontaneously (mREEBS). Although Sherman et al48reported that patients who were breathing spontaneously had a lower mREE than those with NIV (mREEBS: 1341, SD ± 472 kcal/day; mREENIV1655, SD ± 363 kcal/day), Georges et al54presented a significant reduction in the mREE of patients receiving mechanical ventilatory support compared with those breathing spontaneously. These contrasting results could be attributed to the difference of the mean BMI in the 2 cohorts (24.5 kg/m248vs 22 kg/m254, respectively). Sherman et al48also proposed that the counterintuitive increase in mREENIVcould be related to an increased dietary thermogenesis resulting from recent refeeding as a result of gastrostomy insertion.

Consideration and adjustments should be applied when conducting IC for individuals requiring continuous ventilatory support or tracheotomy positive pressure ventilation.51,53,54For example, although there is no evidence, to our knowledge, as to whether the participant’s body position during IC (ie, the angle of the head and torso) influences the measurements, it is important to consider that individuals with a decreased respiratory capacity may not be able to lay in a reclined or supine position, and this could potentially influence IC outcome measurements.

This review has identified that the HB33pREE equation is the most commonly used comparator against mREE when calculating the MI in cohorts of individuals living with MND (Table 5). We have previously criticized the suitability of applying the HB33equation to indicate the state of hypermetabolism in an MND cohort.36We observed that extreme body weight variations influence the prediction accuracy of REE (ie, the lighter the body weight of an individual, the greater the underestimation of pREE, and vice versa). An underprediction of pREE consequently leads to the calculation of a greater metabolic index, introducing a bias in the way patients may be classified as hypermetabolic.36This influence may be exaggerated when compared with healthy cohorts, whose body composition may be more reflective of the cohort from which the predictive equations were derived.

Ellis et al52suggested that predictive energy equations in general, not just the HB33equation, may be more accurate in individuals with a “healthy” nutritional status, defined as a BMI of between 18 and 30 kg/m2. This may explain the discrepancy in the accuracy of each predictive equation presented in this review across different study cohorts, demonstrated by the range of REE variations (–14.8% to 13.9%) (Table 4). For example, although Ellis et al52observed that the Mifflin-St Jeor equation was the most accurate equation in their study, with an average REE variation of –2.7% (accurate in 63% of the study population with an average BMI of 24.14 kg/m2), Jésus et al58observed that the same equation had an average REE variation of –14.8%, accurate in only 27.3% of their study population with a median BMI of 24.2 kg/m2.

FFM is regarded as a contributing factor to REE.96Therefore, because the proportions of FM and FFM for an individual living with MND often deviate from the expected ratios for sex, age, weight, and height, a plausible explanation for this inaccuracy is that MND cohorts do not follow the inherent assumptions underpinning the inclusion of weight in the predictive energy equations. Determining hypermetabolism using predictive equations that include estimates of body composition may be more suitable, therefore, for people living with MND. Holdom et al71reported that FFM consistently contributes to mREE regardless of geographic location; therefore, predictive equations should consider FFM accounting for sex and age, where possible.

Proportions of FM and FFM were assessed using BIA in approximately two-thirds of articles included in this review. When the REE to FFM ratio of MND cohorts was compared to matched healthy control groups, the MI was significantly higher in the MND cohorts.50,69Jésus et al58developed an ALS-specific predictive equation for REE incorporating FFM and FM using BIA.58It was suggested that this equation accurately estimated REE in 65% of the study population (at a threshold of ±10%); however, it would be interesting to know the proportion of this study population who were identified as hypermetabolic using this formula. This equation was not included in any other study in this review; therefore, further comparisons are not possible at this stage.

It is important to factor in the stage of disease progression and severity of the study cohort when considering body composition, and to keep in mind that BIA is an indirect assessment of body composition that relies on derivation equations largely developed in healthy populations to calculate FM and FFM.97Janse van Mantgem et al70observed that predictions of REE, using BIA to assess FM and FFM, were lower than predictions of REE estimated using ADP. Steyn et al38used FFM values, derived from ADP measurements, to predict REE; however, the accuracy of pREE was not reported and comparisons cannot be drawn between the findings of the 2 articles.

Longitudinal assessments of energy expenditure were presented in 3 articles.37,49,50Desport et al49and Vaisman et al50observed a significant decrease in mREE when measured over 6 months to 1 year. However, when mREE was expressed as a percentage of predicted REE by the HB equation, Desport et al49and Bouteloup et al37reported a stable metabolic state over the course of disease progression. When mREE was normalized for FFM (mREE/FFM), Vaisman et al50and Bouteloup et al37observed a significant increase in mREE/FFM over time,37,50wherein mREE remained stable and FFM significantly declined. As we have described, FFM is the biggest determinant of REE in cross-sectional analysis.16,17However, if this relationship held true over time, then a decrease in FFM should always accompany a decrease in REE. This highlights the value of longitudinal energy expenditure measurements. Further investigation is needed to better understand the longitudinal changes in energy expenditure reported in this small subset of articles; perhaps other physiological factors may have greater influence on REE with disease progression.

Using an organizational model such as the PRISMA-ScR, guided by the PICOS criteria, provided a robust framework to retrieve and summarize the evidence we found on the assessment of energy expenditure in people living with MND. However, there were limitations associated with conducting this scoping review. Primarily, the small body of literature captured in this review was highly influenced by 10 articles (35.7%) arising from collaborations across the same research groups (Table 1).17,37,39,40,49,57–59,62,65Moreover, 3 included articles reported data from the same study, and the same study population, therefore, is presented on multiple occasions.40,58,59However, because these articles used different data from this study to address different aims and objectives, the extracted data were synthesized and presented in different ways in this review. The inclusion of articles in this scoping review was restricted to those published in the English language (Figure 1). As such, 2 identified articles were excluded when the full-length articles were assessed for eligibility.98,99Although this may have resulted in omission of relevant evidence in the literature, we were not able to translate articles published in other languages because of time and resource restrictions. Although it was beyond the scope of this review to conduct a full quality assessment of the included articles, we have presented the inconsistencies and missing data identified during the data extraction process.

This review has mapped the current international approaches to assess energy expenditure in MND. IC is the most common method for estimating REE; however, there is an absence of a standardized, validated protocol for the conduction and reporting of IC protocols and outcome measurements.

Hypermetabolism is commonly identified in people living with MND by comparisons of mREE and pREE. The number of individuals classified as hypermetabolic is dependent on the predictive energy equation and the metabolic index threshold applied. This is most often the HB equation at a threshold of 10%, regardless of evidence that this equation may be inaccurate in up to 68% of an MND study population. Normalization of mREE against estimates of FFM may be more appropriate; however, this technology is not always available or practical in either a clinical or research setting. The clinical (eg, disease stage and phenotype) and anthropometric (proportion of FM and FFM) parameters of the study population also need to be considered for differences that may drive changes in the mREE and, subsequently, the metabolic index and mREE to FFM ratio. Standardization of the design and conduct and reporting of IC research would enable comparisons of REE across international databases. In turn, this would allow the stratification of individuals according to measurements of REE, opposed to the current categorization of hypermetabolism, which may be controversial.

The authors thank the NIHR Short Placement Award for Research Collaboration and Dr Stephen Wootton, Southampton BRC, for supporting this research. The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Institute for Health and Care Research or the Department of Health and Social Care.

For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission.

Sarah A Roscoe, 
Division of Neuroscience, School of Medicine and Population Health, Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2HQ, United Kingdom.

Scott P Allen, 
Division of Neuroscience, School of Medicine and Population Health, Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2HQ, United Kingdom.

Christopher J McDermott, 
Division of Neuroscience, School of Medicine and Population Health, Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2HQ, United Kingdom.

Theocharis Stavroulakis, 
Division of Neuroscience, School of Medicine and Population Health, Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience, The University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2HQ, United Kingdom.