Inconsistent reporting of interventions and outcomes is a key barrier to research translation. Children's footwear research is often inconsistently reported as there are no standards or recommendations on what to report or consensus on which outcomes are important. The primary aim of this research was to develop expert consensus in children's footwear features and descriptions for research reporting. The secondary aim focused on consensus building of outcome measures relating to footwear in research in children. The outcome of this study was to develop a reporting checklist and guidance for researchers who are conducting children's footwear studies.

This was a three‐round modified Delphi survey informed by a scoping review. We searched four databases to enable data extraction from 109 records related to children's footwear research. These data established the basis for Round 1. Authors were identified through the scoping review and invited to participate. In Round 1, participants rated the appropriateness of domains relating to reporting footwear descriptions and features and outcomes. Outcome measures were organised against a childhood adaptation of the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF)—F‐words in childhood disability domains. Consensus and agreement levels were set at 70%. Where 50%–69% of participants agreed, the item was returned for rating in Rounds 2 and 3.

There were 33 participants who responded to Round 1 and 29 (88%) in both subsequent rounds. Participants agreed on 20 statements that researchers should use to describe children's footwear and their features. All ICF domains met consensus for outcome collection. There were 17 outcome measures that participants agreed should be used in the future when a researcher's aim aligns with specific domains. Where no specific outcome measures reached consensus or agreement within a domain, a statement was developed to guide researcher choice in the subsequently developed checklist.

Participants reached consensus on the essential footwear characteristics and descriptions that should be consistently reported in children's footwear research. This enabled us to produce a list of preferred outcome measures. Using this checklist can support future research through collection and reporting of comparable data.

Parents and caregivers often seek advice about children's footwear fit and impact on foot and lower limb development [1]. Both parents and health professionals hold beliefs that footwear can positively or negatively impact the growing foot and lower limb morphology and function [2]. These perceptions are frequently shaped by observations and marketing but also from fashion trends and personal beliefs rather than being founded on evidence [3,4]. Two recent systematic reviews exploring the impact of footwear and specific features on children's walking and running reported this challenge [5,6]. Their results were limited by inconsistent descriptions of footwear and diverse outcome measures. These inconsistencies confound the ability of researchers to determine optimal methods to conduct and synthesise children's footwear research.

The children's footwear industry has a projected market size valued at approximately $55 billion (USD) [7]. A major market driver is repeated shoe purchasing due to childhood growth. However, there are additional drivers that hinge on the marketing of the benefits one type of footwear may have over another. This is despite limited evidence indicating a child's physiological or developmental wellbeing being impacted by specific footwear features, or the influence of shoes on the growing lower limb, other than the importance of good fit [8,9,10]. Appropriate footwear fit improves walking speed and can reduce some step variability regardless of a child's ability [11]. Additionally, there is an interest in utilising footwear as a therapeutic intervention for children with lower limb health or gait concerns [12].

There is more known about the impact of footwear on adult's lower limb health and biomechanics compared to paediatric populations [13]. Footwear research in adults links poorly fitting footwear with bone, joint and soft tissue related injuries [13]. Also, studies with adults have demonstrated the potential for footwear to change forces through the lower limb [14], reduce tissue damage [15] and potentially reduce falls [16]. Continued investment in the adult sporting footwear industry demonstrates footwear is also considered a method of performance enhancement [17]. This variation in knowledge about footwear effects across the different life stages provides opportunities for future research.

Inconsistency in reporting the characteristics of children's footwear and measurement of footwear research outcomes are major barriers to research synthesis and translation. Adult footwear research has several tools enabling consistency in reporting [18], such as the definition for minimalist footwear [19] or the footwear assessment tool [20]. Children's footwear is not a scaled down version of adult footwear; therefore, these tools are not translatable nor are there recommended outcome measures. Researchers need to work together to adopt ways to report their research so that data can be pooled to strengthen future recommendations. The primary aim of this research was to develop consensus in children's footwear descriptions and features for research reporting. The secondary aim focused on consensus building of outcome measures relating to footwear research in children. The outcome of this consensus study was to develop a reporting checklist and guidance for researchers who are conducting children's footwear studies.

Our study approach involved a three‐round modified Delphi survey method informed by a scoping review. The Delphi methodology involved inviting experts to participate in sequential questionnaires (Rounds), with the aim of eventual consensus of opinions [21]. Although expert opinion is considered a lower form of evidence, it is considered appropriate as the first step in research in the absence of existing guidance [22]. Delphi was modified from traditional methods by online data collection only and through the development of Round 1 as outlined in the procedure. Monash University Human Research Ethics Committee (27514) approved this research, and it was prospectively registered with Enhancing the QUAlity and Transparency Of health Research (EQUATOR) [23]. We used the Conducting and REporting DElphi Studies (CREDES) checklist to guide reporting our research [24].

Participants were recruited using purposive sampling. Eligible participants were those who had published peer‐reviewed research relating to children's footwear, identified through the scoping review. We determined eligibility in this way to ensure we invited ‘experts’, according to Delphi methodology, due to their research experience and potential contribution to children's footwear research.

We initially conducted a scoping review, directed by the preferred reporting guidelines for scoping reviews [PRISMA‐ScR]. This review was not prospectively registered; however, it enabled the identification of potential experts to guide consensus and was conducted to develop the questions for Round 1 [25]. Searches were conducted using Medline Ovid, CINAHL, EBM, Emcare and AMED (Allied and Complementary Medicine) from inception and up to 24th of March 2022. The searches were rerun up to 20th of May 2024 to ensure current data extraction. We did not apply any study design limits to data searches but applied limits to human participants and English language. The search strategy was broad and used the MeSH terms: (Child OR Infant OR Adolescent OR p*ediatric) AND (Shoes OR Shod OR footwear; Supporting InformationS1: Appendix 1—Search strategy). Inclusion criteria included peer‐reviewed literature of any quantitative study design, description of at least one footwear type or feature or at least one outcome relating to the footwear worn and with a mean age of participants < 18 years. Where studies used footwear modified specifically for the study design, only nonmodified footwear data were extracted. Qualitative articles were excluded.

Data describing footwear characteristics (e.g., features and descriptions) identified in the 109 records (Figure1) were thematically synthesised, where possible, according to published footwear‐related characteristic frameworks [12,26]. Outcomes were synthesised using the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) childhood adaptation. This adaption has been described using F‐words—function, family, fitness, fun, friends and future [27]. Data extraction was undertaken and checked by two authors (J.K. and C.W.) and verified by a research assistant. Five authors (M.F., K.P., S.M., M.H. and H.B.) confirmed domain alignment before data were presented to the participants [12,26] (Supporting InformationS2: Appendix 2—Data extraction).

Potential participant contact details were extracted from their publications prior to being emailed an invitation, which included study details and an option to participate. If an email was invalid, ResearchGate (www.researchgate.net) was used as a secondary contact source. Participants contacted via ResearchGate received messages through the platform's messaging service. Those invited were informed of the publication that led to their invitation and were encouraged to forward the invitation to eligible co‐authors of only that publication. Participants provided written informed consent signifying ongoing commitment to responding to all Delphi rounds. Participants were asked to not engage in intra‐panel communication and to keep their responses confidential at each round. Participants were offered acknowledgement or authorship in the final paper pending their willingness and ability to meet the authorship criteria (see Contribution Statement).

Questions in each round were presented to participants through a purpose‐built survey using the online survey platform Qualtrics software (Qualtrics, Provo, UT, USA). The survey was piloted with two members of the research team who were not child footwear researchers and language adaptations made based on their feedback. The data were linked during the rounds through participant‐provided email only. Rounds were pre‐planned as being open for 2–4 weeks, and participants were emailed weekly reminders to maximise retention throughout the study. All participants were offered their individualised responses at the beginning of each subsequent round. Full results were provided to participants completing all three rounds.

In Round 1, participants provided demographic information including gender, country of residence, highest qualification, number of peer‐reviewed publications and the number of those related to children's footwear. This allowed an understanding of participants' breadth of experience.

Following this, participants were then presented with questions relating to the primary aim. They were asked to respond to each element of interest or domain identified in the scoping review. Survey logic was used to present items under each element or interest or domain based on the participants response. For example, if a participant consideredFootwear Typeshould SOMETIMES or ALWAYS be reported, they were then presented with all the footwear types extracted to rate agreement. Whereas if they responded with NEVER, they moved to the next question.

We followed the same process for the secondary aim. Participants were presented with domains aligning with the relevant F‐word. If participants agreed it should SOMETIMES or ALWAYS be reported, they were then presented with extracted outcomes aligning to that domain to respond in agreement with its inclusion. Open text boxes were included at the end of each section to allow participants to justify their rating or suggest alternative wording. The full Round 1 survey and logic is in Supporting InformationS3: Appendix 3 and a summary of domains and elements in Table1.

Data responses were initially analysed by two researchers (J.K. and C.W.). Round 1 consensus was achieved when 70% or more participants agreed on an item. Where 50%–69% of participants indicated affirmative responses, the information was re‐presented in Round 2 (Supporting InformationS4: Appendix 4). Where less than 50% of participants indicated affirmation on any item, these were excluded from future rounds. These consensus thresholds align with established modified Delphi methodology [28,29].

Round 2 followed the same thresholds for agreement and guided the development of Round 3 (Supporting InformationS5: Appendix 5). Any new items suggested in Round 1 were incorporated in Round 2 for review. Participants were asked to reconsider these items and indicate their level of agreement. In Round 3, any item not meeting the 70% threshold was excluded.

Participants who did not complete the entire round were contacted and offered a further 2‐week extension. Those who did not complete a round were excluded from subsequent rounds. An a priori decision was to cease the Delphi if there was a drop in participant response below 70%.

We described the synthesis of data in Round 1 within the procedure. We calculated the counts and percentages for each round within Microsoft Excel 2018 (Microsoft Corp, Redmond Washington). We also used Excel to track response rates across rounds.

Of the 82 authors invited, 33 consented to participate in Round 1 (Table2). There was an 88% (29 of 33 participants) retention rate for Round 2 and 100% (29 of 29 participants) retention rate in Round 3 (Figure2. Delphi study flow including author and participant involvement). The three rounds were completed between 1st August 2024 and 24th of November 2024.

Summary demographics of participants completing Round 1 (n= 33).

Delphi study flow including author and participant involvement.

A graphical summary of the footwear description and feature domains that met consensus are in Figure3. There were three footwear description elements and three footwear feature elements meeting consensus (Table3). Within footwear descriptions, participants identified brand name, image of the footwear and its commercial availability as essential elements in reporting research about children's footwear. The three footwear feature elements and their element descriptions meeting consensus or agreement included footwear type (n= 9 element descriptors), components of the footwear (n= 8 element descriptors) and composition of the footwear (n= 2 element descriptors) (Table3).

Statements supporting minimum reporting requirements of footwear features and descriptions domains and elements within each.

Note:Colour code: Green: where 70% or more participants agreed similarly and accepted, Orange: where 50%–69% of participants agreed similarly and processed to next round and Red: where < 50% of people and item or element was removed from final CHILD‐SHOE Reporting Checklist.

Indicates alternative wording presented to panel members.

The six ICF F‐words (Table4) met consensus in Round 1, and Figure4provides a graphical summary of these overarching domains and their description. The six outcome measure groups in theFUNCTIONdomain met consensus or agreement. These included spatiotemporal measures (n= 4 outcome measures), kinematics and kinetics (n= 5 outcome measures), plantar pressure (researcher preference statement), foot features (n= 1 outcome measure), balance and gross motor skill (researcher preference statement) and presence of infection.

Statements supporting minimum reporting requirements of footwear research outcomes relating to aim of research and descriptions.

Note:Colour code: Green: where 70% or more participants agreed similarly and accepted, Orange: where 50%–69% of participants agreed similarly and processed to next round and Red: where < 50% of people and item or element was removed from final CHILD‐SHOE Reporting Checklist.

Indicates alternative wording presented to panel members in Rounds 2 and 3.

The three outcome measure groups in the FITNESS domain meeting consensus or agreement included physical activity outcome measurement (n= 1 outcome measure), electromyography (EMG; researcher preference statement) or endurance (researcher preference statement). Participants recommended researcher preference based on age and stage of the child and research aim.

Participants agreed that the FRIENDSHIP domain should collect information about the child's quality of life and that the tool to collect this information be based on the age and developmental stage of the child and research aim.

Comfort and body image perception relating to look of feet were two outcome measures meeting consensus in the FUN domain. Participants agreed researchers should report outcome measures of shoe fit measured with a device and footwear comfort under the comfort element. Whereas they agreed that researchers should choose the appropriate tool or method to report body image perception relevant to the child's age and stage or research aim.

Finally, wear time met consensus under social factors in the FAMILY domain. School attendance and longitudinal impact of footwear on foot shape were outcome measures meeting consensus under the FUTURE domain.

The final checklist was circulated to all authors to ensure appropriate wording for use when reporting research relating to describing children's footwear and choice and reporting of outcomes (Figure5Final Checklist, Supporting InformationS6: Appendix 6 Editable version).

This study, underpinned by an extensive scoping review and developed with experienced researchers in the field, presents the first guidance to support consistency in the measurement and reporting of children's footwear research. The CHILD‐SHOE Reporting Checklist incorporates 20 footwear descriptions and outcome measures considered essential by experienced children's footwear researchers. This checklist can guide the choice of outcome measures during research design, in addition to standardising reporting requirements for publishing research related to children's footwear. Key to this is that outcome measures align with the ICF, supporting researchers to measure things that matter to families and look more broader beyond the functional impact of footwear, increasing not only the consistency but also scope and relevance of published evidence going forward.

Importantly, this adds to a growing body of recommendations and guidelines supporting consistency in the measurement on reporting of research related to children's footwear. These include an international taxonomy that defines nomenclature [26] and consensus recommendations for classifications and indications of use in children's therapeutic footwear [12]. However, it also highlights potential gaps in research consistency, such as where consensus could not be reached on the tools required to measure several key outcome measures, including quality of life or balance and gross motor skill. This is unsurprising given the diversity of instruments to measure these domains (including some specific to age or disease specific tools), but it does inhibit the ability to build large data sets, particularly as children's outcomes change over their development. It also highlights the opportunity to align research outcomes with those recommended by organisations, such as OMERACT (https://omeract.org/) or ICHOM (https://www.ichom.org/), that are focused on outcome measurement sets that align with diseases [30]. Furthermore, some of the outcome measures that reached consensus require use of specific measurement tools over others, such as those that identify joint angles over centre of mass or peak pressures. Although this may be a barrier for some research, it may also assist researchers to seek and plan appropriate equipment and protocols. This may eventuate in the development of much‐needed normative data using this measurement tools.

It is expected that further refinement will be required to improve usability and outcomes contained within the CHILD‐SHOE Reporting Checklist. Specifically, this may include defining specific elements where nomenclature remains inconsistent. This has already been noted as a concern for minimalist, functional and biomimetic footwear for children [31,32,33,34]. Similarly, although agreement was reached on reporting foot size, there was no discussion whether it should be reported in metric, imperial measures or as raw length and/or/width. As technology advances, there will also be a requirement to revisit agreement on preferred measures across most domains (e.g., three‐dimensional scanning may direct foot volume as a measure of interest or wearable sensors may alter kinematic or kinetic outcomes) [35]. Similarly, as the body of evidence and adherence in utilising this recommended checklist develops, further refinements may narrow down the most essential descriptions and outcome measures, reducing the burden on researchers.

However, for now, it is recommended that users of the checklist report against all essential footwear descriptions and feature domains, consider the data collected against the ‘menu’ of outcome measures, and report the impact within the F‐words domains as appropriate to their research question. This will be an important step in future research synthesis, allowing interpretation of research to be meaningful to the population and impactful for consumers, including parents, and caregivers, footwear manufacturers, retailers and those who determine polices around footwear (e.g., such as shoes worn in schools or guidelines for young athletes) [36]. Currently, most of these ‘policy papers’ rely on evidence synthesis, which has been shown to be negatively impacted by the diversity in how footwear is described and assessed during research.

As with all research, there are key limitations to this study. Firstly, the search strategy that directed our scoping review did not include forward and backward searching or the synthesis of data, meaning our theming may be open to bias. We attempted to minimise this bias through transparency to the broader research team at each round, ensuring missing items could be suggested. Secondly, we acknowledge the checklist developed is based on expert opinion, and that no consumers were involved in this research. However, many of the research team are also parents who purchase footwear for their children meaning we are both researchers and consumers. We acknowledge that good research is co‐designed with those most impacted by the outcomes, and for this study, we considered those most impacted to be researchers. The checklist does provide opportunities for researchers to co‐design their research with children and families, meaning the outcomes from this subsequent research potentially include the consumer voice and report on factors important to them. The use of an international panel of experts is a strength in terms of global relevance, albeit we acknowledge that 60% of the panel were from Europe or Oceania. Cultural footwear practices may have biased checklist choices made by the expert researchers involved. Remaining anonymous and keeping statements confidential are suggested to minimise collusions of results and minimise bias in gathering agreement. We guarantee that as an author group no collusion occurred; however, it is unknown what impact collaborative discussion may have had on the final checklist [22].

This research used a modified Delphi consensus methodology to identify key footwear descriptions and features experts agreed should be reported in future children's footwear research. This enabled us to produce a list of preferred outcome measures. Using this checklist can support future research through collection and reporting of comparable data.