The cone penetration test (CPT) is a fast and efficient in-situ testing technique that provides reliable and continuous measurements of soil properties. The CPT calibration chamber test is widely used to investigate soil-pile interactions. To address the boundary effect problem in CPT calibration chamber tests, this paper applies the cavity expansion theory for analysis. In this approach, the stress-strain relationship of soil is modeled using the classical Mohr-Coulomb (M-C) model, where the elastic modulus is associated with the mean stress, and the internal friction angle and dilation angle are related to the void ratio and mean stress. This modification captures the state-dependent characteristics of sand. By combining the stress equilibrium equation and the volume conservation equation, a system of partial differential equations (PDEs) is established to describe the stress-strain behavior of the soil element. The hybrid Eulerian-Lagrangian approach is employed to solve these PDEs, yielding the pressure-expansion curve and the stress distribution curve along the cavity wall during the expansion process of the cylindrical (spherical) cavity. The results of this semi-analytical solution are compared with the exact solution to validate the accuracy of the proposed method. Additionally, the relationship between the cylindrical (spherical) cavity expansion model and the cone penetration resistance in CPT is established. The development curve of critical depth with cone penetration resistance is accurately predicted.

Cone penetration test (CPT) is an in-situ testing technique with a wide range of applications and high data quality, which can compensate for the shortcomings of laboratory geotechnical tests [1]. The calibration chamber test for CPT is an effective means to verify the accuracy of CPT testing and inversion. How to determine the size of the calibration chamber is an important issue in CPT [2]: When the size of the calibration chamber is too small, the boundary effect of the calibration chamber has a certain impact on the measured cone penetration resistance [3,4]; When the size of the calibration chamber is too large, it will reduce experimental efficiency and undertake more resources.

The research on the theory of cone penetration test (CPT) mainly includes the bearing capacity method, motion point displacement method, strain path method, and cavity expansion theory [5]. Since Vesic [6] proposed the theory of cavity expansion theory, it has been widely applied in fields such as in-situ testing, pile foundations, and tunnel excavation. This theory can currently be roughly divided into two methods: the ‘Eulerian method’ and ‘Lagrangian method’. The Eulerian method highly relies on the self-similarity characteristic of the cavity expansion process, that is, all soil elements around the cavity experience the same stress-strain path; The Lagrangian method can be used to solve both self-similar and non-self-similar problems. This method usually requires an analytical form between stress and total strain, so the used constitutive model is relatively simple. Recently, Yang et al. [7–9] proposed a hybrid Eulerian-Lagrangian (HEL) method that combines both advantages of methods, and uses a semi-numerical solution to provide a solution framework for non-self-similar cavity expansion problems in soils with sophisticated constitutive models. The authors will also use the HEL method to solve the cavity expansion problem in this paper.

Due to the relatively easy analysis of the theory of cavity expansion theory in infinite medium, the development of the cavity expansion theory in finite medium is relatively lagging behind. Therefore, researchers often use the approximate solution of cavity expansion theory to predict cone penetration resistance of CPT. Osinov and Cudamni [10] proposed a cavity expansion solution in a finite medium with a hypoplastic constitutive model, but when applied to predict cone penetration resistance of CPT, only the infinite medium case was discussed [11]. Pournaghiazar et al. analyzed the boundary effect of CPT using the cavity expansion theory based on the critical state constitutive model [12], but the solution based on the Eulerian method, which is only an approximate solution and cannot reflect of the non-self-similar behavior during the CPT process of the calibration chamber [13]. The Mohr-Coulomb (M-C) yield criterion is commonly used to analyze the size effect of calibration chamber [14–16], but the M-C model is an ideal elastoplastic model and cannot well reflect the dependence of soil strength and stiffness on stress-strain levels during CPT. Therefore, adopting a relatively simple but soil-state-related model and providing a theoretical framework for calculating the problem of cavity expansion in finite medium, can enrich the theory of cavity expansion theory and improve its applicability and accuracy in CPT prediction.

This paper adopts a relatively simple M-C constitutive model, but associates it with state parameters to establish a state-dependent Mohr-Coulomb (SDMC) constitutive model. The model was found to give satisfactory simulations for large-deformations. The model also provided the key parameters which were made state-dependent and were calibrated carefully against high-quality element tests conducted over appropriate pressure ranges [17,18]. On the basis of the classical M-C model, this model associates the elastic modulus, internal friction angle, and dilation angle with state parameters.

whereα=(1+sinϕ)/(1−sinϕ);Y=2ccosϕ/(1−sinϕ);ϕis the internal friction angle of the soil;cis the cohesion force of the soil.

wheredε1panddε3pare plastic strain increments corresponding to the maximum and minimum principal stresses, respectively.

whereEiis a constant;patmis the atmospheric pressure, taken as 101 kPa.

whereϕcis the friction angle at the critical state;nbandndare model constants.

and Eq (7) defines the liner relationship betweenecand(p/patm)ξ, which is also called ‘critical-state line’, whereecandλcare intercept and slope of the critical-state line, respectively.

The expansion model of cavity in a finite medium is shown inFig 1, assuming that the soil is a homogeneous and isotropic material. Adopting cylindrical coordinate system (r,θ, andz) and spherical coordinate system (r,θ, andφ) to describe the positions of elements around the cylindrical or spherical cavity, respectively. The initial radius of the cavity isa0, and the radius of the outer boundary isb0, and the initial stress inside and outside the cylinder (sphere) isσr0. As the pressure on the inner wall of the cavity continues to increase, the radius of the cavity wall expands froma0toa, and the pressure at the cavity wall changes fromσr0toσr,a. When the boundary conditions of the pressure at the outer wall remain unchanged, the outer radius of the cavity expands fromb0toband the corresponding stress changes fromσr0toσr,b. The soil around the cavity deforms elastically at the initial loading. As the cavity continues to expand, the soil at the cavity wall will first yield, and then the plastic region expands from the radius ofrp0torp. During the expansion process of the soil element around the cavity, the radial (σr), circumferential (σθ), vertical (σz) (for cylindrical cavity) develop, as well as the corresponding strains (εr,εθ, andεz).

(a) Hollow cylinder; (b) Hollow sphere; (c) Plane view for hollow cylinder.

where ‘d(·)’ represents the derivative of a physical quantity with respect to space (Eulerian description);k=1and2representEq (8)for cylindrical or spherical cavity analysis, respectively.

whererandr0are current and initial locations of the soil element.

wherevandv0are current and initial volume of the soil element, respectively. For the expansion process of cylindrical cavities, since the horizontal thin disk can be regarded as the plane strain condition, the vertical strain vanishes everywhere, that is,εz=0.

where ‘D(·)’ represents the derivative of a physical quantity with respect to time (Lagrangian description); The superscript ‘e’ represents the physical quantity of the elastic process;μis Poisson’s ratio.

whereσrpis the radial stress at the elastoplastic boundary. When consideringK0-consolidation, the vertical stress (σz) can be give asσz=K0σr,0−2μBp, whereK0is the in-situ coefficient of the earth pressure.

Yu et al. [21–23] provided an exact solution for the cavity expansion problem in finite medium using the M-C criterion. Due to the simplicity of the M-C criterion, the Lagrangian method can be used to establish the relationship between stress and total strain, and then obtain the analytical solution. This paper adopts the SDMC model, which believes that the state of soil elements is related to the void ratio and mean stress of the soil, that is, the void ratio and mean stress are functions related to time and space. At this time, it is difficult to derive analytical solutions, and because the SDMC model is developed based on the M-C model, which is an ideal elastoplastic model, the stress and strain increments in its plastic development process are independent. The present study uses the hybrid Eulerian-Lagrangian (HEL) method [7–9] to solve the cavity expansion problem during the plastic process.

where the matrix[A]can be calculated by the inverse of the matrix[H]/HofEq (24).

where the superscript “j” represents thejth load step.

wherex(i)(j−1)is known from the previous step of loading. Having calculatedr(i)(j)andσr(i)(j)from Eqs(27),(28), and(33),Dr(i)(j)andDσr(i)(j)can be known byEq (34). Then,Dσθ,Dσz, andDvcan be determined from Eqs(30a)and(30b)withx=x(i)(j−1), andσθ(i)(j),σz(i)(j), andv(i)(j)can also be calculated. The detailed solving procedure can refer to Yang et at. [7–9].

whereσθpis the circumferential stress at the elastoplastic boundary andσzp=σr,0can be given for the vertical stress at the elastoplastic boundary for the cylindrical cavity.

Finally, the solving procedure for the solution of a cavity expansion process is detailed asFig 2.

To verify the proposed approach, finite-element (FE) simulations were conducted by software Plaxis2d and Abaqus. The FE simulation established in the Plaxis2d was used to validate the conversation of principal stress during cylindrical cavity expansion, because the classical M-C model is incorporated in the software. Then, the accuracy of the present approach with the SDMC model in this paper was verified with the model established in the Abaqus, with the M-C model which was user-modified as the SDMC model. Since the form of the M-C model is adopted as the William form [24], of which the angle of the yield surface of the traditional M-C model is rounded, the validation of conversion of the principal stress and the accuracy of the proposed method can be roughly conducted. Finally, an exist exact solution is compared to verify the accuracy of the presented solving procedure of HEL method with M-C model.

Since the cavity expansion problem was symmetrical, the simulation model was established using the axisymmetric shell elements, as shown inFig 3. The soil was modelled as the M-C soil and the soil’s parameters were shown inTable 1, and other parameters needed to be set in Plaxis2d were adopted as default values. The initial cavity radius is set asa0, with the outer boundary ofb=500a0, which was far enough to eliminate the boundary effect. Normal displacements of upper and lower boundaries are restricted, and a constant normal stress ofσr,0was applied to the outer boundary. The model was meshed using the triangular elements and the grid refinement was enhanced. The quality of the element distribution was medium and the number of the elements were 1066 at last.

There were three steps including in the simulation. First, all directions of boundaries were restricted. Since the plane-strain condition was adopted, the calculation mode was set as field stress withσr,0=67.308kPaandσz,0=158kPaand67.308kPacorresponding toK0=σr,0/σz,0=0.426and1, respectively. Secondly, a plastic calculation was added with no variation to avoid imbalance of the model. Thirdly, the restrictions of the upper and lower boundaries were changed to the normal direction. The restrictions of inner and outer boundaries were released, and the inner wall moved radially to the location ofa=1.11a0with a constant stress ofσr,0=67.308kPaapplied to the outer boundary.

The solving procedure based on the SDMC model in study is degraded to accommodate to that based on the M-C model. The comparison of results between present study and numerical simulation from Plaxis2d is shown inFig 4, which shows good agreements. Since the cavity expansion process in infinite medium is self-similar, the distribution of stresses reflects the stress paths of soil elements around the cavity.Fig 4(a)shows the conversion of principal stresses during cavity expansion process whenK0=0.426. The radial (σr) stress equals to the circumferential stress (σθ), and both stresses are smaller than the vertical stress (σz) of the soil elements at initial loading. During elastic loading,σzremains constant whileσrandσθdevelop. When the soil yields,σzandσθbecome smaller, andσrcontinues increasing untilσz=σr. At this time, the maximum stress changes fromσztoσr, then all stresses increase with the loading increases. Both present solutions and Plaxis2d results capture the conversion of principal stresses. However, this phenomenon of the conversion of principal stresses can not be seen for the cavity expansion process whenK0=1. The value of radial stress (σr) has already been larger than that of the vertical stress (σz) when the soil yields. Thus, all stresses increase, and the maximum, intermediate, and minimum stresses are radial, vertical, and circumferential stresses, respectively, that is,σ1=σr,σ2=σz, andσ3=σθall the time.

Different from the classical M-C model in plaxis2d, the M-C model adopted in Abaqus adopts the form of the William Mohr-Coulomb model, of which the detailed equations are presented in the Appendix [24]. The parameters of soil characteristics and constants in the SDMC model take from NE34 sand provided by Ye et al. [25], as presented inTable 2.The state parameter (ψ) is taken within the range of[−0.5,0.5]to fit the friction angle (ϕ) and the dilation angle (ϕd) in the linear form asϕ=−55.23ψ+34.89andϕd=−86.31ψ.

The model establishment methods provided by Zhou et al. [26] and developed by Pang et al. [27] are adopted in this study. The meshing model is depictedFig 5. The initial radius (a0) of the cavity wall is assumed to be 1, and the boundary effects are eliminated by adopting a sufficient length of the outer boundary with 500ra. The size of the element decreases near the cavity wall to ensure the accuracy of results of numerical simulation. Then, the element number of the model is 5360 with eight-node axisymmetric reduced-integration (CAX8R) elements, and the void ratio field is defined withe0=0.63.

Three steps are included in the numerical simulation of Abaqus. First, the initial stress field is defined in the entire soil through the “predefined field” in ABAQUS ofσv0=158kPaandσh0=67.308kPa, withK0=σh0/σv0=0.426. The other initial stress field withσv0=37.308kPaandK0=1is also defined to analyze the effect of the in-situ coefficient of the earth pressure (K0), the same as those defined in Plaxis2d. In this way, the initial mean stress (p0) is calculated as 146.8 kPa and 67.308 kPa forK0=0.426and1.0, respectively. Additionally, some keywords should be added in ABAQUS asϕ0=−0.1404andE0=30443kPaforK0=0.426andϕ0=−0.1635andE0=19835kPaforK0=1to provide the initial values ofϕandE. Second, upper and lower boundaries of the cavity wall are restricted by fixing the displacement of the normal direction, while a radial stress equal to the initial total radial stress of the soil is applied to the outer boundary to achieve a geostatic stress equilibrium. Third, the restriction of the cavity wall is removed, and a displacement-controlled boundary with uniform radial displacement is applied to the cavity wall to simulate the cavity expansion process witha=1.11a0.

As depicted inFig 6, the soil deforms elastically outside the elastoplastic boundary (rp) which roughly equals to8a, and deforms elastoplastically withinrp. The results of distributions of radial (σr) and circumferential (σθ) stresses of the present solution are the same as those from numerical simulation. A significant difference is shown for distributions of the vertical stress (σz), because the relationship between the vertical stress (σz) and strain (εz) obeys the user-modified William Mohr-Coulomb in ABAQUS. However, results of the distribution ofσrandσθare the same as those from numerical simulation, which verifies the accuracy of the present study.

The Poison’s ratio and friction angle are taken asμ=0.3andϕ=40∘, respectively. To ignore the effect of initial stresses (p0) and cohesion force (c), Yu [21] adopted a general stiffness index of the cohesion-frictional material, defined asE/[(α−1)σr+Y], and took it as 500.Fig 7illustrates the comparison of results of pressure-expansion curves between the present study and exact solution. It can be seen the present solution can agree well with the exact solution for different thicknesses of cylinder and dilation angles.

whereF(ϕ)is the function ofϕ;γis the soil weight;qcis the penetration resistance.

The boundary effect is ignored in this comparison. The values of parameters forϕcandγare provided inTable 3.a/a0=5can be assumed and the Poison’s ratio (μ) and modulus (E) of the soil are taken as 0.3 and 54 MPa, respectively, the other constants in the SDMC model are shown inTable 4provided by Gao et al. [31].

Fig 8shows that when penetration resistance (qc) is low, the results of the critical depth (hcr) derived from the proposed solution can agree well with the MCPT. However, as the penetration resistance (qc) increases, the results of the present solution gradually tend to stabilize, which is consistent with the results inFig 7(a)whenb0/a0is large, e.g.b0/a0=500, but relatively small compared to the test results. The results of the critical depth derived from the proposed method are larger than those derived from cylindrical and spherical cavity expansion solutions when penetration resistance is small, but are similar to those derived from the spherical cavity expansion when penetration is large.

Li et al. [30] recalculated the results of the CPT calibration chamber test performed by Kerisel [29] based on the relationship betweenhcr∝qc1+sinϕ1+3sinϕ, as shown inFig 9. It is difficult to avoid boundary effects in the calibration chamber test, and the ratio of the outer and inner walls (b0/a0) is assumed to be 30. The Poisson’s ratio (μ) is 0.3, and constants in the SDMC model are the same as those provided by Gao et al. [31]. It can be seen that with the increases of penetration resistance, the correlation function of the critical depthf(hcr,ϕ,a)calculated by the proposed method quickly reach a stable value, whilef(hcr,ϕ,a)of the test results increase with the increase of penetration resistance. Because of the boundary effect assumed in the present paper,f(hcr,ϕ,a)has a slight decrease when the penetration resistance develops., which is consistent with the results inFig 7(a)whenb0/a0is small, e.g.b0/a0=30. Different from the results of the MCPT in Section 5.1, when considering limited boundary, the results off(hcr,ϕ,a)derived from the proposed method always between those derived from cylindrical and spherical cavity expansion solutions, which are more reasonable and accurate.

(1) When boundary effects are not considered, the critical depth of ultimate penetration resistance increases with the increase of penetration resistance. However, the results obtained using the proposed method will gradually stabilize, and the critical depth increases rapidly when the penetration resistance is relatively small, which is close to the experimental results.

(2) When considering boundary effects, the critical depth increases rapidly when the penetration resistance is low, while when the penetration resistance is high, the calculated critical depth still increases slowly according to experimental results. However, due to the consideration of boundary effects in this paper, the critical depth tends to stabilize and even slightly decreases when the penetration resistance is high.

(3) The results of cavity expansion using the Mohr-Coulomb (M-C) model are not the same as the experimental results. The solutions by using the cylindrical cavity expansion are relatively large, but those by using the spherical cavity expansion are very small. It can be deduced that the results of CPT are between the results of cylindrical and spherical cavity expansions, and are related to the soil state.