The combination of silver nanoparticles and conventional antibiotics could be a promising alternative strategy to fight against antimicrobial resistance. The occurrence of synergistic bactericidal activity between these combinations is supported by a large number of studies, but there is still a great lack of information about the action mechanisms. In this study, a direct analytical method for the detection and quantification of silver content in cells based on single cell inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (SC-ICP-MS), in combination with microscopy and microbiological techniques, has been used. Quantification of silver accumulated inEscherichia colibacteria exposed to combinations of silver(i) or silver nanoparticles and apramycin can help elucidate the synergistic mechanisms of silver–antibiotic combinations. The combination of silver with apramycin resulted in the occurrence of synergistic effects, allowing the reduction of silver(i), silver nanoparticle and apramycin concentrations (from 4- to 16-fold) while preserving the individual bactericidal effects of each antimicrobial. Severe damage in bacteria walls, including double membrane rupture and cytoplasm leakage, was observed when the combination of apramycin and silver was used. In general, the presence of apramycin has promoted silver uptake by bacteria.

Synergistic bactericidal effects were observed when combining apramycin and silver againstEscherichia coli, with apramycin promoting silver uptake by bacteria and hence reducing individual antimicrobial concentration.

Some authors have used different microbiological methods in order to suggest synergistic mechanisms for silver–aminoglycoside combinations. These methods studied the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), antibiotic uptake in the presence/absence of silver and bacterial survival rate.7,20Microscopy techniques such as transmission electron microscopy (TEM) or field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) allow the detection of structural alterations, irregularities in membrane content distributions or even, cytosol leakage in bacteria.21–24On the other hand, flow cytometry is used for evaluating membrane permeability and Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR), UV-visible and Raman spectroscopy allow one to assess chemical interactions of silver nanoparticles and antibiotics.21,25However, there are other useful analytical techniques to corroborate the bactericidal mechanisms. Single cell inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (SC-ICP-MS) allows the detection and quantification of silver content in cells and is used to obtain information on the mass distribution of silver per cell,26which could help to elucidate the synergistic mechanisms of silver–antibiotic combinations. To the best of authors’ knowledge, this work is the first to use SC-ICP-MS to directly determine the silver species involved in the synergistic bactericidal activity of combinations of silver and conventional antibiotics and to help elucidate the mechanisms of action related to this bactericidal activity. This work develops a methodology combining analytical and microbiological techniques to detect and quantify the silver species present in cultures ofE. colibacteria previously exposed to combinations of silver(i) or silver nanoparticles and apramycin, a conventional antibiotic used in veterinary medicine. In addition, the chemical information provided by this technology is used to elucidate the possible synergistic action mechanisms of different antimicrobial combinations. The analytical platform is based on the use of SC-ICP-MS and microscopy techniques, in combination with microbiological techniques for determining antimicrobial susceptibility to antimicrobials and this is going to allow: (i) the evaluation of individual bactericidal activities of antimicrobials (silver(i), 10 nm silver nanoparticles and apramycin) and silver–apramycin combinations, (ii) the identification of possible synergistic effects after the combination of silver and apramycin, (iii) the determination of total silver accumulated in bacteria and its distribution per bacteria, (iv) the detection of possible structural alterations in bacteria after exposure to antimicrobials, and (v) the evaluation of the relationship between silver detected in bacteria, the possible structural alterations and the possible mechanisms of bactericidal activity of silver–apramycin combinations.

Escherichia coliATCC 25922 strain was used in all experiments. The strain was cultured in Müller Hinton (MH) agar and grown overnight at 37 °C and then inoculated in Müller Hinton Broth (MHB) + 2% Tween 80. The culture medium combining MH and 2% Tween 80 was optimized to prevent the aggregation of nanoparticles, while preserving the viability ofE. colibacteria27Bacterial suspensions ofE. coliATCC were exposed to silver(i), 10 nm silver nanoparticles, apramycin and two different combinations of apramycin–Ag(i) and apramycin–silver nanoparticles (Table 1) for 24 h at 37 °C and 100 rpm. Details of standards and reagents are included in the SI. Bacterial cells non-incubated with antimicrobials and culture medium without bacteria or antimicrobials were used as control. After exposure time, bacterial cultures were centrifuged at 4600gduring 15 min. The supernatants were removed and the bacterial cell pellets were washed three times with phosphate buffer solution (PBS) under the same conditions. The evaluation of the effectiveness of the PBS washing process in removing remaining silver that had not interacted with bacteria was previously demonstrated.28Then, the bacterial pellets were resuspended in PBS and the samples were stored at 4 °C until use. To estimate the concentration of bacteria in samples, the optical density of bacterial cultures was measured with a UV-vis spectrophotometer (UV-2004 Lan Optics) at 600 nm.

Determination of the Minimum Inhibitory Concentration (MIC) and the Minimum Bactericidal Concentration (MBC) of silver and apramycin was performed according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) guidelines.29Escherichia colisuspensions were prepared in tubes containing physiological solution (0.9% NaCl) at a concentration corresponding to a 0.5 McFarland standard (1.5 × 108CFU mL−1). Bacteria were exposed to two-fold serial concentrations of silver(i) (0.06–64 mg L−1), 10 nm silver nanoparticles (0.06–16 mg L−1) or apramycin (4–1024 mg L−1) in MHB + 2% Tween 80, in a 96-well microdilution plate. The microplates were incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. Bacteria without exposure to antimicrobials were used as positive controls, whereas incubation medium MHB + 2% Tween 80 and suspensions of silver or antibiotic (without exposure to bacteria) were used as negative controls. The experiments were performed in triplicate. MIC was defined as the minimum concentration that inhibited bacterial growth and corresponded to the absence of turbidity in the wells after incubation. To determine MBCs, aliquots from wells in which bacterial growth was inhibited were collected, seeded on a MH plate and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. After incubation, MBC results were interpreted by observing qualitative bacterial growth on the plates. MBC is the lowest concentration of an antimicrobial agent that results in killing 99.9% of the bacteria, corresponding to the absence of bacterial growth on the plates.

The checkerboard procedure was performed according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) guidelines29,30to evaluate the bactericidal activity of apramycin and silver antimicrobial combinations and the possible occurrence of synergistic effects. Inoculum ofE. colibacteria was prepared as previously described. Using a 96-well plate, two-fold serial dilutions of silver(i) (0.25–32 mg L−1) or silver nanoparticles (0.125–16 mg L−1) were prepared in horizontal rows, and two-fold serial dilutions of apramycin (0.25–64 mg L−1) were prepared in vertical rows. All antimicrobials were diluted in MHB + 2% Tween 80 medium. The plates were prepared well-by-well to obtain a single plate in which both antimicrobial agents were cross-diluted. Afterwards, bacterial inoculum was added to each well. A positive control (bacteria without exposure to antimicrobials) and negative controls (MHB + 2% Tween 80, silver or antibiotic) were evaluated. The microplates were incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. After incubation, results were interpreted by visually observing the well turbidity and the Fractional Inhibitory Concentration Index (FICI) was determined. Details of determination and interpretation of FICI are included in the SI. The Fractional Bactericidal Concentration Index (FBCI) was determined from the FICI results. Aliquots from wells in which bacterial growth was inhibited were collected, seeded on an MH plate and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. After incubation, results were interpreted by observing qualitative bacterial growth on the plates and the FBCI was determined (details in the SI).

Aliquots of 100 μL of bacterial suspensions were subjected to centrifugation (Thermo Heraeus Multifuge X1R, equipped with a swigging bucket rotor, Walthman, USA) for 20 min at 10 000gto remove the PBS medium. 500 μL of HNO3(69–70% w/v) and 100 μL of H2O2(30% v/v) were added to the resulting pellet and samples were digested for 24 h at room temperature and shaken at 124 rpm. After digestion, the volume was made up to 10 mL with 1% HNO3(v/v) and the content of total silver was quantified by ICP-MS. Five replicates of each sample were analysed.

Bacterial cell suspensions obtained from the exposure experiments with silver and/or antibiotic were analysed by SC-ICP-MS (instrument and data acquisition details included in Table S1) to detect and quantify silver in bacteria. Aliquots of 100 μL of bacterial suspensions were subjected to centrifugation for 20 min at 10 000gto remove the PBS medium. The obtained pellet was resuspended in ultrapure water to obtain a cell number concentration of approximately 108cells L−1. Suspensions were measured in the single cell mode using the Syngistix Single Cell-Application module version 2.5 (PerkinElmer Inc.). The recorded signals were processed by applying a 5-sigma threshold calculated as five times the square root of the mean baseline intensity of the time scan.31,32Nebulization efficiency was calculated according to the methods developed by Paceet al.33by using the ultra-uniform gold nanoparticle standard described in the SI. Similar results were obtained for the frequency and the size methods (60.5 ± 0.3% and 57.1 ± 0.3%, respectively,n= 6). The sample flow rate was measured gravimetrically.

Bacterial cell suspensions from the exposure experiments with silver and/or antibiotic were observed by SEM and TEM (instrument details included in the SI). Bacterial samples were subjected to centrifugation for 20 min at 10 000gto remove the PBS medium. The obtained pellet was washed under the same conditions with 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB), which was prepared from 0.2 M NaH2PO4and 0.2 M Na2PO4. Afterwards, the cells were collected, fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M PB (pH = 7.4) for 24 h, washed with 0.1 M PB and post-fixed with 2% osmium tetroxide in 0.1 M PB for 1 h. Finally, the samples were dehydrated with ethanol. For SEM observation, samples were carbon-coated. For TEM observation, uranyl acetate staining was performed, followed by embedding in epoxy resin, cutting to ultra-thin sections and a final lead citrate staining.

The bacteriostatic and bactericidal activity (MIC and MBC, respectively) of silver(i), silver nanoparticles and apramycin was determined by the dilution method.Table 2shows the MIC and MBC results obtained againstE. coliATCC 25922. In general, the MBC is the same or at most one or two dilutions higher than the MIC. The obtained results showed this behaviour. It was observed that the MIC and MBC of silver(i) were lower than those obtained for silver nanoparticles and apramycin.

After evaluating the individual bacteriostatic and bactericidal activity of each antimicrobial agent, apramycin was combined with silver(i) or silver nanoparticles to evaluate the bactericidal activity of each combination and the possible occurrence of synergistic effects. Checkerboard is a method based on the method for MIC and MBC determination, but in this case, two-fold serial concentrations of each antimicrobial were combined. First, bacteriostatic effects for the combinations of apramycin–silver(i) and apramycin–silver nanoparticles againstE. colibacteria were determined (Fig. 1). Wells with no turbidity and therefore, no visible bacterial growth, are shown in grey, whereas white cells indicate the presence of visual bacterial growth and so, these combinations have no bacteriostatic effects. Calculations of FICs and FICI are detailed in the SI. For the apramycin–silver(i) combination (Fig. 1a), the results showed that indifferent bacteriostatic effects were obtained in many of the cases studied, which means that the activity of two antimicrobials does not differ from the activity of the most effective individual antimicrobial. On the other hand, the combination of certain concentrations of apramycin with silver(i) resulted in the occurrence of synergistic bacteriostatic effects, meaning that the activity of two antimicrobials is significantly higher than the most effective individual antimicrobial. As a result, a decrease in apramycin concentration up to 8-fold and up to 16-fold for silver(i) concentration was observed. Likewise, the combination of certain concentrations of apramycin with silver nanoparticles (Fig. 1b) produced synergism and up to 4- and 128-fold reduction in the concentration of apramycin and silver nanoparticles, respectively.

In addition, bactericidal effects for the same antimicrobial combinations againstE. coliwere determined (Fig. 2) by observing the presence of bacterial growth on the plates. The bacterial growth is indicated with an asterisk. Calculations of FBCs and FBCI are detailed in the SI. In this study, the occurrence of synergistic bactericidal effects was also demonstrated for both antimicrobial combinations. For the apramycin–silver(i) combination (Fig. 2a), it allowed to reduce up to 8 and 16 times the concentration of apramycin and silver(i), respectively. For the apramycin–silver nanoparticle combination (Fig. 2b), the reduction was up to 4 and 8 times for apramycin and silver nanoparticle concentration, respectively.

In order to help elucidate the bactericidal role played by apramycin and silver in the bactericidal mechanism, it is necessary to quantify silver accumulated by bacteria during the incubation process. The uptake of silver(i) and silver nanoparticles byE. colibacteria was quantified after their exposure to different apramycin–silver combinations, as well as to individual antimicrobials alone, following the conditions described previously. To avoid bacterial death, bacteria were exposed to lower concentrations than those that produced synergistic bacteriostatic and bactericidal effects. In order to study if apramycin concentration contributes to a higher accumulation of silver in bacteria, two different combinations of apramycin–silver(i) and apramycin–silver nanoparticles were studied. In these combinations, Ag(i) and silver nanoparticle concentrations remained constant (0.5 and 2.0 mg L−1, respectively), while apramycin concentration was varied (0.25 and 2.0 mg L−1).

Bacterial samples previously diluted with ultrapure water were analysed by SC-ICP-MS to detect the accumulated silver in individual bacteria. In addition, bacterial and incubation medium control samples were measured.Fig. 3shows the silver mass per bacteria distributions fromE. colibacteria exposed to silver(i) and apramycin–silver(i) combinations. Under the corresponding measurement conditions, the element mass per particle limit of detection was 13 ag of silver. For bacteria exposed to silver(i) (Fig. 3a), a first large distribution of bacteria accumulating small amounts of silver and a second small distribution of bacteria that accumulated higher amounts of silver were observed. In the presence of apramycin, the first distribution corresponding to bacteria accumulating small amounts of silver disappeared (Fig. 3b and c). On the other hand, the magnitude of the second distribution corresponding to bacteria accumulating higher amounts of silver increased when the apramycin concentration was lower (Fig. 3b) whereas the magnitude decreased for the highest apramycin concentration (Fig. 3c). These results demonstrated the influence of apramycin concentration in relation to accumulated silver.

Likewise,Fig. 4shows the silver mass per bacteria distributions fromE. colibacteria exposed to silver nanoparticles and their combinations with apramycin. Distribution with a greater magnitude was observed in both apramycin-containing samples (Fig. 4b and c) compared to bacteria exposed only to silver nanoparticles (Fig. 4a). In these cases, the influence of apramycin on silver accumulation was also demonstrated.

In addition, the percentage of bacteria that accumulated silver at detectable levels in comparison to total bacteria present in the suspension was determined.Fig. 5shows the fraction of bacteria containing silver above 13 ag (mass per particle limit of detection). When apramycin is added at the lowest concentration (0.25 mg L−1) to silver(i) and silver nanoparticles, it was observed that the fraction of silver-containing bacteria was similar to those obtained in the absence of apramycin (approximately 3–5%). On the contrary, when apramycin concentration was increased to 2 mg L−1, the fraction of silver-containing bacteria increased significantly up to approximately 15 and 30% in the case of the combination with silver nanoparticles and silver(i), respectively.

Furthermore, from direct SC-ICP-MS analysis, total silver accumulated by bacteria was determined. The results are expressed as silver concentration in the original bacterial suspension. The results obtained by SC-ICP-MS were compared with those obtained by ICP-MS after acid digestion (Table 3). The percentage of silver uptake by bacteria in relation to the initial silver concentration exposed during incubation was also obtained. The results showed once again the influence of apramycin presence on silver uptake by bacteria, except for the combination of silver nanoparticles with the lowest apramycin concentration (0.25 mg L−1), where silver uptake was similar to that obtained in the absence of apramycin. Application of at-test (95% confidence level) showed that the direct analysis by SC-ICP-MS provided similar results to those obtained by ICP-MS after acid digestion of the samples. No significant differences were found between both methods (p> 0.05).

In order to detect the possible bacterial wall alterations as a consequence of apramycin or silver presence, samples were observed by SEM and TEM.Fig. 6shows the SEM images of bacterial control and bacteria exposed to apramycin and silver nanoparticles, individually and combined. Control bacteria presented a normal bacillus shape, smooth wall surface and cellular integrity (Fig. 6a). On the contrary, in the presence of apramycin (Fig. 6b), although bacteria preserved their bacillus shape, their walls were damaged in most of them because of the antibiotic bactericidal effect. The wall surface became rough and presented holes and gaps (marked with red circles). Likewise, in the presence of silver nanoparticles (Fig. 6c), bacterial walls were damaged and become rough. Finally, after exposure to the combination of apramycin–silver nanoparticles (Fig. 6d), bacteria were severely damaged and rough and fragmented walls and the occurrence of holes and gaps were observed.

Fig. 7shows the TEM images for samples discussed above. Moreover, TEM images for bacteria exposed to ionic silver individually can be found in the SI (Fig. S1). Control bacteria had an intact double membrane and a homogeneous cytoplasm inside bacteria, as well as their bacillus shape, as was observed by SEM. On the contrary, in the presence of apramycin (Fig. 7b), a significant structural damage was observed. The double membrane was completely broken and the cytoplasm had been released. Alterations of the bacterial shape or irregularities in the membrane structure were observed. Likewise, in the presence of ionic silver and silver nanoparticles (Fig. S1,7c and d), double membrane rupture and membrane irregularities were also observed, as well as cytoplasm shrinkage and heterogeneity (indicated by arrows). Finally, after exposure to the combination of apramycin–silver nanoparticles (Fig. 7e and f), same damage and alterations described for individual antimicrobial exposure were observed, as well as double membrane rupture and cytoplasm leakage through membrane ruptured areas (marked with red circles).

In this study, it was showed that silver(i), 10 nm silver nanoparticles and apramycin have individual antibacterial activity againstE. coliATCC 25922 with MIC and MBC values of 8 μg mL−1for silver(i) and 16 μg mL−1for silver nanoparticles and apramycin. These results indicate that silver(i) has a higher bacteriostatic and bactericidal activity againstE. colibacteria. Because the antimicrobial bactericidal effect depends on factors such as culture medium, bacterial strain, inoculum initial concentration, as well as nanoparticle concentration, size or coating, different MIC and MBC values for silver(i), silver nanoparticles and apramycin are reported in the literature. Silver(i) values againstE. coliATCC 25922 in MH medium range from 1 to 31 μg mL−1,34–36which are consistent with those obtained in this study. Likewise, MIC values for silver nanoparticles with different size and coating againstE. colivary between 0.25 and 100 μg mL−1,37,38which are in agreement with our results. Finally, in relation to apramycin, there are no clinical MIC and MBC criteria established by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) or the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (EUROCAST). Some authors have evaluated apramycin bactericidal activity against a large number ofE. colistrains, generally non-reference strains, and compared it with other aminoglycosides. They obtained MIC values between 1 and 256 μg mL−1,18,39–41suggesting an epidemiological cut-off value of 16–32 μg mL−1, which agrees with our results. Comparing apramycin with other aminoglycosides (amikacin, gentamicin and tobramycin), Juhaset al.found that apramycin had higher bactericidal effects against the same strains than other aminoglycosides.18These results could make the combination of apramycin with silver based materials an attractive alternative to fight against AMR.

To improve the knowledge about the mechanism of action associated with the bactericidal activity of antimicrobial combinations and the individual role played by each antimicrobial, an analytical methodology based on SC-ICP-MS was applied in this work. Silver accumulated by bacteria during the incubation process was quantified, and silver mass per bacteria distributions and percentage of bacteria containing silver were obtained. In addition, bacterial structural alterations as a consequence of apramycin or silver presence were observed by SEM and TEM. Taking into account the results obtained through this study, the following conclusions were reached.

After combining silver(i) with a lower apramycin concentration, bacteria accumulated 32% of the silver, whereas in its absence, silver uptake was 21% (Table 3). Regarding the fraction of bacteria accumulating silver (Fig. 5), no differences were observed in the presence or absence of apramycin (4–5%). These facts would indicate that the presence of apramycin promotes the uptake of higher amounts of silver per bacteria. This deduction would be in agreement with silver mass per bacteria distributions, where a decrease in the first distribution consisting of bacteria accumulating small amounts of silver was observed. Likewise, an increase in the second one, corresponding to bacteria accumulating higher amounts of silver (Fig. 3b), was observed in comparison with apramycin absence (Fig. 3a).

On the other hand, for the combination of silver(i) with a higher apramycin concentration, silver uptake decreased significantly from 21% to 10% (Table 3), whereas the fraction of bacteria accumulating silver increased from 5% to, approximately, 30% (Fig. 5). In both combinations of silver(i) and apramycin, as seen in TEM and SEM images, apramycin and silver(i) produce wall alterations and holes which would facilitate the internalization of silver and other molecules of apramycin, justifying the increase in the fraction of bacteria accumulating silver and silver accumulation. This mechanism of wall disruption has been previously observed by other authors after the evaluation of aminoglycosides (gentamicin and tobramycin) againstPseudomonas aeruginosa.22,24,44,45On the other hand, when bacterial wall damage is too large, cytoplasm leakage could occur, and therefore, a loss of the previously accumulated silver could take place. This fact would justify the decrease in silver uptake obtained by SC-ICP-MS, because released silver would be lost during centrifugation in the sample preparation step, and consequently, the silver quantification would be underestimated.

After analysing these results, an action mechanism associated with the synergistic bactericidal effects of silver nanoparticles and apramycin combination can be proposed. Initially, silver nanoparticles could interact with bacterial wall and were adsorbed on it, resulting in membrane alteration and greater permeability. During nanoparticle-wall interaction, nanoparticles could release silver ions, which would, in turn, lead to further wall disruption. In a previous study, silver accumulated by bacteria was found to be dissolved and particulate silver when using 10 nm AgNPs as the ones used here, which would support the hypothesis of silver released from nanoparticles.26In addition, in the mechanism proposed above, the wall alteration would allow the introduction of apramycin and silver, which would bind to ribosomes, inhibit protein synthesis and produce misfolded proteins.20,46,50This, in turn, would promote further apramycin and silver introduction, and the individual action mechanisms would be activated, leading to severe damage and bacterial death. Davis B. D51demonstrated how the action of aminoglycoside antibiotics is concentration-dependent, supporting the mechanism of action described here. This indicates that at low concentrations, apramycin could only cause mistranslation of mRNA, resulting in a small amount of defective proteins that would not be sufficient to contribute any effect to the antibiotic silver combination. In a previous study, it was shown that a silver fraction was internalized by bacteria after their exposure to silver nanoparticles, supporting the hypothesis of silver internalization through membranes.28However, kinetic studies should be considered to establish the sequence of events. Likewise, Vazquez-Muñozet al.suggested that the antimicrobial activity of silver nanoparticle–antibiotic combination is based, mainly, on cell structure alteration instead of direct nanoparticle–antibiotic interaction,21which is also in concordance with that suggested in the present study.

In conclusion, in this study, a combination of SC-ICP-MS with microscopy and microbiological techniques is applied for the first time to quantify the silver accumulated in bacteria exposed to different combinations of silver(i), silver nanoparticles and apramycin, as well as to determine the damage caused to bacteria. This methodology has allowed the evaluation and determination of the synergistic bactericidal effect of silver–apramycin combinations, as well as the action mechanisms related to these bactericidal effects. The combination of silver with apramycin has resulted in the occurrence of synergistic effects, allowing the reduction of silver(i), silver nanoparticle and apramycin concentrations while preserving the individual bactericidal effects of each antimicrobial. The silver(i)–apramycin combination has allowed a greater reduction in both antimicrobials when compared to the combination with silver nanoparticles. On the other hand, generally the presence of apramycin has promoted the silver uptake by bacteria.

These results confirm that the combination of silver-based materials and conventional antibiotics could be a promising alternative strategy to fight against AMR. Specifically, the combination of apramycin and silver based materials could be applied to reduce the high amounts of antibiotics used nowadays. Likewise, this study model could also be applied to the determination of bactericidal action mechanisms of combinations of nanoparticles with other agents, as conventional antibiotics or disinfectants.