Athletes report using cannabidiol (CBD), a non-intoxicating constituent ofCannabis sativaL., to enhance post-exercise recovery and manage other health conditions (e.g., poor sleep, anxiety, concussion). However, whether CBD influences performance-related outcomes remains unclear. This study investigated the acute effects of a low, nutraceutical (50 mg) and moderate, therapeutic (300 mg) dose of CBD on physiological and subjective responses to endurance exercise in trained runners.

A randomised double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover clinical trial was conducted at the University of Sydney between 24th October 2022 and 4th March 2024. Twenty-five participants (16 male;V˙O2max= 53.1 ± 7.5 mL·min kg−1) received either 0 (placebo), 50 or 300 mg CBD 1.5 h prior to completing a 60-min, submaximal intensity (~ 70%V˙O2max) treadmill run (RUN 1), followed by an incremental run to volitional exhaustion (RUN 2). Neither dose of CBD altered subjective responses (i.e., affective valence, enjoyment, perceived exertion, pain) during RUN 1, nor enjoyment, mood or anxiety following RUN 1 and 2 (p’s > 0.05). CBD also had a limited effect on exercise physiology and performance, with heart rate, exercise efficiency (i.e.,V˙O2),V˙O2peakand time to exhaustion (TTE) unchanged relative to placebo (p’s > 0.05). However, 300 mg CBD decreased the respiratory exchange ratio during RUN 1 (p= 0.030) and 50 mg CBD increased blood glucose upon cessation of RUN 2(p= 0.003), compared to placebo. There was no effect of either dose on plasma concentrations of muscle damage markers, creatine and myoglobin (p’s > 0.05), but a Treatment x Time x Sex interaction was identified for the gastrointestinal barrier function marker, lipopolysaccharide, with post hoc analyses revealing higher concentrations in females Post RUN 2 on 50 mg (p= 0.032), but not 300mg CBD (p= 1.000), compared to placebo.

CBD (50 mg, 300 mg; acute) does not appear to alter the subjective experience of submaximal intensity exercise, impact endurance performance (i.e., TTE) or have compelling effects on physiological responses to exercise. Use of CBD by athletes is, therefore, unlikely to be ergolytic or ergogenic at low to moderate doses.

The trial was approved by the Sydney Local Health District’s Human Research Ethics Committee (2021/ETH11945; X21-0392) and registered prospectively with the Australia and New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (ACTRN12622000717752).

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40798-025-00895-w.

In this randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover trial of 25 trained runners, neither 50 mg nor 300 mg of CBD influenced affective valence, exercise enjoyment, perceived exertion or pain during submaximal intensity running.

CBD had a minimal impact on physiological responses to submaximal and maximal intensity running and did not enhance or impair endurance performance.

This suggests that low to moderate doses of CBD are unlikely to be ergogenic or ergolytic in trained athletes.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s40798-025-00895-w.

Cannabidiol (CBD) is one of over 140 terpenophenolic compounds, collectively termed ‘phytocannabinoids’, that are found withinCannabis sativaL. [1]. Unlike the principal phytocannabinoid, Δ9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), CBD does not induce the sedation, euphoria or cognitive and psychomotor impairment typically associated with cannabis use [2–4]. It does, however, interact with a diverse suite of pharmacological targets and possesses considerable therapeutic potential [5]. CBD has demonstrated efficacy in treating seizures associated with rare forms of paediatric epilepsy [6–8] and is currently approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for this indication (under the brand name ‘Epidiolex®’) [9]. CBD has also demonstrated anxiolytic effects in recent clinical trials [10–12], as well as anti-inflammatory, neuroprotective, and analgesic effects in preclinical studies [13]. These therapeutic effects are typically observed with oral (or human equivalent oral) doses between ~ 300–1500 mg [14] and are of increasing interest to various clinical and non-clinical populations [15,16].

Athletes, in particular, have taken an interest in CBD as a means to facilitate recovery and manage health conditions [17,18]. Twenty-six percent (26%) of professional rugby players surveyed in a recent study (n= 517), reported either currently using or having previously used CBD [18]. The most common reasons for use were to enhance recovery (80%), improve sleep (78%), reduce anxiety (32%), and for “other” medical purposes (14%; e.g., managing concussion). The use of CBD among professional athletes has been facilitated by its removal from the World Anti-Doping Agency’s (WADA) Prohibited List in 2018 [19] and increased commercial availability [20]. While most athletes are ineligible to access registered CBD medicines (e.g., Epidiolex®), a wide range of unregistered products (‘nutraceuticals’) containing lower doses of CBD (e.g., ~ 10–150 mg·mL−1) have become readily accessible online and over-the-counter in many countries (i.e., USA, UK, EU) [20].

Despite its widespread use, research on the topic of CBD in the context of sport and exercise remains limited. Most studies conducted to date have investigated the effects of CBD on post-exercise recovery, yielding unclear results [21–29]. An improved understanding of CBD’s effects on performance related outcomes, as well as physiological and subjective responses to exercise, is required to determine its utility within the sporting context and inform the ongoing evaluation of its status on WADA’s Prohibited List.

Accordingly, in 2020, our research team conducted a pilot randomised controlled trial investigating the acute effects of CBD on responses to endurance exercise [30]. In this exploratory study, nine endurance-trained males (V˙O2max: 57.4 mL·kg·min−1) received 300 mg CBD or placebo, in a double-blind, crossover design, 1.5 h prior to completing a submaximal intensity treadmill run (60 min; ~ 70%V˙O2max) followed by an incremental run to exhaustion. Although this pilot study was not formally powered to detect significance, CBD demonstrated some effects that were deemed worthy of further investigation.

First, and perhaps most notably, CBD appeared to increase positive feelings (i.e., affect) during submaximal intensity exercise. This observation is noteworthy as mood and affective states have been demonstrated to influence performance across various modalities [31–33]. Exercise enjoyment may also be a mediating factor for adherence (i.e. to training, exercise interventions) [34,35] as greater enjoyment has been demonstrated to increase the likelihood of performing exercise [36]. Second, CBD appeared to increase submaximal (V˙O2) and peak (V˙O2peak) rates of oxygen consumption. These measures are important physiological determinants of endurance performance [37,38]; however, no overt difference in time to exhaustion (TTE) was observed. Given the pilot study was conducted in a small sample of male athletes, further research investigating the effects of CBD on responses to exercise is warranted.

The aim of the present study was to investigate the effects of CBD on physiological and subjective responses to exercise in a larger sample of male and female athletes. Two acute doses of CBD were investigated—one that has previously demonstrated therapeutic potential (300 mg) (e.g., in treating situational anxiety and other conditions [16]) and a lower dose (50 mg) that more closely resembles those available to athletes [20]. It was hypothesised that CBD would: (1) increase positive affect during submaximal exercise, and (2) have only subtle effects on physiological responses to exercise that do not affect endurance performance.

A randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover, dose-ranging clinical trial was conducted at the Charles Perkins Centre—Royal Prince Alfred Hospital Clinic (Sydney, Australia) in accordance with the standards of ethics outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki (1983). The trial was approved by the Sydney Local Health District’s Human Research Ethics Committee (2021/ETH11945; X21-0392) and registered prospectively with the Australia and New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry (ACTRN12622000717752).

Healthy males and females who: (1) were aged between 18 and 45 years; (2) reported running an average of ≥ 40 km wk−1; and (3) had not used cannabis and/or cannabinoids in the last three months were recruited. Full eligibility criteria, including exclusion criteria, are available in Supplementary File 1.

Volunteers completed an online questionnaire and a telephone interview. Those suitable to continue subsequently attended an in-person screen where they were informed of the experimental procedures before providing written informed consent and being assessed for eligibility by the trial coordinator (A.S.) and trial physician (N.L.).

Eligible participants then provided basic demographic information, including anthropometric measures (i.e., height, weight, body composition (BC-418; Tanita®, Tokyo, Japan)), and performed a modified Balke treadmill test [39] to assess theirV˙O2max. The test was completed at a fixed speed (10 km·h−1) and an initial gradient of 0%; the gradient then increased by 2% every 3 min until participants reached volitional exhaustion. Participants received feedback and encouragement to ensure they attained maximal exertion. Respiratory gases were sampled continuously throughout the test. The average rate of oxygen consumption (V˙O2) over the final 30 s of each completed increment was also calculated, and the linear relationship betweenV˙O2and treadmill gradient determined, to set the exercise intensity during treatment sessions [30].V˙O2maxwas taken as the highest averageV˙O2attained over a 30 s period.

Participants were randomised to one of six possible treatment orders, together comprising a balanced Latin Square, in a 1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio using a pre-populated randomisation schedule. The schedule was randomly generated in four balanced blocks of six (and one ‘block’ of one) by an independent researcher using an online random number generator (www.sealedenvelope.com).

Each treatment order was linked to a unique identification code and these codes were assigned to participants in a sequential order at the beginning of their first treatment session.

Only the aforementioned researcher, a second independent researcher, and the pharmacists dispensing the treatments could access the randomisation schedule. None of these individuals had contact with participants or further involvement in the trial.

The investigational product (MediCabilis™ 100 CBD Isolate; BOD Australia Ltd, Sydney, Australia) was an oral formulation of plant-derived CBD (100 mg·mL−1) in medium chain triglyceride (MCT) oil. It contained < 0.01 mg·mL−1THC and no other minor cannabinoids or terpenes. The placebo was an equivalent volume of MCT oil only. Both treatments were manufactured at GMP-licenced facilities and stored at the RPAH Pharmacy.

Pharmacists dispensed 3.0 mL of oil providing either 0, 50 or 300 mg CBD (Placebo; CBD50; CBD300) into two oral syringes (i.e., 0.5 mL in one and 2.5 mL in the other). The syringes were amber in colour and carried no treatment identifying information.

Each participant completed three treatment sessions (i.e., one session per dose), with each session separated by a washout period ≥ 7 days. Participants were instructed to maintain their usual diet and exercise patterns and avoid using cannabis, cannabinoids and illicit drugs throughout their involvement in the trial.

Prior to each session, participants were instructed to: (1) avoid anti-inflammatory medication (> 4 days), alcohol (> 24 h), moderate to strenuous exercise (> 24 h), caffeine (> 12 h) and foods that may affect CBD metabolism (i.e., grapefruit and Seville oranges) (> 12 h); (2) keep a record of all foods and fluids consumed (24 h); (3) consume a pre-packaged standardised evening meal (~ 60 kJ·kg−1); (4) fast overnight (~ 10 h); (5) spend ≥ 8 h in bed, (6) collect a first-morning urine sample; and (7) consume 500 mL of water before arriving at the laboratory. Individuals received a copy of their diet record from the first treatment session and were instructed to replicate their dietary intake before each subsequent session.

Participants arrived at the laboratory in a fasted state between 07:00 and 08:30 am, with arrival times replicated across sessions to avoid diurnal variation. Upon arrival, participants were asked to verbally acknowledge compliance with the standardisation procedures, prior to completing a urine drug screen (UDS) to verify cannabis abstinence (Drug Check ® NxStep OnSite Urine Drug Test) and a urine pregnancy test, if applicable (Alere ™ hCG Combo Cassette). Participants’ first-morning urine samples were also analysed to assess hydration status (Urine Specific Gravity [USG]; Palette Digital Refractometer, ATAGO, USA). If USG was > 1.024, likely indicating hypohydration [40] a second on-site sample was collected and analysed (note: all specimens were < 1.024).

The remainder of the test session was divided into seven blocks: Baseline (pre-treatment), Pre RUN 1 (60–90 min post treatment), RUN 1 (90–150 min), Post RUN 1 (150–170 min), RUN 2 (180–~ 200 min), Post RUN 2 (~ 200–220 min) and 1h Post RUN 2 (~ 260–280 min). The specific assessments completed during each block are summarised in Fig.1and detailed below (see ‘Primary Outcome’ and ‘Secondary Outcomes’).

Following the Baseline assessments, participants received a standardised breakfast meal consisting of two slices of raisin toast (TipTop® Café Style Thick Cut) and up to 30 g of jam (Cottee’s®), 20 g of margarine (Flora® Proactive Original) and up to 500 mL water, consumed ad libitum during the first session, with individual intakes recorded and replicated across subsequent sessions. Nutritional values were calculated based on the information panel provided on the packaging of each item. Treatments were then self-administered (via oral ingestion), immediately following the consumption of a high-strength mint (Fisherman’s Friend®) intended to mask any flavour differences [41]. Participants were observed during this period to verify compliance.

Exercise testing was initiated 1.5 h after treatment administration and performed on a motorised treadmill (Trackmaster® TMX428CP) as described below. Participants were not permitted to consume fluid during exercise but received up to 500 mL of water on completion of the Post RUN 1 and 2 assessments, with individual intakes recorded and replicated across sessions.

At the end of each treatment session, participants completed an adverse event (AE) checklist and indicated which treatment they thought they had received and their confidence in this guess on a 4-point Likert scale (1 = ‘not at all’ to 4 = ’extremely’).

Participants ran for 60 min at a fixed speed (10 km·h−1) and individualised gradient designed to elicit an intensity of ~ 70%V˙O2max.There was no communication between the participant and researcher/s throughout this time, except to facilitate data collection. Measures were collected at precisely the same time across sessions to minimise any influence of metabolic drift [42].

Thirty minutes after cessation of RUN 1, participants performed an incremental test to volitional exhaustion. The treadmill was set at a fixed speed (10 km·h−1) and an initial gradient of 0%; the gradient then increased by 2% every 3 min until volitional exhaustion. Participants did not receive information on elapsed time or encouragement during the test.

Affective valence was assessed at 20-min intervals throughout RUN 1 using the 11-point Feelings Scale (FS) [43], where – 5 = “feeling very bad” and + 5 = “feeling very good”. Participants were instructed to rate the emotional component of their experience, only.

A brief summary of methods is summarised below. Detailed methods of each secondary outcome can be found in Supplementary File 1.

Heart rate (HR)using a chest-strap monitor (Polar H10 HR Sensor, Polar Electro, Finland).

Exercise enjoymentusing the short-form (8-item) Physical Activity Enjoyment Scale (PACES) (score range 8–54), where higher scores represent greater enjoyment [44].

Ratings of perceived exertion (RPE)using the 15-point Borg Scale, where 6 = “no exertion” and 20 = “maximal exertion” [45].

Whole body painusing a 100 mm visual analog scale (VAS), where 0 = “no pain” and 100 = “extreme pain”.

Capillary blood glucoseconcentration (AccuCheck ® Performa, Roche, Switzerland).

Capillary blood lactateconcentration (Lactate Scout 4, EKF Diagnostics, United Kingdom).

Expired respiratory breath-by-breath measurements ofV˙O2, expired CO2(V˙CO2), respiratory exchange ratio (RER), respiratory rate (RR), tidal volume (VT) and minute ventilation (V˙E) were collected using an Ultima PFX® pulmonary function system (MGC Diagnostics®) with a PreVent™ flow pneumotach (MCG Diagnostics®) and mouthpiece. RUN 1 measures were collected between 24–32, 37–45 and 50–58 min and averaged across each collection period prior to analysis. RUN 2 measures were collected after the participant’s HR reached 90% HRmax.V˙O2peakwas taken as the highest averageV˙O2attained over 30 s; all other peak respiratory outcomes were taken as the average during the aforementioned period.

Rates of carbohydrate (CHOox) and fat oxidation (FATox), as well as total energy expenditure (EE) during RUN 1 were calculated using the equations of Frayn [73], assuming negligible protein oxidation and energy equivalents of 16.75 kJ·g−1of carbohydrate and 37.68 kJ·g−1of fat.

Exercise enjoymentusing the long-form (18-item) PACES [46] (score range: 18–126), where higher scores represent greater enjoyment. Participants were told that their Pre RUN 1 responses should reflect their attitude toward running in general.

Nude body mass(BC-418; Tanita®, Tokyo, Japan) to estimate sweat loss. Water intake and urinary losses were also measured and factored into these estimations.

State anxietyusing the short-form (6-item) State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI-S) [47] (score range 6 –24), where higher values represent higher anxiety.

Mood(i.e., ‘Tension’, ‘Depression’, ‘Fatigue’, ‘Confusion’, ‘Anger’, ‘Vigour’, ‘Esteem’, ‘Total Mood Disturbance’) using the short-form (41-item) Profile of Mood States (POMS) [48],49(score range 0–28), where higher values represent stronger feelings.

Gastrointestinal comfort(i.e., ‘Abdominal Pain’, ‘Nausea’, ‘Heartburn’, ‘Regurgitation’, ‘Belching’, ‘Bloating’, ‘Flatulence’) using a 100 mm VAS, where 0 = “not at all” and 100 = “extremely “for each item.

Plasma cannabinoidconcentrations using ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry and previously validated methods [50].

Serum lipopolysaccharide (LPS)concentrations using the limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL) chromogenic endpoint assay.

Serum myoglobin (Myo) and creatine kinase (CK)concentrations using commercially available enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits.

Muscle sorenessusing an 11-point scale, where 1 = “no soreness” and + 10 = “extreme soreness”.

Seated HR and blood pressure (BP) were also measured at Baseline, Pre- and Post RUN 1 and Post RUN 2 using an automated sphygmomanometer (OMRON®, M2 Basic). Measurements were taken in duplicate, or triplicate if systolic BP values differed by > 15 mmHg, and averaged prior to analysis [51].

Single-point continuous variables were analysed using random-intercept linear mixed-effects models that included Treatment (categorical: Placebo, CBD50, CBD300) as a fixed effect and Participant as a random effect. Sex (categorical: Male, Female), Session (i.e., trial order) (categorical: Session 1, Session 2, Session 3) or the Treatment × Sex interaction was also included as a fixed effect if it reduced the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) value of the model. If the residuals were non-normally distributed (Shapiro–Wilk test,p< 0.05) and/or heteroscedastic (Levene test,p< 0.05), the dependent variable was square-root transformed and re-analysed (and if unimproved, log-transformed). If the variable included zeros, a small positive constant, equal to half the smallest non-zero value, was added to each value prior to transformation. If neither transformation was curative, a gamma generalised linear mixed-effects model, using a ‘log’ link, was substituted. If an appropriate gamma model could not be generated (e.g., it failed to converge, demonstrated overdispersion), the simplest model violating the fewest assumptions was used.

Serial continuous variables were analysed using the same approach, except the models: (1) had random intercepts and slopes (for Treatment varying by Participant); (2) included Time (categorical) and the Treatment × Time interaction as fixed effects; and (3) included Sex, Session or the Treatment × Sex × Time interaction as a fixed effect if it reduced the AIC value of the model. Ordinal variables were analysed using cumulative link mixed-effects (clmm) models. These models contained the same fixed and random effects structure as specified above.

Two-sided, Dunn–Šidák-corrected post hoc comparisons were used to compare estimated marginal means if a significant main or interaction effect was observed. If the effect involved Treatment, CBD50 and CBD300 were compared to placebo, only (i.e., not one another). Also, if the effect was a Time-dependent interaction, the interacting factor/s were compared at each time point (i.e., comparisons were not performed across Time to conserve power). A priori planned post hoc comparisons of FS ratings at the 40-min timepoint were also performed on each active treatment against placebo.

All statistical analyses were performed in R Studio version 4.2.0 [52] using the following packages: ‘lme4’ (lmer and glmer functions) [53] ‘lmerTest’ [54], ‘ordinal’ (clmm2 function) [55], ‘RVAideMemoire’ (Anova.clmm function) [56], ‘emmeans’ (emmeans function) [57], ‘Car’ (Anova, qqp and LeveneTest functions) [58], ‘MuMIn’ (AICc function) [59] and ‘ggplot2’ (ggplot function) [60].

Statistical significance was accepted asp< 0.05. All values are presented as Mean ± SD or Median [IQR], if normally or non-normally distributed, respectively.

Sahinovic et al. [30] reported that acute CBD (300 mg; oral) increased positive affect (i.e., FS ratings) during a 60-min submaximal intensity treadmill run (~ 70%V˙O2max) compared to placebo (Cohen’s dz= 0.71). Using a power (1-β) of 0.80, a two-sided Dunn–Šidák adjusted α of 0.025, (i.e., to account for two comparisons to placebo), and a comparable Cohen’s dzeffect of 0.70, we determined a priori that 22 participants would be required to detect a significant effect of CBD (300 mg) on FS ratings during RUN 1. A total of 25 participants were recruited to account for possible attrition.

Thirty-two volunteers signed informed consent between 24th October 2022 and 29th January 2024, of whom 25 were willing and eligible to participate in the trial (Fig.2). All 25 were randomised and included in the final sample after completing all three treatment sessions. The characteristics of these participants are summarised in Table1. Briefly, the sample was mostly male (n=16), with an average age andV˙2maxof 30 ± 7 years and 53.1 ± 7.5 mL·kg·min−1, respectively.

All but one participant, who reported spending < 8 h in bed prior to their third treatment session (7 h, CBD300), acknowledged compliance with the pre-session standardisation procedures. Sleep duration, sleep quality, hydration status (i.e., USG), pre-exercise body weight, and the laboratory conditions (i.e., temperature and humidity) did not differ significantly by Treatment (Tables2and3). On average, participants consumed 2073 ± 320 kJ, 79 ± 12 g carbohydrate, 11 ± 1 g protein and 455 ± 116 mL water for breakfast, 338 ± 120 mL water Post RUN 1, and 429 ± 117 mL Post RUN 2. Participants completed their three treatment sessions within 16 [14–22.5] days.

Plasma CBD, 7-COOH-CBD, 7-OH-CBD and 6-OH-CBD concentrations are displayed in Figs.3and4.Cmaxon CBD50 and CBD300 was 11.7 [6.7–15.3] and 143.3 [94.1–203.6] ng∙mL−1, respectively. Tmaxwas estimated to be 205 [205–205] and 205 [155–205] minutes, respectively. THC, 11-OH-THC, 11-COOH-THC and CBDV were not detected in any samples.

When subjected to further analysis, CBD, 6-OH-CBD, 7-OH-CBD and 7-COOH-CBD all demonstrated significant main effects of Treatment, Time and Treatment × Time interactions (Table3). Where Sex or Session were included in the final model, no significant Sex, Session or Treatment × Sex interaction effects were observed. Post hoc analyses of the Treatment × Time interactions revealed significant differences between all treatments at each timepoint (Supplementary File 1).

Although all treatment sessions were separated by a washout period ≥ 7 days (7 [7–10] days), there were twenty occasions where participants were found to have low (but detectable) concentrations of the CBD metabolite, 7-COOH-CBD (≤ 9.9 ng·mL−1), which has largely been demonstrated to be inactive [61], in plasma at Baseline on their second or third treatment session. Ten of these occasions were during a Placebo session (all ≤ 7.1 ng·mL−1). One participant also had very low concentrations of 6-OH-CBD at Baseline during their CBD50 session, while another had very low concentrations of CBD at Post RUN 1 during their Placebo session. Neither of these concentrations exceeded the lower limit of quantitation (LLOQ; 0.5 ng·mL−1).

FS ratings did not demonstrate a significant main effect of Treatment or a Treatment × Time interaction (Table3; Fig.5). Likewise, a priori planned post hoc comparisons of FS ratings between Placebo and CBD50 (p= 0.177) and Placebo and CBD300 (p= 0.995) at the 40-min time point of RUN 1 found no differences between the treatments. A significant main effect of Time was observed (Table3), with post hoc analyses revealing higher FS ratings at 20- compared to both 40- (p= 0.005) and 60- (p< 0.001) minutes of RUN 1.

Results of secondary analyses are presented herein. All significant main and interaction effects, as well as all post hoc comparisons by Treatment and Session (including their interactions), are described below. Post hoc comparisons by Time are described below for CK, Myo and LPS, only. All other post hoc comparisons by Time and Sex are presented in Supplementary File 1.

No significant main effects of Treatment or Treatment × Time interactions were observed for RPE, S-PACES or Pain (Table3, Fig.5). Both RPE and Pain demonstrated main effects of Time; Pain also demonstrated a main effect of Sex (Table3, Supplementary File 1).

No significant main effects of Treatment or Treatment × Time interactions were observed for HR, blood glucose, relativeV˙O2, absoluteV˙O2,V˙CO2, CHOox, FATox, EE, RR, VT,V˙Eor fluid loss (Table3; Figs.6and7). RER and blood lactate demonstrated main effects of Treatment (Table3; Figs.7and8). Post hoc analyses revealed a lower RER with CBD300 (p= 0.030) but not CBD50 (p= 0.195) compared to Placebo. No significant differences in blood lactate were observed with CBD300 (p= 0.053) or CBD50 (p= 0.599) compared to Placebo. HR,V˙CO2, RER, CHOox, FATox, EE, RR VTdemonstrated main effects of Time; absoluteV˙O2,V˙CO2, CHOox, EE, VT,V˙Eand fluid loss also demonstrated main effects of Sex (Table3, Supplementary File 1).

No significant main effects of Treatment were observed for TTE, HRpeak, relative and absoluteV˙O2peak,V˙CO2peak,RERpeak, RRpeak, VTpeak,V˙Epeakor blood lactate concentrations during RUN 2 (Table3). Blood glucose demonstrated a main effect of Treatment (Table3, Fig.9) with post hoc analyses revealing higher concentrations for CBD50 (p= 0.003) but not CBD300 (p= 0.888) compared to Placebo. RelativeV˙O2peak, absoluteV˙O2peak,VTpeak,V˙Epeak, blood lactate, and fluid loss all demonstrated a main effect of Sex (Table3, see Supplementary File 1). TTE, RRpeakandV˙Epeakalso demonstrated a main effect of Session (Table3). Post hoc analyses revealed lower TTE (p= 0.012) andV˙Epeak(p= 0.042) on Session 1 compared to Session 2. No other significant differences (including differences in RRpeak) were observed.

LPS demonstrated a main effect of Treatment, Time, a Treatment × Sex interaction and a Treatment × Time × Sex interaction (Table3, Figs.10and11). Post hoc analyses of the main effect of Treatment revealed higher concentrations of LPS with CBD50 (p= 0.013), but not CBD300 (p= 1.000), compared to Placebo. Post hoc analyses of the Treatment × Time × Sex interaction effect revealed higher LPS concentrations in females at Post RUN 2 with CBD50 compared to Placebo (p= 0.032). Post hoc analyses of the main effect of Time revealed higher LPS concentrations Post RUN 1, Post RUN 2 and 1h Post RUN 2 compared to Baseline (allp’s < 0.001). No other significant differences were observed.

No significant main effects of Treatment or Treatment × Time interactions were observed for CK or Myo (Table3, Fig.10). However, both biomarkers demonstrated significant main effects of Time. Post hoc analyses of CK revealed higher concentrations Post RUN 1, Post RUN 2 and 1h Post RUN 2 compared to Baseline (allp’s < 0.001), and higher concentrations Post RUN 2 (p= 0.001) and 1h Post RUN 2 (p= 0.017) compared to Post RUN 1. Post hoc analysis of Myo revealed higher concentrations Post RUN 1, Post RUN 2 and 1h Post RUN 2 compared to Baseline, and higher concentrations 1h Post RUN 2 compared to Post RUN 1 (allp’s < 0.001).

There was no significant main effect of Treatment or Treatment × Time interaction for resting HR, systolic BP or diastolic BP (Table3, Supplementary File 1). All three outcomes demonstrated main effects of Time; systolic BP also demonstrated a main effect of Sex (Table3, see Supplementary File 1). Diastolic BP demonstrated a main effect of Session (Table3) with post hoc analyses revealing lower values on Session 3 compared to Session 1 (p= 0.025).

There were no significant Treatment, Time or Treatment × Time interactions for STAI-S ratings (Table3, see Supplementary File 1).

Total Mood Disturbance (TMD) and all subscales of the POMS demonstrated no main effect of Treatment. Tension (p= 0.008), Anger (p= 0.005) and Depression (p= 0.008) all demonstrated Treatment × Time interactions. However, none of the post hoc analyses identified differences between the treatments. Esteem demonstrated a significant Treatment × Sex interaction effect (p= 0.014), however post hoc analyses did not identify any significant differences. Tension, Fatigue, Anger, Vigour and Esteem all demonstrated main effects of Time (see Supplementary File 1). Tension (p= 0.014), Confusion (p< 0.001) and Vigour (p= 0.030) also demonstrated main effects of Session. Post hoc analyses revealed: higher ratings of Tension (p= 0.012) and Confusion (p< 0.001) on Session 1 compared to Session 2; and higher ratings of Confusion on Session 1 compared to Session 3 (p= 0.017). No other significant differences (including differences in Vigour) were observed.

There was no main effect of Treatment or Treatment × Time interaction for exercise enjoyment, as measured by the long-form PACES (Table3, Fig.12); however, a significant main effect of Time was observed (Supplementary File 1).

Abdominal Pain demonstrated a significant Treatment × Time interaction (p= 0.028), however post hoc analyses revealed no significant differences between the treatments. There were no other significant Treatment × Time interactions for measures of gastrointestinal comfort (Table3, see Supplementary File 1). Belching and Regurgitation demonstrated main effects of Treatment with post hoc analyses revealing higher ratings of Belching for CBD300 (p= 0.043) but not CBD50 (p= 0.104) compared to Placebo, and higher ratings of Regurgitation with CBD50 (p= 0.018) but not CBD300 (p= 0.947) compared to Placebo. Belching and Nausea both demonstrated main effects of Time (Table3, Supplementary File 1).

Sleep quality and next day muscle soreness did not differ significantly by Treatment (Table3).

Eight (32%), 10 (40%) and four (16%) of the 25 participants correctly identified the treatment session where they received Placebo, CBD50 and CBD300, respectively. None were more than ‘moderately confident’ in their guess. All other responses were either incorrect (n= 37/75; 49%) or ‘unsure’ (n= 16/75; 21%).

No serious adverse events occurred, with only 10 mild adverse events reported: two on Placebo (both ‘sleepiness’), two on CBD50 (‘headache’ and ‘regurgitation/reflux’) and six on CBD300 (‘sleepiness’ (three reports), ‘sedation’, ‘rash’ and ‘bloating/abdominal pain’).

This study investigated the effects of an acute, low (50 mg) and moderate (300 mg) oral dose of CBD on physiological and subjective responses to exercise in endurance-trained athletes. This represented a more definitive test of the initial results reported in our earlier pilot study [30]. Contrary to our primary hypothesis, and in contrast to our earlier findings [30], CBD did not increase positive affect (i.e., FS ratings) during submaximal intensity running. However, in accordance with our secondary hypothesis, CBD had only modest effects on physiological parameters during exercise and no detectable effect on performance (i.e., TTE during an incremental run). These findings indicate that low and moderate doses of CBD are unlikely to have meaningful effects on endurance performance or the experience of exercise in individuals accustomed to running.

The discrepancy between the present findings and our earlier study is difficult to explain given that both studies employed very similar methods. In fact, the only major differences between the two studies were the number of treatments investigated and the inclusion of female participants. The addition of a third treatment increased the length of time that participants were involved in the trial and, therefore, the opportunity for their training status to fluctuate. Some preclinical studies have also identified sex differences in the neuropsychiatric effects of CBD [62]. However, most participants still completed their treatment sessions within a reasonable timeframe (e.g., 84% within 25 days) and no significant session- or sex-dependent differences in FS ratings were observed. It is also worth noting that participants achieved similar plasma CBD concentrations (i.e., on CBD300) in both studies (present Cmax: 143.3 [94.1–203.6] ng mL−1, pilot Cmax: 174 ± 100 ng∙mL−1), although high intra-individual variability was observed, as is typically found with CBD [14,63].

One alternate explanation is that the positive effect observed in the pilot study resulted from a Type 1 Error. Unlike the current investigation, the pilot was not designed nor formally powered to assess “effects” but rather, to determine which outcomes might be worthy of further investigation in a larger, fully powered trial. Outcomes were deemed worthy of further investigation if the 85% confidence interval (CI) around the Cohen’s dzeffect of CBD included ± 0.5 but not zero. Thus, the results of the present study, which employed a more robust statistical approach, should take precedence over those of the pilot investigation.

Of the two other studies [64],65] that have investigated the effects of CBD on affective responses to exercise, only one [64] demonstrated a positive outcome. In that study, CBD-dominant cannabis inhaled ad libitum (~ 94 mg CBD) was found to increase positive affect and exercise enjoyment during a submaximal intensity treadmill run [64]. However, it is important to recognise that this treatment also provided a low, but not negligible [66] dose of THC (~ 3.9 mg), meaning that the effect of CBD, per se, cannot be isolated. The second study administered an oral CBD isolate more comparable to that used in the present investigation and observed no measurable effect on positive affect, nor related metrics (e.g., euphoria, enjoyment)—albeit at a lower dose (150 mg) and in a recreationally active population performing self-paced endurance exercise [65]. The present study also demonstrated no effect of CBD on RPE or pain during submaximal intensity exercise, nor on mood or state anxiety after exercise. Taken together, these findings suggest that CBD is unlikely to alter affective responses to exercise, but future research investigating the effects of low doses of THC, alone and/or in combination with CBD (which may modulate its effects [67,68] may be worthwhile.

The present study also investigated the effects of CBD on a broad suite of physiological metrics. Overall, our findings demonstrate very limited effects of CBD on exercise physiology. Neither the 50 nor 300 mg dose altered HR, exercise efficiency (i.e.V˙O2) or other respiratory parameters during submaximal intensity running; nor did they affectV˙O2peak. Our findings are broadly consistent with other studies that have previously investigated the effects of CBD on physiological responses to endurance exercise [69,70]. Indeed, Gillham et al. [69] demonstrated no effect of CBD (150 mg day−1oral, 8 weeks) on HR during a 10-km cycling time trial, while Cheung et al. [70] found no effect of CBD (14.5 mg inhaled, acute) on HR,V˙O2or other respiratory parameters during both a 10 min submaximal cycle ergometer test and a 20 min time trial. Additionally, Flores et al. [71] found no effect of CBD (50 mg day−1oral;8 weeks) onV˙O2maxduring a modified Astrand treadmill test. Nonetheless, the present study did observe a decrease in RER during submaximal intensity running with CBD (300 mg), and an increase in blood glucose concentration following maximal intensity running with CBD (50 mg) (both compared to Placebo).

The first observation suggests that moderate doses of CBD (300 mg) may alter substrate metabolism during submaximal intensity running, increasing lipid and decreasing carbohydrate utilisation (without altering exercise efficiency). This is noteworthy as it has the potential to spare muscle glycogen, which may improve endurance performance [72]. However, it is important to recognise that the effect was modest (Placebo: 0.94 [0.91–0.97] vs. CBD300: 0.93 [0.90–0.96]) and possibly unlikely to be of practical significance. Indeed, the difference in total carbohydrate oxidation between treatments was estimated to be 2.6 g (i.e., 42 kJ or 0.7 kJ min−1) [73]. Interestingly, the observed decrease in RER tended to be accompanied by an increase in blood lactate concentration (p= 0.054). These observations are somewhat conflicting given that anaerobic metabolism is typically reduced at lower RERs. However, this effect could be explained by a number of factors (e.g., decreased lactate clearance, enhanced lactate shuttle mechanisms, increased reliance on anaerobic metabolism in specific muscle fibres) [74]. There is preclinical evidence to suggest that modulation of the endocannabinoid system (specifically, an agonist action at the cannabinoid 1 receptor) may alter such metabolic processes [75]. To our knowledge, however, this has not been reliably demonstrated with CBD administration.

The second observation suggests that low doses of CBD (50 mg) may alter carbohydrate metabolism (e.g., stimulate glycogenolysis, stimulate gluconeogenesis, modulate insulin activity) during maximal intensity exercise [76]. It is possible that such an effect could occur with altered adrenal responses (e.g., increased release of catecholamines, cortisol, etc.) [77]. However, markers of adrenal function were not measured in the present study. Additionally, an elevated cortisol response has only been observed with high intravenous doses of CBD (i.e., 300 mg, 600 mg) [78], not with lower, oral doses [79]. In fact, low doses of CBD are yet to demonstrate marked physiological or metabolic effects [16].

The current study also investigated the effect of CBD on TTE during an incremental (exhaustive) running task to better understand CBD effects on endurance performance. No effect of CBD, at either dose, was observed on TTE. This finding is consistent with studies that have previously investigated the effects of CBD on endurance performance [25,69–71]. Neither Gillham et al. [69] nor Cheung et al. [70] detected an effect of CBD (150 mg day−1oral, 8 weeks; 14.5 mg inhaled, acute) on performance during a cycling time trial. Likewise, Isenmann et al. [25] found no effect of CBD (60 mg day−1oral, 6 days) on 1-mile run performance. It is also worth noting that McCartney et al. [65] demonstrated no effect of CBD on run time during a self-paced 10 km run in recreationally active individuals, although this was not strictly a performance test.

Taken collectively, these findings suggest that low to moderate doses of CBD are unlikely to impact endurance performance. As such, the use of CBD in the sporting context, therapeutically or otherwise, appears unlikely to compromise endurance performance. Nonetheless, it is important to recognise that use of CBD by athletes may carry other risks. Firstly, CBD products often contain trace amounts of cannabinoids [80,81] that are currently banned by WADA for in-competition use (e.g., cannabigerol). The presence of a minor cannabinoid at any concentration and the detection of 11-COOH-THC at or above a specified threshold (180 ng mL−1in urine) constitutes an anti-doping rule violation [82]. Secondly, there is some evidence to suggest that CBD supplementation (60 mg day−1; 6 days) may inhibit exercise-induced liver activity in trained athletes following a high intensity training protocol [83]. Whether these effects are hepatotoxic remains unknown.

Finally, the present study investigated the effects of CBD on markers of muscle damage and GI barrier function. Serum concentrations of creatine kinase and myoglobin were not significantly altered with CBD, nor were subjective ratings of muscle soreness. Most studies investigating the effects of CBD on markers of muscle damage have also demonstrated no effect [21–29]; the exception being the study of Isenmann et al. [23], which reported that CBD (60 mg oral; acute) decreased blood serum concentrations of creatine kinase and myoglobin at 72 h, but not 24 or 48 h, following resistance exercise. In any case, the present findings should be interpreted with caution as the exercise protocol employed in the current investigation was not designed to elicit extensive muscle damage. It is also possible that the post-exercise period was too short to capture peak creatine kinase and myoglobin concentrations, which have been demonstrated to occur between 4–24 h [84] and 2–3 h [85] following similar (non-eccentric) treadmill-based exercise intervention, respectively.

Regarding GI barrier function, the present study demonstrated an effect of CBD (50 mg) to increase serum concentrations of LPS, specifically in female participants following maximal intensity exercise. LPS is a component of the bacterial cell membrane and a marker of intestinal permeability that often becomes elevated with intense or prolonged exercise [86], particularly with heat stress and dehydration [87,88]. It is unclear why the lower dose of CBD affected this marker in female participants only. However, it may be important to note that there was a high level of inter-individual variation in LPS concentrations, and the number of female participants was small (n= 9). CBD also appeared to affect GI comfort; 50 mg increased ratings of regurgitation, while 300 mg increased ratings of belching, compared to placebo. GI symptoms are among the most frequently reported adverse effects of CBD [90,91]. However, the differences observed here should be interpreted with caution as they were inclusive of (i.e., present at) baseline.

This study provides a highly controlled assessment of the influence of CBD on subjective and physiological responses to exercise. However, it is not without limitations. First, due to the large number of outcomes assessed, there is an increased probability of detecting significant effects by chance (i.e., Type 1 Error). Second, plasma CBD concentrations varied considerably between participants; although, it is worth noting that this is common following oral CBD administration [14,30,63]. Third, it is also likely that plasma CBD concentrations were low during the early stages of RUN 1. Although it should be recognised that all participants reached their Cmaxwithin the exercise period (i.e. Pre Run 1 to Post RUN 2). Fourth, the age range of the population was relatively wide (19–44 years), potentially introducing variability. Fifth, the number of male and female participants was unbalanced. Finally, while the present study has demonstrated minimal effects of CBD on responses to exercise in a healthy, endurance-trained population, it is important to recognise that different effects may be observed in populations with clinical conditions (i.e., in which CBD may have disease modifying effects) and in athletic populations with certain conditions (e.g., training and/or performance anxiety).

This study demonstrates that acute low (50 mg) and moderate (300 mg) doses of CBD do not alter the subjective experience of submaximal endurance exercise (i.e. affect, enjoyment, pain or perceived exertion), have limited effect on physiological responses to exercise, and have no detectable effect on endurance performance. Use of CBD by athletes is, therefore, not likely to be ergolytic nor ergogenic at low to moderate doses.

We would like to extend our sincerest gratitude to all participants for their commitment and contribution to this study.