Acute abdominal pain is a common acute presentation to the emergency department (ED). Contrast-enhanced abdominopelvic CT (AP CT) is typically the most appropriate imaging test. Previously in our ED, it was noted that the process to access AP CT was complicated and associated with delays. We implemented a quality intervention project to develop and implement a diagnostic pathway of ED patients with acute abdominal pain requiring AP CT imaging. Our overall aim was to improve ED length of stay and ED process times for patients presenting with acute abdominal pathology to our ED.

After baseline data collection, we conducted a phased improvement project with pre-measurement and post-measurement. A rationalised multidisciplinary diagnostic pathway was agreed by the radiology, general surgery and emergency medicine teams. The imaging protocol for AP CT abdomens was revised using intravenous contrast only for the majority of patients. The ED length of stay statistically significantly improved from the pre-implementation period (1532 min), the first evaluation (1312 min) and the second evaluation period (1216 min) (p value<0.01). There was a non-statistically significant improvement in the mean-time from ED arrival to AP CT scan in the pre-implementation and post implementation phases (855 min in pre-implementation phase and 670 min and 621 min in the first and second phases, respectively, p=0.06). The overall positivity for significant acute pathology on CT abdomen in the implementation loop was 79.6%.

The introduction of an acute abdominal pain diagnostic pathway improved ED throughput times and reduced admission rates in patients presenting to the ED with acute abdominal pain. The high diagnostic yield from AP CT scans indicates that our pathway was appropriate for ED patients with undifferentiated acute abdominal pain requiring urgent advanced imaging.

Acute abdominal pain is a common cause of emergency department (ED) attendances. Contrast-enhanced abdominopelvic CT (AP CT) is recognised as the most appropriate imaging test for the evaluation of acute abdominal pain in adult non-pregnant patients in the ED. Existing international evidence suggested that eliminating oral contrast and streamlining imaging requests could reduce ED length of stay (LOS) without compromising diagnostic accuracy. Despite this, these approaches have not been systematically evaluated in the Irish healthcare context. This phased improvement project was needed to address delays in AP CT access, assess the feasibility of an intravenous-only contrast protocol and evaluate the impact of a standardised ED diagnostic pathway on throughput and care quality.

This evaluation of a phased improvement project demonstrates that implementing a streamlined diagnostic pathway for acute abdominal pain in the ED, including early CT ordering by emergency physicians and removing the routine use of oral contrast—significantly reduces ED LOS. It also showed that a high proportion (79.6%) of CT scans identified clinically significant acute pathology, supporting the diagnostic efficiency of early CT imaging in this context.

These findings support the development of standardised, multidisciplinary diagnostic pathways for abdominal pain in emergency settings. The results may inform national guidelines in Ireland and encourage similar EDs to adopt CT-first protocols without routine oral contrast, improving patient flow and care delivery.

Our inspiration to improve patient care with this project was twofold. First, the process to get an abdominopelvic CT CT (AP CT) scan performed for indicated ED patients in our hospital was complicated and associated with delays. The custom and practice in our hospital at the time was that ED patients who required an AP CT were referred to the surgical teams on call to review the patients first before an urgent AP CT imaging could be requested. All patients who had AP CT required 1 litre of Omnipaque 350 (iohexol) oral contrast to be given to the patient to consume in the hour prior to his CT scan. The prolonged processes were considered to contribute to delays to advanced imaging and ED throughput times.

Second at a department level, a data analysis of all of the ED attendances in 2023 captured on our ED information system (Symphony, EMIS Health). There were 55 468 ED presentations in 2023. Of these 6448 (12% of all ED presentations) were triaged as ‘abdominal pain’ as per Manchester triage categorisation. The same data set showed that ‘abdominal pain’ attendances consumed 16% (106 201 hours) of all ED hours (680 388 hours) spent on patient care in 2023. This data indicated that a disproportionate amount of time was being spent in ED awaiting a definitive diagnosis for their abdominal pain.

To date, there is no agreed national guideline for a diagnostic pathway to assess acute abdominal pain in Ireland. The UK Royal College of Emergency Medicine issued an advisory statement regarding the management of adults presenting to the ED who may require an emergency laparotomy in October 2024.3The advisory was issued in response to data from the National Emergency Laparotomy Audit showing that the median time from arrival at the hospital to arriving in theatre was 10.3 hours for patients categorised as needing theatre within 2 hours.4The Royal College of Emergency Medicine advisory included a recommendation that hospitals should have agreed pathways of care to ensure timely access to CT scans for patients considered at high risk for delayed recognition of the need for an emergency laparotomy where there is a clinical suspicion of intra-abdominal infection, perforation, ischaemia or bowel obstruction.

In this project, we develop and implement a diagnostic pathway of ED patients with acute abdominal pain requiring AP CT imaging to improve ED throughput times in our ED.

Improve process times in the ED specifically mean ED arrival to CT time by 60 min for those patients where an AP CT scan was indicated by 60 min within 1 year.

Tallaght University Hospital is a level 4 teaching hospital based in the south west of Dublin city in Ireland. The ED is an adult-only department that sees patients who are aged 16 years and above. The ED has an annual attendance of approximately 58 000 patients. It is staffed by 7 whole-time equivalent emergency medicine (EM) consultants, 17 registrars, 12 senior house officers and 2 interns. Tallaght University Hospital did not have a specific guideline and standardised method to manage patients presenting with acute abdominal presentations in the ED.

The multicomponent initiative used a variety of measures to evaluate implementation and impact.

Outcome measures included percentage of patients in the post implementation loop who required surgical admission. This measure relates to those patients that the surgical team deems require admission for further management.

Process measures included mean ED patient LOS. For this project, this was defined as time from the patient’s arrival to the time they left the ED (either discharged from the hospital or admitted to ward).

In the post implementation loop, the number of patients who had AP CT with intravenous contrast only and who had to be re-called for a scan to be done with oral contrast due to insufficient image quality was collated.

The diagnostic yield of AP CT scans in the cohort of ED patients presenting with undifferentiated abdominal pain for acute clinically significant pathology was measured.

A baseline audit was conducted between September and October 2023 before the pathway was introduced. ED patients presenting with symptoms of acute abdominal pain were included in the study if they had an AP CT performed as part of their clinical assessment. Patients were excluded if a CT was not performed as part of their assessment in the ED. Typically, patients with suspected clinical diagnoses such as biliary colic and ultrasound would be the gold standard test were excluded. Patients who had AP CT for non-acute abdominal pain indications such as suspected malignancy work-ups were excluded.

Missing data were minimised as any missing data were retrieved by requesting the hard copies of patients’ clinical charts to review their clinical records.

The data were statistically analysed using SPSS software V.29. Data are expressed as mean for normally distributed continuous data and count (%) for discrete data. Student’s t-test was used for the comparison of two means. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) is a statistical test used to determine if there are any significant differences between the means of three groups. A p value of ≤0.05 was considered statistically significant.

127 patients (mean age 52 years, 63 male:64 female) met the inclusion criteria in the pre-implementation loop between September and October 2023. The mean ED time to AP CT was 855 min in the baseline audit.

Our team was made up of a consultant surgeon, a consultant emergency medicine physician, a radiologist, registrars in emergency medicine and a clinical specialist radiographer.

A process map helped to focus on where interventions were beneficial and where solutions could be found (figure 1). Steps not in boxes were identified as potential redundant steps.

We decided to implement a multicomponent intervention given the multifactorial aetiology and complexity of acute abdominal pain presentations.

We conducted a phased improvement project with pre-measurement and post-measurement to develop, test and implement our changes.

We set out our SMART aims (see the Problem section). Baseline data were collected as documented in the Measurement section.

A process map was constructed of patients who presented to the ED with abdominal pain and for whom an AP CT scan and a surgical assessment was clinically indicated. It was identified that there were twelve steps in this process (figure 1). Two key areas were identified as potential for improvement, namely earlier ordering of the AP CT scan and removal of the administration of oral contrast for all patients.

We developed a diagnostic pathway. In November 2023, a clinical pathway was agreed by radiology, general surgery and emergency medicine consultant leads for the project. It was agreed that patients presenting with acute abdominal pain that required advanced imaging had an AP CT ordered by the attending emergency physician and the patient was simultaneously referred to the surgical team on call for review. Patients who presented with abdominal pain but who were deemed not to require further hospital management or advanced imaging were discharged directly from the ED by the emergency team and thereby excluded from this study. The pathway was in part facilitated by the opening of a new CT scanner within the footprint of the ED in 2023.

Education of medical staff (emergency medicine and surgical) of the process was used as an intervention. This was done by disseminating details on the new pathway by email to all relevant emergency medicine and surgical staff. The new protocol was also flagged daily at the emergency medicine consultant-led board rounds held on the clinical floor with the ten emergency clinicians on shift in attendance for the week at the commencement of the pathway. A poster detailing the pathway was posted on the wall at the main clinical workstation in the ED.

New AP CT with contrast code was activated on National Integrated Medical Imaging System, so that scans could be ordered without oral contrast and also to highlight new protocol to CT radiographers.

We collected data over two evaluation periods (1 December 2023 to 31 January 2024) and (1 December 2024 to 31 January 2025). We used the same inclusions and exclusions as for the baseline data collection. We used the same inclusion as for the baseline data collection, namely we included patients who presented to ED with acute abdominal pain and required a CT AP.

There were 164 patients (mean age 51 years, male 74:female 90) included in the post implementation loop December 2023 and January 2024 (table 1). One patient in the post implementation phase had to have a repeat scan with oral contrast to confirm diagnosis.

There was improvement in the mean time spent in the ED department (table 2). ED LOS statistically significantly improved in the pre-implementation (1532 min), the first evaluation (1312 min) and the second evaluation period (1216 min) (table 2ED stage times). There was a non-statistically significant improvement in the mean-time from ED arrival to AP CT scan in the pre-implementation and post implementation phases, respectively (table 2).

There was a sample size of 457 scans between the three 2-month evaluation periods. The overall positivity for significant acute pathology identified on AP CT is 79.6% (n/N=364/457). The most common surgical diagnoses were appendicitis (n=82), diverticulitis (n=55), bowel obstruction (n=55) and cholecystitis (n=43) (table 3).

As a result of this project, a multidisciplinary departmental diagnostic pathway for ED patients with abdominal pain was developed. This standardised the level of care in line with international practice4,620 21and resulted in a sustained significant improvement in overall ED LOS for acute abdominal pain ED patients. The pathway proved popular with emergency and surgical doctors on call. This was reassuring and indicative of engagement of staff with the project.

International studies have concluded that no routine administration of oral contrast in implementation in our ED setting is safe.21 22In our evaluation, only one patient required a repeat scan due to body habitus with oral contrast to confirm diagnosis in the post implementation phase. While this does suggest that the protocol is safe, the radiology team have further introduced a new protocol on the CT scanner to mitigate for lower inherent fat contrast resolution in slim or low BMI patients. This has helped to improve image quality and further reduced the reliance on oral contrast for this cohort.

It was notable that the majority (79.6%) of scans identified clinically significant acute pathology and indicated that the pathway for assessment of acute abdominal pain in the ED is robust. The results are comparable to similar studies done in France and the USA.23,25The heterogeneity of the AP CT findings confirms the wide aetiology of acute abdominal pain. We feel that this further confirms the efficiency conferred by performing abdominal CT in the ED for patients with non-traumatic abdominal pain. The timely AP CT scans performed in the ED ensured early definitive diagnosis in the majority of cases. In our hospital, this ensured that the ‘right patients’ got to the ‘right doctor’ efficiently. Patients who initially presented to the ED with undifferentiated pain and were found to have urological or gynaecological aetiologies were decanted to the appropriate specialty in a timely manner in the ED. Patients radiologically diagnosed with specific gastroenterology conditions such as colitis were decanted to the gastroenterology teams where appropriate.

The removal of the requirement of oral contrast for the majority of our patients had a number of benefits. First, it contributed to the reduced ED throughput times due to the reduced preparation time prior to scanning. Second, emergency patients can feel very unwell due to oral contrast, which can be poorly tolerated. Restriction of oral contrast use reduces potential side effects such as bloating, cramping, vomiting and dislike for the taste. While a single dose of oral contrast is not expensive, due to the high number of patients scanned each year, some savings can be expected.29 30Future cost benefit analysis would be required to quantify financial impact accurately.

Advancements in imaging techniques such as photon-counting CT and dual-energy CT may further reduce the reliance on oral contrast agents for differentiating anatomical structures and pathology.31Furthermore, the prevalence of incidental findings is unlikely to be changed with or without oral contrast.

This quality improvement project has some limitations. First, this is a single centre pilot project and may not be generalisable due to differing CT capacity in other EDs. Second, it is acknowledged that the sample size in our pre-implementation and post implementation loops is small. However, an exhaustive analysis of emergency medicine and radiological records in Tallaght University Hospital was conducted to ensure completeness in the outcome data. Also, on review of the heterogeneity of the CT findings of the study population, the authors are confident that the study population represents a representative sample. Third, we acknowledge that the use of p values in the context of a small, uncontrolled dataset—such as that derived from our improvement project—may not be statistically appropriate due to limitations in power, lack of randomisation and potential confounding variables. While p values were reported in this paper for descriptive purposes, they should be interpreted with caution and are not intended to imply definitive statistical inference. Finally, the measures used in our study were surrogate outcomes and did not measure reduction of morbidity or mortality in these patients. This would have required a larger collection of data before and after the intervention that was too complex to obtain within our project time frame, so it was decided not to pursue this. Anecdotally, it was noted that time to surgery, particularly for those patients requiring appendectomy, was reduced. We are planning a post hoc study to look at this patient cohort separately.

The study identified a significant cohort of patients who had pathologies such as colitis and enteritis, which typically do not require surgical operative management. The project team will look to develop bespoke clinical care pathways for these cohorts in conjunction with our gastroenterology colleagues to potentially include follow-up endoscopy as applicable.

Implementing a multidisciplinary acute abdominal diagnostic pathway for patients presenting to our ED improved ED LOS, mean time to CT and reduced a reduced admission rates in this cohort. The majority of AP CT scans ordered in the ED to further investigate patients presenting with undifferentiated acute abdominal pain identified acute abdominal pathology indicating appropriateness of the pathway for the target cohort.

The authors would like to acknowledge all the doctors, nurses and allied health professionals of the Tallaght University Hospital for their support.