A DCE was conducted with 98 veterans with diabetes at the Baltimore Veterans Affairs Medical Center. Participants were presented with 10 choice sets involving different levels of postrecovery mobility, amputation levels, and future surgery risks. These attributes were developed through literature review and interviews. Data were analyzed using a multinomial logit model to estimate the utility of each attribute level and assess preference heterogeneity.

The study population was older (mean age 69 years), Black (61%), and male (94%). Half (53%) had a prior foot complication. Postrecovery mobility was the most important attribute (relative importance 53%), followed by amputation level (30%) and future surgery risk (18%). Veterans valued mobility highly, with significant utility differences between walking unaided and needing a wheelchair or scooter. They were willing to accept higher amputation levels to improve mobility.

Diabetes is one of the most prevalent chronic diseases, affecting one in 10 adults in the United States and one in four military veterans receiving care in the Veterans Health Administration. People with diabetes are at increased risk for foot complications including ulcers, infections, and amputations. The lifetime incidence of diabetic foot ulcers (DFUs) among patients with diabetes is greater than 20% (1). One in four ulcers is not healed after 1 year. More than half of DFUs become infected, and 20% of moderate to severe diabetic foot infections ultimately progress to an amputation of some part of the lower extremity (2–4). Treatment goals in the management of a DFU include control infection, heal the ulcer, and restore mobility.

Over the past two decades, clinicians have focused on limb salvage. Limb salvage in the context of a DFU refers to the coordinated medical and surgical efforts to preserve a functional lower extremity in patients with severe diabetic foot complications, rather than proceeding to amputation. It involves multiple interventions aimed at promoting wound healing, infection control, restoration of blood flow (revascularization when needed), and preservation of foot structure and function. In some cases, limb salvage may involve minor amputations (e.g., toe or partial foot) to remove infected or necrotic tissue while still preserving much of the foot and its function. Success requires a multidisciplinary approach involving podiatrists, vascular surgeons, infectious disease specialists, physical therapists, and endocrinologists.

It is often assumed that patients prefer the incremental steps involved with limb salvage. However, the lengthy and complex care required for multiple interventions in DFU treatment can significantly delay a patient’s return to normal life activities (5). Additionally, the high rate of care failure in treating DFUs is often underappreciated (5). This prolonged period of limited mobility poses risks because patients rarely achieve the recommended level of mobility (6), which is crucial for healthy aging. The combination of reduced mobility and increased inflammation from the ulcer likely contributes to adverse cardiovascular outcomes (7–11). In some cases, prioritizing “life salvage” may be a better approach. Life salvage emphasizes the broader goal of saving the patient’s life by addressing severe infections and other life-threatening complications that can arise from DFUs with a lower extremity amputation that is likely to heal (12). This approach involves aggressive management of systemic issues, such as controlling infections and managing cardiovascular risks.

We performed a DCE with patients with diabetes within the Veterans Affairs (VA) Maryland Health Care System in Baltimore, MD. Our target sample size was based on the formula proposed by de Bekker-Grob et al. (14), which multiplies 500 by the number of levels per attribute (n= 3 in our experiment) divided by the product of the number of choice sets (n= 10) and the alternatives in each choice set (n= 2). Based on this heuristic, our design required at least 75 respondents for sufficient statistical precision for main effects estimates. The subgroup analysis was underpowered and considered exploratory and hypothesis-generating.

After assessing eligibility via chart review, patients were recruited from the podiatry clinics that see veterans at high risk for amputation and from the diabetes clinics. Patients were eligible to participate if they had a known history of diabetes. The DCE was administered in person using Qualtrics on a desktop computer in a research clinic. The survey included 19 questions about demographics, current level of mobility, and health history, including questions about diabetes, peripheral neuropathy, peripheral arterial disease, foot ulcers, and amputations. The second portion of the survey presented respondents with 10 choice sets, including one that acted as a test of comprehension. There were two alternatives per choice set with no ability to opt out (15).Figure 1shows an example of one of the 10 choice sets. The entire survey is included in theSupplementary Material. We asked veterans to choose between DFU treatment scenarios with different levels of mobility after recovery (walk without help; walk with help of a walker or prosthesis; unable to walk, need wheelchair or scooter), level of amputation (tissue only, single toe, midfoot, below knee); and risk of additional surgery in the next year (low [<20%], medium, and high [>80%]). These attributes and levels were developed after a review of the literature and were refined by incorporating findings from five semistructured phone interviews with veterans who had a clinical diagnosis of diabetes with a history of a DFU that resulted in an amputation. We also piloted the initial survey with four participants to check understanding, respondent burden, and time required for completion. Attribute wording was updated based on findings from the pilot. All participants were compensated $25 for their participation. This study was reviewed by the University of Maryland Baltimore Institutional Review Board and determined to be exempt category 2.

The data sets underlying the analyses presented here will be available in figshare (https://figshare.com/) upon publication.

The study participants included 98 veterans with diabetes. We mailed information to or spoke with 193 veterans for a response rate of 51%. Of the 95 who did not participate, 35 were not interested, 6 agreed to participate and were scheduled but then did not show up, 3 were in the hospital at the time of survey administration, and we were not able to get in touch with 51 despite several attempts. All respondents were included in the analysis. Most respondents (80%) selected the response presumed to be dominant in the check for validity. Respondents were older (mean age, 69 [SD, 9] years), predominantly Black (61%), and most were male (94%). Approximately half of the respondents (n= 53; 54%) had a foot ulcer, a current foot ulcer, or a lower extremity amputation. As shown inTable 1, 45 (46%) reported a prior history of DFU, 13 (13%) reported they currently had a foot ulcer, and 33 (34%) reported they had undergone a lower extremity amputation. Of the 33 who had an amputation, 10 had the entire foot amputated, 6 had part of the foot amputated, and 17 had one or more toes amputated.

*Participants could have had more than one foot complication.

Among the included treatment and recovery attributes, mobility was the most important to all respondents (relative importance 53%; 95% CI 49–55), followed by the level of amputation (relative importance 30%; 95% CI 26–33), then the risk of an additional surgery (relative importance 18%; 95% CI 15–21) (Fig. 2). We can also compare the relative importance of the attributes, for example, by dividing the relative importance of mobility by the relative importance of amputation. Within the participants’ rankings, mobility was 1.78 times more important than the level of amputation (95% CI 1.73–1.82;P< 0.001), and the level of amputation was 1.64 times more important than additional surgical risk (95% CI 1.46–1.83;P< 0.001).

Relative importance of the included attributes in the full sample (n= 98).

The importance of mobility was driven by a difference in the perceived utility from independent mobility (walk without help) compared with being unable to walk (unable to walk, needs wheelchair or scooter), (utility difference 1.66; 95% CI 1.47–1.85;P< 0.001) (Fig. 3). The utility associated with assisted mobility (walk with help of a walker or prosthesis) was statistically closer to independent mobility (utility difference 0.45; 95% CI 0.26–0.64;P< 0.001) than being unable to walk (utility difference 1.21; 95% CI 1.02–1.40;P< 0.001).

Marginal utility of the attribute levels in the full sample (n= 98).

Our results align with those of other studies that highlighted the importance patients place on maintaining mobility and independence. Zanami et al. (16) reported the clinical outcomes most valued by stakeholders were1) avoiding amputation and2) maintaining or improving health-related quality of life, which included independent mobility, pain control, and mental health. Interestingly the risk of additional surgery was the least important factor in our study, a finding consistent with a survey of 41 patients who underwent a transtibial amputation (17). Of the 17 patients who had multiple amputations prior to the transtibial amputation, 94% would have chosen the same treatment pathway. These results contrast with studies of active duty military personnel who hade early amputation versus those with limb salvage for serious limb injuries (18,19). Those studies showed improved return to health and function among those with early definitive amputation. Finally, patients with diabetic foot disease fear amputation more than dying (20). Of note our participants had a similar utility level for midfoot and below knee amputations. Midfoot or trans metatarsal amputations are categorized as “minor” and below knee or transtibial amputation as “major” by clinicians; however, patients do not make the same distinction. They perceive any amputation greater than a toe amputation as “major,” based on the utility levels. Finally, our results highlight that the fear associated with amputation is the loss of mobility, and that it is important to focus decision-making on final mobility as opposed to level of amputation.

This article contains supplementary material online athttps://doi.org/10.2337/figshare.29246894.

The contents do not represent the views of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs or the U.S. government.

Handling Editors.The journal editors responsible for overseeing the review of the manuscript were Cheryl A.M. Anderson and Jennifer B. Green.

This work was supported in part by VA Merit award CX-0016-01 from the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs Clinical Sciences Research and Development Service and National Institutes of Health University of Maryland Pepper Center (award P30 AG028747). B.M.S. is the principal investigator on National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases grants K23DK131261 and K23DK131261-03S1.