Whether the long-term survival of patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is worse than that of patients with IPF combined with emphysema after anti-fibrotic therapy is unclear. This study aimed to compare treatment outcomes between the two groups and identify potential predictors of mortality.

This retrospective cohort study was conducted in seven hospitals across Taiwan between August 2015 and August 2022 and included patients with IPF who received anti-fibrotic agents covered by national insurance. Based on the extent of emphysema observed on high-resolution chest tomography, patients with IPF were categorized into two groups: IPF only; and IPF with emphysema. Baseline characteristics and survival outcomes were compared between the groups. Cox proportional hazards models were used for multivariable analysis to identify factors associated with overall mortality during the follow-up period.

Of the 275 patients included, 126 (45.8%) had IPF with emphysema and 149 (54.2%) had IPF only. The emphysema group had a higher proportion of males and patients with a smoking history, finger clubbing, comorbidities, or a definite usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) pattern compared to the IPF-only group. Additionally, this group had a higher forced vital capacity (FVC, %) and forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV₁, L), while FEV₁ (%) was similar and FEV₁/FVC (%) was lower. During a median follow-up of 3.7 years, the overall survival rates were comparable (IPF only: 45.6%; IPF with emphysema: 48.4%). The overall survival of patients with probable UIP was significantly better than that of patients with definite UIP (53.5% vs. 34.6%). Likewise, the survival rate of the group with a diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO) > 49% was higher than that of the group with DLCO ≤ 49% (53.9% vs. 31.4%). After adjusting for confounders, lower body mass index (BMI) (adjusted hazard ratio [aHR] = 0.95) and comorbid pulmonary hypertension (aHR = 2.27) were independently associated with increased overall mortality. Neither the presence of emphysema nor the type of anti-fibrotic agent was associated with mortality.

The survival outcomes of patients with IPF and emphysema and those of patients with IPF only are comparable after treatment with anti-fibrotic agents. Lower BMI and comorbid pulmonary hypertension are significant predictors of increased mortality.

Fibrotic interstitial lung disease (f-ILD) encompasses a diverse group of disorders characterized by interstitial inflammation and fibrosis of the lungs, leading to decreased lung function and impaired gas exchange [1]. Emphysema, on the other hand, is marked by the destruction of alveolar walls and enlargement of air spaces, resulting in decreased lung elasticity and increased air trapping [2]. Combined pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema (CPFE) is defined as a syndrome characterized by the concurrent presence of pulmonary fibrosis and emphysema and is relatively common in patients with f-ILD, including idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF), as noted in the official ATS/ERS/JRS/ALAT research statement [3].

Despite its recent definition as a syndrome, CPFE has prompted several research priorities, including the need for clinical trials to address key questions [3]. For instance, the prevalence of the combination of emphysema and IPF, the impact of smoking history on CPFE, and the influence of comorbidities on IPF and CPFE outcomes require real-world studies. In IPF cohorts, the most recently reported CPFE prevalence ranges from 11 to 70%, depending on the study population and diagnostic criteria used [4–7]. A history of smoking is more common in CPFE than in isolated IPF [5]. However, CPFE can occur in nonsmokers and does not necessarily meet chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) criteria [8]. In the case of comorbidities, patients with CPFE are more likely to have lung cancer and pulmonary hypertension, which are associated with worse outcomes [4,9–13]. More data are needed to understand the impact of different comorbidities on the survival of IPF patients with emphysema.

Previous studies have yielded conflicting results for mortality in IPF with emphysema compared to IPF only [14–16]. Additionally, the relationship between different imaging patterns on high-resolution chest tomography (HRCT) and clinical outcomes of CPFE patients remains unclear [17]. The differences in treatment response to anti-fibrotic agents between IPF patients with and without emphysema also need clarification.

In Taiwan, anti-fibrotic agents, including nintedanib and pirfenidone, have been reimbursed by National Health Insurance (NHI) since 2017 [18]. This multi-center, real-world retrospective cohort study aimed to compare treatment outcomes between IPF only and IPF with emphysema patients who received anti-fibrotic agents reimbursed by NHI and investigate factors associated with overall mortality and long-term survival of these groups.

This was a retrospective, observational, real-world registry cohort study conducted in seven hospitals in Taiwan. To be included in the cohort, patients had to be over 18 years of age, have a diagnosis of IPF confirmed through multidisciplinary team discussions (MDD), and have been reimbursed for anti-fibrotic agents by NHI in Taiwan. The inclusion period was from August 2015 to August 2022, and all included patients were required to have received anti-fibrotic therapy for at least six months. The final date for survival follow-up was November 28, 2022. Patients were excluded if they had missing lung function test data or if the HRCT images were of poor quality. All patients were required to meet the diagnostic criteria for IPF, and emphysema was assessed by expert pulmonologists and radiologists using HRCT. Patients were then categorized into those with IPF only and those with IPF with emphysema based on the presence of emphysema involving more than 10% of the lung area.

The study was conducted in accordance with the guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki [19] and was approved by the Institutional Review Board of each participating institution. Informed consent was not required due to the retrospective nature of the study, and patient information was de-identified prior to analysis.

The NHI program in Taiwan is a single-payer, universal system that provides medical coverage to over 99% of the population [20]. Since March 1, 2017, anti-fibrotic agents, such as nintedanib and pirfenidone, have been reimbursed for patients diagnosed with IPF. Approval requires the submission of the patient’s HRCT images, autoimmune markers, and pulmonary function test results to the NHI website, followed by peer review by specialists or consultants invited by NHI.

The eligibility criteria for anti-fibrotic treatment for IPF include forced vital capacity (FVC) between 50% and 80%, or higher than 80% with symptoms of dyspnea or cough. The initial treatment course lasts six months, after which treatment outcomes, including lung function test results and clinical evaluation, must be re-evaluated. Treatment failure, or non-response, is defined as an FVC decrease of 10% or more. If the lung function test shows treatment failure, the patient can continue with the same anti-fibrotic agent or switch to a different class for another three months, followed by another FVC evaluation. If the subsequent FVC level shows a decrease of more than 10% compared to the previous level, the anti-fibrotic agents will be withdrawn from NHI reimbursement. Additionally, NHI does not allow the concomitant use of nintedanib and pirfenidone.

Baseline clinical characteristics, including age, gender, smoking history, body mass index (BMI), physical examination findings, and comorbidities, were recorded on the day of reimbursement of the anti-fibrotic agent. The gender–age–physiology (GAP) index was also evaluated on enrollment and the comorbidities of enrolled patients were summarized using the Charlson Comorbidity Index (CCI).

The radiological classification of the definite usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) pattern or probable UIP pattern was according to the 2022 ATS/ERS/JRS/ALAT practice guidelines for IPF [21]. IPF with emphysema was defined according to the HRCT pattern, including HRCT images showing emphysema in the upper lung and fibrosis in the lower lung, as reported previously [3,8], and an emphysema percentage of more than 10% of lung parenchyma by using the visual scale methods of previous studies [17,22,23]. The extent of both fibrosis and emphysema was calculated according to the CT scoring method proposed by Fraser et al. in 2020 and the Visual HRCT Score proposed by Peris et al. in 2018 [24,25].

The presence of pulmonary hypertension in this cohort was determined based on echocardiographic findings, specifically a peak tricuspid regurgitation velocity of > 2.8 m/s, along with additional echocardiographic signs recommended in the 2022 ESC/ERS Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of pulmonary hypertension [26].

The patients were followed up at yearly intervals until death. The cut-off date for death was November 28, 2022. The annual and overall incidences of mortality were recorded.

Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS (version 22.0; International Business Machines Corp, Armonk, NY, USA). Categorical variables are presented as frequencies and percentages and quantitative variables are presented as medians and interquartile ranges. Significant differences between the groups were determined using the chi-square test, Fisher’s exact test, and Mann–Whitney U test. Univariate and multivariate Cox regression analyses were performed to identify factors associated with overall mortality. Variables included in the multivariable analysis were selected based on statistical significance in univariable analysis; only those variables withp-values below the predefined threshold were entered into the multivariable model. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was used to determine the cutoff values of factors that were significant in the multivariable survival analysis. The strength of associations is presented as hazard ratio (HR) or adjusted HR (aHR), with the corresponding 95% confidence interval (CI). Survival curves were generated using the Kaplan–Meier method, and differences in survival outcomes between groups were identified using the log-rank test. All tests were two-sided, and ap-value less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant.

From August 2015 to August 2022, 336 patients diagnosed with IPF by pulmonologists at seven hospitals in Taiwan were initially enrolled. Forty-seven patients were excluded because their MDD did not reach a consensus on a diagnosis of IPF or due to rejection of reimbursement by the peer-review experts invited by NHI. Additionally, 14 patients were excluded due to missing data on the diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO). Consequently, a total of 275 patients were included in the final analysis (Fig.1). There was no difference in the duration from diagnosis to initiation of anti-fibrotic treatment or in the time to the first acute exacerbation event between the IPF-only group and the IPF with emphysema group (Table1). The median follow-up time for all patients was 3.7 years (IQR: 2.3–5.0); for the IPF only group, it was 3.8 years (IQR: 1.8–5.3); and for the IPF with emphysema group, it was 3.6 years (IQR: 2.5–4.8). There was no statistically significant difference in median follow-up time between the two group (Table1). Among the participating hospitals, Taichung Veterans General Hospital contributed the highest number of patients (n= 125), followed by National Taiwan University Hospital, Yunlin Branch (n= 70), Taoyuan General Hospital (n= 65), Asia University Hospital (n= 38), Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Chiayi Branch (n= 20), E-Da Cancer Hospital (n= 11), and Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung Branch (n= 7).

The demographic data of this cohort showed a median age of 72.9 years, with a male predominance (81.1%) and a high prevalence of smokers (53.5%) (Table1). Physical examinations revealed that 63.3% had basal crackles on chest auscultation and 23.3% had clubbing fingers. Major comorbidities included gastroesophageal reflux disease (25.1%), solid cancer (14.2%), congestive heart failure (11.6%), chronic kidney disease (10.6%), coronary artery disease (6.2%), and pulmonary hypertension (5.8%). Imaging findings showed that 59.3% had a definite UIP pattern and 73.9% had fibrosis of > 10%. The most prescribed anti-fibrotic agent was nintedanib (81.8%). The most common cause of death was pneumonia or infectious diseases (85 cases, 65.9%), followed by malignant neoplasms (14 cases, 10.9%) and COVID-19 (10 cases, 7.8%). Other causes included chronic lower respiratory diseases (6 cases, 4.7%), cardiac diseases excluding hypertensive conditions (4 cases, 3.1%), hypertensive diseases (3 cases, 2.3%), diabetes mellitus (2 cases, 1.6%), nephritis or nephrotic syndrome (2 cases, 1.6%), cerebrovascular diseases (2 cases, 1.6%), and chronic liver disease or cirrhosis (1 case, 0.8%).

The criteria for IPF with emphysema were met by 126 patients (45.8%) and 149 patients (54.2%) were deemed to have IPF only. The emphysema group had a significant male predominance, more smokers, a higher incidence of clubbing fingers, a higher CCI score, and more importantly, a more definite UIP pattern in HRCT (IPF alone: 53.7%; IPF with emphysema: 65.9%;p= 0.041). Despite having significantly higher FVC (L), FVC (%), and FEV1 (L), patients with emphysema had a significantly lower FEV1/FVC (%), with comparable FEV1 (%) and DLCO (%) (Table1). All mortality rates were comparable between the two groups, with an overall mortality of 45.6% for the IPF group and 48.4% for the emphysema group (p= 0.6).

Sixty-eight (52.7%) IPF-only patients and 61 (47.3%) IPF-with-emphysema patients died in this cohort. These patients had a significantly higher prevalence of clubbing fingers, higher GAP score, higher prevalence of pulmonary hypertension, higher FEV1/FVC (%), lower DLCO (%), more definite UIP, and a higher prevalence of fibrosis of > 10% in HRCT (Table2).

We examined the overall survival probabilities according to study group, UIP pattern, and DLCO (%). The overall survival probabilities of the IPF-only and IPF-with-emphysema groups were comparable (43.2% vs. 42.3%,p= 0.7; Fig.2). The overall survival probability of patients with probable UIP was significantly higher than that of patients with definite UIP (53.5% vs. 34.6%,p= 0.03; Fig.3). For the stratified analysis based on DLCO, the cutoff value of 49% was identified using a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis. Patients were then categorized accordingly to evaluate the impact of DLCO on survival outcomes. The survival probability of patients with DLCO of > 49% was significantly higher than that of their counterparts with DLCO ≤ 49% (53.9% vs. 31.4%,p= 0.005; Fig.4).

Lower BMI was significantly associated with higher mortality in both univariate (HR = 0.95, 95% CI = 0.90–0.99,p= 0.029) and multivariate (aHR = 0.95, 95% CI = 0.90–1.00,p= 0.031) analyses (Table3). The risk of mortality of patients with pulmonary hypertension was more than twice that of patients without the disease in both univariate (HR = 2.09, 95% CI = 1.15–3.79,p= 0.015) and multivariate (aHR = 2.27, 95% CI– 1.23–4.18,p= 0.008) analyses. A definite UIP pattern in HRCT was associated with an increased risk of mortality in univariate (HR = 1.51, 95% CI = 1.05–2.17,p= 0.028) but not multivariate (aHR = 1.30, 95% CI = 0.89–1.90,p= 0.178) analysis. Higher FEV1/FVC (%) was associated with a trend toward a higher risk of mortality in both univariate (HR = 1.02, 95% CI = 1–1.03,p= 0.025) and multivariate (aHR = 1.02, 95% CI = 1–1.04,p= 0.015) analyses. There was no significant difference in mortality between patients with IPF and those with IPF and emphysema (HR for IPF with emphysema = 1.08, 95% CI = 0.76–1.52,p= 0.7) or between patients who received nintedanib and those who received pirfenidone (HR for pirfenidone = 1.88, 95% CI = 0.54–1.41,p= 0.59).

In this multi-center, retrospective, real-world registry cohort study, we enrolled 275 patients with IPF whose diagnoses were confirmed by MDD and peer review by external experts. We found a high proportion of patients with IPF comorbid with emphysema (45.8%) in this cohort. The IPF-with-emphysema population showed a male predominance, a higher prevalence of smoking and clubbing fingers, a higher CCI, and a more definite UIP pattern. Although IPF patients with emphysema had higher FVC (L), FVC (%), and FEV₁ (L) values, their FEV₁ (%) was comparable to that of patients with IPF only, resulting in a lower FEV₁/FVC (%). DLCO (%) and overall survival rates were similar between the IPF-only and IPF-with-emphysema groups. Additionally, we found that patients with lower BMI or comorbid pulmonary hypertension had a higher risk of mortality. Patients with definite UIP and DLCO of ≤ 49% had lower overall survival probabilities in the Kaplan–Meier analysis. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first real-world study to address the prevalence of IPF with emphysema and its impact on long-term survival of patients receiving anti-fibrotic agents.

Estimating the true prevalence of IPF with emphysema is challenging. Prevalence estimates of IPF comorbid with emphysema vary depending on the study population, case numbers, and the diagnostic criteria used, and range from 11 to 70% of patients with IPF [4–7]. There may be geographical variation in prevalence, with the highest estimates for Asia and Greece and lower estimates for the United States [3]. Zhao et al. (2023) reported an emphysema prevalence of 317/500 (63%) in an IPF cohort derived from three centers in Turkey, the Netherlands, and Italy and an emphysema prevalence of 358/510 (70%) in another IPF cohort derived from three centers in the UK and Belgium and the Australian IPF registry [5]. Notably, only 143/500 (28.6%) and 152/510 (29.8%) patients in the two cohorts had IPF with emphysema of ≥ 10%. Hage et al. (2024) reported an emphysema prevalence of 10.6% (12/113) among patients with IPF or COPD/emphysema undergoing lung transplantation [6]. In Yoon et al.’s observational study using HRCT scans to identify and measure the extent of emphysema in 209 IPF patients in Korea [7], emphysema prevalence was 36.1% using the definition of emphysema extent of ≥ 5%. Prevalence was 14.3% when it was defined as emphysema extent of ≥ 10%. However, this study is limited due to the use of data from a single hospital [7]. In our study, we enrolled 275 patients with IPF from seven hospitals in Taiwan. The diagnosis of IPF required confirmation not only by a pulmonologist but also through MDD and external peer review to receive approval for anti-fibrotic agents from NHI. The prevalence of emphysema in this study was 45.8%, which can serve as a reference for local epidemiology in Taiwan and reflects the higher prevalence of IPF with emphysema in Asian populations.

Comparing the prognosis of IPF with emphysema with that of IPF alone has been challenging and has yielded conflicting results, likely due to differences in sample size, follow-up time, and comorbidities [3]. Zhao et al. (2023) recently reported comparable survival outcomes between IPF patients and those with emphysema involving less than 10% of the lung, whereas patients with an emphysema extent of ≥ 10% had significantly worse survival probabilities [5]. Despite being older, our IPF-with-emphysema cohort had a more moderate smoking history and better DLCO (%) than the cohort with CPFE with an emphysema extent of ≥ 10% reported by Zhao et al., which may partially explain the better survival outcomes in our study. A meta-analysis that included 13 trials involving 1710 participants found no significant differences in one-year, three-year, and five-year mortality between patients with IPF with emphysema and those with IPF only [15]. Therefore, our study corroborates the findings of previous reports for the Asian population in Taiwan, confirming that the prognosis of patients with IPF with emphysema is comparable to that of patients with IPF only.

We found DLCO of ≤ 49% to be associated with lower overall survival probability in our cohort, which is in agreement with Zhao et al. (2023), who reported a one-year DLCO decline to be strongly associated with mortality [5]. Similarly, the overall survival probability of patients with definite UIP in our cohort was lower, which conforms to previous reports [3,22]. A lower BMI was also associated with an increased risk of overall mortality of IPF patients with or without emphysema. A recent meta-analysis concluded that BMI might be useful in predicting mortality, disease progression, hospitalization, and treatment-related toxicity in IPF [26]. A study from the United States of a cohort of 600 IPF patients found that BMI of < 25 kg/m² was associated with a significantly higher annualized decline in FVC [27].

Our study emphasizes the importance of pulmonary hypertension as a significant predictor of worse survival outcomes of IPF and IPF with emphysema, with patients with pulmonary hypertension having twice the risk of three-year mortality. Previous studies have indicated that the presence of pulmonary hypertension in patients with IPF may reduce survival [9,10]. A single-center, retrospective, observational cohort study conducted in the United States also reported that comorbid pulmonary hypertension in patients with IPF and emphysema predicted higher mortality [4]. Nikolla et al. (2023) reported higher pulmonary hypertension values for four of 18 CPFE patients who developed lung cancer [11]. The results of our study are consistent with all these findings. The recent Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) guidelines acknowledge pulmonary hypertension as an important risk factor of COPD patients [28]. Therefore, we recommend routine screening of IPF patients for pulmonary hypertension due to the high risk of mortality associated with this comorbidity.

All patients in this cohort study received anti-fibrotic agents, including nintedanib and pirfenidone, following the protocols established in landmark clinical trials [29,30]. Both medications have been shown to slow the progression of mild-to-moderate IPF and other subtypes of progressive pulmonary fibrosis by approximately 50% at 12 months [31,32]. Our data showed no statistically significant difference in overall mortality between nintedanib and pirfenidone in the multivariate model. This finding aligns with the results of previous studies and meta-analyses that have highlighted the efficacy of both nintedanib and pirfenidone as anti-fibrotic agents for managing IPF and IPF with emphysema [33–35].

There are several limitations to our study. First, the retrospective nature of this real-world cohort study might have introduced selection bias and recall bias. Second, the sample size in this study was relatively small, which might also have led to bias, limiting the generalizability of the findings to the broader IPF population. Third, the study exclusively used non-invasive transthoracic echocardiography to assess the presence of pulmonary hypertension in patients with IPF, rather than performing right heart catheterization, which might have affected the precision of our findings. Fourth, there is ongoing controversy regarding the threshold used to define emphysema, which may have contributed to the variability in its impact on survival. Finally, we only included patients who were receiving anti-fibrotic agents, which may not be representative of the general population of patients with IPF or IPF with emphysema. However, the strength of our cohort study lies in the robust diagnosis of IPF and IPF with emphysema. This diagnosis was not only based on medical records but also required MDD evaluation and peer review by external experts to obtain reimbursement for anti-fibrotic agents from NHI in Taiwan. In addition, we followed our cases for a relatively long duration of seven years, which has seldom been achieved in previous studies.

In this study, patients with IPF only and those with IPF with emphysema had similar survival outcomes after receiving anti-fibrotic agents. Lower BMI and comorbid pulmonary hypertension were associated with a higher risk of overall mortality. Further well-designed, large-scale, prospective studies are warranted to validate our findings.

The editorial assistance was provided to the authors by Nova Journal Experts.

Yu-Hung Fang: Writing– original draft; Writing– review & editing.Yi-An Hsieh: Methodology; Formal analysis.Yen-Fu Chen: Data curation; Formal analysis.Yu-Chi Chiu: Data curation; Formal analysis.Yu-Ching Lin: Data curation; Formal analysis.Kuo-Tung Huang: Data curation; Formal analysis.Yung-Chia Huang: Data curation; Formal analysis.Yu-Feng Wei: Conceptualization; Project administration; Supervision.Chien-Wen Huang: Supervision.Pin-Kuei Fu: Methodology; Data curation; Formal analysis.

The authors sincerely appreciate funding in part by the Department of Medical Research of Taichung Veterans General Hospital (TCVGH-1137308 C; TCVGH-1123104D; TCVGH-1128303D; TCVGH-1137308D) and National Science and Technology Council of Taiwan (NSTC 112-2314-B-075 A-003 -MY3) for the supporting of study manpower, materials, and the publication fees.