Bovine leptospirosis is a globally distributed zoonotic disease that significantly impacts animal production and public health, leading to abortions and infertility in cattle. The aims of our study were (1) to quantitatively summarize the global and regional prevalence of anti‐Leptospiraantibodies in bovines and (2) to determine the most frequently reported serovars and serogroups affecting bovines.

A systematic literature search was conducted across five electronic databases and a search engine. Eligible studies were published between January 2018 and December 2023 in English, Spanish, or Portuguese and used the MAT for diagnosis. The methodological quality of the documents was assessed using published guidelines. Multilevel random‐effects logistic regression meta‐analysis models for single proportions, with parameters calculated via maximum likelihood, were used to estimate the pooled prevalence of anti‐Leptospiraantibodies. Statistical heterogeneity was assessed using theQandI2tests, whereas publication bias was evaluated with the Begg and Egger tests.

The meta‐analysis included 77 studies, estimating global pooled seroprevalence of 39.5% (95% CI: 33.1%–46.3%). The pooled seroprevalence was 42.7% in the Americas (95% CI: 34.5%–51.4%), 44.3% in Europe (95% CI: 6.7%–89.8%), 37.5% in Asia (95% CI: 25.4%–51.4%), and 27.4% in Africa (95% CI: 19.9%–36.4%). In 55 studies, 18 serovars were identified, with a higher frequency observed in Hardjo (31.1%), Pomona (9.8%), and Icterohaemorrhagiae (8.2%). Additionally, 65 studies reported serogroup‐specific seroprevalence, leading to Sejroe (54.9%), Pomona (9.9%), Icterohaemorrhagiae (8.5%), and Tarassovi (5.6%).

The high global seroprevalence of anti‐Leptospiraantibodies highlights the need for increased surveillance of leptospirosis in bovines. Preventive strategies should be improved to mitigate the effects of bovine leptospirosis in both animal production and public health.

A high global prevalence of anti‐Leptospiraantibodies in cattle and buffaloes (39.5%) was identified, highlighting the widespread distribution of the bacterium and the need for increased attention to bovine leptospirosis.

The prevalence of anti‐Leptospiraantibodies was higher on dual‐purpose farms, but there were no significant differences between cattle and buffaloes, by the continent in which the studies were conducted or sampling periods. The most frequently reported serogroups in bovines worldwide were Sejroe, Pomona, Tarassovi, and Icterohaemorrhagiae.

Leptospirosis is a neglected zoonotic bacterial disease of global distribution, representing a significant concern for human and veterinary public health (Samrot et al.2021). The etiological agentLeptospiraspp. presents a broad diversity of genotypic species and serological variants or serogroups and serovars, which play critical roles in its epidemiology (Azócar‐Aedo2023; Samrot et al.2021).

Animals can become infected with pathogenic leptospires through vertical transmission, direct contact with the urine or placental remains of infected animals, or indirectly through exposure to contaminated water or soil (da Costa Barnabé et al.2023). A key aspect of theLeptospiralife cycle is its ability to colonize the proximal renal tubules of infected animals, leading to bacterial excretion through urine, particularly in maintenance host species (Ellis2015; Stone et al.2022). Once excreted, the bacteria can survive for weeks in water or moist soil, supported by biofilm formation, which enhances their survival outside the host (Samrot et al.2021).

In bovines, the clinical manifestations of leptospirosis primarily affect the reproductive system, causing abortions, stillbirths and infertility (Ellis2015). Acute and multisystemic forms of the disease are more common in calves and lactating cows, presenting symptoms such as fever, haemolytic anaemia, haemoglobinuria, and jaundice, a condition known as ‘weak calf syndrome’ (Ellis2015). Lactating cows may also experience agalactia (Loureiro and Lilenbaum2020; Mughini‐Gras et al.2014; Sykes et al.2022). Abortion is frequently the only clinical sign of leptospirosis in a herd, which usually occurs in the last third of gestation; congenital infections may result in stillbirths, weak offspring, or degenerative pathologies in the liver and kidney, and surviving animals may become chronic carriers of the bacteria (Ellis2015).

Leptospirosis in bovines often results in severe economic losses because of its adverse effects on reproductive performance and animal health. Moreover, it poses a public health threat at the human–cattle‐environment interfaces (Sohm et al.2023). The epidemiology, management, control, and surveillance of leptospirosis align with the ‘One Health’ approach, emphasizing the interaction of the pathogen, infected animals, zoonotic transmission and the environmental maintenance of the bacteria (Pal et al.2021; Sykes et al.2022). Considering this context, the objectives of this study were as follows: (1) to quantitatively summarize the global and regional prevalence of anti‐Leptospiraantibodies in bovines and (2) to determine the most frequently reported serovars and serogroups affecting bovines.

This observational, quantitative, and descriptive epidemiological study employed a systematic review and meta‐analysis design and adhered to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses standards (Page et al.2021).

Eligible reports included observational studies with cross‐sectional, case–control, or longitudinal designs that reported the presence of bovine leptospirosis or anti‐Leptospiraantibodies in cattle (Bos taurus) and buffaloes (Bubalus bubalis). Studies had to be published between January 2018 and December 2023 in English, Spanish, or Portuguese. Articles were required to use the Microscopic Agglutination Test (MAT), recognized as the gold standard for the serological diagnosis of leptospirosis, to detect anti‐Leptospiraantibodies in bovines. Full‐text articles and abstracts that reported the prevalence of leptospirosis and/or provided data on sample size and the number of positive animals were included. Exclusion criteria encompassed clinical trials, bibliographic reviews, duplicate articles, unpublished studies, letters to the editor, audiovisual materials and journalistic publications.

The electronic documentary databases EBSCOHost, Science Direct, PubMed, Redalyc, and SciELO, as well as Google Scholar and journal websites, were used to search for eligible studies. Additionally, asnowball searchwas conducted to identify additional studies from the reference lists of the selected articles. Different keywords were combined using the ‘AND’ and ‘OR’ boolean operators to refine the search (Table1).

Two reviewers (M.F.M. and L.A.A.) independently screened the publications for eligibility, resolving any discrepancies by consensus. The initial screening of search results and the removal of duplicate entries were performed manually.

Three review authors (M.F.M., T.R., and L.A.A.) extracted the following data from each selected publication: author(s), year of publication, geographic location of the study (country, continent), start and end years of sampling, sampled animal species (cattle or buffalo), purpose of the animals (dairy, beef, or mixed [‘dual’]), sample size, number of MAT‐positive animals, prevalence with its confidence intervals (95% CI), and detected serogroups and serovars. If a publication did not report the estimation of prevalence and its 95% CI, these values were calculated using the methodology described by Noordhuizen et al. (2001). For studies reporting seroprevalence separately for cattle and buffalo, the estimate for each species was treated as a separate effect estimate.

The scientific and methodological qualities of the publications were assessed in full‐text articles and abstracts using specific components of the STROBE‐Vet statement (O'Connor et al.2016), as detailed in Table2. When a document fulfilled the selected criteria, it was considered acceptable for methodological quality and included in the review (Azocar‐Aedo2022). The studies were analysed independently by two review authors (M.F.M. and L.A.A.), who resolved discrepancies by consensus.

Characteristics of abstracts and full‐text articles used to evaluate their scientific and methodological quality (O'Connor et al.2016).

The title and purpose of the abstract clearly indicate the research topic and study design.

The abstract specifies that the study is observational.

The geographical location of the study is mentioned.

The diagnostic test used and the sample size are defined.

The main results (prevalence), number of positive animals, or unadjusted estimates with precision (e.g., 95% CI) are described.

The geographic location and dates or periods of data collection are clearly indicated.

The criteria for selecting animal owners/managers and animals, along with sources, methods of selection, and monitoring mechanisms (if applicable), are described.

The diagnostic test used, sample size, main results (prevalence), number of positive animals, or unadjusted estimate with precision (e.g., 95% CI) are reported.

Data cleaning and analysis were conducted in R software (R Core Team2024) using themetapackage (Balduzzi et al.2019). For the descriptive analysis, categorical variables were presented as frequencies (%) and continuous variables as medians (IQR). To determine the most frequentLeptospiraserovars and serogroups detected in seropositive bovines, we generated bar plots with the absolute frequencies of the serovars and serogroups identified in the included studies.

The global pooled prevalence of anti‐Leptospiraantibodies was estimated by fitting multilevel random‐effects logistic regression meta‐analysis models for single proportions, with parameters calculated via maximum likelihood. Statistical heterogeneity was assessed using theQtest, complemented with the inconsistency test (I2) (Bown and Sutton2010) and Tau2(T2) (Veroniki et al.2016). Moderator analysis was performed to evaluate the continent, type of production system, animal species, and sampling year as potential sources of statistical heterogeneity. Forest plots were generated to visually represent the prevalences reported in the included studies. Publication bias was assessed using Begg and Egger tests (Lin et al.2018).

The literature search identified a total of 385 studies related to leptospirosis in bovines, of which 33 were removed due to duplicate studies, and 253 did not meet the inclusion criteria. Another 21 studies were excluded through critical analysis, resulting in a total of 77 eligible studies and 85 effect estimates (Figure1and TableS1).

PRISMA flowchart for the identification and selection of studies included in the systematic review and meta‐analysis. Flow diagram generated using the PRISMA Flow Diagram tool (Haddaway et al.,2022).

The majority of the studies were conducted in America (59.7%), followed by Asia (24.7%), Africa (11.7%) and Europe (3.9%). No studies have been conducted in Oceania. Brazil accounted for the highest number of publications (37.7%), followed by India (14.3%) and Colombia (9.1%, TableS1). A considerable proportion of the studies (37.2%) did not specify whether the sampled animals were used for dairy, beef, or both. Among the studies that provided this information, 27.3% focused on beef production, 26% on dairy farms, and 9.1% on mixed production systems. Most of the estimated effect corresponded to cattle (84.7%), and the remaining 15.3% corresponded to buffalo (TableS1). A total of 20 of the selected studies (26%) did not report the sampling period. Among those with defined sampling periods, the median sampling year was 2016 (IQR: 2015–2017), with a range spanning 2007–2022.

The pooled global seroprevalence was estimated at 39.5% (95% CI: 33.1%–46.3%) based on 1,305,352 observations and 76,594 events across 77 studies and 85 effect estimates (Figure2). TheI2test (99.9%), theT2estimate (1.41), and theQtest (p< 0.001) indicated the presence of high statistical heterogeneity. Additionally, Begg and Egger tests (p< 0.001) were statistically significant, suggesting the presence of publication bias.

Forest plot of the overall prevalence of anti‐Leptospiraantibodies in cattle in the articles included in the meta‐analysis.

The pooled regional prevalences were as follows: 42.7% in America (95% CI: 34.5%–51.4%,k= 47), 44.3% in Europe (95% CI: 6.7%–89.8%,k= 3), 37.5% in Asia (95% CI: 25.4%–51.4%,k= 26), and 27.4% in Africa (95% CI: 19.9%–36.4%,k= 9) (Figure3). Statistical heterogeneity remained high across all groups, withI2values exceeding 90%. The differences in seroprevalence among continents were not statistically significant (p= 0.477, Figure3).

Pooled prevalence of anti‐Leptospiraantibodies in cattle by (A) continent, (B) purpose of the animals (n= 48,k= 50) and (C) sampled species.

Among the studies that reported the production purpose of the sampled animals, seroprevalence was higher in the mixed (dual‐purpose) production systems compared with dairy farms or beef farms, but these differences were not statistically significant (p= 0.053, Figure3). The seroprevalence of buffaloes was not significantly different from that of cattle (p= 0.066, Figure3). No significant temporal trends in seroprevalence were observed across the selected studies (beta = 0.084, se = 0.052,p= 0.107).

A total of 18 pathogenic serovars were identified as the most prevalent among the 55 studies. The predominant serovars were Hardjo (31.1%), Pomona (9.8%), and Icterohaemorrhagiae (8.2%, Figure4). A total of 65 studies (83.3%) reported serogroup‐specific seroprevalence. Among the 11 predominant serogroups found in bovines and reported in 65 studies, the most frequently detected was Sejroe (54.9%), followed by Pomona (9.9%), Icterohaemorrhagiae (8.5%), and Tarassovi (5.6%, Figure4).

Frequency of studies describing seropositivity forLeptospira(A) Most frequently detected serovars (k= 55); (B) Most frequently detected serogroups (k= 65).

The present study estimated a global prevalence of anti‐Leptospiraantibodies in bovines at 39.5% (95% CI: 33.1%–46.3%), with higher seroprevalences observed in animals from mixed‐purpose farms. This estimation is higher than those reported in systematic reviews and meta‐analyses for other production animals, such as goats (18.6%; 95% CI: 15.1%–22.7%) and swine (22%; 95% CI: 16.7%–28.4%) (de Araújo Portela et al.2024; Gomes de Araújo et al.2023). Similarly, seroprevalence in bovines exceeds the 19.5% reported for domestic dogs and the seroprevalences below 12% reported for cats (Azócar‐Aedo2023; Ricardo et al.2024). Our findings highlight the widespread occurrence of leptospirosis in bovines worldwide. However, despite its importance, leptospirosis remains a major challenge due to the scarce information currently available on prophylaxis and control in relation to its epidemiologic patterns (Lilenbaum and Martins2014).

Seroprevalence varied among regions, ranging from 42.7% in the Americas to 27.4% in Africa, though these differences were not statistically significant. The number of studies contributing to each estimate varied, with most conducted in South America and Asia, particularly in Brazil, India, and Colombia, reflecting a strong research focus onLeptospirainfection in these regions. In Brazil, milk production occurs in approximately 99% of rural areas, making the country the fifth largest global producer of cow's milk (Fávero et al.2017). Estimates indicate that approximately 30% of cows experience reproductive failures (Libonati et al.2018). Additionally, tropical and subtropical climates, high temperatures, abundant rodent populations, and extensive wetlands create favourable conditions forLeptospiratransmission (Fadrique Da Silva et al.2022). In India, agroclimatic factors such as flooding, sewage contamination, high rodent populations, mixed farming practices and inadequate biosecurity measures contribute to high seropositivity (Senthilkumar et al.2021). While in Colombia, some studies suggest that seropositivity toLeptospirahas increased over time in various cattle‐raising regions, indicating a possible endemism (Góngora Orjuela et al.2022; Guzman Barragan et al.2023).

The studies included in this research were classified according to the purpose of the animals: mixed, dairy and beef. The pooled seroprevalence was higher in mixed or ‘dual‐purpose animals’ than in dairy and beef animals. However, only seven effect estimates corresponded to mixed‐purpose animals. Endemic infectious diseases in dairy cattle are a significant concern for both the industry and public health due to their potential impact on animal and human health, milk production, and food safety (Pradhan et al.2009). Conversely, the prevalence ofLeptospirainfection in beef cattle farms is influenced by multiple environmental, management, and individual factors (Mazzanti et al.2023). It is important to determine whether mixed‐purpose animals have a greater predisposition to infection or specific risk factors through cross‐sectional or case–control epidemiological studies. Such research would improve awareness of the disease across different production systems.

The seroprevalence was also assessed by bovine species, revealing a greater number of studies in cattle versus buffalo. Although there were no statistically significant differences, the pooled seroprevalence was also high in buffaloes (52.0%; 95% CI: 36.0%–67.0%). This finding has important implications for veterinary practitioners, as the clinical aspects ofLeptospirainfection in buffaloes are not well described. From an agricultural perspective, this issue is also relevant since buffaloes are considered a suitable alternative for food production in less developed regions (Desta2012). Leptospirosis also has a greater impact on marginalized rural and urban communities in developing countries (Uribe‐Restrepo et al.2024), underscoring the need for further investigation.

In systematic reviews, efforts should be made to locate both published and unpublished scientific evidence relevant to the research question (Stern and Kleijnen2020). The use of language restrictions in bibliographic searches (for example, only English language) is a common practice that risks overlooking key data and introducing language bias, which may limit the findings and usefulness of the review (Jackson et al.2019; Walpole2019). We conducted the bibliographic search in three languages: Spanish, English, and Portuguese, to maximize the likelihood of finding relevant information. The majority of articles were written in English (88.0%), followed by Portuguese (7.0%) and Spanish (5.0%), and we conclude that the language of the studies did not influence the study results of the pooled prevalence or the prevalences determined by subgroups (continent, purpose of the animals, and species).

One of the major challenges in controlling leptospirosis in animals and humans is the limited accessibility of diagnostic methods (Sykes et al.2022). Several approaches are used for diagnosis, including the MAT, enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), bacteriological culture from urine or tissue samples, dark field microscopy observation of biological samples (i.e., urine) or polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (Philip et al.2020). Among these, MAT is considered the gold standard for the serodiagnosis of leptospirosis due to its high specificity and the capacity to identify the most likely infecting leptospiral serogroup (Samrot et al.2021), which is important for understanding the epidemiology of the disease and determining the maintenance hosts (Guedes et al.2021). A four‐fold rise in titres or seroconversion is the most definitive criterion for diagnosis of leptospirosis; however, obtaining a second sample can be challenging (Shivakumar and Krishnakumar2006). Some laboratories lack access to a large number of reference strains ofLeptospira spp. for use in the panel (Sandoval et al.2018), and the MAT has limited diagnostic performance measures in chronic infections in maintenance hosts, as the antibody response may be negligible and could be present as subclinical infections (Terpstra et al.1985).

The most frequent serovars in the retrieved studies were Hardjo, Pomona, and Icterohaemorrhagiae. Bovines serve as maintenance hosts of serovar Hardjo and can excrete pathogenic leptospires in their urine (Ellis2015). Serovar Pomona is maintained by swine (Greene2008) and wild mammals (Guedes et al.2021), and it can induce acute kidney disease and abortions in cattle (Wilson‐Welder et al.2021). Serovar Icterohaemorrhagiae, maintained by rodents, is associated with acute infections in cattle, while serovar Tarassovi is maintained by both wild and domestic swine and can cause abortion and reproductive failure in bovines (Ellis2015). RegardingLeptospiraserogroups, the most frequently reported were Sejroe, Pomona, Icterohaemorrhagiae, and Tarassovi, which reflect those circulating in bovines worldwide. These findings indicate variability in the MAT panels across studies, which should include the most prevalent and representative serogroups in each geographical area where anti‐Leptospiraantibody screenings are performed (Sykes et al.2022). In addition, identifying the most frequent serogroups provides valuable information for the development of vaccines that could improve those currently available for bovines. Notably, in the studies included in this research, the number of serovars used as antigens in the MAT panels ranged from 2 to 31, with an average of 9.35 and a median of 8.0. In general, these serovars matched those most prevalent in cattle and those reported in a literature review on leptospirosis in cattle in tropical countries, specifically Hardjo, Grippotyphosa, Pomona, Icterohaemorrhagiae, and Tarassovi (Lilenbaum and Martins2014), which belong to different serogroups such as Sejroe, Grippotyphosa, Icterohaemorrhagiae, and Pomona, also described as frequent in cattle in Europe in a recent bibliographic review (Sohm et al.2023).

Considering the high global prevalence of anti‐Leptospiraantibodies in bovines estimated in the present study, prevention measures in breeding and production facilities are essential. Local studies are critical for improving knowledge of the epidemiology of bovine leptospirosis and for developing relevant, locally adapted prevention and control strategies (Sohm et al.2023). Biosecurity strategies should be primarily focused on minimizing the risk of introducing infected animals into a herd and preventing the spread of infection by reducing the interactions between potentially infected introduced cattle and the herd (Bolin and Alt1999; Regassa and Obsu2024).

Leptospirosis control requires interdisciplinary collaboration and scientific evidence supporting the ‘One Health’ perspective (Hernandez‐Rodriguez and Trujillo‐Rojas2022; Sohm et al.2023). Inter‐institutional efforts are necessary to implement control and monitoring programmes for the disease (Góngora Orjuela et al.2022). Control initiatives should aim to reduce morbidity and losses within the cattle population, with special emphasis on the prevention of clinical disease (Bolin and Alt1999).

It is important to note that publication bias was detected. According to Rothstein et al. (2005), this bias arises from the tendency to publish scientific research based on the results rather than theoretical or methodological quality, leading to the selective publication of articles with favourable or statistically significant results. Preventing publication bias by registering research undertaken or locating all publishing studies is ideal but challenging to achieve (Thornton and Lee2000). In the present research, the pooled prevalence was estimated by fitting multilevel random‐effects logistic regression meta‐analysis models for single proportions, with parameters calculated via maximum likelihood, a robust statistical methodology that confers validity to the results, even in the presence of publication bias.

Another limitation of this study is the high statistical heterogeneity observed among included studies, which may affect the estimation of seroprevalence. Heterogeneity includes all differences between individual studies related to the study design and populations (Melsen et al.2014). Results of multiple studies always differ to some extent, but studies are heterogeneous when their underlying target parameters differ, and meta‐analyses addressing broadly framed questions or the incidence or prevalence of a disease in diverse environments may be highly heterogeneous (Imrey2020). The detection of heterogeneity was expected due to the large number of studies included, conducted in different geographic regions of the world, with different epidemiological scenarios for the disease. Therefore, in addition to estimating the pooled global prevalence of anti‐Leptospiraantibodies, specific prevalences were determined with moderator analysis in different subgroups, such as the continent where the studies were conducted, the purpose of the animals (mixed, dairy, and beef), and species (cattle and buffalo). Additionally, the concentration of studies in certain countries and continents indicates that some regions put greater research efforts into bovine leptospirosis than others. Despite these limitations, our findings provide valuable information on the global frequency of anti‐Leptospiraantibodies in bovines, as well as the main circulating serovars and serogroups circulating. This study also contributes to a better understanding of epidemiological aspects of the disease and supports the need for further research in buffaloes and in under‐represented regions.

A high global prevalence of anti‐Leptospiraantibodies of 39.5% was estimated in bovines in studies published between 2018 and 2023, using the MAT as a diagnostic assay, which highlights the need for enhanced attention to leptospirosis in these animals. More frequency of the Hardjo, Pomona and Icterohaemorrhagiae serovars is observed, in addition to a dominant presentation of the Sejroe, Pomona, and Icterohaemorrhagiae serogroups.

The prevalence of anti‐Leptospiraantibodies has variations regarding bovine species (cattle vs. buffaloes) and the purpose of the sampled animals (dairy, beef and mixed), as well as in the number of published studies depending on the continent. Preventive strategies should be prioritized for better management and control of the disease.