The most frequently cited studies in a given field are those which are pioneering and have been widely accepted by the academic community. The aim of this study was to analyse the 100 most‐cited articles published in veterinary journals bibliometrically.

The 100 most‐cited articles were identified in the Web of Science database. These articles were bibliometrically examined and visualised. The association between average citations per year, years since publication, number of authors, journal impact factor and article length were assessed by Spearman's correlation analysis. Bibliometric analysis and mapping processes were performed using RStudio software.

Amongst the 100 most‐cited articles published between 1980 and 2016, the year 2000 had the highest number of publications (n= 8). The total number of citations ranged from 475 to 1638; the median citation number was 608.5. The most‐cited paper was published in 2004 by Desjeux. The country with the most publications was the United States, with 48 articles. A total of 145 institutions contributed to the 100 most‐cited papers, with the University of California having the most publications with 12 papers. There was a statistically significant negative correlation between the annual average number of citations and the years since publication (r= −0.769,p< 0.001). No significant relationship was found between the average yearly number of citations and other indicators.

The present study provides insight into research in animal health, offering a comprehensive understanding of the trends and contributions of research in this field.

This study shows the results of bibliometric analysis of the 100 most‐cited articles in the field of veterinary medicine. The most‐cited studies in a field are widely recognised as pioneering and exemplary. The analysis aimed to evaluate exemplary research in veterinary medicine in many aspects. It is also expected to guide future studies by identifying important authors, journals and institutions. As a result, it is thought that the deficiency identified in terms of a comprehensive review of the existing literature in the field of veterinary medicine has been completed.

Veterinary medicine is a scientific discipline that prevents diseases and promotes animal welfare. This field encompasses a wide range of subjects, including but not limited to animal diseases and treatment, surgical interventions, animal nutrition and dietetics, veterinary microbiology, pharmacology, oncology, reproduction, genetics, epidemiology and public health, animal welfare and ethics. Consequently, the academic literature on animal health is extensive. Although readily available, clinicians and researchers may not always be able to evaluate the quality of the publications they read.

Bibliometric analysis is a method of examining research trends in a particular field. It involves the examination of scientific publications to determine the performance of researchers, institutions or journals. The analysis can also improve collaborations, discover information gaps in the literature and develop publication strategies. Using numerical data to analyse scientific activity and performance is a significant endeavour, as it facilitates a comprehensive evaluation of the scientific literature within a specific domain. This approach enables the identification of influential articles, thereby providing a comprehensive overview of the field (van Leeuwen2004; Praveen et al.2020; Wang et al.2020).

Citation analysis is a bibliometric approach that examines the frequency and pattern of citations an article receives over time. It is a method of measuring the impact of research on scientific production. It is widely accepted that the number of citations and citation rates are the most commonly used bibliometric indicators of the impact of journal articles (Moed2009; Beatriz et al.2018; Pena‐Cristobal et al.2018). Nevertheless, whilst citations may not be regarded as a comprehensive indicator of study quality (Brandt et al.2010; Pena‐Cristobal et al.2018), articles with a high‐citation frequency can offer significant insights into past and current research trends in a specific field, thereby holding considerable value within the scientific community (Ahmad, Dummer, Chaudhry, et al.2019; Ahmad, Dummer, Noorani, et al.2019; Yi et al.2021). Bibliometric indicators, when interpreted and applied with care and in combination with expert knowledge, are helpful tools for assessing research performance.

Several bibliometric analysis studies have previously been conducted in the domain of veterinary medicine, which encompasses a broad spectrum of subjects. Many of these studies have been restricted in scope since they have only examined articles published in a single journal through bibliometric analysis (Crawley‐Low2006; Arad et al.2023). In addition, some studies have failed to consider the latest information, as they were published long before today, although they did not select any journal (Elsinghorst2005; Pelzer and Wiese2003). A comprehensive and contemporary research initiative must be undertaken to systematically examine the characteristics of veterinary journal articles, focusing on studies about animal health.

This study aimed to analyse the main characteristics and trends of highly cited research published in animal health. For this purpose, the 100 most‐cited articles in veterinary journals were evaluated by bibliometric analysis through the Web of Science. Considering the importance of animal health, this study focuses not only on citability, but also on identifying thematic trends in this field, which can help in planning future research.

A search was conducted of the Web of Science Core Collection database on 19 February 2025 for the 100 most‐cited articles in the field of veterinary medicine, with no limitations applied in terms of publication language or time. In the section designated as ‘Web of Science categories’, the ‘Veterinary Science’ option was selected, and the publication type was determined as ‘Article’. To determine the 100 most‐cited articles, the search results were ranked as citations: highest first, and the list of the 100 most‐cited articles was determined. In the first stage, although the study type was selected as an article since there was a book chapter in the list obtained, that study was removed, and the article ranked 101st was included in the list as 100th. The diagram showing the methodology used to determine the 100 most‐cited articles in veterinary medicine was presented in Figure1. All articles in the final list were rechecked for publication in veterinary journals. Because of the utilisation of articles already in the public domain, in conjunction with the non‐inclusion of any patient data within the present review, it was determined that this particular study would be exempt from the necessity of obtaining approval from the relevant institutional ethics committee.

The diagram showing the methodology used to determine the 100 most‐cited articles in veterinary medicine is presented. The data in this diagram is based on 19 February 2025.

The following data were obtained for each article identified for the study: the title, the name of the first author, the country of the corresponding author, the institution of the corresponding author, the number of authors in the study, the year of publication, the name of the journal, the number of citations and the number of pages. Furthermore, the impact factor (IF) values of the journals in which the articles were found, as well as the quartile (Qvalue) information of the journal, were extracted from the Journal of Citation Reports (https://jcr.clarivate.com).

The records of the 100 articles were transferred to the R Studio program, bibliometric analysis was applied with the help of the biblioshiny package (Aria and Cuccurullo2017), and visualisation maps were created. In these maps, elements are represented by circles. The size of each circle indicates the weight, that is, importance, of the corresponding component, whilst the lines between the circles show the total connection strength. In addition, descriptive statistics related to the characteristics of the analysed articles were calculated. The Shapiro–Wilk test was conducted to assess the normality of the data. Spearman Correlation Analysis analysed the relationship between bibliometric indicators in IBM SPSS Statistics 24.0 (IBM, Chicago, IL, USA). In the correlation analysis, because recently published articles need exposure to increase their citations, annual average citation values were used instead of citation counts to avoid missing important recently published articles. The average citations per year was calculated by dividing the total number of citations of each article by the number of years since the publication of that article. For the interpretation of statistical results, a value ofp< 0.05 was considered significant.

As a result of the Web of Science data search, it was determined that there were 535,915 articles published in the veterinary sciences category. For this study, the 100 most‐cited articles published in 44 academic journals by 145 institutions from 22 countries were ranked in descending order of citation. The complete list of the 100 articles analysed was provided in theSupporting Information. Some characteristics of the 10 most‐cited articles were shown in Table1. The most‐cited paper was published by Desjeux (2004) in Comparative Immunology, Microbiology and Infectious Diseases and received 1638 citations. For the 100 papers analysed, the total number of citations ranged from 475 to 1638, the median citation number was 608.5 (Q1:513–Q3:726), and the average age of the documents was 24.4 years. Whilst 11 articles analysed received more than 1000 citations, 83 received more than 500.

The top 10 most cited articles in the top 100 articles published in veterinary sciences.

The 100 articles selected were published between 1980 and 2016, with 2000 being the year with the highest number of publications (n= 8). Figure2showed the distribution of the number of publications and the average number of citations by year. The year with the highest average number of citations was 2012, with 55.46, followed by 2016, with 48.60 citations and 2013 with 45.68 citations. The earliest paper was written by Williams and Young and published in the Journal of Wildlife Diseases. The latest paper was written by Mellor and published in the journal Animals. The 100 veterinary articles cited most frequently were published in 44 journals, all in English. The top 10 journals with the most‐cited articles were shown in Table2with their characteristics. The number of articles in the same journal varied between 1 and 10. Amongst the journals with 100 articles published, Annual Review of Animal Biosciences was the journal with the highest impact factor (IF = 8.7). Theriogenology, the journal with the highest number of publications (n= 10), had an IF of 2.4. In addition, 57 of the first 100 studies were published in journals with an IF of 2 or more.

The annual distribution of publications (A) and the average citation frequencies in the relevant years (B) show the changes in trend in academic impact over time. The data in this graph is based on 19 February 2025.

Journals with most cited in top 100 articles published in veterinary sciences.

For the analysis of all authors, a total of 438 authors were included in these articles that have been cited most frequently. The number of articles with only one author is 20. A total of 16 authors contributed with two articles, whilst others had only one. The first author's address was used to determine the country of origin. The first authors of the first 100 articles came from 22 different countries. The country with the most publications was the United States, with 48 articles, followed by the United Kingdom, with 13 articles. According to the addresses of the first authors, 145 institutions contributed to the papers cited most frequently in veterinary sciences, with the University of California, Davis having the most publications with 12 papers. The list of the top 10 countries and institutions that contributed most to the 100 most‐cited papers was shown in Table3. The collaborative network of first authors, their countries and institutions contributing to the 100 most‐cited papers was shown in Figure3. It was found that 584 different keywords were used in the articles analysed. The most frequently used keywords were rainbow trout (n= 10), cattle (n= 6), carpCyprinus‐carpio(n= 5), disease (n= 5), troutOncorhynchus‐mykiss(n= 5) and Atlantic salmon (n= 5).

Countries and institutions contributing to the 100 most‐cited articles.

Network visualisation analysis shows the contribution frequency by country (A), institutions (B) and author (C) in the 100 most cited articles on veterinary medicine. The size of the circles is proportional to the amount of associations.

A statistically significant negative correlation was found between the annual average number of citations and the years since publication (r= −0.769,p< 0.001). The average number of citations per year decreases as the number of years since publication increases. No significant correlation was found between the average citations per year and the number of authors (r= 0.038;p= 0.705), the IF of the journal (r= 0.178;p= 0.077) and the number of pages of the article (r= 0.151;p= 0.135). Figure4showed the correlation between average citation per year, years since publication, number of authors, journals' IF and number of pages.

The correlation between average citation per year and years since publication is statistically significant. But the association between average citation per year and the other indicators are not significant.

Veterinary medicine is a broad branch of science that focuses on animal health, diseases, nutrition, reproduction and welfare. Evaluating extant scientific literature on animal health, which encompasses such a broad spectrum, constitutes a significant challenge. Bibliometric studies are chiefly concerned with measuring academic productivity and using quantitative methodologies to assess research activities within a specific domain (Kumar et al.2023). The number of studies that have employed bibliometric methods to examine the extant literature on animal health has been limited. Crawley‐Low (2006) conducted a bibliometric analysis of veterinary medicine journals in the American Journal of Veterinary Research. In another study, Pelzer and Wiese (2003) analysed bibliographic citations in 12 major veterinary journals, focusing on the use and nature of grey literature in veterinary medicine. Elsinghorst (2005) conducted a bibliometric analysis of the 96 most frequently cited articles published in veterinary journals in 2002 and 2003. Arad et al. (2023) bibliometrically analysed the 100 most‐cited articles published in Veterinary Ophthalmology in the most recent publication in this field.

In this study, the 100 most‐cited articles published in veterinary journals were quantitatively analysed using the bibliometric analysis method, and the relationships between some bibliometric indicators were evaluated. The present study is notable for its comprehensive approach, which encompasses a wide range of journals, years and topics within the field of animal health. The report offers a balanced synthesis of general information, supplemented by the most recent findings. The analysis focuses on the 100 most‐cited articles in veterinary science, which were published by 145 institutions across 22 countries in 44 peer‐reviewed journals. These articles have collectively received 68,307 citations, reflecting their significant impact on the academic community. The Web of Science database was the primary source for this study, and all journals in which the articles analysed are included are SCI‐expanded indexed and are placed in the Q1, Q2 and Q3 quartiles. This finding indicates that all of the studies were published in high‐quality journals. In contrast to the studies of Arad et al. (2023) and Elsinghorst (2005), no time restriction was imposed during the database search in this study. Consequently, the analysed studies span a publication interval of 36 years, although the list predominantly comprises publications from 2000.

The total number of citations for a published article is a significant metric, as articles with a high‐citation frequency can provide crucial insights into the current state of research in a particular field (Fei et al.2022). Elsinghorst (2005) analysed the 96 most‐cited articles in veterinary journals and included articles with 20 or more citations in the evaluation, stating that the number of citations varied between 1 and 53, and the average number of citations was 25.3. In this study, the total citation frequency for the 100 articles analysed ranged from 475 to 1638, with a median citation count of 608.5. This considerable disparity can be attributed to the fact that this study was published in 2005, and only 2 years (2002 and 2003) were selected. No date restriction was implemented in this study.

The analysis of journals enables researchers to comprehend the distribution of articles within journals. This process is instrumental in the selection of appropriate journals within the domain of veterinary science and the evaluation of article quality. In this study, an analysis of the journals containing the 100 most‐cited articles revealed that most publications were found in Theriogenology. This finding closely resembles the study of Elsinghorst (2005) in 2005. In the present study, most of the 96 analysed articles were published in the same journal, with 21 out of the total articles published in Theriogenology. The most prolific journals were Developmental and Comparative Immunology and Fish & Shellfish Immunology, followed by Veterinary Immunology, Immunopathology, and Veterinary Microbiology, as reported by Elsinghorst in 2005. A consideration of the IFs of the journals reveals that 57 of the 100 articles analysed in this study were published in journals with an IF of 2 and above, in contrast to 10 out of 96 articles identified as being so in the previous study (Elsinghorst2005). This finding indicates a substantial increase in the publication rate in journals with an IF of 2 and above, from 10.41% to 57% amongst the studies included in the most‐cited article list. This result demonstrates a notable enhancement in the quality of publications within the field of veterinary medicine.

This study determined that the article with the highest citation frequency in the field of veterinary science was the article titled ‘Leishmaniasis: current situation and new perspectives’, which was written by Desjeux and highly cited. This article is a practical guide on Leishmaniasis. A subsequent analysis of the 100 most‐cited articles regarding the number of contributing authors revealed that 16 authors had contributed to two articles each. In contrast, the remaining authors had only contributed to a single article. Given that the number of articles is equal, it would be more appropriate to mention these 16 authors rather than a single author as the definition of the most productive author.

When the top 100 most‐cited papers in veterinary science were analysed according to the first author's country, it was found that the United States, the United Kingdom and France were the most productive countries. The total number of articles published in these three countries constitutes 61% of the top 100. In the study of Elsinghorst (2005), this order is the United States, the United Kingdom and Canada. Even though the review covers only 2002 and 2003, it is seen that the United States is the leading contributing country in this field. Arad et al. (2023) determined that Brazil was the country with the second highest number of articles after the United States in the ranking of the country of the first author in the articles in the relevant journal (Veterinary Opthalmology).

A total of 145 institutions contributed to the 100 most‐cited papers in veterinary sciences, according to the addresses of the first authors. The University of California was the most prolific institution, followed by Iowa State University and the University of Pennsylvania. The fact that most of the institutions in the list are located in the United States explains why the United States is the leader in the list of countries and has great potential in veterinary sciences research. This finding is unsurprising because the United States publishes more medical articles, and its medical research is cited to a greater extent than any other country worldwide (Elsinghorst2005). The keywords analysis reflects the current hot topics in the most‐cited articles. It can be seen that the most frequently cited articles in this field focus on various fish species, diseases and cattle.

In this study, a quantitative analysis was conducted on the 100 most‐cited articles published in the field of veterinary science. The analysis encompassed various metrics, including the number of citations, the initial author's country and institution, and the characteristics of the journal in which the article was published. In addition, maps were created to illustrate the collaborative relationships between countries, institutions and authors. Furthermore, the study evaluated the relationships between specific bibliometric properties of the analysed articles. In the studies examining the most‐cited articles in veterinary medicine, bibliometric features have been considered descriptively, with no statistical evaluation between these indicators. This feature is one of the most important differences between this study and those conducted in similar fields.

In this study, the annual average number of citations (i.e., the citation density) was utilised instead of the raw number of citations of the articles in the statistical evaluation phase. This was because recently published articles require time to accrue citations. The annual average number of citations was employed in the statistical evaluation to avoid overlooking articles of significant importance published more recently.

The present study has determined a negative and significant relationship between the average annual number of citations and the number of years since the article was published (the age of the article was calculated concerning the year 2024). This indicates that as the age of the article increases, the average annual number of citations decreases. This phenomenon may indicate a perpetual refinement within the scientific community, wherein successive studies augment prior contributions and cite more recent publications rather than primary sources. Whilst not in the same field, the relationship between the average annual number of citations and the time elapsed after publication was examined in the study of Uthman et al. (2013), in which the 100 most‐cited systematic reviews and meta‐analyses were examined. This relationship was investigated similarly to this study. In that study, a negative and significant relationship between the average annual number of citations and the time elapsed after publication was determined as in our study. This study demonstrated that the average number of citations per year is unrelated to the number of authors, the IF of the journal in which the article is located, and the number of pages.

In contrast, the study by Uthman et al. (2013) determined that the average annual number of citations increases with the number of authors and the journal's IF. The findings of this study are contingent upon the data set of the articles analysed. In order to evaluate the quality and impact of a study, it is necessary to consider not only its technical parameters but also other factors such as the novelty of the topic and its clinical application.

In this study, the 100 most‐cited articles published in the field of veterinary science were analysed bibliometrically to provide a comprehensive overview of the most‐cited articles. The analysis included various factors and indicators, ensuring a detailed and balanced evaluation. The study's novel approach, which does not restrict the analysis to specific periods or journals, enhances the relevance and comprehensiveness of the findings. As bibliometric studies quantitatively detail the existing literature, it is thought that this study provides detailed information about the studies conducted in the field of veterinary science.

The present study is subject to several limitations. Firstly, the focus is on articles from a single database. Although the Web of Science is the most widely used search engine in bibliometric studies, generating new lists using different databases may provide an opportunity to compare the present study's findings. Secondly, the results of the present study are valid for 19 February 2025. Repeating the study after some time may cause slight changes in the results. A further limitation of the study is that only the ‘veterinary sciences’ category was selected from amongst the Web of Science categories during the database scanning phase of the study. If articles about animals have been published in a different category in the relevant database, they may not be included. This is due to the fact that the study concentrated exclusively on articles published in veterinary journals.

In this study, the 100 most‐cited articles in the field of veterinary science were evaluated using a variety of indicators. Analysing the most‐cited publications in a field is essential to determine the current status and global trends, and the lack of bibliometric studies, both in general veterinary sciences and in some veterinary disciplines, relatively precludes additional analysis of reported results and interpretation of conclusions. However, the present study provides insight into research in animal health, offering a comprehensive understanding of the trends and contributions of research in this field. In summary, it is thought that the results of this bibliometric analysis study in the field of veterinary medicine will contribute to the efficient direction of research in the field, increase scientific productivity, understand the literature more effectively and provide a particular perspective for future studies. The study's findings suggest the presence of thematic gaps within the domain of veterinary medicine, thereby underscoring potential benefits from interdisciplinary research or regional analyses. The present research may be considered as a foundation for further studies. Such subsequent studies may compare findings from different databases or qualitatively examine articles.