Millions of people worldwide suffer from Parkinson’s disease (PD), which has a varying distribution and features in each country. Since there is a shortage of data regarding PD patients in Iran, we present a registry-based study to deepen our understanding of Iranian PD patients’ characteristics, distribution, and clinical differences between genders and different ages of onset. In six years, 4048 patients were interviewed, who had a mean age of 67.66 years, and consisted of 1474 (36.4%) females and 2571 (63.5%) males. Men suffered more from apathy, speech, handwriting, and salivation, while women experienced more anxiety, depression, pain, and psychosis, after multivariable regression. Early-onset Parkinson’s disease (EOPD) and late-onset Parkinson’s disease (LOPD) were divided based on the 50-year-old cut-off age. They were represented by 989 (24.6%) and 2834 (70%) of the total, respectively, and EOPD patients had a higher duration of the disease and a higher positive family history.

Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a condition associated with dopamine deficiency, and it is the second most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder globally. PD is an age-related illness, and its Incidence increases 5 to 10-fold from the sixth to the ninth decades of life1. The etiology of this movement disorder is multifactorial and is a result of genetic and environmental factors1. Although the predominant factor varies between patients, the heritability of PD is mentioned to be up to 30% in different populations2,3. This disorder presents with numerous manifestations, which can be impaired motor or non-motor function. Symptoms may vary within each individual, but the cardinal motor symptoms include bradykinesia, resting tremor, postural instability, and rigidity. Besides the mentioned symptoms, patients usually suffer from cognitive decline, autonomic dysfunction, depression, pain, (Rapid Eye Movement) REM sleep behavior disorder, hyposmia, etc1,4. According to the variety of symptoms and each patient’s specific conditions, the early diagnosis of PD is challenging; however, a clinical diagnosis is possible by the International Parkinson’s and Movement Disorder Society’s diagnostic criteria or the UK Brain Bank criteria5.

It is mentioned that 6.1 million patients worldwide were affected by this disorder in 20166. The annual new incidence of cases ranges from 5 in 100,000 to 35 in 100,0007. Furthermore, due to unknown reasons, PD occurrence has been rising drastically in the past decades4. These increased cases of PD may be caused by the decline in the mortality rate of patients, an increase in the population, a smaller amount of smoking cigarettes, persistent usage of specific pesticides, industrialization, and usage of specific chemicals8–10.

The Global Burden of Disease research showed that neurological disorders are currently one of the leading sources of disability around the world, and the fastest growing of these disorders (in age-standardized rates of prevalence, disability, and deaths) is PD6. People with PD (PwPD) bear a heavy financial burden because of this chronic and incapacitating condition11, and it causes significant effects on caregivers and society4. Therefore, the incidence of PD and epidemiological studies are important concerns for patients, clinicians, and governments. Although there is data on PD epidemiological features, these aspects cannot be extrapolated to other societies due to the wide range of PD prevalence across the globe. Consequently, studies are required in each population and ethnic group12. Therefore, epidemiological studies are necessary to concisely describe the prevalence and geographical distribution of PD in middle- and low-income countries13.

Iran is an aging, populated, developing country that contains an abundant number of PwPD. The prevalence rate of Parkinsonism is mentioned to be 223 in 100,000 in Iran, and the prevalence of PD standardized by the Tehran population was estimated at 129–156 per 100,000, according to Fereshtehnejad et al.12by screening 19,500 cases in a door-to-door survey. However, because screening validation is based on checklists rather than clinical interviews, which frequently result in false positives, and screening nonparticipation is prone to sampling and reporting bias, this type of study may exaggerate the frequency of PD14. Therefore, a registry-based study seems to be needed and crucial for further health policymaking12.

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first registry-based study in Iran with more than 4000 PwPD from the national registry platform of PD (SBMU-PDR) in Iran.

We export demographic information, aspects of PD, patients’ clinical history, and family history of 4048 cases in this study.

Overall, 4048 cases (63.5% male) with a mean age of 67.66 ± 12.08 were assessed. 24.6% of the patients had EOPD. Table1demonstrates the number and percentage of patients according to gender and PD onset age. 10.7% had a job, 43.9% were unemployed (retired or housewives), and 75.8% were married. Out of 4048 patients, 22.7% were illiterate, 35.3% left school at some point, 16.2% obtained their diploma, and 17.5% held higher education. The distribution of patients’ state of birth and state of living is shown in Fig.1. Fars was the most prevalent ethnicity of the patients, Azari, Kord, Lor, Taleshi, and Balouch were next in order of prevalence, which is similar to the normal ethnic population in Iran. Other demographic characteristics are mentioned in Table1and supplementary Table2.

Nnumber,SDstandard deviation,%percentage,PDParkinson’s disease,EOPDearly onset Parkinson’s disease,LOPDlate-onset Parkinson’s disease,H & YHoehn and Yahr scale,DBSdeep brain stimulation,TIAtransient ischemic attack,MSmultiple sclerosis,CPcerebral palsy.

AResidential distribution of Parkinson’s Disease patients in Iran.BProvince of birth of Parkinson’s Disease patients in Iran.

The mean duration of the disease was 7.67 ± 6.29, age at onset was 57.61, and 22.5% had a family history of PD, of which 47.5% were first-degree relatives, and 18.9% were second-degree relatives. The upper body was affected more than the lower (33.9% vs 4.9%). 0.5% of the patients were first affected by their head and neck. Regarding dominancy, most of the patients (61.8%) were tremor dominant, and least of the patients (6.3%) experienced rigidity as their core symptom. According to H&Y, 63.6% had Bilateral involvement without impairment of balance. Motor fluctuations and dyskinesia were present in 17.2% and 14.2% of the patients, respectively.

We also evaluated nonmotor symptoms and quality of life-related problems in our patients. The most common features were tremor, fatigue, anxiousness, getting out of bed, car, or deep chair, and constipation, which were present in 64.3%, 63.7%, 62%, 57.7%, respectively. However, 465 patients (11.4%) refused to answer these questions. Drugs used for treatment were categorized into different groups: levodopa-benserazid (levodopa-B), levodopa-carbidopa (levodopa-C), entacapone, trihexyphenidyl/biperiden, pramipexole, amantadine, selegiline, and apomorphine. The most prevalent drug used in Iranian PD patients was Levodopa, with 89.7% usage, and the least prescribed drug for these patients is selegiline, with 1.33% usage. The complete usage distribution of these drugs is shown in Fig.2. Also, 1.9% of the patients had been treated with DBS.

Demographic characteristics and medical history: Based on the statistical analysis, it was found that women were significantly older than men (Pvalue < 005), and their H&Y scores were significantly higher (2.80 ± 1.35 Vs 2.69 ± 1.20) (Pvalue < 0.05). Men were married significantly more than women, and women were significantly unmarried in relation to men. Men were born in Isfahan city considerably more often than females, whereas females were born more frequently than men in Tehran and Yazd cities. In terms of the state of living, women were significantly more prevalent in Ardebil city, and males were more likely to live in Tehran city. In terms of education, illiteracy and elementary education are more associated with the female gender, while diplomas, bachelor’s, and master’s degrees were more prevalent among males. Regarding the affected side, the upper right limb shows a stronger association with males (Pvalue < 0.05). Similar to other variables, job status and neurological disorders in patients showed statistically significant but mixed associations with gender. These patterns indicate a significant, yet varied, distribution of gender across these categorical variables.

Clinical Characteristics: Depressed mood, pain and other sensations, anxious mood, getting out of bed, car, or deep chair (Pvalue < 0.001), fatigue, hallucinations and psychosis, and balance (Pvalue < 0.05) were more significant in females. Moreover, apathy (Pvalue < 0.05), speech, handwriting, and salivation and drooling (Pvalue < 0.001) were significantly higher in males. Non-motor and motor symptoms between different genders are summarized in Fig.3.

AComparison of motor symptoms between males and females.CNon-motor symptoms between genders. DDS: Dopamine dysregulation syndrome.

Multivariable logistic regression analysis was performed to identify independent clinical predictors of gender differences in PD presentation. All candidate variables were included regardless of univariate significance to comprehensively assess adjusted associations.

Higher odds of apathy (OR = 1.28, 95% CI: 1.07–1.52,p= 0.007), drooling (OR = 1.95, CI: 1.66–2.30,p< 0.001), handwriting difficulties (OR = 1.63, CI: 1.38–1.92,p< 0.001), speech problems (OR = 1.85, CI: 1.56–2.21,p< 0.001) and marital status (OR = 2.42, CI: 2.14–2.72,p< 0.001) were significantly associated with male gender. In contrast, features such as anxiousness (OR = 0.53, CI: 0.44–0.63,p< 0.001), depression (OR = 0.78, CI: 0.65–0.92,p= 0.004), psychosis (OR = 0.80, CI: 0.67–0.95,p= 0.012), lower education level (OR = 0.78, CI: 0.75–0.81,p< 0.001) and sensation of pain (OR = 0.79, CI: 0.68–0.93,p= 0.005) were significantly more common in female patients.

Demographic characteristics and medical history: the analysis of the relation between age of onset and other variables revealed that late onset PD (People with LOPD) was more common in females, and early onset PD (EOPD) was significantly more prevalent in males (Pvalue < 0.05). The duration of the disease is considerably longer in EOPD patients (11.82 ± 8.26 vs. 6.90 ± 4.72), although LOPD patients had a more severe disorder based on H&Y score (2.79±1.29 vs. 2.71±1.27). People with EOPD were more likely to be single, while people with LOPD were much more likely to be divorced or widowed. There is also variation in educational attainment, with people with EOPD having a higher percentage of diplomas than people with LOPD, and bradykinesia and rigidity were more prominent in people with EOPD. Regarding the state of birth and living, individuals with LOPD were more commonly from Isfahan, Yazd, and Ardebil cities, while people with EOPD showed a stronger connection to Tehran city. While levodopa C and pramipexol are more commonly used in EOPD, levodopa B is typically used more in LOPD (Pvalue < 0.001). Additionally, the statistical analysis shows that there are statistical differences (Pvalue < 0.05) between the age at onset and positive family history of PD, and job status, but there was a non-uniform distribution of age of onset across the examined categorical factors.

Clinical Characteristics: constipation, urinary problem (Pvalue < 0.001), hallucinations and psychosis, daytime sleepiness (Pvalue < 0.05), -in daily activities- getting out of bed, car, or deep chair (Pvalue < 0.001), dressing and hygiene (Pvalue < 0.05) were more common in people with LOPD. Depressed mood, apathy, nighttime sleep problems, pain and other sensations, anxious mood, DDS, Salivation and drooling problems, handwriting, Speech (Pvalue < 0.001), chewing and swallowing, freezing (Pvalue < 0.05), -in motor complications- motor fluctuation and dyskinesia (Pvalue < 0.001) were more common in people with EOPD. Non-motor and motor symptoms between early-onset and late-onset PD are summarized in Fig.4.

AComparison of motor symptoms between EOPD and LOPD.CNon-motor symptoms between EOPD and LOPD. DDS: Dopamine dysregulation syndrome.

Multivariable logistic regression was performed to identify independent predictors distinguishing LOPD from EOPD. Independent predictors of LOPD included older age (OR = 6.77 × 10³⁸, 95% CI: 8.20 × 10³⁵ to 1.09 × 10⁴²,p< 0.001), shorter disease duration (OR = 2.01 × 10⁻⁸, CI: 3.60 × 10⁻⁹ to 1.12 × 10⁻⁷,p< 0.001), DDS (OR = 1.95, CI: 1.36–2.79,p< 0.001), and family history of PD (OR = 2.78, CI: 1.56–4.96,p= 0.001). Conversely, being a first-degree relative of the patient was associated with EOPD (OR = 0.76, CI: 0.65–0.89,p= 0.001).

We established the SBMU-PDR, which is the national registry of PD in Iran. In this study, after six years of data gathering from PwPD from all over the country, we included the characteristics of more than 4000 patients diagnosed with PD by movement disorder specialists. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first registry-based study in Iran.

PD occurrence has increased in the past decades in the Middle East and North Africa region due to environmental changes, an aged population, and lifestyle dietary alterations, and disease will continue to be a growing challenge for public health, especially in communities that lack the resources to address the significant burden of this condition15. Therefore, more attention is required for this disorder in different regions. This observational registry allows clinicians to explore distribution, signs and symptoms, clinical characteristics, motor and non-motor features, and the role of family history in PD in an underserved and developing country. Also, it will be a trustworthy source for deepening our understanding of this disorder and its epidemiology, assisting in policy making aimed at lowering the burden of the disease, and—most importantly—producing more diverse, representative, and credible data for additional research. In addition, variations in incidence by time, location, and gender might provide hints about potential environmental and other causes of the disease, and the best method to understand the disease’s natural history is to follow up with an initial cohort that was established during an incidence study.

As a result of our assessments, we were able to measure the demographics and characteristics of PD patients. The demographic features of our patients were comparable to those mentioned in a study conducted in Isfahan16. The mean age in years is mentioned to be 67.66 in this study, which is higher than 65.40 in Salari et al.16with 987 patients and 65.14 in Roohani et al.17, a study conducted in Tehran. On the other hand, the duration of the disease is mentioned to be 7.67, 4.9116, and 10.7717, in years, respectively, and 24.6% of our patients experienced early onset PD, however, 13.78% experienced this condition in the Isfahan study16. The percentage of EOPD was 45.06% in India, the US, and Korea, for persons aged ≤50 years, EOPD incidence ranges from 0.55 to 0.81 per 100,000 person-years, and 1.9 cases per 100,000 person-years, respectively. There are not many reliable epidemiological estimates of EOPD, due to statistical underpowering. This is because EOPD can be rare, especially in very young children, and because language constraints are a major barrier that prevents many Eastern nations from producing as much literature as Western nations. Additionally, many Eastern nations are smaller in terms of both population and geography, which limits the amount of statistical power that can be produced by a national study18.

Age at onset is mentioned to be 51.03 years in India, 60.07 in Europe, and 58.2 in North America, which are slightly different from our results of 57.61 years18.

Family history of PD is positive in 22.5% of our patients, which is close to what is measured by Pagano et al.19(25%) and Arienti et al (21.9%)20. Family history was positive in 9.2% of patients according to Salari et al.16this increase in the positive family history might indicate more diagnoses due to improved knowledge about this disorder and less social stigma than in 2018. Family history varies widely since it depends on various elements, including the operational definition and methods of documentation, geographic location, population under investigation, and societal stigma of being viewed as a neurologic patient21.

Moreover, the male-to-female ratio in this study is 1.74:1, which was 2.06:1 in Salari et al.16study and 2.00:1 in Roohani et al.17study, with 1656 patients. In any case, this ratio is higher than what is mentioned in the Norwegian population (1.5:1)22, Colombian population (1,15:1)11, Korean nationwide population, and Japan (female > male)23,24and much lower than Nigeria’s PD registry (2.6)21. In a study conducted in the USA, the incidence of PD was stated to be twofold in males than in females in all US ethnicities, but in Asians25. The side of the motor symptom onset seems to differ greatly between our study (Right side initiation: 23.9%, left side initiation: 14.9%) and the study conducted in Tehran (R: 49.5%, L: 50.5%). This difference can be explained by the fact that we categorize head and neck as being in another category, and two-limb initiation or non-motor initiation as being in another category. In clinical characteristics, tremor was the most prevalent symptom, followed by bradykinesia and rigidity, according to our study and the study conducted by Salari et al.16. Although in the Chinese registry data, the tremor-dominant subtype was the most prevalent symptom, postural instability or gait difficulty, and the intermediate subtype were in the next order26.

According to our data, most patients were born in Tehran, Ardabil, Isfahan, and Yazd, respectively. The provinces with the fewest born PD patients were Kohgiluyeh and Buyer Ahmed, Bushehr, and Zanjan in order. Additionally, patients mostly live in Tehran, Ardebil, Yazd, and Isfahan, respectively, and are less likely to live in Kohgiluye and Buyer Ahmed, Bushehr, and Zanjan. In contrast to our result, according to Hosseinzadeh et al.13, the medications prescribed for PD patients in Isfahan showed the highest population, and Hormozgan showed the lowest. Nonetheless, the residential distribution of patients in these two studies seems to share the same pattern since the Central and Northeast regions contain more patients than other regions, also the southern regions have less distribution of patients. These variations in the distribution of patients may come from the fact that both of these studies mentioned the proportion of patients, not the incidence or exact prevalence of PD occurrence in each province. However, since this data can be generalized to the whole country, we could conclude that the prevalence of PD may follow the same pattern. This variation might be a result of the percentage of old patients, higher education levels, interactions with chemical compounds and metals, ethnicity, availability of care and treatment, percentage of urbanization, different mean ages of patients, variations in life expectancy, and air pollution in each state13.

In this study, we employed both univariate and multivariate statistical approaches to explore features associated with early- and late-onset PD, as well as gender differences. Univariate analyses, including chi-square and Mann–Whitney U-tests with Benjamini–Hochberg correction, were critical for initial screening and detecting feature-wise group differences. Importantly, standardized residuals from chi-square tests provided further insight into which subgroups (e.g., EOPD vs. LOPD, males vs. females) had stronger associations with specific categorical variables. However, due to the likelihood of confounding, multivariate logistic regression was applied to identify independent predictors by adjusting for inter-variable correlations. Several variables initially significant in univariate analyses lost significance in multivariable models, highlighting the necessity of adjustment, and offering a clearer view of independently associated factors.

Although longer disease duration was significantly associated with LOPD in univariate analysis, this association could be confounded by age. Nonetheless, by multivariable regression model, it remained an independent predictor of LOPD after adjustment, which may reflect distinct clinical trajectories in early- versus late-onset Parkinson’s disease.

We assessed the differences between EOPD and LOPD patients. In this regard, dissimilar to our result, the gender difference between EOPD and mid to late onset PD (MLOPD) was not mentioned in Angelopoulou et al.27, a Greek population-based study with a cutoff age of 50. Moreover, cognition is stated to be better in EOPD patients, UPDRS III was higher in MLOPD patients, and dyskinesia and motor fluctuation didn’t show any relevance to the age of onset, which contradicts our results. However, positive family history, rigidity, and duration of the disease were higher in EOPD patients, similar to our results. Furthermore, they discovered that psychiatric problems were more prominent in EOPD, and autonomic dysfunction was more frequent in MLOPD, which shows some discrepancy with our result. In another study that compared YOPD (age≤49) with mid-onset and late-onset PD, they showed similar results as ours regarding the higher prevalence of positive family history, dyskinesia, depression, and rigidity in initial symptoms, usage of Levodopa-C in YOPD patients. Nonetheless, they couldn’t find any relation between age at onset and apathy, dementia, hallucination, and agitation. These inconsistencies may arise from the fact that we collected the symptoms just by a yes or no question, not according to UPDRS criteria28.

Another aspect of this study was the differences in PD manifestation between genders. In this regard, Abaraham et al.29study stated that females were more likely to be less educated, unmarried, more anxious, older, have greater somatization, greater depressive symptoms, and a more advanced Hoehn & Yahr stage. Moreover, another study showed that fatigue, depression, constipation, and pain are more common in women. Meanwhile, male patients are more prone to severe drooling30. These findings are also replicated by a review study based on several investigations. Women are said to experience despair, anxiety, discomfort, and exhaustion more frequently than men, whereas men are said to experience apathy and RBD more frequently31. All of the mentioned information is in concordance with our result, although there are contrasting results for cognition decline in males and females with PD that we couldn’t find. On the other hand, concerning motor symptoms, it is stated that there are no differences between men and women32,33, and tremor is mentioned to be a more common first presenting symptom in women31, which are inconsistent with our results.

Since there are no significant PD cohorts across the country, this registry-based study with a large sample size aids us in conducting broader basic and clinical research on PD, which still lacks sufficient data. This study covers several objectives, such as increasing our data on the impact of age of onset and gender on the clinical heterogeneity of PD. It can also help researchers to conduct similar and more extensive investigations on PD characteristics to evaluate clinical, genetic, imaging, and biological markers of disease progression. In the future, it will assist us in finding indicators of illness progression, defining measures of outcome for therapy trials, and helping patients get guidance on different phases of the disease.

Assessing biomarkers like brain MRI, Montreal Cognitive Assessment(MoCA), and the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) that are currently being collected from these patients is another plan for our registry. This will help us look into the relationship between clinical features and other biomarkers in PD, which is a great lead because they help us track the disease’s progression and the effectiveness of medications, and will significantly speed up our understanding of PD in the future34.

The growing volume of information from imaging, genetics, symptoms, and other sources would be ideal for illustrating the intricate pathophysiology of PD. This will facilitate the establishment of predictive biomarkers and the investigation of illness heterogeneity. Furthermore, this research can improve global studies by producing more reliable data and robust samples, as well as by promoting knowledge exchange and capacity building, which provide more evidence for the management of PD aimed at relieving symptoms and improving the quality of life of PD patients.

In conclusion, this is Iran’s largest observational and natural history study on PD. It presents a chance to deepen our knowledge of the molecular, genetic, imaging, and clinical indicators of PD progression.

Although this study is the first registry based on the Iranian population, there are some limitations that are important to mention. First, the presence of motor and nonmotor characteristics was only asked from the patient or their caregiver, and it was not evaluated according to validated questionnaires. Next, the data that were collected from the patients may contain recall bias, since some of the patients had PD symptoms for more than a decade, and their information may not be precise, since they forget some of the details of their initial symptoms. Moreover, the data of the patients has some missing values, which may have consequences on our results. On the other hand, the effect of each variable on the other variables and their covariate effects was not considered in the statistical analysis. Another limitation of this study is the fact that most of the patients were referred from Tehran and/or other big cities. Therefore, although we had a lot of patients from all over Iran, we might have underestimated the exact distribution of PD.

demographic features: sex, age, job status, education, marriage status, state of living, state of birth, ethnicity, and dominant hand.

Parkinson’s Disease aspects include; the duration of disease, the first affected side of the body, type of PD by dominancy, used available medications for PD in the country (deep brain stimulation or lesionectomy which was operated in the Shohada-e-Tajrish Hospital a university hospital that offer public healthcare services), non-motor features of the disease, quality of life related questions, motor complications, and Stage of disease according to Hoehn & Yahr (H&Y). It is important to note that patients were asked yes-or-no questions about non-motor characteristics and quality of life.

past medical history including: history of other neurological disease, family history of PD, relation of the member of the family with PwPD.

This study was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki36. All study data were integrated into a database through the RABIT database (disreg.sbmu.ac.ir/q/Parkinson.html), which is a national registry. The institutional review board of Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, ethics committee, reviewed the study and approved it with the code number: IR.SBMU.RETECH.REC.1398.439. Also, a waiver of informed consent was granted due to the minimal risk and non-identifiable nature of the data.

Statistical analyses were performed using the scipy.stats library in Python 3.11.4. The chi-square test was used to evaluate associations between categorical variables, while the Mann-Whitney U-test was applied to continuous (age and disease duration) and ordinal (H&Y) variables. To control the false discovery rate (FDR) due to multiple comparisons, the Benjamini–Hochberg correction was applied. Features with FDR-adjustedp-values below 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Categorical data were reported using proportions. Continuous variables are summarized using means with standard deviations and medians with interquartile ranges (IQR) to provide a comprehensive description of their distribution, particularly given the mild to moderate skewness observed. Non-parametric tests (Mann-Whitney U) were used for inferential analyses. Statistical tests were employed to examine differences across gender and age groups, with 50 years used as the cut-off point, such that individuals aged 50 years or younger were classified as having early-onset PD, and those older than 50 years as having late-onset PD28. We performed multivariate logistic regression, including all demographic and clinical covariates for potential confounders. This model was used to investigate further associations observed in univariate analyses and assess the independent effects of the variables of interest. For significant associations, standardized residuals from the chi-square test were analyzed to determine which group showed a stronger association with each feature category.

In this study, 292 samples with missing values in age at disease onset (approximately 7.2% of the dataset) were excluded from age statistical analysis, as this variable was used for stratifying participants into age-based subgroups. To address the remaining 346 missing values across other features, we employed multiple imputation using a random forest-based approach. Random forest imputation37. It is a robust technique for handling missing data, leveraging the predictive power of multiple decision trees to estimate missing values based on complex, non-linear relationships among observed variables. This method enabled the imputation of 346 missing values across the dataset, including additional instances of missing values that were not used for stratification. This approach preserved the integrity and structure of the dataset. Rather than excluding these cases, which could reduce statistical power and introduce potential bias, we opted for imputation to maximize data utilization. This strategy enhances the reliability of subsequent statistical analyses and predictive modeling by minimizing bias and maintaining the underlying data distributions and inter-feature relationships. To ensure robustness, significant findings identified post-imputation were cross-validated with the original (pre-imputation) dataset, and consistent results were observed.

This article has benefited from the disease registry, titled “Parkinson’s Disease Registry in patients referred to Neurology Clinics of Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences in Tehran (SBMU-PDR)” with the code number “IR.SBMU.RETECH.REC.1398.439” from ethics committee supported by the deputy of research and technology at Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Scienceshttp://dregistry.sbmu.ac.ir. This study received no funding.