As a key region in the lower Yellow River Basin, Shandong Province plays a central role in understanding the genetic history of East Asia. However, detailed ancient DNA data across its historical periods remains limited. This study aims to characterise the genomic profiles of Shandong populations during the Western Han Dynasty and trace their genetic connections with neighbouring regions.

Here, we newly generated 14 ancient genomes from the Wenshaobei site of the Western Han dynasty in Shandong Province. Genetic analyses, including principal component analysis (PCA), ADMIXTURE, andf-statistics, revealed that the Wenshaobei population was genetically distinct from Early Neolithic Shandong hunter-gatherers but closely aligned with Middle Neolithic to Iron Age populations from the middle and lower Yellow River Basin. This indicates strong genetic continuity with millet-farming societies from the middle Yellow River, supplemented by minor influences from southern rice-farming groups. Modern Han Chinese in Shandong share a core genetic foundation with ancient populations, such as Wenshaobei.

Our findings highlight the role of the lower Yellow River Basin as a nexus of genetic exchange between northern millet-farming and southern rice-farming cultures, with sustained genetic influences from the middle Yellow River shaping the demographic landscape from the Neolithic to the Han Dynasty. The study provides critical insights into the formation of East Asian populations, underscoring the interplay between agriculture, migration, and genetic diversity in this cradle of ancient Chinese civilization.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12915-025-02377-7.

East Asia is home to diverse ethnic and linguistic groups, constituting nearly one-quarter of the world’s population, and is one of the most important regions for studying genetic diversity and the dynamics of past population movements [1]. East Asia is also one of the earliest animal and plant domestication centres, with millet agriculture in northern China and rice agriculture in southern China [2,3]. The origin and dissemination of these staple crops significantly influenced demographic expansion and linguistic diffusion [4]. The Yellow River Basin is one of the earliest independent centres of agriculture, with domestication traces of both foxtail and broomcorn millets as early as the tenth millennium B.P [3,5]. Observations from archaeological, historical, and genetic studies have shown that the Yellow River Basin farmers, who contributed 59–84% of the ancestry of the Han Chinese, were the common ancestors of present-day Sino-Tibetan-speaking populations [6–8].

Shandong Province is located in the northern coastal region of China and is geographically connected to northern and southern China. As part of the Yellow River Basin, Shandong is considered one of the cradles of ancient Chinese civilization. The prehistoric cultures that existed in Shandong include Houli culture (~ 8,300–7,400 B.P), Beixin culture (~ 7,400–6,200 B.P), Dawenkou culture (~ 6,200–4,600 B.P), Shandong Longshan culture (~ 4,600–4,000 B.P) and Yueshi culture (~ 3,900–3,500 B.P) [9,10]. Reported ancient individuals from Bianbian, Boshan, Xiaojingshan, and Xiaogao sites are associated with the Houli culture [7], whose population primarily relied on hunting and fishing for subsistence [11]. During the Beixin culture period, the lifestyle shifted from hunting and gathering to millet-based farming [12]. Ancient DNA data was not found from the Beixin culture. There is growing ancient data from the Dawenkou and Longshan periods in Shandong in recent years [13–15]. The groups of Lower_YR_Chengziya_Yueshi and CZYGroup are associated with Yueshi culture during the Bronze Age [14]. Previously reported studies indicate that the Neolithic Shandong populations were influenced by the Yangshao-culture-related ancestry from the middle reaches of the Yellow River; ancient Shandong hunting-gathering individuals (~ 9,500–7,700 B.P); representative Ancient Northeast Asia (ANA) ancestors and Southern East Asia-related ancestry [7,13–15]. Sampling data are also available for Shandong populations in the historical period [13–15]. However, the existing data may have limitations in sample size and potential biases, and whether they can comprehensively reflect the population diversity of Shandong remains to be further explored.

Therefore, we report Wenshaobei samples from Shandong Province dating back to the Han Dynasty and merge reported ancient Shandong genome data to explore the genetic characteristics of Shandong populations across different periods.

In this study, 41 ancient samples were collected from the Wenshaobei site, Shandong Province (Fig.1a, Additional file 1: Table S1 and Additional file 2: Fig. S1). To enhance comprehension of the study background, we selected one tooth sample from individual M28 for calibrated radiocarbon dating at Beta Analytic. We found the sample dated back to the Western Han Dynasty (2,150 ± 30 cal. BP). DNA was extracted from each sample and sequenced. We verified the authenticity of the genome-wide data by examining characteristic post-mortem patterns of ancient DNA. We observed a low level of contamination for mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and the X chromosome of male samples. We mapped the DNA reads to the human genome (hs37d5) and retained samples that could call over 30,000 SNPs in the 1240k panel (Additional file 1: Table S2). We estimated kinship coefficients and found two pairs of individuals with second or under-second-degree relatives, which require filtering of individuals with lower coverage (Additional file 1: Table S3 and Additional file 1: Table S4). After filtering unqualified samples, we focused on 14 samples, with coverage ranging from 0.03- to 6.38-fold, with the number of SNPs ranging from 33,740 to 1,223,088 for further analysis (Additional file 1: Table S2). In accordance with the genetic homogeneity in these samples usingqpWaveanalysis, we regard them as a group named Wenshaobei for further population genetic analysis (Additional file 2: Fig. S2).

We assigned mitochondrial and Y-chromosomal haplogroups of the Wenshaobei samples. The most common mitochondrial haplogroups were D4 and F, and the total percentage of these haplogroups was 50.0% (Additional file 1: Table S2). Haplogroup D4 is predominant among the Chinese Han population, with the highest frequency in northern and northeastern China, and has been found in Shandong during the Dawenkou period [13,16]. However, Haplogroup F has a high frequency in southern East Asia and was also found in Shandong after 4,600 B.P [17]. The presence of haplogroup F in the Wenshaobei site suggests the possible genetic influence from southern East Asia to the lower Yellow River Basin in historical times.

The most common Y-chromosomal haplogroups of Wenshaobei samples were O2a2b1, O2a1b1, O2b, C2b1a2 and Q1a1 (Additional file 1: Table S2). Haplogroup O2a2b1 was widely present amongst ancient Yellow River and West Liao River Basin individuals dating to 3,000 to 6,000 years ago [13,18]. Haplogroup O2a1b1 has been found in Shandong during the Dawenkou period and was present in Shandong during the Neolithic[13]. Haplogroup O2b is believed to have originated in Northeast Asians and is predominant in Koreans [19]. Haplogroup C2b1a2 perhaps originated in Mongolia or the Lake Baikal region and is widely distributed in northern Eurasia [17,20]. Haplogroup Q1a1a originated in South Siberia and expanded 5,000 to 3,000 years ago in northern China [21].

To explore the genetic structure of the Wenshaobei population, we performed a principal component analysis (PCA) among modern and ancient individuals. In the plot, linguistically and geographically distinct populations formed three distinct genetic clusters: the Southern East Asian cluster, the ancient highland Tibetan cluster, and the Northern East Asian cluster (Fig.1b). There is no overlap between the Early Neolithic Shandong hunter-gatherers and the Neolithic Middle Yellow River farmers. Nevertheless, we can find the admixture signals between the Early Neolithic Shandong hunter-gatherers and Neolithic Middle Yellow River farmers in Shandong populations during the Dawenkou period. The Shandong Longshan populations and the Shandong Dawenkou populations showed partial overlap but were genetically closer to the Yellow River Basin populations. The Shandong Longshan populations exhibited higher genetic diversity, which may have been influenced by gene flow from southern East Asian populations. The Wenshaobei population clustered closely with the present-day northern Han Chinese. Additionally, it overlapped with the ancient farming populations from the Late Neolithic period along the Middle Yellow River (represented by YR_LN) and most of the ancient Shandong populations during the historical period. These results indicated the genetic dynamic history between the lower reaches and the middle reaches of the Yellow River during different periods.

We further conducted unsupervised ADMIXTURE analysis to determine ancestral components and compare genetic relationships among populations. The best-fitting ADMIXTURE plot appeared when K = 4, i.e. there were four presumed ancestral groups (Fig.1c). Similar to the PCA result, the ADMIXTURE plot demonstrates that the genetic profile of the Wenshaobei population was more similar to that of the Middle Yellow River than the Early Neolithic Shandong populations.

The qualitative PCA and ADMIXTURE analysis have shown different genetic profiles between early Neolithic Shandong and the Wenshaobei populations [6]. We further performed quantitative outgroup-f3statistics to investigate allele-sharing patterns between the Wenshaobei and other populations (Fig.2a and Additional file 1: Table S5). The results suggest that the Wenshaobei population was genetically closest to ancient Shandong individuals during the Dawenkou, Longshan, and historical periods, as well as to individuals from the Ancient Yellow River Basin. We next performedf4-statistics in the form off4(Mbuti, X; Wenshaobei, Early Neolithic Shandong populations) to quantify the genetic differences. The early Neolithic Shandong populations shared more alleles with the ANA, represented by hunter-gatherers from the Amur River Basin and the Mongolian Plateau. Ancient populations from the Middle Yellow River showed an affinity with Wenshaobei compared with the Early Neolithic Shandong populations (Additional file 1: Table S6).

Considering the genetic affinity between Wenshaobei and Ancient Middle Yellow River farmers in the quantitative analyses, and the distribution of Shandong populations falls on the axis between the Early Neolithic Shandong populations and the Middle Yellow River farmers in the qualitative analyses. We performedf4in the format off4(Mbuti, Shandong populations; Ancient Middle Yellow River Populations, Boshan) to compare the genetic differences between the Shandong populations from different periods (Fig.2b and Additional file 1: Table S7). We found that nearly half of the Shandong population during the Dawenkou and Longshan periods showed a greater genetic affinity with early Neolithic Shandong hunter-gatherers than with middle Yellow River farmers. However, this pattern was not observed in the Shandong populations during the historical period. This suggests a difference in the genetic structure of Shandong populations between the Neolithic and Historic periods.

We further utilized a rotationalqpAdmstrategy to estimate proportions of ancestry. The genetic influence from Middle Yellow River farmers and Shandong hunter-gatherers was demonstrated in the above analyses. Therefore, we used the Yangshao-culture-related ancestry (represented by YR_MN), which was the earliest published population in the middle Yellow River and the Houli-culture-related ancestry (represented by Boshan) in Shandong as potential ancestral sources. Given the archaeological evidence of rice cultivation [22], we also considered Neolithic Southeast Asian-related populations (represented by Tanshishan) as a possible ancestral source. Additionally, considering the close genetic connections between Shandong and the middle Yellow River populations, we included contemporaneous middle Yellow River populations in our comparative analysis. And we used ANA, whom widely distributed in northern East Asia during the Neolithic period, as another potential ancestral source.

We detected the genetic influence of Yellow River farmers on Shandong populations during the Dawenkou period (Fig.3a and Additional file 1: Table S8). These influences were more pronounced in inland areas, while populations closer to the coast retained more genetic components from early Shandong hunter-gatherers and Southeast Asian-related populations. During the Longshan period, the genetic influence of the Yellow River farmers expanded deeply into the coast, and we found the intermingling and mixing of populations (Fig.3b and Additional file 1: Table S8). The genetic structure of the Shandong populations in the historical period was dominated by the Yellow River Basin populations, with the genetic proportion of the Yellow River populations ranging from 19.7%−100.0% in the Dawenkou or Longshan periods to 22.8–100.0% in the historical period (Fig.3c and Additional file 1: Table S8). And the Wenshaobei population was found to have 80.8% Yellow River ancestry and 19.2% Southeast Asian-related ancestry.

In addition, the genetic characteristics of Shandong populations during the historical period are closely associated with geographical location, and this genetic structural characteristic is similar to the genetic patterns of the Dawenkou and Longshan periods (Fig.3). These populations were influenced by ancestries from the Middle Yellow River Basin and southern China. However, populations from northern Shandong retained genetic components from local hunter-gatherers or ANA. This indicated that migrations from the Yellow River Basin or the south entered Shandong primarily via central or southern regions. Temporally, before the Han dynasty, the genetic makeup of Shandong populations was relatively complex, involving multiple ancestral components (Additional file 2: Fig. S3). However, following the Han period, the genetic structure became more stable, predominantly consisting of ancestries from the Yellow River Basin and southern populations. This shift may be attributed to the unification and social stability during the Han dynasty, which likely reduced population movements and led to a more fixed population structure.

Considering the subtle genetic fluctuations within the Shandong population, we employed analysis off4(Mbuti, reference populations; Wenshaobei, Han_Shandong) to explore whether the modern Han Chinese population in Shandong is a direct genetic continuation of the Wenshaobei population (Additional file 1: Table S9). The analysis yielded a significant Z-score of −3.30 when the reference population was middle_YR_Yuzhuang_Longshan. Therefore, we further utilized thef4statistic in the form off4(Mbuti, reference populations; Shandong populations, Han_Shandong) to assess the genetic relationships between the modern Shandong population and populations from different periods in Shandong (Additional file 1: Table S9). No significant Z-scores were detected between Han_Shandong and part of the populations during the Dawenkou period, Longshan period and historical periods. It is possible that the genetic ancestry of the modern Shandong population can be traced back to the Dawenkou period; however, given the stability of the genetic structure (Fig.3and Additional file 2: Fig. S3), it is more likely that it was structured after the Han dynasty.

To confirm the genetic relationship between Han_Shandong and ancient Shandong populations, we carried outqpAdmto estimate proportions of ancestry. We found that Han_Shandong possessed 82.8% middle Yellow River farmers (YR_MN) and 17.2% Southeast Asian-related ancestry (Additional file 1: Table S8). The genetic component ratio were similar to those of YR_LN (modelling by 17.4% Tanshishan and 82.6% YR_MN) and middle_YR_Wadian_Longshan (modelling by 20.8% Tanshishan and 79.2% YR_MN) in the middle reaches of the Yellow River during the Longshan period, as well as to those of Wenshaobei (modelling by 19.3% Tanshishan and 80.7% YR_MN), Shandong_3k_XSJ (modelling by 18.2% Tanshishan and 81.8% YR_MN) and Shandong_1k (modelling by 15.2% Tanshishan and 84.8% YR_MN) in the lower reaches of the Yellow River during the historical period.

This study analysed 41 samples from the Wenshaobei site in Zibo City, Shandong Province. Zibo City served as the capital of the Qi State during the Spring and Autumn Period and the Warring States Period (2,244–2,793 B.P). It was also one of the largest handicraft and commercial cities during the Western Han Dynasty [23]. Therefore, it plays a key role in China. The study revealed the genetic structure of the Shandong population during the Western Han Dynasty and compared it with the Shandong populations in the Neolithic and historical periods. It also analysed the possible origins of the Wenshaobei samples and their relationship with modern Sino-Tibetan populations. The study combined data from other populations in Shandong province and provides a fine-scale analysis of the genetic structure within the Shandong population.

Archaeological evidence suggests that the Peiligang Culture (8000–7000 BP) from the Middle Yellow River Basin had a significant influence on the Late Houli Culture and Beixin Culture in Shandong [24]. Beixin Culture showed distinct differences from Houli Culture, whereas it had clear similarities with Peiligang Culture in terms of housing, means of production, manufacturing methods and styles of pottery [24]. Therefore, the influence of the Central Plain population and culture on Shandong likely started before the Dawenkou period. However, since archaeological evidence suggests that primitive dryland agriculture in the Lower Yellow River Basin originated locally during the Houli Culture [25–27], population dispersal from the Middle Yellow River Basin should not be regarded as a direct cause of agriculture in Shandong.

Genetic analysis revealed that the Shandong Wenshaobei samples from the Han Dynasty showed a close genetic relationship with populations inhabiting the middle Yellow River Basin. The genetic influence from the middle Yellow River Basin was detected as early as the Middle Neolithic period and continues to be present in present-day Han groups. Moreover, we have clearly observed the dynamic changes in the genetic influence of the Yellow River populations across different periods. During the Dawenkou period, the genetic influence of the Yellow River populations was closely tied to geographical location, being primarily confined to inland areas with little impact on the coastal Shandong populations. However, by the Longshan period, the scope of this influence had significantly expanded to cover a broader region. By the historical period, the genetic components of the Yellow River populations had come to dominate the Shandong populations. The findings are consistent with previous research, indicating that approximately 5,000 years ago, populations in the Yellow River Basin introduced the Sino-Tibetan language, agriculture, and related technologies to northern China [6,28,29].

Simultaneously, the genetic relationship between Shandong and the Middle Yellow River Basin populations aligns with the archaeological theory that the Yangshao culture expanded outward, forming a cultural community centred on the Central Plains [30]. Between the Early to Middle Yangshao period, which corresponds to Late Beixin to Early Dawenkou Culture in the Lower Yellow River Basin, the transition from broomcorn millet to foxtail millet occurred in the Middle Yellow River Basin [31–33]. Whereas the same transition in Shandong occurred between the Early to Middle Dawenkou period [34]. It suggests that dryland agriculture and society in the Middle Yellow River basin developed slightly faster, since foxtail millet requires more investment than broomcorn millet and has a higher yield, which can sustain a larger population [31,34]. Climate and environment had a significant influence on the development of early agriculture. Therefore, it remained unclear whether the transition from broomcorn to foxtail millet in Shandong was influenced by the same trend in the Middle Yellow River Basin. Nevertheless, analysis from this study showed that some DNA samples from the Dawenkou period can be simulated solely by DNA samples from the Yangshao Culture. It suggests that the population dispersed from the Middle Yellow River Basin to Shandong around the time of transition to a more intensified dryland agricultural system.

The genetic components of the Shandong hunter-gatherer populations have only been detected within Shandong, with no signs of diffusion into the middle Yellow River populations. These genetic components have nearly disappeared in modern Han Chinese populations, but the possibility that they may still be present in small amounts cannot be excluded.

Genetic influences from Southeast Asian-related populations were detected as early as the Dawenkou period and have persisted in modern Shandong Han Chinese, although they primarily manifest as a minor ancestral component. Archaeological evidence suggests that primitively cultivated rice appeared in both the Central Plain and Shandong before 7000 BP [23,24,28,29]. However, a mixed millet-rice farming system existed in Shandong for a longer period and developed to a greater extent [25]. Whereas millet monoculture was the main theme in the development of agriculture in the Central Plain [32]. The higher proportion of cultivated rice in Neolithic and Bronze Age Shandong might be the result of greater demographical and cultural influence from southern China. The unprecedented expansion and prosperity of rice cultivation during the Longshan period in Shandong [23,32] align with the finding that the Shandong Longshan population had a greater genetic affinity with the population from Southern China. These findings are consistent with genetic studies, suggesting that the genetic influence of southern populations with rice agriculture on the Shandong populations left a lasting genetic legacy in the process.

In addition to two types of millet and rice, wheat and soybean were the other two main cereals during Han Dynasty [27]. These five main cereals were also found from sites belonging to Shang Dynasty such as Dinggong site [35], Daxinzhuang site [36] and Chengxixincun site [32]. Although the proportion of each cereal varied between sites, these five main cereals were already widespread during historical period. The emergence of the combination of these five main cereals occurred during the Longshan period in Central Plain [31]. Wheat was spread to the Yellow River Basin from further west, however from Longshan to historical period the genetic structure of Shandong population remained relatively consistent without significant gene flow from the west. It suggests that the introduction of wheat to the Yellow River Basin was a result of cultural transition instead of population dispersal.

Situated in Linzi, the capital of the Qi State and a major commercial hub during the Western Han Dynasty, the Wenshaobei site occupies a strategic node of human mobility. The genetic homogeneity of the Wenshaobei population, despite Linzi’s status as a crossroads of trade and craftsmanship, suggests a resident community shaped by regional integration rather than extreme diversity. Archaeological evidence suggests the same. Features of tombs and grave goods from Han Dynasty from different sites in Shandong were highly consistent [37–39]. The near-absence of Early Neolithic Shandong hunter-gatherer ancestry in both Wenshaobei and modern Han populations implies their genetic contributions were marginalized by incoming agriculturalists, a pattern consistent with global cases where farming expansions supplanted forager groups. This demographic replacement likely accelerated during the Han Dynasty, driven by technological advancements (e.g., iron tools, irrigation) that boosted agricultural productivity and incentivized settlement growth.

Our study reveals that the ancient Shandong population during the Han Dynasty exhibits high genetic homogeneity with the populations of the middle and lower Yellow River Basin since the Middle Neolithic period, but significant genetic heterogeneity with the early Neolithic Shandong ancients. This may be due to the spreading of the millet-related farming culture from the Middle Yellow River basin to Shandong. From the Shang to the Qin Dynasty, due to increased population mobility, the populations of the Middle and Lower Yellow River became increasingly homogeneous. By the Han dynasty, the genetic difference between Middle and Lower Yellow River populations was only marginal.

The Western Han dynasty (202 BC- 8 AD) experienced a period of economic prosperity and a surge in population growth and technological development. More efficient tillage methods, including cattle ploughing and an advanced irrigation system, were widely popularised [40,41]. Additionally, the development of high-temperature smelting techniques and blowing devices facilitated the widespread adoption of ironware in the Western Han dynasty. According to the Book of Han, the central government set up forty-eight offices for iron smelting (Tie Guan) [42]. By the end of the Western Han dynasty, ironware was widely used in the daily lives of civilians. The advancement of agriculture and technology increased crop yield and productive forces, facilitating population and economic growth. The population of the early Western Han dynasty was estimated to be over ten million [43,44]. During the middle Western Han dynasty, the population reached 30 million and peaked at 60 million in the late Western Han dynasty [42,44]. Commercial activities during the Western Han dynasty were also frequent and thriving. The Silk Road radiated to the Middle East, India, and Southeast Asia [42]. The Silk Road provided numerous trading opportunities between the Han dynasty and these exotic places, as well as within the territory of the Han dynasty. Furthermore, population growth and the prosperity of commerce also facilitated cultural exchange and population movement.

Linzi was the capital of Qi, one of the seven kingdoms during the Warring States Period and one of the ten semi-autonomous kingdoms during the early Western Han dynasty [45–47]. There were over 100,000 households in Linzi city between 130BC-126BC, and the estimated population was 440,000 [48,49]. After 110 BC, Qi became a commandery of the Han Empire [45,50]. Subsequently, the actual domain and population of both Qi commandery and Linzi city shrank [51,52]. In 2 AD, there were over 150k households and over 550k people in Qi Commandery [42]. Nevertheless, Linzi remained a key city for an extended period [53]. Linzi was one of the largest handicraft and commercial cities during the Western Han dynasty [23]. Linzi owned one of the forty-eight iron smelting offices and at least five mint foundries [42,54]. Around 400000m2remains of iron smelting sites and numerous coin moulds were excavated from the Linzi ancient city archaeological site [54–56]. Given the key status of Linzi and the increase in population and social mobility during the Western Han dynasty, the study of the ancient population in Linzi holds great value. It can shed light on the ancient population composition of Linzi, helping to understand the actual extent of population movement in the region.

Samples used in this study were from the Wenshaobei archaeological site. The Wenshaobei site locates in Linzi, Shandong Province. Seventy civilian tombs were excavated from the Wenshaobei site. Calibrated radiocarbon dating of one tooth sample and archaeological evidence suggest that sixty-eight of these tombs belong to the Western Han dynasty. The other two tombs belong to the Sui and Song dynasties. The most common type of civilian grave in Linzi during the Western Han dynasty was a rectangular pit grave with a second-tier platform and wooden coffins, some of which had wooden or brick outer coffins [37,57]. Most of the time, bodies were buried in the extended supine position [37]. The most significant differences between the civilian graves during the Warring States Period and the Western Han dynasty were the number and type of grave goods [57]. During the Warring States Period, grave goods were more abundant, usually more than ten pieces [37,39,57]. Combinations of pottery ritual utensils, including long-neck pots, plates, stemmed cups, tripod pots and boxes, were often buried with the deceased [39]. During the Western Han dynasty, pottery grave goods typically consisted of only one or two pottery jars or one long-neck pot, or both, per grave [37,57]. Additionally, since Linzi was a centre for manufacturing bronze mirrors during the Western Han dynasty, bronze mirrors and coins were often buried with the deceased [37]. The 68 Western Han graves excavated from the Wenshaobei site were typical of that period. They were all rectangular pit graves with at least one wooden coffin. Among the ones that can be identified, all the bodies were buried in extended supine positions, and the type of grave goods matched perfectly with those of the Western Han dynasty. Therefore, we are confident that the 41 samples used in this study belong to the Western Han Dynasty. In addition, the style and decoration of the pottery and bronze mirrors excavated from the Wenshaobei site suggest that this burial site was utilized from the early to late Western Han dynasty.

One human bone sample (M28) was selected and analysed by calibrated radiocarbon dating at Beta Analytic Testing Laboratory in China. The resulting 14 C date was calibrated using the IntCal20 curve [58] in OxCal v4.4 [59]. The sample was dated to the Han Dynasty (2,150 ± 20 cal. B.P.).

Samples from 41 individuals were selected. For 3 of them, only the temporal bones were used. Both teeth and temporal bones were selected for 14 subjects. For the other 24 subjects, only teeth were used. The protocol used for this study was based on published protocols for DNA extraction and library preparation [60,61]. All samples were processed in a clean room designed for ancient DNA experiments. To avoid contamination, necessary precautions were taken, such as wearing a protective suit, latex gloves, and a facemask. Blanks were introduced as controls. All samples were cleaned with 75% ethanol to remove dirt. Then, they were washed with 10–20% NaClO for further sterilization. Residual NaClO was removed by washing with anhydrous ethanol. Next, all samples were placed inside the clean bench for 1–2 h, with the fan and ultraviolet light turned on, until they were completely dry.

For each subject, 130–430 mg of bone powder from the dental pulp and/or the petrous part of the temporal bone was removed using a drill and collected into a 15 ml centrifuge tube. For each 100 mg of bone powder, 1 μL of Proteinase K and 1 mL of 0.5M EDTA were added to the tube to extract DNA. The mixture was turned into a suspension using a vortex shaker. Subsequently, the centrifuge tubes were put into the incubator overnight at 37 °C and 300rpm for pyrolysis. Once the incubation finished, the mixture was centrifuged to separate the supernatant and the precipitate. The supernatant was mixed with 13 mL binding buffer for each subject and purified using the MinElute kit (Qiagen, Germany). Then, DNA was eluted with double-distilled water.

We used the NEBNext UltraTM II DNA Library Prep Kit for library preparation. First, we repaired the damage and created blunt ends for our double-strand DNA. Then, Illumina adaptors were ligated to the blunt ends. After purifying again using the MinElute kit (Qiagen, Germany), indices were ligated to the adaptors and the products were amplified by PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction). Next, the DNA libraries were purified using AMPure XP beads (Beckman Coulter, USA). The volume of each library was around 28–30 μL. The length of the DNA fragments was inspected using the conventional agarose gel electrophoresis method. Finally, samples were delivered to the sequencing company and sequenced using the DNBSEQ-T7 high-throughput platform.

We used AdapterRemoval v2.3.2 [62] to trim the sequencing adapters and merged the paired-end reads into a single sequence, and only those overlapped by at least 30bp were retained. Merged reads were mapped onto the human reference genome (hs37d5) using the aln/samse programs in BWA v0.7.17 [63], with parameters -l 1024 and -n 0.01. Due to some samples with insufficient SNPs, some of the samples were sequenced twice. We used the merge programs in samtools v1.7 [64] to merge the bam results in the same human sample to obtain as many SNPs as possible. Dedup v0.12.8 [65] was used to remove the PCR duplicates. We clipped six bases from both ends of each read to reduce C > T and G > A transitions using trimBam implemented in BamUtil v1.0.15 (https://github.com/statgen/bamUtil). We used mpileup implemented in samtools with parameters -q 30 and -Q 30 to get high-quality aligned reads. Finally, we generated a pseudo-diploid genotype using pileupCaller software (https://github.com/stschiff/sequenceTools). To make the results credible, we used samples that map to the 1240k data set, containing at least 30,000 SNPs, for subsequent analyses.

We used pmdtools [66] to analyse the deamination patterns (5’ C > T and 3’ G > A misincorporation) of ancient DNA. The results were used to trim bases from both ends of each read by trimBam. We estimated mitochondrial DNA contamination rates by Schmutzi [67] for all samples. Individuals with ≤ 3% contamination were regarded as qualifying samples. Then, we estimated the nuclear contamination rate for males by ANGSD v0.941 [68]. All samples with enough coverage on the X chromosome had a contamination rate of ≤ 3%.

We built a data set, including the qualified samples and China_YR_LN samples, which were used to normalise the results. We used pMMRCalculator (https://github.com/TCLamnidis/pMMRCalculator) to calculate pairwise mismatch rate (PMR) for all pairs of samples. We inferred relatedness coefficients (r) to annotate degrees of genetic relationship using cut-offs based on expected relatedness values [69]. And we employed READ2 [70] with default parameters to assess genetic relatedness among ancient individuals. In general, reliable kinship inference requires at least 10,000 overlapping SNPs between sample pairs. Due to limitations in sequencing coverage, we also excluded sample pairs that were identified as related by both methods but had fewer than 10,000 overlapping SNPs.

To determine the sex of each sample, we compare the genome coverage of the X and the genomic coverage on autosomal chromosomes, and the results were reverified by Rx and Ry [71,72]. The log2fasta program, implemented in Schmutzi [67], was used to call the mtDNA sequences, and the mitochondrial haplogroups were assigned using Haplogrep2 [73]. We determined Y-haplogroups by the Yleaf program [74] and ISOGG version 15.73 (https://isogg.org/tree/index.html).

We merged our 14 samples with published present-day and ancient genomic data [6,7,13–15,18,75–85] from the Human Origins Dataset (HO) and the 1240 K dataset from the Allen Ancient DNA Resource (AADR), using mergeit implemented in EIGENSOFT [86]. We used populations from the HO dataset for PCA and ADMIXTURE. We used the 1240 K dataset containing 1,233,013 SNPs in all other studies.

To reveal the genetic structure, we used the smartpca program from the EIGENSOFT [86] package to perform PCA analysis. We used default parameters with lsqproject: YES and numoutlieriter: 0. The modern populations were used to calculate the principal components (PCs), and the ancient samples were projected onto the constructed PCs.

Given the strong linkage disequilibrium (LD) of SNPs, we used Plink [87] with parameters -indep-pairwise 200 25 0.4, which retained 272,837 SNPs. Then, we carried out ADMIXTURE v1.3.0 [88] analysis in unsupervised mode with fivefold cross-validation parameters, 100 bootstrap replicates, and varied ancestral populations K ranging from 2 to 12.

Using a block jackknife, we computedf-statistics by the ADMIXTOOLS [89] package with default parameters and standard errors. We computed outgroupf3-statistics asf3(X, Y; Mbuti) using qp3Pop with the parameter'inbreed'set to'YES'. We used qpDstat to calculate thef4-statistics using parameterf4-mode: YES.

We performed pairwise-qpWaveanalysis by ADMIXTOOLS [89] to test the homogeneity of all Shandong Wenshaobei individuals using the 1240k panel. The genetic relationship among Wenshaobei, the Yellow River Basin ancients, and representative populations using the 1240k panel. We carried it out with the parameters allsnps: YES and inbreed: NO. We used the following outgroups: Mbuti.DG, Luxembourg_Loschbour_published.DG, Russia_Kostenki14.SG, Ust_Ishim.DG, Australian.DG, Russia_Shamanka_Eneolithic.SG, Bianbian, Gaoshan_LN, Taiwan_Hanben..

We applied the rotate strategy to compute the ancestral coefficient usingqpAdmimplemented in ADMIXTOOLS [89]. We set the parameter allsnps: YES and inbreed: NO. The right (outgroup) populations included Mbuti.DG, Luxembourg_Loschbour_published.DG, Russia_Kostenki14.SG, Ust_Ishim.DG, Australian.DG Russia_Shamanka_Eneolithic.SG, Bianbian, Gaoshan_LN, Taiwan_Hanben. The possible ancestral source populations included YR_MN, Boshan, Tanshishan, and AR_EN. InqpAdmmodeling, thep-value reflects the statistical fit between the model and the observed data. A highp-value (> 0.01) suggests that the model is not statistically rejected, though it does not necessarily indicate the best model. Conversely, lowp-values (< 0.01) imply a poor model fit and likely rejection. Thus, interpretation ofp-values should consider biological plausibility and contextual support, rather than relying solely on statistical thresholds.

Additional file 1: Table S1. Newly reported ancient individuals. Table S2. The qualified ancient samples’ information on genome coverage, contamination, genetic sex and haplogroup. Table S3. Kinship results by pMMRCalculator. Table S4. Kinship results by READ2. Table S5. Results of outgroupf3(Source1, Source2; Mbuti). Table S6. Results off4(Mbuti, X; Wenshaobei, early Neolithic Shandong populations). Table S7. Results off4(Mbuti, Shandong populations; Ancient Middle Yellow River Populations, early Neolithic Shandong populations). Table S8. Results of admixture modelling of middle and lower Yellow River populations. Table S9. Results off4(Mbuti, reference populations; Shandong populations, Han_Shandong).

Additional file 2: Fig. S1-Images of Wenshaobei samples. Fig. S2-Pairwise-qpWaveanalysis among Wenshaobei individuals and representative populations. Results with 0.01< p-value < 0.05 are marked with “+”, and those with p-value > 0.05 using the “++” label. Fig. S3-Admixture compositions of ancient Shandong populations. a. Modelling results of Shandong populations sorted in chronological order. b. Modelling results of Shandong populations during Shang, Zhou, Spring and Autumn Period, and Warring States Period. c. Modelling results of Shandong populations during the Qin and Han dynasties and subsequent historical periods.

We sincerely thank the editors and reviewers for their contributions and suggestions. SF and ZX from the Information and Network Center of Xiamen University are acknowledged for their help with high-performance computing.

C.C.W. and Q.Z. designed and supervised the study. K.C., C.Q., and S.C. provided the samples. Z.J., Q.S., B.W., X.M., Y.L., H.Z., X.Z., X.W., J.T., T.M., and W.W. collected the samples from the archaeological sites. Z.J. and H.M. performed the majority of the experiments. J.Z., L.T., H.H., K.Z., R.W., X.Y., Y.X., M.X., T.B., and Y.J. analyzed the data. Z.J., J.Z., and C.C.W. wrote the manuscript. S.W. and L.J. were involved in the discussion. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

The work was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (T2425014 and 32270667), the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province of China (2023J06013), the Major Project of the National Social Science Foundation of Chin (21&ZD285), Open Research Fund of State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering at Fudan University (SKLGE-2310), Open Research Fund of Forensic Genetics Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Public Security (2023FGKFKT07), and National Key Research and Development Program of China (2024YFC3306701, 2023YFC3303701-02).