A higher risk of cardiovascular disease has been correlated with several inflammatory biomarkers, one of which is the systemic immune-inflammatory index (SII). Nevertheless, the relationship between SII and major adverse cardiovascular and cerebrovascular events (MACCE) in patients with diabetes and acute coronary syndrome (ACS) after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) remains unclear. The objective of this study was to assess the prognostic value of SII for the risk of MACCE in patients with diabetes and ACS who underwent PCI.

This study included 1782 patients with ACS and diabetes who underwent PCI successfully at Beijing Anzhen Hospital between August 2021 and April 2022, with a median follow-up of 16.2 months. According to the optimal SII cut-off value for MACCE, patients were categorized into two groups: the high SII group (SII ≥ 735.82 × 109/L,n= 576) and the low SII group (SII < 735.82 × 109/L,n= 1206). Univariate and multivariate Cox regression were used to verify the relationship between SII and MACCE, and the reliability of the relationship was further tested by subgroup analysis.

The incidence of MACCE was significantly higher in the high SII group than in the low SII group (11.3% vs. 6.7%, log-rankP< 0.001), indicating that among 22 patients with high SII levels, an additional MACCE event is expected to occur. Univariate Cox proportional hazards models showed that higher SII was associated with an increased incidence of MACCE (HR: 1.739, 95%CI: 1.254–2.410). After full adjustment, higher SII remained an independent risk factor for MACCE (HR: 1.540, 95%CI: 1.098–2.160) and unplanned revascularization (HR: 1.526, 95%CI: 1.011–2.301).

This study found that elevated SII is an independent risk factor for predicting MACCE in patients with ACS and diabetes mellitus after PCI, providing a theoretical basis for postoperative anti-inflammatory therapy in this population.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12872-025-04990-4.

ACS is an important cause of death [1]. Globally, nearly one-third of people with diabetes suffer from cardiovascular disease [2]. In recent years, advancements in pharmacological and interventional therapies for patients with ACS have significantly mitigated the risk of MACCE. However, the risk of MACCE post-PCI remains a concern, particularly among diabetic patients [3]. Therefore, it is crucial to identify high-risk patient groups with ACS and diabetes after PCI and implement early intervention measures.

Numerous studies indicate that the occurrence of MACCE is linked to inflammation. Atherosclerosis, a chronic inflammatory process affecting the walls of major arteries, is a key contributor to cardiovascular disease (CVD) [4,5]. Blood cells play a crucial role in promoting the development of inflammation [4]. In metabolic disorders such as diabetes, there is an increased production and activation of monocytes, neutrophils, and platelets, which further exacerbates the progression of atherosclerosis and contributes to adverse outcomes following PCI [3,6]. Recent studies have shown that neutrophil-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) and platelet-lymphocyte ratio (PLR) have predictive value for the poor prognosis in patients with CVD or ACS [7–9].

SII integrates NLR and PLR, better reflecting systemic inflammation and immune status. Initially, the prognostic effect of SII on patients with hepatocellular carcinoma after curative surgery was explored through the introduction of SII [10]. Recently, the research of SII in the cardiovascular field has gradually increased. SII levels significantly increased in patients with ACS compared to those with stable CAD [11]. Previous studies have shown that SII outperforms NLR and PLR in predicting adverse outcomes in ACS cohorts [12,13]. Furthermore, research has demonstrated that SII is capable of predicting all-cause mortality in individuals with diabetes and is linked to the severity of diabetic retinopathy [14,15].

However, limited studies have demonstrated the prognostic effect of SII on MACCE in patients with diabetes and ACS after PCI. Therefore, further exploration of the predictive role of SII for adverse events in this population is of critical importance for early identification of high-risk individuals and the subsequent implementation of preventive measures.

This prospective cohort study consecutively enrolled 2220 patients with ACS and diabetes who received PCI from August 2021 to April 2022 at Beijing Anzhen Hospital. Participants with the following characteristics were excluded: (1) hematologic or autoimmune diseases, (2) infectious diseases, (3) severe inflammation (white blood cell count ≥ 20 × 109/L), (4) malignant tumors, (5) severe kidney disease with an eGFR < 15 mL/min/1.73 m2, (6) pregnant or lactating women, (7) missing critical data (Fig.1). Ultimately, a total of 1782 eligible patients were included in this study.

The optimal threshold for SII was determined by receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis, with MACCE as the state variable. The cutoff value corresponding to the maximum Youden index (sensitivity + specificity − 1) was selected to stratify patients. 735.82 × 10⁹/L is the best cutoff value, based on which we divided the population into two categories: the high SII group (SII ≥ 735.82 × 109/L,n= 576) and the low SII group (SII < 735.82 × 109/L,n= 1206) [10,16,17].

This study strictly followed the guidelines outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki, with all participants signing written consent. Upon admission after an overnight fast, blood samples were immediately collected during a single venipuncture, and various parameters were tested in the Anzhen Hospital’s laboratory according to the standard detection method on the same day. SII was calculated by three blood cell subtypes (platelet count × neutrophil/lymphocyte ratio). ACS encompasses unstable angina pectoris(myocardial ischemia symptoms without dynamic elevation of myocardial injury biomarkers), non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (dynamic elevation of myocardial injury biomarkers without persistent ST-segment elevation), and ST-elevation myocardial infarction (dynamic elevation of myocardial injury biomarkers accompanied by persistent ST-segment elevation or equivalent ECG changes) [18]. The diagnosis of diabetes includes the following three points: fasting blood glucose levels (FBG) ≥ 7.0 mmol/L or the presence of hyperglycemia symptoms along with random blood glucose levels ≥ 11.1 mmol/L, or 2-hour blood glucose levels ≥ 11.1 mmol/L during an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) [19]. According to the hypertension guidelines released by WHO in 2022, the diagnostic criteria for hypertension include systolic blood pressure(SBP) not less than 140 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure(DBP) greater than 90 mmHg [20].

Experienced cardiologists conducted clinical follow-ups on all patients for a median duration of 16.2 months via outpatient consultations or telephone appointments. A panel of clinical cardiologists determined a consensus on categorizing endpoint events collaboratively. The primary endpoint of the study was MACCE (all-cause death, nonfatal stroke, nonfatal myocardial infarction (MI), and unplanned revascularization). Secondary endpoints comprised cardiac death, readmission due to unstable angina (UA) and heart failure (HF), along with each constituent event within MACCE criteria. All deaths without a verified non-cardiovascular cause would be treated as cardiac deaths. Nonfatal MI was defined as type 4 myocardial infarction, including type 4a (periprocedural MI), type 4b (stent/scaffold thrombosis), and type 4c (restenosis) [21]. Unplanned revascularization refers to PCI and coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) performed due to symptoms (such as recurrent angina) or confirmed severe stenosis (≥ 50% diameter stenosis) during non-protocol-mandated follow-up [22].

The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test was applied to check the normality of the continuous variables. Mean (standard deviation [SD]) was used to describe normally distributed continuous variables. The non-normal distribution was described using the median (interquartile ranges [IQR]). The independent sample t-test and Mann-Whitney U test were used to test the differences between the two groups respectively. Categorical variables were represented using absolute frequencies (percentages), and Pearson’s Chi-square test was applied to verify the relationship between the two groups. In this study, the Kaplan-Meier method was utilized to generate the survival curves, and the differences between the two groups were evaluated through the log-rank test. We employed univariate Cox proportional hazard regressions to evaluate the association between SII and each endpoint. Two multivariate Cox regression models were utilized to evaluate the influence of potential confounding factors on the relationship between SII and outcomes. The covariates of the multivariate Cox regression were selected based on clinical relevance and significant association with MACCE in univariable Cox regression analysis (p< 0.05) (Supplementary Table1). Model 1 was adjusted for age (< 65 years and ≥ 65 years) and sex (female and male), and Model 2 was adjusted for age, sex, BMI, HDL, eGFR, CR, HbA1C, different types of ACS, hypertension, CKD, prior CABG, prior stroke, and medication (CCB). We employed ROC curve analysis to assess the specificity and sensitivity of SII in predicting MACCE (Fig.2), and we used the optimal cut-off value as the criterion for group classification. Subsequently, we conducted subgroup analysis based on the following groups: age (< 65 years, ≥ 65 years), sex (female, male), smoking status (current smokers, ex-smokers, non-smokers), HbA1c (< 7.0%, ≥ 7.0%), BMI (< 28.0 kg/m2, ≥ 28.0 kg/m2), hypertension (yes, no), and CKD (yes, no). Thep-values of the product terms were used to check the significance of the interactions between different levels of SII and multiple stratified variables. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS version 27.0 and graphs were drawn using GraphPad Prism version 9.0.

To eliminate potential confounding variables, we performed 1:3 propensity score matching (PSM) with a caliper of 0.02 and nearest neighbor matching. The final matched cohort included 495 high SII and 984 low SII patients (approximating 1:2), achieving standardized mean differences (SMD) < 0.1 for all covariates (Supplementary Table 2).

Participants were divided into the following two groups: the high SII group (SII ≥ 735.82 × 109/L,n= 576) and the low SII group (SII < 735.82 × 109/L,n= 1206). The baseline characteristics of this population are shown in Table1. The study involved 1782 participants, of whom 1284(72.1%) patients were male, with a median age of 61.0 years. Median levels of age, neutrophil count, platelet count, monocyte count, HbA1c, CR and hsCRP were significantly higher in the high SII group than in the low SII group. Similarly, NSTEMI, STEMI, hypertension, CKD, previous HF, PCI, ticagrelor, and certain medications (ticagrelor, β-blocker, ACEI/ARB, CCB) were more likely to occur in the high SII group. However, the median levels of body weight, BMI, lymphocyte count, eGFR, and LVEF were higher in low SII group.

During the median follow-up of 16.2 months, 146 patients developed MACCE, comprising 65 (11.3%) individuals with higher SII and 81 (6.7%) individuals with lower SII (Table2). The absolute risk difference (ARD) for MACCE between high and low SII groups was 4.6% (95% CI: 1.6–7.5%), corresponding to a number needed to harm (NNH) of 22 (95% CI: 14–62). The cumulative hazard curves for MACCE and other endpoints at different levels of SII were shown in Fig.3. The incidence of MACCE was significantly higher in patients with higher SII compared to patients with lower SII (log-rankp< 0.001). Similarly, the above trends were observed in all-cause death, cardiac death, non-fatal MI, unplanned revascularization, and HF hospitalization (log-rankp< 0.05). However, there was no significant difference between the two groups in the non-fatal stroke and angina hospitalization, and the log-rankp-values were 0.541 and 0.554, respectively. Next, to clarify the correlation between SII and MACCE as well as other secondary endpoints, Cox regression was performed, as shown in Table2. In univariate Cox regression, patients with a higher SII were associated with the occurrence of MACCE (HR: 1.739, 95%CI: 1.254–2.410;p <0.001) in the unadjusted model. The relationship remains nearly constant in Model 1(HR: 1.699, 95% CI: 1.224–2.357;p =0.002) and Model 2(HR: 1.540, 95% CI: 1.098–2.160;p= 0.012). Moreover, in univariate Cox regression, higher SII was correlated with an elevated risk of all-cause death(HR: 2.269, 95% CI: 1.095-4.700;p =0.027), cardiac death(HR: 2.915, 95% CI: 1.173–7.248;p =0.021), non-fatal MI(HR: 2.734, 95% CI: 1.018–7.342;p =0.046), unplanned revascularization(HR: 1.658, 95% CI: 1.114–2.467;p =0.013), and HF hospitalization(HR: 2.652, 95% CI: 1.047–6.719;p =0.040). In Model 1, the relationship between higher SII and cardiac death (HR: 2.651, 95% CI: 1.064–6.608;p =0.036) as well as unplanned revascularization (HR: 1.657, 95% CI: 1.112–2.469;p =0.013) remained significant. In Model 2, higher SII continued to be an independent risk factor for unplanned revascularization (HR: 1.526, 95%CI: 1.011–2.301;p =0.044).

Next, we performed subgroup analysis to assess the robustness of the relationship between SII and MACCE (Fig.4). We categorize the subgroups based on age, sex, smoking status, HbA1c, BMI, hypertension, and CKD. In all groups except smoking status, thep-values for interactions exceeded 0.05, indicating nonsignificant differences between SII and MACCE across diverse populations within these subgroups. Consequently, the reliability of SII in predicting MACCE was further substantiated. Notably, higher SII interacted with different smoking states.

After a 1:3 PSM, 495 pairs were successfully matched in the high SII and low SII groups (Supplementary Table2). Subsequently, we conducted Cox regression analysis again within the matched population, demonstrating that elevated levels of SII remained an independent risk factor for MACCE (HR: 1.500, 95% CI: 1.041–2.162;p =0.029) and unplanned revascularization (HR: 1.640, 95% CI: 1.064–2.528;p =0.025) (Supplementary Table3). After full adjustment, the relationship between higher SII and MACCE (HR: 1.459, 95% CI: 1.009–2.108;p =0.044) as well as unplanned revascularization (HR: 1.590, 95% CI: 1.027–2.461;p =0.037) remained significant (Supplementary Table3).

To our knowledge, this is the first study to analyze the predictive role of SII in adverse prognosis in ACS patients with diabetes after PCI. Our study found that patients with higher level of SII had a higher risk of MACCE and several other secondary endpoints (all-cause death, cardiac death, non-fatal MI, unplanned revascularization, and HF hospitalization). After adequate adjustment for confounders, higher SII levels remained an independent risk factor for MACCE and unplanned revascularization. This result was further verified after PSM. Furthermore, through subgroup analysis, we confirmed that the relationship between higher SII and MACCE showed no significant differences across subgroups of age, sex, HbA1c, BMI, hypertension, and CKD. Notably, we identified a significant interaction between elevated SII and smoking status, suggesting that smokers with high SII face compounded cardiovascular risk.

Both CVD and diabetes are closely related to inflammation. Atherosclerosis, as the predominant pathogenic process of cardiovascular disease (CVD), is a chronic, low-grade inflammatory disorder [4,5,23,24]. Both systemic and local inflammation play a central role in the occurrence and progression of cardiovascular disease (CVD) [25,26]. Leukocytes play a pivotal role in the inflammatory response process. Previous studies have indicated that leukocytes, especially elevated neutrophils and decreased lymphocytes, are significant independent risk factors for cardiovascular events [27,28]. Neutrophils, the major subtype of white blood cells, play an instrumental part in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis through various mechanisms and are closely connected to diabetes. It has been reported that patients with atherosclerosis have elevated levels of neutrophils in their blood [29]. TLR2-dependent endothelial cell apoptosis can stimulate the aggregation and activation of neutrophils, as well as the release of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), thereby expediting the progression of atherosclerosis [30]. In addition, Wong et al. demonstrated a significant increase in NETs produced by neutrophils in a mouse model of diabetes [31]. In mice with diabetes, NETs have also been shown to inhibit atherosclerosis regression by increasing plaque inflammation, as well as promote plaque destabilization by modulating the activity of vascular smooth muscle cells [32,33]. Furthermore, a systematic review showed that neutrophils are an independent risk factor for adverse cardiovascular events in ACS patients with cardiac revascularization [34]. In contrast, lymphocytes inhibit the development of atherosclerosis. Núñez et al. showed that low levels of lymphocytes significantly increased the risk of reinfarction in the first 96 h after STEMI [35]. Platelets are capable of promoting the development of atherosclerosis not only through the secretion of biologically active molecules, including chemokines and pro-inflammatory cytokines, but also via interactions with neutrophils and macrophages [36]. Furthermore, platelet-derived matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP9) and tissue proteinase G can further contribute to the rupture of fibrous caps in advanced atherosclerotic plaques [37]. Diabetes is also closely related to inflammation and may promote the development of vascular lesions in various ways, including damage to endothelial cell function [38–41]. Previous studies have demonstrated that the differential expression of lncRNAs in diabetic patients promotes the development of inflammation and further exacerbates disease progression [42].

Considering the effects of the above cells, NLR and PLR were introduced in previous studies to reflect the level of systemic inflammation. Bagyura et al. analyzed data from 280 asymptomatic participants and found that NLR was independently associated with coronary artery calcification in those with the highest degree of visceral obesity [7]. Shahsanaei et al. demonstrate that NLR is an independent risk factor for increased long-term mortality and MACE incidence in ACS patients undergoing PCI [43]. Willim et al. found that a higher level of PLR is an independent risk factor for in-hospital and long-term MACE and mortality in STEMI patients undergoing PCI [8].

Given the distinct roles of various inflammatory cells in diabetes and atherosclerosis, substantial prior research has explored the predictive value of NLR and PLR for adverse cardiovascular events. Willim et al. demonstrated that elevated PLR independently predicts MACE and mortality in STEMI patients undergoing PCI [8]. Regarding NLR, while one study found it correlated with baseline coronary disease severity but not with adverse outcomes in new-onset ACS patients [44], Shahsanaei et al. conversely established NLR as an independent predictor of long-term mortality and MACE incidence in PCI-treated ACS patients [43]. This heterogeneity in NLR’s predictive utility underscores the need for a more comprehensive inflammatory indicator to reliably assess cardiovascular prognosis.

SII, a novel indicator of systemic inflammation, integrates neutrophils, platelets and lymphocytes, providing a more comprehensive reflection of the body’s immune and inflammatory status compared to NLR and PLR [10]. In a cross-sectional study of 699 patients with CAD, it was observed that individuals with ACS exhibited elevated levels of SII compared to those with stable angina [11]. Similarly, Yang et al. categorized 950 patients who underwent PCI into the contrast-induced acute kidney injury (CI-AKI) group and the Non-CI-AKI group, revealing that SII levels were elevated in the CI-AKI cohort [45]. In a recent cohort study, Luo et al. revealed that higher SII is a predictor of long-term mortality in AMI patients with diabetes. The restricted cubic spline (RCS) analysis revealed a linear relationship between SII and long-term mortality within this specific population [46]. Numerous prior studies have elucidated the relationship between cardiovascular disease (CVD), diabetes, and inflammation from both clinical and theoretical perspectives. Nevertheless, the impact of SII on the occurrence of adverse events in diabetic patients with ACS after PCI remains uncertain, and additional evidence for anti-inflammatory therapy in this specific population is still required.

In alignment with previous findings, this study further elucidates the impact of elevated inflammation levels on MACCE and unplanned revascularization in diabetic patients after PCI. The cascade of pathophysiological changes—from diabetes to inflammatory response to atherosclerosis—further promotes the occurrence of cardiovascular events. It is precisely the pivotal role of inflammation in this process that provides the theoretical foundation for using SII to predict the incidence of MACCE. Notably, elevated SII demonstrated its strongest predictive value for unplanned revascularization among all the secondary outcomes. This association likely stems from the direct link between atherosclerosis progression and the development of recurrent angina and severe stenosis, the primary clinical indications for unplanned revascularization. Conversely, SII lacked independent association with HF hospitalization, likely because HF is more closely related to oxidative stress and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) activation rather than inflammatory cascade reactions [47–49].

Although numerous studies have established risk stratification models for ACS patients and those with coronary artery disease (CAD) post-CABG [50,51], diabetic patients exhibit distinct clinical challenges, notably more extensive/complex coronary lesions and significantly higher post-PCI mortality compared to CABG [3,52]. Consequently, for patients with ACS and diabetes, the prompt identification of high-risk groups following PCI is crucial. SII, as an easily obtainable and cost-effective inflammatory biomarker, demonstrates significant clinical utility for both risk stratification and therapeutic decision-making in post-PCI diabetic patients. By incorporating SII into established risk assessment tools such as the GRACE score, clinicians could more accurately identify high-risk individuals who may benefit from intensified surveillance. Furthermore, recent years have witnessed extensive research on therapeutic strategies for ACS, among which anti-inflammatory therapies constitute a significant focus [53–59]. The LoDoCo2 trial demonstrated that low-dose colchicine can inhibit inflammatory responses and effectively reduce cardiovascular events in patients with chronic coronary disease [60,61]. However, precise anti-inflammatory treatment still needs further exploration. Our research found that among patients with diabetes and ACS after PCI, the risk of MACCE in patients with higher levels of SII increased by 54% compared with those with lower levels of SII. In 22 patients with high levels of SII, additional MACCE events were expected to occur. The above results will further promote the precise anti-inflammatory treatment of this population. Consequently, future studies should explore whether integrating SII with the GRACE score enhances risk prediction and whether SII-guided anti-inflammatory therapy improves clinical outcomes.

Furthermore, the interaction between SII and smoking underscores a synergistic pro-inflammatory mechanism. Numerous prior studies have demonstrated that smoking can exacerbate both systemic and localized vascular inflammation through the enhancement of oxidative stress, NETs, and other pathophysiological mechanisms [62]. This study offers novel insights into the intricate relationship between smoking and systemic inflammation, highlighting the critical need for smoking cessation in high-SII patients and supporting targeted anti-inflammatory therapies.

However, the definition of the cut-off value of SII in different populations still needs further exploration. In a study that included patients with three-vessel disease after revascularization, the optimal cut-off value of SII (SII = 694.3 × 109/L) was also used to classify the population [16]. However, in this study, the optimal cut-off value was 735.82 × 109/L. In the above-mentioned study, approximately 39% of the patients were diabetic, while all the patients in this study had diabetes. Previous studies have shown that diabetes is an important factor in promoting inflammation in atherosclerosis [6]. Therefore, the different optimal cutoff values of SII may be caused by different baseline inflammatory levels.

There are certain limitations to this study. Firstly, as this is a single-center, prospective cohort study, some selection biases and confounding factors are difficult to eliminate. Future multicenter studies can be designed to further validate the generality of this conclusion. Secondly, SII was calculated based on the blood routine obtained at the time of admission, so it is difficult to determine the impact of the dynamic changes in SII on the results during the study period. Future studies should incorporate continuous SII measurements to assess the correlation between inflammatory changes and outcomes. Finally, the proportion of AMI patients included in our study is relatively low. In future cohorts, the predictive effect of SII on outcomes in the AMI population can be further explored.

In ACS patients with diabetes who underwent PCI, higher SII is an independent prognostic factor for MACCE. Given the detrimental impact of inflammation on prognosis, further investigation is warranted to ascertain whether SII contributes to clinical decision-making regarding anti-inflammatory therapy in patients with ACS and DM following PCI.

Supplementary Materials 1. Supplementary Table 1 Univariate Cox regression between each variable and MACCE. Supplementary Table 2 Baseline characteristics before and after 1:3 PSM. Supplementary Table 3 Cox regression analyses between SII and MACCE as well as other secondary endpoints after 1:3 PSM.

We express our gratitude to all the personnel who have contributed to the establishment of this database.

L.Z. and S.W. proposed the study’s research ideas, conception, and design. L.Z. P.G. and Y.W. completed practical work and collected the data. L.Z. P.G. and S.W. analyzed and interpreted the data. L.Z. prepared the manuscript’s initial drafts. S.W. P.G. Y.W. B.S. and X.W. critically reviewed the manuscript’s intellectual content. All authors reviewed, understood, and approved the manuscript’s final version to be submitted or published.

The study received funding from Capital’s Funds for Health Improvement and Research (2022-2-2068) and the National Natural Science Foundations of China (NSFC, Grant No. 82271605, 82471603, 82071573).