Pathogenic variants ofHNF1Acause maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (HNF1A-MODY; also known as MODY3). Individuals with HNF1A-MODY are primarily treated with sulfonylureas; however, little is known about the effect of sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors in HNF1A-MODY. Interestingly, HNF1A-MODY is associated with increased glucosuria, which has been attributed to lower expression ofSGLT2as observed inHNF1A-knockout mice. We investigated the impact of acute SGLT2 inhibition on glucosuria in individuals with HNF1A-MODY or type 2 diabetes.

In a randomized, double-blind, crossover study, individuals with HNF1A-MODY or type 2 diabetes underwent two three-step hyperglycemic clamps targeted at 1-h periods of 10, 14, and 18 mmol/L glucose with and without acute SGLT2 inhibition (25 mg empagliflozin or placebo administrated 2 h before clamp procedures).

Eleven individuals with HNF1A-MODY (age [mean ± SD] 49 ± 15 years; glomerular filtration rate [GFR; mean ± SD] 113 ± 18 mL/min) and 10 individuals with type 2 diabetes (age 63 ± 7 years; GFR 103 ± 27 mL/min) were included. During the 3-h hyperglycemic clamp, SGLT2 inhibition increased urinary glucose excretion in both groups (HNF1A-MODY: 24.5 g [95% CI 20.6, 28.3]; type 2 diabetes: 23.5 g [95% CI 20.4, 26.5]). The effect of SGLT2 inhibition was not significantly different between the groups (1.0 g [95% CI −3.5, 5.6];P= 0.6).

The robust effect of SGLT2 inhibition on urinary glucose excretion in participants with HNF1A-MODY points to SGLT2 inhibition as a relevant glucose-lowering treatment strategy in individuals with HNF1A-MODY.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) is a monogenic form of diabetes caused by pathogenic variants in the geneHNF1Aencoding the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-α (HNF1A) (1). The transcription factor HNF1A is important for β-cell function (2). In individuals with pathogenic variants ofHNF1A, β-cell function is impaired to the extent that hyperglycemia develops relatively early in life, often before the age of 40 years (3). Furthermore, the risk of complications is comparable to that of type 2 diabetes (4–7). Hyperglycemia is initially managed with low doses of sulfonylurea (SU) (8), but intensified treatment is often required (9). However, intensified SU treatment is associated with hypoglycemia in individuals with MODY3 (also known as HNF1A-MODY) (8–10) and may lead to body weight gain (11).

Increased urinary glucose excretion has been observed in individuals with pathogenic variants ofHNF1Abefore the onset of diabetes and compared with individuals with type 2 diabetes (12,13). This has been attributed to the involvement of the transcription factor HNF1A in the regulation ofSLC5A2, the gene encoding sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) (14,15). SGLT2, located in the proximal renal tubules, reabsorbs ∼90% of the glucose filtered by the glomeruli (16). SGLT1 is located downstream of SGLT2 in the tubules (and in the gut) and reabsorbs the remaining glucose in the tubules (16). Thus, under normal physiologic conditions, little glucose is excreted. When plasma glucose exceeds ∼10–11 mmol/L in healthy individuals, glucose is lost in the urine in a curvilinear relationship following plasma glucose concentrations (16). The renal glucose threshold is defined as the plasma glucose concentration at which renal glucose reabsorption becomes partly saturated and glucose excretion in the urine becomes significant (16). In individuals with HNF1A-MODY, the renal glucose threshold is markedly lower compared with that in individuals with type 1 or 2 diabetes (14,17), which has been attributed to decreased expression of the gene encoding SGLT2 as shown in a knockout mouse model (14) and a human kidney cell model (15).

The possibly lower expression of SGLT2 in individuals with HNF1A-MODY would be expected to reduce the potential therapeutic effects of SGLT2 inhibitors. Nevertheless, effects of SGLT2 inhibitors on glucosuria and glycemic control have been reported. After a single dose of 10 mg dapagliflozin, the urinary glucose-to-creatinine ratio (UGCR) increased markedly from a baseline of nearly unmeasurable glucosuria in individuals with HNF1A-MODY (18). Furthermore, case series and reports have suggested that SGLT2 inhibitors lower plasma glucose in individuals with HNF1A-MODY (19–21).

The physiologic consequences of possibly lower expression of SGLT2 in individuals with HNF1A-MODY have not been investigated in a setting with controlled plasma glucose concentration, which, along with the glomerular filtration rate (GFR), determines the amount of filtered glucose in the tubules, the amount of glucose reabsorption (by SGLT2 and SGLT1), and thus the amount of glucose excreted in the urine (16).

In the current study, we investigated the pathophysiologic implications of the suggested decreased expression of SGLT2 in individuals with HNF1A-MODY under controlled clamp conditions using an SGLT2 inhibitor. By comparing urinary glucose excretion during SGLT2 inhibition, we aimed to quantify the impact of any decreased expression of SGLT2 in individuals with HNF1A-MODY compared with that in individuals with type 2 diabetes. We hypothesized that decreased SGLT2 expression would lead to a lower increase of urinary glucose excretion after SGLT2 inhibition in individuals with HNF1A-MODY compared with in individuals with type 2 diabetes.

The study was approved by the ethical committee of the Capital Region of Denmark (Hillerød, Denmark; H–21066984), registered on ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT05417646), and performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki.

Two groups of participants were recruited:1) individuals with HNF1A-MODY (verified by genetic testing) treated with diet and/or glucose-lowering drugs and2) individuals with type 2 diabetes (diagnosed according to the World Health Organization (22) and without a family history of HNF1A-MODY). Inclusion criteria were age ≥18 years, normal hemoglobin (men 8.3–10.5 mmol/L; women 7.3–9.5 mmol/L), and informed consent. Exclusion criteria were chronic kidney disease (defined as estimated GFR <60 mL/min/1.73 m2and/or severely increased albuminuria [>300 mg/g creatinine]), liver disease (known clinically significant liver disease and/or plasma ALT and/or plasma AST more than two times the normal values), pregnancy or breastfeeding, treatment with an SGLT2 inhibitor, and fasting plasma glucose >10 mmol/L. Participants were recruited from the outpatient clinic at Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen (Herlev, Denmark) and from previous study populations.

Empagliflozin (25 mg) and placebo were encapsulated in identical gelatin capsules (DBcaps [size AAel]; Capsugel, Bornem, Belgium) and packed in containers labeled for each participant and experiment day according to a randomization list with a block size of four by the hospital pharmacy of the Capital Region of Denmark (Herlev, Denmark) to ensure blinding of participants and investigators. According to pharmacokinetic properties (tmax1.3–3.0 h;t½10.3–18.8 h) (23) and experience from a previous study (24), the capsules were administered with a glass of water (∼200 mL) 2 h before initiation of the clamp.

The study was a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover study consisting of a screening visit, a 4-h99mTc-DTPA plasma clearance measurement of GFR on a separate day (25), and two experimental glucose clamp days in randomized order (separated by at least 7 days) with administration of empagliflozin or placebo. The glucose clamp had three steps: 10, 14, and 18 mmol/L, each lasting 1 h. Before each experimental clamp day, participants were instructed to fast overnight (10 h; water allowed until 2 h before the first blood sampling). After measurement of body weight, the participant was placed in recumbent position. An i.v. cannula was inserted into a cubital vein of each arm (one for infusions and one for collection of blood). Arterialized blood was obtained by wrapping a heating pad around the forearm. At times −130, −125, and −120 min, blood was drawn for baseline samples. At time −120 min, empagliflozin or placebo was administered, and directly after, the participant was instructed to empty their bladder (urine discarded). At −30 min, blood was sampled, and an isotonic saline infusion (250 mL/h) was started to stimulate urine production. At time −15 min, immediately after blood sampling, the participant was instructed to void, and urine was collected in a restroom adjacent to the experimental room. At time 0 min, the glucose clamp was initiated using i.v. glucose bolus (amount: [target plasma glucose − current plasma glucose in mmol/L] × 35 mg × body weight in kg) and maintained using a continuous, variable-rate infusion of 20% (w/v) glucose adjusted by the investigator according to bedside plasma glucose measurements made every 5 min. During the clamp, the infusion rate of saline was adjusted inversely to the infusion rate of the glucose infusion to maintain a minimum total infusion rate of 250 mL/h. After blood sampling for plasma glucose at times 50, 110, and 170 min, the participant was instructed to void, and the urine collected (time points −15, 52, 112, and 172 min were used for calculation of the urine production period). At times 60 and 120 min, the plasma glucose concentration was increased using an i.v. glucose bolus (calculated as described above). Participants were not allowed any drinks from administration of the study drug until after the clamp procedure. The primary outcome was the difference between groups in placebo-subtracted urinary glucose excretion during the 3-h clamp evaluated as a superiority outcome.

During the clamp days, blood for bedside plasma glucose was sampled in heparin–fluoride tubes, centrifuged for 30 s at 10,600gand analyzed using the glucose oxidase method (Model 2900 Biochemistry Analyzers; Yellow Springs Instruments, Yellow Springs, OH). EDTA plasma for analysis of glucagon was immediately put on ice until centrifugation (10 min at 850g) and stored at −20°C until batch analysis using a radioimmunoassay (antibody 4305) directed against the COOH-terminal (26,27). Blood for C-peptide analysis was left to coagulate for 30 min at room temperature before centrifugation (10 min at 850g), and serum was stored at −80°C until batch analysis (Atellica IM). Blood for analyses of plasma creatinine, sodium, and potassium (times −125, 30, and 150 min) was collected in a lithium–heparin tube, and plasma was analyzed the same day (Atellica CH 930; Siemens Healthineers). Urine was collected in containers without additives and stored at −80°C until analyses of glucose, creatinine, and sodium (Atellica CH 930; Siemens Healthineers). The lower level of quantification for urine glucose was 0.2 mmol/L (Supplementary Material).

Areas under the curve (AUCs) were calculated using the trapezoid rule. HOMA2 for insulin resistance and β-cell function indices were calculated using fasting plasma C-peptide and glucose concentrations obtained on clamp days before drug administration with HOMA calculator software (version 2.2.3) (28). Adjustment of urinary glucose excretion by GFR was made by dividing by the total measured GFR (99mTc-DTPA plasma clearance) and thereafter multiplying by 100 mL/min. Urinary creatinine clearance was calculated as the urinary creatinine excretion rate during the clamp (time −15 to 172 min) divided by the plasma creatinine concentration (mean of samples from time 30 to 150 min). The renal glucose threshold was estimated as described earlier (29–31) using total measured GFR and the urinary glucose excretion and plasma glucose concentrations collected during the first two steps of the glucose clamp (time −15 to 112 min) to ensure balance between groups and that all participants had significant amounts of glucosuria (details provided in theSupplementary Material). Renal glucose reabsorption was calculated as total filtered glucose minus urinary excreted glucose (using urinary glucose collected during the last step [time 112–172 min]; plasma glucose ∼18 mmol/L). Renal glucose reabsorption was adjusted for GFR by dividing by total GFR. Total filtered glucose was calculated as measured GFR (L/min) × AUCplasma glucose(mmol/L × min).

The Welchttest was used to compare differences between groups, and the pairedttest was used for within-group comparisons. CIs were calculated using atdistribution with a confidence level of 95%. The study was powered to detect a between-group difference for the effect of SGLT2 inhibition on urinary glucose excretion of 7 g with 12 participants in each group (details of power calculation provided in theSupplementary Material).

Data were missing for the following parameters: plasma glucose (three samples), plasma potassium (one sample), step-specific urine collection (two participants were unable to void after first step), and renal glucose reabsorption (one calculated value was negative and therefore meaningless; details provided in theSupplementary Material).

The data sets generated during and/or analyzed in the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request and if in compliance with applicable data protection legislation.

Participants in the two groups were overall similar regarding HbA1c, fasting plasma glucose, BMI, and kidney function and prevalence of complications (Table 1). The ratio of sex was skewed toward more men in the group with type 2 diabetes. In line with general characteristics of MODY, age at diabetes diagnosis was younger and HOMA2 for insulin resistance was lower among participants with HNF1A-MODY. Most participants with HNF1A-MODY were treated with SU and none with metformin, whereas participants with type 2 diabetes were all treated with metformin and none with SU. Other glucose-lowering treatments were balanced between the groups, with half of the participants treated with a glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist (Table 1). The participants carried the followingHNF1Avariants: p.Gln124Ter (n= 1), exon 2–10 deletion (n= 2), p.Cys241Gly (n= 1), p.Pro289fs (n= 1), p.Pro291fs (n= 3), c.956-2A>G (n= 1), p.Pro447Leu (n= 1), and p.Ala559fs (n= 1; RefSeqNM_000545.5). There were no first-degree relatives among the participants.

Data are given as mean (SD) or median (quartile 1–quartile 3) unless otherwise indicated.

BSA, body surface area; DPP-4, dipeptidyl peptidase 4; GLP-1RA, glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor agonist; HOMA2-B, HOMA2 for β-cell function; HOMA2-IR, HOMA2 for insulin resistance.

*Only includes individuals not treated with insulin.

Urinary glucose excretion increased significantly during SGLT2 inhibition compared with placebo in both groups. The effect of SGLT2 inhibition did not differ between groups (Table 2andFig. 1). Accordingly, the amount of infused glucose was higher during SGLT2 inhibition in both groups (Table 2). One participant with HNF1A-MODY had markedly higher urinary glucose excretion compared with all other participants and could be considered an outlier during placebo (details and sensitivity analysis provided in theSupplementary Material). Plasma glucose (AUC) during the glucose clamp was not significantly different between groups during placebo (estimated difference between groups 36 mmol/L × min [95% CI −9, 81];P= 0.11) or SGLT2 inhibition (21 mmol/L × min [95% CI −20, 62];P= 0.3) (Fig. 2AandBandTable 2). Notably, a small (∼2%) effect of SGLT2 inhibition on plasma glucose was observed in both groups (Table 2).

ETD, estimated treatment difference; SGLT2i, SGLT2 inhibition.

*Missing one observation for type 2 diabetes during placebo.

†Missing one observation for HNF1A-MODY during SGLT2i.

Urinary glucose excretion (UGE) (A) and UGE adjusted for GFR (B) at fasting (2 h before clamp), each step (1 h each), and whole clamp (3 h) during SGLT2 inhibition (light blue) and placebo (dark blue) in participants with HNF1A-MODY (solid lines and circles;n= 11) or type 2 diabetes (triangles;n= 8 for stepwise data [dashed lines],n= 10 for whole clamp [steps 1–3] estimates). UGE adjusted for GFR (normalized to 100 mL/min) (B). Participant with HNF1A-MODY who had extreme data for UGE is included (sensitivity analysis and data inSupplementary Material). Error bars indicate 95% CIs.

Plasma glucose (AandB), plasma C-peptide (CandD), and plasma glucagon (EandF) during experiment days with SGLT2 inhibition (light blue lines) and placebo (dark blue lines) in participants with HNF1A-MODY (A,C, andE) and type 2 diabetes (B,D, andF). Ribbons indicate 95% CIs.

Plasma C-peptide and glucagon (AUC) were unaltered by SGLT2 inhibition in both groups during the clamp procedure (Fig. 2C–FandTable 2). Plasma C-peptide was lower in participants with HNF1A-MODY compared with in participants with type 2 diabetes during both placebo (−194 nmol/L × min [95% CI −367, −22];P= 0.031) and SGLT2 inhibition (−185 nmol/L × min [95% CI −340, −31];P= 0.023). No differences between groups were observed regarding plasma glucagon (AUC) during placebo (−140 pmol/L × min [95% CI −366, 86];P= 0.2) or SGLT2 inhibition (−142 pmol/L × min [95% CI −446, 162];P= 0.3).

Urinary sodium excretion was increased during SGLT2 inhibition, whereas the amount of infused sodium was lower during SGLT2 inhibition (as expected based on the inverse relationship of infusion rates of saline and glucose specified in the protocol) (Table 2). When sodium excretion was adjusted by subtraction of the amount of infused sodium (net sodium excretion), the effect of SGLT2 inhibition on sodium excretion was even more pronounced in both groups (Table 2). Plasma sodium concentration (time 150 min) was unaffected by SGLT2 inhibition in both groups, whereas plasma potassium (time 150 min) was lowered in both groups by SGLT2 inhibition (Supplementary Fig. 1andTable 2). No effects of SGLT2 inhibition were observed for urinary creatinine excretion or clearance in either group. However, two participants with type 2 diabetes were considered outliers regarding between-intervention difference in urinary creatinine excretion, which raised the suspicion of possible incomplete bladder emptying (Supplementary Materialprovides additional data, including a sensitivity analysis excluding the two participants). Plasma creatinine (time 150 min) was significantly increased by SGLT2 inhibition compared with placebo in participants with HNF1A-MODY; a nonsignificant increase was observed in participants with type 2 diabetes, and no difference between groups in the effect of SGLT2 inhibition was observed (Table 2).

The infused volume was comparable across groups and interventions (Table 2). Urine volume increased during SGLT2 inhibition in both groups. No difference was observed in the effect of SGLT2 inhibition on urine volume between the groups.

Renal glucose reabsorption (during the highest step with target plasma glucose ∼18 mmol/L) and the renal glucose threshold decreased significantly during SGLT2 inhibition compared with placebo in both groups (Table 2). No differences were observed between groups during placebo for renal glucose reabsorption (estimated between-group difference −1.2 mmol/L [95% CI −2.9, 0.5];P= 0.2) or the renal glucose threshold (−0.8 mmol/L [95% CI −2.1, 0.5];P= 0.2). During SGLT2 inhibition, neither renal glucose reabsorption (−0.1 mmol/L [95% CI −2.1, 2.2];P> 0.9) nor the renal glucose threshold (−0.1 mmol/L [95% CI −1.4, 1.3];P= 0.9) was different between groups. Four participants with HNF1A-MODY and two participants with type 2 diabetes had glucosuria >25 mg/h during the 2 h before the clamp (Supplementary Table 3).

The purpose of this study was to investigate the impact of the potentially lowered expression of SGLT2 in individuals with HNF1A-MODY using an SGLT2 inhibitor compared with expression in individuals with type 2 diabetes. In both groups, SGLT2 inhibition significantly increased urinary glucose excretion compared with placebo. Contrary to our hypothesis, urinary glucose excretion was not significantly different between the groups either with or without SGLT2 inhibition.

The strengths of this study include its randomized, placebo-controlled, crossover design. The use of the glucose clamp method ensured similar plasma glucose levels across participants, thereby minimizing the impact of varying plasma glucose levels on urinary glucose excretion. A small but statistically significant effect of SGLT2 inhibition on plasma glucose was observed in both groups. Theoretically, this may have underestimated the effect of SGLT2 inhibition by ∼0.5 g. Baseline kidney function was accurately measured using99mTc-DTPA plasma clearance. The mean total GFR was slightly lower (∼10%) in participants with type 2 diabetes, but adjusting urinary glucose excretion for GFR did not change the conclusion (Table 2). None of the participants with HNF1A-MODY were first-degree relatives of one another, so enrichment of other genetic factors that could have confounded the results was avoided, and participants carried several differentHNF1Avariants, ensuring that results are generalizable to different variant types and positions.

The small sample size of the study limited its power to detect small differences in outcomes, especially between groups. The sample size was based on the assumption that the low renal glucose threshold observed in previous studies (14,17) would result in marked differences in urinary glucose excretion during placebo. Based on our assumptions, we expected to find a difference in the effect of SGLT2 inhibition between the groups of ∼11 g in urinary glucose excretion, and the study was powered to detect a difference of ∼7 g. Furthermore, slight differences in kidney function and an imbalance in sex distribution between groups may have introduced bias. Urine was collected by voluntary voiding, which may have led to imprecise measurement of urinary parameters because of residual urine. We did not measure residual urine volume but assessed changes in urinary creatinine excretion, which would be expected to be relatively stable between the experimental days (32). Two participants with type 2 diabetes had unexpected differences in urinary creatinine excretion and clearance, which could be indicative of incomplete emptying of the bladder. Excluding these two participants did not alter the main conclusions (Supplementary Table 2).

The effects of SGLT2 inhibition have not been studied in individuals with HNF1A-MODY in a randomized controlled setting before. Hohendorff et al. (18) measured glucosuria before and after a single dose of dapagliflozin in individuals with MODY resulting from pathogenic variants inGCK, HNF1A-MODY, or type 2 diabetes. Increased glucosuria, measured as the UGCR, was observed in all groups from baseline to follow-up. The use of the UGCR for group comparisons may be challenging, because the creatinine excretion rate (denominator) varies with muscle mass, diet, and physical activity, whereas urinary glucose excretion (nominator) is determined by GFR and plasma glucose concentrations. In the current study, both plasma glucose levels and GFR were considered, as discussed above.

The effect of SGLT2 inhibitors on glucose excretion during stepwise hyperglycemic clamps has been investigated in several studies in individuals with and without diabetes. Despite differences in the hyperglycemic clamp protocols used (plasma glucose targets, length of steps, and timing of urine collection), the observed glucose excretion rates at specific plasma glucose concentrations during placebo and SGLT2 inhibition were comparable to those in other studies (29,33–35).

In previous studies, the renal glucose threshold in individuals with HNF1A-MODY was lower compared with that in individuals with type 1 or 2 diabetes (14,17). Because of these findings, we expected that the urinary glucose excretion would be markedly higher during placebo in individuals with HNF1A-MODY compared with that in individuals with type 2 diabetes. However, in accordance with the similar urinary glucose excretion in the groups during placebo, we estimated the renal glucose threshold to be quite similar between groups during placebo. However, our study was not designed to determine the renal glucose threshold, and therefore, our results are not necessarily inconsistent with the earlier findings because of different methodology. We estimated the renal glucose threshold based on an idealized threshold, which theoretically overestimates the renal glucose threshold (34). In a post hoc analysis, we stratified participants by glucosuria at different parts of the clamp during placebo. This analysis indicates that the actual individual renal glucose thresholds could have been between 6.7 and ∼10 mmol/L in participants with HNF1A-MODY (Supplementary Table 3). Furthermore, heterogeneity resulting fromHNF1Avariant–specific effects on SGLT2 expression could exist among individuals with HNF1A-MODY, as indicated by one participant with HNF1A-MODY who had extreme data on urinary glucose excretion and related parameters. Of note, the effect of SGLT2 inhibition on urinary glucose excretion in this participant was preserved, although lower, after adjustment for GFR compared with the other participants (Supplementary Fig. 2).

In summary, our study cannot rule out a low renal glucose threshold among individuals with HNF1A-MODY, but our data show that urinary glucose excretion is not markedly increased, especially at lower plasma glucose concentrations (i.e., <14 mmol/L). Although not statistically significant, the effect of SGLT2 inhibition on renal glucose reabsorption (when GFR adjusted) was numerically lower in participants with HNF1A-MODY. This is compatible with the hypothesis of a lower renal glucose reabsorption capacity related to slightly lower expression of SGLT2. Speculatively, the tendency toward glucosuria in individuals with HNF1A-MODY could involve altered expression of SGLT1, although this is not supported by data from mouse models (14,36,37). Nevertheless, in our participants, the effect size of the phenomenon was so small that it was difficult to measure in our setting. Furthermore, theHNF1A-related glucosuria seemed to occur predominantly at relatively high plasma glucose concentrations, which calls into question the clinical relevance of this potentially inborn SGLT2 insufficiency in individuals with HNF1A-MODY, at least when glycemia is well controlled. Lastly, urinary glucose excretion was similar during SGLT2 inhibition and similar plasma glucose concentrations. This suggests that SGLT2 inhibition is a potential pharmacologic treatment strategy in individuals with HNF1A-MODY, but further investigation regarding the glucose-lowering effect and adverse effects (e.g., diabetic ketoacidosis) is required.

This article contains supplementary material online athttps://doi.org/10.2337/figshare.29310023.

Prior Presentation.Parts of this study were presented in abstract form at the 84th Scientific Sessions of the American Diabetes Association, Orlando, FL, 21–24 June 2024, and at the 60th Annual Meeting of the European Association for the Study of Diabetes, Madrid, Spain, 9–13 September 2024.

Handling Editors.The journal editors responsible for overseeing the review of the manuscript were Elizabeth Selvin and Anna L. Gloyn.

This study was indirectly supported by the Novo Nordisk Foundation through unrestricted grants to the Steno Diabetes Center Copenhagen.