Timely intervention of interstitial lung disease (ILD) was promising for attenuating the lung function decline and improving clinical outcomes. The prone position HRCT is essential for early diagnosis of ILD, but limited by its high radiation exposure. This study was aimed to explore whether deep learning reconstruction (DLR) could keep the image quality and reduce the radiation dose compared with hybrid iterative reconstruction (HIR) in prone position scanning for patients of early-stage ILD.

This study prospectively enrolled 21 patients with early-stage ILD. All patients underwent high-resolution CT (HRCT) and low-dose CT (LDCT) scans. HRCT images were reconstructed with HIR using standard settings, and LDCT images were reconstructed with DLR (lung/bone kernel) in a mild, standard, or strong setting. Overall image quality, image noise, streak artifacts, and visualization of normal and abnormal ILD features were analysed.

The effective dose of LDCT was 1.22 ± 0.09 mSv, 63.7% less than the HRCT dose. The objective noise of the LDCT DLR images was 35.9–112.6% that of the HRCT HIR images. The LDCT DLR was comparable to the HRCT HIR in terms of overall image quality. LDCT DLR (bone, strong) visualization of bronchiectasis and/or bronchiolectasis was significantly weaker than that of HRCT HIR (p= 0.046). The LDCT DLR (all settings) did not significantly differ from the HRCT HIR in the evaluation of other abnormal features, including ground glass opacities (GGOs), architectural distortion, reticulation and honeycombing.

With 63.7% reduction of radiation dose, the overall image quality of LDCT DLR was comparable to HRCT HIR in prone scanning for early ILD patients. This study supported that DLR was promising for maintaining image quality under a lower radiation dose in prone scanning, and it offered valuable insights for the selection of images reconstruction algorithms for the diagnosis and follow-up of early ILD.

Interstitial lung disease (ILD) is a group of diseases caused by diffuse lung parenchymal disease, characterized by chronic inflammation of parabronchial tissues, alveolar spaces, and adjacent supporting structures, and interstitial fibrosis [1,2]. ILD can lead to lung remodeling, progressive lung function deterioration, a limited response to treatment, and even respiratory failure [3]. Timely intervention, including drugs and nonmedical treatment during the early stage of ILD, is promising for attenuating lung function decline and improving clinical outcomes [4]. To evaluate the suspected and known ILD, high-resolution CT (HRCT) was widely used, and prone position scanning was considered as a reliable protocol to differentiate pathological features from gravitation-dependent density in early ILD patients [5–8].  A survey performed by European Society of Thoracic Imaging reported that 59% of the responders would perform additional prone position scanning in ILD evaluation [9]. However, repetitive scanning during the follow up of ILD can cause accumulative radiation exposure, which is correlated with a greater risk of cancer and other diseases [10]. Therefore, clinicians must weigh the benefits and risks of duplicated HRCT scans.

With the wide use of supercomputing power, a newly developed reconstruction method called deep learning reconstruction (DLR) has emerged. This technique is based on a deep convolutional neural network (DCCN), which was trained with noise-contaminated and noise-free training pairs to allow the network to extract signals from low quality hybrid IR images to have similar image quality as high-dose model-based IR images. During the training process which can be described as solving optimization problem, DCNN incorporates advanced physics models (e.g., statistical model, scanner model, optics model and cone angle model) through learning from the target images. Therefore, DLR images could reduce the image noise and artifact even if in low dose condition [11]. Multiple phantom and clinical studies have shown that DLRs maintain or improve image quality at lower doses or at a given dose [11–14]. However, studies applying the DLR in early-stage ILD patients are limited. Therefore, this study explored whether DLR could maintain image quality and reduce radiation dosage for prone position scanning in early ILD patients.

This prospective study had been approved by our Institutional Review Board, and written informed consent was obtained from each participant (Ethics approval reference number: HS-2175). The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Patients were admitted to the outpatient clinic between December 2020 and September 2021. The inclusion criteria were as follows [15]: (1) typical findings of ILD in previous chest CT images; (2) no respiratory symptoms or pulmonary function test (PFT) impairment, and a diagnosis of early interstitial lung disease by a pulmonologist within the last year; (3) no other underlying lung disease (such as COPD, lung infection uncured, malignancies); and (4) need for a prone HRCT scan during a routine return visit. The exclusion criteria included: (1) inability to hold breath to finish a standard CT scan, (2) a history of lung surgery. (3) no interstitial lung abnormality (ILA) on the prone CT imaging. Finally, 21 ILD patients, including eight males and thirteen females, were enrolled.

All patients were scanned with a 320-row detector CT (Aquilion ONE Genesis, Canon Medical System). Every patient underwent two consecutive unenhanced chest CT scans at 20-second intervals with randomized order. The HRCT scan was performed using a 120 kVp tube voltage, automatic tube current, and standard deviation of 8.8 HU. The LDCT scan was performed using a 120 kVp tube voltage and 30 mAs tube current. Other parameters were kept unchanged, including rotation time of 0.5 s/circle, detector number 0.5 mm × 80, and pitch standard (PF 0.813/HP 65.0). Scanning was performed from the diaphragm to the pulmonary apex in the craniocaudal direction and prone position. Patients were required to hold their breath after full inspiration during the scan.

HRCT images were reconstructed with standard reconstruction method in clinical diagnosis, called HIR (Adaptive Iterative Dose Reduction 3-Dimensional, AIDR3D) with a standard lung kernel, and LDCT images were reconstructed with DLR (Advanced Intelligence Clear-IQ Engine, AiCE) with lung/bone kernels at mild, standard, or strong levels. All images were reconstructed in the axial plane, and the slice thickness and increment were both 1 mm.

Objective image quality was assessed by measuring the mean CT value and standard deviation of spherical volume regions of interest (VOI). As the previous study described [16], the VOI within the tracheal lumen were segmented, and mean CT value and standard deviation of VOI were recorded. The standard deviation (SD) was defined as the image noise.

The subjective assessment included the overall image quality, subjective image noise, streak artifacts, and normal and abnormal lung structures. All patient information and scanning parameters were hidden and renumbered before the assessment. Two trained radiologists with three and five years of experience in ILD independently evaluated these images at a preselected lung window setting (window width 1200 HU, window level − 600 HU). No changes in these settings were allowed during the assessment to preclude any influence on image quality. When there was any uncertainty, one radiologist with over 40 years of experience would be turned to for help.

5 score: Very poor (major artifacts with significant loss of diagnostic information).

3 score: Severe and altered the identification of normal and/or abnormal structures.

Normal lung features, including fissures, proximal bronchi and adjacent pulmonary vessels (above subsegmental level), peripheral bronchi and adjacent pulmonary vessels, and subpleural vessels, were evaluated.

0 score: No above abnormal lung features (only applied to abnormal structures evaluation).

5 score: Severe reduced image quality, making reliable interpretation impossible [18–21].

The dose-length product (DLP) and volume CT dose index (CTDIvol) were extracted from patient protocols. The lateral (LAT) and anteroposterior (AP) diameters were measured at the mid-liver level of axial CT images with digital calipers, and the square root of the product of LAT and AP was defined as the effective diameter. The effective radiation dose (ED) was the product of DLP and a chest-specific conversion coefficient (0.014 mSv/mGy·cm). [22,23] The size-specific dose estimates (SSDE) were the product of CTDIvoland a size-specific conversion factorfsize, obtained based on the effective diameter by checking the AAPM Report 204 [24].

Continuous variables were calculated as the mean ± standard deviation (SD), and categorical variables were summarized as numbers and frequencies. The interobserver agreement of the two radiologists was assessed using Cohen’s κ-test. The κ value was classified as poor (0–0.20), fair (0.21–0.40), moderate (0.41–0.60), substantial (0.61–0.80), or excellent (0.81–1.00) [25]. The image quality and radiation dosage of the reconstructed HRCT and LDCT images were compared. All analyses were performed using paired sample t-tests or the Wilcoxon signed-rank test according to the results of the Shapiro-Wilk test. The data were analysed in IBM SPSS 20.0. The two-tailed statistical significance threshold was set atp< 0.05.

Twenty-one patients with early-stage ILD were enrolled, with a mean age of 62.2 ± 7.2 years (range: 45–78 years) and a mean BMI of 25.69 ± 3.05 kg/m2. Seven patients were diagnosed with connective tissue disease-related (CTD-related) ILD, and the other patients were of unknown origin.

The LDCT DLR images (apart from the mild and standard lung algorithm) had significantly less image noise than the HRCT HIR images (p< 0.001 orp< 0.01, Table2).

The interobserver agreement was substantial (κ value = 0.73). There was no significant difference in the overall image quality of whole lung or lobe pairs between HRCT HIR and LDCT DLR (Table3; Fig.1). Subjective image noise in the LDCT DLR group (lung/bone, standard/strong) was significantly lower than that in the HRCT HIR group(p< 0.001). Streak artifacts on LDCT DLR were not significantly different from those on HRCT HIR (Table3).

Most of the normal lung features were scored as 1 or 2. The LDCT DLR was comparable to the HRCT HIR in evaluating all normal lung structures (Table4).

In total, 126 lung lobes were assessed for abnormal lung structures, including GGOs (82, 65.1%), reticulation (39, 31.0%), bronchiectasis and/or bronchiolectasis (50, 39.7%), architectural distortion (28, 22.2%), and honeycombing (8, 6.3%). LDCT DLR (bone, strong) visualization of bronchiectasis and/or bronchiolectasis was significantly weaker than that of HRCT HIR (p= 0.046) (Fig.1). The assessment of other abnormal lung structures assessment showed no significant differences between LDCT DLRs and HRCT HIRs (Table5; Fig.2).

This study revealed that the DLR method could maintain the quality and reduce the noise of LDCT images compared with HRCT HIR in early ILD patients.

To eliminate the influence of gravitation-dependent density, prone position scanning was designed for better recognition of ILA in this study. The survey performed by European Society of Thoracic Imaging had reported that 59% of responders indicated that additional prone position scanning would be performed on demand in clinical practice [9]. The high radiation exposure of prone position scanning may be the main cause that restricts its clinical use. In this study, the SSDE of prone HRCT was 7.57 ± 1.33 mGy, which was much greater than the 5.24 ± 0.87 mGy of supine RDCT in ILD reported by Xu et al. [23] and similar to the 7.29 ± 1.45 mGy in supine HRCT reported in our previous study [26]. After combination with DLR, the radiation dose was reduced 63.7% in prone LDCT scans, which is much lower than that in chest RDCT.

DLR could reduce the image noise and keep image quality at low dose [11,27]while HIR trades off image noise and spatial resolution at different radiation doses [28,29] Several studies performed on coronary CTA, CTPA and abdominal ultrahigh-resolution CT revealed a concurrently significant reduction in the radiation dose and maintenance of image quality with DLR [11,12,30–32]. This study applied DLR to prone chest LDCT scans, and the results confirmed that DLR image quality was maintained at a lower dose than that of HRCT HIR.

To date, studies comparing images reconstructed with DLR and HIR in chest CT have been limited. Singh et al. compared standard-dose CT HIR and LDCT DLR images from 22 patients and found no significant differences in image quality or lung nodule detection between these image series [32]. Lenfant et al. applied DLR and HIR (AIDR3D) reconstruction techniques to 45 and 48 CTPA images, respectively, and reported significantly greater image quality scores with DLR than with HIR. Nevertheless, the PE diagnostic confidence level showed no significant difference [12]. Similarly, our study of prone chest LDCT in early ILD patients revealed no significant difference in the overall image quality of the whole lung or lobar level between LDCT DLR and HRCT HIR.

Six DLR reconstruction algorithms (lung/bone, mild/standard/strong) were applied in this study. The objective assessment indicated that DLR significantly reduced image noise of LDCT, which was generally consistent with the subjective evaluation of image noise. Interestingly, the LDCT DLR (lung, mild) had slightly higher image noise than HRCT HIR, though the difference was not significant. No significant difference was found in the evaluation of normal or abnormal lung features between the two series of images. Nevertheless, the LDCT DLR (bone, strong) showed significantly less image noise than HRCT HIR, but the former was weaker for identifying in bronchiectasis and/or bronchiolectasis. According to previous studies, the bone kernel was recognized as a sharper, higher frequency kernel, as it was trained with high- and low-quality bone image pairs to produce an image quality similar to that of high-dose MBIR images. Several phantom studies have applied the bone kernel to small airway assessment and parenchymal density measurements and have shown improved spatial resolution and measurement accuracy [33,34]. Additionally, small group tests in diffuse lung disease patients revealed that sharper images are helpful for clinical evaluation [35]. A phantom study by Greffier J. et al. demonstrated that image smoothness and feature detectability improved as the DLR levels increased [36]. Thus, the lung and bone kernels at the strong level were expected to produce the best image quality. However, our results were inconsistent with this expectation. Another DLR phantom study reported a difference in the behavior of the DLR strong level when comparing “body” and “body sharp” kernels. The researchers found that the mild and standard levels of the “body sharp” kernel better detected two different simulated lesions. In contrast, the strong level led to opposite changes in spatial resolution between high- and low-contrast lesions. The different spatial resolution results highlighted the potential uncertainty of “body sharp” kernels, and the authors conjectured that the training database of MBIR images might transfer nonlinear spatial resolution and noise characteristics to the DLR algorithm [14]. This finding might explain the opposite effects of “lung” and “bone” kernels in our study. Moreover, future studies with larger sample sizes and comparisons of multiple lesions should help clarify these findings.

This study has several limitations. First, as early ILD was usually occasional findings during the clinical practice, this study only enrolled a small number of patients, and more patients are needed to verify the results. Second, the scanning protocol was derived from a small-sample pretest in the supine position and was designed for equal image quality for diagnosis and a relatively lower radiation dose. Therefore, the maximal radiation dose reduction may not have been achieved, and further exploration of prone position scanning protocols is necessary, however, it should also be noted that the objective image noise of this protocol was relatively high, which might be related with the high BMI of enrolled patients, and researchers would better consider the image noise and radiation dose comprehensively. Third, the lack of unified clinical standards for prone position chest scans have led to selection bias, and a larger sample size and multicenter study may help reduce bias. Fourth, the image reconstruction methods applied in this study were specific algorithms of DLR and HIR, and the findings should be interpreted with cautiousness, and could not be directly generalized to other DLR technologies. The last but not least, the definition of ILA was subjective at present stage, and the relationship of ILA and clinical outcomes was still under study. Further studies could focus more on the features highly related to disease progression and clinical management.

DLR maintained image quality and reduced image noise in prone chest CT while reducing the radiation dose by 63.7%. LDCT reconstructed with DLR is potentially applicable for assessing early ILD in the prone position.