Ionic liquids have
aroused great interest as solvents for the synthesis
and stabilization of nanomaterials. The segregation between polar
and apolar domains in ionic liquids with long alkyl groups provides
kinetic stability for nanoparticle dispersions by rendering multiple
free energy barriers for the aggregation. Similar effects also modulate
the adsorption of nanoparticles over both liquid–vapor and
liquid/solid interfaces. In this work, molecular dynamics simulations
were performed to compute the potential of the mean force for the
adsorption of spherical nanoparticles over solid substrates through
films of imidazolium-based ionic liquids with different alkyl group
lengths. While liquids with small alkyl groups produce simple profiles
with barriers only close to the substrate, complex oscillatory forces
arise between the nanoparticle and the substrate for ionic liquids
with significant domain segregation. In addition, long-range solvent-mediated
repulsive forces were also noted for liquids with an alkyl group long
enough to display a smectic liquid crystal phase.

Ionic liquids (ILs) are salts
with melting points below 100 °C, achieved by the presence of
bulk, low-symmetry, and flexible ions.−They are interesting
as solvents for the synthesis and stabilization of nanomaterials due
to their unique physical properties, including their high thermal
stability, negligible vapor pressure, the ability to solvate both
organic and inorganic species, high microwave absorption, and the possibility to stabilize nanoparticle
(NP)−and carbon nanotube,dispersions without the need
of additives like polymers or surfactants.

In our recent work,
it was demonstrated that ILs with hydrophobic/hydrophilic
domain segregation provide kinetic stability to NP dispersions although
the aggregation free energy between the NPs remains favorable. The domain segregation arises in ionic liquids
with large enough apolar portions (usually the cation alkyl chain)
as a result of the strength of ionic interaction between the charged
portions of the cation and the anion, which expels the apolar portion
that interacts only by weak London forces forming a nanostructured
liquid with polar and apolar regions. These domains were already observed in computer simulations−and by light and neutron scattering experiments.−When dispersed
in ILs with domain segregation, a spherical NP induces the formation
of spherical layers of IL of alternating nature depending on the chemical
composition of the NP surface. A hydrophilic NP interacts better with
the charged portions of the IL and induces a first layer rich in 
charged portions of the ionic liquid. This layer is followed by a
layer of the alkyl groups, rendering an apolar region that is followed
by another polar region and so on. The
same trend is noticed for NPs with hydrophobic nature but with the
first solvent layer being apolar. In our previous work, this was characterized
for spherical NPs with 2.2 nm radius in two ILs: 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium
tetrafluoroborate (C4) and 1-octyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
(C8), with only the latter presenting a long enough alkyl chain to
display significant domain segregation. The potential of mean force
computed for the aggregation between pairs of NPs dispersed on C8
displayed a complex behavior with multiple maxima and minima that
are noticeable even at distances larger than twice the NP diameter.
Those oscillatory forces between NPs arise from the superposition
of the solvent layers formed by each particle. The distances at which
there is a superposition of solvent layers of the same nature result
in a local free energy minimum. From these local minima, if either
the NPs get closer or move away from each other, unfavorable superposition
of solvent layers of opposite nature takes place, resulting in free
energy barriers. This effect not only provides kinetic stability but
also induces some long-range organization between the NPs in concentrated
dispersions. Those effects are absent in the C4 liquid, which displays
only a single and smaller barrier prior to NP contact.

The importance of the domain segregation
for the interaction between
NPs dispersed in ILs raises the question of how the same effect modulates
the interaction between NPs in a dispersion with solid surfaces, which
is relevant to understanding how to control the deposition of NPs
from an IL dispersion and also the solvent effects in top-down NP
synthesis. The emergence of oscillatory forces between surfaces separated
by an ionic liquid film was observed by atomic force microscopy, which
demonstrated that the period of the oscillations is proportional to
the length of the cation hydrophobic tail.,The formation of alternating solvent layers was also observed in
molecular dynamics simulations of thin films of ILs confined between
solid surfaces.−However, while a flat solid surface induces the formation of planar
alternating layers in the IL, a small spherical NP induces the formation
of concentric spherical layers. Also, the interface curvature changes
the adsorption,and, consequently, the intensity
of the organization of the solvent layers. In order to explore those effects, the potential of mean force (pmf)
was computed for the adsorption of a nearly spherical hydrophobic
NP with a 2.2 nm radius over a flat surface of the same material across
a thin film (ca. 20 nm thickness) of an IL using the umbrella sampling
method.

Three ILs were selected for this study keeping the anion
and the
cation head fixed and changing the size of the cation tail, which
modulates the occurrence and the size of the domains in the liquid:
1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (C4), 1-octyl-3-methylimidazolium
tetrafluoroborate (C8), and 1-dodecyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
(C12). All the simulations were performed at 300 K using the Gromacs
2018.8 package,with Martini 3.0 coarse grained
force field,using the same parameters and
conditions as in the previous work except
that no pressure coupling was used in the present work due to the
presence of liquid/vapor interfaces. VMD 1.9.3 was used to render the graphical representations. Details
of the model preparation, size, interaction parameters, and potential
of mean force calculation are given in theSupporting Information.

The C4 IL has a hydrophobic group that is
too short and displays
no significant domain segregation. Thus, the adsorption pmf in this
liquid is the simplest of the studied liquids (Figurea). The pmf calculation started with the
NP in the vapor phase just above the liquid film (z= 22 nm). As the NP is brought closer to the liquid surface, the
attractive forces between the NP and the exposed ions lead to a large
free energy decrease, indicating that the adsorption of the NP at
the liquid–vapor interface is favorable for C4. The global
minimum of the pmf happens when the NP center of mass is located at
the liquid/vapor interface (density profile inFigureb) and a repulsive force arises when bringing
the NP to the interior of the liquid. The average force ⟨F⟩ that acts in the NP at any positionz(bottom panel ofFigurea) was calculated by the numerical derivative of the pmf (eq). The unfavorable free
energy for penetration in the liquid phase is a signal of the low
solubility of this hydrophobic NP in the C4 liquid, which also leads
to a relatively fast aggregation between the same NPs in the bulk
C4. After the NP is completely immersed
in the IL (z= 14 nm), the pmf displays a plateau,
indicating that the free energy does not change as the NP moves inside
the liquid film or, equivalent, the average force acting over the
NP is zero inside of the C4 film until the NP gets close to the solid
(z< 6.5 nm). Close to the solid surface, there
are two minima separated by free energy barriers. At the 5.0 nm minimum,
the NP touches the solid substrate, but only with a few interaction
sites. At 4.7 nm, one of the NP faces fits perfectly with the substrate
crystalline structure, increasing the interaction between both and
leading to a deeper minimum. Between those minima, there is a free
energy barrier related to the mismatch between crystalline faces of
the NP and the substrate. However, this minimum presents yet a larger
free energy than the global minimum atz= 17.5 nm,
indicating that this hydrophobic NP in C4 adsorbs stronger at the
liquid/vapor than at the liquid/solid surface.

Adsorption of the NP at the solid surface from 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium
tetrafluoroborate (C4). (a) Potential of mean force (pmf) for the
NP displacement in the direction perpendicular to the solid surface
(top) and the corresponding average force profile (bottom). Insets
zoom in on the region close to the solid surface. The solid substrate
is located betweenz= 0 andz=
2.0 nm. (b) Number density of NP and IL sites in the direction perpendicular
to the solid surface in the simulations corresponding to the pmf minimum
at the liquid/vacuum interface (solid curves) and in the simulation
corresponding to the minimum at the contact with the surface (dashed
curves). Vertical dotted lines indicate the positions of minima in
the pmf. (c) Transversal slice of the simulation box showing the NP
adsorbed over the solid surface, with interaction sites of the NP
and the solid shown in pink, the cation tail in green, the cation
head in blue (dark blue for charged sites, light blue for uncharged),
and the anions in red.

The simplicity of the
pmf in C4 is related to the lack of long-range
ordering of this liquid, as shown by the density profiles inFigureb. The number density
was computed by dividing the simulation box into slices in the direction
perpendicular to the interface in two simulations for each system,
with the solid curves being the results for the simulation with the
NP at the liquid/vacuum interface and the dashed curves for the one
with the NP at the solid/liquid interface. In bothFigureb and in the corresponding
figures for the other systems (Figuresb and b), the results for the
cation tail and the cation head were divided by the number of interaction
sites of those species to render them in the same scale of anion density.
As stated before, the structure of C4 is relatively simple, with IL
species displaying a constant density except close to the interfaces
with a tendency to expose the cation tails both to the vacuum and
to the hydrophobic solid surface. Since C4 only shows a distinct organization
at the interfaces, the pmf for the NP adsorption displays variations
only at those regions. Notice also that the NP only affects the density
profile of the IL by reducing them in the same slices occupied by
NP interaction sites (compare solid and dashed curves), which is a
trivial effect since the NP itself corresponds to an excluded volume
region for the IL. Finally, the profile for the NP sites (black curves
inFigureb) displays
a continuous Gaussian shape at the liquid/vapor interface (and also
at any distance before the contact with the solid) but a spiked one
at the solid/liquid interface because in the former the NP can rotate
and all orientations of the crystalline planes are sampled. However,
once adsorbed on the solid substrate, the crystalline structure of
the NP aligns with the solid substrate and can no longer rotate. This
feature is present in all of the systems studied.

Adsorption of the NP
at the solid surface from the 1-octyl-3-methylimidazolium
tetrafluoroborate (C8) liquid film. (a) Potential of mean force (pmf)
for the NP displacement in the direction perpendicular to the solid
surface and the corresponding average force profile. Insets zoom over
the middle of the liquid slab. (b) Number density of NP and IL sites
in the direction perpendicular to the solid surface in the simulations
corresponding to the pmf minimum at liquid/vacuum interface (solid
curves) and in the simulation corresponding to the minimum at the
contact with the surface (dashed curves). Vertical dotted lines indicate
the positions of minima in the pmf. (c) Transversal slice of the simulation
box showing the NP adsorbed over the solid surface, with interaction
sites of the NP and the solid shown in pink, the cation tail in green,
the cation head in blue (dark blue for charged sites, light blue for
uncharged), and the anions in red.

Adsorption
of the NP at the solid surface from the 1-dodecyl-3-methylimidazolium
tetrafluoroborate (C12) liquid crystal. (a) Potential of mean force
(pmf) for the NP displacement in the direction perpendicular to the
solid surface and the corresponding average force profiles, with different
colors corresponding to different NP radius (1.1, 2.2, and 3.3 nm)
or to different temperature (blue curve only, which corresponds to
370 K). Dashed curves correspond to linear regression between 7 and
18 nm of the corresponding pmfs. (b) Number density of NP and IL sites
in the direction perpendicular to the solid surface in the simulations
corresponding to the pmf minimum at liquid/vacuum interface (solid
curves) and in the simulation corresponding to the minimum at the
contact with the surface, both for the NP with radius 2.2 nm at 300
K. The density profiles forT= 370 K are given in
theSupporting Information. Vertical dotted
lines indicate the positions of minima in the pmf. (c) Transversal
slice of the simulation box showing the NP with radius 2.2 nm adsorbed
over the solid surface, with interaction sites of the NP and the solid
shown in pink, the cation tail in green, the cation head in blue (dark
blue for charged sites, light blue for uncharged), and the anions
in red.

Increasing the length of the alkyl
group in the C8 liquid leads
to significant domain segregation, which results in remarkable differences
in the liquid structure and adsorption pmf (Figure). As in the case of C4, when the hydrophobic
particle is moved from the vapor phase to the liquid surface (z= 21 nm), a large drop is noticeable in the free energy
(Figurea). The ability
of C8 to solvate the NP better than C4 results in a further drop in
the free energy as the NP is completely immersed in the liquid (z= 18 nm) instead of an increase.

Besides being a
better solvent to disperse the hydrophobic NPs,
another feature arises from the larger alkyl group in the IL: the
segregation between hydrophobic and hydrophilic domains leads to liquid
layers of different natures moving farther from the solid substrate.
The first layer is of the same nature as the solid, in this case,
hydrophobic, and is followed by a hydrophilic layer rich in cation
head groups and anions, followed by a second layer rich in hydrophobic
groups, and so on (Figureb,c). A similar organization is also noticed at the liquid/vapor
interface due to the tendency of the IL to expose the weakly interacting
alkyl groups to the vapor instead of the ionic portions. As a result,
both interfaces generate layered structures that propagate a few nanometers
inside the liquid but lose intensity as they move toward the middle
of the liquid film. This structure is partially disrupted by the presence
of the NP, which also tends to organize layers of the IL around itself.
The interaction between the NP and the liquid layers structured by
both interfaces leads to oscillations in both the pmf and the average
force profiles (Figurea), with the local minima of the pmf corresponding to the liquid
layers rich in the cation tails (Figureb, where vertical dotted lines correspond
to the positions of the pmf minima). The liquid layers rich in the
polar portions of the liquid correspond to free energy barriers larger
than the thermal energy for the NP to move either toward or away from
the solid surface. Similarly to the aggregation between NPs, the domain
segregation in C8 leads to barriers for NP adsorption; however, while
the aggregation between 2 of those NPs is thermodynamically favorable
in C8, the adsorption over a solid substrate of the same material
is unfavorable. Besides presenting a local minimum when in contact
with the solid surface, the free energy of the adsorbed NP is higher
than the free energy in the middle of the liquid film, which may be
a result of a mismatch between the symmetries of the solvent layers
organized by the NP and by the solid substrate. Other factors, such
as the loss of both translational and rotational entropies of the
NP upon adsorption, may also contribute to this difference.

C12 presents an even longer alkyl tail and, consequently, one would
expect a larger free energy drop when moving from the vapor to the
liquid surface as well as a larger drop when penetrating the liquid
film. However, the drop when moving toward the liquid/vapor interface
is nearly the same as noticed for C8 and there is a strong repulsion
against the NP penetration deeper in the liquid film (Figurea, red curves). This happens
due to a distinct structure of the C12 IL, which displays a liquid
crystal behavior with a smectic phase, with a long-range structure of alternating hydrophobic and hydrophilic
layers (Figureb,c).
While C8 displays domain segregation, it is still an isotropic liquid
with no long-range organization, similar to the micelles in the isotropic
phase of surfactant solutions. C12, on the other hand, in temperatures
below the transition to the isotropic phase, is similar to the lamellar
phases observed in concentrated surfactant solutions. This leads to an even stronger organization of the liquid
layers in response to the solid surface, as noted by the density profiles.
As observed in C8, the NP also tends to organize the liquid in a spherical
symmetry around itself and presents local minima in the pmf at the
distances corresponding to the hydrophobic layers of the IL (vertical
dotted lines inFigureb). However, the barriers between consecutive minima are higher in
C12, and most notably, there is a steady increase in the free energy
as the momentum moves toward the solid surface superimposed with those
oscillations. A linear regression of the pmf in the region after the
second polar layer and before the liquid/vapor interface (betweenz= 7 andz= 18 nm) was computed and showed
an increase of 28 kJ/mol in the free energy for each nm the NP moves
toward the solid substrate ignoring the local oscillations or a corresponding
repulsive force of 0.05 nN.

The long-range repulsive force superimposed
with the oscillations
in the pmf expected from the layers of different natures is due to
the perturbation that the NP itself introduces on the organized liquid
layers of the smectic liquid crystal phase. While in the isotropic
liquids (C4 and C8) the NP penetration only induces small and local
perturbations in the liquid density profiles (Figuresb and b), in C12
the NP disturbs every liquid layer between its position and the liquid/vapor
interface, with the amplitudes of the density profile decreasing as
the NP gets closer to the solid surface (compare solid and dashed
line curves inFigureb). This effect can be better understood by looking at the average
liquid structure (generated by the superposition of several simulation
frames) when the NP is at several positions along the pmf (Figure, top). At the liquid–vapor
interface, the perturbation induced in the IL lamellae is small. As
the NP moves closer to the solid substrate, the layers between the
NP and the liquid/vapor interface are perturbed. This results in an
increase in the surface energy that gets larger as more layers of
liquid are perturbed as the NP gets closer to the solid, explaining
the growth of the free energy as the NP moves toward the substrate.
This effect is absent in isotropic ILs even with domain segregation.Figurealso displays the
disruption of more lamellae by the mismatch with the NP solvation
layers at the distances corresponding to local maxima in the pmf than
in the regions corresponding to local minima.

Top: transversal slice
of the simulation box showing the structure
of the liquid 1-dodecyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (C12)
at selected minima (20.4, 18.6, 15.7, 12.8, and 5.2 nm) and maxima
(16.1, 14.3, and 8.4 nm) of the potential of mean force. Those representations
were produced by the superposition of 50 different structures from
the second half of the umbrella sampling simulations at the corresponding
distances after the NP was centralized in the simulation box. NP and
solid surface sites are displayed in pink, cation tail in green, cation
head in blue (dark blue for charged and light blue for uncharged sites),
and anions in red. Middle and Bottom: similar representations for
selected distances between the NP center and the solid surface for
the NP of radius 2.2 nm at C12 at a higher temperature at which a
isotropic phase is observed and for the NPs of radii 1.1 and 3.3 nm
at 300 K. The increase of the liquid volume in the structures displayed
for 370 K is due to the thermal expansion of the IL, and the number
of ions was held constant.

To better evaluate the effect of the long-range ordering of the
smectic phase, additional pmf values were computed in C12. To evaluate
the effect of the size, the pmf was computed for NPs with radii 1.1
and 3.3 nm (black and green curves inFigurea) and, to study a temperature at which the
liquid became isotropic, the pmf of the reference NP with 2.2 nm radius
was computed at 370 K (blue curves inFigurea). At 370 K, after the transition to the
isotropic phase, the pmf observed for C12 becomes similar to the one
for C8, without a significant long-range repulsion but with the oscillatory
behavior, as there are no more ordered layers far from the solid/liquid
interface to be disturbed (structures inFigureand density profiles inFigure S4). The size of the particle affects the long-range
repulsion, with the same increasing as the NP increases size at least
in the range accessible in our calculation, with the linear regression
of the pmfs betweenz= 7 andz=
18 nm resulting in average free energy increases of 12, 28, and 45
kJ/mol per nm as the NP moves closer to the surface for the ones with
radii 1.1, 2.2, and 3.3 nm, respectively. The long-range repulsion
is still significant even for the smallest NP considered besides the
structural perturbation induced in the solvent being smaller and harder
to notice in visual inspection (Figure).

The stronger perturbation induced
by the NP in C12 also justifies
the presence of only a shallow local minimum when the NP gets in contact
with the substrate, with again the adsorption being thermodynamically
unfavorable. However, a word of caution is needed: the strength of
the interaction of the NP and solid surface sites as well as specific
details of the surfaces, such as their roughness, will greatly affect
the depth of this minimum, and depending on those factors, the adsorption
may be thermodynamically favorable. Those factors must be taken into
account when comparing those models with different models or experimental
data.

The interaction between nanoparticles and solid
substrates through
ionic liquid films strongly depends on the molecular structure of
the liquid. Ionic liquids with no significant domain segregation display
free energy barriers only very close to contact with the surface.
The increase in the amphiphilic character achieved by longer alkyl
groups in the cation leads to the formation of nanometric hydrophobic
and hydrophilic domains inside the liquid, which will be organized
around the nanoparticle and solid substrate. When the nanoparticle
approaches the solid, the superposition between solvent layers of
opposing nature established around the particle and the surface results
in multiple free energy barriers and oscillatory forces that propagate
for several nanometers. If the alkyl group gets even longer, the liquid
becomes anisotropic, displaying many more organized polar and apolar
alternating layers that propagate across the whole film, characterizing
a smectic liquid crystal phase. In this phase, not only do the oscillatory
forces due to the superposition of solvent layers become stronger
but also an overall repulsive solvent-mediated force arises as a consequence
of the long-range structure of the liquid crystal, which is perturbed
in every liquid layer between the nanoparticle and the liquid/vapor
interface as the particle moves closer to the solid substrate. As
those liquid crystals are thermotropic, the interaction between the
NP and the substrate can be controlled by the temperature. After the
liquid changes from smectic to isotropic phases at higher temperatures,
the long-range repulsion is eliminated, leaving only the oscillatory
forces.

The authors are in debt to FAPESP (Fundação
de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo,Grants 2023/09350-6 and 2024/14289-7) and CAPES for the financial
support and the “Laboratório Nacional de Computação
Científica (LNCC/MCTI, Brazil)” for the use of the supercomputer
SDumont (https://sdumont.lncc.br).

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.5c00003.

CRediT:Kalil Bernardinoconceptualization, data curation, formal
analysis, funding acquisition, investigation, methodology, project
administration, supervision, visualization, writing - original draft,
writing - review & editing.

The Article
Processing Charge for the publication of this research was funded
by the Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior
(CAPES), Brazil (ROR identifier: 00x0ma614).

The authors
declare no
competing financial interest.