To systematically synthesise existing literature and identify supports to promote employee retention in the aged care sector.

A systematic integrative review was conducted following Whittemore and Knafl's (2005) methodology framework and guided by the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analyses guidelines. A comprehensive search for studies published between 1997 and 2024 was undertaken across Business Source Complete, CINAHL Complete, Medline Complete and APA PsycInfo (via administration, pastoral and ancillary care workers influencing employee retention in the aged care sector were included), with qualitative findings and statistically significant quantitative data extracted. Methodological quality was assessed using the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool, and the data were analysed inductively using a thematic approach.

Eighteen studies were included in the review, comprising 13 quantitative, four qualitative and one mixed‐methods study. The factors and strategies were themed into six areas relating to the retention of the aged care workforce: (1) employee characteristics, stability and well‐being, (2) workplace relationships, (3) training opportunities and career growth, (4) recognition, incentive and compensation, (5) organisational structure, culture and resources and (6) value‐driven and empowered care practice.

This review identified employee, employer and organisational factors and strategies that influence workforce retention within the aged care sector. While there is a paucity of evidence available, these findings are a critical first step to guide further design, implementation and evaluation of retention strategies to address the challenges of workforce retention in the aged care sector.

Strategies are urgently needed to ensure workforce retention meets the growing demands of an ageing population. Despite the limited evidence on retention supports for aged care workers, this review identified factors and strategies that can be applied by aged care operators to help achieve a stable and competent workforce.

The findings highlight the need for long‐term strategic workforce planning to address the shortage of direct care workers within Australia's aged care sector, and increased funding for evidence‐informed retention initiatives. As demand for aged care services increases, policies must prioritise workforce stability, mitigating the projected direct care workforce shortages.

Australia's aged care services cover the continuum of care, including (1) the Commonwealth Home Support Program (CHSP) offering entry‐level home care support, (2) the Home Care Packages Program (HCP) for people with more complex home care needs and (3) residential care, encompassing both permanent and respite care.6The workforce for these services is extensive and diverse, comprising approximately 420,000 individuals,7including health professionals, support staff and ancillary staff, along with management and administrative support personnel. The occupational groups include registered nurses (RN), enrolled nurses (EN), nurse practitioners, allied health professionals, personal care workers (PCW), community care workers, administration staff, pastoral and ancillary care workers.8Globally, occupational titles for PCWs vary, including certified nursing assistants, nursing aides and personal carers, despite shared responsibilities. For consistency, we use the term personal care workers (PCW) throughout this review.

Retention in the context of employment refers to the duration of time in which an employee remains within an organisation.12This has emerged as a major concern among aged care operators, particularly for managing workforce shortages. Such shortages are exacerbated by high turnover and low retention rates across the aged care workforce. According to the latest published data from November 2019 to November 2020, turnover rates were 37% for RNs, 28% for ENs, 28% for PCWs, 25% for allied health professionals and 28% for allied health assistants.8In contrast, the overall job mobility rate (changing industry or occupation, job tenure or changes in current job) in Australia was 8% in 2024.13Although these metrics capture distinct facets of workforce mobility and pertain to different periods of time, they highlight the comparatively high rate of turnover in the aged care sector relative to general employee mobility across Australia. Understanding, implementing and evaluating factors and strategies for retaining aged care workers is critical for aged care operators to promote employee retention and lower the high turnover rates. Such measures are essential to ensuring a stable and competent workforce capable of meeting the growing needs of an ageing population,14while reducing operating costs and improving employee well‐being.

The aim of this integrative review was to synthesise literature that investigated supports to promote employee retention in the aged care sector. The research question was as follows: What retention supports are effective and not effective in reducing the turnover of employees working in the aged care sector? For the purposes of this study, supports included factors and strategies that were found to be effective and not effective in reducing turnover. This review encompassed studies addressing the entire aged care workforce across home care, assisted living and residential aged care.

A systematic integrative review was undertaken to capture articles using quantitative, qualitative and mixed‐methods research methodologies that identified factors and strategies to promote the retention of employees working in the aged care sector. Whittemore and Knafl's15integrative review process, comprising five stages to enhance rigour, was used to synthesise the evidence included in the review. Additionally, the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta‐Analysis (PRISMA) statement and checklist16guided the reporting of the review. The review protocol was prospectively registered on PROSPERO (https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/PROSPERO/), registration number CRD42022361696.

A systematic electronic literature search was developed in consultation with a research librarian. The search was conducted in August 2022 and updated in June 2024. Keywords and MesH terms relating to ‘employee retention’, ‘workforce’, ‘aged care’ and ‘retention strategies’ were used. The full search was performed using the EBSCOHost platform in the Business Source Complete, CINAHL Complete, MEDLINE Complete and APA PsycInfo databases and the Embase platform (excluding Medline) (AppendixS1). One author performed both searches.

A two‐stage screening process was conducted using Covidence. After removing duplicates, two authors independently reviewed the articles' titles and abstracts, applying the criteria in Table1. Discrepancies in screening decisions were resolved through discussion. One author documented inclusion/exclusion reasons during the full‐text screening.

The methodological quality of the included studies was appraised independently by two authors using the Mixed Methods Appraisal Tool (MMAT) version 2018.17The MMAT is designed for appraising the methodological quality of quantitative, qualitative and mixed‐methods studies in a single tool. Studies are assessed across five different categories based on the study design. Questions in each category are rated either ‘Yes’, ‘No’ or ‘Can't tell’. Based on the ratings, an overall score is calculated using a scale ranging from 1 to 5 (1 = low quality, 2 = average quality, 3 = good quality, 4 = high quality and 5 = excellent quality). Adhering to the guidelines established by Hong et al.,17studies were retained regardless of their methodological quality scores. Discrepancies in the quality appraisal ratings were resolved through verbal discussions between the two authors until consensus was reached.

Following Whittemore and Knafl's framework involving data reduction, data display, data comparison, conclusion drawing and verification,15a standardised data extraction table was developed to capture data related to retention factors and strategies, facilitating a descriptive summary for each study. Quantitative data showing statistical significance, including descriptive statistics andp‐values, were recorded in the data extraction table and are detailed in Table2. Qualitative data were extracted (AppendixS2) and thematically analysed, guided by Braun and Clarke's18six‐step process. The extracted data were compared and contrasted repeatedly between the qualitative and quantitative findings to identify relationships. This process involved systematically integrating and refining the data to identify patterns, connections and relationships.15The data extracted by one author were independently reviewed and verified for accuracy by another author using the primary source.19The final set of themes and sub‐themes was iteratively refined by one author and collaboratively reviewed and discussed by all authors, with consensus reached through discussion and joint refinement (Table3).

Participant sample:n= 413,295 CNAs, 59 DoN, 59 Administrators.

Setting: 12 purposively selected high‐performing NHs, ALs, and HCAs across Ohio, America.

A potential drop‐off effect was observed between 6 and 12 months, (mean −.720,p< .001). The initial significant gain decreased, was not significant between Time 1 and Time 3, but the overall effect remained significant when averaged across both time points (baseline compared to 6‐ and 12‐month/2 mean .516,p< .002).

Note: Sample size = the respective studies sample for analysis.

Abbreviations: ACF, Aged care facilities; AL, Assisted living; CNA, Certified nursing assistant; CW, Care worker; DCW, Direct care worker; DoN, Director of nursing; FM, Facility manager; FTE, Full‐time equivalent; HCA, Home care agencies; HR, Human resources; ITS, intention to stay; LP, Leadership personnel; LPN, Licensed practical nurse; LTC, Long‐term care; LTCF, Long‐term care facility;N, number; NA, Nursing assistant; NESB, Non‐English‐speaking background; NH, Nursing home; NHA, Nursing home administrator; NNR, New nurse resident; PC, Personal carer; RN, Registered nurse; SD, Standard deviation; T1, Time 1; T2, Time 2; USA, United States of America.

Variables demonstrating statistical significance were extracted and reported from the highest level of analysis.

Factors and strategies promoting retention of aged care employees: Themes and sub‐themes.

Note: The qualitative data presented in the table has been thematically analysed.

The search yielded 7925 articles. After the removal of duplicates (n= 3238), the title and abstract screening resulted in 4520 articles being excluded. Full‐text screening excluded 151 articles, resulting in 16 included articles. Searching the reference lists of the 16 articles resulted in the inclusion of two additional articles (Figure1).

PRISMA flow diagram. ITL, Intention to leave; ITS, Intention to stay. *Articles excluded, with reasons (n= 151), including: Not retention support – studies that did not investigate the phenomenon of interest (n= 53), Not research – non‐primary research articles, rather than empirical studies (n= 37), Research findings – did not report of any impact pertaining to employee retention (n= 26), Focus Intention to stay, intention to leave or Turnover (n= 16), Population – studies where data were not collected from personal care workers' (n= 8), Setting – studies conducted in home care, community care or hospitals (n= 5), Differentiate results between recruitment and retention – studies that did not disaggregate findings based on recruitment and retention (n= 2), Abstract only: studies availability only in abstract form with a full‐text report (n= 2), Not research: non‐primary research articles, rather than empirical studies (n= 2).

A summary of the main characteristics of the included studies is presented in Table2, with additional information provided in AppendixS3. Eighteen articles, published between 1998 and 2023, were included in this review. Participant sample sizes across studies ranged from 36 to 2034. Fifteen studies were conducted in the United States of America (USA) and one each in Australia, Canada and Taiwan. The research designs comprised 13 quantitative studies, four qualitative studies and one mixed‐methods study. Seventeen studies were conducted in nursing homes (NH), with one study involving participants from various aged care settings, including NHs, assisted living facilities and home care. Of the 18 articles, only three included a definition of retention (AppendixS4).

The methodological quality of included studies was assessed using the MMAT.17Overall quality of the studies varied, with seven studies assessed as meeting all five methodological criteria (Table2). Qualitative studies included in the review consistently demonstrated strong methodological quality. In contrast, quantitative studies, particularly the randomised controlled and non‐randomised studies, exhibited weaknesses, with some scoring as low as 1. This indicated substantial shortcomings with respect to sampling strategy, appropriateness of the selected measures, risk of bias, statistical analysis method, representativeness of the target population, incompleteness of the outcome data, confounders not being accounted for in the design and analysis, and whether the intervention (or exposure occurred) was administered as intended. The MMAT results are detailed in AppendixS5.

The factors and strategies that promote the retention of employees working in the aged care sector identified in the 18 included studies were themed into six areas and are detailed below. Table3summarises the key themes and sub‐themes emerging from the data.

Collaborative and supportive workplace relationships also played a critical role in retention outcomes.23,24,26,27Both formal and informal workplace connections were highly valued, particularly among medical directors, and were associated with increased retention.27Additionally, perceptions of workplace collaboration23,24and supportive peer relationships among PCWs26were perceived as key factors promoting retention across one quantitative and two qualitative studies.

Leadership continuity emerged as a key factor significantly influencing employee retention.32,33,36Retention of personal care workers was significantly higher in NHs that reported one or two administrators in the past year, compared to those with three or more administrators during the same period.33Additionally, a longer tenure of the director of nursing was positively associated with higher staff retention,12,32underscoring the role of stable leadership in fostering workforce commitment.

Organisational strategies emphasising employee empowerment and role flexibility were associated with improved retention among PCWs in four studies.20,23,24,25,33Empowering employees through enabling authority, resources and decision‐making autonomy was positively and statistically significantly associated with higher retention among PCWs.33An empowering work environment for PCWs was perceived to improve retention in a qualitative study,24while a greater level of work latitude among older PCWs was positively and statistically significantly associated with a higher retention rate in a quantitative study.20Job modifications, including job design and workforce adaptability to accommodate diverse employee needs and ages23along with role flexibility,25were perceived to promote retention among PCWs in two qualitative studies.

The primary objective of this integrative review was to synthesise the evidence on factors and strategies that promote employee retention in the aged care sector, revealing six key themes: (1) employee characteristics, stability and well‐being, (2) workplace relationships, (3) training opportunities and career growth, (4) recognition, incentive and compensation, (5) organisational structure, culture and resources and (6) values driven and empowered care practice. Most studies (15/18) were conducted in the United States, and the majority of studies focused on PCWs and were conducted in NH settings, with few addressing other aged care occupational groups, such as nurses, leadership personnel, and medical directors.

This review included 13 quantitative, four qualitative and one mixed‐methods study investigating factors and strategies to promote employee retention in the aged care sector. Application of the MMAT revealed notable methodological weaknesses, particularly among the quantitative studies. Greater confidence was placed in three of 10 quantitative descriptive studies and the four qualitative studies that met all five quality criteria, demonstrating strong coherence between the data collection, analysis and interpretation. In contrast, the greatest methodological limitations were exhibited in the randomised controlled and non‐randomised quantitative studies.

Quantitative studies in this review primarily identified relationships between socio‐demographic, employee stability, organisational and structural factors with employee retention, highlighting measurable predictors such as age, marital status, financial incentives, employee well‐being, staffing levels, leadership continuity and organisational structure. In contrast, the qualitative studies included in this review provided a deeper insight into the lived experience of employees, emphasising subjective factors such as employee recognition and appreciation, leadership support and intrinsic motivation. While the mixed‐methods study revealed no significant association between a nurse residency program and retention, an increased commitment to the organisation was linked to the program.

The findings from both quantitative and qualitative studies underscored the importance of job design, employee empowerment, supportive workplace relationships and opportunities for training and career development. However, discrepancies emerged in two intervention studies investigating the long‐term effectiveness of a specialised retention role and a training program, as well as in two descriptive studies exploring the impact of compensation for RNs, LPNs and medical directors on employee retention. In the two intervention studies, a randomised controlled trial investigating the effectiveness of a retention specialist34and a non‐randomised trial investigating the effectiveness of a peer‐mentoring program,28positive effects on retention outcomes were initially found. However, these effects diminished by the 6‐ and 12‐month follow‐ups.28,34Assessment with MMAT revealed low methodological quality for both studies. The randomised controlled trial scored 1/5 based on issues with sampling and statistical analysis, raising concerns about biases and the reliability and validity of the findings. The non‐randomised study scored 2/5 based on average quality in sample representativeness, confounder controls and the intervention duration. Of the 10 quantitative descriptive studies, two were assessed as good quality, scoring 3/5.

Second, findings relating to compensation and retention varied across staff roles in two descriptive studies.12,27In one study (scoring 5/5 demonstrating excellent quality), higher PCW starting salaries were positively associated with improved RN and LPN retention, while higher LPN starting salaries were negatively associated with LPN retention.12In contrast, the other descriptive study (scoring 3/5 indicating good quality) showed that increased fee schedules and on‐call stipends contributed to improved retention among medical directors,27though MMAT assessment revealed concerns regarding sample representativeness and potential non‐response bias.

The amalgamation of the quantitative and qualitative findings in this review highlights the need for a balanced approach to employee retention in aged care. While structural improvements are critical, they must be integrated with a range of employee, employer and organisation‐related factors and strategies, reinforcing the need for evidence‐informed initiatives to promote employee retention. Engaging the aged care workforce in co‐designing these strategies may additionally improve the effectiveness and sustainability of such initiatives.

Of the 13 studies included in this review, only one was conducted in Australia,23while the majority of the studies were conducted in the United States. The generalisability of the findings may be influenced by structural and policy differences between the two countries, including variations in funding models, regulatory frameworks, employment conditions, workforce structures and care standards. However, the fundamental role, responsibilities and status of PCWs remain largely consistent across the two countries.37In both Australia and the United States, PCWs spend a significant proportion of their time providing direct care and support to older people in residential aged care, often under challenging working conditions.38These challenges include high workloads, staffing shortages, limited career progression opportunities, low wages, emotional and physical strain, and minimal professional recognition.4The prevalence of these shared workforce issues suggests that while policy responses and interventions aimed at promoting employee retention must be tailored to Australia's specific regulatory and funding requirements, the findings of this review remain relevant to all aged care operators, policymakers, and researchers.

The findings of this review align with the recommendations of the two prominent reports arising from national inquiries into Australia's aged care workforce. These include the Aged Care Sector Workforce Strategy'sA Matter of Care39and the Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality and Safety (RCACQS) (2018–2021) Final report titledCare Dignity and Respect,4with the latter report driving Australia's aged care reforms.

Additionally, organisational factors were found in most included studies in this review to be key to employee retention, highlighting the significant role organisations play in retaining PCWs. Although the findings of this review reveal mixed results regarding the influence of organisational ownership on staff retention, historically, not‐for‐profit residential operators have played a critical role in Australia's aged care sector, offering a substantial portion of residential care services. In recent years, mounting financial pressures have driven consolidation and mergers, leading to growth among for‐profit operators.46The combination of lower employee retention in for‐profit facilities, as revealed in this review,12and the significant growth of the for‐profit sector could exacerbate workforce instability, potentially compromising care quality, as for‐profit operators continue to manage a significant portion of the market.

While retention is generally understood as the length of employees' tenure and indicates an organisation's ability to retain personnel over time,12most authors did not provide a definition against which they were measuring retention. The absence of a universally accepted definition of ‘retention’ in the literature presents a challenge to benchmarking and comparing research findings. Of the 18 included articles, only three included a definition of retention,2,12,22with each using a different definition (AppendixS4). In one study, retention was defined by average employment duration at the same facility.12In another, retention was measured as a percentage of staff employed over a specific time.2In the third, retention was defined as employment of 3 years or longer at the same facility.22Establishing a clear, widely accepted and consistently applied definition of retention is essential to facilitate cross‐study synthesis, to accurately identify retention rates, and to further enable evidence‐informed retention factors and strategies.

The strength of this study lies in the rigour and comprehensiveness of the review process, guided by the PRISMA framework16and Whittemore and Knafl's integrative review methodology.15The review search strategy included a wide range of databases and qualitative, quantitative and mixed‐methods research methodologies. Additionally, a key strength of this review was the focus on a single occupational group, PCWs. Globally, despite the variations in aged care systems, the role and responsibilities of PCWs remain consistent across the included studies, enhancing the generalisability of the findings in relation to employee retention beyond the countries that were examined. However, despite developing a comprehensive search strategy in consultation with a health sciences librarian, there remains a possibility that some studies were missed. The term ‘retention’ was broadly used in all articles in this review, with most authors (15/18) failing to define retention. Most studies in this review were conducted in residential care, potentially limiting the translation of findings to the home care setting. Further, most studies employed cross‐sectional designs, limiting the ability to establish causation between the preselected variables under examination.

This review captured methodological and statistical heterogeneity in research studies exploring retention factors and strategies employed by aged care operators to retain their staff. Employee retention is a complex issue influenced by multiple factors, and this review underscores that no single factor can solely account for workforce retention. The retention of a stable and competent aged care workforce depends on a multifaceted approach.

Workforce retention is widely recognised as essential for maintaining a stable and skilled workforce. This review identified key factors and strategies across employee, employer and organisational domains that were found to influence retention among PCW in NHs. The retention of a stable and competent aged care workforce hinges on a multifaceted approach, incorporating employee, employer and organisational factors and strategies. The findings align with both government reports driving the transformation of Australia's aged care sector and peer‐reviewed literature, which consistently identifies job satisfaction and personal fulfilment as critical strategies to maintaining a stable, competent aged care workforce. As Australia progresses with generational reforms to deliver high‐quality, rights‐based person‐centred care that prioritises the needs of older people, implementing the evidence‐informed retention factors and strategies identified as influential in this review is essential.

Despite the critical importance of retaining the aged care workforce, particularly direct care workers, this review identified a paucity of evidence, especially regarding home care workers. The findings from this review are recommended for use by aged care operators, policymakers and researchers as a critical first step to guide the development, implementation and evaluation of evidence‐informed retention factors and strategies. Given the unique challenges in workforce retention within aged care, these findings provide valuable insights into evidence‐informed factors and strategies that promote retention and highlight the need for further empirical studies, particularly among former personal care workers and home care workers, given the lack of evidence in this area. Additionally, the development of a universal definition of ‘retention’ is needed, as the term is often used without clarity or consistency.

We acknowledge the facilitation of open access publishing by Deakin University through the Wiley‐Deakin University agreement, in collaboration with the Council of Australian University Librarians. Open access publishing facilitated by Deakin University, as part of the Wiley ‐ Deakin University agreement via the Council of Australian University Librarians.