Although creativity is an essential cognitive function to adapt to an ever-changing world, its neurocognitive and cerebral bases still need clarification. Current models highlight the interaction between associative and executive processes underpinned by the default mode (DMN), executive control (ECN) and salience networks (SN). Furthermore, recent neuroimaging studies highlight the key role of the prefrontal cortex (PFC), located at the crossroads of these networks. Hence, behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), characterized by progressive neurodegeneration principally impacting the prefrontal cortex and the intrinsic connectivity of these three creativity-related networks, represents a unique model to study creativity. In this study involving 14 bvFTD patients and 20 matched controls, we used a simple word-to-word association task (FGAT) to explore the specific cognitive processes involved in remote thinking, i.e., the production of creative semantic associations. Using voxel-based morphometry, we uncovered critical brain regions for each component and then characterized these regions’ intrinsic connectivity profiles using resting-state functional connectivity in healthy controls.

We dissociated four key cognitive components underlying remote thinking: spontaneous associative thinking, inhibition of unoriginal responses, intentional remote associative thinking, and verbal initiation; and replicated them in three independent datasets. Spontaneous associative thinking relied on temporal and cerebellar regions involved in low-order and automatic semantic processing, connected with the DMN, ECN and SN. Inhibition of prepotent unoriginal responses depended on key nodes of the SN. The ability to intentionally generate remote semantic associations was underpinned by key regions of the DMN. Finally, initiation of verbal responses relied on the right dorsolateral PFC, connected to the ECN. BvFTD patients were impaired in the last three components. Two components, cognitive inhibition and intentional remote thinking, mediated the link between atrophy in critical regions and an independent measure of creative abilities.

These findings advance our understanding of creative neurocognition, distinguishing components of creative thinking and clarifying their critical cerebral bases, and participate in the characterization of creativity impairment in patients with bvFTD.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12993-025-00292-z.

Finding solutions to new problems, thinking away from pre-established concepts, and connecting distant ideas are all creative requirements allowing us to cope with the challenges of everyday life. Defined as the ability to produce something both original (unusual, novel) and adequate (appropriate, useful) within a given context [1], creativity is recognized as an essential cognitive function at both societal and individual levels. Despite its significance, few neuroscientific studies have investigated creative thinking in neurological patients [2–6]. Neither is creativity evaluated in clinical practice, despite potential negative consequences for individuals if impaired [7]. Thus, patient studies are critical to better understand the cognitive and cerebral bases underlying creativity and the consequences of their alteration in brain diseases.

Creative ideas are thought to arise from the reconfiguration of existing knowledge [8,9], with the activation of semantically distant concepts, or remote thinking, playing a central role [10–12]. Creativity, as well as remote thinking, are thought to rely on the combination of two types of complementary processes [13]. Firstly, associative thinking, whose fundamental role in creativity [14] was confirmed by several psychological studies [9,15], allows the generation of associations between ideas. It is thought to rely on spontaneous unconstrained associations shaped by semantic memory structure, with looser links between elements of knowledge resulting in less stringent barriers between dissimilar concepts [13,16]. However, research has also shown that creative individuals are able to provide more remote associates when instructed to [10,17], suggesting that associative thinking might also involve intentional processes that take the goal into account when associating concepts [18]. Secondly, executive control processes, that gather domain-general goal-directed processes supporting the adaptation and control of behaviors [19,20] including inhibition, working memory, self-initiation, or controlled retrieval in semantic or episodic memory, are also essential for creativity to manipulate, elaborate, and select ideas [13,21]. Recent neuroimaging findings support this associative-executive dialogue, aligned on the interaction between three functional networks: the default mode (DMN), executive control (ECN) and salience-ventral attention (SN-VAN) networks [9,13,22–24]. The DMN [25], linked to self-generated cognition [26], facilitates associative aspects of creativity, enabling the generation of candidate ideas which are then processed by the ECN, implementing executive control processes [27]. The SN-VAN acts as an attentional switch and a detector of relevant stimuli, driving the cooperation between DMN and ECN [25,28]. At the crossroads between these networks, the prefrontal cortex (PFC) is the region most consistently associated with creativity [11,12,29–32], although the precise role of each prefrontal subregion remains debated [2].

To explore the brain correlates of creativity, studying brain-lesioned patients provides unique insights into brain regions whose integrity is critical for creativity [2,4–6]. Indeed, while purely correlational studies in healthy individuals, including fMRI studies, are of great value to identify brain regions that are involved in creative thinking, they can’t reveal which regions are critical. Instead, examining the consequences of brain lesions on creative performance reveals the brain regions whose integrity is necessary for creativity and thus links brain structure and function in a more causal way. In particular, studying patients with behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) [33], the third most common neurodegenerative dementia [34], seems highly relevant as the cognitive processes and brain regions affected during bvFTD overlap with those involved in creativity [4,5,35]. Indeed, bvFTD is characterized by progressive atrophy in the PFC, anterior cingulate and insular cortices [36], key regions for creative cognition [29,30,37] and key nodes of the three main creativity-related networks (SN-VAN, DMN, and ECN). Consistently, resting state functional connectivity (RSFC) studies in bvFTD identified early alterations within these three creativity-related networks [36]. Cognitive deficits in bvFTD involve processes key to creativity, with gradual deterioration of executive functions, particularly with difficulties in initiation and inhibition that can manifest at both cognitive and behavioral levels [33,34,38]. While spontaneous cognition remains largely unexplored in bvFTD, this pathology may also affect it [39], and offers a unique model to explore the cerebral bases of spontaneous cognition in addition to executive control processes. The few controlled studies exploring creativity in patients with bvFTD reported impaired creative abilities [35,40–42], and converged on the critical role of the PFC, with different subregions involved [35,42]. However, a detailed exploration of the cognitive underpinnings of creative impairment in bvFTD and of their brain correlates is missing.

In this study, we aimed to uncover distinct neurocognitive processes underlying verbal creativity through the exploration of remote thinking, an essential aspect of creativity [10–12,14] allowing the activation of distant semantic associates. Using a simple word-to-word generation task [12,43–45], we applied a principal component analysis (PCA) to variables extracted from participants’ responses to identify the cognitive components underlying remote thinking, and replicated this analysis in three independent datasets. We then used whole-brain voxel-based morphometry (VBM) to unveil critical brain regions for each component, and RSFC methods in controls to demonstrate the normal intrinsic connectivity profile of these critical regions. Based on current creativity models [9,12,13], we hypothesized to isolate two or more cognitive components, distinguishing associative and executive aspects of remote thinking, and expected bvFTD to impair executive processes and creativity. We also hypothesized that atrophy in prefrontal regions [12,22,23,30] connected to the DMN (particularly the rostromedial PFC [12]) or the ECN would negatively impact associative and executive processes, respectively.

Participants were recruited between September 2017 and July 2023 within the ECOCAPTURE protocol (INSERM, C16-87, clinicaltrials.gov:NCT03272230), exploring several behavioral and cognitive disorders in bvFTD patients. Eligible participants were French-native speakers aged 40 to 85, with Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE [46]) scores above 20, with non-pathological scores on clinical routine semantic assessments [47] (short French versions of a naming (/40) and a semantic matching test (/40)), and free from neurological, psychiatric or substance abuse disorder (except bvFTD). Patients meeting probable bvFTD diagnosis criteria [33] were recruited prospectively from two tertiary referral centers at Salpêtrière and Fernand-Widal hospitals in Paris. Control subjects were recruited through public announcement and matched to patients for age, gender, and education level (according to the French Barbizet scale [48], ranging from one to seven).

Forty-nine participants were recruited: 27 patients and 22 controls. Twelve patients and one control were excluded due to pathological scores on one or both semantic tests, one control was excluded due to a psychiatric condition, and technical tablet issues prevented one patient from completing the tasks. Thus, the final sample included 34 participants: 14 bvFTD patients and 20 controls.

All participants completed the entire ECOCAPTURE protocol with the same schedule, without deviations from the preregistered protocol. This study only focuses on creativity tasks, neuropsychological tests, and structural and functional MRI data. An approved ethics committee authorized the study, all participants provided written informed consent, and anonymity was preserved, in accordance with French regulations and the Declaration of Helsinki.

To explore remote thinking, an essential component of creative thinking [9–12], we used the Free Generation of Associates Task (FGAT), a simple word-association task previously validated in both patients [12] and healthy subjects [43,44]. The uncommonness of responses in word-to-word generation tasks has been previously correlated with creative performances [10,12].

The FGAT aims to distinguish spontaneous semantic associations from goal-directed remote semantic associations. Participants were asked to say aloud a word in response to a cue-word displayed on a tablet screen, according to two conditions. In the ‘FGAT-First’ condition, participants were asked to provide the first word coming to mind (e.g., ‘father’ in response to ‘mother’). This condition assesses semantic associations with minimal executive involvement, aiming to explore spontaneous associative thinking, a key aspect of creativity(Mednick, 1962). In the ‘FGAT-Distant’ condition, participants were asked to generate a word associated with the cue-word in an original, unusual way (e.g., “nature” in response to “mother”), though remaining understandable. This condition explores goal-directed remote thinking, thought to involve both spontaneous and intentional associative processes, as well as executive control processes.

Participants always performed the ‘FGAT-First’ before the ‘FGAT-Distant’, with the same 58 cue-words for both conditions, successively presented in a randomized order. We computed 15 variables for each participant, described in Table1. Some variables relied on two distinct normative associative databases. The French dictionary of verbal associations [49] provided free, unconstrained, associative norms of spontaneous semantic associations (‘Free Association Norms’). In parallel, a dataset of 96 healthy subjects who performed the same FGAT task in our lab, provided task-specific norms including ‘FGAT-First Norms’ and ‘FGAT-Distant Norms’. A description of the verbal material, experimental set-up, data cleaning and variables computation is provided in Supplementary Method1.

Replication Dataset 1: a cohort of 28 patients who underwent surgery for focal low-grade glioma (10 females; mean age 46.6 years, range 23–70) and 27 matched controls (14 females; mean age 46.9 years, range 23–70) [50] who performed the FGAT with the same 58 cue-words.

Replication Dataset 2: a cohort of 93 young healthy subjects (49 females; mean age 25.4 years, range 22–37) [51] who performed the FGAT task with a new 62 cue-words list (mean lexical frequency of 102 occurrences per million). As this new cue-words list was used for the first time in this cohort, and thus, no ‘FGAT Norms’ existed, ‘FGAT Norms’-indexed variables were computed on the Replication Dataset 2 itself, used to compute unique responses (corresponding to answers given by only one participant) and responses’ frequency (as the proportion of subjects that generated this response in the cohort).

Replication Dataset 3: a cohort of 87 young healthy subjects (66 subjects from Lopez-Persem et al. [43] and 21 subjects from its pilot study; resulting in 87 subjects: 56 females; mean age 25.0 years, range 22–40) who performed the FGAT task with the same 62 cue-words list described for Replication Dataset 2, and with answers from Replication Dataset 2 again used as ‘FGAT Norms’.

After identifying the cognitive components involved in the FGAT, individual loadings on each component were compared between groups, correlated with cognitive measures, and used in the neuroimaging analyses.

To ensure that our results were not biased by intrinsic differences between bvFTD patients and controls that may have influenced the PCA components computation, we ran complementary between-group comparisons using an independent PCA projection approach [52]. Specifically, we projected the FGAT components obtained from the PCA in the largest independent replication dataset of healthy subjects (Replication Dataset 2) onto our study. This projection used the product of the measured FGAT variables of interest in our study sample by their component loadings obtained from the PCA in Replication Dataset 2. Hence, we obtained individual loadings for each component that are not influenced by the differences between patients and controls. To assess the similarity between this control analysis and the original one, we tested correlations between the PCA components’ individual loadings obtained from these two methods using two-sided Spearman’s rank correlations. We also tested between-group differences of these new PCA components’ individual loadings, to ensure that the group comparisons initially reported were not influenced by the effect of intrinsic differences between bvFTD patients and healthy controls on PCA components extraction.

Participants also completed the Alternative Uses Task (AUT), a classical creativity task and a reliable indicator of real-life creative achievements [53]. The AUT served as reference creativity task to investigate how FGAT components related to creativity. In the AUT, participants were asked to generate five alternative, original uses for three everyday objects (“bottle”, “knife”, “tyre”), within 5 min per object. Detailed information about the experimental procedure is provided in Supplementary Method2. Two patients refused to perform the task, resulting in an AUT sample of 32 participants (12 patients, 20 controls).

The ‘AUT Fluency’ score was calculated as the total number of provided responses per participant for all three cues.

The ‘AUT Creativity Rating’, a reference measure for assessing creativity using the AUT [53], was computed as the mean of the creativity ratings given to each of a participant’s ideas on a scale from 1 (not creative at all) to 5 (highly creative) by four creativity experts (E.V., A.LP, M.OT. and T.B). Ratings were performed according to state-of-the-art guidelines (https://osf.io/vie7s/), excluding non-use responses. All rated ideas were presented in a random order to the judges, who were blind to the participants’ medical status.

The number of ‘AUT Non-Alternative’ responses was calculated to quantify failures in providing alternative uses.

The ‘AUT Minimal Frequency’, i.e., the frequency of participants’ rarest response, was measured to quantify participants’ peak originality in AUT responses. To compute this variable, we first assessed the frequency of each response, excluding non-use responses. Responses’ frequency was defined in reference to a normative database of 94 healthy subjects [51], as the number of participants that generated the idea divided by the total number of participants (n= 95, 94 healthy subjects of the reference database plus the participant whose ideas were currently evaluated). Once the frequency of each idea was established, we then calculated the minimal frequencies for each participant for each prompt object. These scores were then z-scored across participants for each prompt object. Finally, we selected the lowest z-scored minimal frequency across prompt objects to obtain the ‘AUT Minimal Frequency’ variable.

General cognitive functioning was assessed using the MMSE [46] (range 0–30, pathological score below 27 [55,56]), part of the inclusion criteria. General executive abilities were assessed using the Frontal Assessment Battery (FAB [57], a short battery classically used to evaluate executive functions in frontal patients (score range 0–18, pathological score below 16 [55]). Cognitive inhibition and verbal initiation were tested using the Hayling Sentence Completion Test [58] (HSCT), shown to be highly sensitive in bvFTD [59]. In the HSCT, participants are first (Part A) asked to complete 15 sentences using the appropriate word as fast as possible, and then (Part B) to complete 15 other sentences using a word unrelated to the sentence. The response time in part A was used to measure verbal initiation (‘HSCT-Initiation’), and the number of errors in part B to measure cognitive inhibition (‘HSCT Inhibition’). Finally, the number of responses in a phonemic fluency task (letter “S”, 60 s) explored executive verbal production.

All statistical analyses on clinical and neuropsychological data were conducted using R 4.1.2 (https://cran.r-project.org/). Significance was determined by an alpha level of 0.05.

Between-group differences were tested using two-tailed non-parametric Mann-Whitney U tests, orχ2tests for nominal variables. We used aP< .05 statistical significance threshold and False Discovery Rate (FDR) correction for multiple comparisons.

The PCA was performed on the entire sample (n= 34), entering all FGAT variables after ascertaining sampling adequacy for each variable by removing variables with a Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) measure smaller than 0.5, and data appropriateness for PCA using Bartlett’s test of sphericity, in line with good practices [60]. We based the number of retained factors on Jolliffe’s criterion (retaining factors with eigenvalues above 0.7) [52] and on the scree-plot analysis. Obliqueobliminrotation was used to allow non-independence between components. After identifying the cognitive components involved in the FGAT, individual loadings on each component were compared between groups, correlated with cognitive measures, and used in the neuroimaging analyses (see Neuroimaging analyses). Two-sided Spearman’s rank partial correlations were performed to assess the relationships between PCA component loadings and both AUT and neuropsychological scores, while accounting for the effects of age, gender, and education by partialling out their influence on the variables of interest. We used aP< .05 statistical significance threshold and FDR correction for multiple correlations. To rule out the possibility that significant findings hold true only in one group and are not generalizable, results were checked for consistency by additionally partialling out the effect of participants’ clinical status. The external validity of the extracted components was analyzed by replicating the same PCA with the same number of components in the three independent replication datasets (see above).

The strategy for structural and functional brain analyses is summarized in Fig.1.

MRI acquisitions were performed on a 3T Siemens PRISMA MRI scanner with a 64-channel total imaging matrix system. High-resolution T1-weighted structural images were acquired (TR = 2400ms, TE = 2.17ms, flip angle 8°, TI = 1000, acquisition matrix = 320 × 320, FoV = 224 mm, slice thickness 0.7 mm, iso-voxel). Subsequently, RSFC oblique axial brain slices based on a BOLD-sensitive T2* echo-planar image pulse sequence (TR = 2050ms, TE = 25ms, flip angle 80°, matrix = 68 × 68, FoV = 204 mm, slice thickness 3.0 mm, spacing between slices 3.15 mm) were acquired at 290 time-points for the eight first participants (four patients, four controls) and, due to a protocol change independent from this study, at 436 time-points for the later participants. For data homogeneity purposes, only the 290 first time-points were analyzed for all subjects. Participants were asked to lie with closed eyes without falling asleep during the RSFC acquisition.

T1-weighted images were preprocessed using the CAT12 toolbox (www.neuro.uni-jena.de/cat/) implemented in SPM12 (www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm), running on Matlab R2020b (Mathworks, USA). T1-weighted images were normalized and segmented to extract grey matter probability maps using default settings. Grey matter segmentations were affine transformed into the Montreal Neurological Institute 152 space with 1,5 mm isotropic voxels. Resulting grey matter normalized images were modulated to allow tissue volume comparison, and smoothed using an 8 mm full-width at half maximum Gaussian kernel. At each stage, all segmentations were reviewed visually, and VBM data homogeneity was checked using CAT12.

For all VBM analyses we used an explicit grey matter mask computed on the entire sample using the SPM Masking Toolbox, as recommended when analyzing atrophied brains to prevent excluding voxels of greatest atrophy [61]. We conducted 5000 permutations-based non-parametric VBM analyses [62] using SPM12 and the TFCE toolbox with default settings (github.com/ChristianGaser/tfce). Gender, age, and education were included as covariates of no interest with centering on overall mean, and individual differences in total intracranial volume were accounted for by global scaling to sample mean total intracranial volume. Voxel-wise whole-brain group differences in grey matter volume (GMV) were assessed using a one-tailed two-sample t-test. We used voxel-wise whole-brain multiple linear regressions to explore regions in which GMV showed a significant relationship with FGAT components’ loadings, using separate models for each component. Regressions were performed on the whole dataset, combining patients and controls (n= 34), to achieve greater variance in individual scores and thus greater statistical power [63]. Results are reported for both uncorrectedPuncorrected< 0.001 and Family-Wise Error (FWE) correctedPFWE< 0.05 statistical thresholds applied at the voxel level. To explore the scientific relevance of the results [64,65], we also computed Cohen’s f2voxel-wise effect size maps using Nilearn 0.9.2 (nilearn.github.io) running on Python 3.10.4 (www.python.org). To rule out the possibility that significant findings hold true only in one group and do not represent a generalizable brain-behavior relationship, effect size maps were also explored after adding participants’ clinical status (bvFTD or controls) as a covariate of no interest. For all results, a cluster extent threshold of 100 contiguous voxels was applied, along with non-stationary smoothness correction. For each FGAT component, significant regions at thePFWE< 0.05 threshold were used as regions of interest (ROI) for RSFC analyses. When no region reached significance at the FWE-corrected threshold, regions significant at thePuncorrected< 0.001 threshold were used as ROIs.

After investigating the relationship between FGAT and atrophy (GMV) and between FGAT and creative behavior (AUT), we explored whether FGAT components mediate the relationship between GMV and creative behavior. We performed mediation analyses testing mediation effects of each FGAT component’s score on the relationship between GMV within the clusters identified as critical for this component and AUT variables correlated with this component. Analyses were computed using 5000 bias-corrected bootstrapping simulations, with age, gender, education and total intracranial volume as covariates of no interest. To rule out the possibility that significant findings hold true only in one group and are not generalizable, results were checked for consistency after adding participants’ group as covariates of no interest.

RSFC data were preprocessed with the default fMRIprep 22.0.2 pipeline (https://fmriprep.org/en/22.0.2/). Each healthy control’s priorly denoised T1-weighted brain MRI underwent preprocessing steps including intensity non-uniformity correction, skull stripping, segmentation into grey matter, white matter, and cerebrospinal fluid, brain surface reconstruction, and spatial normalization to the Montreal Neurological Institute 152 standard space. Secondly, BOLD images underwent motion correction, slice-timing correction, co-registration to the normalized T1-weighted image, resampling to the standard space, and confounds computation. For more details, see Supplementary Method3orhttps://fmriprep.readthedocs.io/en/latest/workflows.html.

Using Nilearn, we used a seed-based approach to explore the functional connectivity of the significant ROIs identified in the VBM analysis. BOLD time-series were spatially smoothed using a Gaussian kernel of 8 mm full-width at half maximum, z-scored, detrended, and band-pass filtered (transmission range 0.01–0.1 Hz). The first four volumes of each BOLD run were discarded for signal intensity stabilization. Confounds regression included six head-motion (x, y, z, pitch, yaw and roll) and three global signals (white matter, cerebrospinal fluid, global signal) parameters, their temporal derivatives, and quadratic terms of each parameter and temporal derivative (36 confounds) [66]. Additionally, volumes exceeding motion artefacts thresholds (standardized DVARS (D: temporal derivative of time-courses, VARS: root mean square variance over voxels) above 1.5 or framewise displacement above 0.5 mm) were discarded [67] and participants with more than 20% discarded volumes were excluded, resulting in the exclusion of two subjects. For each VBM-extracted ROI and each of the 18 remaining healthy controls, we computed the ROI-to-voxel correlation map between averaged fMRI time-courses within the ROI and time-courses from each brain voxel within the mask. Fisher’s z-transform was applied to improve normality of ROI-to-voxel correlation maps.

We conducted 5000 permutations-based non-parametric second-level analyses using the TFCE toolbox with default parameters. Gender, age, education and total intracranial volume were included as covariates of no interest with centering on overall mean. One-tailed one-sample t-tests of z-transformed ROI-to-voxel correlation maps were performed to explore the connectivity profile of each ROI in healthy individuals. Results were corrected for multiple comparisons using FWE rate atP< .05 at the voxel level. A cluster extent threshold of 50 contiguous voxels was applied, along with non-stationary smoothness correction. Yeo and colleagues’ 7-networks resting-state parcellations of the cortex, cerebellum, and striatum [68–70] were used to explore which proportion of each ROI’s connectivity profile overlapped with known intrinsic functional networks. Specifically, we first generated a unified 7-network parcellation of the whole brain by combining the cortical [68], cerebellar [69] and striatal [70] 7-network parcellations of Yeo and colleagues. Then, we computed the proportion of voxels in each ROI’s thresholded connectivity map that spatially overlapped with each of the seven intrinsic functional networks.

Thirty-four participants (14 bvFTD patients and 20 healthy controls) were included in the analyses. Compared to controls, patients did not differ in age, gender or education (Table2).

As expected in bvFTD, patients showed impairment in general cognitive (MMSE) and executive efficiency (FAB), as well as in letter fluency and HSCT Initiation and Inhibition (Table3). Patients also performed worse than controls in the AUT, namely in ‘AUT Fluency’, ‘AUT Non-Alternative’ and ‘AUT Creativity Rating’ scores, while no significant difference emerged in AUT Minimal Frequency scores.

To isolate the cognitive components involved in the FGAT we conducted a PCA of all variables in the whole sample (n= 34), resulting in a four-component structure (C1 to C4, Fig.2) accounting for 91.8% of the total variance (Supplementary Table1). Bartlett’s test of sphericity was significant (χ2(105) = 810.92,P< .001), and no variable required removal based on KMO inspection (Supplementary Table2). The variables with highest loadings on C1 reflected the spontaneous expression of infrequent (Frequency ‘Free Association Norms’ First; Frequency ‘FGAT-First Norms’ First), atypical (Typicality First) or unique (Uniqueness ‘Free Association Norms’ First; Uniqueness ‘FGAT-First Norms’ First) spontaneous semantic associations in the ‘FGAT-First’ condition. C1 was therefore labelled as the ‘Remoteness of Spontaneous Semantic Associations’ component, with higher individual scores reflecting more remote or atypical spontaneous semantic associations. The C2 component gathered variables capturing the ability to suppress common (Frequency ‘Free Association Norms’ Distant), stereotypical (Typicality Distant) or previously provided (Same Responses First-Distant) responses in the goal-directed ‘FGAT-Distant’ condition, and was thus named ‘Cognitive Inhibition’. C3 captured variables related to the ability (No Response) or rapidity (Response Time) to initiate a response in this verbal task and was therefore labelled as the ‘Verbal Initiation’ component. Finally, C4 gathered variables corresponding to the ability to voluntarily produce infrequent (Frequency ‘FGAT-Distant Norms’ Distant) or unique (Uniqueness ‘Free Association Norms’ Distant; Uniqueness ‘FGAT-Distant Norms’ Distant) remote associations in the goal-directed ‘FGAT-Distant’ condition and was therefore labelled as the ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’component.

The correlations between FGAT components’ loadings and participants’ scores on neurocognitive and creativity measures revealed several significant correlations supporting the construct validity of the identified components (Table4). ‘Verbal Initiation’ correlated with general executive abilities (FAB,ρ= .48;P= .006), but also more specifically with HSCT-Initiation (ρ= .56;P= .003) and with phonemic (ρ= .59;P= .005) and AUT (ρ= .52;P= .004) fluencies, confirming its role in the production of verbal responses. ‘Cognitive Inhibition’ also correlated with the FAB (ρ= .42;P= .003), and more distinctively with HSCT-Inhibition (ρ= .63;P= < .001) and with the ability to provide few ‘AUT Non-Alternative’ responses (ρ= .51;P= .004), and thus to inhibit prototypical uses of the AUT objects. Interestingly, ‘Cognitive Inhibition’ also correlated with the ‘AUT Creativity Rating’ (ρ= .49;P= .007), indicating that in our sample, cognitive inhibition impairment in the FGAT related to the generation of more frequent and less creative ideas in the AUT. ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’correlated with the ability to avoid typical answers (HSCT-Inhibition,ρ= .52;P= .003; and ‘AUT Non-Alternative’,ρ= .46;P= .011) and with executive processes (FAB,ρ= .50;P= .004), but also with ‘AUT Fluency’ (ρ= .50;P= .005) and with ‘AUT Minimal Frequency’ (ρ= .44;P= .018), i.e., to the peak originality during the AUT. An additional correlation with phonemic fluency (ρ= .46;P= .037) was found but did not survive FDR-correction. Finally, the ‘Remoteness of Spontaneous Semantic Associations’ also correlated with both ‘AUT Fluency’ (ρ= .44;P= .016) and ‘AUT Minimal Frequency’ (ρ= 0.44;P= .018). These results suggest a link between both spontaneous and intentional remote associations and the fluency and maximal originality of ideas in the AUT. The exploration of correlations after additionally partialling out the effect of participants’ clinical status yielded similar results, although with a lower statistical significance, with only one result surviving FDR-correction (Supplementary Table3). However, the significant uncorrected correlations appear to gain specificity.

The external validity of the PCA was successfully demonstrated by replicating the PCA results in three independent datasets. The same four-component structure as in the original PCA was found for each replication dataset, with the same variables loading on each component. Replication PCAs accounted for over 80% of total FGAT variance (91%, 80% and 85% for replication datasets 1, 2, and 3, respectively). Based on KMO inspection, the ‘No Response Distant’ variable was excluded from Replication Datasets 1 and 2 and the ‘No Response First’variable was excluded from Replication Dataset 3. Results for the three replication PCAs are detailed in Supplementary Tables4to7.

Between-group comparisons (Table5) of each component’s individual loadings revealed patients’ impairment in ‘Verbal Initiation’, ‘Cognitive Inhibition’ and ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’. In contrast, no significant difference was shown between the two groups in terms of ‘Remoteness of Spontaneous Semantic Associations’. To ensure that our results were not biased by intrinsic differences between bvFTD patients and controls that may have influenced the PCA components computation, we ran complementary between-group comparisons using an independent PCA projection approach [52] (see Methods - Cross-sample control PCA projection analysis). We found high correlations between the PCA components’ individual loadings obtained from the control projection method and the original method (Supplementary Table8):‘Remoteness of Spontaneous Semantic Associations’(ρ= .99;P< .001),‘Cognitive Inhibition’(ρ= .91;P< .001),‘Verbal Initiation’(ρ= 0.97;P< .001) and‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’(ρ= 0.97;P< .001). Overall, the control projection method replicated the between-group FGAT components comparison results of the original method (Supplementary Table9).

Group comparison for GMV showed a fronto-temporo-parietal atrophy pattern in patients, typical of bvFTD (Supplementary Fig.1, Supplementary Table10). Atrophy affected mainly the bilateral dorsolateral PFC, orbitofrontal, cingulate, insular and temporal cortices.

To investigate the cerebral correlates of remote thinking components, we used whole-brain voxel-wise analyses exploring whether regional brain atrophy patterns (GMV) could be related to FGAT components’ individual scores.

At a stringentPFWE<.05 threshold (Fig.3, Supplementary Table11), individual ‘Verbal Initiation’ scores correlated positively with GMV in the right dorsolateral PFC. The ‘Cognitive Inhibition’component correlated with GMV in the bilateral dorsomedial PFC, in the right anterior cingulate, orbitofrontal and insular/ventrolateral prefrontal cortices, and in the left temporal pole. For the ‘Remoteness of Spontaneous Semantic Associations’and ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’components, no clusters survived for thisPFWE< 0.05 threshold.

At a more permissivePuncorrected<.001 threshold (Fig.4, Supplementary Table11), ‘Verbal Initiation’ involved a broad set of frontotemporal regions mainly involving the bilateral dorsolateral, orbitofrontal and ventromedial PFC. ‘Cognitive Inhibition’involved fronto-temporo-parietal regions centered on the anterior cingulate, dorsomedial PFC, ventromedial PFC and orbitofrontal cortices, as well bilateral regions involving the temporal poles, hippocampal formations and basal ganglia. Scores on the ‘Remoteness of Spontaneous Semantic Associations’component correlated positively with GMV in the right posteroinferior temporal cortex and in Crus I-II of the right cerebellum. Finally, for the ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’ component, we identified a critical role of the left-sided rostromedial PFC, dorsomedial PFC, temporal pole and hippocampus. Critically, all identified critical regions for all four FGAT components presented Cohen’sf2above 0.35 (Supplementary Fig.2), indicating large effect sizes and thus suggesting the scientific and potential clinical relevance of the results. After adding participants’ group as a covariate of no interest, whole-brain effect size maps showed moderate to large effect sizes in the previously identified critical regions (Supplementary Fig.3).

Significant critical regions identified for each component were used as ROIs to perform the subsequent RSFC analysis. For ‘Remoteness of Spontaneous Semantic Associations’ and ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’, we used regions significant at thePuncorrected< 0.001 threshold as no region reached significance at thePFWE< 0.05 threshold. For each FGAT cognitive component, adjusted (residual) values from the VBM regression models were plotted against the total grey matter volume within each component’s critical ROI to illustrate brain–behavior correlations (Supplementary Fig.4), and the spatial correspondence between ROIs and Yeo and colleagues 7-networks brain parcellation [68–70] are shown in Supplementary Fig.5for illustrative purposes.

After investigating the relationship between FGAT and GMV, and between FGAT and creative abilities (AUT), we explored whether the FGAT components that correlated with a creativity score could be mediators of a relationship between GMV and creative abilities. These analyses allowed us to link brain structure and creativity through FGAT cognitive components. We showed that ‘Cognitive Inhibition’ abilities mediated the link between GMV in the regions critical for ‘Cognitive Inhibition’ and ‘AUT Creativity Rating’ (Fig.5). We also identified a mediation effect of the ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’ on the relationship between GMV in regions critical for this component and ‘AUT Minimal Frequency’ (Fig.5). Other mediation analyses were non-significant (Supplementary Fig.6). Significant mediation effects remained significant after adding participants’ group as a covariate of no interest (Supplementary Fig.7).

We examined each VBM ROI’s RSFC in healthy controls (n= 18) to characterize their normal functional connectivity profile with respect to well-characterized functional networks. Statistical maps of the connectivity profiles for all ROIs combined are provided for each component in Fig.6, with the overlap of the results with Yeo and colleagues’ 7 intrinsic connectivity networks. Detailed results for each ROI are provided in Supplementary Tables12and Supplementary Figs.8to11.

The connectivity profile of the right dorsolateral PFC cluster critical for ‘Verbal Initiation’ involved the bilateral dorsolateral PFC and posterior parietal cortex, likely explaining a dominant overlap with the ECN (64%), and the bilateral dorsomedial PFC, at the intersection between ECN and SN-VAN (22% overlap).

The regions critical for ‘Cognitive Inhibition’ included the right anterior cingulate and insular/ventrolateral prefrontal cortices, connected to each other bilaterally and to bilateral dorsomedial PFC, dorsolateral PFC and posterior parietal cortex regions, mainly connecting with the SN-VAN (79% and 74% for anterior cingulate cortex and insula/ventrolateral PFC respectively). The right anterior cingulate cortex also connected to the right striatum and thalamus. The right orbitofrontal cortex connected to the right dorsolateral PFC and posterior parietal cortex, overlapping with both ECN (55%) and SN-VAN (29%). The bilateral dorsomedial PFC connected reciprocally and, for the left dorsomedial PFC, to the bilateral dorsolateral PFC and left ventrolateral PFC, with connectivity to the DMN (47% and 35% for right and left dorsomedial PFC respectively), ECN (10% and 37%) and SN-VAN (30% and 10%). The left temporal pole connected to its right counterpart, with a main involvement of the limbic (48%) and default (34%) networks. Finally, the right insula/ventrolateral PFC connected to its left counterpart and to the bilateral dorsomedial PFC and anterior cingulate cortex, principally involving the SN-VAN (74%). Overall, the functional connectivity profile of ‘Cognitive Inhibition’ mainly involved the SN-VAN (39%) over the DMN (21%) and ECN (17%).

From regions critical for the ‘Remoteness of Spontaneous Semantic Associations’, Crus I-II of the right cerebellum were functionally connected to their left cerebellum counterparts and to the left dorsolateral PFC, with main overlaps with the ECN (40%), DMN (29%) and SN-VAN (26%) that accounted for most of this component’s overall connectivity profile (38%, 27% and 24% for ECN, DMN and SN-VAN, respectively). For the right posteroinferior temporal cortex, only local connectivity proved significant, located within the dorsal attention (78%) and visual (19%) networks.

Finally, the ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’ involved the rostromedial PFC, at the core of the DMN (68% connectivity overlap) with connections to the bilateral precunei and posterior cingulate cortices, and to all other regions found critical: bilateral dorsomedial PFC, orbitofrontal/ventromedial PFC and hippocampus, the latter two explaining additional connectivity to the limbic network (12%). The left hippocampus also connected with the bilateral rostromedial PFC and temporal poles, and to its right counterpart, again connecting with both DMN (27%) and limbic (28%) networks. The left dorsomedial PFC and temporal pole connected to their respective right-hemisphere counterparts, mainly involving the DMN for the former (DMN 69%, SN-VAN 18%) and the limbic network for the latter (79%). Overall, the connectivity profile of the regions critical for the ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’ showed a clear predominance of the DMN (48%) and to a lesser extent of the limbic network (19%).

This study advances our understanding of remote thinking, a key aspect of creativity [9–12], and describes its impairment in bvFTD. Through a simple yet discriminant word-association task (FGAT), we uncovered four cognitive components underlying remote thinking, replicated in three independent datasets, and validated in relation to conventional neuropsychological and creativity tests. While ‘Remoteness of Spontaneous Semantic Associations’ and ‘Cognitive Inhibition’ components reaffirmed the known involvement of spontaneous associative thinking and executive control in creativity [13], the ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’ component unveiled additional intentional associative processes involved. Lastly, ‘Verbal Initiation’ involved nonspecific verbal activation processes. Whole-brain VBM and ROI-based RSFC approaches also allowed us to expose distinct critical brain regions for each component, along with their respective connectivity profile.

‘Remoteness of Spontaneous Semantic Associations’ captured spontaneous associative thinking, a key aspect of creativity [9,13,14]. Individuals who spontaneously provided remote semantic associations exhibited superior performance in both idea fluency and peak originality on the AUT, confirming that creative individuals present looser semantic associations between concepts [14–16,71]. Spontaneous associative thinking depended on brain regions at the intersection between low and higher-order semantic processes. The posteroinferior temporal cortex, functionally connected to the dorsal attention and visual networks, lies at the crossroads between the visual word form area, involved in word recognition and processing [72], and the inferior temporal cortex, implicated in semantic cognition and control [73]. Although classically left-lateralized, we identified these regions in the right hemisphere, as previously described for low-level semantic processes such as word recognition [74], comprehension [75], generation [76], or semantic matching [77]. Crus I-II of the right cerebellum, again intersecting low- and higher-level semantic processes, were also found critical. These regions support both automatic behaviors and language [78] including automatic retrieval of words’ dominant semantic associates [79,80], higher-level semantic control [81] and creative processes [82,83]. While connectivity with the DMN was expected for spontaneous associative processes [8,23], Crus I-II also connected to the ECN (mainly control-A subnetwork, connected to the DMN [84]) and SN-VAN. The unanticipated involvement of these networks in spontaneous thinking could relate to evaluative processes to fit with instructions. Indeed, recent studies show that FGAT responses depend on subjective evaluations of ideas’ adequacy and originality [43,44], the two dimensions defining a creative product [1], respectively encoded in the ECN and DMN [44]. During FGAT-First, the mental task-set may be unbalanced in favor of adequate over original responses, explaining the recruitment of the ECN, SN-VAN, and left dorsolateral PFC.

Although creative individuals may spontaneously provide remote associations, first ideas are more often close and require suppression to think creatively [21,85–87]. This inhibition of prepotent unoriginal answers was captured by the ‘Cognitive Inhibition’ component, characterized by correlations with FAB, HSCT-Inhibition, and with the ability to overcome fixation effects on ‘AUT Non-Alternative’ answers, but also with ‘AUT Creativity Rating’. Moreover, we uncovered that ‘Cognitive Inhibition’ impairment mediated the link between atrophy in regions critical for ‘Cognitive Inhibition’ and creativity impairment as measured by ‘AUT Creativity Rating’. Although some reports suggest that cognitive disinhibition could paradoxically facilitate creative ideation [4,5,88], our findings rather highlight the critical role of inhibitory control in creativity, particularly in bvFTD [5,35,42]. Consistently with previous findings in healthy [89] and brain-lesioned [90,91] individuals, including in bvFTD [38], ‘Cognitive Inhibition’ relied on core regions of the SN-VAN (anterior cingulate cortex, insula), allowing inappropriate ideas detection [25,28], and of the ECN (orbitofrontal cortex, ventrolateral PFC), likely implementing their suppression [22–24,86]. The anterior cingulate cortex is involved in error monitoring and detection [89], and the right orbitofrontal cortex in cognitive inhibition [38,91], while the right insula/ventrolateral PFC may participate in both [89]. ‘Cognitive Inhibition’ also depended on the dorsomedial PFC, a region at the intersection between DMN, ECN and SN-VAN supporting mental representation shifts [92], in relation with creative verbal associations [37]. Besides these semantic control regions [73,93], ‘Cognitive Inhibition’ also relied on the left temporal pole, connected to the default and limbic networks. This core region of integrative semantic processing [93] may contribute to detecting over- or un-related word pairs [94]. Altogether, our results confirm the critical role of control-related regions in creativity [22,29,30,35,37,42,82].

Beyond spontaneous associations and inhibition of typical associations, we identified another component of remote thinking, the ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’. This component correlated with ‘AUT Fluency’ and ‘AUT Minimal Frequency’, highlighting the critical role of the ability to voluntarily generate remote semantic associations in verbal creativity [8–12], and with fewer ‘AUT Non-Alternative’ responses and HSCT-Inhibition errors, underlining its role in generating alternative rather than obvious associates. These original results emphasize the pivotal role of both spontaneous and intentional associative processes in creative thinking [9,13]. Furthermore, we unveiled that ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’ abilities mediated the link between GMV within regions critical for this component and peak AUT creativity (‘AUT Minimal Frequency’). Our results provide causal evidence for the critical role of rostromedial PFC integrity in creativity. They converge with previous research involving healthy subjects [11,30,95] or patients [12,32,35,96], in particular replicating previous findings using the FGAT in patients with focal frontal lesions [12]. A recent study [97] identified the right frontal pole as a key region for creativity using seed-based functional connectivity analysis of activation peaks reported in 36 fMRI studies in healthy participants. Comparing this network to brain damage patterns in various diseases through large-scale meta-analysis, the authors suggested that focal or neurodegenerative lesions affecting the frontal pole, or the network positively connected to it, enhance creativity. However, this conclusion rests on debatable assumptions: first, that focal frontal pole lesions promote creativity, a claim not statistically supported by the cited work [31]; and second, that creativity increases in bvFTD, an assertion based on case reports but contradicted by findings from controlled patient studies [5,35,41,42]. Furthermore, the study did not statistically test the relationship between patients’ performance and damage to the frontal pole or its connected networks, limiting causal conclusions. These discrepancies underscore the need for direct empirical testing of creativity in bvFTD, as conducted in the current study, to clarify the role of rostral PFC damage in creativity. The rostromedial PFC, identified as a key region for intentional remote thinking in our study, is a core region of the DMN, the network most robustly associated with the ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’. While the DMN is traditionally linked to spontaneous cognition and considered a “task-negative” network, our findings suggest that this characterization may be over simplistic by demonstrating that the DMN plays a crucial role in active processes involved in intentional remote associative thinking. This finding aligns with a recent theory on associative thinking [9] and with the central role of the DMN in the self-generation of mental contents [98–100] and creative ideas [12,22–24,101]. The DMN is also essential for processing both semantic and episodic memory information [26,102,103], that have been shown instrumental to creative thinking [8,104]. Further supporting the role of these different types of memory in the ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’, our results reveal the critical involvement of the left temporal pole, central hub of semantic processing [73,93], and of the left hippocampus (reciprocally connected to the rostromedial PFC and temporal poles), involved in the retrieval of episodic memory elements [105] relevant for the recognition and generation of creative ideas [8,106,107], including in bvFTD patients [42]. These temporal regions of the limbic and mediotemporal DMN [26] networks have been associated with general, socioemotional and hedonic semantic knowledge [93,108]. Additionally, intentionally generating remote associates also depended on the left dorsomedial PFC, a key region of the dorsomedial DMN related to semantic control [26,73], that may facilitate the transition from conventional to creative thought patterns [37,92]. Altogether, our results highlight the interplay between mediotemporal, dorsomedial and core DMN, limbic and hippocampal memory networks as critical in intentionally retrieving multiple types of information, enabling the formation of new semantic associations and thinking ‘outside of the box‘ [8,9].

Finally, remote thinking involved a less specific ‘Verbal Initiation’ component, related to executive control (FAB), verbal (HSCT) initiation, and both executive (phonemic) and creative (AUT) fluencies. This component is likely to capture processes of initiation and sustainment of verbal responses, i.e., energization of behavior [90], expected to be impaired in bvFTD, characterized by apathetic symptoms [109]. This component may also capture additional executive processes necessary for the production of a verbal response. Brain correlates of ‘Verbal Initiation’ corroborate this view, with the involvement of the right dorsolateral PFC, a region involved in working memory [110], attentional control [111], task-monitoring [90], or word selection processes [73,112], whose impairments could affect the selection and production of relevant responses. Furthermore, the right dorsolateral PFC, that has been related to behavioral activation in bvFTD [109] was connected to the bilateral dorsomedial PFC, a core region of energization processes [90], and bilateral dorsolateral prefrontal and posterior parietal cortices, key regions of executive control [27]. These regions are all involved in ECN’s control-B subnetwork [84], preferentially interacting with the dorsal attention network at rest and associated with attention towards external stimuli [84], but also connecting with the DMN in the context of creative cognition [113].

Our findings also describe the impact of bvFTD on remote thinking. Compared to controls, patients presented ‘Verbal Initiation’ and ‘Cognitive Inhibition’ impairments, as expected in this pathology [33,34,38]. Interestingly, our findings also revealed difficulties of bvFTD patients in the ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’. These difficulties may explain lower creativity in bvFTD, reported in the present (‘AUT Fluency’, ‘AUT Creativity Rating’ and ‘AUT Non-Alternative’) and in previous studies [4,5,35,41,42]. Interestingly, patients did not differ from controls in the ‘Remoteness of Spontaneous Semantic Associations’.Although excluding semantically impaired participants likely influenced this result, spontaneous semantic associations, conceptualized as an executive-independent individual trait [14,114], may be preserved in bvFTD, characterized by goal-directed dysexecutive impairments. However, this interpretation remains to be tested, for example by exploring verbal (FGAT) and non-verbal [45] remote thinking in early-stage semantic dementia, another variant of frontotemporal dementia primarily affecting semantic knowledge through anterior temporal lobe neurodegeneration [5,34,42].

A few methodological limitations of this study require consideration. First, although the external validity of the FGAT PCA components is supported by their replication in three independent datasets, their construct validity remains to be further replicated. The conceptual understanding of these cognitive components was primarily based on the variables that loaded onto them, and was also informed by their patterns of correlations with creativity and cognitive measures. Replicating these associations in future studies, using the same measures or generalizing them using alternative cognitive measures, would help to strengthen and extend the understanding of these cognitive components. Importantly, while this study aimed to capture distinct cognitive processes contributing to remote thinking, some of these processes are likely not specific to creativity and may also contribute to other cognitive functions [115]. Clarifying the relationships between these components and other cognitive domains will thus be an important goal for future work. Another limitation, given the rarity of bvFTD and our strict inclusion criteria, is the limited sample size in our study, which could lack statistical power, for example to bring out more statistically salient brain correlates for the ‘Remoteness of Spontaneous Semantic Associations’ and ‘Intentional Generation of Remote Semantic Associations’ components. However, we found that, although not surviving FWE correction, the critical structural correlates identified for these two components showed large effect sizes. These VBM results thus likely reflect scientifically truthful and clinically relevant findings [64,65], whose significance at a more permissive statistical threshold may relate to lower variability between patients and controls for these components than for initiation or cognitive inhibition deficits characteristic of bvFTD. It is also worth noting that, while our RSFC results characterize the normal intrinsic connectivity profiles of critical brain regions involved in creative cognition, they do not address how large-scale functional network alterations in bvFTD relate to creative performance, an important question for future investigations. Finally, the FGAT only assesses verbal remote thinking, one of several aspects of creative thinking. Further work is therefore needed to explore other modalities of remote thinking, especially using non-verbal tasks that have been proposed to have common but also distinct brain correlates than verbal tasks [30]. Another important direction for future research is to investigate remote thinking in other brain diseases to establish the specific impairment profile unique to bvFTD, which our study has only described. Furthermore, this study might appear to contradict observations of a facilitation or emergence of artistic production in some patients with bvFTD [4,116,117]. However, these observations remain rare, especially in bvFTD [117], the mechanisms are not understood [4], and the few controlled group studies converge on the impairment of creative abilities in patients with bvFTD [5,35,41,42]. This paradox raises the question of the mechanisms fostering artistic exacerbations in bvFTD and whether it genuinely reflects enhanced creative capacities [4,118]. Experimental testing using theory-based creativity tasks, such as the FGAT, in bvFTD patients with artistic facilitation would help address this question.

Overall, our replicated results reveal how a simple and short word-generation task allows the unprecedented characterization of four latent cognitive components that are relevant to creativity and rely on distinct brain substrates. The findings demonstrate that bvFTD patients are impaired in most of these components, confirming our hypotheses based on the resemblance between creativity networks and brain damage usually reported in this pathology. Our behavioral and neuroimaging results provide preliminary bases for the cognitive processes underlying each component, advancing the understanding of creative cognition but also of its impairments in bvFTD patients, whose characterization has been overlooked but constitutes a first step towards the improvement of their care. Hence, extending our results to other neurological conditions would be of great interest. Although further validation is necessary before transferring the FGAT to bedside clinical practice for diagnosis or rehabilitation purposes, it may be a valuable tool in future studies and clinical settings to explore different aspects of creative cognitions that are not classically assessed in clinical practice.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

We thankfully acknowledge the contributions of the ECOCAPTURE study group: Karen Lecouturier, Johan Ferrand-Verdejo, Delphine Tanguy, Valérie Godefroy, Louis Bonnefous, Yongjian Liu, Pierre Mullot, Aymen Mousli, Idil Sezer, Manon Le Bozec, Arabella Bouzigues, Camille Simard, Paolo Fulcheri, Hortense Guitton, Mathilde Boucly, Elena Karpinski, Nassim Saidi, Shany Aflalo, Carla Matos Araujo, Estelle Janvier, Aline Jourdain, Flore Pochan-Leva, Lucie Jeanne, Mathilde Joulié, Myriam Provost, Rozenn Renaud, Sarah Hachemi, Armelle Blossier, Giulia Visentin, Blandine Cabrol-Douat, Raphaëlle Odobez, Constance Marque, Tatiana Landre, Alizée Paquiry, Manon Gallouedec, Caroline Peltier, François-Xavier Lejeune, Vincent Guillemot, Frédéric Marin, Anaïs Blau, Anaïs Raud, Daphné Tessereau-Barbot, Fanny Colin, Fanny Pineau, Hélène Vinatea, Julie Socha, Marie-Alexandrine Glachant, Aurélie Funkiewiez, Céline Chamayou, Sophie Coriou, Vanessa Batista-Brochard, Cécile Gaudebout, Carole Azuar, Bruno Dubois, David Bendetowicz, Guilhem Carle, Dario Saracino, Théophile Bieth, Stéphanie Bombois, Emmanuel Cognat, Louise-Laure Mariani, Graziella Mangone, Jean-Christophe Corvol, Antoni Valero-Cabre.We also thank both the PRISME and CENIR ICM platforms for their help in collecting cognitive and brain imaging data, respectively. We than Romain Valabregue for his help in the preprocessing of fMRI data. Finally, we sincerely thank the patients and volunteers for participating in this study.