The Type IX Secretion System exports proteins across the outer membrane (OM) of bacteria in the Bacteroidota phylum, however, the mechanistic details remain unknown. InPorphyromonas gingivalisthe core components of the multi-protein complex are the Sov translocon, Attachment Complexes (PorQ, U, V, Z), PorLM molecular motors and PorKN rings. Here, we present a ~ 3.5 Å cryo-EM structure of the periplasmic rings comprising 32–33 subunits each of PorK and PorN. Additionally, we show the presence of a critical disulfide bond between PorK and the OM protein PorG that is essential for protein secretion and demonstrate that the Attachment Complexes bind to, and are localized above, the PorKN rings. Overall, each ring resembles a cogwheel with PorN forming cog-like projections that we propose engage with the PorLM motor to drive the rotation of the PorKN cogwheel together with PorG and associated Attachment Complexes, thus providing the energy to complete protein secretion and the coordinated cell surface attachment of the secreted cargo.

Type IX secretion system (T9SS) is required for protein export in the Bacteroidota. Here, the authors obtain structure of T9SS PorKN ring which resembles a cogwheel that may have a rotational movement and is disulfide bonded to outer membrane beta-barrel PorG.

Periodontitis is a prevalent, chronic inflammatory disease associated with a dysbiotic subgingival plaque that results in the destruction of the tooth’s supporting tissues and is additionally linked with a range of systemic diseases like diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, certain cancers and dementia1,2.Porphyromonas gingivalis, an obligate anaerobe, is strongly associated with severe periodontitis at sites refractory to treatment and is now recognised as a keystone pathobiont of this disease3–5.P. gingivalisuses the Type IX Secretion System (T9SS) to translocate at least 35 cargo proteins to the cell surface, including hallmark virulence factors such as the gingipain proteases RgpA, RgpB, and Kgp6,7. The T9SS secreted cargo proteins play an important role in virulence of the bacterium, including biofilm formation, nutrition acquisition, antibiotic resistance, adhesion and degradation of host proteins8,9.

The T9SS is exclusively present in members of theBacteroidotaphylum10,11. The T9SS cargo proteins have an N-terminal signal peptide that facilitates export across the inner membrane by the Sec system and have a conserved C-terminal domain (CTD), referred to as the CTD signal, that enables them to pass through the outer membrane (OM) via the T9SS7,12–14. The fate of proteins secreted by the T9SS is determined by their CTD signal type. Proteins with type A CTD signals undergo a complex process once they reach the cell surface. Their CTD signals are removed and replaced with anionic-lipopolysaccharide (A-LPS), which anchors the proteins to the cell surface, resulting in the formation of an electron-dense surface layer (EDSL)15,16. In contrast, proteins possessing type B CTD signals are anchored by binding to their cognate carrier proteins17. Besides regulatory proteins, the T9SS is composed of at least 18 proteins inP. gingivalis, namely: PorK, PorL, PorM, PorN, Sov, PorT, PorU, PorW, PorP, PorV, PorQ, PorZ, PorE, PorF, PorG, Plug, PorD, PorA6,8,18–20. Recent studies have begun to shed light on the structure and function of some of these components (Fig.1A). The PorL-PorM motor complex is anchored to the inner membrane and powered by the proton motive force21–23. The PorM rotor extends into the periplasm to drive secretion in non-motileP. gingivalisand both secretion and motility inFlavobacterium johnsoniae23. Additionally, in-situ structural studies of the T9SS and bacterial two-hybrid studies have shown an interaction between PorM and PorN21,24. PorK and PorN form large ring-shaped structures in the periplasm that are tethered to the OM by the lipidation of the PorK N-terminus and by association with an 8-stranded OM β-barrel protein, PorG22,24. Evidence from cross-linking studies indicated that a periplasmic loop of PorG is in close proximity to both PorK and PorN22. SprA (an orthologue ofP. gingivalisSov) has been shown to form a large 36-stranded β-barrel that is either bound to PorV or Plug and is the OM translocon through which the T9SS cargo proteins are secreted25. We demonstrated that the Sov interactome inP. gingivalisincluded PorV, PorA, Plug, PorW, PorD, and the PorKN rings, proposing that PorW forms a bridge between the PorKN rings and the Sov translocon26. Recent findings inF. johnsoniaevalidated our results, where an extended-translocon including SprE (PorW orthologue), PorD, and trapped substrates was purified from thegldL(porL) mutant27. The accumulation of substrates in the translocon when energetic input was removed suggested that energy is required to release PorV-bound substrates from the translocon27. PorU and PorZ are anchored to the OM via binding to the PorV and PorQ OM β-barrel proteins respectively, and together the four proteins form the Attachment Complex28. PorU is a sortase that cleaves the CTD signal on the cell surface and swaps it with A-LPS provided by PorZ, thereby anchoring cargo proteins onto the cell surface15,16,29.

ACartoon representation of the T9SS architecture showing the location of PorKN rings and PorG, PorLM motor, and the Sov translocon bound to PorV and PorW.BA bottom view of 33-fold symmetry cryo-EM volume of the PorKN ring (Pink: PorK, Blue: PorN).CSide views of the PorKN ring showing the flat upper surface and an outer rim formed by PorK with cog-like projections formed by PorN.DTop-view of the PorKN ring.EEnlarged views of the outer surface of the PorKN ring showing the fitting of PorK (pink) and PorN (blue) and interlock of PorK subunits.FRibbon fold structures of PorK (pink) and PorN (blue), outer and side views showing the glycans on PorK.GInner ring cross section showing the interface of PorN with the cavity formed by two PorK subunits. PorK (purple and pink) surface rendered. PorN (blue) in surface rendered and ribbon representation.HDetailed structure of the two glycans on PorK.

Although, the PorKN ring and its association with PorG was identified nearly a decade ago, their precise role remains unclear. The proteins that comprise the Attachment Complex have been identified, but the exact location of this complex in relation to the other T9SS components is unknown. In this work, we present a high-resolution structure of the PorKN ring, offering insights into their function. We also demonstrate that PorG is associated with PorK through a disulphide bond, which is crucial for the function of the T9SS and show that the Attachment Complexes are associated with, and co-localised in-vivo above the PorKN rings providing insight into the co-ordinated mechanism of T9SS secretion and attachment inP. gingivalis.

Previously, we purified the PorKNG complex fromP. gingivalisand demonstrated that it forms large, 50 nm ring-shaped structures22. However, due to one preferred orientation on the EM grid and protein aggregation, we were only able to achieve a resolution of ~40 Å. At this resolution, we could discern that the structure was composed of one large ring and one slightly smaller ring, but the organisation of the PorK, PorN and PorG subunits within the ring structure remained unclear. With optimisation of buffer conditions, which included addition of 1 M urea prior to applying the sample on an EM grid, we were able to mitigate strong aggregation of the PorKN rings and capture various orientations of the rings on the EM grid by focusing acquisition on thicker vitreous ice. This improvement enabled us to achieve ~3.5 Å maps of the PorKN rings (Fig.1B–D, Supplementary Fig.1). Several rounds of classifications were performed that resulted in two classes with distinct symmetry of C32 (46% of final particles) and C33 (54% of final particles). A very small number of top views with C34 and C35 fold-symmetry were observed early in the 2D classification process but did not lead to 3D classes suggesting that these two species are too rare to bear on the classification.P. gingivalisis therefore capable of assembling rings of different stoichiometry. The interfaces between adjacent heterodimers were identical in the C32 and C33 fold symmetries, however, they did make a difference to the measured diameter of the ring: an increase of 16 Å was observed in the C33 fold symmetry (529 Å) compared to the C32 fold-symmetry (513 Å). In both instance each heterodimer had the periodicity of 50.36 Å.

The AlphaFold30predicted structure of the PorK and PorN heterodimer was used as a starting point for structure refinement. The structure of PorK was solved from Glu45to Ala481missing the N-terminal 21 residues (not including signal peptide) and the C-terminal 10 residues. PorN was solved from Leu50to Gln297missing the N-terminal 25 residues (not including signal peptide) and the C-terminal 63 residues. Although present in the purified samples, PorG was unable to be resolved (see below)22. The orientation of the ring was easily solved by comparison to the published in-situ structures of the ring where the larger diameter “upper ring” is adjacent to the OM24. The top and side views of the ring show that PorK forms the upper ring, featuring a large, flat surface orientated towards the OM that is bound by a discontinuous “outer rim” (Fig.1C, D). PorN forms the second ring of a slightly smaller external diameter underneath PorK and it folds to create cog-like projections that in vivo would be on the periplasmic side (Fig.1C). Enlarged side-views show how PorK subunits interlock through a large wedge-shaped protrusion (~Asp186-Ile218), which extends diagonally down and across to fit into a crevice on the adjacent monomer (Fig.1E, G). Interestingly, the outside surface of the PorK outer rim resembled a three-toed claw that exhibited highly conserved negatively charged residues (Supplementary Fig.2A, B). InP. gingivalisPorK, these were largely contributed by Glu121-2, Glu127, and Glu152-4. A small N-terminal region of PorK (residues Gly50-Val103) and the C-terminal part of PorK (residues Trp261-Arg471) together adopt the fold of a formylglycine generating enzyme (FGE)31with a root mean square deviation (RMSD) of 0.951. This structural arrangement makes up most of the core of PorK and a large part of the cavity that binds PorN (Supplementary Fig.2C). In contrast, the region Arg104-Cys260is unique to PorK and includes the interlocking wedge, the negatively charged outer rim and the outside wall of the PorN-binding cavity (Supplementary Fig.2C).

A cross-section view of the PorKN heterodimer (Fig.1F) highlights the location of the most N- and C-terminal parts solved. For PorK, both termini appear on the OM side, consistent with the N-terminal Cys being lipidated and inserted into the membrane. The most C-terminal part of PorN was the α-helix extending from Thr271-Arg290located on the inside of the ring extending toward the OM (Fig.1F). This helix can be seen in the inside views appearing as vertical bars (Fig.1C). The unsolved N- and C-terminal regions of PorK and PorN are likely to be flexible in the purified rings. The unresolved C-terminal region of PorN (residues Thr291-Lys361) is highly positively charged and is predicted to be mostly α-helical.

PorN was found to insert into a cavity produced underneath each pair of PorK subunits (Fig.1G). Three linear regions of PorN are involved in the binding. The first region from Leu50to Trp70is mostly α-helix and binds deeply within the cavity of PorK (Supplementary Fig.3A). Within this region, Arg53and Ser/Thr51are absolutely conserved among 45 diverse PorN homologues within theBacteroidiaclass (Supplementary Data1). These residues penetrate deeply into a pocket of PorK and are modelled to interact mainly through hydrogen bonds (Supplementary Fig.3A). The second and third regions from Phe179to Ser184and Glu285to Val295respectively form one deeply penetrating loop, and several residues involved in hydrophobic and aromatic stacking interactions (Supplementary Fig.3A). Together, the nature and extent of these interactions suggest a stable interaction between PorK and PorN. Consistent with this, the computationally estimated dissociation constant (Kd) of one PorN subunit binding to two PorK subunits at 37 °C was computed to be 2 × 10−11M with a ΔG of −15.2 kcal/mol, indicative of a strong association. Due to technical limitations in obtaining native PorK without PorN, the Kdcould not be determined experimentally.

The cog-like projections of PorN suggest potential interaction points with the dimeric PorM rotor. We therefore predicted the binding site for this known interaction using AlphaFold. The C-terminal d4 domain of PorM was predicted to bind between the cog-like projections of PorN, potentially through electrostatic interactions between the conserved negatively charged cogs and the positively charged rotor tip (Supplementary Fig.3B). While the ipTM score was 0.47, the prediction was consistent, and the geometry was a good fit. The poor score may reflect that the binding is dynamic- the main requirement being that the PorM shaft can slot in-between the cogs that can drive rotation of the rings.

PorK and PorN were predicted to beO-glycosylated at three and two sites respectively, on the basis of the published (D)(S/T)(A/I/L/V/M/T/S/C/F/G) glycosylation motif32. We performed mass spectrometry analysis on the purified PorK and PorN protein bands resulting in the identification of glycosylated peptides that covered all 5 sites (Table1). All sites were modified with the known major heptasaccharide O-glycans of Δmass 1436 and 1394 Da, while the minor O-glycans of Δmass 1352 and 792 were observed for only some of the sites. The level of site occupancy was high since non-glycosylated forms of the same peptides were not observed, with the exception of non-glycosylated PorN264ALAEYCPTPDSMK280which was detected at a low level. The collision-induced decay (CID) MS2 spectra clearly show the presence of the heptasaccharide associated with each of the five glycosylated peptides (Supplementary Fig.4).

aMinor levels of non-glycosylated peptide were also detected.

bThe PorK peptide DSIIR was too small to generate a sufficient number of MS fragments for Mascot scoring. However, manual searching of the raw data revealed glycosylated peptides that exhibited the expected fragment ions (y1-4, b2-4) for this sequence with very high mass accuracy.

The PorK glycans were also observed in the cryo-EM map. PorK Ser68was observed with only one sugar, while PorK Ser106and Thr222were observed with full-length (heptasaccharide) glycans with only the acetyl glycerol phosphate portion unassigned (Fig.1H). The glycans on Ser106and Thr222are located in the PorK-specific region under the outer rim, with the terminal sugars potentially interacting with adjacent PorK subunits. In contrast, the glycans on PorN were not visualised on the cryo-EM map, suggesting high flexibility.

Previously, we have shown that PorG interacts with the PorKN ring (Fig.1A)22. To further elucidate PorG’s role within these PorKN rings and the T9SS, we generated aporGdeletion mutant in theP. gingivalisW50 strain. We assessed the impact of the deletion on T9SS function through phenotypic analysis of pigmentation, gingipain activity assay and the ability of T9SS cargo proteins to attach to the cell surface. The W50porGmutant was apigmented on blood agar plates as opposed to the black pigmented WT, consistent with earlier reports of aporGdeletion mutant in theP. gingivalisATCC 33277 strain18. This suggests that PorG is an essential component of the T9SS (Fig.2A). TheporGmutant displayed negligible <5% cell surface and supernatant gingipain (Kgp and Rgp) activity compared to the WT (Fig.2B), consistent with an inability of these T9SS-dependent proteases to be translocated across the OM. In contrast to the WT, anti-A-LPS western blot showed no signal above 60 kDa in theporGmutant (Fig.2C), indicating the inability of T9SS cargo proteins to be attached to the cell surface by modification with A-LPS. Accordingly, the layer of cargo proteins on the cell surface known as the EDSL was absent in cryo-electron microscopy images ofporGmutant cells but present in the WT (Fig.2D). We also constructedporGcomplementation strains (porG+) by chromosomal integration ofporGinto thefimA(pg2132) locus. TheporG-complemented strain demonstrated pigmentation, increased protease activities, A-LPS signal above 60 kDa and EDSL (Fig.2A–D), indicating the phenotype observed in theporGmutant is specifically due to the lack of PorG. Jointly, these results indicate that PorG is an essential component of the T9SS.

AP. gingivalisWT,porGdeletant, andporG+complementation strain pigmentation on blood agar plates after 7 days of incubation.BIntact whole cells and supernatant samples were analysed for endoproteolytic activities of the T9SS RgpA, RgpB, and Kgp cargo proteins using Arg- and Lys-specific chromogenic substrates. Relative gingipain activities are represented as a percentage of the WT activity for all fractions and strains,n= 3 biological replicates, error bars mean ± SD. Significant difference is observed between WT andporGmutant, two-tailed unpaired Student’sttest (pvalue: 6 × 10−7).CCell lysates from WT and the porG mutant were electrophoresed using SDS-PAGE and the proteins were transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane and probed with mouse monoclonal antibody mAb 1B5 (anti-A-LPS). Coomassie stained gel shows the protein load.DCryo-electron micrographs showing the presence of an electron-dense surface layer (EDSL) in WT cells, and the absence of this layer in theporGmutant cells (white arrows). Arrows show outer membrane (OM) and inner membrane (IM). Scale bars, 200 nm. Large protein complexes were prepared fromEABK- andFporGmutant cells, the samples were negatively stained and viewed under the electron microscope. The electron micrographs show the presence of large (50 nm) rings (black arrows). Scale bars, 200 nm. Source data are provided as aSource Datafile.

Next, we investigated if the PorKN rings were affected by the absence of PorG. We applied our partial purification protocol for macromolecular complexes, that we have previously used to assess the presence of the rings in various T9SS mutants22. For comparison with theporGmutant, we used theP. gingivalisABK- strain which lacks all three gingipains but has a functional T9SS. The samples were stained with uranyl acetate and visualised under electron microscopy. The 50 nm PorKN rings were visible in the ABK- cells (Fig.2E) and theporGdeletion mutant (Fig.2F). Notably, fewer PorKN rings were visible in theporGmutant, possibly due to a reduction in the abundance of T9SS protein components in this strain (see below).

We also performed gene cluster analysis and foundP. gingivalis porG(pg0189) is located adjacent to genes coding a BamA-associated lipoprotein (PG0188)33and undecaprenyl diphosphate synthase (UppS, IspU, PG0190). Nearby are also the genes coding BamA (PG0191), and two Skp proteins (PG0192 and PG0193)27. This six-gene cluster was found to be conserved across numerous genera in the Bacteroidota phylum, especially in classBacteroidia, but also extending to other classes such asCytophagia,Sphingobacteriia, andFlavobacteriia, with the exception of the lipoprotein orthologs, which were sometimes undetected (Supplementary Data2). Besides UppS, which is involved in peptidoglycan and LPS biosynthesis, the other four encoded proteins are involved in Omp biogenesis34, with Skp functioning as a periplasmic chaperone and the BAM complex responsible for the insertion of OMPs into the OM35. The conserved location ofporGwithin this cluster, therefore, suggested a possible involvement with OMP biogenesis that is specific to the T9SS. Some species ofBacteroides, such asB. fragilis, while closely related toP. gingivalis, lack PorG and the T9SS. A gene cluster analysis ofB. fragilis bamA(BF0504), shows an extended gene cluster that includes all the genes noted above in the same order except forporG(Supplementary Data2).

To explore if the T9SS components are affected in the absence of PorG, we performed label free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics on the whole cell lysate of WT and theporGmutant as per our published protocol36. In theporGmutant, all the T9SS components were decreased in abundance compared to the WT (Supplementary Fig.5), including 6 OM β-barrels, however, OM β-barrels unrelated to the T9SS were unaffected. This suggests that the T9SS is downregulated in the absence of PorG.

BamA is a highly conserved protein responsible for folding and inserting OM β-barrel proteins into the OM37. Since theporGgene (pg0189) is localised near thebamAgene (pg0191), we explored whether PorG was involved in the localisation and folding of the T9SS specific OM β-barrels Sov, PorV, PorQ, PorT, PorF, and PorP. The cell envelope (CE) proteins from both the wild-type (WT) andporGmutant strains were subjected to trypsin digestion and analysed by mass spectrometry. The data were analysed by MaxQuant software, and the values of the ratio of LFQ intensities of theporGmutant to WT was normalised to other OM β-barrels that are not related to the T9SS. The T9SS OM β-barrels were identified in the CE of theporGmutant albeit at reduced levels (Fig.3A), consistent with the whole cell lysate results (Supplementary Fig.5). Together, this suggests that T9SS OM β-barrels are able to integrate into the OM in the absence of PorG. We also investigated the protein interactions of the Sov translocon in theporGmutant by blue native PAGE western blot and affinity purification mass spectrometry using Sov specific antibodies. In the native western blot, two Sov specific bands were observed, which we previously assigned to mainly PorV-Sov (~500 kDa) and PorV-Sov-PorW (~750 kDa) (Fig.3B)26consistent with the PorV and Sov β-barrels being properly integrated in the OM. Of note, to obtain the signal in theporGlane, the blot was exposed for longer, supporting the finding of lower Sov abundance in theporGmutant. Similarly, we previously employed Sov co-immunoprecipitation (Co-IP) studies in several strains to show that the Sov interactome includes PorA, PorD, Plug, PorK, and PorN in addition to PorV and PorW26. To test if Sov can make the same interactions in theporGmutant, the Sov affinity-enriched material from ATCC 33277porGmutant (gift from Prof Naito) was analysed by mass spectrometry and found to contain Sov, PorV, PorA, PorW, and PorK at more than 10 times the level observed in the negative control, while PorD was also present but its observed ratio was not significant (Fig.3C). The ATCC 33277porGmutant was selected for this work to maintain consistency with our previous published work in the ATCC 33277P. gingivalisstrain26. Taken together, these results strongly suggest that the two key T9SS OMPs, Sov, and PorV can integrate into the OM and interact with their binding partners, suggesting that the defect in the T9SS function due to lack of PorG is not due to the inability of OMPs to be incorporated into the OM.

ACell envelope fractions from WT and theporGmutant were analysed by mass spectrometry and MaxQuant software. The LFQ ratios ofporGmutant to WT of the T9SS OM β-barrels were plotted relative to other OMPs not related to the T9SS.n= 3 biological replicates, Error bars: mean ± SD.BCell lysates from ABK- and theporGmutant were electrophoresed on a blue native gel. The proteins were transferred onto a PVDF membrane and probed with anti-Sov antibodies. Coomassie stained gel shows the protein load.CCell lysates fromporGandsovmutants were subjected to co-immunoprecipitation using anti-Sov antibodies. The enriched material was analysed by mass spectrometry and MaxQuant software. The graph is a plot of LFQ intensities ratio ofporGtosovmutant (log scale). The values of abundance of each protein relative to Sov (iBAQ) is written on top of the bar graph. * LFQ ratios <10 were deemed insignificant but shown to enable the display of PorD for completeness. Source data are provided as aSource Datafile.

To further understand the nature of the interaction between PorK, PorN, and PorG, we used AlphaFold Multimer30to predict the structure of the PorKNG complex and its relationship with the lipid bilayer. The modelling revealed that PorK anchors to the membrane via its lipid moiety and interacts with PorG, while also showing a gap of ~20 Å between the flat surface of PorK and the OM (Fig.4A). Assuming a conventional OM β-barrel architecture where the N- and C- termini are located in the periplasm, the model shows the periplasmic end of the PorG barrel interacting with PorK (Fig.4A). The PorG C-terminal extension containing Cys232was predicted to run on the surface of PorK with the Cys placed in close proximity to PorK Cys356, suggesting potential for disulphide bond formation (Fig.4A). The structure of PorKN derived from the cryo-EM analysis confirmed the location of the PorK Cys356and its availability for creating a disulphide bond with PorG.

AAlphaFold3 model of PorG (green)-PorK(pink) interaction showing the close proximity of the PorG Cys232and PorK Cys356(circled). Cys residues are shown in ball renderingBSDS-PAGE of purified PorKNG complex electrophoresed under reducing (DTT+) and non-reducing (DTT−) conditions.CMS/MS spectra consistent with a disulphide bond peptide between PorG (230TFCNKQ235) and PorK (355GCFLGNFKPGEGDYTADGHLIPSR378).DSDS-PAGE of purified PorKNG complex under reducing conditions.ECryo-EM images of the PorKN rings showing the purified dual ring structure (NK-KN) in the presence (top panel) and absence of DTT (bottom panel). Scale bars: 50 nm. Source data are provided as aSource Datafile.

To verify the presence of a disulphide bond between PorK and PorG, the purified PorKNG complex sample was analysed by SDS-PAGE under denatured reducing and nonreducing conditions (Fig.4B). There were no obvious differences in the migration profiles of the two prominent protein bands of PorK and PorN under reducing and nonreducing conditions. However, under nonreducing condition the intensity of the PorG (~25 kDa) (band 4) (Fig.4B) decreased significantly and a band at ~90 kDa appeared (band 1) (Fig.4B). This suggested the presence of a disulphide bond between PorG and its associated partner. To investigate which proteins are present in the ~90 kDa band, this protein band, together with the PorK and PorN bands in the nonreducing gel lane, was excised and cut in half. Half of each band was subjected to trypsin digestion in the absence of dithiothreitol (DTT), while the other half was reduced and alkylated before trypsin digestion. The tryptic fragments were analysed by mass spectrometry. Analysis of the band at ~90 kDa identified both PorK and PorG proteins, however, pLink software did not identify any disulphide bonded peptides. Thus, the MS/MS spectra were analysed manually to identify the disulphide bond. PorG only contains one cysteine, Cys232. In the reduced gel band analysis of the ~90 kDa band a PorK peptide containing Cys356was identified “355GCFLGNFKPGEGDYTADGHLIPSR378”. Of note, this peptide was absent in the nonreduced gel analysis of the same band. Thus, we created a table of expected masses containing the PorK peptide “355GCFLGNFKPGEGDYTADGHLIPSR378” combined with four differentially cleaved PorG peptides “230TFCNK234”, “230TFCNKQ235”, “229KTFCNK234” and “229KTFCNKQ235” (Table2). Analysis of the MS1-level spectra accurately identified MS peaks corresponding to the PorK peptide cross-linked to all four of the variant PorG peptides (Table2). Each of these peaks was only found in the nonreduced band, supporting their identity as cross-linked peptides. The assignments were confirmed from multiple MS/MS spectra, from various charge-states with the best spectrum obtained for the crosslinked peptides PorK-355GCFLGNFKPGEGDYTADGHLIPSR378and PorG-229KTFCNKQ235with a parent ion mass of 822.8873 (4+) (Fig.4C). Bioinformatic analysis and BLAST searches of PorG and PorK identified PorG, Cys232and PorK Cys356to be conserved suggesting that the crosslink between these two Cys residues may be a conserved and important feature (Supplementary Fig.6). Since PorG was not resolved in the high-resolution structure of the PorKN rings we determined its stoichiometry by densitometry analysis. Densitometry analysis of coomassie-stained gels of the purified complex estimated ~6–7 PorG molecules per PorKN ring (Supplementary Fig.7).

To investigate a structural role of disulphide bond formation between PorK and PorG, we employed our PorKNG complex purification protocol using reducing conditions at all steps and electrophoresed the purified sample on an SDS-PAGE gel. We identified the PorK and PorN bands, however, the PorG band was not detected (Fig.4D). PorN appeared to be degraded slightly, perhaps due to some protease activity. The PorKN containing complex isolated under reducing conditions was then visualised under cryo-EM to investigate the effect of reduction and the removal of PorG on the structure of the rings. The rings under reducing conditions appeared to be same as the rings without DTT (Fig.4E), and the dual ring structure (NK-KN) was also unaffected. This suggests that once the rings have formed, the removal of PorG does not impact the PorKN ring structure. In the presence of DTT, the PorG is removed, but the dual ring structure stays intact, likely due to the lipid interactions of the PorK lipoprotein. In the absence of DTT PorG is likely to be present in between the lipids and due to its low stoichiometry, is difficult to visualise. This suggests that the artefact of the dual ring formation between the rings is attributable to the lipids in PorK as we had speculated previously22and is not related to the presence of PorG.

To further understand the role of the disulphide bond between PorG and PorK, we mutated PorG Cys232to Ser232. We mutated the Cys232codon ofporGwith the insertion ofermF3’ as a recombinant marker gene, producing the strain designated PorGC232S. As a control, a recombinant cassette in which the Cys232codon was unchanged was also prepared, this strain was named PorGCys-Cys. The control PorGCys-Cysstrain retained a WT like black pigmentation on blood agar, had A-LPS signal above 60 kDa and EDSL was present, indicating the recombination strategy did not affect the function of the T9SS (Fig.5A–C). In contrast, the PorGC232Sstrain was similar to theporGmutant in that it was not pigmented on blood agar (Fig.5A), had no A-LPS signal above 60 kDa in the mAb-1B5 western blot (Fig.5B), and had no EDSL layer (Fig.5C). All these findings indicate that the T9SS is non-functional in the PorGC232Sstrain. To explore if the PorK and PorN were localised to the CE, we prepared CE fractions from WT and PorGC232Smutant. The sample was subjected to Western blot analysis using PorK and PorN antibodies. The immunoblot showed the presence of both PorK and PorN with similar abundances in both WT and PorGC232Smutant (Fig.5D). Next, we investigated if the PorKN rings were formed in the PorGC232Smutant by isolating the complex using our published purification protocol under non-reducing conditions22. The sample was analysed on the gel to assess its purity and the identity of the proteins present (Fig.5E). Both PorK and PorN bands were identified, however, the PorG band was missing on the gel. This suggested that the disulphide bond between PorG and PorK is required for the stable interaction. The sample was then negatively stained and visualised under the electron microscope. The rings were visualised and appeared to be of unaltered size and shape (Fig.5F), thus Cys232of PorG is not essential for PorKN ring formation. Jointly, these results suggest that PorG may play an active role in the mechanism of type IX secretion that is dependent on its disulphide bond to PorK.

AP. gingivalisPorGCys232-Cys, PorGCys232-Serpigmentation on blood agar plates after 7 days of incubation.BCell lysates from WT and the PorGCys-Serwere electrophoresed on an SDS-PAGE gel and the proteins were transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane and probed with mouse monoclonal antibody mAb 1B5 (anti-A-LPS). Coomassie stained gel shows protein load.CCryo-electron micrographs showing the presence of an EDSL (white arrow) on WT and PorGCys-Cysmutants cells and absence in the PorGCys-Sermutant cells.DCell envelope fractions from the WT, PorGCys-Ser, and PorGCys-Cyswere electrophoresed on an SDS-PAGE gel. The proteins were transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane and probed with PorK and PorN antibodies. The Coomassie stained gel shows the protein load.ESDS-PAGE gel of purified PorKN complex from the PorGCys232-Sermutant cells. The protein band observed beneath PorK was identified as PG1881, which co-purified with the complex.FPurified PorKN complex from PorGCys-Serwas negatively stained and visualised by cryo-electron microscopy, showing ring structures. Scale bar: 100 nm. Source data are provided as aSource Datafile.

Recent in-situ structural studies of the T9SS revealed distinct surface densities positioned above the PorKN rings24. Given that PorZ and PorU are known to be localised on the cell surface (Fig.1A), we investigated whether these observed densities could represent components of the Attachment Complexes. Additionally, while the function of the Attachment Complex is well-established, its structural organisation and spatial relationship to other T9SS sub-complexes remain unexplored. Therefore, we investigated whether the Attachment Complexes were associated with the PorKN rings. To address this question, we performed Co-IP with PorZ antibodies using lysates from ABK-,porV,porU, andwbaPmutantP. gingivaliscells. The immunoprecipitated material was quantified by mass spectrometry and MaxQuant relative toporZmutant negative control. The label-free quantitation (LFQ) intensity ratios of the top 30 proteins in the ABK Co-IP were plotted on a heatmap, along with the LFQ intensity ratios for theporV,porU, andwbaPmutants (Fig.6A). ThewbaPmutant lacks A-LPS and, consequently, while possessing a functional T9SS, fails to anchor cargo proteins to the cell surface, resulting in their release into the culture fluid (CF)15. As expected, the other Attachment Complex components PorQ, PorU, and PorV were observed in the pulldown assay with high LFQ intensity ratios (Fig.6A). PorK, PorN, PorG, PorE, PorT, and Sov also exhibited high LFQ intensity ratios (Fig.6A), indicating that their presence in the pulldown assay was specific to the presence of PorZ. The iBAQ metric was used to quantify the relative abundance of proteins in the pulldown. After correction of the iBAQ values using theporZmutant negative control, the values were quantified relative to PorQ. PorZ, PorU, PorQ, and PorV were the most abundant proteins present in the immunoprecipitated material, followed by PorK, PorN, and PorG, consistent with the Attachment Complexes being associated with the PorKN rings and PorG (Fig.6B). The Co-IP using PorZ antibodies was also performed onporV,porUandwbaPmutant cells (Table3). In theporVandporUmutants, PorU and PorV proteins were absent in the immunoprecipitated material as expected, but the PorKN rings and PorG were still present (Table3), suggesting that the PorQZ subcomplex28,38can form in the absence of PorU and PorV and still associate with the PorKN rings and PorG. A-LPS binds to PorZ and is a substrate of PorU29. In thewbaPmutant, which does not express A-LPS, all four components of the attachment complex were enriched together with the components of the PorKN rings and PorG (Table3), indicating that A-LPS was not required for their association. Collectively, this suggests that the Attachment Complex associates directly with the PorKN ring and PorG.

TheP. gingivalisstrain lysates were subjected to coimmunoprecipitation using PorZ-specific antibodies. TheporZmutant was used as a negative control. The immunoprecipitated samples were digested with trypsin, analysed by mass spectrometry, and quantified using MaxQuant software. The ratio of LFQ intensity relative to theporZcontrol was determined.AThe top 30 proteins for (ABK−/porZ) were plotted on a heatmap along with LFQ intensity ratios for the same proteins calculated forporV,porU, andwbaPmutants.BTheporVmutant cells were labelled with PorZ primary antibodies followed by anti-rabbit gold (6 nm) secondary antibodies. TheporZmutant cells were used as a negative control. Cryo-ET was performed on the immunolabeled cells. In cryotomograms, PorKN rings were observed directly underneath the gold clusters. White arrows point to gold clusters and the yellow arrows point to the PorKN rings. Scale bars: 50 nm.CA cartoon representation of the PorKN rings connected to PorM (M) on the periplasmic side, and to the outer membrane (OM) β-barrels, including PorG (G), PorQ-PorZ (Q, Z), and PorV-PorU (V, U) on the OM side.DA schematic illustrating the proposed mechanism of the T9SS secretion and the attachment of cargo proteins to the cell surface. The rotary movement of PorM causes the PorKN ring and its associated proteins (PorG and attachment complexes) to rotate along with it. The Sov-PorV-cargo is positioned adjacent to the PorKN rings, held in place by the transient interaction between PorW and PorN. As PorG rotates, it provides the energy to push the PorV-cargo out of the Sov translocon and place it next to the attachment complex for sortase (PorU) reaction and anchorage to the cell surface via A-LPS. Source data are provided as aSource Datafile.

To validate this finding and investigate if multiple Attachment Complexes were co-located and are above the PorKN rings in vivo,porVmutant cells were labelled with anti-PorZ and secondary antibodies conjugated to gold and imaged by cryo-electron tomography (cryo-ET). TheporVmutant was selected for this work because it lacks an EDSL, providing better access of the antibodies to the PorZ antigen. From 62 tomograms ofporV- cells we observed an average of 4 clusters of gold particles per cell. Within each cluster were up to 4 gold particles and tomogram sections showed the PorKN rings directly beneath the gold clusters (Fig.6Band Supplementary Movie1). In comparison, nanogold cryo-ET on aporZmutant only showed a small number of labelled cells relative to theporVmutant, indicating the specificity of the PorZ antibodies. Together, these results indicate that multiple Attachment Complexes are co-located directly above the PorKN rings.

The T9SS inP. gingivalisis comprised of at least 20 proteins. We previously showed that the PorK and PorN components of the T9SS form large 50 nm ring-shaped structures, which are intimately associated with PorG22. The exact role of these rings in the mechanistic function of the T9SS is unknown. We proposed that the large PorKN rings create a diffusion barrier that retains all the T9SS components within the ring to promote efficient and coordinated protein secretion and cell surface attachment39. The PorKN ring makes a direct contact with the PorL/M motor24that powers the T9SS, therefore, the ring is also presumably involved in distributing the energy23.

The high-resolution structure of the PorKN rings presented here reveals that PorK forms a core domain resembling a formylglycine-generating enzyme (FGE). These enzymes catalyse the conversion of a protein cysteine to a protein formylglycine via a proposed copper oxidase mechanism31. The two Cys residues in the FGE active site are missing in PorK, indicating that it cannot perform this function. The PorK-specific portion is inserted within the FGE sequence between residue 103 and 261 and is located on the outer side of each subunit, forming the outer rim and the interlocking wedge that fits snuggly within the adjacent PorK subunits. Hence, one of the functions of the PorK-specific appendage appears to be ring formation. The ring structures in other secretion systems either assemble around a solid core or possess intrinsic properties that facilitate self-assembly. For instance, FliF of Flagella motor self-assembles to form the MS-ring in the inner membrane40,41. Since there is no solid core present in the T9SS, PorK may possess intrinsic properties that enable it to self-assemble and form a ring structure in the periplasm.

MS analysis showed that theO-glycosylation sites of PorK and PorN were glycosylated with full length glycans (7 sugars), however in the structure, only the first sugar was resolved at PorK Ser68. No sugars were resolved for the two identified glycosylation sites in PorN. The resolution of the structure was not sufficient to resolve the isomeric conformations of the sugars. Presumably, the hidden sugars were not visible due to having high flexibility. The visible sugars participated in multiple hydrogen bonds to different parts of the protein sequence, potentially contributing to the stability of the structure. The role ofO-glycans on PorK and PorN is unclear, however, SprE, a homologue of PorW inP. gingivalis, was also found to beO-glycosylated, and this glycosylation was essential for its stability27. We therefore predict a similar role forO-glycosylation in PorK and PorN.

The structure of PorN was similar to the published crystal structure42(RMSD: 1.112), with the following notable exceptions (Supplementary Fig.2C). The “cog” was displaced by ~13 Å, and the N-terminal segment (Leu50-Asn67) as well as the C-terminal segment (Arg263-Lys303) were resolved here. PorN binds deeply within a cavity produced by two PorK subunits, suggesting that in the ring assembly process, PorK multimerization (at least dimer) may precede the incorporation of PorN subunits. The stability of the PorKN interaction is underscored computationally with a very low estimated Kd, and experimentally by the ability of the PorKN rings to withstand the harsh purification protocol, including overnight centrifugation in 30% w/v CsCl and short periods in 0.5% DDM, 500 mM NaCl and 1 M urea. Together, these data indicate a solid ring under physiological conditions. The cog-like projections of PorN in the periplasm suggest a mechanism by which the PorLM motor could transfer its rotational energy. AlphaFold modelling of PorM with PorN positioned PorM between the cog-like projections of PorN. Since PorLM motors have been proposed to exhibit rotary movement23, the rotation of PorM rotors interlocked with PorN cogs would cause the whole PorKN ring to rotate.

PorG co-purifies with the PorKN rings, and we found it to associate with PorK via a disulphide bond between conserved cysteine residues. The inability to resolve PorG in the structure may be due to its low stoichiometry, small size and/or flexibility. Disruption of the disulphide bond made the T9SS non-functional, however, the rings now comprising only PorK and PorN appeared similar in structure to the native PorKN rings. This suggests that the disulphide bond with PorG plays a crucial mechanistic role in the function of the T9SS rather than in the assembly of the PorKN rings. PorG has three periplasmic loops. Two of these are the more common short loops of 3–5 aa that are modelled to be buried amongst the hydrophilic phospholipid head-groups, but one loop, Ser121-Arg131and the C-terminal extension are long enough to traverse the gap and interact with the surface of PorK. The model predicts PorG to be located on the inside edge of PorK. This location is supported by our previously observed Lys-Lys crosslinks between the periplasmic loop of PorG (Lys125) and Lys480and Lys483of PorK22, with a modelled distance of only 7 Å and 15 Å, respectively.

We also demonstrate that the Attachment Complex, consisting of PorU, PorV, PorQ, and PorZ, associates with the PorKN rings. Using immunogold and cryo-ET, we show that this complex is co-located directly above the PorKN rings. Recently, Song et al. solved a low-resolution in-situ structure of theP. gingivalisT9SS24. An 8-fold symmetry ring of cell surface densities was observed directly above the PorKN periplasmic rings. Based on the observation that these surface densities disappeared in asovmutant, the authors proposed that the surface densities were individual Sov subunits. Interestingly, the densities were also absent inporLandporMmutants24. Our data however, show that Sov is properly located in the OM inporLandporMmutants maintaining its functional interaction network including PorV, PorW, PorK and PorN (Supplementary Fig.8). Similarly, a recent study showed that SprA, the Sov orthologue inF. johnsoniae, maintains its complex with PorV and SprE (PorW orthologue) in thegldL(porL)mutant27. Therefore, if the surface densities observed in the in-situ structure by Song et al. were Sov, then those densities shouldn’t disappear in theporLmutant. These results suggest that the cell surface rings are unlikely to be the Sov translocons alone. PorU and PorZ of the Attachment Complexes are also T9SS cargo proteins that cannot be secreted to the cell surface in any T9SS component mutants, such assov,porLandporM, and therefore it is likely that the observed cell surface densities include the Attachment Complexes, which are of similar overall dimensions to Sov.

Collectively, based on our results, we propose the following. PorG OMPs are symmetrically arranged on top of the flat PorK ring surface, secured firmly via disulphide bond linkages with the PorK subunits. The OM β- barrels PorQ (bound to PorZ) and PorV (bound to PorU) are also positioned above PorK monomers in close proximity to PorG (Fig.6C). The rotation of the PorKN rings would cause the tethered PorGs and the associated Attachment Complexes to also rotate. Recently, it was proposed that energy is needed to detach cargo bound PorV from the Sov translocon27. The loaded Sov-PorV-cargo complex is likely to be positioned near the ring via dynamic interaction with the Sov/PorN bridging protein PorW26leading to our proposed model of T9SS secretion and attachment inP. gingivalis(Fig.6D).

In the model the energy of rotation provided by the T9SS PorLM motors is conveyed to the PorKN rings. The bent PorM rotors fit into the PorN cogs to drive the rotation of the ring along with the disulphide-bonded PorG and associated Attachment Complexes. With Sov in close proximity to the rotating ring, it positions the PorV-cargo in the path of the rotating PorG. When the PorG and Attachment Complexes are driven past Sov-PorV, PorG dislodges PorV, pushing it away from Sov, and simultaneously pulling the cargo through Sov’s lateral gate, thereby completing secretion (Fig.6D). The extracted PorV-cargo complex may then bind to the Attachment Complex, also rotating past, leading to PorU-catalysed CTD cleavage and A-LPS attachment of the cargo. This represents an efficient and coordinated model of secretion and attachment, since the cargo substrates would be transferred directly from Sov to the Attachment Complexes by the action of PorG, rather than utilising the less efficient shuttle model that we previously suggested8,28. Our previous data can nevertheless be explained, whereby in the absence of PorU or PorZ of the Attachment Complexes, the PorV cargo complexes accumulate28. In these mutants, PorG can presumably still function to extract the PorV-cargo complexes from Sov, but without functional Attachment Complexes, the PorV-cargo cannot be processed and therefore accumulate. The model also allows for one or more Sov translocons per ring.

While our study provides insights into the structure of the PorKN ring as a potential cogwheel, it is limited by the lack of direct evidence of rotational movement. Hence our future work will focus on targeted mutagenesis of key residues at the PorK-PorN interface and PorN-PorM interface as well as demonstrating rotation of the PorKN cogwheel with PorG attached to validate our model of T9SS cargo protein secretion. In conclusion, we present a high-resolution structure of the T9SS PorKN rings and demonstrate a close association with other components of the T9SS, in particular PorG and the Attachment Complexes. Based on this ring structure and association, we propose that the PorLM motor drives the rotation of the PorKN cogwheel in the periplasm together with the OM PorG and associated Attachment Complexes, providing the energy to complete protein secretion and the coordinated cell surface attachment of the secreted cargo. The movement of PorG and the Attachment Complexes rotationally through the OM, driven by rotating periplasmic cog wheels of a protein nanomachine, implies a paradigm shift from the widely considered rigid OM theory to one of fluidity. These findings provide insights into the molecular mechanism of T9SS secretion and attachment inP. gingivalis.

P. gingivalisstrains were grown on solid medium (TSBHI agar) containing trypticase soy agar (40 g/L), brain heart infusion (5 g/L), 5% (v/v) lysed defibrinated horse blood, cysteine hydrochloride (0.5 g/L), hemin (5 mg/L) and menadione (5 µg/mL) or in TSBHI broth (25 g/L tryptic soy, 30 g/L brain heart infusion, 0.5 g/L cysteine hydrochloride, 5 mg/L haemin and 1 mg/L menadione) under anaerobic conditions as described previously43,44. The appropriate antibiotic was included in the media to select for the relevant antibiotic marker of the strain, but omitted in the final harvested liquid culture.

TheporGdeletion mutant in the W50 strain was generated by double cross-over recombination using the suicide plasmid pΔPorG-ermF that contained upstream and downstream regions ofporG(pg0189) directionally cloned adjacent to an erythromycin resistance cassette (ermF). The upstream and downstream regions ofporGwere amplified by PCR using W50 genomic DNA as a template and the following primer pairs: Upstream-F (ACGCGCATGCCCACAGAACAAGCCGAAGGTATAA (SphI site underlined)/ Upstream-R (ACGCCCATGGTGAGCAGCTATCCGGCCGTTAC) (NcoI site underlined) and Downstream-F (ACGCCTGCAGGGATGCGCTGACGGATAAAAGTG) (PstI site underlined)/ Downstream-R (ACGCATGCATACCATCCATGACCAAAGCGATATG) (NsiI site underlined). The PCR amplicons were digested with the appropriate restriction endonucleases and sequentially cloned upstream and downstream ofermFin pAL3045. Once the sequence integrity of the cloned DNA was confirmed pΔPorG-ermF was linearised using NsiI and electroporated intoP.gingivalisW50 with transformants selected on TSBHI agar plates supplemented with 10 mg/L of erythromycin. The correct homologous recombination of transformants was verified using PCR with primer pair TACTATTATGCCACAGAAC and GACAACCACCCGACTTTGAA. The absence of PorG protein was verified by mass spectrometry.

To construct theporGcomplementation plasmid, pKD713-PstI that contains a recombinant cassette of thefimAneighbouring gene regions and thetetQgene selection marker (a gift from Dr Mikio Shoji) was utilised. DNA spanning from a 3′ region of thepg0188locus toporGwas PCR-amplified using primers -ACGCCTGCAGCCATGGTTTGGCCACAGGGAA and - ACGCCTGCAGGCACTATAACTGCTGACTGGAG (PstI site underlined). The amplicon was cloned into the pKD713-PstI through PstI digestion and ligation to create pKD713-PorG. Once it was verified that the cloned DNA sequence was correct, pKD713-PorG was linearised using NotI and introduced into theporGmutant cells by electroporation and plated on TSBHI agar supplemented with 1 mg/L tetracycline to select complementation clones. Insertion ofporGinto thefimAlocus was verified by genomic PCR using primers corresponding toporG, the tetracycline resistance gene (tetQ) and thepg2133locus.

A series of PCR and SOE-PCR reactions were conducted to producepg0189Cys232Ser codon mutation and non-mutated control recombination cassettes. Thepg0188open reading frame 3’ overlaps the 5’ of thepg0189open reading frame by 14 nucleotides, so the recombination markerermFwas placed 3’ topg0189to not disrupt the putative operon. Template DNAs were pAL3045(PCR-1) orP. gingivalisW50 genomic DNA (PCR-2, PCR-3 and PCR-4). PCR-1 used primers ermFprom_for (GATAGCTTCCGCTATTGCTT) and ermF-Rev (GACAACCACCCGACTTTGAA) to produceermFwith theermFpromoter. The PCR-2 amplicon used a forward primer with a fusion of ermF 5’ andpg0189-pg0190intergenic nucleotides. The PCR-2 primers were ermF_pg0190_For,AAGCAATAGCGGAAGCTATCCCTCGAAACATTCTAAGGGAAT (ermFnucleotides underlined) and a reverse primer that annealed withinpg0190, Reverse_3_PstI, ACGCCTGCAGCTTCCGGACGATTCCAATTCT (PstI site underlined). PCR-3 and PCR-4 used forward primer that annealed topg0189, Forward Oli_1_SphI (ACGCGCATGCGGCCGGGTTGTCTTTGGGTT, SphI site underlined) and respective reverse primers that annealed topg0189and had anermFtag at 5’ (underlined below), Reverse-1A-WT (TTCAAAGTCGGGTGGTTGTCCCCTATTGTTTATTACAAAAAGTC) and Reverse-1B-Ser (TTCAAAGTCGGGTGGTTGTCCCCTATTGTTTATTACTAAAAGTC). PCR-1 and PCR-2 were denatured and annealed by the homologous nucleotides, extended, then amplified with external primers ermF-Rev and Reverse_3_PstI to produce SOE-1 product. SOE-1 and either PCR-3 or PCR-4 were denatured and annealed, extended, then amplified with external primers Forward Oli_1_SphI and Reverse_3_PstI to produce SOE-2 and SOE-3, respectively. SOE-2 and SOE-3 were digested using SphI and PstI and ligated to the pAL30 vector. After verification of the fidelity of the inserted DNA by sequencing, the plasmid was digested with SacI and transformed intoP. gingivalisW50 by electroporation. Erythromycin-resistant transformants were selected from TSBHI agar plates, and correct integration into the genome was determined using PCR with primer pair Forward Check (GCGGATTTTAAGGTCGGCTT) and Reverse-Check (AGCATCTCATTCATGATAGC).

Arg- and Lys-specific proteolytic activity was determined using the synthetic chromogenic substrates N-benzoyl-DL-arginine-4-nitroanilide hydrochloride (BapNA) and N-(p-tosyl)-Gly-Pro-Lys 4-nitroanilide acetate salt (GPKNA) (Sigma Aldrich), respectively. Briefly,P. gingivalisin broth culture were pelleted at 8000 g for 10 min then resuspended in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 5 mM CaCl2and 150 mM NaCl. The supernatant (culture fluid, CF) containing vesicles were also collected. Assays were conducted in 96-well microtiter plates with 5.6 × 106cells or 140 µL of CF per well to which a final concentration of 20 mM L-cysteine, pH 8.0 was added. After the mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 10 min, a final concentration of 1 mM substrate (BapNA or GPKNA) was added to it and substrate cleavage was determined by measuring the absorbance at 405 nm at 10 s intervals for ~60 min at 37 °C using a PerkinElmer 1420 Multilabel Counter VICTOR3™. For CF activity assay, 140 µL of each sample was used instead of the cells.

Protein samples were mixed with SDS- loading dye and analysed on NuPAGE Bis-Tris precast gels electrophoresed using MOPS SDS running buffer. The gels were stained overnight with 0.1% w/v Coomassie Blue G-250 in 17% w/v ammonium sulphate, 34% v/v methanol and 3% v/v o-phosphoric acid. For western blotting, protein samples were resolved on SDS-PAGE gels and transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane. The membrane was blocked with 5% skim milk powder in PBS-tween (0.05% (v/v) Tween-20 in PBS). The membranes were probed with mAb-1B5 (a kind gift from Professor M.A Curtis), PorK or PorN primary antibodies followed by goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit HRP conjugated secondary antibodies. The signal was developed using SuperSignal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate and visualised with a LAS-3000 imaging system. For an example of presentation of full scan blots, see theSource Datafile.

The cell envelope was prepared as described in Glew et al.43. Briefly,P. gingivaliscells were washed and resuspended in 0.5× PBS, 5 mM MgCl2in a 50 mL tube and placed in a beaker containing an ice/water mixture and sonicated using an ultrasonic processor (model CPX 750, Cole Parmer) fitted with a 6.5 mm tapered microtip. The amplitude was set to 40%, pulser to 1 s on, 2 s off for a total of 30 min. The CE was collected by centrifugation at 48,400gfor 20 min and washed in 1× PBS before storing in −80 °C for further analysis.

Blue native PAGE immunoblot and Co-IP were conducted using cell lysates in buffers containing 1% DDM as described by Gorasia et al.17,26,38.

PorKNG complexes were purified as per our published protocol22. For the complex preparation under reducing conditions, 5 mM DTT was added to the cell lysate and 1 mM DTT in all the subsequent steps. For the cryo-EM single particle analysis, 1 M urea was added to the purified sample immediately before application to the EM grid.

For the crude preparation, theP.gingivaliscells (ABK- (P. gingivaliscells lacking gingipains) andporGmutant) were lysed and digested with lysozyme as per our published protocol22and the pelleted complexes were resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCL, pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 1% DDM and 5 mM EDTA. Following centrifugation at 17,000gfor 10 min, the resulting supernatant was layered on a 30% sucrose cushion and centrifuged at 104,677gfor 2 h at 4 °C in a TLS-55 rotor (Beckman Coulter). The pellet was resuspended in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl and 0.5% DDM and stored at 4 °C.

For negative staining of protein complexes samples were adsorbed onto glow discharged Formvar-carbon films supported on 400 mesh copper grids. Samples were negatively stained with aqueous uranyl acetate and viewed under an FEI Tecnai F30 operated at 200 kV equipped with a CETA 4kx4k camera (FEI, NL). Micrographs were obtained under low-dose conditions (~20 e−/Å2) with defocus values of ~2 μm. For cryo-electron microscopy of protein complexes andP.gingivaliscells, samples were applied onto a glow discharged Quantifoil (respectively R1.2/1.3 and R3.5/1) holey carbon film mounted on a 200 mesh copper grid. The grid was blotted for 4 s with a blot force of −1 using a Vitrobot Mark IV (Thermo Fisher Scientific) set to 22 °C and 100% humidity and plunge frozen into liquid ethane. For cells, transmission electron microscopy was carried out under cryogenic conditions using a FEI Tecnai F30 operated as described above. Micrographs were obtained under low-dose conditions (~25 e−/Å2) with defocus values of ~2 μm. For protein complex, 1 M urea was added to the complex to limit strong self-aggregation and cryo-EM data collection was carried out on a Titan Krios G4 cryo-electron microscope equipped with a K3 detector and a BioQuantum imaging filter (Gatan) at 300 kV in counting mode. Movie stacks were collected at a nominal magnification of 64,000×, a pixel size of 1.32 Å, and a defocus of −0.6 to −2 μm with a fluency of 13.5 e−/pixel/s. Each movie was a result of 5.34 s exposures with a total accumulated electron exposure of 54 e−/Å2which were fractioned into 40 frames. Automated data collection in AFIS mode was performed using EPU (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An energy filter slit width of 10 eV and a 50 μm C2 condenser aperture were used during imaging.

Movies were collected (8909), motion-corrected and CTF fitted using CryoSPARC Patch motion correction and Patch CTF jobs46. Manual picking was used to pick ~200 particles, subject them to class average with 3 classes corresponding to top, side and tilted views. Picking using these templates yielded 556,522 initial particles from which 121,937 final particles were selected using two rounds of 2D classification. Ab initio modelling with 50,000 particles was carried out and output 4 model. The top two models were used in heterogeneous refinement with the 121,937 particles. 77,661 particles were selected and subjected to homogenous refinement in C1 then C2. Symmetry expansion and subtraction on one of the ring was carried out. The resulting particles were subjected to C1 homogenous refinement and 3D classification in C1, 47.3% resulted in a map with 33 repeats and 52.3% in a ring with 32 repeats. Both maps were subjected to C1 refinement then respectively C33 and C32 refinement. Particles were further cleaned up with a round of 2D classes and a final round of local refinement (masking the detergent) was carried out in respectively C33 (3.57 Å, EMD-48741) [https://www.ebi.ac.uk/emdb/EMD-48741] and C32 (3.63 Å, EMD-48722) [https://www.ebi.ac.uk/emdb/EMD-48722].

Initial model of PorK and PorN were generated using Alpha Fold3 with three copies as a hexamer (three copies of the PorK-N dimer) and fitted to the experimental map with manual modification in Coot47and real space refinement with Phenix48with statistics reported for the central dimer of the modelled hexamer (Supplementary Table1). Complete PorKN ring models were generated by duplication of the refined dimer structure using C33 symmetry (PDB: 9MYJ).

PorZ antibodies were generated by Genscript against amino acid residues 29-776 ofP. gingivalisPorZ.P. gingivaliscells were labelled with PorZ antibodies as detailed in Chen et al.44with the following modifications. PorZ antibodies were used at a concentration of 30 µg/mL, and three washes were included after the incubation with anti-rabbit secondary gold (6 nm) antibody. The immunogold-treated positive and appropriate negative control samples were vitrified using a Vitrobot Mark IV (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 4 μL of the sample was pipetted on a glow discharged Quantifoil extra thick copper EM-grids (R2/2 200 mesh, Electron Microscopy Sciences). The excess liquid was blotted (blot force 7, blot time 7 s) using a Whatman filter paper and plunge frozen into liquid ethane.

Data was collected on Titan Krios G4, 300 keV FEG cryo transmission electron microscope, equipped with a Gatan K3 direct electron detector equipped with an energy filter set to 20 eV. The tilt series was acquired in movie mode from −60° to +60° at 3° intervals with a total electron dose of 120 e−/Å2, defocus of −8 μm and a pixel size of 3.4 Å. Subsequently, tilt series were aligned using IMOD (Version 4.11.5)49. The 2 K binned micrographs were reconstructed into 500 nm thick 1 K SIRT tomograms by Tomo3D (Version 2.2)50.

In-gel digestions and LC-MS/MS analysis were performed as essentially described in refs.15,22,26. Relative abundances of proteins were quantified by MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30)51. Raw MS/MS files were searched against theP. gingivalisW83 or ATCC 33277 database. The default MaxQuant parameters were used, except the LFQ minimum ratio count was set to 1 and the match between runs was selected. MaxQuant normalised the data set as part of data processing.

To identify the disulphide bond, raw MS/MS files were analysed using pLink software and manually reviewed to detect the disulphide linkage between PorG and PorK.

To identify glycosylation sites on PorK and PorN, the purified PorKNG complex was electrophoresed on an SDS-PAGE gel. The bands corresponding to PorK and PorN were subjected to trypsin digestion and the tryptic fragments analysed as essentially described in ref.32. Proteins and peptides were identified using Mascot software. All searches were conducted using trypsin with up to two missed cleavages allowed, peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance to 0.04 Da, and a fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications of oxidation (M), 792.25 (S, T), 1352.42 (S, T), 1394.42 (S, T) and 1436.43 (S, T).

Gene cluster analysis was performed using the Kegg SSDB gene cluster tool, accessible fromhttps://www.genome.jp/kegg/genes.html, using default parameters (gap size = 0; Threshold = 100).

Model structures for various components of T9SS and their complexes were generated using AlphaFold3 through the AlphaFold3 server interface30. Where necessary, membrane effects on proteins during model building were simulated by the inclusion of multiple copies (usually 100) of myristic acid in the modelling process. Full membrane complexes were generated for protein models using the OPM52and CHARMM-GUI53,54servers. Interfacial energies in protein-protein complexes were predicted using the PRODIGY server55,56using default settings other than the temperature, which was set to 37 °C.

All results presented in the paper are representative with similar data obtained for at least three biological replicates unless otherwise specified. Data were analysed using a two-tailed unpaired Student’sttest to compare means between two groups. Differences were considered statistically significant atp< 0.05.

Further information on research design is available in theNature Portfolio Reporting Summarylinked to this article.

This work was supported by the Australian Government, Department of Industry, Innovation and Science (Grant ID: 20080108), E.C.R., the Australian National Health and Medical Research Council (Grant IDs: 1193647, 1123866 and APP1196924), E.C.R. and D.G. the Australian Research Council (Grant ID: DP200100914), E.C.R. and the Australian Dental Research Foundation (Grant ID: 492-2019), D.G.G. and a Cumming Global Centre for Pandemic Therapeutics, Foundation Grant, D.G. We acknowledge the use of the Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility and the Ian Holmes Imaging Centre both at the Bio21 Institute, The University of Melbourne, Australia.