Hybrid bacterial cellulose (BC)-calcium phosphate apatite
(Ap)
composite was successfully synthesized via the sitting drop vapor
diffusion crystallization method. The BC matrix was produced using
the bacterial strainKomagataeibactersp. SU12 cultured
in a medium derived from mango juice waste, underscoring a sustainable
strategy for biopolymer production. The resulting BC-Ap composite
exhibited plate-like apatite crystals, as confirmed by X-ray diffraction
analyses, which were heterogeneously distributed on the BC matrix
and coupled to the nanocellulose surface fibers. An increase in mineral
content in the BC-Ap composites over the experimental reaction times
(1–15 days) was observed by thermogravimetry analyses. Spectroscopic
analyses confirmed the presence of characteristic BC functional groups
(e.g., hydroxyl and carboxylate), and the vibrational modes associated
with phosphate (ν1–ν4of
PO43–), corroborating the formation of
apatite within the BC–Ap material. These findings suggest that
the vapor diffusion crystallization method is an effective approach
for the controlled mineralization of BC nanofibers with nanocrystalline
apatite, yielding a bioinspired material with promising potential
application in bone tissue engineering. Additionally, the use of mango-processing
waste as a carbon source for BC production offers a sustainable and
cost-efficient alternative, supporting the advancement of green technology
and biocompatible routes for material design.

Hydroxyapatite (HAp; Ca10(PO4)6(OH)2) crystallization holds significant importance in
several biomineralization processes and biomaterial engineering. HAp
is the most abundant inorganic component of mineralized tissues (e.g.,
bone and teeth). In bone, the HAp shows distinctive structural features,
comprising nanoscale platelets interwoven with an organic matrix composed
mainly of collagen, noncollagenous proteins, and small organic molecules
such as citrate.−To resemble bone or tooth structures, synthetic apatite
should replicate the morphological and crystalline properties of biological
HAp, evolving nano or micrometer-sized crystals, and proper orientation.,Moreover, the chemical composition should also reflect the Ca/P
ratios of the biological HAp incorporating CO32–that partially replace OH–and PO43–groups, and metal ions such as Mg2+in
atomic positions of Ca2+in the case of bone HAp. In addition, the chemical stability of synthetic
apatite-based materials at different pH levels and temperature ranges
is crucial, along with porosity and density, to facilitate tissue
integration.

Hybrid materials composed
of BC-HAp have demonstrated potential
capabilities for several industrial and technological applications. Previous research has investigated the use of
BC-HAp scaffolds for various biomedical applications, including wound
dressing, tissue engineering, vascular stents, and bone grafts.,,This biohybrid material offers
high biocompatibility with calcified tissues, stability under physiological
conditions, and an enhanced ability to stimulate osseointegration.
Recent studies have shown the effectiveness of the BC-HAp composites
in supporting bone cell adhesion, proliferation, and migration, which
are crucial features for bone healing and regeneration.,On the other hand, for successful tissue integration, these BC-HAp
composites must exhibit appropriate biodegradability, porosity and
structure to facilitate cellular infiltration and nutrient exchange.,Additionally, these materials must also provide sufficient mechanical
strength to withstand specific physiological loads associated with
each tissue function.,,Such functionalized biopolymer-apatite composites have demonstrated
significant potential in guided bone regeneration, serving as scaffolds
or membranes that facilitate bone formation while preventing soft
tissue infiltration.

Synthetic polymers are widely used to provide versatility
and strength
to materials. However, these polymers have significant drawbacks,
including substantial environmental impact and the release of toxic
substances during production and usage. In contrast, cellulose-mineral composites are gaining popularity
in various industries due to their distinctive properties, such as
nontoxicity, high biocompatibility, reduced environmental footprint,
and potential long-term cost reduction. For example, cellulose-silica composites combine the biodegradability
and flexibility of organic cellulose with the thermal stability and
mechanical strength of inorganic silica,,making them ideal for various applications like thermal and acoustic
insulation. Other materials, such as
cellulose-zeolite composite, exhibit enhanced biodegradability and
mechanical strength due to the organic substrate features, while zeolite
improves metal removal efficiency through its high adsorption and
ion exchange capacities. These overall
properties lead to improved performance in advanced filtration systems
and technological applications requiring high removal effectiveness.

This study explores the use of bacterial cellulose (BC) as an organic
template for the controlled precipitation of calcium phosphate (CaP)
using the SDVD crystallization method. For this purpose, BC membranes
were synthesized fromKomagataeibactersp. SU12 (bacterial
strain isolated from kombucha tea), utilizing plant waste extract
from as a culture
medium (i.e., carbon-rich source). This approach may help reduce environmental
impact by recycling agricultural waste generated during food production,
while also establishing biocompatible pathways for novel material
design. Thus, the current study has two main objectives: (1) to evaluate
the effectiveness of the SDVD crystallization method in controlling
mineral deposition on bacterial cellulose nanofibers, and (2) to characterize
the key physicochemical, morphological, and microstructural properties
of the resulting BC–CaP composite, with potential relevance
for different applications, such as guided bone regeneration.

The bacterial cellulose (BC) was synthesized using theKomagataeibactersp. SU12 strain, isolated from kombucha tea at the Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, National University
of San Marcos (Lima, Peru). The mango pulp ( var. Edward) was processed using an electric
blender, and centrifugation at 45 Relative Centrifugal Force (RCF)
and 25 °C for 10 min. The supernatant, referred to as mango extract
(ME), was collected and autoclaved at 121 °C for 3 min at 15
psi. Reducing sugar concentration in the ME was quantified using the
3,5-dinitrosalicylic acid assay, with
a glucose standard curve (R2= 0.99).
The total reducing sugar concentration in the ME was adjusted to 2.0%
(w/v) for use as a carbon source in the cultivation medium. The ME
medium also contained 0.5% yeast extract (Oxoid, UK), 0.5% peptone
(Gibco, USA), 0.27% Na2HPO4(J.T. Baker, Mexico),
and 0.115% citric acid (Amresco, USA). The pH of the medium was adjusted
to 6.0 using 0.1 M NaOH solution and was subsequently autoclaved at
121 °C for 15 min at 15 psi. Reactivation ofKomagataeibactersp. SU12 was carried out by transferring a colony to HS medium prepared in 250 mL flasks containing 50 mL of
medium. The strain was incubated at 2 RCF and 30 °C for 48 h.,Subsequently, 10% (v/v) of the reactivated culture was inoculated
into 500 mL of ME medium in a 2 L flask. Cultivation was conducted
under static conditions at 30 °C for 7 days. The BC film formed
at the air-medium interface was harvested, immersed in a 0.1 M NaOH
solution (pH ≈ 13), and incubated at 50 °C for 6 h to
remove impurities. The BC was then washed with distilled water until
a neutral pH was achieved. Finally, the purified BC film was dried
at 40 °C for 24 h and stored in a moisture-free environment until
used in crystallization experiments.

BC round
pieces (Ø 8 mm) were sectioned from the previously obtained film
using a biopsy punch (Kai Medical, Japan). The SDVD crystallization
experiments were performed in “crystallization mushrooms”
(Triana Sci. & Tech., Spain), which consist of a glass microreactor
device with two cylindrical glass chambers connected through a Ø
6 mm hole. The BC pieces were placed in the upper chamber and 40 μL
droplets, consisting of 20 μL of 50 mM Ca­(CH3COO)2and 20 μL of 30 mM (NH4)2HPO4solutions, were deposited on them covering the full surfaces.
The Ca/P ratio in the mixed solutions was set at 5:3 (∼1.67).
Then, 3 mL of 40 mM NH4HCO3solution was deposited
in the lower chamber (reservoir) and the mushrooms were sealed with
a top cap using high-vacuum silicone grease (Dow Corning, USA). The
concentration of reagents was chosen based on previous work. The pH was measured with a pH probe (Titan model,
Sentron, The Netherlands). The crystallization experiments were conducted
at 1, 3, 5, 7, and 15-days, at ambient conditions (room temperature
∼25 °C and ∼1 atm). All reagents were supplied
by Sigma-Aldrich (>99.00% pure, St. Louis, MO, USA), and solutions
were prepared using ultrapure Milli-Q water (0.22 μS, 25 °C,
Millipore, Burlington, MA, USA).

For scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
observations, samples were Au-coated (Balzers SCD 004) and examined
using Quanta 650F and JEOL JSM-5600 microscopes. Semiquantitative
chemical analysis was performed by energy-dispersive X-ray microanalysis
(EDX) using a Bruker xFlash 6/30 detector. The acceleration voltage
was set between 5 and 20 kV for the image acquisition. High-resolution
images (HR-SEM) were acquired using a field-emission SEM microscope
(FESEM) Zeiss Auriga (Carl Zeiss SMT Jena, Germany) operated at an
acceleration voltage of 3 kV, high vacuum (∼10–4mbar), a working distance of 4 mm, and an aperture of 30 μm.
All samples for HR-SEM observations were previously Au-coated (Emitech
K975X). The crystal dimensions (length and width) were obtained from
SEM images using the ImageJ software.

Two-dimensional X-ray
diffraction (2D-XRD) patterns were acquired using an X-ray diffractometer
(Bruker D8 DISCOVER; Billerica, MA, USA) equipped with an area detector
(DECTRIS PILATUS 3100 K-A; Baden, Switzerland). The XRD experimental
conditions were CuKα (λ = 1.5406 Å) radiation at
50 kV and 30 mA, with a pinhole diameter collimator of 0.5 mm. The
2D-XRD patterns were registered within the 2θ scanning angle
range from 8 to 50°, considering 0.02° 2θ steps and
40 s/step. The intensities concentrated in arcs within the Debye diffraction
rings (corresponding to specificd-spacings) were
integrated to obtain a unidimensional scan (i.e., 2θ pattern).

Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy analyses were conducted
using a JASCO 6200 spectrometer (JASCO, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with
an attenuated total reflectance (ATR) diamond crystal accessory. Spectra
were collected at a resolution of 2 cm–1with 124
accumulations over a spectral range of 400–4000 cm–1. Additionally, Raman spectroscopic characterization was performed
with a JASCO NRS-5100 Micro-Raman spectrometer (JASCO, Tokyo, Japan)
covering a spectral range of 300–1800 cm–1, with a 20 s exposure time and 5 scans accumulations, maintaining
an average spectral resolution of 1.6 cm–1. The
excitation was provided by a diode laser (λexc.=
785 nm) coupled with a Peltier-cooled charge-coupled device (CCD:
1064 × 256 pixels dimension). The instrument was calibrated using
a silicon standard (reference position at 520 cm–1) before data acquisition.

Thermogravimetric analyses (TGA-DSC3+,
Mettler Toledo, Columbus,
OH, USA) were performed under air between 25 and 900 °C at a
heating rate of 10 °C/min. Three samples were analyzed for each
experimental reaction time to determine the residual mass at the end
of the runs.

Bacterial cellulose (BC) exhibits several distinctive properties,
including an ultrafine nanofiber network with a complex architecture,
high mechanical strength, in situ moldability and flexibility, and
chemical purity (free of lignin and hemicellulose), which differentiate
it from other forms of plant cellulose. The genusKomagataeibacterused is particularly noted for its exceptional cellulose-producing
capacity. However, the high cost of the
carbon sources for cellulose production poses a significant challenge. The current study proposes a mango waste-based
medium ( var. Edward)
to address this issue. This strategy reduces production costs and
utilizes a sustainable resource, contributing to a more cost-effective
and environmentally friendly solution for BC manufacturing.

In our research, BC membranes were synthesized using the activity
ofKomagataeibactersp. SU12, which forms at the
air–liquid interface of the mango waste-based medium (Figurea). Static fermentation
conditions facilitate efficient cellulose accumulation under aerobic
culture conditions, resulting in biofilms (Figureb) with approximate thicknesses of 0.05 mm,
manageable for the proposed crystallization procedure. The surface
appearance of the raw BC obtained is shown inFigurec,d. The BC network is characterized by cellulose
nanofibers with random orientation, converging either perpendicularly
or parallel to each other (Figurec). These individual cellulose fibers have diameters
ranging from 30 to 60 nm, assembled into cross-linked bundles reaching
widths of 100 nm (Figured). It is noteworthy that the nanomorphology of BC shows fibers
approximately one hundred times finer than those found in plant cellulose, thus increasing its relative specific surface
area. This structure, along with its high porosity, allows BC to retain
significantly more water, providing high moisture resistance, elasticity,
and adaptability-features that are optimal for the controlled crystallization
experiments following performed.

Production and morphology of BC derived
fromMangifera
indicaextract medium usingKomagataeibactersp. SU12. (a) Laboratory production of BC in a static system, (b)
Purified BC in thin membrane morphology, (c, d) SEM images showing
the nanocellulose structure in the produced BC.

Previous studies
have addressed apatite precipitation on BC membranes by immersing
the material in a simulated body fluid (SBF) solution.,,,It was shown that the chemical surface properties of BC are crucial
as these features affect the organic–inorganic interactions
that play a key role in the CaP precipitation. Additionally, BC-Ap hybrid composites have been created
by incubating Ap particles in the BC production medium. Immersion methods do not allow for control over
surface mineralization in the assembled biohybrid material, as these
methods typically coat both sides of the BC membranes. In contrast, our findings demonstrate that the
VDSD method facilitates the control of apatite coating on one side
of the BC membrane, leaving the other side unmineralized, thus enabling
the customization of some coating properties such as the amount of
material precipitated and the extent of the coating on the mineralized
BC surface and its nanofibers.

During the application of the
VDSD method, the NH3and CO2vapors produced
from the decomposition of the NH4HCO3solution
in the lower chamber of thecrystallization mushroom(eqsand ), travel through a 6 mm hole from the lower to the
upper chamber. This process increases
the partial pressures of both gases in the upper chamber. These gases
then diffuse into the microdroplets deposited on the outer side of
the BC membranes. As NH3diffuses through the droplets
containing CaCH3COO+and HPO42–ions, the pH of the microdroplet rises from approximately
4.8 to 8.5. This pH increase leads to the progressive decomposition
of CaCH3COO+complexes, releasing Ca2+ions, while promotes the formation of PO43–according toeq,
and CO32–ions, according toeqs–, eventually increasing their concentration at the solid-solution
interface, and then reaching the critical supersaturation necessary
for heterogeneous nucleation of CaP. The local ion increase is favored
by the presence of polar chemical surface groups of the cellulose. The overall precipitation process, which considers
a CO32–-Ap as an example of a solid phase,
is illustrated ineq.

When increasing the experimental
time from 1 to 15 days, we observed a marked increase for mineral
precipitated on the BC outer surfaces (Figure), due to the progressive release of Ca2+ions from the Ca-CH3COO–complexes.
These complexes act as Ca reservoir during the whole period sustaining
the precipitation. This crystal formation, which increases with aging
time, occurs in a heterogeneous distribution on the BC surface in
relation to the porous structure and permeation capacity of the pristine
cellulose (Figurea). At early reaction times (1 and 3 days;Figureb,c), the CaP deposits appear highly dispersed,
becoming more abundant and forming aggregates at longer reaction times
(5 and 7 days;Figured,e), and eventually coating almost the entire cellulose surface
after 15 days (Figuref). The increasing mineralization with reaction time is further confirmed
by the total amount of mineral content determined by thermogravimetric
analyses (provided below). It should be noted that, at the end of
the experiments the droplet volume remained practically unchanged,
and no precipitation was observed on the inner side of the membranes.

SEM images
of CaP precipitation on BC surface for different reaction
times. (a) Pristine BC surface; (b–f) Experimental reaction
times at 1, 3, 5, 7, and 15 days, respectively.

Detailed observations from FESEM micrographs (secondary
and backscattered
electron images) reveal the crystalline properties and morphology
of the CaP precipitates and their association with the cellulose nanofibers
(Figure). SEM images
show the BC network with crystals coating intimately the cellulose
fibers and partially filling the pores of the three-dimensional structure.
Interestingly, remnants of dead bacteria (Komagataeibactersp. SU12) can also be observed forming nanofibers protruding laterally
from their elongated bodies (Figurea: white arrows). Notably, no precipitation occurs
on the surface of these bacterial remnants.

FESEM images of BC-CaP
coatings: (a) BC-CaP coatings showingKomagataeibactersp. SU12 remnants (white arrows); (b, c)
Heterogeneous distribution of CaP aggregates embedded within the BC
matrix (BSE images); (d, e) CaP crystals intimately coating the BC
nanofibers (blue arrows); (f) CaP crystals forming large flower-like
aggregates.

The CaP mineralization is heterogeneously distributed
and embedded
within the BC matrix. CaP precipitation occurs from the interior to
the exterior of the BC matrix on the outer surface, forming aggregates
that appear to be embedded within its thickness and progressively
emerge toward the BC membrane (Figureb,c; BSE images). Higher-resolution images reveal crystal
formation intimately coating the cellulose nanofibers (Figured,e). The interaction phenomena
between organic–inorganic components influence the crystal
nucleation and growth during the reaction of the Ca and P-bearing
solutions with the polymeric matrix of the BC nanofibers surface (Figuree: blue arrows).
The morphology of the crystals exhibits the typical apatite plate-like
shape elongated along thec-axis, forming larger
flower-like aggregates (Figuref). The more isolated crystals inFigured–f display an average length of 270
± 5 nm, and an average width of 40 ± 3 nm (around 20 measurements
per dimension).

EDX analyses confirmed the heterogeneous distribution
of mineral
formation on the cellulose matrix.Figureshows the elemental mapping (calcium, phosphorus,
and oxygen distribution) of the BC-CaP sample after 7 days, wherein
the Ca and P atoms are highlighted (Figureb,c, respectively). Crystals are distributed
irregularly, forming crystalline aggregates of varying sizes.Figureshows one of these
crystalline aggregates protruding from the BC matrix, along with its
EDX spectrum. The EDX values resulted in a Ca/P ratio of around 1.75,
which is slightly above 1.67, the stoichiometric hydroxyapatite ratio,
the thermodynamically most stable phase among various CaP forms (e.g.,
brushite, monetite, OCP, TCP, or ACP). This higher Ca/P ratio can be mainly explained by the presence of
CO32–substituting PO43–groups in the apatite structure (B-type substitutions).
These results are consistent with the crystalline identification observed
from XRD analyses.

SEM micrograph and elemental distribution maps of BC-CaP
surfaces
obtained by EDX mapping. (a) SEM image of BC-CaP surface; (b) Elemental
map showing Calcium (Ca, in red); (c) Phosphorus (P, in purple); and
(d) Oxygen (O; green).

Identification of CaP aggregate on the BC matrix (a) SEM
micrograph
showing CaP morphology, and (b) the corresponding EDX spectrum.

The crystalline CaP phase was characterized by
2D-XRD pattern integration
(i.e., unidimensional 2θ scan).Figureshows the XRD results of the BC surface
and mineralized BC-Ap 15 days samples. The broad diffraction peaks
reflect the nanocrystalline character of both the BC substrate and
CaP precipitation. The XRD pattern for BC (Figurea) shows diffraction peaks at 2θ angles
of approximately 14.5, 16.6, and 22.6°, corresponding to the
crystalline cellulose I structure planes (101), (101−) and (002), respectively. On the other hand, the XRD pattern for BC-Ap 15 days sample
(Figureb) corresponds
to hydroxyapatite, as identified by comparison with the standard JCPDS
card No. 01-074-0565 (International Centre for Diffraction Data).
Specifically, the diffraction peak located at 25.9° corresponds
to the (002) diffraction line (c-axisdirection),
while a broad band in the 2θ range of 32–34° to
the combined (121), (211), (112), and (300) diffraction lines. This
phase identification, along with similar crystalline properties, was
observed consistently for all experimental reaction times. The 2D-XRD
patterns (Figure,
insets) show continuous diffraction arcs within the Debye–Scherrer
ring, indicating a crystal random orientation of the crystalline phases.
The broadness of the diffraction peaks points to the low degree of
crystallinity of the BC and Ap phases presented in the samples, which
correlates with the nanometer scale of the crystals, as previously
observed in the SEM analysis.

XRD analysis of (a) bacterial cellulose (BC)
surface, and (b) BC-Ap
15 days samples (Ap; apatite). Insets display the 2D-XRD patterns
for each sample, used to obtain the unidimensional integration scan
(2θ degree).

Vibrational spectroscopies allow us to identify
the molecular composition
of the structural organic groups of BC and the molecular vibration
modes associated with Ap.,Detailed vibrational
band assignments for BC and BC-Ap samples in the ATR-FTIR and Raman
spectra are provided inFigureandTablesand  (ATR-FTIR and Raman band assignments,
respectively). The ATR-FTIR spectrum of BC (Figurea) shows an intense narrow band at 1030 cm–1corresponding to C–O stretching vibrations
associated with the cyclic glucose of cellulose. Additional bands
at 1160 and 897 cm–1indicate β-1,4-glycosidic
linkages.−Other bands observed in the 400–700 cm–1range (δCOH out of plane), at 1650 cm–1(hydrogen-bonded),
and at 3340 cm–1(γOH covalent bond) were
also identified.,,,,−
,These cellulose biomolecules
engage in electrostatic interactions between the functional groups
of BC (e.g., carboxylate and hydroxyl groups) and calcium ions, promoting
the formation of apatite crystals. The
FTIR spectrum of the BC-Ap samples (Figureb), showed intense bands at 960–1103
cm–1(ν1-ν3PO43–) and 557 cm–1(ν4PO43–), corresponding to characteristic
apatite IR absorption bands.,−Other less intense bands are intended at 434 cm–1(ν2PO43–) and 1556
cm–1(ν3CO3).,,However, the ATR-FTIR analysis
faced challenges in precisely identifying BC-Ap interactions due to
overlapping signals from BC groups and Ap modes.

Vibrational analysis
of BC-Ap 15-day sample using ATR-FTIR and
Raman spectroscopy. (a) ATR-FTIR spectrum of BC, indicating OH, COH,
COC, CO, and CH bands (organic modes), (b) ATR-FTIR spectra of CaP,
highlighting the vibrational modes of phosphate ν1–ν3PO43–and
carbonate ν3CO3groups (inorganic modes),
(c) Raman spectra of BC, indicating skeletal, methane, glucose ring,
COC, and CH bands, (d) Raman spectra of CaP highlighting the vibrational
modes of phosphate groups ν1–ν4PO43–.

The ATR-FTIR results show spectral characteristics
of BC, such
as OH, C–O, C–O–C, and C–H bonds, consistent
with previous studies.,Vibrational modes of phosphate
groups (ν1-ν3PO43–) were also identified in the 950–1000 cm–1range. It was observed that the phosphate bands overlap
with the C–O and C–O–C vibrations of BC, highlighting
the need for complementary spectroscopic techniques, such as Raman
spectroscopy, to allow for a more detailed analysis of BC-Ap composites.

The crystallization mechanism
underlying the formation of the BC-Ap
composite is directly influenced by the interfacial binding strength
between the organic (BC) and inorganic (Ap) components. This interfacial affinity is determined by the
intermolecular interactions occurring at the organic–inorganic
phase boundaries. The structural conformation of anhydro-glucose units
(AGUs) in nanocellulose consists of linear chains of β-d-glucopyranose units arranged in ribbon-like shapes and stabilized
by intra- and intermolecular hydrogen bonds, where carboxyl functional
groups can be selectively anchored at the surface-exposed C6 positions
of the AGUs.,Due to the structural configuration
of the BC surface, hydroxyl and carboxyl functional groups can readily
act as effective nucleation sites for Ap formation. This process suggests
a first nucleation mechanism in which Ap crystals form through the
initial adsorption of calcium ions, mediated by electrostatic interactions
and complexation with negatively charged surface BC groups, followed
by the subsequent binding of phosphate ions from the surrounding fluid.
Therefore, the formation of BC-Oδ- BC–Oδ–···Ca2+or BC–COO–···Ca2+coordination complexes on the surface
of BC nanofibrils serves as a critical prerequisite for the nucleation
of the calcium phosphate (CaP) precursor phase, which subsequently
evolves into apatite through the sustained uptake of phosphate ions
from the solution. Furthermore, previous molecular modeling studies
have revealed that interfacial structures stabilized by electrostatic
interactions between BC and CaP crystalline surfaces promote the formation
of plate-like hydroxyapatite morphologies, as further evidenced by SEM imaging in the current study.

Thermogravimetric analyses (Figure) of the BC and BC-Ap 15d samples show distinct thermal
decomposition patterns and residual mass differences after heat treatment
up to 900 °C. At temperatures below 200 °C, there is no
significant weight loss (i.e., <2% for BC) due to moisture and
volatile compounds, remaining stable until higher temperatures. Around
320 °C–350 °C, significant weight loss occurs due
to BC degradation, including depolymerization, decomposition of glucosyl
units, and formation of charred residue. A carbonaceous residue was observed in the pure BC sample, which
remained stable from 450 °C until the end of the thermal degradation
temperature. The BC-Ap exhibited a higher residue content above the
latter temperature, confirming mineral deposition in the BC structure
that increases with reaction time.Tableshows the percentages of residual mass at
the end of the heat treatment (up to 900 °C), showing a difference
between 3.25% for pure BC and 18.23% for the sample reacted for 15
days (i.e., indicating mineralization of approximately 15% for the
BC-AP 15d reaction time). During the entire experimental reaction
time, the amount of precipitate was progressive, distributing heterogeneously
on the surface of the cellulose (as also observed in the SEM images).

Thermogravimetric
analysis (TGA) conducted in the temperature range
from 25 to 900 °C using a linear heating rate of 10 °C/min.
The plot shows the weight loss (%) curves of BC and BC-Ap 15d indicating
the residual mass difference (double arrow line) corresponding to
mineral precipitation.

In the present research, we have proved that the SDVD
technique
allows for coating one of the two surfaces of the BC membrane, yielding
a hybrid material with potential bifunctional properties, i.e. osteoinductive
on the apatite-coated side and barrier against cells on the opposite
side. The potential application of BC-Ap composite obtained through
controlled crystallization remains to be addressed, particularly concerning
key material properties, such as mechanical testing and hydrophilicity/wettability.
Additionally, future investigations will include cellular assays to
evaluate bioactivity, cytotoxicity, and biocompatibility, although
some of these characteristics have already been reported in previous
studies for analogous BC-CaP materials.,−In any case, the control of the mineral surface formation through
SDVD allows for detailed modulation of the properties of this biohybrid
BC-Ap, tailoring it to specific needs depending on the type of calcified
tissue and the intended application (i.e., pulp capping, guided bone
regeneration). Regarding the potential scalability of BC-Ap for industrial
or clinical applications, several limitations and challenges should
be considered. Notably, (1) producing BC using an organic substrate
derived from plant waste, rather than a standardized Hestrin-Schramm
medium, compromises control over bacterial growth and influences key
properties of the resulting cellulose, such as porosity and thickness.
Additionally, (2) the SDVD crystallization method involves the use
of microdroplets (40 μL) and extended processing times (up to
15 days) to achieve complete coating of the BC membranes, which may
hinder its feasibility for large-scale or time-sensitive applications.
To address the volume issue, it would be necessary to implement vapor
diffusion in high volume desiccators or using a higher amount of crystallization
mushrooms to multiply the number of droplets. In addition, the optimization
or acceleration of the crystallization by adjusting different experimental
parameters, such as reaction temperature or ionic strength (e.g.,
by introducing additional ions into the solution), could help reduce
processing time while maintaining control over Ap crystal formation
on the BC nanofibers. These factors are critical to ensure the reproducibility
and scalability of BC-Ap production from laboratory to industrial
production.

The SDVD method successfully
achieved apatite (Ap) mineralization
in bacterial cellulose (BC) surface, allowing precise control over
precipitation. This approach resulted in a BC-Ap hybrid material,
where the mineral phase presents chemical and structural characteristics
similar to nanocrystalline apatite. Additionally, mineral content
increased over experimental reaction times ranging from 1 to 15 days.
Morphological and spectroscopic studies revealed the interaction of
Ap crystals along the nanocellulose fibers. The BC-Ap composite exhibits
significant potential for tissue engineering applications. Moreover,
using mango waste as a substrate for BC production provides a sustainable
and cost-effective solution, contributing to the development of materials
from green and biocompatible technological solutions.

Authors would
like to thank the technical staff
of both the Scientific Instrumentation Center (University of Granada,
Spain) and the Scientific and Technical Services (University of Oviedo,
Spain), particularly Dr. Víctor Vega for his assistance and
support during Scanning Electron Microscopy imaging.

P.A.L.:
conceptualization,
supervision, data curation, investigation, funding, writing -original
draft-, review and editing. I.N.Z.: conceptualization, data curation,
investigation, writing -original draft-, review and editing. A.I.Z.:
supervision, conceptualization, methodology and investigation. S.C.T.:
conceptualization, methodology and investigation. J.G.M.: funding,
investigation, writing -original draft- and review.

We acknowledge
funding from the Spanish Ministry of Science, Innovation and Universities,
the Spanish Research Agency and FEDER, UE: Project GBRMat ref 2023-151538NB-100,
funded by MCIU/AEI/10.13039/501100011033/FEDER, UE and the European
Regional Development Fund (ERDF)-Next Generation/EU program. INZ gratefully
acknowledges Asociación Universitaria Iberoamericana de Posgrado
(AUIP) for financial support in the Mobility Scholarship Program 2024-I.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.