The complex chemical nature of metal nanoparticle synthesis
presents
obstacles for the mechanistic understanding of nanoparticle growth
and predictive synthesis design, despite significant progress in this
area. Real-time characterization of the chemical processes that take
place throughout nanoparticle growth will enable progress toward addressing
outstanding challenges in metal nanoparticle synthesis, such as mitigating
synthetic reproducibility issues, defining chemical mechanisms that
direct nanoparticle growth, and designing synthetic conditions for
previously unachievable combinations of nanoparticle shape and composition.
In this Perspective, we present open-circuit potential (OCP) measurements
as an in situ, real-time method for characterizing chemical changes
during nanoparticle growth and discuss the method’s strengths
in comparison to and in combination with other characterization techniques.
We propose the use of OCP measurements as benchmarks for troubleshooting
irreproducibility and streamlining synthetic optimization. Finally,
we explore possibilities for using the increased parameter space accessible
by electrodeposition to accelerate the development of shape-selective
nanoparticle syntheses.

Monitoring the progress of nanoparticle growth during synthesis
is not generally necessary to ensure product quality and can be time-prohibitive
if many nanoparticle growth reactions are set up at one time, as is
common. Therefore, observation and characterization of the resulting
nanoparticles is typically only conducted following the completion
of the reaction. Because this analysis is done at the end of the synthesis,
common characterization methods focus on the properties and attributes
of the nanoparticle products, rather than the chemical characteristics
of the nanoparticle growth environment. This approach to characterization
unintentionally creates a situation where nanoparticle synthesis development
can sometimes be a “black box,” resulting in problems
during the reproduction of nanoparticle syntheses if, for instance,
impurities are unknowingly introduced or omitted through the reagents
used.

The combinatorial approach to synthesis design is common
by necessity
due to the complex nature of the chemistry of colloidal nanoparticle
growth solutions. While nanoparticle synthesis is fundamentally a
redox process between metal ions and a chemical reducing agent, it
is challenging to model using standard reduction potentials because
of the nonstandard conditions used (pH ≠ 0; temperature ≠
25 °C; concentrations ≠ 1 M) and due to the presence of
oxygen in most published synthetic conditions. Further, the use of
capping agents and other rate- and shape-directing additives is standard
for even simple nanoparticle synthesis routes. These additional reagents
greatly complicate specific chemical understanding of redox reactions
during nanoparticle growth and introduce important interfacial processes.
Establishing detailed chemical mechanisms is particularly challenging
due to the multiple possible roles of many common reagents in growth
solutions. For instance, halide ions can act as selective or nonspecific
surface passivators, facilitate oxidative etching, shift the reduction
potential of the metal salt precursor through ligand exchange, or
catalyze metal ion reduction.−This makes it difficult to assign
a particular chemical mechanism to a growth solution component. Additionally,
concentrations of reactants and dissolved oxygen are not constant
over time, leading to complexities with steady-state attempts at interpreting
solution chemistry.

Building robust and predictive mechanistic
principles for colloidal
nanoparticle growth has long been a goal of the metal nanoparticle
research community. Significant progress has been made toward understanding
nanoparticle growth mechanisms using a number of approaches that correlate
physical changes of the nanoparticles during or after growth with
changes in initial growth solution chemistry.,−However, there are still many unknowns in the understanding of even
some of the best characterized systems, especially in the growth of
nanoparticles composed of metals other than Au and Pd. The development
of additional easy-to-use, in situ chemical characterization methods
will enable further understanding of reaction chemistry in nanoparticle
synthesis to meet the grand challenge of establishing a comprehensive
framework for predictive design of nanoparticle growth.

This
Perspective highlights recent advances and future opportunities
in the use of electroanalytical methods to increase understanding
of colloidal nanoparticle synthesis, as well as in the use of electrodeposition
to develop new syntheses for shaped metal nanoparticles (Figure). Specifically,
we discuss how open-circuit potential (OCP) measurements meet the
need identified above for an in situ, real-time chemical measurement
of nanoparticle growth. These measurements can be used to enhance
synthetic reproducibility and streamline synthetic optimization through
benchmarking of the real-time chemistry (mixed solution potential)
during colloidal nanoparticle growth. Additionally, we analyze the
strengths and limitations of other in situ and time-resolved methods
for characterizing nanoparticle growth to provide context for how
OCP measurements can complement these techniques and overcome these
limitations to achieve better understanding of growth mechanisms through
real-time measurements of the changing chemical environment during
synthesis. Finally, we describe how the increased parameter space
and synthetic flexibility accessible by electrodeposition can be used
in combination with electrochemical measurements of growth to accelerate
synthesis design and discovery.

Overview of outstanding problems and questions
in metal nanoparticle
synthesis that can be addressed via electroanalytical methods (such
as open-circuit potential (OCP) measurements), electrodeposition synthesis,
or a combination of both.

To reproduce a published synthesis for metal nanoparticles,
one needs an experimental protocol for the synthesis as well as analytical
tools to investigate whether the synthesis has been replicated successfully.
The literature typically reports experimental synthetic protocols
with an explicit focus on the amount of each reagent added and the
sequence of addition, as well as the conditions (temperature, pressure,
and reaction time) for each reaction step. These are all well-defined
synthesis parameters and are, in most cases, easily reproduced. Additionally,
the purity and source of the chemical reagents (e.g., sodium tetrachloropalladate­(II)
(Na2PdCl4, ≥99.99% trace metal basis)
Sigma-Aldrich), the purity of water used (e.g., 18.2 MΩ resistivity),
and the cleaning protocol for glassware (e.g., with aqua regia (1:3
ratio of concentrated HNO3: concentrated HCl;caution:
strong acid)) are commonly reported. Most publications also
report a detailed physical characterization of the synthesized nanoparticles
at the end of the reaction and, less commonly, throughout the synthesis.

Prevalent methods for characterization of nanoparticles include
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy
(TEM), which provide information about the size, shape, composition,
and dispersity of the product nanoparticles. Additionally, spectroscopic
methods such as ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy (UV–vis)
are widely used to characterize shape, size, and uniformity of nanoparticles
whose optical properties are structure-sensitive, such as plasmonic
nanoparticles. In the case of multimetallic nanoparticles, electronic
and X-ray spectroscopies, including energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
(EDS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), are used to characterize
the bulk and surface composition of the nanoparticles, respectively.
Additional characterization techniques like atomic force microscopy
(AFM), X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), and electron diffraction
methods are also used throughout the literature to complement the
above techniques.

However, a pervasive
problem in nanoparticle synthesis is a sporadic lack of reproducibility
of published syntheses betweenor even withinlaboratories,−meaning that while the reaction protocol has been accurately followed,
the resulting nanoparticles exhibit a different size, dispersity,
or morphology than the reported ones. Reproducibility issues can also
cause significant challenges for scaling up syntheses of nanoparticles
for use in specialized applications. There are multiple underlying
reasons for these reproducibility issues. One possible contributing
factor is the lack of precise definitions for certain terms used in
reaction protocols, such as “vigorously stirred,” “overnight,”
“swirl,” or “until completion,” which
can be interpreted differently by each researcher reproducing the
procedure. Solely reporting the sequence of reagent addition instead
of discrete time points for the addition of these chemicals can influence
the morphology of the resulting nanoparticles as well. Moreover, the
manufacturer and part number of vials, flasks, or stir bars are often
not detailed, which can lead to differences in the size, shape, and
quality of the reproduced nanoparticles during synthesis replication.

The
present method of reporting nanoparticle syntheseswhich
provides only reaction steps and the detailed physical characterization
of the nanoparticlesis often insufficient when troubleshooting
reproducibility issues in general, as well as for identifying the
influence of impurities. While discussions of proposed reaction mechanisms
can hint at reasons for reproducibility issues, the absence of real-time
information about the chemical changes occurring in the growth solution
of the reported reaction over time makes the resolution of reproducibility
issues a time and resource-intensive iterative task.,,,,Reporting, by default, a benchmark reference
measurement of the chemical growth environment of the reaction over
the course of the synthesis to complement the physical characterization
and the reaction protocol that are already reported for nanoparticle
syntheses would streamline the resolution of impurity and reproducibility
issues that subsequently emerge. To make this feasible, a reproducible,
facile, and accessible method of collecting in situ, real-time information
about the chemical reaction environment is required.

OCP measurements represent a promising
approach for generating benchmark measurements of the chemical reaction
environment behind a successful nanoparticle synthesis. While the
many competing processes in even simple nanoparticle growth solutions
make them mechanistically complex, the overall chemistry of nanoparticle
growth can be monitored via measurement of the mixed potential of
the growth solution during the particle growth process. Time-resolved
measurement of the solution potential during nanoparticle growth can
be achieved through OCP measurements of the growth solution, taken
in an electrochemical cell that includes a working electrode (for
example, a glassy carbon electrode) and a reference electrode (such
as silver/silver chloride (Ag/AgCl) or mercury/mercurous sulfate (Hg/HgSO4)). Though it is not strictly required for OCP measurements,
the inclusion of a counter electrode (for instance, a platinum (Pt)
wire) to create a three-electrode cell is common. The electrodes are
introduced to a colloidal nanoparticle growth solution prior to the
initiation of growth by a chemical reducing agent, and the solution
potential is measured over time (Figure).

Example OCP measurements illustrating real-time
mixed potential
responses, with the time point of addition of chemical reducing agent
noted with a dotted line. The measurements shown are for colloidal
growth solutions in a halide-free surfactant (cetyltrimethylammonium
hydrogen sulfate) containing 0.5 mL of 10 mM H2PdCl4, with a 2-fold stoichiometric excess of reducing agent added
after initiating measurement (0.1 mL of 100 mM hydroquinone,l-ascorbic acid, hydroxylamine hydrochloride, or trisodium citrate
or 0.025 mL of 100 mM sodium borohydride). Adapted with permission
from ref . Copyright
2020 American Chemical Society.

The OCP is the potential measured between the working
electrode
and the reference electrode when no applied current is flowing.,At any given potential at any given time, the working electrode
passes a total current that is the sum of all individual currents
arising from the anodic and cathodic half reactions taking place there.
At the OCP, the net current is zero, since there is no external current
flow. Thus, the sum of the cathodic currents and the sum of the anodic
currents have equal magnitudes and opposite signs. If the individual
component currents vary over time, such as when nonequilibrium chemical
reactions are occurring, the zero-current point (and, therefore, the
measured OCP) will drift.

When
the cathodic and anodic currents at the working electrode
are dominated by a single redox couple, the OCP is equal to the equilibrium
potential of the redox couple determined by the Nernst equation. However,
when the OCP is controlled kinetically by two or more half reactions,
such as during metal nanoparticle growth, the OCP is not an equilibrium
potential, but rather a mixed potential. When measuring the OCP of a nanoparticle growth solution, contributions
to the mixed potential may include metal ion reduction, reducing agent
oxidation, dissolved oxygen reduction, electrolyte decomposition,
and/or other contributions from other electroactive species such as
halide ions or ionic surfactants. These additional contributions to
the mixed potential are the reason why the measured OCP has an initial
nonzero “background” value before the initiation of
metal ion reduction with injection of the chemical reducing agent
and seeds.

While the determination of the mixed potential from
theory is generally
impractical, some general considerations for predicting the effects
of chemical and physical parameters on the measured OCP do exist.
Solute concentration is known to affect the OCP such that when a redox-active
solute is at a millimolar or higher concentration and all other species’
concentrations are order(s) of magnitude lower, the OCP is pushed
toward the Nernstian equilibrium potential. When the solute’s
concentration is nanomolar or lower, its contribution to the mixed
potential becomes negligible and the OCP approaches the “background”
value.,This concentration effect on OCP is an important
consideration for any measurements of especially dilute growth solutions,
such as those used for some nanorod syntheses, as other background contributions to the mixed potential
may partially mask the OCP contribution from metal ion reduction.
Additionally, significant local pH changes near or at the working
electrode, such as those due to metal ion reduction reactions that
release protons, can cause rapid changes or oscillatory behavior in
the measured OCP.

The mixed potential
captured in OCP measurements is representative
of all chemical processes (and the physical or interfacial processes
perturbing chemical processes) occurring in the growth solution in
real time. The reducing environment resulting from this combination
of chemical processes influences the kinetics of metal ion reduction
and, therefore, the growth pathway and ultimate nanoparticle product
morphology. Early examples of OCP measurements of Pd nanoparticle
growth suggest that there is a correspondence between the measured
strength of the reducing environment (the mixed solution potential)as
well as changes in this solution potentialand the development
of particular morphologies for a given system.,Because of their ability to record real-time differences in reaction
chemistry that directly correlate to particular synthetic outcomes,
OCP measurements of solution-phase nanoparticle growth have demonstrated
promise as a technique of choice for benchmarking optimal growth conditions
(FigureA).

(A) Schematic of the OCP measurement approach for benchmarking
nanoparticle synthesis and troubleshooting reproducibility issues.
(B) OCP measurements of growth solutions made in as-received BioUltra
A CTAB (black) and BioXtra CTAB (orange)both using the conditions
developed for Pd THH growth in BioUltra A CTABand a growth
solution made in oven-dried BioXtra CTAB with shape-directing additives
(blue; 0.58 μM NaI and 230 μL of acetone (0.31 M in the
growth solution)). (C–E) SEM images of colloidal Pd THH and
CC nanoparticles. (C) Pd THH nanoparticles synthesized in as-received
BioUltra A CTAB. (D) Pd CC nanoparticles synthesized in as-received
BioXtra CTAB but otherwise under the same conditions as (C). (E) Pd
THH nanoparticles synthesized in oven-dried BioXtra CTAB with 0.58
μM of NaI and 230 μL of acetone added to the growth solution.
Scale bars: 300 nm. Panels B-E adapted with permission under a Creative
Commons CC BY-NC 3.0 license from ref . Copyright 2024 Royal Society of Chemistry.

We recently provided proof of concept for this
OCP benchmarking
approach by using these measurements to inform troubleshooting of
reproducibility issues in the synthesis of Pd tetrahexahedra (THH)
stemming from the previously mentioned line-to-line and lot-to-lot
variability in high-purity commercial cetyltrimethylammonium bromide
(CTAB) surfactant. When Sigma-Aldrich
BioUltra CTAB (99.0%, Lot No. BCCC5274; “BioUltra A CTAB”)
was used as the surfactant in Pd nanoparticle synthesis, monodisperse
THH (99% of particles) were formed (FigureC). When another lot number of the same BioUltra
CTAB line (99.0%, Lot No. BCCF7530; “BioUltra B CTAB”)
or a similarly high-purity line (Sigma-Aldrich BioXtra CTAB (99%,
Lot No. SLCJ8356)) was used in reactions with otherwise identical
growth conditions, the products were concave cubes and various twinned
particles (∼75 and ∼25% of particles, respectively,FigureD). A comparison
of the benchmark OCP measurement for the successful synthesis of Pd
THH in BioUltra A CTAB with OCP measurements for unsuccessful Pd nanoparticle
syntheses in the other two CTABs revealed a more strongly reducing
mixed solution potential in the nanoparticle growth solutions that
produced undesired concave cubes compared to the mixed potential of
the successful THH reaction conditions (FigureB).

Shape-directing iodide and acetone
or methanol impurities were
identified in all CTAB varieties via inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry (ICP-MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy,
respectively. “Beneficial,”
controlled amounts of both impurities were determined to be necessary
for successful Pd THH formation. Following oven drying of the as-received
BioUltra B CTAB and BioXtra CTAB powders to eliminate residual organic
solvent impurities that were in excess of the ideal amounts, OCP measurements
of “modified” reaction solutionsinto which controlled
small amounts of iodide and acetone or short-chain alcohols were addedshowed
that the addition of iodide increased the mixed solution potential,
shifting it toward the benchmark value, as did the readdition of a
smaller concentration of organic solvent. Through modification of
the growth solution with these impurity species, it was possible to
adjust the measured mixed solution potential of the reaction in BioUltra
B CTAB and BioXtra CTAB to match that of the successful Pd THH synthesis
in BioUltra A (FigureB), and to successfully synthesize the Pd THH using these other types
of CTAB (FigureE).
We hypothesized that these species (iodide and organic solvent) disrupt
the surfactant bilayer at the surface of the growing nanoparticle,
thus increasing the rate of metal ion reduction and, correspondingly,
the rate of consumption of the chemical reducing agent ascorbic acid
(AA). Importantly, while the OCP measurement records the solution
potential and changes in the solution potential, if surface passivation
affects the overall reaction rate, this influence is captured as a
component of the measurement.

We next demonstrated that the
OCP benchmarking and troubleshooting
approach could be used to expedite resolution of reproducibility challenges
with new batches of CTAB. OCP measurements of Pd nanoparticle growth
solutions made in CTAB from Thermo Scientific (99%) and Tokyo Chemical
Industries (TCI; 98.0%, “TCI CTAB”) were compared to
the THH-forming BioUltra A CTAB benchmark measurement. The differences between these measurements and
the THH benchmark, in combination with previous measurements demonstrating
the relationships between iodide and acetone concentrations and the
strength of the reducing environment, were used to select NaI and
acetone additive concentrations for the Thermo Scientific and TCI
CTAB varieties (again following oven-drying of the CTAB powder). Only
one round of additional minor synthetic modification was necessary
to achieve OCP traces in good agreement with the BioUltra A CTAB benchmark
(FigureA) and corresponding
successful formation of the THH product morphology (FigureB–D). These experiments
demonstrated the power and utility of the OCP benchmarking and troubleshooting
approach. Importantly, this second set of corrections based on the
benchmark required only 3 days, which was much less time-consuming
than troubleshooting via trial-and-error variation of synthetic conditions
without OCP measurements (which had previously been used to attempt
Pd THH optimization for other CTAB sources, taking years).

(A) Open-circuit
potential (OCP) measurements of growth solutions
made in as-received BioUltra A CTAB (black; SEM shown inFigureC), as-received TCI
CTAB (green)both using the Pd THH growth conditions developed
for BioUltra A CTABand in oven-dried TCI CTAB with shape-directing
additives (blue; 0.48 μM NaI and 90 μL of acetone (0.12
M in the growth solution)). (B–D) SEM images of colloidal Pd
nanoparticles synthesized in TCI CTAB. (B) Pd nanocubes synthesized
in as-received TCI CTAB (green OCP trace in (A)). (C) Truncated Pd
THH nanoparticles synthesized in oven-dried TCI CTAB with 0.58 μM
added NaI and 100 μL added acetone (0.14 M in the growth solution).
(D) Pd THH nanoparticles synthesized in oven-dried TCI CTAB with 0.48
μM of NaI and 90 μL of acetone additives (0.12 M acetone
in the growth solution; blue OCP trace in (A)). Scale bars: 300 nm.
Adapted with permission under a Creative Commons CC BY-NC 3.0 license
from ref . Copyright
2024 Royal Society of Chemistry.

The real-time nature of OCP measurements and their
comparative
ease of setup allow benchmark measurements of the growth process to
be easily created for all synthetic conditions of interest. These
OCP benchmarks, in turn, provide a record of the optimal behavior
of a nanoparticle synthesis reaction from achemicalperspectiveduringthe reaction, rather than just
observing that the product is correct. Whenever reproducibility issues
with a colloidal nanoparticle synthesis are subsequently observed
via any commonly used characterization technique, comparison of a
new OCP measurement to the benchmark measurement for the reaction
of interest can elucidate discrepancies between the relative strength
of the reducing environment over time compared to the ideal case.
This can then be readily correlated with synthetic parameters affecting
the reducing environment, such as the ratio of metal ions to chemical
reducing agent or the concentration of halide ions. Troubleshooting
would then involve manipulating a relevant synthetic parameter in
a direction and with a magnitude guided by the difference from the
benchmark measurement.

When obtaining benchmark OCP measurements,
appropriate selection of electrodes is key for ensuring measurement
accuracy. The working electrode material must be inert under the conditions
of the synthesis reaction, as plating of metal salts from the growth
solution onto the working electrode will shift the measured potential. Glassy carbon is an appropriate working electrode
material for use with a variety of metals. While the surface area
of the working electrode does contribute to the OCP of solutions containing
metal nanoparticles when at least one of the electrode dimensions
is also at the nanoscale or low microscale (in the case of ultramicroelectrodes),,this contribution becomes negligible and electrode area does not
need to be considered when larger electrodes are used (as is the case
in all studies described in this Perspective). Reference electrode
choice also must be informed by the chemistry of the growth solution.
Silver/silver chloride (Ag/AgCl) reference electrodes were used for
our initial OCP measurements of colloidal Pd particles; however, we switched to using a mercury/mercurous
sulfate reference electrode (Hg/HgSO4) for measuring colloidal
Pd THH growth solutions that contained NaI as a shape-directing additive because I–contamination can
shift the Ag/AgCl reference potential through formation of an AgI
layer on the electrode.,A reference electrode
other than Ag/AgCl should be chosen in situations where Ag+and/or Cl–leaching could pose interference,
such as syntheses where Ag underpotential deposition controls shape
or halide-free syntheses.

Other important considerations for making reproducible OCP
measurements
include cleaning and maintenance of equipment. As is generally the
case for studies of metal nanoparticle synthesis, cleaning of glassware
with aqua regia between uses (including cleaning of the reference
electrode bridge tube) and appropriate storage and fresh preparation
of stock solutions are crucial. Polishing of glassy carbon working
electrodes with an alumina slurry and subsequent cleaning in an ultrasonic
bath are also required after each use; other electrodes may require
different polishing and surface activation steps, such as sanding
for Ag wire electrodes. We have not found aqua regia cleaning of glassy
carbon electrodes between uses to be necessary. Regular maintenance
of reference electrodesrefilling of electrolyte solutions,
changing of frits, and verification against a “master”
reference electrode or calibration solution of a known redox couple,
such as ferrocene/ferroceniumis also crucial for ensuring
accurate measurements.

Care should also be taken to make sure
that the morphological result
of the synthesis is not altered by the experimental setup of the measurement.
For example, moving a synthesis from a scintillation vial to a beaker
or specialty electrochemistry glassware may induce problems for syntheses
with glassware sensitivities (common for Ag nanoparticle synthesis),
and the choice of an acidic salt bridge electrolyte such as sulfuric
acid to fill the reference electrode bridge tube may alter, for instance,
a highly pH-sensitive synthesis. A best practice is to characterize
and “verify” all measured products through orthogonal
techniques such as electron microscopy or optical spectroscopy until
a robust protocol for OCP measurement is established for a particular
synthetic system via selection of compatible glassware and electrodes
(Figure). Once a
protocol has been established, experimental setup is facile and OCP
measurements themselves generally show good batch-to-batch, day-to-day,
and researcher-to-researcher reproducibility.

SEM images of colloidal
Pd THH particles which were (A) unmeasured
and undisturbed and (B) subject to OCP measurements throughout growth.
Both growth solutions were prepared with oven-dried BioXtra CTAB with
additives: 0.58 μM NaI and 230 μL of acetone (0.31 M in
the growth solution). Scale bars: 300 nm. Panel B adapted with permission
under a Creative Commons CC BY-NC 3.0 license from ref . Copyright 2024 Royal
Society of Chemistry.

Beyond issues of synthetic reproducibility, new insights into specific
chemical mechanisms of nanoparticle growth are necessary for a more
predictive approach to synthesis design. While comparison of OCP measurements
for benchmarking and troubleshooting purposes does not necessarily
require detailed deconvolution of the specific individual processes
contributing to the overall mixed solution potential, the mixed solution
potential contains a wealth of additional chemical information that
can be further analyzed. OCP measurements capture information related
to metal ion reduction rate and reducing agent oxidation, as well
as surface interactions and diffusion if they affect the redox process.
Work to understand how to extract these parameters and mechanistic
information easily from an OCP measurement, using orthogonal analytical
techniques to probe each one, is ongoing.

A particular opportunity
afforded by the use of OCP measurements
is the ability to observe chemical changes in the growth solution
directly, rather than studying physical changes to nanoparticles during
or following growth. In this section, we will first summarize progress
made with other frequently used techniques for in situ and time-resolved
study of nanoparticle growth mechanisms.Sectionprovides detailed contextual background
on the strengths and limitations of these other techniques: electron
microscopy, UV–vis spectroscopy, inductively coupled plasma
spectroscopies, and NMR spectroscopy. A reader who has a high degree
of familiarity with the nuances of each technique may wish to skip
directly toSection. We will then highlight how time-resolved, in situ solution potential
measurements can complement and fill gaps in understanding left by
these other analysis techniques.

Electron microscopy techniques
such as SEM and TEM are some of the most common physical characterization
methods for metal nanoparticles, each with unique benefits: SEM has
its advantages in capturing three-dimensional structural information
and TEM provides increased resolution, down to the atomic scale. Most
often, both SEM and TEM imaging are used for the characterization
of nanoparticle products following the conclusion of growth. However,
tracking the size and shape development of nanoparticles during growth
is feasible through point-in-time imaging with SEM as well as TEM.,,−In this method, nanoparticle
growth is stopped through chemical or mechanical means at a defined
time point of the reaction. A near-instantaneous stop in reaction
progress can be achieved by a chemical quenching agent, often the
chelating agent bis­(p-sulfonatophenyl)­phenylphosphine dihydrate potassium
salt (BSPP) (discussed further in the ICP-OES/MS section),,,although cystine has also been
used. Unfortunately, the strong adsorption
of BSPP on the surface of metal nanoparticles often leads to charging-related
image artifacts and a decrease in image quality. Instead of chemically quenching the reaction, an aliquot
of the growth solution can be centrifuged for several minutes at a
specific time point to isolate nanoparticles from the supernatant
containing the reducing agent and unreacted metal ions, stopping the
further growth of the nanoparticles. However, the minutes-long centrifuging
step in this method limits time resolution.

Electron microscopy
additionally allows for the further characterization of the structure
and composition of nanoparticle growth intermediates using complementary
characterization techniques like EDS (SEM and TEM), electron energy
loss spectroscopy (EELS; TEM only) and electron diffraction (TEM only).−For example, Ahn et al. paired point-in-time TEM imaging with EDS
mapping to study Au, Pd, Ag, and multimetallic nanostructures throughout
their growth. Scanning transmission electron
microscopy (STEM) can also provide high-resolution characterization
of shape development and elemental distribution,,−such as the tracking of the development of single-crystalline Au
seeds into 20-fold twinned Ag–Au icosahedra through sequential
growth of Ag tetrahedra onto the Au seeds.

In addition to point-in-time electron microscopy methods,
in situ
TEM techniques have become a significant tool for studying nanoparticle
growth.−These techniques enable the observation of growth,
dissolution, and shape transformations in real space and real time
under vacuum, liquid, and gas environments. Liquid phase TEM in particular has been utilized to investigate
both classical and nonclassical nucleation and growth pathways, as
well as the self-assembly of nanoparticles.,,,Early examples
of liquid phase TEM involved the time-resolved study of copper (Cu)
nucleation and growth during electrodeposition,,while additional examples have probed Ag–Pd and Ag–Au
galvanic replacement reactions on Ag nanoparticle templates,,and the development of core–shell bimetallic structures.,An advantage of in situ imaging in a liquid cell is the capture
of much smaller time intervals than point-in-time imaging following
reaction quenching. This opens up the investigation of seed formation
and growth dynamics, which are critical for establishing nanoparticle
structure at early time points. Liao et al. used a liquid cell TEM
in conjunction with a fast-detection camera to track the facet development
of Pt nanocubes during the first seconds of growth, and Gao et al. later followed up this work with liquid
cell observation of the development of high-index facets from Pt cubes
following electron beam irradiation. Time-lapse
liquid cell TEM imaging has also been used to understand nanoparticle
growth by monitoring the dissolution of nanoparticles through etching.,,Ye et al. studied the oxidative
etching of Au nanorods, nanocubes, and rhombic dodecahedral nanoparticles
in a redox environment in a liquid cell, using time-lapse TEM imaging
to track the shape of intermediates throughout the course of dissolution. These time-lapse images revealed tetrahexahedral
structures as an intermediate during the nonequilibrium etching process
of multiple Au nanocrystal shapes (Figure).

Transition of a rhombic dodecahedral Au nanoparticle
to a THH shape
during nonequilibrium etching by a TEM beam. (A) Model of a rhombic
dodecahedron (gray) with intermediate THH shown internally (blue).
(B) Time-lapse TEM images during etching and corresponding snapshots
from Monte Carlo simulations of the etching process. THH intermediates
with labeled zone axis and calculated {hk0} facet
from (C) experiment and (D) simulation. (E) Crystallographic particle
dissolution rates extracted from contour plots, averaged over several
symmetric directions. (F) Time-domain contour plots, showing contour
every 1.6 s during etching, with relevant crystallographic directions
labeled as dotted lines. Adapted with permission from ref . Copyright 2016 American
Association for the Advancement of Science.

In a second method, the growth of plasmonic nanoparticles
is investigated
directly by analyzing the change in the LSPR peak of the nanoparticles
over time. The position of the absorbance maxima of the LSPR is characteristic
of the shape, size, and composition of a nanoparticle, allowing one
to monitor the growth of nanoparticles of a specific shape over time
from UV–vis. Information about the development of the size
of the nanoparticles can be gathered, as an increase in particle size
leads to a shift of the longitudinal LSPR to longer wavelengths (red
shift). In most cases, the information obtained from the UV–vis
spectra is solely qualitative, giving information about the concentration,
shape, and size of the particles as well as trends in these characteristics.−In a recent example, our research group used time-resolved UV–vis
to study the mechanism of a visible light-induced interconversion
of Ag nanoprisms to icosahedra. The gradual
onset of the characteristic absorbance peaks of Ag icosahedra at ∼450
nm, with the simultaneous decrease of the characteristic peak of the
Ag prisms in the near-infrared (NIR) throughout the course of the
reaction, indicated an interconversion of the prisms into icosahedra
at illumination with light of a specific wavelength. (FigureA). This interconversion mechanism
was further supported by point-in-time SEM imaging, which additionally
indicated a homogeneous nucleation of icosahedral seeds from residual
Ag+with subsequent growth of these icosahedra utilizing
the oxidative dissolution of the prisms as a source of Ag+(FigureB–D).

(A) Point-in-time UV–vis extinction spectra of
the growth
solution at discrete time points during the prism to icosahedra transformation
under 400 nm illumination. (B–D) Point-in-time SEM images of
Ag prisms during 400 nm irradiation-induced reconfiguration into icosahedra.
Images show particles following 400 nm irradiation for (B) 30 min,
(C) 60 min, and (D) 120 min. Scale bars: 500 nm. Adapted with permission
from ref . Copyright
2023 American Chemical Society.

In an additional recent study, UV–vis extinction
spectroscopy
was used by Simon et al. to monitor the growth of Au, Au/M bimetallic
(M = Cd, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Ag, Pt, or Pd), and Ag/Pt nanoparticles produced
using a molecular photosensitizer as the reducing agent. In combination with point-in-time TEM imaging,
the optical density (O.D.) derived from the UV–vis spectra
(a qualitative method for tracking nanoparticle concentration) confirmed
that the nanoparticles produced by photocatalytic reduction were continuously
nucleated throughout the reaction under sustained illumination, while
all particle growth was quenched in the dark. This contrasts with
what is typically observed in homogeneously nucleated metal nanoparticle
syntheses, where nucleation commonly occurs in a single burst early
in the reaction.

LSPR peaks in UV–vis spectra can additionally
be studied
quantitatively through a fit of Gaussian functions to the spectra.,This method was successfully used by Wang et al. in the study of
the shape evolution of Ag nanodecahedra and nanoprisms, where different
growth mechanisms of Ag nanoparticles were investigated by extracting
the time-resolved contributions to the overall UV–vis absorbance
resulting from Ag (1) seeds, (2) prisms, and (3) decahedra. Furthermore, this method allowed the authors
to obtain Arrhenius plots of rate vs temperature at different irradiation
wavelengths by tracking the seed concentration, which was the Ag+source in this reaction.

The procedure for conducting time-resolved
ICP measurements typically involves quenching metal ion reduction
in an aliquot of the nanoparticle growth solution at each time point
of interest using a chelating agent, commonly BSPP. BSPP was initially
selected due to its affinity for chelating Ag and Au ions, but has
since proven successful for additional metals.,,,,,The quenched aliquot
of growth solution is then centrifuged, and the supernatant (containing
BSPP-chelated metal ions) is separated from reduced metal solids.
For analysis of the reduced metal solids, the isolated pellets of
nanoparticles are then washed, digested in aqua regia, and diluted
to an appropriate concentration for ICP-OES or ICP-MS analysis. Supernatant
samples typically only require dilution before analysis. The concentration
of the element of interest obtained by ICP spectroscopy is representative
of the concentration of unreacted, unreduced metal ions (for a supernatant
sample) or reduced metal ions incorporated into nanoparticles (from
a digested solid sample).

The as-determined concentrations of metal at different time
points
are used to generate a kinetic curve based on either the depletion
of the metal precursor ion or the increase in the amount of reduced
metal over time. Comparison of this data across multiple reaction
conditions (i.e., different concentrations of additives) can give
qualitative insight into differences in particle growth rate and extent
of reaction for different syntheses. This approach has, for instance,
been used by our research group to demonstrate the catalysis of metal
ion reduction by low concentrations of halide additives. Point-in-time electron microscopy images are
often correlated with time-resolved ICP data. For example, 3 μM
I–was found to be necessary for the growth of Au–Pd
tetradecapod nanoparticles, while a rhombic dodecahedral shape formed
in the absence of I–(FigureA,B). The ICP-OES
kinetics data showed that the rates of Pd ion reduction with and without
iodide diverged at about 15 min, while the rates of Au ion reduction
remained the same (FigureC,D). Time-resolved SEM imaging of tetradecapod formation
revealed that, prior to 14 min of growth, the particles had a rhombic
dodecahedral morphology. At 16 min, however, high-index features became
visible in the SEM images, confirming the shape-directing role of
the iodide-induced change in Pd ion reduction rate beginning at 15
min (FigureE).

(A,B) SEM images
demonstrating change in Au–Pd particle
morphology with and without addition of NaI. (A) 3 μM added
NaI; tetradecapod morphology. (B) No added NaI; rhombic dodecahedral
morphology. (C,D) ICP-OES kinetics data showing the reduction of (B)
Pd and (C) Au ions over the course of bimetallic nanoparticle growth.
Data are shown for particles synthesized with and without NaI. (E)
Point-in-time SEM images of the formation of Au–Pd tetradecapod
particles, obtained by quenching aliquots of reactions with BSPP.
Green boxes highlight the correlation between (C) the difference in
Pd ion reduction rate at 15 min for syntheses with and without iodide
and (E) the transition from rhombic dodecahedral to high-index proto-tetradecapod
morphology at 14–16 min. Scale bars: 200 nm. Adapted with permission
from ref . Copyright
2017 Wiley-VCH.

Although NMR spectroscopy
is frequently used for kinetic characterization and mechanism determination
(as well as simple product identification and yield quantification)
by synthetic chemists focusing on small molecules, metal–organic
frameworks, and polymer materials, its use in the metal nanoparticle
synthesis community has been far more limited. NMR spectroscopy is
most commonly employed for analyzing organic reagents used during
synthesis,and probing properties of ligands
at the surface of nanoparticles.−Interpretation of NMR spectra for even simple organic molecules
in solutions containing metal nanoparticles is made complex by resonance
frequency shifts due to the hyperfine coupling between the nuclei
of interest and the conduction band electrons at the metal nanoparticle
surface (Knight shift). Additionally,
probing any species appended to a metal nanoparticle via NMR will
generally result in peak broadening (a powder-type pattern, similar
to those seen in solid-state NMR). These
effects make the assignment of small peaks and examination of more
subtle changes in chemical shift (δ) complicated for some organic
species of interest in nanoparticle growth solutions. Additionally,
concentrations of many species of interest (such as chemical reducing
agents) in nanoparticle growth solutions are often multiple orders
of magnitude lower than the concentrations of other organics (surfactants,
polymers), complicating peak resolution for1H NMR and13C NMR techniques especially. Furthermore, the most common
nuclei of interest for solution-phase NMR (1H NMR,13C NMR,15N NMR,17O NMR,19F-NMR, and31P NMR) are generally not applicable techniques
for probing many of the inorganic species of interest (Cl–, Br–, I–, transition metals)
in metal nanoparticle growth solutions.

The
NMR study of metal nuclei for characterizing metal nanoparticle
growth is also challenging. While Au nanoparticles are otherwise generally
well-characterized compared to other metals, probing197Au via NMR is difficult due to its high quadrupole moment, though
solid-state techniques for bulk197Au-NMR have been developed. The107Ag and109Ag nuclei
do not suffer from this issue, but have hours-long thermal relaxation
(T1) times, making acquisition of large
data sets time-prohibitive. Additionally,
the gyromagnetic ratio of both Ag isotopes is low, leading to poor
detection sensitivity and consequently the need for a different, specialized
probe.,Coupling Au or Ag to heteroatoms has had
some success in nanoparticle characterization,,and this approach has even been used to monitor the conversion of
Ag­(I) into Ag nanoclusters and ∼30 nm Ag nanoparticles.

In contrast to Au and Ag,195Pt has advantageous NMR
properties and has been studied extensively during nanoparticle growth
via NMR in comparison to other metal nuclei. In early work, Pellechia
et al. used195Pt-NMR to track the kinetics of ligand exchange
between a Pt­(II) salt and poly­(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimers during
a PAMAM-mediated Pt particle synthesis. These NMR spectra were used to determine the relationship between
the PAMAM structure and Pt­(II) speciation and reactivity, with consequences
for Pt particle growth. Straney et al. further examined Pt­(IV) and
its pH-dependent reduction onto Au nanoprism substrates via195Pt-NMR. This work correlated information
about the chemical environment of the growth solution and Pt­(IV) speciation
with mechanisms of Au–Pt interaction and, ultimately, the resulting
bimetallic nanoparticle morphologyAu@Pt core–shell
with Pt pendant “islands” vs hollow frame nanostructures
(FigureA–C).
This information was then coupled with time-resolved electron microscopy
(FigureD–G)
and UV–vis studies (FigureH) to gain an understanding of the formation kinetics
of the Pt islands.

(A)195Pt NMR analysis of H2PtCl6(Pt precursor) speciation as a function of precursor solution
pH.
(B) TEM images of Pt deposition on Au nanoprism substrates at Pt precursor
solution pH values of (B) 1.8 and (C) 8.6. Scale bars: 50 nm. (D–G)
Point-in-time SEM images of Au nanoprism substrates indicating the
extent of Pt deposition at (D) 2 min, (E) 4 min, (F) 6 min, and (G)
8 min after addition of H2PtCl6to the reaction
solution, with higher magnification image insets at the lower right
of each panel. Larger image scale bars: 100 nm; inset scale bars:
50 nm. (H) Point-in-time UV–vis–NIR spectra corresponding
to the SEM images. Panels A and C–H adapted with permission
from ref . Copyright
2014 American Chemical Society. Panel B adapted with permission from
ref . Copyright
2015 American Chemical Society.

Gaining a time-resolved understanding
of the metal nanoparticle growth process requires careful selection
of characterization techniques (Table). Point-in-time TEM and SEM are ideal for characterizing
nanoparticle morphology throughout the growth process, but do not
directly reveal anything about the chemical environment within a nanoparticle
growth solution. For in situ TEM techniques, care must be taken to
ensure that any changes observed are not the result of beam damage
to the sample or beam-induced reactions.−Often, additional
experimentation involving variation of more individual parameters
or the introduction of other characterization techniques is necessary
to correlate a physical change observed through electron microscopy
with a change in chemical environment. Electron microscopy also captures
a small subset of the overall ensemble of nanoparticles, which is
particularly important to consider in single particle measurements
such as those conducted via in situ TEM.

Point-in-time ICP-OES/MS
measurements are powerful for tracking
metal ion reduction over time. Their main drawback is the time-consuming
nature of sample preparation (a full day is required to prepare the
samples necessary to probe a 1 h synthesis reaction) and the limited
time resolution at the beginning of the growth reaction. Unlike many
other commonly used techniques, they do probe a chemical process in
the nanoparticle growth solution (metal ion reduction), rather than
only physical changes in particles themselves. However, since these
measurements only provide information about metal ion reduction rate
(concentration of either metal ions in solution or reduced metal over
time), they must be correlated with additional information about growth
solution composition and/or nanoparticle morphology to be predictive
of or descriptive about nanoparticle growth principles.

Like
UV–vis spectroscopy, NMR spectroscopy can be a powerful
method for probing metal nanoparticle growth and the fate of individual
small molecules in a nanoparticle growth solution. However, the complexities
of NMR with metal nanoparticles in the sample and/or NMR of metal
nuclei, both in experimentation and interpretation, are practically
limiting. On top of the challenges of interpreting spectra containing
metal nanoparticles, experimental design for in situ NMR studies of
nanoparticle growth can be challenging for other reasons. Standard
NMR tube sizes hold much lower solution volumes than those used for
most nanoparticle growth solutions, which can change important factors
such as diffusion. Furthermore, the time resolution available at the
beginning of a growth reaction is limited by the time necessary to
take a sufficient number of NMR scans for an appropriate signal-to-noise
ratio. For these reasons, adoption of NMR as a time-resolved technique
for growth studies (rather than for other uses, such as examining
ligand shells on metal nanoparticles following growth) by the research
community has remained fairly limited despite the technique’s
flexibility.

OCP measurements offer
an additional option for time-resolved characterization of nanoparticle
growth mechanisms that can address challenges raised by existing analysis
approaches. While efforts to fully understand the contribution of
individual processes and synthetic conditions to the mixed solution
potential are ongoing, progress has been made in identifying the underlying
chemical origins of the overall measured mixed potential. For example,
tuning the ratio of reducing agent concentration to metal ion concentration
is a facile way to control reduction rate in colloidal synthesisa
higher ratio of chemical reducing agent to metal ions leads to a stronger
reducing environment and faster metal ion reduction. In our synthesis
of Pd nanoparticles in BioUltra A CTAB, when [AA] was held constant
and [Pd2+] was decreased, products shifted from terraced
cube (TC) nanoparticles (0.38 mM Pd2+) to THH (0.24 mM
Pd2+) to CC (0.15 mM Pd2+) (FigureA–C). These shifts in Pd precursor concentrationphenomenologically
associated with changes in growth rate and therefore formation of
different kinetic productscorresponded with changes in the
measured OCP. The OCP measurement of TC growth was consistently shifted
∼0.05 V more positive (more weakly reducing) than the OCP measurement
of THH growth, which was in turn shifted ∼0.06 V more positive
(more weakly reducing) than the OCP measurement of CC growth (FigureD). These data
suggest a relationship between the reducing agent and metal ion concentrations
(or their relative ratio) and the kinetics of nanoparticle growth,
which can in turn be observed in the strength of the reducing environment
measured by the OCP method.

(A–C) SEM images of Pd nanoparticle
shape as a function
of Pd2+concentration: (A) 400, (B) 250, and (C) 150 μL
of 10 mM Na2PdCl4. These volumes correspond
to overall concentrations of (A) 0.38, (B) 0.24, and (C) 0.15 mM of
Pd2+. Scale bars: 300 nm. (D) OCP measurements of otherwise
identical growth solutions containing 0.38 mM, 0.24 mM, and 0.15 mM
of Pd2+. Adapted with permission under a Creative Commons
CC BY-NC 3.0 license from ref . Copyright 2024 Royal Society of Chemistry.

The in situ nature of
the OCP measurement method allows for increased
confidence in the relevance of the measurement to an identical “unobserved”
growth reaction. This eliminates possible changes in variables such
as mass transport due to changes in solution volume necessary to prepare
reactions for techniques such as in situ NMR, UV–vis, or in
situ TEM. It also eliminates concerns that the preparation method
of samples for measurement with ex situ time-resolved techniques could
be a confounding factorfor example, the roles of flocculation
and particle aggregation in creating nonhomogenous distributions of
particles in solution over time, which can present an issue for preparation
of point-in-time ICP-OES/MS and electron microscopy samples. Finally,
it is nondestructive, allowing for analysis with a secondary technique
(i.e., electron microscopy) following the OCP measurement. The ability
to take in situ OCP measurements without significant effects on the
growth processes of noble metal nanoparticles can provide a richer
understanding of nanoparticle growth chemistry, which is necessary
to further build synthetic understanding.

Thus, far, we have
studied only monometallic particle growth using
the OCP method. The mixed potential nature of OCP method presents
both challenges and possible opportunities for studying multimetallic
nanoparticle growth. On one hand, the mixed potential nature of measurements
means that the reduction of one metal vs another cannot be explicitly
separated, as they can be with other electroanalytical techniques
such as cyclic voltammetry. On the other hand, measurement of the
mixed solution potential provides a direct opportunity to study multimetallic
growth where one metal influences or changes the reduction pathway
of another.

(A) Schematic of a colloidal
synthesis with corresponding OCP measurement
(top) and its subsequent translation to electrodeposition (bottom).
(B) Comparison between time-resolved potential profiles for colloidal
synthesis (OCP measurement) and electrodeposition (chronopotentiometry
measurement) of Pd octahedra. (C,D) SEM images of (C) colloidally
synthesized and (D) electrodeposited Pd octahedra. The electrodeposition
synthesis was conducted using a galvanodynamic current ramp from −20.4
to −2.55 μA/cm2over 30 min. Scale bars: 200
nm. Panels B–D adapted with permission from ref . Copyright 2020 American
Chemical Society.

We initially validated this colloidal-to-electrodeposition
translation
approach with the successful translation of the colloidal chemical
synthesis of Pd cubes and octahedra to electrodeposition on an electrode
surface. The mixed solution potential
of both colloidal growth reactions sloped upward over the course of
growth, which was attributed to the oxidation of the chemical reducing
agent, which was not in significant excess. To match this, a current
ramp that became less strongly reducing over time was programmed for
the electrodeposition. Application of this current ramp led to a potential
profile over the course of the electrodeposition reaction that tracked
well with the OCP measurements (FigureB) and matching colloidal and electrodeposited
nanoparticle morphologies were subsequently confirmed for both shapes
by SEM (FigureC,D).
Recently, the development of an electrodeposition method inspired
by our colloidal synthesis of high-index Pd nanoparticles with shapes
controlled by acetone and iodide impurities in CTAB provided further
evidence for translatability between solution growth and electrodeposition. Overall, the correspondence between colloidal
synthesis and electrodeposition suggests possible opportunities for
using electrodeposition to directly accelerate synthesis discovery,
rather than only using colloidal synthesis to inform synthesis design
for electrodeposition.

As described earlier,
the present approach for synthesis development for new nanoparticle
architectures and/or compositions often involves a combinatorial,
iterative process. Consequently, many colloidal synthetic routes belong
to the same complex family tree, tracing back to examples such as
the Turkevich synthesis for citrate-capped Au nanoparticles and the Au nanorods developed independently
by the Murphy and El-Sayed research groups.,Developing novel synthetic approaches without iterating on the conditions
of a previously published synthesis remains challenging, which in
turn limits the ability to develop syntheses for certain desired architectures,
such as shape-controlled non-noble metal particles, multimetallic
particles, or particles with unusual high-index facet structures.
Combinatorial or stepwise screening approaches are generally time-consuming
when not guided by chemical design principles. Additionally, while
iterating on previous work has thus far been very successful both
in generating syntheses for new particle morphologies and in building
a framework for physical and structural understanding of nanoparticle
growth processes, the discovery of new synthetic routes for low-index
and other easier-to-attain products is gradually being exhausted.

Meeting demands for the development of new synthetic conditions involves
confronting the limitations of colloidal nanoparticle synthesis with
a chemical reducing agent. One major challenge is the relatively small
library of chemical reducing agentsl-ascorbic acid,
sodium borohydride, citric acid, hydroquinone, hydroxylamine, hydrazine,
polyols, and otherscommonly used in colloidal nanoparticle
synthesis. The limited number of chemical
reductants available essentially quantizes the available reducing
strengths/potentials for metal ion reduction, in turn shrinking the
scope of available chemical syntheses.

Like colloidal synthesis, electrodeposition
yields control over the size, shape, and other structural characteristics
of metal nanoparticles. Rather than
adding a chemical reducing agent as in colloidal synthesis, the Fermi
level of the working electrode is changed. This allows for the regulation
of the electron supply to the nanoparticle growth reaction through
experimental control of the potential or current density applied to
the working electrode by a potentiostat. This enables precise control
of the kinetics of metal ion reduction on the working electrode and
allows for more accurate manipulation of the final product morphology.
Fine control of the applied potential or current density can adjust
the rates of the redox reactions, while temperature and reagent concentrations
further influence the growth and shape of the nanostructures. This overall provides access to a far greater
number of different reducing environments available for designing
new syntheses, in contrast to the more limited possibilities of chemical
reduction.

Electrodeposition as a standalone method, without
parallel insights from colloidal syntheses, has been used to synthesize
a wide range of materials, including thermodynamically favorable nanostructuressuch
as nanowires, cubes, octahedra, and nanosheetsof common metals
(Au, Pd, Pt, and Cu). Electrodeposition
syntheses of shaped multimetallic nanostructuresPt-rare earth
metal alloys and iron–nickel (Fe–Ni) alloyshave
also been reported, although these are rarer. Electrodeposition is generally classified into two main
categories: the galvanostatic method and the potentiostatic method.
In the galvanostatic method (chronopotentiometry), the current is
kept constant while the potential at the electrode surface is allowed
to vary.,This method is the closest analogy to colloidal
chemical synthesis. In contrast, the
potentiostatic method (chronoamperometry) involves applying a constant
potential for a certain duration to electrodeposit metal nanoparticles.,This method differs from colloidal synthesis, as the solution potential
in colloidal synthesis will naturally increase over the course of
colloidal synthesis as more of the reductant is oxidized. In contrast, potentiostatic electrodeposition
will typically involve application of an increasingly strong current
over time to maintain the same potential, causing different effects
in later stages of particle growth. Galvanodynamic
and potentiodynamic methods, involving applied current or applied
potential ramps, respectively, are also occasionally used.

Just as seeds are used to catalyze metal
ion reduction and control
nanoparticle growth in colloidal synthesis, the use of a nucleation
or seeding step can be employed in electrodeposition. Single-step,
“conventional” electrodeposition methods, which lack
a separate seeding step, result in ongoing nucleation during nanoparticle
growth, which often results in polydispersity and affects the shape
and size of the newly formed particles. This issue can be addressed by separating the nucleation and growth
steps. Uniform nuclei or seeds can be generated by applying a large
initial overpotential for a short period. Following this, slow growth
can be achieved by carefully controlling the potential or current
density, which prevents further nucleation and allows for controlled
growth onto the seeds.

Recently, electrophoretic deposition
has been utilized to immobilize
citrate-capped Au nanoclusters uniformly on electrode surfaces via
the electrochemical oxidation of hydrogen peroxide or hydroquinone.,Electrophoretic deposition involves two processes: migration of
charged particles present in the solution/suspension toward the electrode
surface under an applied potential, followed by the accumulation and
deposition of the particles onto the electrode surface. This method
has been used to study the electrochemical growth kinetics of Au nanoparticles
as a function of Au nanocluster size. Other examples of seeded electrochemical syntheses in the literature
have been conducted using double-step chronopotentiometry experiments,
such as the synthesis of high-index faceted Au nanocrystals in deep
eutectic solvents by Wei et al. Following
application of the same nucleation overpotential, variation of the
growth potentials (Egrowth) between −0.45
and −0.6 V led to a shape evolution from Au concave trisoctahedra
(TOH), to stellated concave TOH, to concave cubes, to nanocubes.

Recently, pulsed electrodeposition methods have been employed to
control the growth of nanoparticles, enabling the synthesis of metal
nanoparticles with an expanded range of shapes.,The pulsed electrodeposition process consists of an initial step
to relax the compositional double layer, followed by repeated, alternating
anodic and cathodic pulses of either current density or potential
to produce uniquely shaped, often high-index nanoparticles. Pulsed techniques are unique to electrodeposition,
as the rapid cycling of oxidizing and reducing conditions is not presently
feasible for colloidal nanoparticle synthesis.

One common pulsed electrodeposition technique is
the square wave
potential method, which can generate metal nanoparticles with complex
structures by oscillating between an oxidizing upper potential (EU) and a reducing lower potential (EL) (FigureA). Examples of high-index structures
synthesized using a square wave potential include Pt tetrahexahedra and Pd tetrahexahedra (FigureB). Shape
evolution of Pd nanocrystals electrodeposited with a square wave potential
from cubes to truncated octahedra has also been demonstrated, mediated
by the concentration of the PdCl2precursor salt. Additional parameter space is opened through
variation of eitherEUorELwhile holding the other potential constant. For example,
Wei et al. electrochemically synthesized faceted Pd nanocrystals using
a square-wave method in choline chloride-urea based deep eutectic
solvent. By keepingELat −0.40 V and increasingEUprogressively from – 0.05 to 0.05 V vs a Pt quasi-reference
counter electrode, the shape of the Pd nanocrystals was changed from
a mixture of octahedra and icosahedra to concave–disdyakis
triacontahedra.

(A) Schematic of the square-wave potential electrodeposition
method
for synthesis of Pd THH nanoparticles. (B) SEM image of Pd THH Pd
nanoparticles and inset of high-magnification SEM image showing a
single Pd THH. Larger image scale bar: 200 nm; inset scale bar: 50
nm. Adapted with permission from ref . Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.

The added flexibility in choosing an applied current
or potential
that is not fixed by the selection of available chemical reducing
agents, as well as options for pulsing of redox conditions and the
ability to change the growth environment over multiple steps, make
electrodeposition methods promising for the synthesis of all metal
nanoparticles. They are especially poised for further development
of synthetic conditions that are challenging to achieve by colloidal
synthesis. These include the development of nonpolyol thermal syntheses
for shaped Ag nanoparticles and conditions for the shape control of
Pt. Pt represents an especially interesting case, as there are presently
few reports of successful colloidal faceted shape control (even for
conditions similar to those which produce shaped Pd nanoparticles),
yet shape control of Pt nanoparticles has been achieved through electrodeposition
repeatedly.,−The increased abundance of electrodeposition syntheses compared
to colloidal syntheses for Pt underlines the opportunities that emerge
from the wider parameter space of reducing environments available
in electrodeposition.

The expanded parameter space afforded
by electrodeposition also
invites new research into techniques for the synthesis of nonplatinum
group nanostructures, particularly Cu, Ni, and cobalt (Co), for which
there are far fewer well-established colloidal synthesis routes to
shaped nanoparticles. As previously
discussed, the majority of colloidal syntheses for noble metals have
been developed through an iterative approach starting from reported
syntheses for Au and Pd; however, this approach is likely not feasible
for the development of non-noble metal nanoparticles synthesis, as
the synthetic conditions for these materials require the use of stronger
reducing environments or higher reaction temperatures in colloidal
synthesis than are typical for noble metal nanoparticles.,,Electrodeposition could present
an advantage over colloidal chemical synthesis in this case. The added
flexibility in reducing environment design provided by electrodeposition
methods may also aid in the development of multimetallic nanoparticle
syntheses. Shape control of alloy nanoparticles remains a challenge
due to the need to either closely match the reduction potentials of
all metals or to make the reducing environment (applied current/potential
or chemical reducing environment) so strong that the difference between
metal ion reduction rates is minimized. The ability to control both chemical and electrochemical parameters
simultaneously in electrodeposition synthesis may allow for better
achievement of these synthetic needs.

Additionally, the omission
of chemical reducing agents from the
electrodeposition growth solution in turn allows for omission of acid
or base additives used to mediate the strength of the chemical reductant,
as demonstrated by the adaptation of a colloidal synthesis for corrugated
Pd nanoparticles to an electrodeposition synthesis. The ability to decouple pH from the applied reducing environment
in electrodeposition may provide additional options for promoting
the formation of metallic vs metal oxide nanostructures, as copper
oxide formation, for instance, is known to be pH-dependent.

With respect to mechanistic studies of
nanoparticle growth, an
advantage of electrodeposition is that deposition can be easily and
rapidly stopped at any time for characterization of the “intermediate”
nanoparticle products. The presence of the growing nanoparticles on
the electrode surface also facilitates additional characterization
by complementary electroanalytical methods. For instance, linear sweep
voltammetry has been used to study the electrochemical growth kinetics
of Au nanoparticles with respect to the seed size. Underpotential deposition has also been used to characterize
the surface area and structure of noble metal nanoparticles. This
technique involves the irreversible site-specific adsorption of adatoms
onto the nanoparticle surface under underpotential conditions. After
adsorption, subsequent quantitative stripping of the adatoms reveals
the relative amounts of different surface facets, and this approach
has been used to characterize Pt spheres, cubes, octahedra, tetrahedra,
and truncated octahedra.,Unfortunately, real-time
electrochemical analysis via these types of methods during the growth
process is challenging, since electrochemical characterization methods
such as stripping voltammetry or underpotential deposition tend to
be destructive.

While electrodeposition presents unique possibilities
and opens
additional parameter space for the synthesis of non-noble metal nanoparticles
and alloy nanoparticles, additional experimental considerations must
be taken, as the available applied potential range is not unlimited
in these cases. The onset of electrolyte decomposition, particularly
due to the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)and, less importantly,
the oxygen evolution reaction (OER)in aqueous electrolytes,
poses a limit to the available potential range that may be narrower
than theoretical potentials of interest for reduction of non-noble
metal ions. Avoidance of the HER and OER are crucial for shaped particle
synthesis, as gas evolution during electrodeposition results in the
formation of unfaceted nanocrystalline structures. The onset of the HER can be tuned by controlling the pH
of the aqueous electrolyte if more reducing (lower) potentials are
required, although an increase in pH can also concurrently increase
the likelihood of metal oxide formation. Alternatively, a switch to
a nonaqueous electrolyte can tune the accessible potential window,
while avoiding an increased oxide formation, although precursor solubility
and solvent cost need to be considered.

A present drawback of electrodeposition compared
to traditional colloidal nanoparticle synthesis is that electrodeposition
is usually serial and consequently low throughput. Existing electrodeposition
setups generally require a dedicated potentiostat for each experiment,
limiting the number of conditions that can be screened simultaneously. The development of high-throughput electrodeposition
approaches would enable the combination of the increased parameter
space of electrodeposition with a high simultaneous number of experimentstraditionally
a trademark of colloidal synthesisaccelerating the implementation
of a combinatorial approach in electrochemical material synthesis.

Using a multichannel potentiostat known as “Legion”
that is based on the dimensions of a 96-well plate with 96 independently
controllable quasi-reference counter electrodes and a large single
glassy carbon working electrode (FigureA), our research
group, in collaboration with the Baker Group at Texas A&M University,
recently demonstrated that it is possible to increase the throughput
of electrodeposition to match that of colloidal synthesis. Proof of concept for this combinatorial electrodeposition
technique was established via the implementation of a two-part synthesis
discovery approach for shaped Pd nanoparticles. In the first stage,
the chemical environment of the synthesis (surfactant, metal precursor
concentration, etc.) was screened for promising conditions that led
to the deposition of moderately well-defined polyhedral nanoparticles.
In the second stage, the electrochemical parameter space (potential,
constant vs square wave potential profile, deposition time) was investigated
to optimize conditions for the uniform deposition of nanoparticle
shapes that emerged from the first stage of screeningin this
case Pd cubes (FigureB). Importantly, the optimized deposition parameters that resulted
from the combinatorial experiment in the two-electrode cells of the
Legion setup were directly translatable to a standard bulk three-electrode
cell (FigureC,D),
thereby establishing the feasibility of this increased throughput
approach and adding combinatorial nanoparticle synthesis screening
capabilities to the approaches accessible via electrodeposition. These
combinatorial capabilities hold promise both for advancing the discovery
of novel-shaped nanoparticles for the well-studied noble metals Au,
Pd, and Pt by building on already established electrochemical syntheses
for these materials and for accelerating the development of novel
shape-selective conditions for the synthesis of non-noble metal nanoparticles.

(A)
Schematic illustration of the Legion 96-well plate design and
electrode geometry. (B) Schematic representation of the experimental
workflow for synthesis discovery and optimization via array-based
parallel electrodeposition of metal nanoparticles, with separation
of chemical and electrochemical screening stages. (C,D) SEM images
demonstrating translation of the optimized Pd nanocube synthesis conditions
identified with Legion to a bulk three-electrode cell. (C) Pd nanoparticles
electrodeposited using Legion (Ag/AgO QRCE). (D) Pd nanoparticles
electrodeposited using analogous conditions in a traditional bulk
cell (Ag/AgCl || Pt; all deposition potentials shifted +193 mV to
account for the difference in reference electrode potentials between
Ag/AgCl and Ag/AgO). Scale bars: 500 nm. Adapted with permission under
a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0 license from ref . Copyright 2024 American
Chemical Society.

Looking beyond the separate
roles of electrochemistry in (1) measurement
of colloidal synthesis and (2) materials discovery via electrodeposition,
additional emerging opportunities exist at the interface of electrodeposition
and colloidal synthesis, both for synthesis design and for mechanistic
understanding. As one example, some chemical additives necessary for
colloidal synthesis can be omitted entirely from synthesis via electrodeposition.
For instance, surfactant- and capping agent-free synthetic routes
are possible in electrodeposition, where they would be impossible
due to particle aggregation for successful chemical synthesis, as
are some synthetic routes with the omission of acid or base additives.,Consequently, by taking advantage of the parallels between nanoparticle
growth in colloidal synthesis and electrodeposition under well-controlled,
analogous conditions, it becomes possible to directly study the roles
of individual reagents in colloidal synthesis by probing the influence
of their presence and absence on the outcome of electrodeposition.
These insights can then be applied to better inform colloidal synthesis
design. This approach to isolating the specific chemical roles of
individual reagents under particular reaction conditions could be
especially powerful in tandem with insights from electrochemical studies
utilizing single crystal electrode measurements to understand adsorption
of reagents of interest onto model metal surfaces, such as those by
Wiley and co-workers examining the adsorption of halide ions and ionic
surfactants onto Cu, Au, and Ag surfaces.−The immobilization of nanoparticles on a substrate during electrochemical
growth also allows for easier tracking of individual particles throughout
the growth process and therefore improved understanding of particle-to-particle
heterogeneity, as reported by Verma et al. in a recent study of Au
electrodeposition onto colloidally prepared Au cubes, which explored
the roles of CTAB and multiple applied potential conditions on final
Au particle morphology.

In addition,
the added flexibility of electrodeposition to discover
synthetic conditions outside of those accessible using common reducing
agents presents a possible method of identifying reaction environments
that would be successful at producing a particular shape in colloidal
synthesis. Establishing ideal reducing conditions for the growth of
novel shapes using electrodeposition and then translating from electrodeposition
to colloidal synthesisthe reverse of the process described
inSectioncould
be more generally instrumental in identifying chemicals to serve as
novel reducing agents for materials whose synthesis is currently prohibitively
challenging, such as shape-controlled syntheses for nanoparticles
of non-noble transition metals. Combinatorial iteration on colloidal
syntheses developed with this approach could then yield more productive
discovery of new colloidal syntheses. The success of translation from
electrodeposition to colloidal synthesis, for which our research group
established preliminary proof of concept, may also require the use of dynamic synthetic conditions, such as
the addition of reagents at specific time points during nanoparticle
growth or in a controlled manner throughout growth instead of only
at the beginning of the synthesis.

Finally, the process of troubleshooting
irreproducibility could
be streamlined by creating a data set of benchmark OCP measurements
for all synthetic conditions of interest when a newly developed nanoparticle
synthesis is reported, to preliminarily identify variations in synthetic
parameters that induce specific changes in OCP measurements. Comparison
to such a data set would then allow for even faster “informed
guessing” as to how to alter the mixed potential of a nanoparticle
growth solution to match a desired benchmark measurement should a
synthesis by imperfectly reproducible in a different lab. Open access
to such a data set would facilitate synthetic reproducibility efforts
throughout the research community and would provide information that
could be used to understand trends in reactivity in mechanisms across
different synthetic systems. The utility and impact of this information
could also be increased by using rapidly advancing tools such as large
language models and machine learning both to accelerate troubleshooting
of syntheses and to uncover mechanistic trends for use in establishing
a comprehensive set of predictive design principles.

This material is based in part upon work supported
by the U.S. National Science Foundation under Grant No. CHE-2406130
(open-circuit potential measurements and fundamental mechanism studies
for noble metal nanoparticles, support for G.C.H.) and on work supported
by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science under Grant No.
DE-SC0024862 (synthesis discovery via combinatorial electrodeposition,
support for S.H. and H.N.N).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.