The growing threat of fungal infections, driven by increasing
drug
resistance, has become a major global health concern. Candidiasis,
a common human infection, is associated with high mortality, particularly
in invasive cases. Among non- (NAC) species, (renamed ) is of clinical importance because
of its intrinsic resistance to fluconazole, complicating treatment
options. This study evaluated the antifungal efficacy and safety of
the bioinspired peptideCaDef2.1G27‑K44(CDF-GK) against NAC species, with a specific focus on , through a series ofin vitroandin vivotests. CDF-GK effectively inhibited
the growth of several yeast species, including , , , and , with MIC values ranging from 3.12 to 200 μM. The peptide
demonstrated particularly strong activity against , with an MIC100of 25 μM,
an MFC100of 50 μM, and an IC50of 5 μM,
surpassing the effectiveness of fluconazole. Additionally, CDF-GK
inhibited biofilm formation, caused 100% cell death within 1 h, permeabilized
the cell membrane, interacted with ergosterol, induced oxidative stress,
mitochondrial dysfunction, and vacuolar fragmentation, and entered
the intracellular space of .In vivoassays using larvae confirmed the low toxicity of CDF-GK, even at high concentrations,
and significantly improved the survival of infected larvae with minimal
activation of cellular and humoral immune responses. These findings
indicate that CDF-GK holds great promise as a therapeutic agent for infections, as it combines potent antifungal
action with safety in bothin vitroandin
vivomodels.

In Brazil,
the situation is even more concerning. The Ministry
of Health lacks routine epidemiological surveillance for systemic
mycoses, resulting in insufficient data on the prevalence, incidence,
and impact of systemic candidiasis nationwide. Public tertiary hospitals
in Brazil report an incidence rate of 2.49 cases of candidaemia per
1,000 hospital admissions, a figure significantly higher by a factor
of 2–15 than those reported in the United States and Europe.

Previously, our research group designed the antimicrobial
peptideCaDef2.1G27‑K44(dubbed
CDF-GK) on the
basis of its physicochemical properties and explored its antimicrobial
activity and low toxicity to mammalian cells. Comprising 18 amino
acid residues with a global charge of +6, CDF-GK can form an α-helix
in the presence of anionic membranes. It is active againstCandidaspecies andin vitroand exhibits low cytotoxicity toward mammalian
cells. In this study, we further explored
the antifungal and antibiofilm properties of CDF-GKin vitroandin vivousing larvae as an infection model and demonstrated the safety and efficacy
of this peptide in treating candidiasis caused by .

The yeasts (ATCC 10154), (ATCC 90030), (ATCC 6260), (ATCC 6258), and (ATCC
9983) were maintained on Sabouraud agar (1% peptone, 2% glucose, and
1.7% agar) (Merck) and preserved in the LFBM at the CBB of UENF, Campos
dos Goytacazes, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

larval
colonies are maintained at LFBM/CBB/UENF, employing the diet outlined
by Jorjão et al. Larvae in the
sixth instar, weighing between 0.25 and 0.3 g and exhibiting no discernible
melanization, were separated into groups of 10 or 15 within Petri
dishes to be used in the assays. Before infection, the larval proleg
was cleaned with 70% ethanol. Using 10 μL insulin syringes (Uniqmed,
needle 8 mm × 0.30 mm, 5/16 in. × 30G), yeast and peptide
suspensions were injected into the larvae. The assessment of larval
mortality was conducted through visual inspection, considering factors
such as color changes (melanization) and the absence of movement upon
contact with tweezers.

Cells from the different
yeast species , , , and (1 × 104cells/mL)
were incubated in Sabouraud broth containing different concentrations
of the CDF-GK peptide (200 μM to 1.56 μM), with the final
assay volume adjusted to 100 μL. The assay was carried out in
96-well cell culture plates (Nunc) at 30 °C for a period of 24
h. Optical densities were measured at 620 nm after 24 h. Untreated
yeast cells were used as a positive growth control, and the culture
medium was used as a negative growth control. The minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC100) was defined visually as the lowest
peptide concentration (in μM) at which 100% inhibition of yeast
growth was observed within 24 h. The 50% inhibitory concentration
(IC50) was defined as the peptide concentration (in μM)
that caused 50% inhibition of yeast growth and was estimated via nonlinear
regression analysis. The entire procedure was carried out in triplicate
according to the method of Taveira et al. Amphotericin B (AmB) (25 to 0.19 μM) and fluconazole (FLZ)
(200 to 1.56 μM) were also tested against cells. The assay results were determined statistically
via one-way ANOVA, with mean differences of *p<
0.05, **p< 0.01, ***p< 0.001,
and ****p< 0.0001 considered significant. Analyses
were performed with Prism software (version 8.0.2).

After the yeast growth
inhibition assay, the entire contents of the wells containing the
MIC100or twice the MIC100for all yeast tested
were washed in Sabouraud broth and, via a Drigalski loop, evenly spread
on a Petri dish containing Sabouraud agar. The plates were subsequently
incubated at 30 °C for 24 h. Control cells were considered viable;
that is, in the appropriate medium, they divided and formed colonies.
The development of colonies indicates fungistatic action, while the
absence of colony development indicates the fungicidal action of the
peptide. The lowest concentration of peptide, in μM, with fungicidal
action was considered MFC100, whose interpretation was
based on the absence of colony growth after plating. This assay was
based on the method described by Soares et al. The experiments were performed in triplicate.

After the viability of yeast treated with
the CDF-GK peptide was analyzed, an assay was carried out to determine
the minimum period necessary for the peptide, at the MFC100concentration, to reduce cell viability. This assay was carried out as described in the section
“Yeast cellular viability analysis”, with the exception
that a volume of 10 μL from each sample was transferred to Sabouraud
agar plates at 0, 0.5, 1, 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, and 24 h intervals.
Treated and untreated plates were incubated at 30 °C for 24 h.
The colony-forming units (CFUs) were counted, and the percentage of
cell survival was quantified by means of CFU/mL. The assay results
were determined statistically via one-way ANOVA, with mean differences
of ****p< 0.0001 considered significant. Analyses
were performed with Prism software (version 8.0.2).

For the biofilm
formation inhibition assays, a 200 μL aliquot of a suspension
containing 2 × 107cells/mL in BHI broth was added to each well of a 96-well microplate. The microplate was then incubated at 37 °C
for 2 h to allow for cell adhesion. Following this period, each well
was washed twice with sterile PBS to remove nonadherent cells. The
peptide CDF-GK was diluted in BHI broth to obtain concentrations equivalent
to the previously determined MIC, 2 × MIC, 4 × MIC, and
6 × MIC for planktonic cells. After different concentrations
of CDF-GK were added to the wells, the plates were further incubated
for 24 h at 37 °C. The same procedure was carried out for AmB,
which was used as a positive control. Following the 24-h incubation
with CDF-GK and AmB, the culture medium was removed, and the wells
were washed twice with PBS to remove planktonic cells. The adhered
biofilms were stained for 30 min with 200 μL of crystal violet
at a final concentration of 0.1%. Excess stain was removed, and the
biofilm was washed once with 200 μL of PBS. To release the retained
crystal violet from the biofilm cells, 200 μL of 1% SDS in 50%
ethanol was added, and the cellular material was resuspended by pipetting. The absorbance was measured at 490 nm via a
microplate reader. The data presented represent the means of three
independent experiments.

Membrane permeabilization
in was assessed through fluorescence
microscopy using a SYTOX Green probe. The procedure followed the methodology
outlined in the section “Yeast growth inhibition assay”,
with the following adjustments: yeast cells were treated with 5 μM
(IC50) CDF-GK for 24 h. Both the control (untreated cells),
the positive control (Triton X-100, 0.1%), and peptide-treated cells
were then incubated with a 0.2 μM solution of the SYTOX Green
fluorescent probe for 10 min at 30 °C. Subsequent analysis was
conducted via differential interference contrast (DIC) on an optical
microscope (Axioplan A2, Zeiss) equipped with a fluorescence filter
set for fluorescein detection (excitation wavelengths of 450–490
nm; emission wavelength of 500 nm). The
positive control was used to optimize the excitation intensity and
exposure time parameters during fluorescent image acquisition. These
settings were then uniformly applied to all experimental treatments
to ensure consistency.

The lipids
1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine
(POPC), 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine
(POPE), 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-L-serine (POPS), chicken egg sphingomyelin (SM), ergosterol
(Erg), and cholesterol (Chol) were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids,
Inc.

SUVs were prepared as described elsewhere. Briefly, phospholipids from chloroform stock solutions
were mixed at desired molar ratios in a glass tube and dried under
a gentle stream of nitrogen gas to form a thin lipid film. The film
was further dried under vacuum for at least 1 h to ensure complete
removal of residual organic solvent. The film was hydrated with 5
mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.0) at room temperature, followed by six freeze–thaw
cycles to promote vesicle formation and ensure homogeneous dispersion.
The resulting suspension was sonicated on ice using a Sonics Vibra-Cell
VCX 500 (Sonics & Materials, Inc.) tip sonicator for 1 min (5
s on and 10 s off) at 20% amplitude, facilitating the formation of
SUVs. To remove any large insoluble aggregates and potential metallic
particles released from the sonicator tip, the samples were centrifuged
at 13,000 rpm for 10 min using a benchtop centrifuge (Eppendorf 5424R).
Peptide stock solutions were prepared in ultrapure water and diluted
into SUVs immediately prior to analysis to achieve the desired peptide-to-lipid
molar ratio.

CD measurements were conducted
at 30 and 37 °C on a Jasco J-815 spectrometer. Spectra were recorded
in a 1 mm path-length quartz cuvette at 50 nm/s over the wavelength
range of 350 to 190 nm. The data pitch and bandwidth were set to 1
and 2 nm, respectively. Peptide samples were prepared at a concentration
of 30 μM in 5 mM HEPES buffer, pH 7.0. Spectra were acquired
in the absence and presence of SUVs with varying lipid compositions.
The following artificial model membranes were used to mimic distinct
biological membranes: (i) POPC/SM/Chol (40/30/30 mol %) to simulate
the mammalian plasma membrane; (ii) POPC/POPE/POPS (40/30/30 mol %)
to represent a sterol-free fungal membrane; (iii) POPC/POPE/POPS/Erg
(28/21/21/30 mol %) and POPC/POPS/Erg (40/30/30 mol %) to model theCandidagenus membrane containing ergosterol; and (iv) POPC/POPE/POPS/Chol
(28/21/21/30 mol %) to evaluate the impact of cholesterol replacing
ergosterol in a fungal-like membrane. SUVs were prepared at a final
lipid concentration of 450 μM, ensuring minimal light scattering
and absorption flattening effects, with the photomultiplier tube voltage
maintained below 600 V throughout the experiments. For each sample,
10 scans were accumulated and averaged. Data were processed using
the CDToolX software. The average of
the best scans for each measurement was subtracted from the blank
(buffer solution or SUV), zeroed using the appropriate baseline region,
and converted to mean residue ellipticity (MRE), θ, expressed
in deg·cm2·dmol–1. Secondary
structure content was estimated using DichroWeb, applying various algorithms and data sets. The normalized
root mean squared deviation (NRMSD), along with visual inspection
of the computed spectra, was used to assess the quality of the fit,
ensuring accurate structural estimations.

To evaluate the ability of CDF-GK to induce oxidative stress,
the fluorescent probe 2’,7’-dichlorofluorescein diacetate
(H2DCFDA) was used to measure intracellular reactive oxygen
species. The test was carried out as described in the section “Yeast
growth inhibition assay”, with the following modifications:
cells were incubated with 5 μM (IC50) CDF-GK for
24 h. A positive control was performed with 3% acetic acid. After
24 h of incubation, the control and treated cells were incubated with
20 μM H2DCFDA for 30 min at 30 °C and analyzed
via DIC with an optical microscope (Axioplan A2, Zeiss) equipped with
a fluorescence filter set for fluorescein detection (excitation wavelengths
of 450–490 nm; emission wavelength of 500 nm).

To evaluate the Δψm, we used 5,5′,6,6′-tetrachloro-1,1′,3,3′-tetraethylbenzimidazolocarbocyanine
iodide (JC-1). The test was carried out as described in the item “Yeast
growth inhibition assay”, with the following modifications:
the cells were incubated with 5 μM (IC50) CDF-GK
for 24 h. After this incubation period, the cell suspension was centrifuged
at 2500 rpm for 15 min, washed once in 500 μL of PBS (10 mM
NaH2PO4, 0.15 M NaCl), pH 7.4, and resuspended
in 50 μL of PBS. After the cells were washed, 2 μM JC-1
dye was added, and the mixture was incubated for 30 min at 30 °C.
The negative control cells (incubated without CDF-GK) were subjected
to the same treatment as the cells treated with the peptide, and 1%
Triton X-100 was used as the positive control. The cells were analyzed
via DIC via an optical microscope equipped with a fluorescence filter
to detect fluorescein (excitation wavelength: 450–490 nm; emission
wavelengths: 530 and 590 nm).

Vacuolar mapping of was performed using the FM4-64 probe. FM4-64 is a lipophilic styryl
dye that does not permeate cell membranes but instead intercalates
into the plasma membrane and is then taken into cells by endocytosis,
allowing labeling of vacuolar membranes. The test was carried out
as described in the item “Yeast growth inhibition assay”,
with the following modifications: cells were incubated with 5 μM (IC50) CDF-GK for
24 h and then treated with FM4-64 for 1 h at 30 °C. The cells
were subsequently washed and centrifuged with PBS twice to remove
free FM4-64. The control was treated only with FM4-64. The cells were analyzed via DIC with an optical
microscope (Axioplan A2, Zeiss) equipped with a fluorescence filter
set with an absorption/emission wavelength of 585/590 nm.

Before conducting the time-lapse assay with
the peptide conjugated to 5-FAM, its antifungal activity was validated
through an MFC100assay against . This assay was carried out as described in item “Yeast cellular
viability analysis”.

cells were treated with CDF-GK coupled to 5-carboxyfluorescein (5-FAM)
to investigate the interaction of CDF-GK with cells and its ability to enter the intracellular space at a concentration
of the fungicide (50 μM). Initially, cells were cultivated in Sabouraud broth (Merck Millipore, Brazil)
for 16 h at 30 °C. After the growth period, the cells were quantified
in a Neubauer chamber (Laboroptik, United Kingdom) under an optical
microscope (Axioplan A2, Carl Zeiss) to prepare an inoculum with 1
× 106cells/mL. For the time course experiments, aliquots
of 200 μL of cell inoculum were transferred to 1.5 mL microcentrifuge
tubes. Before the addition of CDF-GK coupled to 5-FAM (5-FAM-CDF-GK),
the cells were pretreated with 10 μL of Calcofluor White (Calcofluor
White M2R, 1 g/L; Evans Blue, 0.5 g/L; Sigma) for 10 min. After this
step, the cells were transferred to microscopy slides, followed by
the addition of 50 μM 5-FAM-CDF-GK. Immediately after the addition
of 5-FAM-CDF-GK, the cells were monitored via a Zeiss LSM 710 Laser
Scanning Confocal Microscope (Carl Zeiss, Germany) with a Plan Apochromat
× 63/1.4 objective and scan intervals every 27 s. The images
were created from the z-stack series of confocal planes with Zen Lite
Edition 2011 (Zeiss). For the detection of the fluorescent probes,
we used a set of fluorescence filters with excitation at 365 nm/emission
at 397 nm for Calcofluor White and excitation at 450–490 nm/emission
at 500 nm for the detection of 5-carboxyfluorescein.

The assay was performed as
described by Mylonakis et al., with modifications.
Fifteen last-instar caterpillars
with similar weights (between 250 and 300 mg) and sizes were used
in each of the three treatment groups with CDF-GK. Insulin syringes
were used to inject 10 μL of each concentration of CDF-GK (1000,
500, and 250 μM) into the hemocoel of each larva through the
last proleg. Two groups were included as controls for the general
viability of the larvae: one group was inoculated with PBS, and the
other group sustained injury only from the injection needle. After
injection, the larvae were incubated in Petri dishes at 37 °C,
and the number of dead larvae was counted every 24 h for a period
of 168 h. Larvae were considered dead when they showed no movement
in response to touch. Survival percentage curves were plotted, and
estimates of differences in survival (log-rank Mantel–Cox and
Breslow–Wilcoxon tests) were analyzed via the Kaplan–Meier
method via GraphPad (version 8.0.2).

To evaluate the effects of CDF-GK on infection, the lethal concentration was
initially determined by injecting serial dilutions of the fungal suspension
into larvae. Yeast cells
were centrifuged and washed with 0.9% NaCl. The cell density was standardized
to 109cells/mL by spectrophotometry (590 nm), and concentrations
of 103to 107cells/larva were used in the assay.
A total of 10 μL of each standardized cell suspension was inoculated
into the hemocoel of each larva through the last left proleg to determine
the minimum lethal cell density. After inoculation, the larvae were
incubated in Petri dishes at 37 °C, and the number of dead larvae
was counted every 24 h for 168 h. Following the determination of the
lethal cell concentration, larvae were inoculated with 10 μL
of PBS containing 106cells/larva via the last left proleg. After 30 min, CDF-GK (50 or
100 μM) or AmB (1.56 or 3.12 μM) was injected into the
last right proleg to avoid cross-interference. PBS-injected larvae
served as the controls. The larvae were incubated in Petri dishes
at 37 °C, and the number of dead larvae was counted every 24
h for a period of 168 h. The larvae were considered dead when they
did not show any movement to the touch at the end of 168 h. Every assay was performed in triplicate, and
each independent experiment yielded similar results. The data presented
here are from a representative experiment. Survival percentage curves
were plotted, and estimates of differences in survival (log-rank Mantel–Cox
and Breslow–Wilcoxon tests) were analyzed via the Kaplan–Meier
method via GraphPad Software (version 8.0.2).

The density of hemocytes was analyzed after 3, 6,
and 24 h of inoculation, or lack thereof, with the yeast . Three groups with five larvae each were
used: 1-larvae only injected with PBS (PBS); 2-larvae inoculated with
106cells/larva
and treated with PBS (C.k+ PBS); and 3-larvae inoculated
with 106cells/larva
and treated with 100 μM CDF-GK (C.k+ CDF-GK).
Before hemolymph extraction, the larvae were cleaned with a 70% ethanol
swab. Then, 10 μL of hemolymph from each larva in each group
was collected separately after piercing the last proleg with an insulin
needle, added to microcentrifuge tubes, diluted with insect physiological
saline (IPS; 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 100 mM Tris/HCl, 10 mM EDTA, 30
mM sodium citrate, pH 6.9) on ice at a 1:10, and centrifuged at 800
×gand 4 °C for 5 min. After centrifugation,
the pellets were resuspended in ice-cold IPS, and hemocytes were quantified
in a Neubauer chamber (Laboroptik).

The quantification of melanininafter 3,
6, and 24 h of inoculation, or when not inoculated with the yeast was carried out as described in the section
“Quantification of hemocytes”, with the following modifications:
after different incubation times, 10 μL of hemolymph from each
larva in each group was collected separately by piercing the last
proleg with an insulin needle and adding it to microcentrifuge tubes.
The hemolymph was diluted with IPS buffer at a 1:10 ratio and centrifuged
at 4500 g and 4 °C for 5 min. The supernatant of each sample
was placed in a 96-well microdilution plate, and the optical density
was determined with a spectrophotometer at 405 nm.

We tested the bioinspired peptide
CDF-GK against non-albicans Candida(NAC) species
at concentrations ranging from 200 to 1.56 μM. CDF-GK exhibited
significant antifungal activity against all tested yeasts at a concentration
of 3.12 μM, except for and , where significant
inhibition was observed only at concentrations of 6.25 and 25 μM,
respectively (Figure). Among the NAC species, the strongest inhibitory activity was observed
against (renamed ), with the lowest MIC100(25 μM) and IC50(5 μM) values (Table).

Anti-Candidaactivity of CDF-GK. Effect of CDF-GK
on the growth of , , , , and at concentrations ranging from 200
to 1.56 μM after 24 h of incubation. Data represent the mean
± SD (bars) with individual replicates (scatter points;n= 3). The assay is representative of an independent assay
out of three. Asterisks indicate significant differences: *p< 0.05, **p< 0.01, ***p< 0.001, and ****p< 0.0001 between
treatments and positive control (C+). (ns) indicates not
significantly different.

MIC100was determined
as the lowest concentration of the studied peptide that inhibited
100% fungal growth. Data are representative of two independent experiments.

MFC100was determined
as the lowest concentration of the studied peptide that kill 100%
fungal growth. Data are representative of two independent experiments.

IC50was determined
as the concentration of the studied peptide that inhibited 50% fungal
growth and was estimated by nonlinear regression analysis. nd: not
determined.CaDef2.1G27‑K44(CDF-GK);
Fluconazole (FLZ); Amphotericin B (AmB).

The MIC100does not distinguish between
the fungicidal
and fungistatic effects of CDF-GK. To differentiate between these
effects, the test cells were washed with Sabouraud medium to remove
the peptide and then cultured in fresh medium without the compound.
The minimum fungicidal concentration (MFC100) of CDF-GK
was determined for all tested yeasts, revealing that the inhibitory
effect of CDF-GK is fungicidal, which is a highly desirable mode of
action. The lowest effective concentrations (50 μM) were observed
for and (Table).

Given that CDF-GK exhibited the highest antifungal
activity against among the
tested species, we compared its
efficacy with that of the main antifungal agents used in clinical
practice: fluconazole (FLZ) and amphotericin B (AmB) (Table). CDF-GK was more effective
than FLZ, with MIC100and IC50values being
8 and 18 times lower, respectively. However, AmB demonstrated greater
efficacy than CDF-GK, with MIC100and IC50values
being 16 and 10.8 times lower, respectively.

After determining MFC100, we sought to establish
the minimum time required for the CDF-GK peptide to induce a loss
of viability in cells. Our
results showed that CDF-GK, at a concentration of 50 μM, causes
a significant reduction in colony formation observed at 0 and 0.5
h, where only six and one CFU were detected, respectively. After 1
h, CDF-GK completely eliminated the viability of cells (FiguresandS1). These findings
indicate that CDF-GK exerts its lethal effect on within the first few minutes of incubation.

Time-kill
kinetics of CDF-GK against . Log10CFU/mL reduction over time after treatment with
50 μM CDF-GK. Data represent mean ± SD (n= 3). Statistical significance was determined by one-way ANOVA (****p< 0.0001). Representative plate images are provided
inFigure S1.

The ability of CDF-GK to inhibit biofilm formation was evaluated at various
concentrations: MIC, 2 × MIC, 4 × MIC, and 6 × MIC
(Figurea). Optical
microscopy images revealed heterogeneous biofilm structures with dense
cellular aggregates but no hyphal dominance. The results showed that
CDF-GK significantly reduced biofilm formation at all tested concentrations
compared to the control. At 2 × MIC, 4 × MIC, and 6 ×
MIC, CDF-GK completely inhibited biofilm formation (100%). Even at
MIC, CDF-GK reduced biofilm formation by 48%, as confirmed by microscopy
images (Figurec and
d). In comparison, AmB treatment also significantly inhibited biofilm
formation, achieving complete inhibition at 2 × MIC, 4 ×
MIC, and 6 × MIC. However, at MIC, AmB inhibited 86% of biofilm
formation, nearly double the inhibition achieved by CDF-GK at MIC
(Figureb).

Effect of CDF-GK
(a) and amphotericin B (b) on biofilm formation at concentrations equivalent
to MIC, 2 × MIC, 4 × MIC, and 6 × MIC previously determined
for planktonic cells. Data represent mean ± SD (bars) with individual
replicates (scatter points;n= 3) The assay is representative
of an independent assay out of three. Different letters denote statistical
differences (p< 0.05). Optical microscopy images
of the control (c) and CDF-GK-treated (d) biofilm. Scale bars: 20 μm.

The uptake of Sytox Green
by cells treated with 5 μM
CDF-GK (Figure) suggests
plasma membrane permeabilization, a mechanism likely contributing
to the peptide’s fungicidal activity. CDF-GK appears to induce
membrane permeability, significantly reducing the cell count and triggering
pseudohyphal formation (Figure). A similar effect was observed in the positive control,
where cells were treated with the detergent Triton X-100. It must
be emphasized that the comparison of control and peptide-treated samples
within the same time point can be interpreted relative to one another
because the images were acquired with the same fluorescent intensity
and exposure time settings, adjusted to their respective positive
controls.

Fluorescence optical microscopy images of cells after a membrane permeabilization assay using the fluorescent
probe Sytox Green. Cells were treated with 5 μM CDF-GK for 24
h and then tested for membrane permeabilization. Control cells were
treated with Sytox Green only, and positive control cells were treated
with 1% Triton X-100. Scale bars: 20 μm.

Figurea shows the CD spectra of CDF-GK in the absence and presence of model
membranes mimickingCandidagenus and mammalian plasma
membranes. In an aqueous solution, CDF-GK displays a characteristic
negative band near 198 nm, indicating a predominantly disordered structure.
Upon interaction with the mammalian model membrane (POPC/SM/Chol),
the negative peak shifts from 198 to 204 nm and becomes more negative,
suggesting the acquisition of a more ordered conformation. In contrast,
the CD spectra of CDF-GK in the presence of fungal-like membranes
containing ergosterol (POPC/POPS/Erg and POPC/POPE/POPS/Erg) reveal
two prominent negative bands at 209 and 224 nm along with a positive
band near 195 nm. These features are characteristic of an α-helical
secondary structure (Figurea). A similar, though less intense, helical signature is observed
in the spectrum obtained in the presence of the PC/PE/PS membrane,
indicating partial α-helical folding. Replacing ergosterol with
cholesterol in the POPC/POPE/POPS/Erg membranes significantly reduces
the intensities of the α-helical bands, indicating a lower α-helical
content. This observation highlights the critical role of ergosterol
in stabilizing the peptide’s secondary structure and underscores
the negative impact of cholesterol on α-helix formation in these
lipid environments. The calculated fraction of α-helical content,
determined through spectral deconvolution using DichroWeb, confirms
a significantly higher helical fraction for CDF-GK in ergosterol-containing
membranes compared to both the cholesterol-containing mammalian-like
membranes and the ergosterol-free fungal-like membrane (Table). This finding underscores
the structural dependence of CDF-GK on the specific lipid composition
of the membrane, particularly highlighting the essential role of ergosterol
in stabilizing and promoting α-helix formation.

Secondary structure of
CDF-GK in membrane mimics. (a) CD spectra
of 30 μM CDF-GK with and without 450 μM SUVs composed
of POPC/POPE/POPS, POPC/POPE/POPS/Erg, POPC/POPS/Erg, POPC/POPE/POPS/Chol,
and POPC/SM/Chol. Data were recorded at 30 °C and converted to
mean residue ellipticity (MRE). (b) Far-UV CD spectra of 450 μM
of various SUVs in the absence and presence of 30 μM CDF-GK.
Data were recorded at 30 °C and displayed in millidegrees. Buffer:
5 mM HEPES, pH 7.0.

The best solutions, indicated
by the lowest NRMSD values, were obtained using the CDSSTR Method
along with data sets 4 and 7.

Additionally, the negative peaks at 272, 283, and
294 nm observed
exclusively in the CD spectra of membranes containing ergosterol are
likely associated with the electronic transitions of the ergosterol
molecule (Figureb).
The absence of these peaks in membranes lacking ergosterol further
supports the notion that ergosterol is the primary contributor to
the observed spectral features. The enhancement of these negative
peaks upon peptide binding suggests a specific interaction between
the peptides and ergosterol-containing membranes. This interaction
may induce local reorganization or clustering of ergosterol molecules,
altering their average orientation and resulting in enhanced chiral
optical activity. These findings underscore the role of ergosterol
in mediating peptide-membrane interactions and stabilizing peptide-induced
membrane structures.

Endogenous ROS
production was analyzed using the probe 2’,7’-dichlorofluorescein
diacetate (H2DCFDA). This dye passively enters the cell,
where it is deacetylated by intracellular esterases and becomes fluorescent
upon oxidation by ROS.Figureillustrates the increase in ROS production in cells, indicating increased oxidative stress
following incubation with 5 μM CDF-GK. No fluorescence was detected
in the control group (without peptide), whereas fluorescent cells
were observed in the positive control (3% acetic acid).

Fluorescence
optical microscopy images of cells after a ROS induction assay using the fluorescent probe H2DCFDA. Cells were treated with 5 μM CDF-GK for 24 h
and then tested for oxidative stress. Control cells were treated with
H2DCFDA only, and positive control cells were treated with
3% CH3COOH (acetic acid). Scale bars: 20 μm.

The mitochondrial membrane potential (Δψm) of cells under
control conditions and after treatment with CDF-GK was assessed via
the JC-1 probe. JC-1 is a cationic, lipophilic dye that can permeate
the plasma membrane. In cells with a high Δψm, the dye forms aggregates within the mitochondrial matrix (J-aggregates)
and emits red fluorescence. Conversely, in cells with a low Δψm, the dye remains in its monomeric form in the cytoplasm,
emitting green fluorescence. These observations indicate that CDF-GK
induces mitochondrial depolarization, as evidenced by the reduced
formation of J-aggregates, leading to decreased red fluorescence and
increased green fluorescence intensity. A similar effect was observed
in positive control cells treated with Triton X-100. In contrast,
the negative control cells presented a greater Δψm, as indicated by the pronounced red shift of the probe (Figure).

Effect of CDF-GK on the
mitochondrial membrane potential of . Untreated (control) cells or cells treated
with 5 μM CDF-GK for 24 h. Cells treated with Triton X-100 were
used as positive control. JC-1, a cationic dye, accumulates as J-aggregates
(red) in cells with normal mitochondrial membrane potential, and after
depolarization, it remains as a monomer, emitting green fluorescence.
Scale bars: 20 μm.

After incubation for
60 min at 30 °C, the FM4-64 probe clearly stained the vacuole
membrane, showing a ring staining pattern in practically all of the
cells in the control group. In contrast, in cells treated with CDF-GK,
a distinct staining pattern was observed compared to that in the control
cells. In this case, a dotted marking stands out, suggesting that
CDF-GK may impact the integrity and structure of the vacuolar compartment
(Figure).

Vacuolar mapping
was performed using the FM4-64 probe. Cells were
treated with 5 μM CDF-GK for 24 h and then incubated with FM4-64
for 60 min at 30 °C. The control was treated with FM4-64 only.
Scale bars: 20 μm.

Before conducting the time-lapse assay with the peptide
coupled to 5-carboxyfluorescein (5-FAM), its antifungal activity was
validated through an MFC100(50 μM) assay against . The results showed no significant difference
in activity between 5-FAM-CDF-GK and the unconjugated form (Figure S2), confirming the preservation of its
antifungal properties. After validation, we used confocal fluorescence
microscopy with the peptide coupled to 5-FAM to investigate the interaction
of CDF-GK with cells and
its ability to enter the intracellular space at a fungicidal concentration
(50 μM). After 20.5 min of incubation with 5-FAM-CDF-GK, we
observed intense green fluorescence staining in the intracellular
space of cells, indicating
the entry of the peptide (Figure). To evaluate real-time entry kinetics, we monitored
5-FAM-CDF-GK fluorescence over time in cells. The results revealed that at time 0, only the cell wall stained
with Calcofluor White (fluorescent blue) was visible, indicating that
the peptide had not yet reached the intracellular space. From 3.5
min onward, we observed green fluorescent labeling in the intracellular
space, suggesting that this would be the minimum time for the beginning
of peptide entry. The accumulation of 5-FAM-CDF-GK within the cell
progressively increased with the incubation time, which was accompanied
by an increase in fluorescence intensity. The maximum fluorescence
peak was reached at 20.5 min.

Time-lapse confocal microscopy showing the entry
of 5-FAM-CDF-GK
(50 μM) into cells.
At time 0, only the cell wall stained with Calcofluor White (blue
fluorescence) is visible. From 3.5 min onward, green fluorescence
(5-FAM-CDF-GK) is observed inside the intracellular space (arrow).
The fluorescence intensity peak was reached at 20.5 min. Scale bars:
10 μm.

To evaluate the toxicity of CDF-GKin vivo, we used larvae (Figurea). No significant toxic effects were observed in larvae inoculated
with high concentrations of CDF-GK (1000, 500, and 250 μM) compared
with the control groups, which included larvae subjected only to mechanical
injury from the syringe and those injected with PBS.

Toxicity and therapeutic
activity of CDF-GK. (a) Toxicity of the
peptide CDF-GK for larvae.
The larvae were treated with concentrations of CDF-GK ranging from
250 to 1000 μM. Wound refers to damage caused only by the injection
needle. (b) Survival curves of larvae infected with (106cells/larva) and treated with CDF-GK at concentrations of
50 and 100 μM or Amphotericin B at 1.56 and 3.12 μM. PBS
indicates that larvae were inoculated only with phosphate-buffered
saline. represents larvae
infected with 106cells/larva and untreated. Results are
the mean of three independent experiments. Statistical significance
was determined using the Gehan–Breslow–Wilcoxon test,p≤ 0.05.

To assess the therapeutic potential of CDF-GK,
anin vivoassay was conducted using larvae infected with . Initially,
larvae infected with were
used to determine the minimum lethal concentration (MLC). Inocula
ranging from 103to 107CFU/larva were tested,
and the MLC was identified at 106CFU/larva (data not shown).
On the basis of these findings, a concentration of 1 × 106CFU/larva was selected to evaluate the effect of CDF-GK on
experimental candidiasis. Treatment of larvae infected with via CDF-GK at concentrations of 50 and
100 μM, corresponding to the minimum fungicidal concentration
(MFC) and twice the MFCin vitro, respectively, resulted
in a significant increase in the survival rate (Figureb). CDF-GK treatment extended
the survival of infected larvae to 168 h. The survival rates were
73% and 33% with 100 and 50 μM CDF-GK, respectively (Figureb). In comparison,
treatment with AmB provided protection rates of 66.6% and 80% at concentrations
equivalent to those of MFC (1.56 μM) and twice those of MFC
(3.12 μM)in vitro, respectively. Although
AmB demonstrated greater efficacy at lower concentrations, these results
suggest that CDF-GK is a potent molecule with protective effects comparable
to those of commercial antifungals.

We observed a rapid onset of melanization in larvae within 3 h
post-infection with when
the larvae were treated with only PBS (C.k+ PBS).
This melanization intensified significantly after 24 h, with a substantial
accumulation of melanin in the hemolymph of infected and untreated
larvae (C.k.+ PBS), which presented levels approximately
3.5 times higher than those in larvae treated with CDF-GK (C.k.+ CDF-GK) (Figurea). No significant difference in melanization was observed
between uninfected larvae (PBS) and those infected with 100 μM
CDF-GK (C.k.+ CDF-GK) at any of the tested time
points (Figurea).
These findings suggest that CDF-GK effectively protected infected
larvae, potentially by inhibiting proliferation in the hemolymph, thereby preventing the activation
of the melanization process for up to 24 h, as illustrated in the
images of treated and untreated larvae. In untreated larvae, more
pronounced melanization was observed in the dorsal region (Figureb).

Melanization
and hemocyte density in infected with . (a) Optical
density of hemolymph from collected 3, 6, and 24 h after infection with 106cells/larva
of . Groups include larvae
injected with PBS (PBS); larvae inoculated with 106cells/larva and treated with PBS (C.k+ PBS); and larvae inoculated with 106cells/larva and treated with 100 μM
CDF-GK (C.k+ CDF-GK). (b) Images of larvae at 24
h showing prominent melanization in the dorsal vessel (arrow) in the
control group compared with those treated with CDF-GK. (c) Hemocyte
density in the hemolymph of larvae after 3, 6, and 24 h of infection with 106cells/larva
of or inoculated with PBS,
estimated using a hemocytometer. The groups are the same as those
described above. All larvae were incubated at 37 °C Different
letters indicate significant differences, while the same letter indicates
no difference (p< 0.05). Data represent the mean
± SD (bars) with individual replicates (scatter points;n= 5). The assay is representative of an independent assay
out of two.

We also assessed the hemocyte concentration in
larvae infected
with and treated with or
without 100 μM CDF-GK. The results revealed a 2.3-fold decrease
in hemocyte density in -infected
larvae compared with that in uninfected controls (PBS) and larvae
treated with CDF-GK (Figurec). Although the hemocyte density in CDF-GK-treated larvae
decreased similarly to that in untreated larvae at 6 h postinfection,
it recovered to levels comparable to those in uninfected larvae by
24 h postinfection. Together, the melanization and hemocyte density
data underscore the protective effect of CDF-GK in -infected larvae.

The treatment of fungal infections remains
a significant challenge
for global healthcare, mainly because of the limited availability
of antifungal agents that combine low toxicity to nontarget organisms
with high clinical efficacy. Expanding the current antifungal repertoire
by identifying new therapeutic targets and developing innovative strategies
is crucial to overcoming these limitations. In 2022, the World Health
Organization (WHO) emphasized this need by identifying severalCandidaspecies as high-priority pathogens, classified across
all risk categories, from critical to medium risk.

In this study, we evaluated the antimicrobial properties
of a rationally
designed peptide,CaDef2.1G27‑K44(CDF-GK), derived from the defensinCaDef2.1, which
was originally isolated fromCapsicum annuumfruits. This peptide, consisting of 18 amino acids,
was designed by Taveira et al. and tested
against non-albicans Candida(NAC) species. Our investigation
explored its antifungal mechanism, cytotoxicity, and therapeutic potentialin vivousing larvae as an infection model.

Our initial tests demonstrated
that CDF-GK exhibited significant
antifungal activity against all of the testedCandidaspecies. However, the inhibitory and fungicidal effects were particularly
potent against (renamed ), with the lowest MIC100, MFC100, and IC50values recorded at 25, 50,
and 5 μM, respectively (Table). These findings are consistent with those reported
by Souza et al., who designed a peptide
named JcTI–PepI, bioinspired by the primary structure of a
trypsin inhibitor purified from seeds. Like CDF-GK, JcTI-PepI exhibited antifungal activity against
all of the testedCandidastrains, with the most
potent inhibitory action also observed against , where the MIC (31.25 μM) and MFC (62.5 μM) values were
comparable to those reported for CDF-GK against the same strain (ATCC 6258).

has emerged as a
significant concern in clinical settings, particularly because of
its intrinsic resistance to fluconazole (FLZ), a commonly used antifungal
agent. This resistance, often exacerbated by the prophylactic or therapeutic
use of FLZ, complicates the management of candidiasis. The WHO classified as a medium-risk fungal pathogen in 2022, highlighting the need
for alternative treatments.

In addition to its inhibitory properties, CDF-GK
exhibited rapid
fungicidal action, killing 99% of the cells within 30 min and achieving complete cell death within 1 h
(Figure). This rapid
action is critical for reducing the opportunity for resistant strains
to develop. Comparable kinetics have
been reported for other bioinspired peptides. For example, Lucas et
al. demonstrated that the WR peptide
derived from defensinVuDef1eliminated 97% of cells immediately and 100% within 1 h. This finding matches the
performance of CDF-GK against and reinforces the relevance of rapid-acting peptides in antifungal
therapy. The rapid killing and significant activity against fluconazole-resistant
species underscore the therapeutic potential of CDF-GK and the need
for further exploration inin vivomodels, particularly
given the limitations of current antifungal treatments.

Candidaspecies are well-documented for their
ability to form complex, structured biofilms that include various
morphological forms. Biofilms are implicated
in approximately 80% of human microbial infections, as reported by
the National Institutes of Health. The
biofilm matrix provides a protective environment that enhances fungal
survival and shields it from host immune responses, often leading
to increased drug resistance.,The ability of to form biofilms on inert surfaces, such
as catheters and prosthetic devices, is a key virulence factor contributing
to its pathogenicity. These biofilm-covered surfaces can act as entry
points for bloodstream infections in hospitalized patients, significantly
increasing the risk of candidaemia. Additionally, biofilms exhibit
resistance to antifungal agents at concentrations much higher than
those required to inhibit planktonic cells.

Given the potent and rapid fungicidal activity of CDF-GK,
we further
investigated its efficacy in inhibiting biofilm formation. Our results show that CDF-GK significantly inhibited
biofilm formation at concentrations similar to those effective against
planktonic cells, achieving complete inhibition at 2 × MIC. Comparable
results were observed with AmB at 1.56 μM (2 × MIC) (Figure). These findings
are consistent with previous studies on bioinspired AMPs. For example,
PEP-IA18, a synthetic AMP inspired by the primary structure of profilin
from (fall armyworm),
exhibited similar effects on the inhibition of biofilm formation by and . At the MIC (2.5 μM) and 10 × MIC (25 μM), PEP-IA18
significantly reduced biofilm formation and disrupted preformed biofilms
in both species. Conversely, while the
peptide JcTI-PepI was effective against planktonic yeast cells, it
failed to prevent the formation of biofilms by . However, a concentration of 62.5 μM JcTI-PepI reduced preformed biofilms by 62%. The effect of CDF-GK on preformed biofilms remains to be tested.

While many AMPs
are recognized for their membrane-targeting activity,
the precise mechanisms by which these peptides interact with cellular
membranes remain incompletely understood. The prevailing model suggests
that AMPs initially engage with microbial membranes through electrostatic
interactions, which are facilitated by the charge differences between
the peptides and the microbial membranes. Following this initial interaction,
membrane disruption or peptide internalization into the cell may occur. Previous studies by Taveira et al. demonstrated that the CDF-GK peptide can permeabilize
the plasma membrane of variousCandidaspecies, including , , , and . In the present study, we confirmed
this membrane-disrupting effect, showing that CDF-GK also induces
damage to the cytoplasmic membrane of (Figure). Several
studies have corroborated the ability of both natural and bioinspired
AMPs to increase the permeability of fungal cytoplasmic membranes.,,,A recent example is the KWI-19 peptide, which directly targets the
cell membrane of by interacting
with ergosterol.

The composition
of sterols in cell membranes is a key difference
between mammals and fungi. While cholesterol (CHL) predominates in
mammalian membranes, ergosterol (ERG) is the main sterol in fungi.
Both sterols modulate properties such as lipid fluidity and packing,
but they do so in distinct ways.,This distinction
is essential for the selectivity of antimicrobial peptides, such as
CDF-GK, which demonstrate specific secondary conformations, including
the formation of α-helices in the presence of ERG, as observed
through circular dichroism (CD) spectroscopy (Figure). The results obtained highlight the importance
of ERG as a preferential target in fungal membranes, promoting favorable
structural interactions with antifungal peptides, contrary to what
occurs with CHL in mammals. The selectivity observed in CDF-GK in
the presence of ERG, as well as the stabilization of α-helices,
is consistent with previous studies on the peptide VG16KRKP. Both findings suggest that ERG facilitates the
structural reorganization of membranes, favoring peptide–membrane
interactions and increasing antifungal efficacy. Additionally, CD
spectroscopy data revealed that the peptide undergoes structural reorganization,
adopting an α-helical conformation in membrane mimics containing
ERG (Figure). This
interaction and structural conformation likely destabilize lipid packing
in fungal membrane mimics due to the peptide. The membrane permeabilization by CDF-GK, observed
via the Sytox Green assay (Figure), suggests CDF-GK’s interaction with ERG in
fungal membranes. Similarly, AmB, a well-known membrane-active agent,
also interacts with ERG, forming transmembrane pores that disrupt
membrane integrity and induce cell lysis. Although CDF-GK interacts
with ERG, its mechanism of action appears to differ significantly.
The 5-FAM-CDF-GK data show that it did not remain in the membrane
like AmB but was quickly internalized (Figure), suggesting the possibility of intracellular
targets. This distinction between ERG and CHL interactions has important
implications for the development of selective therapies. Peptides
such as CDF-GK, which rely on the presence of ERG, show great therapeutic
potential due to their selectivity, offering a strong foundation for
the development of antifungals with lower toxicity to the host.

In our study, treated
with CDF-GK presented a marked increase in ROS production (Figure), likely leading
to significant disruptions in cellular processes. Additionally, mitochondrial
membrane depolarization was observed following treatment with CDF-GK
(Figure), indicating
impaired energy metabolism. Mitochondrial depolarization is often
linked to oxidative stress-induced damage, as ROS can trigger the
opening of mitochondrial permeability transition pores, leading to
cytochrome c release and a reduction in mitochondrial potential.−Since most fungal pathogens depend on mitochondria for growth, survival,
and ATP production, targeting mitochondrial function may represent
a good antifungal strategy. These findings
are consistent with those of Li et al., who demonstrated that the CGA-N12 peptide, derived from human chromogranin
A, induces ROS production, mitochondrial membrane potential dissipation,
and cytochrome c release in , ultimately resulting in mitochondria-dependent apoptosis.

In fungal cells, the vacuole is a multifunctional organelle essential
for maintaining cellular homeostasis, regulating ion and pH balance,
and degrading macromolecules. During
optical microscopy assays, we observed morphological changes in cells treated with CDF-GK, which are potentially
linked to vacuole dynamics. Vacuolar morphology is known to undergo
fission and fusion in response to environmental stress, such as oxidative
stress, which promotes vacuole fission and leads to hyperfragmentation.,To investigate whether CDF-GK influences vacuole morphology, we
used the FM4-64 probe and confirmed vacuole fragmentation in treated with the peptide (Figure). This finding is consistent
with those of previous studies, such as Ogita et al., who reported that polyene antifungals, such as amphotericin
B and nystatin, cause vacuole disintegration in , contributing to their fungicidal effects.
Similarly, Parisi et al. reported that
the plant defensin Ppdef1 from causes vacuole rupture in . Ppdef1 was shown to rapidly enter the cytoplasm, increase ROS production,
induce vacuolar fusion, and ultimately lead to plasma membrane permeabilization
and vacuole rupture, causing cell death.

In our study, CDF-GK
also penetrated the intracellular space of within 3.5 min, with progressive accumulation
in the cytoplasm over time (Figure). Although we did not monitor vacuole labeling over
time, we hypothesize that the darker circular regions observed in
the cytoplasm between 6.5 and 18.5 min represent vacuolar structures.
The subsequent disappearance of these regions by 20.5 min, accompanied
by homogeneous green staining of the peptide throughout the cytoplasm,
suggested vacuole fragmentation. The peak cytoplasmic accumulation
of CDF-GK at 20.5 min coincided with the timing of cell death, as
99% of the cells died within 30 min, as indicated by the results of
the cell death kinetics assay (Figure). In contrast, the WMR peptide, bioinspired by the
myxinidin sequence from , demonstrated slower intracellular penetration in , with significant cytoplasmic accumulation
only after 4 h of incubation. This difference
in kinetics highlights the rapid action of CDF-GK, which may contribute
to its potent antifungal effects.

In this study, we demonstrated that CDF-GK had no toxic effects
on larvae, even at concentrations
as high as 1000 μM, with a 100% survival rate observed over
168 h (Figurea).
These findings contrast with those of Martins de Andrade et al., who evaluated the toxicity of IbKTP-NH2, a derivative
of the neuropeptide kyotorphin. Although IbKTP-NH2 exhibited potent
antifungal activity against biofilms of variousCandidaspecies and showed no significant toxicity in larvae at concentrations between 125 and
500 μM, it caused 100% mortality at 1000 μM after 120
h. This difference highlights the enhanced safety profile of CDF-GK
at higher concentrations. Maione et al. reported that the bioinspired peptide WMR did not exhibit toxicity
in larvae. However, they
tested concentrations 100 times lower than those used for CDF-GK and
monitored survival for only 72 h. More recently, Almeida et al. demonstrated the safety of KWI-19, with no larval
deaths observed at the highest concentrations tested (25 and 50 μM/L)
over 72 h, further supporting the nontoxic nature of peptide-based
treatmentsin vivo. These findings collectively suggest
that CDF-GK is a safe molecule, even at high doses over extended periods,
positioning it as a promising candidate for further therapeutic development.

Evaluating both toxicity and therapeutic efficacyin vivois a crucial step in the development of new antimicrobial molecules.
Given the strongin vitroantifungal activity of
CDF-GK against and its lack
of toxicity in larvae,
we investigated its therapeutic potential. Our findings revealed that
CDF-GK significantly improved the survival rate of larvae infected
with , indicating its potential
as an effective candidicidal agentin vivo. Similarly,
Martins de Andrade et al. assessed the
therapeutic potential of IbKTP-NH2 against candidiasis using . Larvae infected with and treated with 500 μM IbKTP-NH2
presented an initial survival rate of 80% at 24 h, which decreased
to 30% at 48 h and stabilized at 20% over 168 h. Maione et al. demonstrated that the peptide WMR, at a concentration
of 10 μM, protected larvae infected with and NAC species, increasing survival rates by approximately 30–40%
over 72 h. Although we did not test , limiting direct comparison, treatment of -infected larvae with 50 and 100 μM CDF-GK resulted in survival
increases of 33% and 73%, respectively, at 168 h (Figureb). These rates are notably
higher than those reported for IbKTP-NH2 and WMR in similar models.
Scorzoni et al. evaluated thein vivoefficacy of antifungal agents during infections
caused by and via alternative models, including . Their data revealed that FLZ had no
protective effect on the infection.
Additionally, they reported that higher concentrations of caspofungin
and AmB were required for protection during infection than during infection. These findings support the idea that CDF-GK is as promising
as clinically used antifungals, particularly in treating infections
caused by drug-resistant strains such as .

Other key parameters for evaluating the response of to pathogens and antimicrobial agents
include melanization and quantification of circulating hemocyte density.
Melanin, a toxic compound whose production is tightly regulated, represents
a crucial humoral response catalyzed by the enzyme phenoloxidase.
This process leads to the encapsulation of foreign particles, which
serve as indicators of larval health.,,Melanization appears as dark spots on the cuticle,
and as infection progresses, it can lead to complete melanization
of the larva, particularly in the dorsal region comprising the heart,
which correlates with subsequent larval death.,,In this study, we observed that larvae infected
with and treated with CDF-GK
presented melanization levels comparable to those of noninfected larvae
(Figurea). In contrast,
untreated infected larvae presented a significant increase in melanization.

Another relevant parameter is hemocyte density, which plays a central
role in the cellular immune response of larvae. These hemocytes, analogous
to human phagocytes, are involved in processes such as phagocytosis,
encapsulation, and nodule formation.,,In our study, we demonstrated that larvae infected
with and treated with CDF-GK
maintained a high density of circulating hemocytes, whereas untreated
infected larvae presented a drastic reduction in hemocyte count (Figurec). There is a
direct correlation between hemocyte density and larval survival rates;
infected individuals often display a lower hemocyte density than noninfected
controls, reflecting greater susceptibility to infection. Additionally, the reduction in hemocyte count
is also associated with the migration of these cells to infection
sites, where they form nodules in response to the pathogen.

On the basis of these findings, we conclude
that maintaining a
high density of circulating hemocytes and the absence of melanization,
similar to noninfected larvae, indicates that CDF-GK is effective
in controlling -induced candidiasis.
These results suggest that the peptide reduces the fungal burden in
larvae, minimizing the need for the activation of both cellular and
humoral immune responses.

The findings of this study demonstrate that
the bioinspired peptide
CDF-GK has significant potential as an antifungal agent, particularly
againstCandidaspecies, including non-albicansstrains resistant to conventional treatments. Notably, CDF-GK exhibited
superior efficacy compared to FLZ and comparable activity to AmB in
inhibiting the growth of as
well as reducing cell viability and preventing biofilm formation.
Mechanism of action analyses revealed that CDF-GK induces cell membrane
permeabilization and intracellular damage. Furthermore, our findings
highlight the crucial role of ergosterol in promoting the α-helical
structure of CDF-GK and mediating its interaction with fungal membranes,
suggesting its potential as a selective antifungal agent. The generation
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and mitochondrial membrane depolarization
suggests that the peptide may trigger programmed cell death. Additionally,
vacuolar fragmentation and peptide internalization support the hypothesis
that specific intracellular targets enhance antifungal efficacy.In vivotests using larvae confirmed the low toxicity of the peptide, even at high concentrations,
and its ability to significantly improve the survival rate of larvae
infected with . Moreover,
assays quantifying melanization and hemocyte density further supported
the safety and efficacy of CDF-GK in an animal model. In conclusion,
this study provides strong evidence that CDF-GK is a promising candidate
for combating resistant fungal infections, demonstrating a favorable
safety profile and potent antifungal activity in bothin vitroandin vivomodels.

This work was performed at the Universidade Estadual
do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF). We wish to thank L.C.D.
Souza and V.M. Kokis for technical assistance. We acknowledge the
financial support of the Brazilian agencies Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento
Científico e Tecnológico – CNPq (307590/2021-6;
403302/2023-4; 306429/2023-3) and Fundação Carlos Chagas
Filho de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado do Rio de Janeiro –
FAPERJ (E-26/200.589/2022; E-26/210.353/2022; E-26/200.567/2023; E-26/200.127/2023;
E-26/210.484/2024; E-26/210.778/2021; E-26/211.816/2021). This study
was also financed in part by the Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento
de Pessoal de Nível Superior – Brasil (CAPES), finance
code 001. F.S.S.M. thanks CAPES for the doctorate fellowship (Grant
number 88887.978846/2024-00). The Table of Contents artwork was created
using BioRender.com.

The Supporting Information is
available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsbiomedchemau.5c00020.

CRediT:Thomas Z. A. Guimarãesconceptualization,
formal analysis,
investigation, methodology, writing - original draft;Erica
O. Melloconceptualization, formal analysis, funding acquisition,
investigation, methodology;Douglas R. Lucasformal analysis,
investigation, methodology;Filipe Z. Damicaformal analysis,
investigation, methodology;Fadi S. S. Magalhãesformal analysis, investigation, methodology, writing - original
draft;Luis G. M. Bassoformal analysis, funding acquisition,
investigation, methodology, writing - original draft;Andre
O. Carvalhoformal analysis, funding acquisition, investigation,
methodology;Valdirene M. Gomesformal analysis, funding
acquisition, investigation, methodology;Gabriel B. Taveiraconceptualization, formal analysis, funding acquisition, investigation,
methodology, supervision, validation, visualization, writing - original
draft, writing - review & editing.

The Article Processing
Charge for the publication of this research was funded by the Coordenacao
de Aperfeicoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES), Brazil (ROR
identifier: 00x0ma614).

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.