Official websites use .govA.govwebsite belongs to an official
                            government organization in the United States.

Secure .gov websites use HTTPSAlock(LockLocked padlock icon) orhttps://means you've safely
                                connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive
                                information only on official, secure websites.

This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

As mentioned by the authors, objectively measuring lower extremity volumes may be beneficial, particularly for patients with venous disease, because edema is one of the most cumbersome symptoms that our patients suffer from.1It is difficult to evaluate the success of treatment, particularly when the main symptom is limb swelling. Traditionally, lower extremity edema or volume has been quantified by measuring the extremity diameter at different points including the ankle, calf, and thigh and comparing those values with previous measurements. However, based on varying techniques, this approach can cause large variations, rendering the measurements inaccurate and unreliable as a way to quantify limb volumes. Specifically for venous disease the Clinical Etiological Anatomical Pathophysiological score is used, but does not really make a differentiation on the severity of edema.1The revised Venous Clinical Severity score takes into consideration the severity of the edema: edema is scored as mild if it is limited to the foot and ankle, moderate if it extends above the ankle but below the knee, and severe if it extends to the knee and above.2,3Much clinical decision-making is also based on patient perception of their symptoms. Usually, patients can tell if their edema is stable, improving, or worsening. However, no objective data can be collected based on patient report. Therefore, the authors' attempt to measure lower extremity edema objectively can be very useful in the clinic setting to correlate volume with symptoms and even gauge treatment result.

In this article, the authors discuss a technique of limb volumetry using an iPad-based three-dimensional scanner. The objective of the article was to determine whether this technique was reproducible. A standardized protocol was implemented and demonstrated a decrease in measurement variability when using the proposed protocol. Shortcomings of the article include that the study only included 20 limbs from healthy individuals. It will be interesting to see if this protocol will be reproducible in patients with lower extremity pathologies like lymphedema or venous disease. A larger cohort should also be used to test the protocol to ensure its validity.

Although having a simple and objective way to measure limb volume is currently lacking in clinical practice, it remains to be seen if implementing such routine measurements would actually have any impact in treating patients. The iPad-based three-dimensional scanning technology, despite how it can present objectively data and possibly improve overtime, should not replace the physician’s role in examining the patient and obtaining a good history of the patient’s symptoms. A detailed clinical examination and interview with the patient could still be the easiest, most cost-effective, and patient-oriented approach to the assessment of edema. Treatment of venous disease or lymphedema that cause lower extremity edema should still focus on symptom alleviation. As many clinicians can attest, many patients may have lower extremity edema that is not bothersome enough to warrant treatment. Routinely scanning these patients can be time consuming and not offer much benefit. I congratulate the authors for attempting to objectivize such a cumbersome symptom and recommend future studies with a larger sample size to fully evaulate the benefit of iPad-based three-dimensional scanning in patients with edema.

The opinions or views expressed in this commentary are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the opinions or recommendations of the Journal of Vascular Surgery: Venous and Lymphatic Disorders or the Society for Vascular Surgery.