Ischemia/reperfusion injury after lung transplantation is a significant cause of morbidity. In the realm of ex vivo lung perfusion (EVLP), inflammation, edema formation, and reduced compliance have limited the durability of EVLP. Previous evidence has suggested that platelet activation and thrombosis may play a role in both conditions.

A literature search of PubMed and Embase was conducted, including all articles describing all human or animal investigations of platelet activation or the use of antiplatelet agents in the settings of EVLP or lung transplantation. Articles published from database inception to July 15, 2024, were analyzed.

In total, 9 studies were included in the review. Studies on EVLP have found an association between platelet activation and adverse effects on lung function, whereas in lung transplantation, platelet activation appears to play a role in primary graft dysfunction. In both settings, the inhibition of platelets ameliorated these effects.

Platelet activation in EVLP and lung transplantation results in distal arterial thrombosis and has been associated with graft dysfunction. The use of antiplatelet agents in the included studies was associated with reduced lung injury and improved lung function on EVLP or during lung transplantation.

EVLP today continues to be limited in several respects. One such limitation is the durability of EVLP. EVLP has largely been limited to <24 h, with select reports extending past this duration.23-26Although EVLP has shown utility in recovering donor organs in the short term by improving the function of marginal donor lungs,13,27prolonged durations of EVLP result in adverse changes, such as edema formation, elevating lactate, and increasing ventilatory resistance signal worsening lung function and a resultant upper limit to the duration of EVLP.14,27Several factors have been proposed to contribute to these findings, including ischemia/reperfusion injuries.

One such factor is platelet activation and thrombosis of the distal vessels of the donor organ during organ procurement and after implantation.10Although platelet activation has been identified in the setting of EVLP, no consensus has been reached regarding the use of antiplatelet agents during EVLP. Similarly, there have been limited investigations into the use of antiplatelet agents in lung transplantation. Herein, we perform a narrative review of antiplatelet use in lung transplantation and EVLP to consolidate the available information on this topic. We seek to identify evidence of benefit from antiplatelet use and any paucity of data in this field of study.

A literature search of PubMed and Embase was conducted by 2 authors. The search terms used individually or in combination for this review were “lung transplantation, ex situ lung perfusion, ex vivo lung perfusion, ESLP, EVLP, antiplatelets, platelets, aspirin, ASA, ticagrelor, clopidogrel, prasugrel, cangrelor, Plavix, Brilinta” individually or in combination. This review included all English language articles describing all human or animal investigations of platelet activation or the use of antiplatelet agents in the settings of EVLP or lung transplantation. Notably, both the terms ex situ lung perfusion and EVLP have been used in the literature on this topic. Although we used EVLP in this study to maintain consistency, both ex situ lung perfusion and EVLP were used in the search to identify articles to avoid missing relevant articles.

Randomized controlled trials, prospective, retrospective, and observational studies, as well as animal studies describing the impact of platelet activation, thrombosis, or the use of antiplatelet agents in the setting of lung transplantation or EVLP were included. The exclusion criteria for this review included case reports, editorials, and abstracts without an associated full text.

Outcomes of interest included measures of platelet aggregation, thrombus formation, obliterative bronchiolitis, and lung function in either EVLP or transplantation settings, including oxygenation, lung compliance, pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR), and edema formation. Other outcomes related to organ ischemia or ischemia/reperfusion injuries, such as PGD and obliterative bronchiolitis, were also included. Given the expected heterogeneity between studies, including small animal, large animal, and human models, there was no predetermined plan to perform aggregate analyses on the available data.

Risk of bias was assessed for the included animal studies using SYRCLE’s risk of bias tool for animal studies.28The risk of bias assessment includes questions regarding selection bias, performance bias, detection bias, attrition bias, and reporting bias.

In total, 9 studies were included in the review. Six small animal studies, 2 large animal studies, and 1 human study were included in this review. The included studies are summarized in Table1and outcomes of interest are reported in Table2. Among the included studies, the majority of studies tended to have unclear or high risk related to blinding and randomization, which were infrequently explicitly reported. Selection bias, attrition bias, and reporting bias were generally low (Figure1).

CSP, cold static preservation; EVLP, ex vivo lung perfusion; PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; SH, sarpogrelate hydrochloride; vWF, von Willebrand factor.

PVR, pulmonary vascular resistance; SH, sarpogrelate hydrochloride; vWF, von Willebrand factor.

Risk of bias assessment based on SYRCLE’s risk of bias tool for animal studies. + refers to an article with a low risk of bias, ? refers to unclear risk of bias, and - refers to a high risk of bias.

Preidl investigated the influence of clopidogrel, an antiplatelet agent that works by irreversibly binding to platelets, on posttransplant obliterative bronchiolitis. The authors transplanted trachea from donor mice to recipient mice. The mice were divided into groups that were treated with high or low doses of clopidogrel with or without immunosuppression with everolimus or tacrolimus. This study found reduced rates of luminal obliteration for groups receiving either immunosuppression or clopidogrel, with the least luminal obliteration found in those treated with a combination of the 2. Cellular infiltration with CD4+T cells, CD8+T cells, and macrophages was reduced with clopidogrel, with a further reduction observed when combined with immunosuppression. Additionally, lower rates of intragraft proinflammatory cytokine production were identified in mice treated with clopidogrel. Finally, clopidogrel with or without immunosuppression resulted in reduced levels of circulating donor-specific alloantibodies.31Although not necessarily focusing on lung transplantation, the use of clopidogrel after tracheal transplantation provides important insight into the role of platelet activation and thrombosis in combination with immune activation on obliterative bronchiolitis after transplantation.

Lung transplantation remains the gold standard for patients with end-stage lung disease. Additionally, EVLP is an exciting technology with the potential to improve patient outcomes by increasing donor lung availability and improving the quality of transplanted organs. However, both continue to be limited. EVLP is limited in maximum duration, with edema formation and graft dysfunction playing central roles in the limited longevity of lungs preserved on EVLP devices.13,14,23-27,39Several factors have been suggested to contribute to edema formation and graft dysfunction, including an inflammatory cascade during EVLP as well as the development of arterial thrombosis, both of which likely play a role.8,10,11,27Similarly, after lung transplantation, PGD occurs secondary to alveolar damage and ischemia/reperfusion injuries, resulting in edema formation, hypoxemia, and portending poor long-term outcomes.11,27Although these conditions are certainly multifactorial, platelet aggregation and thrombosis have been infrequently investigated and addressed.

Several studies published in preceding decades have attempted to identify the role of platelet activation and aggregation in the development of graft dysfunction both in EVLP and lung transplantation.11Small animal and large animal trials have found that platelet aggregation and distal arterial thrombosis lead to pulmonary congestion, inflammation, and edema formation.10,30–33,35,40Only a single human study was identified in this review, which found markers of increased platelet activation after lung transplantation.32The data available in the literature on this topic reinforce the notion that platelet activation may play a role in some of the current limitations of EVLP and lung transplantation, although these data are largely limited to animal models and the paucity of data from human participants limits our ability to understand the impact of platelet aggregation and arterial thrombosis in clinical settings of EVLP and lung transplantation. This review consolidated the information available on this topic, while also identifying areas that require further investigation. Although limited, the available literature has demonstrated an association between platelet activation and various antiplatelet agents in reducing lung injury and improving function in various animal models. The similar findings in a variety of settings suggest there is an association between platelet activation and lung function in the settings of EVLP and lung transplantation, and these findings should encourage additional investigation into this field, given the potential impact on clinical outcomes if this association is conclusively proven. Future studies should aim to use clinically available antiplatelet agents, additional animal models, and human participants through retrospective analyses and prospective trials to confirm the translation of these findings into clinical settings. In clinical settings, the administration of antiplatelet agents after lung transplantation may help to prevent arterial thrombosis, although this must certainly be balanced with the risk of bleeding after an invasive operation. The optimal selection of antiplatelet agents and their dosing is yet to be determined.

There are currently no guideline recommendations regarding antiplatelet use in lung transplantation, likely owing to the limited evidence regarding this topic. As highlighted by this review, few studies have investigated the impact of platelet activation in EVLP and lung transplantation settings, although those that have investigated this topic have found evidence suggesting that platelets may play a role in lung dysfunction during EVLP and transplant, as well as the potential benefit of antiplatelet therapy in these settings. However, the available evidence is insufficient to conclusively determine the optimal use of antiplatelet agents in EVLP and transplant. Several key questions remain that must be addressed.

First, in the setting of EVLP, the role of antiplatelet agents will likely vary depending on the protocol used. In EVLP using whole blood, investigations into the impact of antiplatelet agents are feasible given the circulating platelet volume. In acellular EVLP or EVLP circuits using washed blood without platelets, the role of antiplatelets is less clear. In these settings, there is likely an insignificant volume of circulating platelets to justify the use of antiplatelet, although this is not certain. Platelet activation during procurement and ischemia may result in platelet aggregation and distal arterial thrombosis before the establishment of EVLP. Furthermore, it is likely that endothelial injury sustained during procurement and cold ischemic time, inflammation from cardiopulmonary bypass, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, and surgical stimulation, along with reperfusion injury, may further stimulate platelet activation post-EVLP and transplant. Therefore, antiplatelet agents may still play a role in the setting of acellular EVLP. Pretreatment of the donor with antiplatelet therapy, along with postoperative antiplatelet use, may help to prevent platelet aggregation. Certainly, there is concern with antiplatelet use and postoperative bleeding that requires consideration. Only with robust evidence supporting, or not supporting, the use of antiplatelet agents in the EVLP and lung transplantation settings can the risks and benefits of this intervention be known.

There are limitations to this review. These include heterogeneous studies with limited numbers that hinder our ability to aggregate data for analysis. Furthermore, the vast majority of studies were performed in animal models with only 1 prospective study of human participants.

Platelet activation in the setting of EVLP and lung transplantation has been demonstrated in numerous settings. The activation of platelets results in distal vessel thrombosis and has been associated with graft dysfunction. In a limited number of investigations, the use of antiplatelet agents was associated with reduced rates of platelet activation and accumulation, lower rates of lung injury and edema formation, as well as improved lung function on EVLP or during lung transplantation. Although the available evidence supports an association between platelets and lung function in the setting of EVLP and lung transplantation, the available literature is limited and heterogeneous. Future investigations into this topic are required to conclusively determine the role of antiplatelet agents in EVLP and lung transplantation.