In Japan, with aging population, there is a growing emphasis on community-based integrated care system, focusing on supporting healthy lifestyles and promoting prevention in medicine, nursing care, and welfare. Meanwhile, the U.S. is witnessing the widespread implementation of healthcare incorporating the concept of integrative health (IH), which combines evidence-based complementary approaches with conventional healthcare approaches. In this study, the focus was on aromatherapy and yoga, both of which were expected to have a positive effect on patients as complementary approaches. The purpose of the study was to determine the impact of the complementary approaches on pharmacotherapy.

This study was a single-facility, retrospective observational study. This study was conducted from March 3, 2022, to March 31, 2024. The data extraction of the patients was performed at the Maeda Clinic, and the analysis was performed at the collaborating institutions. Participants were enrolled, aged ≥ 20 years, who sought aromatherapy or yoga for 6-month. The primary endpoint was the MRCI-J score, which quantified the effect of variations in prescription drugs dosage form and usage before and after 6 months. The secondary endpoints were age, number of complementary approaches, number of clinic visits, change and rate of change in the number of prescription drugs, number of prescription drugs, and change and rate of change in the MRCI-J score, when grouped according to the increase in the MRCI-J score.

96 participants met the eligibility criteria. After 6 months, the complementary approaches were performed more frequently in the non-increased MRCI-J score group than in the increased MRCI-J score group (8.0 ± 5.8 vs. 5.3 ± 4.1;p< 0.01). The rate of change in the number of prescription drugs was significantly higher in the increased MRCI-J score group than in the non-increased MRCI-J score group (1.5 ± 0.77 vs.0.89 ± 0.18;p< 0.01).

This study determined patient profiles receiving complementary approaches, and changes in prescription drugs. The frequency of complementary approaches might have affected the changes in prescription.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12906-025-05041-3.

The aging population is increasing every year in many countries worldwide and is expected to progress in the future not only in developed regions but also in developing countries. Older individuals, particularly those over 75 years, living in local communities have multiple health concerns and often face challenges when adapting to sudden environmental changes. For example, during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic in 2019, older adults at high risk of becoming seriously ill due to infection were forced to stay at home and measures were taken to restrict their access to nursing homes and day services in Japan [1]. Consequently, they had significantly fewer opportunities for social interaction, thereby creating a feeling of loneliness, exacerbation of chronic diseases, worsening of psychiatric symptoms, such as depression and anxiety, and deterioration of motor functions [2]. According to a survey by the Cabinet Office, approximately 10% of the elderly aged ≥ 65 years are in a situation where they feel lonely, as if they do not have social contact with others at all times [3]. Therefore, the well-being of the older individuals is greatly affected by medical management, as well as their behavior and quality of daily life. In Japan, the population over 65 years old accounts for about 30% of the total population, and the population over 75 years old accounts for 20% of the total population [4]. In this aging society, Japan has implemented a system (community-based integrated care system) to supports healthy lifestyles and promotes prevention of medical, nursing, and welfare care for older individuals within the community. This community-based integrated care system was designed to provide care to the older individuals by utilizing the characteristics of the community through collaboration among multiple professionals to maintain their dignity and support independent living. In contrast, the U.S. medical care system differs by emphasizing a resident’s quality of life (QOL). In recent years, the U.S. is witnessing the widespread implementation of healthcare incorporating the concept of integrative health (IH), which combines evidence-based complementary approaches with conventional healthcare approaches, as well as the concept of prevention. IH is a patient-centered, multidisciplinary approach integrated into national healthcare systems in Europe, providing individuals with a choice of medical care; in other countries, it has developed as a unique medical system in each country [5]. The concept of IH in Japan gained prominence during the 2011 Tohoku Earthquake off the Pacific coast. The damage caused tremendous stress to the victims, and conventional healthcare approaches did not work at all. However, aromatherapy and yoga were reported to alleviate the stress among the affected individuals [6].

The number of elderly residents will continue to increase; thus resolving their health problems is an urgent issue. Lessons learned from COVID-19 and the 2011 off the Pacific coast of Tohoku Earthquake suggest the need to establish a system for multidisciplinary observation and health support to implement care that focuses on improving residents’ QOL. Many studies have been conducted on the impact of complementary approaches on mental health. For example, Mindfulness has been reported to improve subjective well-being as a self-care technique for maintaining mental health in the elderly [7]. Other, yoga as a complementary approach improves physical and mental mood and sleep quality [8,9], whereas aromatherapy improves sleep quality, anxiety, and depression [10,11]. Furthermore, yoga has been reported to improve sleep quality in cancer survivors compared to conventional healthcare. This report further suggests that yoga is effective in improving sleep quality in cancer survivors, with reduced reliance on sleep medications in the yoga group [12]. Therefore, we hypothesized that if complementary approaches can influence mental health and reduce medication usage, they may not only provide effective mental healthcare but also mitigate the risks associated with medications.

There have been limited reports on the effects of complementary approaches on patients’ prescriptions and medications. In this study, the focused was on aromatherapy and yoga, which are expected to have both psychological and medication optimization effects on patients and defined the implementation of aromatherapy and/or yoga as complementary approaches. Investigating the medical records of patients who combined IH with these complementary and conventional healthcare approaches, aiming to clarify the impact of complementary approaches on pharmacotherapy.

This study was a single-facility, retrospective observational study conducted exclusively at the Maeda Clinic. The data extraction of the patients was performed at the Maeda Clinic, and the analysis was performed at the collaborating institutions. The Maeda Clinic is in a residential area and provides community-based primary healthcare and serves older patients as local family doctors. Its main departments are internal medicine, endocrinology and metabolism, diabetology, rehabilitation, and cardiovascular medicine. Several physicians provide care at different times of the day. In addition to conventional healthcare approaches, the Maeda Clinic offers nutritional therapy, herbal medicine, exercise therapy, aromatherapy, yoga, and other therapies according to the patients’ needs. At the Maeda Clinic, each therapy is administered by a specialist, and the two work together to provide health support to patients under the supervision of family doctors. The survey period was set at 6 months, as previous reports on yoga interventions for sleep quality and depressive symptoms have shown that 3 months is a short intervention period, and 6 months is more likely to yield a significant result [9].

To eliminate bias such as worsening insomnia or patients refraining from seeking care due to anxiety caused by the effects of COVID-19, participants were selected from April 1, 2016, to March 31, 2020. To eliminate patient selection bias, patient sampling was performed for the entire study period. The eligibility criteria for the encompassed patients who had a continuous clinic visit for at least 6 months, were at least 20 years old, and had a history of at least 6 months of treatment incorporating yoga and/or aromatherapy in addition to conventional health care. Patients who did not have a history of continuous medical visits for at least 6 months, those younger than 20 years, those with an orthopedic or cardiopulmonary-related history, those with malignant neoplasm diseases that required consideration for the implementation of complementary approaches, those with no history of pharmacotherapy in their medical records during the study period, and those who did not consent to the use of their medical records during the study period were excluded.

A power analysis was performed using G*Power 3.1.9.7, setting the expected effect size as d = 0.5, α = 0.05, and 1-β = 0.9, and the sample size was calculated as 34 participants. First, participants were classified into three groups as follows: aromatherapy for feet (AF) group included patients who used aromatic essential oils for foot massage by a nurse; aromatherapy for insomnia (AI) group included patients who used aromatic essential oils to improve sleep status; and yoga therapy (YT) group included patients who underwent yoga. To extract data for patients who underwent aromatherapy and yoga from April 1, 2016, to March 31, 2020, we conducted searches in the electronic medical record system using the keywords “aromatherapy oil for foot care” and “lavender oil.” Subsequently, we searched the participation records maintained by yoga therapists using the keywords “yoga class.” Data were extracted by reviewing their medical records who met the study criteria. In the AF group, the date of the most recent aromatherapy implementation was set as the 6-month post-data extraction date, and the date 6 months prior to that date was set as the baseline data extraction date. In the AI group, considering the long-term implementation of aromatherapy at home, the date of delivery was set as the baseline extraction date, and the date 6 months after the baseline date was set as the post-data extraction. In the YT group, the date of the most recent yoga session was set as the 6-month post-data extraction date, and the date 6 months prior to that date was set as the baseline data extraction date. We extracted information on age, sex, and height as of the 6-month post-data extraction date. Data on prescription details, and blood test results were extracted at baseline and 6 months later. At the same time, prescription drugs were assigned a drug category code using the drug category table issued by Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare (MHLW).

The Japanese version of Medication Regimen Complexity Index (MRCI-J) [13] is used to assess prescription complexity based on information on prescription drugs. The MRCI-J was adapted from the original Medication Regimen Complexity Index (MRCI) [14] to fit the dosage form and administration method of drugs used in Japan, and it was developed with high reliability and validity. The MRCI-J consists of three sections representing the complexity of drug therapy. Section A assigns weights according to the route of administration (oral, topical, ear, eye) and dosage form (tablets, liquids, sprays). Section B assigns weights according to the dosing frequency and daily timing. Section C assigns weights to the additional directions required for administration (tapering, relation to food, crushing). The MRCI-J checklist has 61 items, and the higher the total score calculated for each section, the more complex the prescription.

Aromatherapy was performed by nurses who were members of the Japanese Society of Aromatherapy or had completed diabetic foot care training. Aromatherapy was performed at an integrated rehabilitation center attached to the clinic or at patients’ homes. Foot care for patients with diabetes included care to prevent and improve the occurrence of neuropathy, ulceration, and necrosis in the lower limbs, along with massage and aromatherapy. Foot care for patients with edema due to cardiovascular disease included observation and care of the foot condition, along with aromatherapy massage. During massage, the essential oils of tea tree, lavender, citronella java, cedarwood, juniper, and geranium were mixed with vegetable oils, such as macadamia nut oil, for aromatherapy. Patients who complained of insomnia were instructed to use a mixture of lavender oil and moisturizer at home before bedtime.

Yoga was conducted by the clinic’s resident yoga therapist, and all yoga sessions were implemented at the Integrated Rehabilitation Centre attached to the clinic. Yoga was performed using a yoga mat and chair once a week for 60 min in the afternoon. The type of yoga was raja yoga [15], which included (1) breathing exercises (to harmonize the body and mind), (2) sukshma vyayama (to make the parasympathetic nervous system work predominantly), (3) isometric asana breathing (asanas to stop the sensory organs and will from working out of control) (4) isotonic asana (aerobic exercise), (5) pranayama (breathing exercises), and (6) meditation (mindfulness). The intensity of the yoga sessions was gentle.

We studied and analyzed the entire participants and each therapy as the AF, AI, and YT groups. To investigate the relationship between complementary approaches and medication regimen complexity, we focused on MRCI-J scores, dividing those whose MRCI-J scores were maintained or improved into the non-increased MRCI-J scores group and those whose MRCI-J scores worsened into the increased MRCI-J scores.

The primary endpoints included changes in the MRCI-J score and the rate of change before and after 6 months. The secondary endpoints included age, number of complementary approaches implemented, number of clinic visits, change and rate of change in the number of prescription drugs before and after 6 months, change and rate of change in MRCI-J score before and after 6 months, when grouped according to the increased in the MRCI-J score. We validated the prescription contents of prescription drugs for eligible patients using drug classification codes assigned to each drug.

The collected data were first tabulated. Pairwise elimination methods were used to correct for missing values, and participants with missing values were removed from the analysis. A pairedt-test was used for comparisons before and after the 6-months observation period, one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used for 3-group comparisons, and Steel–Dwass’s multiple-comparison test was used for post hoc comparisons. Independentt-tests and Welch’st-test were used for between-group comparisons when the two groups were further divided based on MRCI-J scores. Spearman’s correlation test was used to determine the correlations between variables. Interpretation of the magnitude of the correlation coefficient were as follows: 0.90 to 1.00 (−0.90 to −1.00) as very high positive (negative) correlation, 0.70 to 0.90 (−0.70 to −0.90) as high positive (negative) correlation, 0.50 to 0.70 (−0.50 to −0.70) as moderate positive (negative) correlation, 0.30 to 0.50 (−0.30 to −0.50) as low positive (negative) correlation, 0.00 to 0.30 (0.00 to −0.30) as negligible correlation [16]. In this study, a magnitude from 0.50 to 1.00 (−0.50 to −1.00) was determined as a strong correlation. Additionally, a partial correlation analysis was calculated. A p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. All statistical analyses were performed using JMP® Pro 15 software (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, U.S.).

In total, 214 patients who practiced aromatherapy and/or yoga were selected during the study period. Among them, 118 patients were excluded and 96 patients who met the eligibility criteria were analyzed. The number of participants was adequate to meet the required sample size for this study. The analysis included 60, 11, and 25 patients in the AF, AI and YT groups, respectively (Fig.1). The data obtained did not follow a normal distribution.

Participant backgrounds and medical history are summarized in Tables1. and2. At baseline, some differences in the characteristics were observed between patients receiving aromatherapy and those receiving yoga. The mean (SD) number of complementary approaches implemented was 6.9 (5.4), 5.9 (4.3), 1.7 (0.8), and 11.6 (5.4) for the entire participants, AF, AI, and YT groups. The YT group had a significantly higher number of complementary approaches than that of the AF and AI groups (p< 0.01 using one-way ANOVA; post-hoc comparisons: AF vs. YT,p< 0.01; AF vs. AI,p< 0.01; AI vs. YT,p< 0.01). The mean (SD) number of clinic visits was 7.2 (3.1), 7.2 (3.1), 7.8 (3.3), and 6.9 (3.1) for the entire participants, AF, AI, and YT groups, with no significant differences among the groups (p= 0.73) (Table1.). The other participants’ backgrounds and blood test results are presented in the SupplementaryS1andS2.

Single correlation analysis was performed with participants’ age, number of complementary approaches implemented, number of clinic visits, number of prescription drugs, MRCI-J scores, and blood test results; the rate of change in MRCI-J score and in number of prescription drugs (rs = 0.85,p< 0.01), the partial correlation coefficient was r = 0.75,p< 0.01, and the rate of change in ALB and in TP (rs = 0.55,p< 0.01), the partial correlation coefficient was r = 0.51,p< 0.01 demonstrated significantly correlation, falling within the range of 0.50 to 1.00 (− 0.50 to − 1.00) set for a strong correlation in this study. The age and the number of clinic visits (rs = 0.37,p< 0.01), the partial correlation coefficient was r = 0.31,p< 0.01, the rate of change in LDL-Cho and in TP (rs = 0.24,p< 0.05), the partial correlation coefficient was r = 0.33,p< 0.01, the rate of change in systolic blood pressure and in diastolic blood pressure (rs = 0.43,p< 0.01), the partial correlation coefficient was r = 0.42,p< 0.01, the rate of change in BUN and in CRE (rs = 0.35,p< 0.01), the partial correlation coefficient was r = 0.54,p< 0.01, that demonstrated significant but weak correlation. The data are shown in Fig.2.

No significant differences were found in the measured values and rates of change in the number of prescription drugs and MRCI-J scores at baseline and 6 months after baseline. Results data are shown in Table3.

The AF, AI, and YT groups were further divided into two groups based on their MRCI-J scores. Characteristics of participants in the groups non-increased and increased MRCI-J scores are presented in Table4. First, we compared the non-increased and increased MRCI-J score groups in entire participants. Both groups had a predominance of female participants (n = 42 vs. n = 28). There was no significant difference in the mean age between the groups (p= 0.22). For entire participants, the non-increased MRCI-J score group had a significantly higher number of complementary approaches at 8 (5.8) than that of the increased MRCI-J score group at 5.3 (4.1) (p< 0.01). The number of clinic visits for entire participants was not significantly different between the non-increased and increased MRCI-J score groups (p= 0.19). Thereafter, comparison of the AF, AI, and YT groups between the non-increased and increased MRCI-J score groups were compared. Other result data are shown in Table4. Table5displays the actual number of prescription drugs and the actual values and rate of change in MRCI-J scores before and after 6 months. The actual number of prescription drugs in the groups divided according to non-increased or increased in the MRCI-J score was confirmed. At baseline, there was no significant difference in the number of prescription drugs in the entire participants, AF, AI, and YT groups, regardless of the increase in MRCI-J scores. However, at 6 months from baseline, there was a significant difference in the number of prescription drugs for the entire participants and AF groups, regardless of the increase in the MRCI-J scores (entire participants,p< 0.01; AF,p< 0.05). The actual MRCI-J scores in the groups divided according to a non-increased or increased in the MRCI-J scores were confirmed. At baseline, there was no significant difference in the MRCI-J scores among the entire participants, AF, AI, and YT groups, regardless of the increase in the MRCI-J scores. In contrast, at 6 months, there was a significant difference in the MRCI-J scores for the entire participants and AF groups, regardless of the increase in the MRCI-J scores (entire participants,p< 0.01; AF,p< 0.05). The mean (SD) rate of change in the number of prescription drugs in groups according to a non-increased or increased in the MRCI-J scores was confirmed: non-increased MRCI-J score vs. increased MRCI-J score in the entire participants (p< 0.01), non-increased MRCI-J score vs. increased MRCI-J score in the AF group (p< 0.01), and non-increased MRCI-J score vs. increased MRCI-J score in the YT group (p< 0.05), indicating a significant difference between the groups. The mean (SD) rate of change in MRCI-J scores for groups according to a non-increased or increased in the MRCI-J scores was confirmed: non-increased MRCI-J scores vs. increased MRCI-J scores in the entire participants (p< 0.01), non-increased MRCI-J scores vs. increased MRCI-J scores in the AF group (p< 0.01), and non-increased MRCI-J scores vs. increased MRCI-J scores in the YT group (p< 0.01), indicating a significant difference between the groups (Table5).

The three most prescribed drugs were cardiovascular agents (code: 21), other metabolic medicines (code: 39), and digestive organ agents (code: 23). The other categories are listed in Table6in order of the number of prescriptions.

This study evaluated the efficacy of the complementary approach on pharmacotherapy. Among the participants in this study, complementary approaches were implemented in a wide range of age groups, from 38 to 92 years, among individuals with diseases. The utilization rate was high among those aged 60 years and older, accounting for more than 80% of the total. Notably, those who actively engaged in complementary approaches more than 20 times in 6 months were four women aged 57, 61, 62, and 75 years, and all who implemented yoga. Furthermore, all these participants had a history of diabetes, hyperlipidemia, or hypertension. This aligns with existing research that highlights the substantial stress experienced by midlife women, aged 40–65 years, due to menopause, physical changes, children leaving the nest, and caregiving responsibilities for parents [17,18]. Therefore, yoga was implemented more frequently as a means to maintain health. One of the reasons for the inclusion of participants as old as 92 years might be because participants included individuals with underlying diseases, and the complementary approaches were implemented in a clinical setting. This can be seen as an indicator of the safety and acceptance of complementary approaches, even among older adults, that can be implemented under the supervision of medical professionals. At the facility where this study was conducted, aromatherapy was provided by a nurse who was a medical professional, and yoga was provided by a certified yoga therapist with experience in providing yoga to patients at a university hospital. Thus, it can be said that complementary approaches can be accepted not only by healthy individuals, but also by individuals with diseases, if the environment is prepared for their implementation. In the U.S., the programs of all-inclusive care for the elderly (PACE) has been introduced in some states, and care and services are provided to those enrolled in the system as needed [19]. In the U.K., comprehensive medical services including disease prevention and rehabilitation are provided to all residents [19]. In Japan, the community-based integrated care systems include only services that are covered by insurance, such as medical care and long-term care. Therefore, off-label services such as yoga and aromatherapy, are only adopted in some cases as a complementary service [20]. Accordingly, if it is possible to establish and use a system that enables the sharing of information on the status of participation in complementary approaches and their health in the community, it may facilitate the effective use of complementary approaches as a means of community-based integrated care. This is because the number of pharmacies in Japan is increasing annually and the MHLW reports that the total number of pharmacies in 2020 will exceed 60,000, which is approximately 50 pharmacies per 100,000 people. This indicates that Japan’s social infrastructure facilities are well established. For this reason, pharmacists working in community pharmacies are expected to play a central role in preventive measures to maintain patients’ health and improve their QOL as familiar healthcare professionals and to provide information on complementary approaches, other lifestyle support, and environmental improvements that do not rely too heavily on drugs.

A simple tabulation of the number of prescription drugs showed no significant changes before and after 6 months. Furthermore, in a single correlation analysis, the correlation between complementary approaches and other variables was checked and no significant correlations were found. Therefore, we divided the patients according to the MRCI-J score, which was used as a measure of drug complexity, participants non-increased MRCI-J scores exhibited a higher frequency of implemented complementary approaches, indicating that the participants were actively participating in IH. The mean rate of change in the number of prescription drugs before and after 6 months was significantly different between the entire participants, AF and YT groups. The mean rate of change in the MRCI-J score before and after 6 months was significantly different between the entire participants, AF and YT groups. In addition, the number of interventions was lower in the AI group. These results suggested that the frequency of complementary approaches might have influenced the changes in prescription content. Other factors influencing patients’ own attitudes toward treatment include a report [21] in which a qualitative study of interviews conducted with IH practitioners suggested that participants were more satisfied with their treatment when IH was implemented than when traditional medical management alone was used. Similar to the research of McCaffrey et al. [21], the possibility that psychological factors may have contributed to the participants’ active participation in treating and influencing their MRCI-J scores was also inferred in this study.

Cardiovascular agents (code: 21) were the most commonly prescribed drugs among the study participants, followed by other metabolic medicines (code: 39). Since cardiovascular agents (code: 21), include antihypertensive and hyperlipidemic drugs, and other metabolic medicines (code: 39), include diabetic drugs, it was evident that the majority of participants in this study were prescribed drugs for chronic diseases. Therefore, the participants in this study are similar to those identified by Phillips et al. as having the potential for clinical inertia, a term proposed by Phillips et al. to describe lifestyle-related diseases, such as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and diabetes mellitus, which are difficult to detect in the early stages and prevents healthcare professionals from initiating or intensifying treatment for patients during visits, although it is important to provide regular healthcare because of the lack of subjective symptoms [22]. Phillips et al. emphasized the importance of addressing lifestyle-related diseases in their early stages [22]. Therefore, Clinical inertia is currently a problem in the medical field, and multidisciplinary observation of participants through IH may be one way to solve this problem for medical care. It was observed that about four participants with a decreased MRCI-J score reduced or stopped using their neuropsychiatric medications (codes: 11, 52), which aligns with previous studies [8–11]. In other hand, in participants with increased MRCI-J scores, most of them required the addition or increase of cardiovascular agents (code: 21) and other metabolic medicines (code: 39). McCaffrey et al. highlighted the importance of maintaining physical, mental, and nutritional balance, while allowing adequate time for discussions between healthcare professionals and patients to ensure good health [21]. They also highlighted the role IH can play in this regard [21]. Implementing complementary approaches in a clinical setting, as in the case of the participants in this study, is also the best way to counter clinical inertia, as it provides an incentive for hospital visit, attracting attention from multiple professionals and facilitating necessary treatment. It may also be useful in reducing geriatric syndromes [23] and preventing dementia [24]. In addition, hospital visits for the implementation of complementary approaches can serve as a valuable platform for patient-to-patient communication for promoting social interaction, particularly among the older individuals, and improve their well-being.

This study did have some limitations. First, there is bias in observational studies. Concerning the target population, the presence of large number of younger patients in the YT group resulted in potential bias in the analysis. In addition, observational studies rely on the review of medical records, which may lead to missing information. Furthermore, since the pairwise deletion method was used to correct missing values in this study, the sample size changed each time correlations were obtained, difficult to compare between different correlation coefficients. It is difficult to make generalizations in this study, but it may provide a basis for future prospective studies. Moreover, it is expected that comorbidities will be a significant factor in the impact of the complementary treatment approaches on the patients. However, it is difficult to mention this study alone. Thus, future research based on this study is desirable. Furthermore, data were extracted for a 6-month implementation period of complementary approaches, but just this period may not always produce significant changes among patients. Therefore, it is necessary to follow the patients over time to evaluate the effects on drugs and patient backgrounds. Finally, because the data were obtained from a single facility, the findings may have been subjected to departmental bias. Therefore, a multicenter collaborative study is desirable in the future; however, the number of eligible facilities is limited. Therefore, it is necessary to first promote evidence generation and dissemination of complementary approaches to enhance their recognition in Japan.

The study suggested that the frequency of complementary approaches might have affected the changes in prescription. These results suggest that complementary approaches may reduce the burden of medical costs due to drugs and, in turn, reduce clinical inertia by health care professionals. IH as health care, including complementary approaches, is leading to patient-centered health care, wherein patients actively make choices and decisions and participate. Thus, it is expected to function organically in a comprehensive community care system in which other professions who work together, contributing to health promotion and disease prevention, including medicine, nursing care, and social welfare, and to serve as a source of information for effective pharmacotherapy implementation. Further analysis and investigation of the influence and effect of complementary approaches on the content of prescriptions and number of drugs, as well as their factors, will be necessary in the future.

We thank Dr. Shoichi Masumoto for providing us with the Japanese version of the medication regimen complexity index script, then Yuki Asai and Yuriko Masuda for research support.

MY conceived of the original idea and wrote the manuscript. TS introduce the facility and support for study design. KM developed the theory. AK and KI verified the analytical methods. KI encouraged MY to investigate subjects’ information and supervised the findings of this work. All authors discussed the results and contributed to the final manuscript.