This study aimed to explore the distribution of Ezrin-positive cells in poorly differentiated cluster (PDC) of colorectal cancer (CRC), and its correlation with both traditional and auxiliary pathological indicators, including E-cadherin and tumor-stroma ratio (TSR), as well as patient prognosis.

We selected 59 patients with stage I–III who underwent radical surgery to observe the expression of CRC under hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining. This study establishes the poorly differentiated cluster-based Ezrin marginal score (PDC-EMS), which quantifies the tendency of Ezrin-positive cells to accumulate at the margins of PDC, to evaluate the validity and superiority of this assessment method.

The results indicate that PDC grading is significantly correlated with the TNMAJCCstage, pN stage, macroscopic configuration, and tumor budding (TB) grading. The PDC-EMS shows significant correlations with PDC and TB grading and demonstrates good consistency with traditional pathological indicators. E-cadherin expression significantly negatively correlates with TNMAJCCstaging and markedly associates with pN stage, perineural invasion (PNI) and TSR. Univariate analysis suggests that the PDC-EMS system, PDC grading (three-tiered system) and pT stage are risk factors that affect prognosis. Multivariate regression analysis identifies WHO grading, E-cadherin, and tumor location to be independent influencing factors. When considering only PDC classification, pT stage, and lympho-vascular invasion (LVI), PDC emerges an independent influencing factor affecting postoperative survival.

The innovative PDC-EMS scoring system developed in this study demonstrates functional consistency with both PDC grading and TB grading. Furthermore, this scoring system offers significant advantages in predicting prognosis and shows promising potential for clinical applications.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1007/s12672-025-03211-w.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a common malignant tumor in the digestive system, with its incidence and mortality rates increasing annually [1], posing a severe threat to public health. The pathological features of CRCs are crucial for assessing the prognosis and determining the therapeutic approaches and developing follow-up strategies [2].

TNM staging and WHO grading, considered as traditional parameters, serve as reliable criteria for predicting CRC prognosis [3,4]. However, resent studies have revealed some limitations of these evaluation systems, such as the outcome heterogeneity in patients with the same stage [5,6], low levels of interobserver agreement, and poor reproducibility [7]. As a result, other adjunctive histomorphological features, such as tumor-stromal ratio (TSR) and E-cadherin, which are associated with the malignant behaviors of CRCs have been explored as auxiliary pathological indicators. TSR, proposed by Mesker, is the ratio of tumor cells to tumor stroma in tumor tissue [8] and is strongly correlated with overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) in CRC patients [9]. Loss of E-cadherin is a sign of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) [10], and its downregulation is associated with reduced OS and increased risk of postoperative recurrence in CRC patients [11]. However, these indicators also have limitations. For einstance, the correlation between TSR and postoperative metastasis has not been reported in the literature, and the underlying mechanisms have not been elucidated [12]. Regarding E-cadherin, despite a substantial body of research, the mechanisms regulating E-cadherin are complex [13], and there is no consensus on the core regulatory mechanisms or intervention targets that lead to tumor invasion and metastasis.

Recently, several new and promising prognostic factors have emerged, offering superior risk stratification to their more established counterparts. For example, poorly differentiated clusters (PDC) and tumor budding (TB), located at the tumor invasion front, have showed significant correlations with traditional histopathological indicators [14] and demonstrated considerable potential in prognostic assessment [15]. Unlike TB, PDC can be detected not only at the tumor invasion front but also in more distant stroma from the primary tumor [16]. Additionally, its larger size makes it easier to identify on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) sections. PDC grading applicable not only to colorectal adenocarcinoma but also aids in identifying special types of malignant tumors, such as mucinous [5] and micropapillary carcinomas [17]. Furthermore, studies have highlighted the clinical significance of PDC across different TNM stages of CRC [15], especially in advanced CRC. PDC grading has been shown to be the most powerful predictor of relapse-free survival (RFS) and DFS, outperforming both TNM staging and other adverse prognostic indicators [14,15,18].

Ezrin, a member of the ERM (Ezrin/Radixin/Moesin) family, connects the cytoskeleton and microfilament structure, which is crucial for cell polarity and tumor cell adhesion [19,20]. Recent studies have reported that Ezrin enhances CRC cell motility by disrupting cell connections, reducing intercellular adhesion, decreasing the expression of β-catenin, and promoting the intracellular aggregation of E-cadherin [21,22]. As a result, Ezrin has been considered an important regulator in the process of invasion and metastasis. Additionally, proteomic studies have found that Ezrin expression is significantly higher in CRC compared with adjacent normal colorectal mucosa [23], and its elevated expression is significantly associated with tumor progression and poor prognosis, serving as an independent predictor of lymph node metastasis (LNM) [23]. Furthermore, the subcellular distribution of Ezrin plays a regulatory role in cell invasion, as evidenced by its notably stronger expression in stromal tumor cell clusters and isolated tumor cells [24]. Moreover, Ezrin-expressing cells within PDC are prone to migrate into the extracellular matrix. The marginal distribution of Ezrin in PDC correlates with disease progression and lymphatic invasion, which may serve as indicators of a poor prognosis for patients. Therefore, the evaluation of Ezrin distribution in PDC may be an effective prognostic indicator for patients [17].

In this report, we have innovatively developed the poorly differentiated cluster-based Ezrin Marginal Score (PDC-EMS) system to quantitatively score Ezrin-positive PDC. We investigated the correlation between the PDC-EMS system and other histopathological features. In addition, we explored the value of this evaluation system and various pathological indicators in relation to patient survival prognosis.

A retrospective analysis was conducted on patients with CRC diagnosed by radical surgery between 2012 and 2019 at the Jiangsu Provincial Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine. Inclusion criteria comprised patients diagnosed with stage I-III nonspecific CRC through pathology, who underwent radical surgical resection without preoperative radiotherapy and chemotherapy, and who had complete clinicopathological data available after the operation. Exclusion criteria included non-adenocarcinoma and special types of adenocarcinoma tumors (such as mucinous adenocarcinoma,n= 5) as well as cases lacking slides for complete pathological evaluation (n= 4) (Supplementary Figure1). Ultimately, a total of 59 complete cases met the criteria, consisting of 37 males and 22 females, with an average age at surgery of 60.54 ± 10.67 years. General information collected included gender, age, contact information, while clinical and pathological data encompassed macroscopic classification, tumor location, size, depth of invasion, number of lymph node metastases, WHO grading, TNMAJCCstaging, lympho-vascular invasion (LVI), and perineural invasion (PNI). All specimens were treated with 10% neutral-buffered formalin, paraffin-fixed, and embedded, with representative tissue blocks selected for continuous sectioning, H&E staining, and IHC staining. The design of this retrospective study and the experimental protocol conformed to the requirements of the Declaration of Helsinki and were approved by the Ethics Committee of Jiangsu Province Hospital of Chinese Medicine. The committee exempted informed consent from patients due to the retrospective nature of the study.

PDC refers to a cluster of ≥ 5 cancer cells that form in the stroma at the invasion front of a tumor, without glandular formation. Currently, the evaluation of PDC lacks a unified grading standard, with most studies adopting the Ueno grading system [14]. This system involves selecting the H&E section with the highest number of PDCs at the tumor front and scanning 10 individual fields at low magnification (10× objective lens) to determine the “hot spot” area at the invasive front. Within the selected “hot spot,” the number of PDCs in a field at 20× objective lens (0.785 mm2) is counted. According to the number of PDCs [14], they are categorized into 3 levels: < 5 (PDC-G1), 5–9 (PDC-G2), and ≥ 10 (PDC-G3). Our study also applied a binary scoring system based on a previous report [5], categorizing cases as low grade (< 10 PDCs) or high-grade(≥ 10 PDCs).

TB is defined as the scattered appearance of individual tumor cells or small clusters of up to 4 tumor cells at the invasion front or surrounding the tumor as observed under the microscope. According to the standards established by the International Tumor Bud Consensus Conference (ITBCC) in 2016 [25], the evaluation process involves selecting the H&E section that exhibits the greatest degree of budding at the tumor front. A low-power field (10× objective lens) is scanned across 10 individual fields to identify the “hot spot” area at the invasive front. Within this selected “hot spot,” the number of tumor buds in a 20× objective lens field (0.785mm2) is counted. According to the number of tumor buds, they are categorized into three grades, < 5 (TB1), 5–9 (TB2), and ≥ 10 (TB3) (Fig.1).

Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded blocks were sectioned to a thickness of 4 μm. For Ezrin IHC (Fig.2), the sections were boiled in a water bath for 30 min at 100 ℃ in 10 mmol/L citrate buffer (pH 6.0), then left to cool at room temperature for 30 min. After treatment with 3% H2O2to block endogenous peroxidase activity, the sections were incubated overnight at 4 °C with the primary antibody against Ezrin (3145, Cell Signaling Technology), diluted 1:600 in Signal_Stain Antibody Diluent (AG8597, Beyotime). For E-cadherin IHC, the instructions provided by ZSGB-BIO were followed.

The expression of Ezrin-positive cells at the edge of PDCs was quantified using the PDC-EMS. The “hot spot” of PDCs was selected, and the PDC-EMS of all PDCs in this region was calculated according to the formula. As shown in Fig.3, each PDC has its own PDC-EMS. To determine the positivity of Ezrin, the relative expression within PDCs was considered. For example, when several cells within a PDC showed significantly higher expression than others in the same cluster, only these highly expressed cells were designated as Ezrin-positive. When the cell intensity of Ezrin expression was uniform within a PDC, with only subtle differences between cells, all cells within the PDC were considered Ezrin-positive. These criteria did not include the intensity of Ezrin positivity between different clusters.

We further assessed the clinicopathological implications of PDC-EMS values from each PDC in two distinct ways. The first method involves calculating the “average PDC-EMS”, which represents the mean of all PDC-EMS values within the defined area. The second method utilizes a cut-off value of PDC-EMS (2.18) (Fig.4), determined through RStudio, to categorize the data into PDC-EMS-high and PDC-EMS-low groups, allowing us to examine its effect on survival prognosis. A digital pathology reading software was employed to construct the PDC-EMS scoring model. To facilitate calculations and improve visual clarity, the RGB values and brightness/contrast settings of each slide were standardized: red value (− 5), green value (0), blue value (17), γ value (1.7), brightness value (10 or 20), and contrast (20 or 50).

E-cadherin positivity is indicated by brown-yellow particles in the cytoplasm or membrane. The specific detection method is as follows: Five regions with obvious E-cadherin expression were selected under a 5× objective lens, and 100 cells were randomly selected from each field of view under a 20× objective lens. The number of E-cadherin-expressing positive cells and the staining intensity were counted respectively, and the integrals of the two values were added together.

TSR was used to “quantify” the proportion of tumor mesenchyme. Specifically, the detection method [26] involves selecting the area with the most obvious interstitial infiltration in the tumor tissue (100× magnification). The area occupied by tumor cells in each field of view is evaluated, with the remaining part representing TS. TSR is calculated as the ratio of the percentage of tumor parenchymal cells and interstitial cells in the field of view. The TSR value with the highest interstitial area is taken as the final value. In addition, to exclude interference of surrounding tissue, the selected area for evaluation must be entirely surrounded by tumor tissue. TSR ≥ 1 is defined as the sparse interstitial group, while TSR < 1 as the abundant interstitial group (Fig.5).

It should be noted that a total of 52 E-cadherin-stained sections and 45 Ezrin-stained sections were obtained due to tissue shedding during IHC. To avoid statistical errors, 41 sections with both Ezrin and E-cadherin staining were intact. Specific details are provided in the Tables.

Patients were monitored through telephone calls and medical records to assess postoperative follow-up and survival status. Necessary health education and review guidance were provided to the patients. The follow-up endpoint was defined as the date of completion or loss of follow-up, measured in months.

Data analysis was conducted using Microsoft Office Excel, while statistical analysis was performed using the SPSS software (version 25.0, SPSS) and RStudio software. For categorical data, the chi-square (χ2) test or Fisher’s exact test was employed. For continuous data, normality testing was conducted, and data that met the normal distribution were presented as mean ± standard deviation. T-tests or approximate t-tests were used for comparison. Data with a skewed distribution were reported as median ± interquartile range. One-way ANOVA and Mann-Whitney U tests were conducted for group comparisons. RStudio was utilized to calculate the cut-off value of the PDC-EMS and forward regression was used to explore the models. Survival curves were plotted by Kaplan-Meier curves (K-M curves) to evaluate the differences with a log-rank test. Univariate analyses selected covariates to introduce into the multivariate Cox hazards regression models to identify independent risk factors for a poor prognosis. AP-value < 0.05 (two-sided) was considered statistically significant.

This study collected clinical and pathological information from 59 patients, including 37 males and 22 females, with an average age at surgery of 60.54 ± 10.67 years (Table1). To investigate the expression of Ezrin in PDCs, paraffin blocks from these patients were respected and stained with H&E and IHC. Due to the limitations of previous wax block aging and fixation embedding techniques, the final IHC cohort included 29 males and 16 females (Table2). Follow-up was performed based on overall survival (OS). Of the 59 patients, 7 were lost to follow-up and 6 patients died. The follow-up period ranged from 15 months to 12 years, with an average of 5.6 years.

Statistical analysis revealed that more patients had right colon cancer and rectal cancer, with 24 cases (40.7%) of right colon cancer and 32 cases (54.2%) of rectal cancer. Only 3 cases (5.1%) were in left colon. From the perspective of gross morphology, there were 15 cases of protruding type, 43 cases of ulcerative type, and only 1 case of infiltrative type. According to the WHO grading standards, G1 and G3 tumors accounted for 16.9% and 11.9%, respectively, while G2 tumors accounted for 71.2 %. There were 6 LVI positive cases, accounting for 10.2%, and 13 PNI positive cases, accounting for 2.0 %.

According to TNMAJCCstaging, there were 11 cases (18.6%) in stage I, 24 cases (40.7%) in stage II, and 24 cases (40.7%) in stage III. By pT staging, pT2, pT3, and pT4 accounted for 23.7%, 74.6%, and 1.7%, respectively. By pN staging, pN0, pN1, and pN2 were found in 59.3%, 37.3%, and 3.4% of the cases, respectively.

The PDC and TB grades were assessed using a three-tiered system (Table3) and a two-tiered system (Table4), respectively, and the relationships between the two grades and other clinicopathological features were summarized. The representative pathological characteristics of PDC and TB on H&E sections are shown in Fig.1.

This study found that there was a significant correlation between PDC grading and TB grading. Based on the number of PDCs, 12, 28, and 19 tumors were classified as PDC-G1, PDC-G2, and PDC-G3, respectively. The PDC grading based on the three-tiered system demostrated a significant positive correlation with TB grading (P= 0.003). Simultaneously, using the two-tiered system, PDC-G1 and PDC-G2 were grouped as low-grade PDC (a total of 30 tumors), while PDC-G3 was considered high-grade. Notably, the PDC grading based on the two-tiered system had an even more significant correlation with TB grading (P< 0.0001). These findings were in accordance with previous reports [15]. Meanwhile, the current study suggested that the two-tiered system for PDC and TB grading seemed simpler and more sensitive than the three-tiered system (Tables3and4).

To validate the correlation between PDC and TB grading and some traditional pathological characteristics, a comparative analysis was conducted. The data indicated that PDC grading based on the three-tiered system had significant correlation with TNMAJCCstage, N stage, and gross morphology (P values were 0.003, 0.015, and 0.006, respectively), with a trend toward correlation with T stage (P= 0.08). Similarly, PDC grading based on the two-tiered system also showed significant correlation with TNMAJCCstage and N stage (P values were 0.0343 and 0.0192, respectively). Additionally, TB grading (both three-tiered and two-tiered) was significantly correlated with TNMAJCCstage and N stage (P values were 0.025, 0.011, 0.0048, and 0.0006, respectively), with the correlation between PDC grading and TNMAJCCstage being more significant. Furthermore, the data indicated that PDC grading (two-tiered) had a trend toward correlation with LVI and PNI (P values were 0.0566 and 0.0586, respectively), and that TB grading (two-tiered) also had a trend toward correlation with PNI (P= 0.0589). These results indicated that PDC grading (regardless of the grading method), was comparable to traditional histological indicators and the novel TB grading system.

Meanwhile, to explore the correlation between PDC and auxiliary indicators (TSR and E-cadherin), our group conducted relevant studies. As shown in Supplementary Tables1and Supplementary Table2, with the increase of TB grade, the proportion of tumors with TSR < 1 and negative E-cadherin expression gradually increased, consistent with previous reports [27,28]. Besides, when the stroma was denser (TSR < 1), E-cadherin expression showed a decreasing trend, exhibiting a significant statistical significance (P= 0.002) (Supplementary Table 1). TSR also showed some trend toward correlation with TNMAJCCstage, although there was no significant difference between the two parameters. As expected, E-cadherin expression decreased as TNMAJCCstage increased (P= 0.038), consistent with the results of previous study [11]. Furthermore, our results showed that the expression level of E-cadherin was negatively correlated with PNI (P= 0.001) and had significant statistical significance with pN stage (P= 0.021), but no statistical significance was found with LVI (Supplementary Table 2).

To assess the distribution trend of Ezrin-positive cell in PDC, IHC was applied to mark Ezrin-positive cells. Meanwhile, we developed a novel simplified method known as the PDC-EMS. The specific PDC-EMS scoring diagram is illustrated in Fig.3.

According to our findings, PDC-EMS had a significant correlation with traditional pathological indicators. Of the 45 cases included in the TNMAJCCstaging, there were 10 in stage I, 18 in stage II, and 17 cases in stage III, with mean PDC-EMS values of 1.64 ± 0.53, 1.80 ± 0.48, and 2.40 ± 0.58, respectively (P= 0.001). Furthermore, the mean PDC-EMS also had a significant correlation with the pN stage (P= 0.003). Although the mean PDC-EMS increased gradually with pT stage, there was no statistical significance. Additionally, the WHO grading system also showed good accordance with PDC-EMS (P= 0.029). Interestingly, our data also suggested that PDC-EMS correlated with gross morphology (P= 0.033), especially in ulcerative lesions, where the PDC-EMS were significantly higher than polypoid lesions. Meanwhile, a high PDC-EMS suggested an increased risk of LVI (P= 0.014), but this scoring system did not show any associations with PNI, gender, or tumor location (Table2).

To validate the performance of PDC-EMS in prognostic evaluation, we compared it with PDC and TB. The results showed that based on TB grading (three-tiered system), there were 13, 15, and 17 cases in TB1, TB2, and TB3, respectively, with corresponding mean PDC-EMS values of 1.51 ± 0.48, 2.12 ± 0.52, and 2.52 ± 0.59, respectively (P= 0.001). Similarly, based on PDC grading (three-tiered system), there were 8, 22, and 15 cases of PDC-G1, PDC-G2, and PDC-G3, respectively, with corresponding mean EMS values of 1.40 ± 0.37, 2.04 ± 0.67, and 2.25 ± 0.40, respectively. The mean PDC-EMS showed a positive correlation with PDC grading in both three-tiered system (P= 0.004).and two-tiered system (P= 0.047). Meanwhile, this effective predictability of PDC-EMS was also synchronous with TB grading, indicating its reliability for clinical prognosis (Table2).

Finally, our group also examined the relationship between mean PDC-EMS and auxiliary pathological indicators and found no significant correlation with TSR and E-cadherin. However, as the proportion of tumor stromal components increased (TSR < 1) and E-cadherin level decreased, the mean PDC-EMS value showed no significant increasing trend (Table2).

To investigate the correlation between various pathological indicators and patient survival in the real-world setting, the research group employed univariate Kaplan-Meier analysis and multivariate Cox regression survival analysis. The univariate results indicated that the PDC-EMS grading demonstrated a superior prognostic value (P= 0.0081) for survival (Fig.6), showing that the PDC-EMS-high group had a shorter survival time than the PDC-EMS-low group. Additionally, pT staging (P= 0.0056) confirmed its clinical prognostic value, whereas other traditional pathological indicators such as pN staging, TNM stage, WHO grading, LVI, and PNI, did not show a significant correlation with clinical prognosis. Notably, PDC grading (three-tiered system) was identified as a risk factor for prognosis (P= 0.018). At the same time, both PDC grading (two-tiered system) and TB grading (two-tiered system) showed a tendency to become risk factors for predicting postoperative survival (P values were 0.059 and 0.055, respectively) (Fig.7). These results indicated that PDC and TB grading offer greater advantages over traditional pathological indicators regarding clinical prognosis, and that PDC-EMS system proves to be superior to both novel and traditional pathological indicators.

Furthermore, multivariate Cox regression analysis was conducted to identify risk factors affecting postoperative survival in CRC. When eight factors were included in the regression analysis, significant statistical significance was found (P= 0.029), with E-cadherin and PNI as independent influencing factors (P values were 0.017 and 0.015, respectively) (Table5). When only PDC grading, pT staging, and LVI were included, it was found that PDC grading was an independent factor affecting postoperative survival (P= 0.026) (Table6).

The role of PDC in the evaluation and prognostic assessment of CRC has gradually garnered attention and recognition in the field. Previous studies have shown that PDC grading is statistically significant for CRC across different TNM stages [14,15]. In the present study, PDC grading was significantly associated with TNMAJCCstage, N stage, gross morphology, and TB grading, outperforming traditional histological parameters (Tables3and4). Furthermore, in the univariate survival analysis, when the PDC-EMS was graded by a cut-off value, it exhibited a significant negative correlation with overall survival (OS). Specifically, the OS of patients in the PDC-EMS-high group was significantly lower than that of those in the PDC-EMS-low group (Fig.7). These findings indicate that the innovative PDC-EMS system has substantial value in predicting patient survival prognosis. In addition, PDC grading (three-tiered system) was found to have a significant negative correlation with OS, with patients classified as PDC-G3 having significantly lower OS compared to those classified as PDC-G1 (Fig.7), which is consistent with some previous research findings. Notably, when PDC and TB were graded using a dichotomous method, this study suggests that both tend to become risk factors for predicting postoperative survival (Fig.7). Multivariate Cox regression analysis revealed that when only PDC grading, pT stage, and LVI were included, PDC grading emerged as an independent influencing factor for postoperative recurrence (P= 0.026) (Table6). This demonstrates that PDC grading has significant advantages both compared with other pathological features and in terms of survival prognosis. However, the current grading of PDC is mostly based on the observer’s judgment of the microscopic number, which, like other pathological indicators, has the characteristics of strong subjectivity and variable repeatability [7]. This subjectivity affects the accuracy and objectivity of PDC and other indicators, thereby limiting their clinical application to some extent.

The expression of Ezrin protein is clearly correlated with the invasion and metastasis of CRC [23]. Studies have shown that knocking out Ezrin significantly reduces the invasive and metastatic capabilities of CRC cells, making it a novel target for preventing further tumor metastasis [23]. Additionally, high levels of Ezrin expression are significantly associated with tumor progression and poor prognosis, while also serving as an independent risk factor for predicting LVI [24]. Meta-analysis suggests that Ezrin expression is significantly associated with tumor grade, TNMAJCCstage, and LVI [29]. These studies indicate that the expression of Ezrin is closely related to patient prognosis. Furthermore, some studies suggest that Ezrin is more strongly expressed in cancer nests in the stromal area and in single tumor cells [24], with its distribution in PDC is related to lymphatic invasion and the progression of PDC [17], indicating a poor clinical prognosis for patients. Allowing the role Ezrin expression in malignant behavior of CRC, our group discovered the marginalized distribution of Ezrin in PDC as a novel predictor for CRC malignance. Previous studies have also reported the heterogeneous distribution of Ezrin in MP-PDC [17], which is considered a relatively rare subtype of CRC. However, the PDC-EMS seemed more compatible with traditional CRC [17]. As demonstrated in the present study, PDC-EMS performed well as a prognostic predictor in consistence with traditional parameters such as TNMAJCCstage and WHO grade (Table2). Additionally, the mean PDC-EMS had more significant statistical significance with the novel pathological indicators (PDC and TB grading) (Table2).

In recent years, there have been scattered reports on the research of PDC scoring system, mainly including the following contents. Aikawa was the first to use “Ezrin Corner Score” (ECS) to evaluate PDC, which had good predictive effects in MP-PDC but was not applicable in colorectal adenocarcinoma. Besides, the position of PDC margins was unclear and time-consuming [17]. Pai used a deep learning algorithm to quantify the histological characteristics (including PDC and TB) of CRC, achieving better results for evaluating TB and PDC were better than traditional grading guidelines. However, the algorithm required a large number of pathological images and detailed differentiation by senior pathologists, making it time-consuming and difficult to apply in routine diagnosis [30]. Subsequently, Shivji came up with a “Combined Score” (CS) scoring system that combined TB and PDC into a single parameter, eliminating the need for both at the dividing point (4 tumor cells). However, this approach had limitations, including the difficulty in identifying small TBs, the lack of normalization for PDC counts to a standard area, and the inability to standardize the CS for specific domains [31]. Notably, the PDC-EMS is a quantification of PDC scoring in colorectal adenocarcinoma that our group constructed through the Ezrin marginalization scoring system, addressing the errors caused by the above problems and providing a more objective and convenient approach. The results showed that the mean PDC-EMS was significantly correlated not only with traditional pathological indicators, but also positively correlated with novel pathological indicators (three-tiered system) (Table2). Moreover, compared with several similar studies mentioned above, the PDC-EMS algorithm system is simpler, more convenient, and more universally applicable.

Additionally, some studies have shown that auxiliary pathological indicators, such as TSR and E-cadherin, possess clinical value [8,11]. However, our research found that TSR is not correlated with traditional indicators and has no significant correlation with PDC grading or PDC-EMS. Previous studies have believed that when TSR < 1, that is, there were more stromal components and less tumor components, indicating a poor prognosis. Based on the above research results, we propose that PDCs represent solid cancer nests of tumor cells, making it difficult to observe at the invasive front of lesions with TSR < 1 [9], which provides an objective explanation for the observed difference in correlation between PDC-EMS and TSR. However, both previous research and our study have confirmed that PDC grading is significantly correlated with TNMAJCCstage and pN staging (Tables3and4), indicating PDC-EMS and PDC grading are superior to TSR (Table2and Supplementary Table 1). The development of PDC and TB is a progressive process, within E-cadherin serving as a key regulatory factor [10]. E-cadherin acts as a marker for EMT, characterized by cytoskeletal rearrangement, cell migration, and extracellular matrix (ECM) degradation [32]. In the process of cell EMT, PDC and TB gradually begin to occur along with the enhancement of invasion ability, and the marginalized expression of Ezrin is a key step to promote the above process. Our research showed that the lower degrees of tumor differentiation, were associated with reduced levels of E-cadherin expression (Supplementary Table 2). This finding further supports previous studies [11]. In addition, E-cadherin not only had significant correlation with TNMAJCCstage, WHO grade, pN stage, and PNI indicators (Supplementary Table 2), but also had significant differences with PDC-EMS and PDC grading (Tables2,3and4). However, the E-cadherin evaluation method is cumbersome and subjective [11], while PDC-EMS and PDC grading are relatively simpler and more objective, showing comparable strength in prognostic efficacy. Therefore, PDC-EMS and PDC grading are more advantageous.

There are still some limitations in this study. Firstly, it was a single-center retrospective study with only 59 cases which could be susceptible to inherent bias. Therefore, multi-center prospective verification of the effectiveness of PDC-EMS is urgently needed in the future. Secondly, this study failed to collect relevant information on patients’ sensitivity to postoperative chemotherapy and postoperative recurrence. Subsequent research will focus on these two aspects and analyze their correlation with PDC-EMS and may find more valuable information. Additionally, our research subjects predominantly consisted of stage II-III samples, as stage I lesions (particularly pT1a stage) were primarily managed through endoscopic resection, while stage IV CRC was mainly treated with radiotherapy and chemotherapy.

In summary, our research team has developed a novel, objective, and convenient histological scoring system, PDC-EMS, which is not influenced by the number of PDCs. This system demonstrates strong functional consistency with the novel adverse parameters (PDC and TB grading), and offers higher sensitivity and accuracy compared to the traditional TNM staging and auxiliary pathological indicators. Moreover, it is of great significance for survival prognosis and holds considerable clinical value. If subsequent studies by other researchers confirm these findings, this study will be pivotal in elucidating the invasive mechanisms of PDCs and identifying prognostic markers for them. Therefore, the PDC-EMS scoring system warrants further research and consideration in the future.