New formulation of diflubenzuron, was carried out through a simple and green route using polyethylene glycol (PEG). The insecticidal efficacy of PEG nano-capsules loaded with diflubenzuron (DFB) pesticide was evaluated againstHelicoverpa armigera(Heb). The loaded nanoparticles had the spherical-shape and an average size of 80 ± 20 nm. In the acute toxicity bioassay, 2nd instar larvae ofH. armigerawere exposed to either DFB or fabricated DFB@NPs for 96 h. According to the results, the LC50values were 316.87 and 139.36 µg a.i./mL for DFB and fabricated DFB@NPs, respectively. Also, the results of the contact toxicity bioassay against the egg stage of the pest revealed the LC50values of 70.74 and 8.58 µg a.i./mL for DFB and nanoparticles prepared by PEG-400, respectively. Controlled release experiments showed that DFB@NPs releases the active ingredient over a prolonged period. This study revealed that the nanoformulation of diflubenzuron by PEG-400 can improve its insecticidal efficacy againstH. armigera. The residue of DFB was analyzed via an HPLC and showed that after 3 weeks the residue of DFB and DFB@NPs were much lower than MRLs. Overall, our results indicated that the nanoformulation of diflubenzuron is more economical and environmentally friendly than traditional formulations.

Control of pests is a decisive function in achieving the goals for food and energy. Pesticides play a critical role in the increase of food production crops and many other forms of products based on the growing world population. Without pesticide application, 70% of crops could have been lost by pests1–3. Nevertheless, the application of chemical pesticides is not desirable owing to their impact on human health and the environment. Hence, the excessive use of these compounds over the past half-century has led to concerns around the world about risks to human health4–6. Unfortunately, the repeated application of synthetic pesticides can lead to the persistence and accumulation of non-biodegradable toxic components in the ecosystem. The excessive application of pesticides can lead to serious issues such as groundwater contamination, the spread of toxic substances in the environment by leaching or in rainfall runoff, and volatilization. So, there is a strong need to identify and investigate new alternatives to the use of pesticides so that their use can be minimized if it cannot be stopped. One way to decrease pesticide residues, as artificial organic compounds, in the environment is to use biorational pesticides, and the other is to use new formulations with a small amount of pesticide in them and with harmless solvents and other additives. Therefore, the quest for shifting the focus onto more reliable, sustainable and environment-friendly agents of pest control has recently started gaining momentum. Biorational pesticides are expected to fill in this slot and play a prominent role in future integrated pest management (IPM) programs7–9.

Benzoylphenylureas (BPUs, IRAC group 15) are biorational pesticides that disrupt the insect biochemistry and physiology processes. They are relatively non-toxic to humans with few environmental side effects10,11. According to the pesticide physicochemical and ecotoxicological data of commercial benzoylphenylureas obtained from the Pesticide Properties Database (PPDB), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Benzoylurea pesticides own eco-friendly properties and low acute toxicity to mammals and birds as well as crop pollinators such as bees12. Different degradation rates of BPUs occur in a variety of environmental conditions, as it also depends on climatic conditions, water content, organic matter, pH, microbial biomass, temperature, etc., and these processes may have different timings, from hours or days to years. The half-life of benzoylureas in the environment is modified by the type of medium, such as soil, water, or sunlight11,13. However, most BPUs suffer a rapid degradation in both soil and water by photolysis and hydrolysis10,11. The lack of or limited contact activity of the Benzoylphenylureas has also limited their use against pests that are undercover feeders10,11. On the other hand, most of these BPUs are poorly soluble in aqueous media, which limits the extension of their efficient and green formulations10,13. In addition, in the conventional formulations, the organic solvents such as toluene and xylene are used, which are highly toxic, inflammable, explosive and pose environmental risks13–15.

This initiated the usage of modern techniques for the expansion of novel strategies of plant protection. Over the past decade, there has been a remarkable amount of research on the possible usage of nanotechnology in the current agricultural practices including the expansion of novel formulations of pesticides16–20. The encapsulation of pesticides can be utilized as an efficient route because of not only enhanced pesticide stability but also because of sustained release from the fabricated matrix19. Pesticides in nanoparticle form may present an attractive solution to this problem. The applications of polymers and polymeric nanoformulations in human medicine are common, but very little is reported on the controlled release of pesticides using polymer nanocapsules20–23. The encapsulation of pesticides in biopolymers can be used very effectively against pests. Moreover, the dose of pesticide used is much less in nanoformulation and, therefore, decreases the potential negative effects (if any) related to overdose5,21,23. The encapsulation of pesticides in natural and biodegradable polymers causes enhanced efficiency of chemical and natural insecticides by controlled release5,15,20.

Considering these parameters, the present work has been focused on the fabrication ananoformulation of biorational pesticide (active ingredient DFB) by polyethylene glycol-400, (PEG-400) and its effect onH. armigera. In order to prepare an eco-friendly, low-cost and biodegradable formulation of DFB, nanotechnology-based research was carried out. Here, we report a novel method of preparation and subsequent characterization of the DFB nano-encapsulation complex by the polymer polyethylene glycol-400. The successful encapsulation of DFB with PEG 400 may open a new route for enhancing longer-lasting biological effects, increasing stability, and sustaining the release of the active ingredient.

Larvae ofHelicoverpa armigerawas collected from the Moghan cotton farms in Iran and reared on modified Shorey and Halepinto24bean-based artificial diet in the laboratory at 27 ± 2 °C, a photoperiod of 16 h light:8 h dark (L: D 16:8) and 60 ± 5% RH.

PEG-400 (MW 380–420 g/mol, density 1.128 g/cm3and dialysis bags (2,000 MW cutoff) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, Missouri). Diflubenzuron technical grade material (97%) was obtained from Golsam Company (Gorgan, Iran).

Nanoencapsulation of DFB was prepared by dissolving the active ingredient of DFB in octanol (0.5 g/20 mL) under magnetic stirring. About 0.12 g of polysorbate (Tween®80) as an emulsifier for the active ingredient of DFB was added to the solution and allowed to stir for 10 min to obtain a homogeneous solution. Then, 10 mL of PEG-400 was dropped into the DFB/tween 80 solution and stirred for 60 min at 500 rpm. A simple scheme showing the preparation steps of loaded DFB in polyethylene glycol nanoparticles is shown in Fig.1.

Schematicsteps of DFB loaded in polyethylene glycol nanoparticles and its insecticide effect.

Surface morphology, topology and size of pesticide-loaded PEG-400 nanoparticles were characterized by Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM; Zeiss Leo 906 TEM-Gmbh, Germany). The average particle size and size distribution were determined by dynamic light scattering (DLS) using a Zeta sizer photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS) instrument (Malvern Instruments Limited, UK). All of the DLS tests were replicated four times. The DFB loading in PEG-400 nanoparticles was confirmed by UV-Visible and FTIR (Shimadzu).

This study was designed according to the Christofoli et al.28and Abdennouri et al.29method. In brief, photocatalytic experiments were performed in a chamber equipped with four UV light irradiation lamps (G36T5L (40 W) UV-C, with a maximum emission wavelength of 257 nm). Constant agitation was assured by means of a magnetic stirrer placed at the reactor base. 5 mL of DFB and encapsulated DFB (with the same concentration) were individually poured into vials and kept under UV-C irradiation. At specified times (1, 3, 6, 9, 12 and 15 h), the stability of the pesticide was determined by UV–Vis spectrophotometer, as mentioned above.

In order to determine the residual of DFB on the leaves of tomato plant, samples of the tomato plants were sprayed separately with the normal formulation and its nanoformulation of DFB by Potter spray tower. The DFB analysis was performed on it using a high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (KNAUER, Germany) equipped with a UV detector and a reversed-phase C18 column (5 μm, 250 × 4.6 mm) at 25℃was used for the separation of pesticide compounds at different times. The mobile phase was acetonitrile, methanol and acetic acid 0.3% (25:20:55) delivered at a flow-rate of 1 mL min−1. The flow rate and wavelength were 0.4 ml/min and 257 nm, respectively. The time of chromatography was 20 min. DFB compound of the samples was determined by the equation of calibration curves and was expressed as mg/g FW.

In this study, the toxicities of the conventional formulation of DFB (WP/WW) and DFB@NPs were assessed against 2nd instar larvae ofH. armigeraon the treated tomato leaves. The concentrations used for the bioassay were selected based on preliminary tests (dose-setting). The concentration range was between 300 and 74.31 µg a.i./mL for DFB@NPs and 625–167.10 µg a.i./mL for DFB with common formulation (WP/WW). The tomato leaves were dipped in each concentration of either DFB@NPs or its conventional formulation for 20 s and allowed to air dry for 1 h at room temperature. Due to the cannibalism nature of the larvae, the 2nd instar larvae ofH. armigerawere transferred individually into a 40 ml vial containing 3–4 treated leaves of tomato. The mortality of larvae was recorded in 96 h after treatments. The bioassays were replicated independently 5 times.

The ovicidal test method was that described by Ascher et al.30. Briefly, females ofH. armigerain in a culture kept in a growth chamber were allowed to lay egg masses on strips of filter paper covering the inside of jars. Oviposition took place only during the night, but eggs that were used for experiments on the same day as the morning collection were designated, for the sake of convenience, as ≤ one- day- old. The eggs were examined carefully under the microscope and any defective egg, shell debris, etc., were removed. The filter-paper strips were further cut with fine scissors into small pieces, each carrying 30 eggs. The small filter paper pieces with 30 eggs were dipped into aqueous dilutions of the formulation of DFB and transferred to an incubator kept at 27 ± 2 °C under a photoperiod of 16 h light:8 h dark (L: D 16:8) and 60 ± 5 RH%; then the eggs were subsequently monitored for hatching. The eggs that did not result in hatching neonate larvae were considered dead eggs. The range concentrations of various treatments was between 24 and 3.94 µg a.i./mL for DFB@NPs and 87.5–59.97 µg a.i./mL for DFB with conventional formulation (WP/WW). Mortality of eggs in the control was used for correcting the treatment mortality by using Abbott’s formula31.

An active residual lethality test was done using an LC95of DFB and DFB@NPs. This concentration of either DFB or DFB@NPs was applied to tomato leaves until the pesticide solution ran off and then the 2nd instars ofH. armigerawere introduced to the treated leaves. To assess the durability of the lethality of DFB nanoformulation and conventional formulation of DFB, twenty larvae were used in each exposure. Thereafter, new larva (< 24 h old) were introduced to each experimental glass vials every 4 days and mortality was recorded after 96 h exposure. The experiment was continued until the DFB or DFB@NPs lost insecticidal activity. The experimental conditions of the active residual lethality experiment were the same as those described above for the toxicity bioassay againstH. armigera.

Data were subjected to probit analysis32. The LC30, LC50, and LC90values and their fiducial limits (95%) by probit procedure; as well as the comparison of averages were estimated using Tukey’s test at the 5% probability level33.

DFB-loaded nanocapsules were prepared using the ionic gelation method. The shape and average size of nanoparticles were investigated by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and dynamic light scattering (DLS) techniques, respectively. The results were illustrated in Fig.2. The TEM analysis indicated that DFB-loaded PEG nanoparticles are spherical in shape, with an average size of 80 ± 20 nm. On the basis of DLS analysis, the average hydrodynamic diameter of DFB-loaded NPs is 100 ± 30 nm (DFB@NPs, PDI = 0.3) (Fig.2b). The size and shape of DFB@NPs were determined in order to understand the stability as well as the aggregation of DFB-loaded PEG nanoparticles. Comparison of the TEM and DLS analyses showed that the size of the former was smaller than that of the latter (Fig.2a and b, respectively). The larger apparent size of the nanoparticles on the basis of DLS likely resulted from the aggregation of the nanoparticles in solution.

(a) TEM images of PEG nanoparticle loaded with DFB, (b) DLS curves of measurement of particle size distribution of PEG nanoparticle.

The FTIR spectra of PEG-400, DFB and DFB-loaded in nanoparticles (DFB@NPs) are shown in Fig.3.

FTIR spectra of PEG 400, Diflubenzuron, Diflubenzorun-loaded nanoparticles.

In the PEG spectrum, the weak peak at 3,557 cm−1is related to the vibrational elongation of the O-H groups of the ends. Also, the peak at 2,878 cm−1is related to the vibrational elongation of C-H groups in the PEG complex. The observed peaks at 1,107.6 and 1,242.6 cm−1are related to the vibrational elongation of the C-O and C-O-C groups in the PEG chain (Fig.3). In the DFB spectrum, the peak of the vibrational elongation of C-Cl and C-F groups appeared at ~ 500–800 cm−1. The peak of the C-N groups was identified at ~ 1000–1200 cm−1. The peak of C = C was identified at 1500 cm−1. In addition, the peaks of the C = O groups are revealed at 1650 cm−1. The strong bands at ~ 2900–3400 cm−1and 3700 cm−1could correspond to the C-H stretching vibration and N–H bending and stretching, respectively. The results of the nano-formulation spectrum showed that most of the peaks overlap. The peak of the vibrational elongation of C-Cl, C-F and C-C groups appeared at ~ 500–800 cm−1. The absorption peaks at 1000 cm−1were assigned to the C-N, and also the peak at 1500 cm−1could correspond to the C = C and C-O. The absorption peaks at 1700 cm−1were assigned to the C = O carbonyl group. The symmetric tensile frequencies associated with the C-H2bonds of methyl appeared at 2600 cm−1and also the strong bands at 3600 cm−1could correspond to the N–H bending and stretching (Fig.3). The use of FTIR confirmed that DFB is present in the pesticide-loaded PEG nanoformulation. FTIR also confirmed that there is no chemical interaction between PEG and pesticide; therefore, the actual properties of each are maintained as such.

The encapsulation efficiency of DFB in PEG-400 nanoparticles was assessed using UV/Vis spectroscopy. To evaluate the pesticide-loading efficiency in nanoparticles, samples were analyzed in 5 replications and the entrapment efficiencies were found to be 62.89 ± 5% for the formulated nanoparticles. The concentration of DFB in the supernatant was determined using the standard curve (y = 0.1948x + 0.2216, R2= 0.9312) at 257 nm (Fig.4a). This result indicated that the PEG nanoparticles are a promising carrier for the encapsulation of this pesticide.

(a) calibration curve of DFB and (b) release rate percentage of DFB from nanocapsules.

The in vitro release behavior of DFB from PEG-NPs is summarized in the cumulative percentage release shown in Fig.4b. Evaluation of in vitro pesticide release from encapsulated PEG was done by the dialysis method. The results of the dialysis method provided relevance with the in vivo release. The release of DFB from nanoparticles occurred in two steps, i.e., ~ 15% (V/V) of DFB was released within 24 h, and during the subsequent 120 h, 75% of the remaining DFB was released into the medium in a sustained manner. This confirms the fact that PEG acts as a barrier against the diffusion of DFB. The hydrophobic long alkyl chains of the polymer may act as a barrier, and the pesticide was effectively entrapped in the polymers, and PEG-NPs resulted in a sustainable release of DFB over a prolonged time period.

Statistical comparison of the results with parallel HPLC methods showed good agreement and indicated that there was a significant difference between the two formulations on leaves for the first day. While the residual of DFB@NPs in leaf treatments reduced significantly in the third week. As shown in Fig.5a, for the fourth week, there was no significant difference in the amount of residual active ingredient in the nanoformulation and conventional formulation of DFB on the leaf.

(a) Residual of DFB and DFB@NPs in leaves of host plant, (b) degradation assay of DFB and DFB@NPs exposed to UV light.

The effect of encapsulation on the photodegradation of DFB under UV light irradiation was studied. During 15 h exposure to UV irradiation, the degradation rates of DFB and its nanoformulation were shown in Fig.5b. The results of UV light irradiation showed that the photodegradation of DFB@NPs was less than that DFB in the normal formulation at the same time. This data clearly demonstrated that the stability of DFB in nanoformulation was effectively improved.

The pesticide activities of nanoencapsulated DFB and the bulk form of DFB were studied against 2nd instars of larvae ofH.armigera(Fig.6). The exposure time was 96 h. The results of assessing the toxicity of DFB on theH. armigerashowed that DFB@NPs is highly toxic against the pest compared to bulk DFB (Table1).

Toxicity of Diflubenzuron and its nanoformulation against larvae and eggs ofHelicoverpa armigera. FL = Fiducial Limits.

The LC50values of DFB@NPs against the 2nd instar larvae and egg stages were 139.36 µg a.i./mL and 8.58 µg a.i./mL, respectively. The bioassay results showed a significant (p< 0.05) difference between DFB@NPs and the bulk form of DFB. The LC50values for bulk DFB against the larval and egg stages of the pest were 316.87 and 70.74 µg a.i./mL, respectively, at 96 h of exposure period. The results of the bioassays demonstrated that the larvae were less susceptible than eggs to DFB. Our results showed that the nanoformulation of DFB was more effective againstH. armigerathan the bulk form of DFB. These results confirm that nanoparticles exhibit a much higher ability to penetrate the cuticle of larvae’s gut and eggs compared to bulk particles (not dissolved)34.The toxicity of DFB@NPs was significantly higher than the normal formulation of DFB against larval and egg stages (based on non-overlap in 95% confidence limits of LC50values). In all treatments, the egg stage was more susceptible to either conventional or nanoformulation of DFB.

The residual lethal effect of the tested pesticide in nano and commercial formulations against larvae ofH. armigerawas illustrated in Table2, where the pesticide showed a longer residual effect for 30 days after initial exposure. This may be assigned to the change in the persistency of DFB35,36. According to the results, the nanoparticles loaded with DFB caused 65% mortality after 18 days, whereas it was 44% for the conventional formulation of DFB. In this case, the nanoencapsulation of DFB seems to be very promising and could protect the plants fromH. armigerainfestation for a longer time.

Residual contact toxicity ofTetranychu urticaeat the highest concentration for different periods. Each datum represents the mean of five replicates, each set up with 20 pre-adults (n= 100). In the same column, means followed by the same letters are not significantly different (p< 0.05) as determined by tukey’s studentized range (HSD) test.

Although, pesticides are considered harmful, but they are still essential substances in agriculture. They will continue to be used to address issues such as global food security and the economic stability of nations dependent on agriculture. Natural and eco-friendly polymers have been consistently evaluated and modified to create controlled-release agrichemicals. The primary qualities of polymeric materials that make them the preferred option for nanoencapsulation are their slow release, resistance to degradation, and enhancement of insecticidal properties. The majority of nanopesticides have been developed for gradual release and increased environmental durability in order to guarantee efficacy. In this study, we found that adding DFB to a liquid, controlled-release nanoformulation with PEG 400 as a coating material improved the pesticide’s stability and activity when it came to contact or ingestion.

The sizes of the PEG-encapsulated DFB@NPs that we generated were in good agreement with reports in the literature regarding the encapsulation of cinnamon essential oil (EO) in chitosan and geranium/bergamot EOs by PEG19,37–40. Compared to the TEM results, the increase in the average diameter obtained by DLS may be attributed to nanoparticle aggregation. According to the DLS data, the average hydrodynamic diameter of the DFB@NPs was larger than the pristine PEG nanoparticles. This may be attributed to the solubility or dispersibility of the poorly water-soluble DFB in an aqueous system40. The particle size characteristics of the DFB-loaded PEG-NPs were also characterized by FTIR and TEM.FTIR confirmed the presence and nature of DFB in the nanoformulation and it can also be confirmed that there is no chemical interaction between PEG and pesticide; hence actual properties of each are preserved as such.

Our bioassay experiments showed that the egg stage was more susceptible to DFB than larvae. In the present investigation, the DFB@NPs showed toxicity against larvae and eggs ofH. armigeraafter 96 h (LC50of 139.36 µg a.i./mL and 8.58 µg a.i./mL, respectively) in comparison to the non-capsulated DFB after 96 h (LC50of 316.87 µg a.i./mL and 70.74 µg a.i./mL, respectively). Our findings aligned with those of López et al.41who investigated the insecticidal efficacy of hexaflumuron onHelicoverpa zea(Boddie) and identified significant toxicity against eggs. Similarly, Anjali et al.34used solvent evaporation to prepare water-dispersible nanopermethrin and investigated the larvicidal properties of this formulation againstCulex quinquefasciatus. They showed that the larvicidal potency of nanopermethrin was significantly higher than its bulk formulation. Memarizadeh et al.27also reported that the duration of lethal activity is increased with nanoformulations in comparison to formulations with the bulk of imidacloprid.

The results indicated that the release of DFB was diffusion -controlled. The time taken for 50% of the active ingredient to be released, T1/2, was 10–12 days in water from nanoformulation. Similarly, Ferna´ndez-Pe´rez et al.41Choudhary et al.42and Nonci et al.43also showed that the release of carbofuran, an insecticide- nematicide, was faster from biodegradable than synthetic matrices. Kumar et al.41prepared a nanoformulation of imidacloprid in sodium alginate nanoparticles and made the release of the agrochemical slower.

In the study of the residues of DFB in leaves of tomato, Singh et al.44and Kalogiouri et al.45used a similar method to analyze thiamethoxam residues in fresh and cooked vegetable samples. The result indicated that residues of DFB@NPs in leaves at 4th week were decreased compared to the DFB with normal formulation. Although the DFB pesticide was detected in the tomato leaves, the detected levels were lower than the Maximum Residue Limit (MRLs) for each compound established by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations46. The residues obtained can be attributed principally to growth dilution occurring between application and sampling, as well as to the volatilization associated with application, removal by weathering, heat decomposition, sunlight UV radiation, or other complex conditions. Our observations were consistent with the results reported by Chamas et al.47. They reported that the residual concentrations of lambda-cyhalothrin, lufenuron, thiamethoxam, and clothianidin in treated pomegranate samples were significantly below the maximum residue limits (0.5 mg/kg). Several studies are using residual levels of pesticides on host plants47–49but none have investigated the residues of nanoformulations of pesticides (e.g. diflubenzuron) on host plants.

The results of the Photodegradation of DFB and DFB@NPs showed that the encapsulation had a significant effect on the stability of DFB (Fig.5b). It is clear from the data that the encapsulation of DFB using PEG provides a delay in the photodegradation and decomposition of the active ingredients of DFB. These findings are in agreement with the studies of Christofoli et al.28for the encapsulation of essential oils from theZanthoxylum rhoifoliumleaves in poly-ɛ-caprolactone (PCL) polymer. Thus, it was proven that the nanoencapsulation of DFB exhibits enhanced efficacy and prolonged effects compared to the conventional formulation of DFB. According to a study of the active residual duration of pesticide and photodegradation and also the results of the residual amount of diflubenzuron, it can be concluded that during the first hours and days, the amount of photodegradation of pesticide nanoformulation was less than its normal formulation.

In summary, polymeric nanoformulations can provide efficient utilization of pesticides while reducing the adverse effects on non-target organisms, soil microbes, dynamics in the environment, etc. Our findings demonstrated that the feasibility of using DFB@NPs in controllingH. armigera, at much lower doses than those required for normal formulation of DFB, without using any detrimental additives such as organic solvents. The advantage of this method is low environmental pollution, along with cheap raw materials and high yields. Synthetic polymers such as PEG are considered to be economically viable and biocompatible materials that can offer great opportunities in this field due to their potential role as nanocapsules in materials science and agricultural applications. The slow activity has resulted in a need to educate farmers and growers, who are accustomed to the rapid knockdown activity of neurotoxic pesticides, regarding the correct application timing of these compounds and the time required to observe their full activity. Future research can benefit from the application of the nanoformulation’s impacts of DFB@NPs on the pest’s biological and genetic activity as well as its application in field conditions.

This research is supported by Iran National Science Foundation (INSF) (number 97015122). This article is part of the Dr. second author postdoctoral research, and all co-authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. We greatly appreciate the support for this project provided by the Research and Technology affairs of University of Tabriz, Iran.