Computed tomography (CT) based sarcopenia has been linked to postoperative complications in various surgeries. Although the associations between sarcopenia and femoral neck fractures (FNF) have received considerable attention, the relationship between sarcopenia and blood transfusions after hip arthroplasty in FNF patients remains unclear. This study aimed to investigate the relationship between CT-based sarcopenia and blood transfusions in elderly FNF patients after hip arthroplasty.

A retrospective cohort study was conducted with 337 elderly FNF patients from September 2018 to January 2024. Basic demographic data, preoperative laboratory data, surgical data and chest CT data were collected. CT-based sarcopenia was diagnosed with gender-specific skeletal muscle index (SMI) cut-off values within the same ethnicity. Univariate and multivariate analyses were performed to identify independent risk factors for sarcopenia and blood transfusions in elderly FNF patients; receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was used to determine the predictive cut-off value of SMI.

Among the 337 patients, 99 (29.4%) patients received blood transfusions, and 104 (30.9%) patients were diagnosed with CT-based sarcopenia. Sarcopenia patients had advanced age, lower body mass index (BMI), lower hemoglobin and lower serum albumin, with an increased likelihood of undergoing hemiarthroplasty (P< 0.05). Multivariate analysis revealed that advanced age (P= 0.002) and lower BMI (P< 0.001) were independently associated with CT-based sarcopenia. Patients who received transfusions had a lower BMI, lower hemoglobin, lower serum albumin, longer operation duration, greater intraoperative blood loss (IBL), and a greater incidence of sarcopenia (P< 0.05). Multivariate analysis revealed that sarcopenia (P= 0.006), lower hemoglobin (P< 0.001), longer operation duration (P= 0.022), and greater IBL (P< 0.001) were significantly associated with transfusion. ROC analysis revealed an optimal SMI cut-off of 23.0 cm²/m² for predicting transfusion, with 71.7% sensitivity and 71.0% specificity.

CT-based sarcopenia was independently associated with blood transfusions after hip arthroplasty in elderly FNF patients. In clinical practice, attention should be given to identifying it and implementing targeted interventions.

With the aging global population, the incidence of hip fractures is rising, and the number of hip fractures is expected to reach 4.5 million in 2050 worldwide [1]. In the elderly population, hip fractures are a significant cause of morbidity and mortality. An estimated 25% of elderly patients with hip fractures die within the first year after fracture [2]. The most common type of hip fracture is femoral neck fracture (FNF), which imposes a significant medical and socioeconomic burden [3]. Hip arthroplasty is widely recognized as the most commonly utilized and highly effective intervention for FNF in elderly patients [4,5]. Despite its numerous advantages, previous studies have reported that the rate of blood transfusion after total hip arthroplasty (THA) can reach 21%, whereas this rate may increase to 38% after hemiarthroplasty (HA) [6,7]. Blood transfusions raise concerns, particularly in older adults, whose reduced tolerance increases their risk of transfusion-related complications [7]. Despite ongoing advancements in transfusion safety, blood transfusion can still cause serious complications, including allergic reactions, blood-borne infections, circulatory overload, and transfusion-associated lung injury [8,9]. Furthermore, blood transfusion has been associated with an increased risk of early postoperative complications, poorer functional outcomes, and higher mortality rates following hip arthroplasty [10–13]. Therefore, identifying the risk factors for transfusion and minimizing the need for blood transfusion in elderly FNF patients undergoing THA or HA has become a critical area of focus for clinicians and researchers [6,7,11,14].

Sarcopenia is a decline in skeletal muscle mass and strength and/or decreased physical performance with increasing age [15]. It has been reported that geriatric patients with sarcopenia are at high risk for FNF [16,17]. However, evaluations of muscle mass measured by dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) imaging and physical performance measured by walking or standing, which are parts of the diagnostic guidelines, are complex for FNF patients because of pain and anatomical abnormalities [18]. Therefore, computed tomography (CT) images may have more application potential in evaluating sarcopenia in patients with FNF, especially in many hospitals without DXA [18,19]. CT-based sarcopenia alone has significant medical implications and is associated with overall survival and postoperative complications in multiple diseases, especially in the field of surgery and oncology, where CT images are normally obtained [20–24]. Concerning hip fractures in elderly patients, several studies have revealed a connection between CT-based sarcopenia and poor prognosis and high fatality rates [25–28]. Furthermore, sarcopenia has been demonstrated to be a significant risk factor for postoperative blood transfusion following various surgeries, including but not limited to total knee arthroplasty, head and neck cancer-free flap surgery, and liver resection for malignant tumors [29–33].

Given the importance of identifying risk factors for blood transfusion after hip arthroplasty for femoral neck fractures (FNF) in elderly individuals and considering the significant detrimental impact of sarcopenia on this population, investigating the relationship between the two is crucial. However, to our knowledge, no studies have explored this association. Clarifying this relationship will help clinicians better implement targeted interventions for high-risk patients, thereby minimizing transfusions and their serious associated complications. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the relationship between CT-based sarcopenia and blood transfusions after hip arthroplasty in elderly FNF patients. We hypothesized that CT-based sarcopenia is correlated with an increased risk of postoperative blood transfusions in elderly patients after hip arthroplasty.

This retrospective study was approved by the local Ethics Committee (approval no. KY2022326). For this study, patients who visited our department from September 2018 to January 2024 were reviewed retrospectively. The inclusion criteria were age ≥ 65 years, FNF patients who underwent hip arthroplasty, and patients whose medical records were complete. The exclusion criteria were the absence or poor quality of CT images, open fractures, old fractures (> 3 weeks from injury), multiple fractures, pathological fractures, previous fractures on the affected side, and patients who have received preoperative or intraoperative blood transfusions, patients with a history of blood transfusion allergy, patients with blood system diseases, and patients with severe liver or kidney disease. According to the inclusion and exclusion criteria, 337 patients were finally enrolled in the cohort (Fig.1). All patients in our department were treated with the standard posterior approach THA or HA by a team of experienced orthopedic surgeons. The choice of surgical procedure was based on the guidelines suggested in reference [34] and the patient’s overall health status: patients with relatively better general health, a longer life expectancy, and no conditions affecting joint stability were selected for THA, whereas the remaining patients underwent HA. Surgery was performed via a posterolateral approach. After resection of the femoral head and preparation of the femoral neck, the acetabulum was reamed, and an appropriately sized acetabular component was implanted (only for THA). The femoral canal was then adequately prepared, followed by the insertion of a suitable femoral stem prosthesis. The prosthetic femoral head was then seated. A drainage tube was placed before layer-by-layer wound closure. Drainage tubes were placed postoperatively and removed within 24 h. The patient underwent a hematological examination within 24 h of admission. Standardized and uniform anticoagulation and hemostatic protocols were used for all patients throughout the perioperative period. Tranexamic acid is used during surgery. All the patients were encouraged to ambulate on the second postoperative day, provided that there were no contraindications. Concurrently, they were instructed to perform ankle pump exercises and quadriceps setting exercises. The transfusion strategy of our institution was restrictive, and red blood cell transfusion was used only for patients with hemoglobin < 70 g/L or symptomatic anemia with hemoglobin < 100 g/L.

Basic demographic data, preoperative laboratory data, and surgical data were collected according to patient records at this institute and follow-up data. The basic demographic data to be collected included gender, age, body mass index (BMI), affected side, health risk behaviors (smoking and alcohol), and comorbidities (sarcopenia, hypertension, diabetes, chronic lung disease, cardiovascular heart disease, and cerebrovascular disease). The preoperative laboratory data included hemoglobin, white blood cell counts, platelet counts, serum albumin levels, serum sodium levels, serum potassium levels, serum calcium levels, activated partial thromboplastin times, prothrombin times, and international normalized ratios. The surgical data included the American Society of Anesthesiologists classification, anesthesia type, type of surgery, fracture to operation time, operation duration, and intraoperative blood loss (IBL). The IBL was estimated according to the volume of blood collected by the suction apparatus and the gauze weight.

This study used muscle mass assessment via chest CT images at admission to identify sarcopenia. In the unenhanced cross-sectional CT images at the 12th thoracic vertebra level, dedicated software was used to measure muscle mass (SliceOmatic software, 5.0). On the designated tomographic images, the skeletal muscle area (SMA) was segmented based on the widely accepted muscle tissue thresholds (− 29 to 150 HU) [35]. The images were then visually reassessed to ensure that all nonmuscle regions were excluded and that muscle regions were included (Fig.2). The SMA defines the skeletal muscle index (SMI) as the square of the patient’s height. Two orthoptists, blinded to patient details, independently recorded all the data. They were professionally trained and skilled in this technique. Twenty CT images were randomly selected and remeasured by the two observers after a two-week interval to evaluate reproducibility. The average measurements from both observers were used for the final analysis; because the thresholds of CT-determined sarcopenia might be impacted by ethnicity, the diagnostic cut-off values for sarcopenia at the 12th thoracic vertebra level SMI based on Chinese people were chosen and were < 25.75 cm2/m2in men and < 20.16 cm2/m2in women [36].

All the data were analyzed using SPSS 27.0. Intraclass correlation coefficients (ICC) were calculated to assess the intrarater and interrater reliabilities of the SMA measurements. To ensure the reliability of logistic regression analysis, the sample size should be at least ten times the number of covariates [37]. In this study, with 28 covariates, the required sample size should exceed 280. Continuous variables are expressed as the means ± standard deviations and were analyzed using either Student’s t-test or the Mann–Whitney U test, depending on the data distribution assessed via normality testing. Categorical variables are presented as frequencies (%) and were analyzed using the chi-squared test or Fisher’s exact test. Univariate analyses were performed on numerous factors associated with sarcopenia and blood transfusion, respectively. After univariate analysis, factors with aP-value < 0.05 were included in the multivariable logistic regression analysis. To determine the optimal cut-off values for the SMI, a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was conducted, and the area under the curve (AUC) was calculated for transfusion-related factors. All significance levels wereP< 0.05.

In this cohort, 99 patients (29.4%) received red blood cell transfusions and 104 patients (30.9%) were diagnosed with sarcopenia based on our thresholds. The intraobserver and interobserver ICCs for the SMA measurements are shown in Table1, respectively. All the measurements showed excellent agreement. The study variables of all patients are presented in Table2.

Advanced age (P< 0.001), lower BMI (P< 0.001), and HA (P= 0.018) were significantly associated with sarcopenia. Additionally, FNF patients with sarcopenia had significantly lower hemoglobin (P= 0.038) and lower serum albumin (P= 0.027) compared with the patients without sarcopenia (Table3). When all these factors were included in the subsequent multivariate analysis, only advanced age [odds ratio (OR) = 1.063, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 1.023–1.104,P= 0.002] and lower BMI (OR = 0.789, 95% CI = 0.725–0.860,P< 0.001) remained significantly associated with sarcopenia (Table4).

After univariate analysis, lower BMI (P= 0.010), sarcopenia (P= 0.001), lower hemoglobin (P< 0.001), lower serum albumin (P= 0.003), longer operation duration (P= 0.001), and greater IBL (P< 0.001) were determined to be significantly associated with postoperative blood transfusion (Table5). When all these factors were entered into a multivariate logistic regression analysis, sarcopenia (OR = 2.451, 95% CI = 1.301–4.618,P= 0.006), lower hemoglobin (OR = 0.937, 95% CI = 0.916–0.959,P< 0.001), longer operation duration (OR = 1.012, 95% CI = 1.002–1.023,P= 0.022), and greater IBL (OR = 1.005, 95% CI = 1.003–1.007,P< 0.001) were still significantly related to the postoperative transfusion (Table6). The univariate area under the ROC curve demonstrated the predictive capacity of each variable. The ROC analysis suggested an optimal SMI cut-off of 23.0 cm²/m², with an AUC value of 0.76, a sensitivity of 71.7%, and a specificity of 71.0% (Fig.3).

Sarcopenia has been identified as one of the most common comorbidities in FNF patients [38]. The prevalence of sarcopenia in elderly hip fracture patients is much higher than that in older people in the local area, when different diagnostic methods and criteria, such as DXA [39], BIA [40], and CT [26], are used. The observed prevalence of sarcopenia was 30.9% in this study, which is more than twice the overall prevalence of sarcopenia in the elderly population in China [41]. Since the SMI cut-off values used to diagnose sarcopenia are affected by ethical differences, the cut-off values developed for the Chinese population were selected and applied in the present study [36]. In our cohort, sarcopenia patients had significantly lower levels of hemoglobin and albumin, which is consistent with several previous studies and may be associated with malnutrition in elderly patients [42]. Additionally, the results indicated that sarcopenia patients were more likely to undergo HA, potentially because of advanced age, higher comorbidity burden, and reduced life expectancy. For patients planning for HA, increasing attention to the identification of sarcopenia is necessary. On the basis of our study, older age and lower BMI are independently associated with sarcopenia, and thus, patients with these characteristics should be more closely monitored for the onset of sarcopenia.

Previous studies have demonstrated that postoperative blood transfusion is common in geriatric FNF patients, regardless of whether they undergo THA or HA [6,7,11,14,43]. In our study, the blood transfusion rate after HA was 38.1%, which was almost as high as that reported by Zhu et al. [11]. Preoperative identification of risk factors for blood transfusion is crucial to avoid transfusion-related complications. In line with the findings of most previous studies, we identified preoperative low preoperative hemoglobin levels, prolonged surgical duration, and increased intraoperative blood loss as independent risk factors for blood transfusion [6,7,11,14]. This result is understandable as these indicators are directly associated with lower postoperative hemoglobin levels. However, no significant difference in age was found between patients with and without blood transfusions in our cohort, which is only consistent with the findings of two previous studies [7,11]. The possible reason is that elderly patients require a shorter operation time because of their poor tolerance to surgery and anesthesia. These factors may indirectly affect the blood transfusion rate through intraoperative indicators. Furthermore, no significant difference in transfusion rates was found between HA patients and those who underwent THA. This may be attributed to the fact that although THA is well known to be associated with more significant blood loss, patients may have better overall health and compensatory mechanisms, which reduces the need for transfusion.

To our knowledge, this is the first study to explore the correlation between sarcopenia and blood transfusions after hip arthroplasty in FNF patients. Sarcopenia was previously identified as a risk factor for postoperative blood transfusions in patients with various organ system diseases, with similar findings reported in orthopedic patients, particularly those who underwent total knee arthroplasty [29–33]. However, one study reported that an increased transfusion rate following THA was not associated with sarcopenia in patients with osteoarthritis [44]. Notably, the diagnostic criteria for sarcopenia in that study were inconsistent, and it is well-established that variations in patient populations and disease types can lead to differences in transfusion rates. Thus, these findings do not conflict with our results. We found that sarcopenia was strongly associated with transfusions after hip arthroplasty in geriatric patients. However, the cause of the more significant transfusion requirements in sarcopenia was poorly defined. Patients with sarcopenia were found to have significantly lower hemoglobin in this study, and lower hemoglobin in itself was a decisive risk factor for transfusion, which was proven by our study and almost all the previous studies [7,10,11,14]. Additionally, sarcopenia was also independently related to transfusion, even after hemoglobin was taken into account. Another possible reason is that skeletal muscle is recognized as a vascular reservoir. Hence, patients with low skeletal muscle mass tend to have much lower total blood volume and relatively more blood loss [31]. A lower BMI was not a factor related to transfusion in the present study. This may be because muscle tissue has a greater capillary density than adipose tissue does, and lower skeletal muscle mass is more strongly associated with total blood volume rather than lower BMI [31]. In addition, sarcopenia is significantly related to osteoporosis, which may contribute to increased occult IBL [45,46]. Furthermore, sarcopenia patients may experience more postoperative complications, leading to an increased need for symptomatic blood transfusions. However, unlike some studies [6,14], hypoalbuminemia was not ultimately identified as a risk factor for blood transfusion. This finding may be attributed to the greater nutritional risk observed in patients with sarcopenia [47]. When sarcopenia was accounted for, the association between hypoalbuminemia and transfusion appeared to be less significant than the direct relationship between sarcopenia and transfusion. The identification of CT-based sarcopenia as a novel predictor for post-arthroplasty blood transfusion in FNF patients represents an advancement in this field. Meanwhile, we employed ROC curve analysis to establish the optimal cut-off value of the SMI as a predictive marker for transfusion. This approach enhances the ability of clinical practice to identify patients at high risk for blood transfusion.

As an independent risk factor, sarcopenia, in conjunction with other predictive factors, can enhance the prediction of blood transfusions. Sarcopenic patients are more likely to require blood transfusions, leading to higher anticipated healthcare costs and potentially increased postoperative complication rates [10–13]. These risks should be discussed with patients preoperatively and prioritized, particularly when blood product availability is limited. Special attention is warranted for careful management of intravenous fluids and the application of enhanced hemostatic measures. Moreover, patients with sarcopenia should benefit from more proactive perioperative multidisciplinary management, such as preoperative pharmacological optimization of hemoglobin levels, nutritional support, and prehabilitation programs [31]. Finally, hemiarthroplasty might be a preferable option for this population.

This study had several limitations. First, as a retrospective study, this research inherently has limitations and potential biases. Obtaining patient data about muscle strength and physical performance was not feasible. However, evaluating these two indicators accurately in FNF patients is difficult because of their pain, motor dysfunction, and anatomical abnormalities, even in prospective studies [18]. Second, although CT is not the most recommended diagnostic tool for sarcopenia [48], it was utilized to investigate potential risk factors for blood transfusions in FNF patients rather than for standard sarcopenia diagnosis. Elderly patients, owing to comorbidities and preoperative evaluations, are more likely to undergo chest CT scans rather than abdominal CT [36]. Furthermore, hip CT may not achieve the optimal scanning level for assessing central muscle mass, potentially reducing the feasibility of the evaluation. Therefore, the use of chest CT for diagnosing sarcopenia and assessing blood transfusion risk factors avoids the need for additional tests and holds unique clinical value, especially in many hospitals without DXA data [19]. Finally, this study was a single-center, retrospective analysis with a relatively small sample size. These findings require further validation in larger cohorts and studies assessing muscle mass and physical performance concurrently.

CT-based sarcopenia is relatively common among elderly patients with FNF and is independently associated with blood transfusion following hip arthroplasty. Individuals with an SMI < 23.0 cm²/m² are at high risk for transfusion, and intervention programs should target this group.

The authors would like to thank all staff in our department.