Growing catch crops can improve soil health by enhancing microbial diversity, but their impact may be constrained by how they are managed. This study examined the effects of different catch crop species and soil cultivation methods on bacterial and fungal diversity, and total soil microbial biomass. A 3-year field experiment on Luvi-haplic Chernozem included two catch crop species and five mixtures (further catch crop species) and three cultivation methods (ploughing, reduced tillage and no tillage), resulting in 21 treatments (7 catch crop species x 3 soil cultivations). Soil samples (0–15 cm depth) were collected annually in autumn and spring since 2021 to 2024. Microbial biomass was assessed using the chloroform fumigation extraction method, while fungal and bacterial diversity was analysed by amplifying and sequencing the ITS2 region of rDNA and the V4 region of the 16 S rRNA gene for fungi and bacteria, respectively, via Illumina paired-end amplicon sequencing. Soil cultivation methods affected bacterial diversity, with reduced tillage showing higher diversity and evenness than ploughing, though neither differed from no-till. However, no effect was observed on fungal diversity, including AM fungi, or microbial biomass. Catch crop species did not significantly impact microbial diversity or biomass. Neither cultivation method nor catch crop species influenced the ratios of functional trophic groups, such as pathogens, saprotrophs or symbionts. This study underscores the critical role of soil management practices—especially reduced tillage—in promoting soil health, primarily through the enhancement of bacterial diversity.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-15255-7.

Catch crops, also referred to as cover crops, are planted to reduce nutrient leaching from the soil after the harvest of the main crop. They can be incorporated into the soil as green manure enhancing soil fertility for subsequent crop. The effectiveness of a catch crop depends on rapid establishment, the timing of termination and species-specific traits such as growth rate, rooting depth and root density1. In addition to their role in nutrition retention, catch crops are increasingly used to improve soil health and mitigate the negative environmental impacts associated with intensive main crop cultivation.

Research demonstrated that catch crops influence various soil microbial properties, including microbial diversity2, microbial biomass3and enzymatic activities4,5. Catch crops contribute organic matter to the soil, providing an essential carbon source for microbial communities and enzymatic processes6. A meta-analysis of 60 studies examining 48 soil microbial parameters showed that cover cropping significantly increased microbial abundance, activity, and diversity by 27%, 22%, and 2.5% respectively, compared to bare fallow7.

The effects of catch crops on soil properties depend largely on whether they belong to leguminous or non-leguminous species. Catch crops with a narrow C/N ratio in their biomass decompose rapidly, inducing fast changes in soil physical and biological properties and accelerating nutrient mineralization. ManyFabaceaespecies, for example, have low hemicellulose and lignin content but high nitrogen levels, leading to rapid decomposition in soil8. In general, legume catch crops contribute more nitrogen from biological N2fixation and have a lower C/N ratio than non-legumes9. Conversely, non-legume catch crops tend to produce more above- and below-ground biomass, increasing carbon inputs and having higher C/N ratio10. These differences influence soil microbial communities, with high-quality residues (low C/N ratio) and high N content favouring bacterial dominance, while low-quality residues promote fungal growth11. A meta-analysis of 81 studies revealed that legume catch crops increased total abundance of bacteria and actinomycetes in soil but reduced total fungal abundance compared to non-legumes12. The study by Che et al.13demonstrated the strong ability of legume catch crops to shape soil microbial communities and reduce microbial diversity. This negative impact was weakened when legume catch crops were grown in mixed planting withBrassicaceaespecies.

Important factor influencing soil microbial responses is thus the community composition and extent of diversity of cultivated catch crops. Gentch et al.14investigated the impacts of increasing plant diversity in catch crop rotations on rhizosphere carbon inputs and microbial activity, comparing mustard planted as a single cultivar with diversified catch crop mixtures of 4 or 12 species. Total microbial biomass increased from 14 to 22 gm− 2compared to the fallow, with mixtures of four and twelve species showing 8% and 18% higher microbial biomass, respectively, than single mustard. These findings highlight the positive impact of plant diversity on soil carbon cycling, microbial activity and the stabilization of organic matter.

Beyond species diversity, catch crop management practices play a critical role in maximizing their benefits. Key management factors include species selection, seeding rates, planting periods, termination timing, and termination methods15. Romdhane et al.16found that catch crop management had a more significant influence on soil bacterial community composition and nitrogen-cycling microbial groups than the choice of catch crop species composition alone. Catch crops can be terminated by frost, mowing, disking, roller crimping or herbicide application to prepare for the subsequent main crop17. Disking, a commonly used termination method, has been shown to increase the total and gram-negative bacterial populations while either stabilizing or reducing actinomycetes and fungi18. In contrast, herbicide application can negatively affect soil microorganisms, reducing their biomass and enzymatic activity17. Using frost-sensitive catch crops as a termination strategy has been proposed as an alternative to herbicide use19. However, frost-killed catch crops may increase N2O emissions, posing an environmental risk20.

Another key aspect of catch crop management is soil preparation before sowing. Tillage intensity, ranging from conventional ploughing to reduced and no-till systems, significantly affects the soil physical, chemical, and biological properties21. Harasim et al.22examined enzymatic activity in a three-year spring wheat monoculture incorporating biomass of white mustard, lacy phacelia, and mixture of faba bean + spring vetch into the soil using conventional ploughing and conservation tillage. Conservation tillage enhanced dehydrogenase and urease activities in both topsoil and deeper soil layers, while white mustard promoted enzymatic activity regardless of tillage system. Wanic et al.8reported that catch crops planted in compact soils under reduced tillage systems increased carbon content and improved biological activity, particularly when the soil remained covered throughout the growing season. Similarly, meta-analysis of 139 observations from 62 global sites showed that no-till and reduced tillage, such as chisel tillage, promoted larger microbial communities and greater enzymatic activity23. Another meta-analysis by Bowles et al.24evaluated the effects of catch crops and tillage on arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi colonization, reporting benefits of alternative tillage, but no significant interaction between tillage and catch crops.

Despite the growing body of research, significant gaps remain in understanding the interactions between catch crops, tillage practices and soil microorganisms. Current research provides insights into the effects of catch crops and tillage practices, but the existing studies are often context-specific and do not capture the full variability in soil and climatic conditions in order to use the potential of catch crops for maintaining soil health and quality. Further research is needed to generate a more comprehensive understanding of how these factors influence soil microbial communities under different environmental settings. Moreover, little is known about the effects of catch crops on specific microbial taxa, including AM fungi, and various trophic groups.

The objective of this study was to assess how different catch crop species and different pre-sowing tillage practices affect soil microbial parameters, content of microbial biomass and diversity of fungi and bacteria with a special focus on their functional trophic groups. We hypothesized that each catch crop species affects the diversity and biomass of soil fungi and bacteria and differentially alters the ratios of different functional trophic groups, and that reduced tillage and no-till will support higher microbial diversity, compared to ploughing by maintaining more stable soil conditions.

The study site was located in Prague-Ruzyně, Czech Republic (latitude 50°08’50’’N, longitude 14° 30’ 23’’ E). Altitude of the site is 370 m a.s.l. The average annual temperature was 8.7 °C and the average annual precipitation was 490 mm, as recorded by the meteorological station located at the Czech Agrifood Research Center in Prague-Ruzyně (Fig.1). The taxonomical soil unit was Luvi-haplic Chernozem, clay-loam, skeletal content up to 10%. Trial plot had a mean supply of soil organic matter (2.1% of total C and 0.19% of total N per gram of soil) and neutral pH/H2O (7.7). Available plant nutrient content in the soil was: P 144.3 mg kg− 1, K 377 mg kg− 1, Mg 229.9 mg kg− 1and Ca 6155.1 mg kg− 1.

Monthly precipitation and temperatures at the Prague-Ruzyně site during the experiment.

The field experiment was established annually from 2021 to 2024 and consisted of 21 treatments (7 catch crop species × 3 soil cultivation methods; plots of 5 × 15 m). The experimental area was divided into 3 parallel strips according to the cultivation method, which was carried out before sowing the main crop, and these methods were: (1) conventional tillage by moldboard ploughing to 25 cm (further referred to as “ploughing”); (2) reduced tillage to 10 cm with a tine cultivator Kverneland Korund; and (3) no-tillage (further referred to as “no-till”). Pre-sowing preparation with the combinator Lemken Smaragd was carried out in the case of conventional and reduced tillage. Spring barley was grown as the main crop (April to July, 2021–2023). Catch crops were sown on August 19, 2021, August 11, 2022, and August 25, 2023.

Each of the seven catch crop species was sown across all three soil cultivation strips, and this entire design (catch crop × soil cultivation) was repeated three times. However, for sampling purposes, the three replicates per soil cultivation and catch crop combination were pooled into a single composite sample.

Treatments were separated from field boundaries and from each other by 1 m on all sides to eliminate interactions between treatments. Individual catch crop species and their mixtures (further referred to as “catch crop species”) and their sowing rates are listed in Table1. Seeds were sown with a mounted no-till seeder Ripper 300 from PaL. No fertilization was used before or during the growth of catch crops.

Common and scientific names of catch crop species used and their sowing rate.

Soil samples were collected in autumn (November) and spring (early March) in the years 2021–2024. At the time of autumn sampling, the catch crops were still green or partially frozen (Fagopyrum,Setaria). During the spring sampling, the plants were mostly frozen. Three sub-samples of the soil under the catch crops were taken from each treatment. The sub-samples which were taken from a 0–15 cm soil profile, were mixed and homogenize to receive final approx. 1000 g soil sample. A larger portion of the soil was air-dried and used for molecular genetic and physicochemical analyses. A smaller portion was stored at 7 °C in a refrigerator until the following day and then processed fresh. This fraction was passed through a 2 mm sieve, and microbial biomass was subsequently assessed. A total of 21 samples were prepared for each sampling period.

Chloroform fumigation-extraction method was used for the estimation of soil microbial biomass by the measurement of extractable organic biomass in the soil. Through the fumigation of the soil samples intact microbial cells were lysed and the microbial organic matter was released. The organic C was extracted using 0.5 mol/L potassium sulphate25.

The bacterial and fungal communities were analysed only in samples from the last autumn sampling in 2023. The DNA was extracted using the Power Soil DNA isolation kit (MO BIO Laboratories, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions from the dried soil samples as in, e.g., Řezáčová et al.26. To evaluate the fungal and bacterial diversity, we amplified and sequenced the ITS2 region of rDNA and V4 region of 16 S rRNA gene of the fungi and bacteria, respectively, from soil samples using Illumina pair-end amplicon sequencing. The V4 region of 16 S SSU rRNA gene of the bacteria was then amplified using tagged primers 515 F27and 806R28as in Řezáč et al.29. The ITS2 region of rDNA was amplified with gITS730and ITS431tagged primers. The reaction mixture for bacterial 16 S rRNA gene amplification (25 µl total per reaction) contained 12.5 µl, TP HS DNA-free 2 × Master Mix (Top-Bio, Vestec, Czech Republic), 0.5 µl of each forward and reverse primer mixture (equimolar mixtures of nondegenerate primer variants, 10 µM total concentration per primer solution), 10.5 µl ddH2O, and 1 µl DNA template (diluted DNA extracts). The reaction conditions were as follow: initial denaturation at 94 °C for 5 min; 30 cycles starting with denaturation at 94 C for 45 s, annealing at 54 °C for 50 s, and amplification at 72 °C for 1.5 min; then final elongation at 72 °C for 10 min. The reaction mixture for fungal ITS region amplification (24 µl total per reaction) contained 12.5 µl of PPP Combi Master Mix (Top-Bio, Prague, Czech Republic), 1 µl of each forward and reverse primer mixture (equimolar mixtures of nondegenerate primer variants, 10 µM total concentration per primer solution), 9.5 µl ddH2O, and 1 µl DNA template (diluted DNA extracts). The reaction conditions were as follow: initial denaturation at 94 °C for 4 min; 30 cycles starting with denaturation at 94 °C for 30 s, annealing at 60 °C for 30 s, and amplification at 72 °C for 30 s; then final elongation at 72 °C for 5 min. We checked the quantity of the resulting PCR products using Quantifluor ONE dsDNA System (Promega, Madison, WI) and purified the PCR products using the QIAquick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen). We performed the PCR in triplicate for each sample and pooled the resulting purified amplicons prior to sequencing. We then sequenced equimolar amplicon libraries on a 2 × 250-bp MiSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA). We used PCR water as a negative control for the presence of contaminants in the PCR. For purposes of this work Archae and Bacteria were marked as “bacteria” and analysed together.

The soil characteristics as soil acidity (pH), conductivity, available P, K, Mg, Ca, and N (total N and available NO3and NH4), soil organic C and percentage of humus were measured as in Řezáčová et al.32in the dried soil samples to elucidate the underlying potential effect of catch plants and soil cultivation method on soil bacteria and fungi. The soil pH was assessed in a water slurry (1:10, w: v) following shaking of the samples for 1 h. Available P, K, Mg, and Ca were assessed according to the Mehlich III method33on an Agilant ICP-OES 5110 VDV instrument. NO3and NH4were determined using calcium chloride solution as extractant according to ISO 14255:1998 on automated chemistry analyser SKALAR. Soil organic C and percentage of humus were determined by sulfochromic oxidation according to ISO 14235:1998.

The sequencing data were processed as in Řezáčová et al.34and Řezáč et al.35using the SEED2 2.0.4 pipeline36: After assembling the paired-end reads and removing the low-quality sequences as well as sequences shorter than 250 bp, the targeted regions were extracted. The sequences were then clustered into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) with 97% similarity threshold, and chimeras were detected using the built-in USEARCH 8.1.1861. For each OTU, a representative sequence was defined as the most abundant sequence in the sequence cluster and used for taxonomic assignment by blasting (BLASTn 2.5.0+) against the relevant sequence databases. A filtration procedure was then employed to determine all the non-bacterial or fungal sequences and to exclude them from further analyses. The remaining sequences were then standardized by calculating the abundances of the different OTUs, which were obtained by dividing the OTU sequence count by the total number of sequences reads in the sample. Taxa richness, Shannon diversity index and community evenness of bacterial, fungal and AM fungi communities were calculated for each sample using PAST 4.03 software (http://folk.uio.no/ohammer/past/). OTUs for both fungi and bacteria were, moreover, assigned to trophic groups (symbionts, saprotrophs, and pathogens). For fungi, trophic modes were assigned as part of the SEED2 processing workflow based on taxonomic identity. For bacteria, trophic group classification was assigned manually based on taxonomic information, using curated online databases (e.g., NCBI Taxonomy Browser) and relevant scientific literature.

The mixed effect models were calculated in the R 4.3.3 statistical environment (R Core Team, 2013,http://www.R-project.org/). The basic statistical values, i.e., averages and standard deviations, Pearson correlation were calculated by Microsoft Excel (Microsoft Corporation, Redmund, WA, USA) and Statistica 14.0.0.15 (TIBCO Software Inc., Palo Alto, USA) software.

One-way ANOVAs with factors “catch crop species” or “soil cultivation method” were performed on OTUs taxa richness, Shannon diversity, community evenness, proportions of different trophic groups (pathogens, saprotrophs and symbionts) among fungi and bacteria and soil physicochemical properties. Subsequent Tukey HSDpost hoctest was used to address the differences among individual treatments. In order to capture temporal trends in the change in biomass along with possible interactions with “catch crop species” and “soil cultivation method”, a mixed-effects model (lmer function, lme4 R package,37) was constructed so that it included “catch crop species”, “soil cultivation method”, “session” (i.e. the sequence of the sampling session) and their interactions. “Season” (i.e. spring/autumn timing of sampling) was used as a random effect to account for the known differences in soil microbial activity in spring and autumn38,39, which might otherwise confound tested patterns among the fixed effects terms if not included in the model. As “session” was the only significant fixed term in the model, the follow-up linear model included in interaction “session” and “season”, to test for possible temporal changes for spring and autumn periods. Due to the nature of the data, we assumed normal distribution of errors in both models. The adequacy of this assumption was supported by using diagnostic plots (normal quantile-quantile plot and fitted versus residuals plot). Content of microbial biomass, concentrations of available NH4, Shannon index and evenness for fungi were log-transformed before the analyses. Pearson’s correlation coefficients were calculated to assess potential relationship and its direction between microbiological and soil physico-chemical parameters. The effects of “catch crops” and soil cultivation management on bacterial, fungal and AM fungi communities compositions were analysed by redundancy analyses (RDA) using the CANOCO 5.0 software package40. Here, the relative abundances of the OTUs were included.

Method of soil cultivation affected bacterial diversity with reduced tillage enhancing all three tested diversity parameters, community evenness, Shannon index and taxa richness compared to ploughing, but neither differed from no-till (Table2; Fig.2). Opposite to bacterial diversity, soil cultivation method did not influence the fungal diversity, including the AM diversity (Table2; Fig.2). Soil cultivation methods did not affect the proportions of functional trophic groups of fungi and bacteria (Table2; Fig.3).

The effects of catch crop species or soil cultivation method as revealed by one-way ANOVAs on OTUs richness, Shannon index and community evenness of fungi, arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi and bacteria, and functional trophic groups of fungi and bacteria.

OTUs richness, Shannon index and community evenness of bacteria (above) and fungi (bellow) as affected by soil cultivation method (ploughing, reduced tillage or no-till). Bars represent means accompanied by standard errors (n= 7). Different letters above individual bars indicate significant differences among means as revealed by the Tukey post hoc test (α= 0.05).

Relative abundance of three trophic groups (pathogens, saprotrophs and symbionts) within fungi and within bacteria in the soil of our experiment. Bars represent means accompanied by standard errors (n= 21).

Similarly, catch crop species had no effect on neither the diversity of bacteria and fungi, including AM fungi, nor the functional trophic groups of these microbial groups (Table2).

For purposes of this work Archaea and Bacteria are marked as “bacteria” and analysed together.

The OTUs community compositions of fungi, including AM fungi and bacteria were not affected (P< 0.05) by the catch crops species or soil cultivation method. However, the influence of soil cultivation method on community composition of bacteria was marginally significant (significant atP< 0.1), and using the “forward selection of environmental variables” tool in Canoco 5.0 software, a significant influence of ploughing was confirmed (explaining 10.3% of the total data variability, pseudo-F = 2.3,P= 0.004). It was possible to identify a number of OTUs, mostly saprotrophs, that benefit from ploughing and a number of those that do not (Fig.4, Table S2).

T-value biplot for the relationships between the ploughing and bacterial OTUs. The arrows fully falling within a Van Dobben circle indicate a significant (P< 0.05) relationship between an OTUs and the ploughing, even positive (red circle) or negative (blue circle). OTUs located outside the circles are not displayed, although they were included in the analysis.

The microbial biomass content in the soil was significantly affected only by the time of sampling (F1, 83.6= 5.2928,P= 0.0239) in our full mixed-effects model. Neither the soil cultivation method (F6, 83= 1.1658,P= 0.3325) nor the catch crop species (F2, 83= 0.1462,P= 0.8642) significantly affected the biomass content. Further tests revealed specific temporal trends in microbial biomass content for spring and autumn seasons (Fig.5). While the biomass generally decreased over the years in spring sampling (slope: – 42.243 ± 4.649, t = – 9.085,P< 0.001), it gradually increased in autumn sampling (slope: 20.232 ± 6.575, t = 9.501,P< 0.001).

Microbial C biomass as affected by catch crop species and season in the years 2021–2024. The lines represent slopes for the temporal effects, and the grey areas represent 95% confidence intervals.

In this research, we investigated how various catch crop species and methods of soil cultivation before sowing the main crop affect soil microbial abundance and diversity in a three-year field experiment. We found that bacterial diversity was positively affected by reduced tillage, while fungal diversity, including that of important symbionts - AM fungi, remained unchanged (Table2; Fig.2). Soil cultivation methods did not influence the proportions of key trophic groups, pathogens, symbionts, and saprotrophs (Table2; Fig.3), nor the overall microbial biomass (Fig.5). The species of catch crop, including five species and two mixtures, did not alter any microbial parameter under any soil cultivation method.

We demonstrate that reduced tillage fosters greater bacterial diversity compared to conventional ploughing (Fig.2). These findings align with the global trend of exploring soil cultivation practices that minimize disruption to soil ecosystems. Schmidt et al.41, for example, found that no-till soils exhibited higher bacterial species diversity compared to conventionally tilled soils. Similarly, Wang et al.42reported increased bacterial diversity under conservation tillage (zero plough or chisel plough). In our study, the reduction in diversity caused by ploughing was associated with significant shifts in bacterial community composition. Ploughing promoted certain taxa while suppressing others (Fig.4), with both cases involving changes in the abundance of saprotrophic taxa. However, these shifts did not affect the overall ratio of this trophic group relative to pathogens and symbionts (Table2; Fig.3). This finding contrasts with the results of Schmidt et al.43, who reported that ploughing reduced the proportion of symbiotrophs relative to saprotrophs, which was linked to decreased soil organic matter and nutrient content, something we have not recorded. Although their study focused solely on fungi, this mechanism could explain why we did not observe changes in the proportions of different trophic groups. Interestingly, in our experiment, we found that bacterial diversity was reduced to a similar extent under both ploughing and no-till compared to reduced tillage (Fig.2). This contrasts with many previous studies and suggests that site-specific factors may have influenced our results. While generally fertile, the heavier texture of the soil at our site may have contributed to increased compaction and limited aeration under no-till management, conditions that are less favorable for bacterial proliferation. Unlike reduced tillage, which involves some degree of loosening, no-till systems can lead to denser topsoil layers, especially in clay-rich soils. This may explain why no-till did not provide the expected microbial benefits in our study and performed similarly to ploughing in terms of bacterial diversity.

We observed an impact of soil cultivation on bacterial diversity but found no significant differences in fungal diversity across the cultivation methods (Table2; Fig.2). This is consistent with the meta-analysis by Li et al.44, who concluded that no-till has different effects on bacterial and fungal community diversity. While it increases soil bacterial diversity, it does not significantly affect fungal diversity. This is likely related to the fact that bacteria are more sensitive to soil environmental changes caused by agricultural practices than fungi45. Fungi are generally considered habitat generalists and are less influenced by disturbance46,47. Additionally, fungi may require a longer time to respond to changes in soil management. While bacterial communities can react quickly to soil disturbances, fungal communities have slower growth cycles and may exhibit changes over a longer period. This delayed response could explain why we did not observe significant shifts in fungal diversity due to different soil cultivation methods in our study. Moreover, it is possible that the lack of observed effect on fungal communities was also influenced by the timing of our soil sampling. As soil samples were collected in autumn, several months after spring ploughing, fungal communities may have already reached a new equilibrium or partially recovered from the disturbance, making potential short-term effects less detectable.

AM fungi are often desirable in agricultural soils, represent a key element for plant health and ecosystem sustainability, as they significantly increase nutrient uptake (especially phosphorus) and help protect plants against pathogens – aspects that are critical for sustainable agriculture48. Although the abundance of AM fungi was similar to the values previously reported for ITS sequencing analyses43,49, - i.e., constituting 0.8% of all fungi, we did not observe any negative impact of ploughing on their diversity (Table2) unlike the meta-analysis by Bowles et al.24. Similarly, Jansa et al.50did not report differences in AMF diversity between tilled and no-tilled soils, although conventional tillage significantly altered the composition of these fungal communities. This finding suggests that diversity indices may not always accurately reflect the complex ecosystem structure, especially if differences in abundance between individual species are too pronounced51. However, even though this phenomenon was observed in our study, we did not detect any effect of soil cultivation methods on the composition of AM fungal communities. It is likely that, as mentioned earlier, fungi respond more slowly to disturbances, and the effects of agricultural management have not yet fully manifested or they have already completely recovered since the spring ploughing. Moreover, these fungi form extensive subterranean networks of hyphae that may remain functional even when surface soil layers are disturbed.

The catch crop species had no effect on the diversity (Table2) or composition of bacterial and fungal communities, including AM fungi. This result contrasts with findings by Gao et al.52, Cazzaniga et al.53, Muturi et al.54and Aiyer et al.55, who reported variable effects of different catch crops on microbial diversity. These discrepancies may again be linked to the time required for changes in microbial diversity and community composition to manifest. According to Eisenhauer et al.56, it takes 4–6 years for soil biota to respond significantly to changes in plant diversity. Additionally, Gao et al.52found that shifts in bacterial community abundance and structure caused by variability in catch crop species were primarily driven by changes in soil pH. This could also explain why we did not observe any differences in bacterial community responses to different catch crop species.

AM fungi have a wide host range and their interactions with plants can be quite non-specific. This means that different species of catch crops may not have a significant effect on AM fungal diversity or activity if all hosts provide similar conditions for the growth of fungal mycelia. AM fungi can be adapted to certain environmental conditions, and unless key factors such as pH, nutrient availability or moisture have been altered, the effect of catch crops on AM fungi may not be apparent. Thus, the absence of an effect of catch crop species on AM fungi may support the theory of a non-specific interaction between AMF and plants. This suggests that mycorrhizal fungi can adapt to different conditions and hosts without showing a marked response to changes in catch crops composition.

In our study, we observed no significant differences in the relative abundance of bacterial and fungal trophic groups—specifically saprotrophs, symbionts, and pathogens—across various treatments involving different catch crops and soil cultivation methods (Table2; Fig.3). Thus, catch crops did not appear to contribute to functional changes in the microbial community. Despite concerns among some farmers that the adoption of conservation agricultural practices could increase crop diseases - a view supported by studies indicating that reduced tillage may favour certain plant pathogens57,58, - our findings suggest that, at least under the specific environmental conditions of our study, the implementation of conservation tillage practices and the use of various catch crops did not lead to significant changes in the proportions of saprotrophs, symbionts, and pathogens in the soil.

Because soil abiotic parameters were either not affected (P< 0.05) by the soil cultivation method at all (humus, organic C, pH, NO3, K, total N) or differed only between ploughing and no-till (in the case of Ca concentration and conductivity; FigureS1), or no-till differed from both ploughing and reduced tillage (available P; Fig.S1), we cannot explain the positive changes in bacterial diversity caused by reduced tillage based on changes in soil parameters. Moreover, none of the physicochemical factors correlated (P< 0.05) with the diversity (expressed by the taxa richness, Shannon index, or community evenness) or abundance of fungi or bacteria. Our findings thus indicate that the variations in soil bacterial communities were probably shaped by other, unmeasured, factors in this study, such as temperature and soil moisture.

Similarly, in most cases (pH, conductivity, available Ca, Mg, P, NH4, NO3), no or minor changes in soil parameters were observed due to the catch crop species (Fig. S2). Only white mustard increased humus and organic C contents compared to other catch crop species and total N compared to buckwheat + phacelia, and minor differences in available K were observed among some catch crop species (Figu.S2). Although the amount of organic matter should have a significant impact on microbial community diversity and composition, we did not observe differences in diversity between the effects of different catch crops, possibly due to the dominance of opportunistic microorganisms in treatments supporting higher organic matter content during our assessment.

Interestingly, neither the soil cultivation method nor the catch crop species significantly affected microbial biomass in our study. This contrasts with some previous studies, such as Zuber and Villamil23and Engell et al.59, which indicate that deep tillage leads to a reduction in microbial biomass compared to no-till due to soil structure degradation, nutrient loss, and decreased soil organic matter. Similarly, Bowles et al.24reported that reduced tillage and no-till practices enhance microbial biomass compared to conventional ploughing. The discrepancy between our findings and these studies may be attributed to site-specific conditions such as soil type, climate, main crop used and the duration of the experiment. As discussed above, the duration of our experiment might have been insufficient to detect significant changes in microbial biomass resulting from different tillage practices.

Despite our expectations, no significant differences among catch crop species were found. Some studies, such as Patkowska et al.60or Gentch et al.14, have previously demonstrated a negative impact of catch crop, here mustard, on the abundance of soil microorganism, while others have not observed this effect61, suggesting a possible dependence on soil type or climatic conditions, which can influence microbial population dynamics62,63.

However, total microbial biomass is only a coarse indicator of microbial processes in the soil and does not reflect changes in the composition of microbial communities. Conversely, changes in the composition of these communities may not manifest in total biomass, as they can be masked by the replacement of one group of microorganisms with another/others with comparable biomass. However, our further analyses showed that catch crops did not affect the diversity of bacteria and fungi or the composition of their communities. This suggests that, although there may be slight changes in total microbial biomass, the structure of the soil microbiome remains relatively stable.

Our study revealed that the microbial biomass content in the soil was primarily influenced by the time of sampling, with significant temporal trends observed for both spring and autumn seasons (Fig.5). These seasonal variations suggest that environmental conditions, such as temperature and moisture, play a crucial role in microbial biomass dynamics. The observed increase in microbial biomass during autumn sampling over the years can be attributed to the prolonged presence of catch crops, which provide a continuous supply of organic matter and root exudates that support microbial growth. Additionally, the observed decreasing trend in microbial biomass during spring sampling over the years may be influenced by other factors, such as changes in soil nutrient availability, microbial community composition, or environmental stressors. Overall, these results highlight the importance of considering the timing of soil management practices to optimize microbial biomass and soil health.

Although the field experiment was established as a full-factorial design with three replicates per treatment combination (catch crop × soil cultivation method), the sequencing analyses were performed on composite soil samples. Each composite was prepared by pooling subsamples from the three field replicates per treatment to reduce the high costs associated with next-generation sequencing. As a result, it was not possible to assess treatment-level variability or include interaction terms in the statistical models. This limitation restricts the statistical evaluation to main effects only and should be considered when interpreting the results.

Fungal and bacterial communities in soil fulfil different functions in agroecosystems and are strongly affected by agricultural management practices. Conservation tillage, which minimizes soil disturbance, plays a crucial role in promoting soil microbial diversity and enhancing long-term soil health. Additionally, the use of catch crops to improve soil health is a key component of sustainable agriculture but the impact of different catch crop species on soil microbial communities remains poorly understood.

The results of our study on microbial abundance and diversity in soil suggest that conservation tillage, particularly reduced tillage, leads to an increase in soil bacterial diversity within a relatively short time. Although bacterial diversity did not differ significantly between no-till and ploughing, reduced tillage showed higher diversity than ploughing, suggesting that even moderate reduction in soil disturbance can benefit microbial communities. The negative effect of ploughing on bacterial diversity thus supports concerns about the potential negative impact of intensive tillage on soil microbial health. While no-till is widely considered a conservation practice, it may have limitations—such as reduced soil aeration, compaction, or organic matter stratification—that could explain why it did not perform better than ploughing in our conditions. Ploughing altered the composition of bacterial communities but neither promoted nor suppressed any specific trophic groups, such as pathogens, saprotrophs, or symbionts, and thus did not significantly change the main soil functions.

Unfortunately, we were unable to compare the effect of different catch crop species with an untreated control, where catch crops were not used at all. However, the general effect of catch crops compared to no treatment is well-established. We did not observe significant differences in microbial diversity or composition between the various catch crop species, likely because the duration of the experiment was not long enough for such effects to manifest. However, the observed increase in microbial biomass during autumn sampling over the years suggests a positive influence of catch crops, regardless of the species.

These findings contribute to our understanding of how different conservation tillage methods and catch crop species influence the diversity and structure of bacterial and fungal communities in Central European agricultural soils. They support the view that reduced tillage represents a beneficial compromise between soil disturbance and microbial health, while also suggesting that catch crop species-specific effects may require more time to fully develop.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

We would like to thank Ing. Martin Káš, Ph.D. for allowing us to collect samples from his experiment for our research.