Debris flow hazard mapping (DFHM) played an important role in reducing the threat of debris flows. Conventional DFHM usually requires numerical simulations to obtain debris flow intensity, which is usually quite time-consuming. This paper is to introduce a combined application framework of numerical simulation and machine learning to improve the efficiency of DFHM. The FLO-2D model was employed to simulate debris flows with different recurrence intervals of 20 years, 50 years and 100 years, respectively. Corresponding maximum accumulation depth and flow velocity were collected as dependent variables. Rainfall with corresponding recurrence intervals, altitude, slope, plane curvature, profile curvature, topographic humidity index, normalized difference vegetation index and Manning’s coefficients were collected as independent variables. Then the 20-year, 50-year and 100-year datasets were prepared by combining the independent and dependent variables. The 20-year and 50-year datasets were used for training a machine learning model called gradient boosted decision tree (GBDT). The 100-year dataset was used for validation. The results showed that the predicted results are quite close to the simulated results, which verified the validity and rationality of the proposed method. In addition, the training and prediction process of machine learning models is more than 10 times faster than the running process of numerical model. This study proposed the potential use of machine learning models as alternatives to hydraulic simulations, which could provide a more efficient solution for large-scale DFHM.

Debris flows, which are usually considered to be highly destructive and unpredictable, have been a major threat to the lives and property of people living in mountainous areas1,2. Considering the impact of extreme rainfall in recent years, debris flow control deserves more attention. Generally speaking, the development of debris flow control measures requires adequate knowledge of debris flow events3.

Debris flow hazard mapping (DFHM) proved to be an effective tool for visualizing the hazard scope and the intensity of debris flows4. Generally speaking, there are three approaches to create a debris flow hazard map and these approaches could be categorized as experience-based, experimentally-based and simulation-based5. The experience-based models aim to establish a relationship between environmental factors and debris flows and thus to predict their hazard, which requires a great deal of detailed data and expert experience6. The experimentally-based methods usually imply high cost and experimental requirements, which limited the development of the corresponding methods7. It can be seen that both methods are difficult to replicate on a large scale. With the development of hardware and software, the application of simulation-based approaches has became the mainstream for DFHM. By determining appropriate input parameters, numerical models capable of reproducing debris flow movements could be built8,9.

Machine learning have been extensively applied in geotechnical engineering, each with distinct methodologies and strengths. Nguyen et al. (2024) estimated the risk of landslides based on the spatial probability of landslides obtained from a one-dimensional convolutional neural network15. Song et al. (2025) established a model for predicting debris flow entrainment rate based on generative AI16. In addition, machine learning has also been widely used to predict the probability of geological hazards in recent years due to its advantages of high efficiency and low parameter dependency17. Based on suitable training datasets and machine learning models, high-quality debris flow susceptibility maps (DFSM) could be obtained18. Inspired by the core ideas of DFSM, we firstly sampled the study area with a spatial precision of 5 m to form a sample set. Subsequently, we extracted the factors related to debris flow generation and movement as independent variables, and regarded the maximum flow velocity and accumulation depth obtained by simulation as dependent variables. The training dataset could be obtained by combining the independent variables with the dependent variables. Then the training dataset was used to train a model called gradient boosting decision tree (GBDT). We believe that with proper training, GBDT could play an important role in DFHM.

To summarize, numerical simulations currently play a dominant role in DFHM studies, but the computational costs are sometimes intolerable. This study was designed to introduce machine learning to improve the efficiency of DFHM. The FLO-2D model was employed to simulate debris flows with recurrence intervals of 20 years, 50 years and 100 years, respectively. Corresponding maximum debris flow accumulation depth and flow velocity were collected as dependent variables. Multiple factors related to debris flow movement including rainfall with different recurrence intervals. were collected as independent variables. The independent and dependent variables comprise the 20-year dataset, 50-year dataset, and 100-year dataset. The GBDT algorithm was used for modeling. The 20-year and 50-year datasets were used for training, and the 100-year dataset was used for validation. This study explored the potential of machine learning as an alternative to numerical simulation in DFHM, which could provide a more efficient option for large-scale DFHM.

Based on the field survey results and historical records, the Nanjiao watershed in Fangshan District, Beijing, was selected as the study area. Located in the warm temperate semi-humid continental monsoon climate zone, the rainfall in Nanjiao watershed is concentrated from June to September every year. Strong incision effect results in a high density of gullies in this region, which could provide favorable topographic conditions for debris flow formation. In addition, the severe weathering of the region’s lithology and the widespread distribution of collapses and landslides could provide a rich source of material for the formation of debris flows. Finally, as shown in Fig.1, there are 1 main gulch and 6 branch gulches in Nanjiao watershed.

As shown in Table1, the key to numerical simulation of debris flow movement is to collect sufficiently reliable input parameters.

A high-precision digital elevation model (DEM) is an important basis for realizing accurate simulation of debris flows19. In this paper, a 5-m precision DEM was prepared for the follow-up studies.

Fluid weight has a very important influence on both the movement and accumulation characteristics of debris flows20. In the process of debris flow outbursts, the fluids are complex in spatial and temporal distribution and therefore difficult to obtain appropriate fluid weight. Based on the results of field investigations and tests, the fluid weight was determined to be 1.52 t/m3.

where Vsis the volume of solids in a debris flow; Vwis the volume of liquid in a debris flow.

Considering the results of the field investigation and the composition and distribution of sources in the area, the volume concentration was finally determined to be 0.48.

The degree of surface roughness varies significantly in a watershed. The roughness of the ground surface directly affects the accumulation depth and flow velocity21. In practice, Manning’s coefficient is often used as a measure of the roughness of the surface. The Manning’s coefficients for different land use of the watershed were shown in Table2.

The debris flow is usually stratified by external frictional resistance. The laminar flow retardation coefficient, K, is a parameter that reflects the friction that occurs when this stratified flow phenomenon occurs, and is influenced by a combination of vegetation and surface roughness. Based on the FLO-2D manual recommendations and field survey results, K was finally determined to be 2800.

According to the FLO-2D manual, α1, α2, β1and β2were determined to be 0.811, 0.00462, 13.72 and 11.24, respectively.

Catchment points are predefined activation locations in the event of a debris flow outbreak. Accurate catchment points contribute to the reliability of the simulation results, which usually requires the following conditions: (1) Adequate material sources are available near the catchment points; (2) Material sources have sufficient potential energy in the vicinity of the catchment points; (3) Catchment points should have good hydrodynamic conditions. In the study area, the distribution of the catchment points is shown in Fig.2.

where QBis the peak flood discharge; φ is the runoff coefficient; n is the rainfall attenuation factor; S is the maximum rainfall in 1 h; L is the gulch length; F is the watershed area; J is the longitudinal gradient of the gulch; τ is the confluence time; m is the confluence parameter.

Peak flood discharge of different gulches under different rainfall recurrence interval.

Clear water flow process line under: (a) rainfall with 20-year recurrence interval; (b) rainfall with 50-year recurrence interval; (c) rainfall with 100-year recurrence interval.

The value of BF was calculated to be 1.92. Based on the clear water flow process line and BF, the debris flow process line can be obtained (Fig.4).

Debris flow process line under: (a) rainfall with 20-year recurrence interval; (b) rainfall with 50-year recurrence interval; (c) rainfall with 100-year recurrence interval.

As shown in Table6, the inputs to the machine learning model are mainly conditioning factors that are closely related to the mudslide movement.

In general, conditioning factors associated with the debris flow movement process can be treated as independent variables to build a regression model23. In the present study, a total of 8 conditioning factors were collected.

Rainfall is the hydrodynamic source of debris flows in the watershed. The greater the intensity of rainfall, the greater the scope and intensity of the debris flow hazard24. In this study, the maximum rainfall in 1 h with recurrence interval of 20 years (72.1 mm), 50 years (87.9 mm) and 100 years (101.2 mm) were applied for different datasets.

The remaining conditioning factors, in addition to rainfall, were shown in Fig.5. The topographic factors have played an important role in debris flow studies. Altitude is a important conditioning factor since debris flows are terrain-driven in many cases25. Slope is closely related to the debris flow circulation and accumulation processes26. Plane curvature determines the convergence and dispersion of debris flows, and profile curvature influences the acceleration and deceleration of debris flows27. TWI quantified topographic control of basic hydrologic processes28. All the topographic factors were obtained based on the collected 5-m precision DEM.

Conditioning factors used for training: (a) altitude; (b) slope; (c) plane curvature; (d) profile curvature; (e) TWI; (f) NDVI; (g) Manning’s coefficients.

In addition, NDVI and Manning’s coefficients are two conditioning factors used to characterize the surface conditions, which have an important impact on the movement process of debris flows.

In this study, the maximum accumulation depth and flow velocity of debris flows under different rainfall conditions were used as the dependent variables.

This study proposed the use of machine learning to assist numerical simulation in DFHM to improve efficiency. The process was shown in Fig.6.

where h is the accumulation depth; t is the motion time; Vxis the flow velocity in the x-direction; Vyis the flow velocity in the y-direction; I is the rainfall intensity.

Where g is the gravitational acceleration; Sfxand Sfyrepresent the friction slope in the x and y directions; Soxand Soyrepresent the slope of the bottom of the gulch bed in the X and Y directions.

Where Sfis the friction slope; Syis the yield slope; Svis the viscous slope; Stdis the turbulence dispersion slope; τyis the yield stress; η is the viscosity coefficient; γmis the unit weight of debris flows; K is the laminar flow retardation coefficient; n is Manning’s coefficient.

Previous studies have shown that GBDT can flexibly handle various types of data and is robust to outliers by employing some robust loss functions34. In addition, GBDT models have good generalization and expressive ability when dealing with densely distributed datasets.

At present, debris flow hazard mapping are primarily defined by the flow velocity and accumulation depth. Referring to previous studies35the determination criteria of debris flow hazard in this study was shown in Table7. Finally, each grid cell will be assigned an independent hazard ranking.

The distribution of maximum debris flow velocity corresponding to different rainfall conditions was shown in Fig.7. The statistical results of the grid cells at each maximum flow velocity level were shown in Table8. It can be seen that for all rainfall conditions, the maximum debris flow velocities are mostly under 3 m/s. The high flow velocity mostly occurs within the gulches, which is due to the fact that there is no obvious blockage in the gulches, and there are some areas with low Manning’s coefficient. On the contrary, since both sides of the gulches are diffuse extension zones, the maximum flow velocities were significantly reduced. On the other hand, the proportion of higher flow velocity units increased significantly with the increasing rainfall intensity. In addition, there are also obvious differences in maximum flow velocities between different gulches, which are determined by a combination of the watershed area, the peak flood flow, the source reserve, and the longitudinal slope drop of the gulches.

Maximum debris flow velocity distribution under: (a) rainfall with 20-year recurrence interval; (b) rainfall with 50-year recurrence interval; (c) rainfall with 100-year recurrence interval.

Statistical results of maximum flow velocity corresponding to different rainfall condition.

The distribution of maximum debris flow accumulation depth corresponding to different rainfall conditions was shown in Fig.8. The statistical results of the grid cells at each maximum accumulation depth level were shown in Table9. The results showed that the maximum accumulation depth under each rainfall condition generally does not exceed 2.4 m, and the debris flow tends to accumulate in the area with high Manning’s coefficient. In addition, in area where the debris flow turns, the maximum accumulation depth also increased significantly, which is due to a certain degree of obstruction to the movement of the debris flow. The accumulation fan is characterized by a thick middle part and shallower accumulation depth on both sides, showing the typical characteristics of debris flow accumulation. As the intensity of rainfall increased, the amount of material that can be flushed out within each gulch would also increase, which could directly lead to an increase in the proportion of grid cells with higher accumulation depth.

Maximum debris flow accumulation depth under different rainfall conditions: (a) rainfall with 20-year recurrence interval; (b) rainfall with 50-year recurrence interval; (c) Rainfall with 100-year recurrence interval.

Statistical results of maximum accumulation depth corresponding to different rainfall condition.

Generally speaking, the simulation results need to be verified based on more reliable field data. However, for debris flows, the collection of filed data is usually quite challenging. After an extensive literature review, we collected the accumulation depth of the main gulch under a heavy rainfall36. Historical records showed that the rainfall reached 67 mm in one hour, which is very close to the rainfall with 20-year recurrence interval. Therefore, the accumulation depth obtained by monitoring can be used to verify the rationality of the simulation. The monitoring location was shown in Fig.9. The results showed that the accumulation depth obtained based on numerical simulation is 0.84 m, while the data obtained from monitoring is about 0.74 m, with an error of 13.5%. Compared with previous studies, it could meet the requirements of simulation accuracy.

Schematic diagram of the location of the accumulation depth sensor.

Based on the judgment criteria in Table7, the debris flow hazard maps under different rainfall conditions were obtained as shown in Fig.10. The hazard maps were statistically analyzed and the results were shown in Table10. Under the rainfall condition with a recurrence interval of 20 years, the proportions of very low, low, moderate and high hazard in the map are 66.7%, 28.4%, 0.7% and 4.2% respectively. Under the rainfall condition with a recurrence interval of 50 years, the proportions of very low, low, moderate and high hazard are 59.8%, 31.8%, 1.6% and 6.8%, respectively. Under the rainfall condition with a recurrence interval of 100 years, the proportions of very low, low, moderate and high were 55.2%, 33.4%, 2.3% and 9.1%, respectively. As the intensity of rainfall increases, more areas are categorized into higher hazard classes. In addition, in terms of the spatial distribution of the high hazard class, most of the high hazard areas are located in the main gulch, which is due to the fact that the peak debris flow discharge of the main gulch is larger than that of the rest of branch gulches. On the other hand, debris flows in the branch gulches would eventually converge with the main ditch, which further enhanced the hazard in the main gulch.

Debris flow hazard maps under: (a) Rainfall with 20-year recurrence interval; (b) rainfall with 50-year recurrence interval; (c) rainfall with 100-year recurrence interval.

Statistical results of hazard proportions under different rainfall condition.

Based on the GBDT model trained on 20-year and 50-year datasets, the maximum flow velocity and accumulation depth under the rainfall with 100-year recurrence interval can be predicted for the entire Nanjiao watershed. To compare the predicted and simulated results in the same area, the maximum flow velocity and accumulation depth within the simulated hazard area were extracted based on the100-year simulated results (Fig.11). Table11exhibited the predicted and simulated flow velocity class proportions, while Table12showed the predicted and simulated accumulation depth class proportions. The mean squared errors of the maximum flow velocity and maximum accumulation depth were 0.247 and 0.184, respectively. Compared with previous studies, the accuracy requirements could be met37,38which verified the reliability of the machine learning models. The comparison between the simulated and predicted results were shown in Fig.12. Table13demonstrated the debris flow hazard class proportion based on predicted and simulated results. Overall, the machine learning model predictions were more conservative, which is related to the fact that a large number of samples from non-debris flow areas were involved in the model training. In addition, the simulations of debris flows with recurrence intervals of 20 years, 50 years, and 100 years took 51 h, 59 h, and 63 h, respectively. The training and predicting process of the machine learning model took about 4 h. Compared with numerical models, machine learning models have demonstrated more than 10 times the efficiency.

Predictions corresponding to rainfall with a 100-year recurrence interval: (a) Maximum debris flow velocity of the entire area; (b) maximum debris flow accumulation depth of the entire area; (c) maximum debris flow velocity of the extracted area; (d) maximum debris flow accumulation depth of the extracted area.

Comparison of predicted and simulated flow velocity class proportions.

Comparison of predicted and simulated accumulation depth class proportions.

The debris flow hazard maps based on the: (a) simulated results; (b) predicted results.

Comparison of debris flow hazard class proportions based on predicted and simulated values.

DFHM has evolved significantly over the years, with diverse methodologies developed to address the complexity and dynamic characteristics39. Traditional experience-based methods are typically simple and highly interpretable, but it would also make the results too subjective and difficult to generalize to areas where historical data are scarce40. The experiment-based approach is a reproduction of debris flow generation and movement, which is convincing in most cases. However, building a physical model of debris flow is usually challenging41. For example, the terrain and surface conditions in nature are complex and variable, which is difficult to realize in the laboratory. As a result, the experimental conditions are usually simplified to some extent in practice, which would lead to the accuracy of the results being compromised as well. Recently, numerical simulation has emerged as a important tool for investigating the intensity characteristics of debris flows. By leveraging advanced computational frameworks, numerical simulations enable the precise quantification of flow velocity and accumulation depth. However, high computational costs remain a significant challenge, particularly for high-resolution models that require substantial processing resources. In addition, the reliability of simulation outcomes heavily depends on the availability and quality of input parameters. which are often subject to uncertainties due to sparse field measurements42,43.

Overall, the current methods used for DFHM have obvious advantages and disadvantages. Numerical simulation methods have been widely used in DFHM but are also limited by the high computational cost and scarce input parameters. Therefore, improving computational efficiency and reducing parameter dependence are important considerations in exploring advanced DFHM methods.

Compared to numerical simulations, machine learning have demonstrated the potential of developing models that minimize dependency on extensive input parameter tuning while maintaining low computational overhead44. Accordingly, we proposed to introduce machine learning to perform DFHM. For machine learning models, classification and regression are the two main tasks. In previous debris flow studies, classification models have been widely used in debris flow susceptibility prediction. By inputting conditioning factors closely related to the formation of debris flow into a classification model, the probability of debris flows can be predicted45. For DFHM, the key lies in the acquisition of motion intensity characteristics. Therefore, we mainly focused on the application of regression models. The datasets corresponding to rainfall with 20-year recurrence interval and 50-year recurrence interval were used for training. The dataset corresponding to rainfall with 100-year recurrence interval was used for validation. The results showed that the predicted results are quite close to the simulated results and have a higher efficiency, which verified the validity and rationality of the proposed method in this study. Therefore, we believe machine learning has the potential to play a more important role in DFHM.

In this study, machine learning was introduced to assist numerical simulations for DFHM to improve the efficiency. The following are some of the limitations that need to be addressed in future studies: (1) FLO-2D is applied in this paper to obtain the debris flow velocity and accumulation depth, and more advanced numerical simulation methods can be employed to further improve the accuracy and efficiency. (2) The accumulation depth of a debris flow at one monitoring point during a rainfall was used to validate the reliability of simulation results, more field data could be prepared to increase the persuasiveness in future studies. (3) A single machine learning model was used in this study and more models can be explored to improve reliability. (4) The performance of machine learning models for unseen situations is highly dependent on their training datasets. If the datasets corresponding to a new situation exhibits significant differences from the training datasets, the model performance is difficult to guarantee. In addition, compared to physics-based models, the interpretability was also limited.

In future studies, we believe that by improving algorithms and models and collecting more training data, machine learning will have broader application prospects in DFHM. In addition, this study provided an important framework of machine learning as an efficient alternative to time-consuming numerical simulations, which could offer an efficient solution for similar time-consuming numerical simulation application scenarios.

Various methods for DFHM have been developed in recent years, each with its advantages and disadvantages. Numerical simulation methods can be useful in most cases, but limitations such as high computational costs and parameter scarcity still exist.

The introduction of machine learning proved to be effective in compensating for the shortcomings of numerical simulation and achieving high-quality DFHM.

With the introduction of more training data, models with higher performance can be built and machine learning is expected to play a dominant role in DFHM.

The authors declare that the data supporting the findings of this study are available within the paper. If any raw data files are needed in another format, they are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request.