Ejection fraction (EF) is a key component of heart failure (HF) classification. However, the biologic basis of HF with mildly reduced EF (HFmrEF) as a distinct biologic entity distinct from HF with preserved EF (HFpEF) and reduced EF (HFrEF) has not been well characterized. The EXSCEL trial randomized participants with type 2 diabetes (T2DM) to a once-weekly glucagon-like peptide receptor agonist (GLP-1 RA) exenatide (EQW) vs. placebo. For this study, profiling of ~ 5000 proteins using the SomaLogic SomaScan platform was performed in baseline and 12-month serum samples fromN= 1199 participants with prevalent HF at baseline. Unsupervised principal component analysis (PCA) and ANOVA (FDRp< 0.1) were used to identify proteins that were significantly between three EF groups (EF > 55% [HFpEF], EF 40–55% [HFmrEF], EF < 40% [HFrEF], categories as previously curated in the parent trial). Cox proportional hazards was used to assess association between baseline levels of proteins significantly different between groups, and changes in protein level between baseline and 12-month, with time-to-HF hospitalization. Mixed models were used to assess whether significant proteins changed differentially with exenatide vs. placebo therapy. OfN= 1199 EXSCEL participants with prevalent HF, 284 (24%), 704 (59%) and 211 (18%) had HFpEF, HFmrEF and HFrEF, respectively. Eight principal components analysis (PCA) protein factors differed significantly across the three EF groups, of which 270 individual proteins within those factors were significant. The majority of proteins (75%) demonstrated similar levels in HFmrEF and HFpEF with higher levels in HFrEF. Biologic pathways of epithelial-mesenchymal transition, ECM receptor interaction (tenascin C [TNC], COL28A1), complement and coagulation cascades, and epithelial apical surface and junctions demonstrated enrichment among proteins with this dominant pattern. A minority of proteins (1%) demonstrated similar levels between HFmrEF and HFrEF with lower levels in HFpEF, including MMP-9 (p< 0.0001). Baseline levels of the majority of the 270 proteins (92%) were also associated with time-to-incident HF hospitalization including domains of extracellular matrix (COL28A1, TNC), angiogenesis (VEGFa, VEGFd), myocyte stretch (NT-proBNP), and renal function (cystatin-C). Change in levels of 8% of these from baseline to 12 months (including increase in TNC) predicted incident HF hospitalization (p< 0.05). Levels of 41% of the 270 significant proteins (including TNC and NT-proBNP;p< 0.0001) were reduced differentially by EQW compared with placebo. In conclusion, we found that serum levels of the vast majority of proteins across multiple biologic domains were similar between HFmrEF and HFpEF suggesting that HFmrEF may be more biologically similar to HFpEF than HFrEF. We also identified specific biomarkers showing this pattern, most notably TNC, for which baseline and change levels predicted incident HF hospitalization and were beneficially modified by the GLP-1 RA EQW. These results may offer unique data on prognosis and pharmacotherapy modification with variability by EF.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1038/s41598-025-14414-0.

Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) categories, now including HF with mildly reduced EF (HFmrEF), are a key component of classifying patients with heart failure (HF) and guiding implementation of therapies1,2. Yet, the biologic basis of HFmrEF as an entity distinct from HF with preserved EF (HFpEF) and HF with reduced EF (HFrEF) has not been well characterized. There is accumulating evidence for different biological signatures underlying HFpEF as compared with HFrEF3–6but HFmrEF remains a less well-defined entity. Data on HFmrEF as comprising a distinct pathophysiology or representing simply a transition between HFrEF and HFpEF are mixed7. Prior data has suggested that HFmrEF has some similarities to HFrEF with regards to HF etiology (e.g. more commonly ischemic), outcomes, and response to therapy8–12although these data are inconsistent with some recent studies indicating more clinical similarities between HFpEF and HFmrEF13.

Molecular profiling can help evaluate the underlying biological basis of disease while simultaneously identifying clinically relevant biomarkers. Notably, proteomics studies including HFmrEF have shown unique, intermediary signatures in HFmrEF, but have been limited by small sample sizes, focus on a smaller set of proteins, and/or lack of longitudinal biomarker data4,5,14,15. At a clinical level, there is an increasing movement to advance beyond LVEF in phenotyping patients with HF due the limited relationship between LVEF and pathophysiology, outcomes, and treatment response16–18. An improved understanding of the biological correlates of LVEF phenotypes and related biomarkers in HF could inform patient classification and management. Thus, to address these interconnected gaps in the literature, we used proteomics applied to a large clinical trial database to define molecular processes across the EF spectrum in HF and investigated their role as prognostic biomarkers of incident hospitalization for HF (hHF) outcomes.

The Exenatide Study of Cardiovascular Event Lowering (EXSCEL) evaluated the effects of once-weekly exenatide (EQW) in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Design, baseline characteristics, and primary results have been published19–21. The EXSCEL study population was enriched for participants with history of prior CV events including previous coronary, cerebrovascular, or peripheral vascular events or stenosis and also included a primary prevention group20. Biospecimens were collected at enrollment in a subset of EXSCEL participants (N= 5668, 38.4% of the overall trial population).

For this study, the subset of participants with a history of HF at baseline (i.e. prevalent HF) who had consented for and had biospecimens collected were included. Presence or absence of history of clinical HF was captured upon enrollment into the trial. Clinical HF status at baseline was prospectively recorded by the clinician-investigator based on all available clinical data including patients’ signs/symptoms and objective measures such as echocardiography and biomarker data (e.g., natriuretic peptide levels)22. Participants with prevalent HF were further stratified across three EF groups as defined and curated in the parent EXSCEL trial as follows: preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF, EF > 55%), mildly reduced ejection fraction (HFmrEF, EF 40–55%), and reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF, EF < 40%). Incident HF events were defined as any heart failure hospitalization (hHF) as the primary reason for hospitalization. A blinded, independent clinical events classification committee adjudicated all the components of the primary composite and secondary outcomes including hHF.

Profiling of ~ 5000 proteins was performed in frozen serum (not previously thawed) collected at baseline (enrollment) and at 12 month follow-up. Profiling was performed utilizing the SomaScan assay (SomaLogic Inc., Boulder, USA). The design and performance characteristics of this assay have been previously described23,24. This assay uses DNA-based binding reagents (modified aptamers) to quantify, with high specificity, the availability of binding epitopes on plasma proteins23,25enabling high throughput relative quantification of thousands of proteins in small amounts of sample. Samples were run in three dilutions to ensure dynamic range in serum. Eleven control replicates from three control lots were included in each 96-sample plate and five calibrator replicates per run were used with a reference standard. Three quality control (QC) replicates were also included per run with a reference standard to evaluate the accuracy of the assay after data standardization. Prior studies have established the specificity of the majority of the SomaScan reagents using affinity-capture experiments and orthogonal means (i.e., presence ofcisgenetic variants and validation by mass spectrometry)26,27.

Proteomics data first underwent QC procedures and standard normalization28using adaptive median normalization by maximum likelihood, scaling the total fluorescence from the experimental sample based on point and variance estimates from a population control set as previously done. This procedure identified 5.1% of samples for having normalization scale factors outside recommended ranges and were removed from analysis. Unsupervised principal component analysis (PCA) with varimax rotation was performed on 4979 proteins (baseline samples) passing QC measures as a means of dimensionality reduction to reduce the burden of multiple comparisons and identify potential shared biologic pathways. Before PCA, to address considerations of skewness without compromising sample size and maintain relative rankings, individual protein outlier values (defined as being +/− 6 median absolute deviation beyond the median value for the entire cohort for that protein) were k nearest neighbor imputed (k = 10 (package impute from BioConductor). Across all individual protein levels at both time points for this study (baselinen= 10311509, follow-upn= 109792; 1%) were considered outliers and were knn imputed. All protein values were log-transformed after imputation and prior to inclusion in PCA. To calculate factor scores, baseline samples were scaled and these mean/ scales were used to scale follow up samples. The Kaiser criterion (eigenvalue > 1) was used to identify PCA protein factors for inclusion in analysis. Each PCA factor is a weighted sum of all proteins for each participant. Proteins with an absolute value factor load ≥ 0.4 were considered as heavily loaded and thus composing a given factor and were analyzed as individual proteins for significant PCA factors. PCA factors with only one protein heavily loaded in a given factor were not analyzed as a factor but instead as the individual heavily loaded protein.

For discovery analyses, ANOVA was used to determine differences in PCA protein factor levels across the three EF groups (HFpEF, HFmrEF and HFrEF) and adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Benjamini Hochberg false discovery rate [FDR]p< 0.1 at level of factors (Supplemental Fig.1). Individual proteins heavily loaded on PCA factors significant from the ANOVA were then analyzed in subsequent sensitivity analyses (nominal significance i.e.p< 0.05) as follows: (1) ANOVA across EF groups; (2) of proteins significant in ANOVA, unadjusted pairwise comparisons using t-tests with pooled SD between the three EF groups; (3) significant individual proteins were then assessed in pairwise multivariable model adjusted for age, sex, race, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obesity by enrollment body mass index (BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2), and enrollment hemoglobin A1C; (4) Cox proportional hazard models were constructed to assess for relationship between baseline protein and change in protein level (baseline to 12 month; adjusting for baseline protein level) with time-to-incident hHF; for proteins violating the proportional hazards assumption, a parametric accelerated failure time (AFT) model was constructed for comparison; the hazard ratio (HR) was calculated by a one unit increase in the log-transformed protein level; adjusted HR (aHR) calculated with same adjustment variables from above analysis #3; and (5) the effect of EQW on protein levels was assessed using linear mixed effects models inclusive of terms for treatment arm (EQW vs. placebo), protein timepoint (baseline, 12 months) and an interaction term (treatment*timepoint). For incident HF hospitalization analysis with change in protein level over time, only events occurring after 12-month follow-up were included.

Based on results from pairwise multivariable models (sensitivity analysis #3), individual proteins were classified into patterns for being similar or discordant between EF groups (i.e. based on nominal p-value, proteins not significantly different between two EF groups were considered similar between those groups; proteins significantly different between two EF groups were considered discordant) and by whether protein levels were significantly higher/lower in one EF group (or increasing/decreasing significantly across groups).

Overrepresentation analysis (ORA) using the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) was performed to highlight biologic pathways enriched among individual proteins, starting with those with multivariable ANOVAp-value < 0.05 among EF groups, and narrowing to those with (1) similar levels in HFmrEF and HFpEF (multivariable pairwisep-value ≥ 0.05) and, separately, (2) similar levels in HFmrEF and HFrEF (multivariable pairwisep-value ≥ 0.05). ORA was conducted using a hypergeometric test of these specific proteins on a background of all tested proteins. A pathway was considered significantly enriched if its nominalp-value < 0.05. Two gene collections (Hallmark [50 gene sets] and Canonical Pathways derived from the KEGG pathway database [CP: KEGG; 186 gene sets]) were utilized29. Primary biological domains (i.e. extracellular matrix/space regulation, endothelial-mesenchymal transition, angiogenesis, etc.) for this analysis were defined by presence in a combination of multiple sources including ‘Biological Processes’ and Cellular Components’ of Gene Ontology, biological pathways defined by the Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB), and several HF-biomarker literature sources5,30–33.

All methods were carried out in accordance with relevant guidelines and regulations. The EXSCEL study protocol was approved by the ethics committee at each participating site, as described in the primary trial manuscript21. All patients provided written informed consent in the parent study and for use of their stored biospecimens for future use.

Among EXSCEL participants with available biospecimens (N= 5668, 38.4% of total EXSCEL population),N= 1199 (21.2%) of individuals had prevalent HF (Supplemental Table1). There were slight differences in the included cohort as compared to other participants from EXSCEL not included including slightly higher age, higher percentage of male sex and Caucasian race, a higher burden of cardiovascular disease and cardiovascular medical therapy. Of these,N= 284 (24%) had HFpEF,N= 704 (59%) had HFmrEF, andN= 211 (18%) had HFrEF. Baseline characteristics of the study population overall and by EF group are included in Table1. Baseline medications of participants by EF group are included in Supplemental Table2. Participants with HFmrEF had an overall intermediate demographic and clinical profile compared with participants with HFrEF or HFpEF as follows: participants with HFmrEF were 71% male (compared with 78% of HFrEF and 64% of HFpEF), 90% white (vs. 83% of HFrEF and 95% of HFpEF), and 66% enrolled in Europe (vs. 47% for HFrEF and 82% for HFpEF). Participants with HFmrEF were 41% non-smokers (vs. 60% of HFpEF and 38% of HFrEF) and had an intermediate burden of prior cardiovascular events and coronary disease at baseline, compared to participants with HFrEF or HFpEF (Table1). Participants with HFrEF demonstrated higher rates of HF hospitalization, cardiovascular mortality, and all-cause mortality, compared with those with HFmrEF or HFpEF (Supplemental Table3).

Baseline characteristics of participants by ejection fraction group.

PCA with varimax rotation ofN= 4979 proteins resulted in 625 protein factors; 128 factors had multiple heavily loaded proteins and 497 factors had a single protein heavily loaded on the factor (Supplemental Table4). These PCA factors explain 80.3% of the variance in the data. Scree plot included as Supplemental Fig.2. PC-PC plots color-coded by plate run dates (split into three plots for ease of visualization) demonstrated no batch effects detected in our samples (Supplemental Fig.3). Factors heavily loaded with a single protein were analyzed as individual proteins (i.e. unweighted). In discovery analyses across all protein factors/proteins, ANOVA (FDR adjusted for multiple comparisons considering 625 comparisons) across the three EF groups identified 24 PCA protein factors that were significantly different (FDR < 0.1) across EF groups, of which 16 were heavily loaded with only one protein and thus analyzed as individual proteins (Table2). The PCA protein factors with multiple loaded proteins were comprised of 261 (factor 4), 12 (factor 37), 7 (factor 38), 14 (factor 67), 4 (factor 78), 6 (factor 108), 2 (factor 149), and 2 (factor 381) heavily loaded proteins respectively. Of note, NT-proBNP was loaded on factor 381 (factor loading 0.488).

Factors/proteins significantly associated with EF group by FDR-adjusted ANOVA across the three EF groups.

In analyses of individual proteins most heavily loaded on these PCA protein factors, 293 individual proteins remained significantly associated with EF groups. The majority of these proteins (n= 270, 92%) remained significant in multivariable models with strongest results for NTpro-BNP (individual protein nominalp-value 4.16e-26), BNP, cystatin-C, and collagen alpha-1 (XXVIII) chain (COL28A1).

Patterns across EF groups were defined based on nominal significance (p< 0.05) of multivariable pairwise comparisons between groups. As above, 270 individual proteins from PCA factors remained significantly different across EF groups in multivariable models. The majority (236, 87%) of these proteins were differentially higher in one EF group (with the other two groups not having different levels), while eight (3%) of these proteins demonstrated a graded increasing pattern across declining EF groups.

The dominant pattern across groups was of higher levels of proteins in HFrEF as compared to both HFmrEF and HFpEF, with similar protein levels in HFmrEF as compared with HFpEF (n= 203 proteins, 75.2%; Figs.1and2, Supplemental Fig.4). This pattern included previously established biomarkers of troponin T and cystatin-C, as well as proteins residing in multiple biologic domains including extracellular matrix/space regulation (e.g. COL28A1, TNC), angiogenesis (e.g. VEGFa, VEGFd), humoral immune response (e.g. B2M), inflammation (e.g. TNF ligands/receptors), and growth factor response/regulation (e.g. IGFBPs). Eight proteins (3% of all proteins, including MMP-9, cysteine-rich secretory protein LCCL domain-containing 2, and prokineticin-2) demonstrated a pattern with significantly different levels in HFpEF as compared with both HFrEF and HFmrEF (with non-different levels in HFrEF vs. HFmrEF; Supplemental Fig.5). Eight proteins (3%, including selenoprotein W, CD48 antigen, programmed cell death 1 ligand 2) demonstrated a pattern with lower levels in HFmrEF compared to both other groups (Supplemental Fig.6). Eight proteins (3%) showed a steadily increasing pattern of protein levels across declining EF groups (i.e. higher levels in HFrEF, intermediate in HFmrEF and lowest in HFpEF) including NTpro-BNP, hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 2 (TIMD3), neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (lipocalin 2), and hepatocyte growth factor (Supplemental Fig.7).

Heatmap of mean protein levels significantly different across HF groups.

To further understand the biologic pathways represented by these proteins, overrepresentation analyses (ORA) were performed with significant individual proteins, which revealed several pathways (Table3) to be significantly enriched among proteins with similar levels between HFmrEF and HFpEF (translating to 766 of 4755 genes, all with nominalp< 0.05) including pathways of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (nominalp< 0.001, 38 genes including those associated with IGF binding proteins, TNC, TNF receptors, and VEGFa), ECM receptor interaction, complement and coagulation cascades, cell adhesion molecules, and TGF beta signaling. ORA demonstrated fewer pathways (Supplemental Table5) to be significantly enriched among proteins with similar expression levels between HFmrEF and HFrEF (120 among 4755 genes, all with nominalp< 0.05). These pathways included hematopoietic cell lineage, dilated cardiomyopathy, and ECM receptor interaction.

Overrepresentation analysis for proteins with similar levels in HFmrEF-HFpEF.

HF hospitalization and mortality event rates were higher in participants with HFrEF, but substantial across all EF groups (Supplemental Table3). Baseline levels of the majority of individual proteins significantly associated with EF group also demonstrated association with time-to-incident hHF in multivariable analysis (92% of 270 proteins, all fdrp-value < 0.05; Fig.3). As expected, NT-proBNP levels at baseline were associated with time-to-incident hHF (NT-proBNP, multivariable HR [aHR] 3.13 [95% CI: 2.68–3.67],p< 0.0001). Other proteins demonstrated strong effects including COL28A1 (aHR 13.99 [95% CI 8.90-21.99], nominalp< 0.0001), cystatin-C (aHR 13.54 [95% CI: 8.25–22.22],p< 0.0001), TNC [aHR 8.61 [95% CI: 5.39–13.75],p< 0.0001), tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 1 A (aHR 6.54 [95% CI: 4.31–9.94],p< 0.0001), and NT-proBNP (aHR 3.13 [95% CI: 2.68–3.67],p< 0.0001). Notably, each of these proteins had demonstrated a pattern of higher levels in HFrEF and similar levels in HFmrEF/HFpEF, except for NTpro-BNP, which after multivariable adjustment, showed a graded increasing pattern across the three EF groups. Results after scaling protein levels demonstrated the same 249 significant proteins with variations in exact hazard ratios and confidence intervals (Supplemental Fig.8).

Volcano plot of results of multivariable Cox proportional hazards models for association between baseline protein expression and time-to-incident heart failure hospitalization (hHF).

Given the potential clinical utility of understanding how changes in these biologic pathways may presage HF development, we then examined whether change in protein levels from baseline to 12 months was associated with time-to-incident hHF. Twenty four proteins were associated with time-to-incident hHF (i.e. events after 12-month follow-up) including NT-proBNP (multivariable HR 1.85 [1.37–2.51],p= 0.005), transmembrane emp24 domain-containing protein 10 (TMED10, HR 5.64 [2.46–12.93],p= 0.004), TNC (HR 5.82 [3.09–10.95],p< 0.001), and epidermal growth factor receptor (HR 0.02 [0.003–0.12],p= 0.003) (Fig.4). Seventeen proteins (including NT-proBNP, BNP, transmembrane emp24 domain-containing protein 10, matrilin-2, and TNC) demonstrated higher risk with an increase in mean protein levels, with the other proteins showing higher risk with a decrease in mean protein levels (Supplemental Figs.9and10). Results after scaling protein levels demonstrated the same 24 significant proteins with variations in exact hazard ratios and confidence intervals (Supplemental Fig.11).

Volcano plot of results of multivariable Cox proportional hazards models for association between change in protein expression over 12 months and time-to-incident heart failure hospitalization hHF).

To understand whether the proteins we identified that differentiate EF groups are modified by EQW therapy, we then conducted linear mixed models and evaluation of interaction between treatment and timepoint on protein levels. Levels of 111 (41%) of proteins changed from baseline to 12 months differentially by EQW treatment as compared with placebo (nominal interactionp< 0.05, Fig.5). The majority (84/111, 76%) of these proteins increased to a greater degree in the EQW arm as compared with placebo. The minority (27/111, 24%) of these proteins were reduced to a greater degree in the EQW arm as compared with placebo; baseline levels of 26 of these proteins were associated with higher risk of hHF (including TNC and NT-proBNP). These results suggest that these 26 proteins reporting at baseline on higher risk of incident hHF are beneficially modified by EQW therapy. TNC had also demonstrated an increased risk for hHF with increase in protein level from baseline to 12 months.

Select plots of interaction between treatment vs. placebo and change in protein (baseline to 12 month). *Results from multiple Somamer reagents targeting different epitopes of theTenascin-C protein are included here.

In summary, across our multiple analyses, several proteins were identified as (1) differentially expressed across LVEF HF subtypes, (2) associated with incident hHF (either as baseline protein levels, change in levels, or both), and (3) modified by the glucagon-like peptide receptor agonist (GLP-1 RA), exenatide. These included NT-proBNP, TNC, TMED10, EGFR, TPPP2, CgA, HSPB6, and MATN2.

In this multinational, carefully adjudicated clinical trial cohort, we report herein the largest and most comprehensive proteomics analysis of HF across EF. Specifically, we find that the majority of protein levels measured were similar between HFmrEF and HFpEF. Biologic pathways represented by these proteins highlight the role of extracellular matrix regulation, angiogenesis, inflammation, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition. We also find that the majority of proteins reporting on differences in EF were also associated with incident hHF and many appear to be beneficially modified by the GLP-1 RA exenatide. These protein patterns and associations are hypothesis-generating for potential pharmacologic targets for the management of HF and concomitant T2DM. These findings suggest that HFmrEF may be more biologically similar to HFpEF and suggest that clinical and outcome differences seen in some prior secondary/subset and registry studies of HFmrEF8–12may not be related to underlying biologic differences.

This dominant pattern across EF groups (similar protein levels in HFmrEF and HFpEF) was driven primarily by proteins with higher mean levels in individuals with HFrEF, including established biomarkers such as troponin T and cystatin-C; NT-proBNP was also higher in HFrEF but with a graded increase across EF as discussed below. The majority of these proteins were also prognostic for incident hHF, and several were pharmacologically significantly modified by EQW (including troponin T and NT-proBNP). Further, overrepresentation analyses revealed several pathways to be significantly enriched among proteins with different levels in HFrEF and similar levels between HFmrEF and HFpEF including pathways of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT, including genes associated with IGF binding proteins, TNC, TNF receptors, and VEGFa), ECM receptor interaction, complement and coagulation cascades, cell adhesion molecules, and TGF beta signaling.

Notably, the pathophysiologic domain of EMT, the top pathway in the overrepresentation analysis, was overexpressed in this pattern in alignment with prior HF studies in animal and translational models34–38and smaller human proteomics studies39. This underscores its potential role in HF for the first time to our knowledge in a large, clinical cohort of human patients with HF. Tenascin C, a key extracellular matrix protein that plays a role in EMT among other processes, demonstrated this expression pattern in HFrEF compared to HFmrEF/HFpEF. Tenascin C has known pleiotropic effects but appears to primarily act as a proinflammatory and profibrotic modulator in HF, thereby worsening adverse myocardial remodeling40–42, and has been shown to be elevated in both HFrEF and HFpEF43. In this study, both baseline level and change in tenascin C predicted HF hospitalization and changed beneficially with EQW, demonstrating a robust profile of prognostic and modifiable biomarker that varies by EF. Interestingly, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) demonstrated the opposite of this dominant pattern (i.e. higher mean levels in individuals with HFpEF or HFmrEF, as compared with HFrEF). This is consistent with one of the primary findings from one of the few other smaller studies comparing plasma proteome of HFpEF vs. ischemic HFrEF6. Lower baseline levels and a decrease from baseline to 12 months in EGFR levels were also associated with higher risk of incident hHF and EGFR levels were modified by EQW therapy (but in a potentially unfavorable direction, i.e. decreased in intervention arm). These data support further investigation into the role of EGFs and EGFRs in heart failure, a pathophysiologic phenomenon that appears complex and incompletely understood to date. While a degree of EGF/EGFR activity is normal for cardiac development and functioning44,45, overexpression of EGF may be associated with CV disease, atrial fibrillation, and HF44–46. Further, EGFR overexpression in mouse models may promote HOCM-like phenotypes with regression of this phenotype by EGFR inhibition47. On the other hand, blocking EGFR signaling with tyrosine kinase inhibition in humans is associated with development of HF in rare cases48. Findings from the present study are unable to determine causality or fully elucidate the role of EGFR signaling, but support the prognostic role of EGFR in patients with HF, particularly those with HFmrEF/HFpEF.

Other protein patterns across LVEF categories were uncommon (< 3% each), including the pattern of graded progression across EF groups with significant differences between HFrEF, HFmrEF, and HFpEF. This included the established biomarker, NTpro-BNP, as well as proteins of immune regulation (hepatitis A virus cellular receptor 2) and those reflecting renal injury (e.g. neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin, a previously recognized biomarker with mixed evidence in HF49–52among others. Properdin was the only protein to demonstrate the relationship of lower levels in HFrEF, which were associated with increased risk for adverse outcomes (consistent with prior studies)53and a graded increase in level as EF increased. All 8 proteins were higher in HFrEF and each of these proteins were also associated with hHF risk, except for trypsin-1 and trypsin-3.

Lastly, several proteins (n= 8) involved in redox homeostasis/antioxidant processes (selenoprotein W) and immune regulation (CD48 antigen, immunoglobulin M, and programmed cell death 1 ligand 2) showed lower expression in HFmrEF compared with HFrEF/HFpEF, and lower levels were associated with lower risk for subsequent hHF from some of these proteins. Additionally, 6 proteins demonstrated significantly higher levels in both HFmrEF and HFrEF compared to HFpEF including prokineticin-2, which was associated with increased hHF risk at higher levels in this study. In addition to its neurologic and gastrointestinal effects, prokineticin-2 has also been shown to play a role in cardiac hypertrophy in hypertensive pressure-overload mice models54. Although prokineticin-2 was not differentially reduced by EQW treatment in this study, this protein pathway may warrant further investigation in HF pathophysiology. Two proteins (calpstatin and ADA19) were elevated in HFpEF as compared to similar levels in HFrEF/HFmrEF, but neither was associated with incident hHF.

This study also adds to the growing literature describing biologic mechanisms leading to the development and progression of HF. These previous studies have identified dominant biologic domains with considerable overlap to the present study including the domains of inflammation/apoptosis, growth factor binding, and extracellular matrix remodeling (and related angiogenesis processes)6,55–58. Further, this analysis extends and builds upon findings from similar prior, smaller studies studying the biology of the EF spectrum4–6,14,15,43,59. A few early studies suggested that HFmrEF may have an intermediate biomarker profile between HFrEF and HFpEF5,15. For instance, one study demonstrated the top upregulated pathways in HFmrEF were related to neutrophil degranulation, leucocyte migration, and DNA-binding transcription factor activity, and this was intermediate between the dominant biological pathways of HFrEF and HFpEF15. Another study found only BNP, KIM-1, RBC, and Hgb significantly associated with EF and intermediate in HFmrEF5. These analyses had several limitations including being based on a relatively small number of proteins (< 100)5,15.

Consistent with our findings, a more recent but smaller study analyzing a smaller number of proteins (n= 1129 using the SomaLogic platform) in 173 patients found that HFmrEF was more biologically similar to HFpEF, although the degree of this association was affected by whether patients have HFmrEF with recovered EF (i.e. previously HFrEF) or unchanged/stable EF4. The analysis noted several differences in biological themes across LVEF groups such as within the domain of ‘VEGF-A/angiogenesis’ including the proteins angiopoietin-2 and VEGF-A and within the domain of growth factor signaling including insulin-like growth factor-binding proteins. Each of these signals was overexpressed in HFrEF and similar in HFmrEF and HFpEF4, which is consistent with our findings. On the other hand, the analysis also noted prominent MMP-activity differentially in HFrEF patients4which was not as notable in our study. This analysis also described a few overexpression signals in HFmrEF (complement/opsonization related) and separately in HFpEF (NK-cell markers, VEGF-C/angiogenesis)4, which were not noted in our study; still, these signals were fewer than in HFrEF, consistent with our results. Taken together, the findings of our present study and prior analyses suggest that HFmrEF may be a heterogenous biological entity (partly driven by preceding EF trend) but that patients with HFmrEF predominantly demonstrate biological similarities to those with HFpEF.

The results of the present analysis also suggest that unique biologic patterns associated with HFmrEF, HFpEF, or HFmrEF/HFpEF (e.g. EF > 40%) compared to HFrEF are fairly narrow (18 unique proteins with higher levels). It should be emphasized that this result does not indicate that these biologic processes (e.g. ECM regulation, endothelial function/angiogenesis, inflammation) are not present in HFmrEF/HFpEF compared to non-HF patients; several prior analyses have demonstrated the role of these processes in HFmrEF/HFpEF60−64. But rather, the present analysis finding indicates these processes (as reflected by systemic protein expression) are more highly expressed in HFrEF as compared to HFmrEF/HFpEF, in patients with concomitant DM. Several factors may explain this finding. First, HFmrEF and HFpEF are heterogenous entities and our analyses likely included HF with recovered EF, low risk early HFpEF, and HF with declining EF (55–45%) along with a range of HFpEF phenotypes (which we were not able to differentiate). Second, the HF cohort in this diabetes trial may be distinct from routinely encountered patients with HF; for instance, HFpEF patients are typically older with higher burden of DM compared to patients with HFrEF13and, in this study, HF patients across EF spectrum were similarly aged and all had DM. Third, residual confounding by factors unadjusted for in the analyses, such as renal function or burden of ischemic vs. non-ischemic cardiomyopathy, may have affected the strength of protein elevations in the HFrEF cohort. Still, it should be noted that the degree of rigor in covariable adjustment is higher in the present study than in previous gold standard studies in this area4,15. Within the context of these possible limitations, this study’s findings suggest that EF, when applied to a broad chronic HF population, has limited biologic specificity as EF increases above 40% (only ~ 0.4% of all proteins studied with unique overexpression in HFmrEF/HFpEF). Taken together, these findings support this movement to expand HF phenotyping and classification beyond EF, particularly when considering patients with EF > 40%, to inform development and testing of targeted therapies.

Lastly, the results of this analysis also serve as hypothesis-generating findings regarding the molecular effects of contemporary GLP-1 RA. Over 100 proteins changed from baseline to 12 months differentially with EQW treatment as compared with placebo. Approximately 20 of these proteins were associated with higher risk of hHFandreduced to a greater degree in the EQW arm as compared with placebo; these included NTpro-BNP, TNC, angiopoietin-2, TNFrSF6, and C1q receptor protein, among others. These proteins reflected molecular pathways including myocardial fibrosis/remodeling, myocardial stretch, angiogenesis/endothelial dysfunction, inflammation, apoptosis, and immune regulation, and suggest the benefits of GLP-1 RA therapy may be associated with alterations in these molecular pathways. Further studies are required to determined definitive causal molecular pathways in the effects of GLP-1 RAs and variations in the effects of different modern GLP-1 RAs.

Notably, the present study included the largest combination of cohort sample size (n= 1199 participants) and proteomics panel scale (4979 proteins). Further, to our knowledge, this is the first study to combine this scale of biologic investigation and include prognostication bychange in proteinlevels across three EF groups with additional interaction analyses by treatment (EQW). However, it is important to note several limitations of our study. First, we used EF categorization as collected and documented in the parent EXSCEL trial, which defined a ‘mid-range’ EF as 40–55%, since individual level EF results were not available; these EF strata differ slightly from the HF EF categories more recently established since the initiation of the EXSCEL trial, including the category of HFmrEF with EF 41–49%1,2. However, the variability of EF assessment makes it unlikely that such slight changes in EF thresholds would dramatically alter protein patterns evaluated on a large-scale as in this study. Continuous values of ejection fraction and serial values were not available in EXSCEL so we were unable to assess ejection fraction as a continuous variable or sub-categories of HFmrEF/HFpEF (i.e. recovered vs. unchanged); both of these analyses would be valuable in future studies. EXSCEL enrolled participants with DM with a high proportion with prevalent CAD, thus our results may not be generalizable to other populations with HF. Additionally, adjustment variables for our analyses were limited to those collected in the parent trial, which have intrinsic limitations (i.e. definition of BMI alone with regional adiposity metrics) and may be affected by threshold selections (i.e. obesity definition threshold of BMI 30 kg/m2). Finally, we used a broad HF definition; protein differences might be more manifest in a more strictly defined HFmrEF/HFpEF population (i.e. with additional requirements of natriuretic peptide elevation and/or invasively confirmed elevated filling pressures).

In this large clinical trial, we found that most proteins were similar between HFmrEF and HFpEF and differentially higher in HFrEF in patients with T2DM. These results suggest that HFmrEF may be more biologically similar to HFpEF and highlight novel prognostic and modifiable biomarkers that vary by EF.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

We thank the participants of the EXSCEL clinical trial for their participation.