This paper introduces the chaotic enhanced leader slime mold algorithm (CELSMA), an advanced bio-inspired optimization technique aimed at addressing high-dimensional engineering challenges. Building on the traditional slime mold algorithm (SMA), CELSMA implements a multi-leader strategy that utilizes three candidate leaders to enhance both exploration and exploitation capabilities. Additionally, CELSMA harnesses the ergodic and non-repetitive characteristics of chaotic maps to improve global search behavior and reduce the risk of premature convergence to local optima. The proposed algorithm is applied to the size optimization of truss structures under frequency constraints, a computationally intensive task due to the repeated evaluation of structural eigenvalues. To tackle this issue, the largest eigenvalues of sparse matrix (LESM) technique is employed to significantly decrease computational time, facilitating the practical optimization of large-scale truss systems. Comprehensive numerical experiments were conducted on large-scale dome truss structures and benchmarked against established metaheuristic algorithms. The results clearly indicate that the CELSMA-LESM approach achieves superior accuracy and convergence speed, consistently yielding optimal solutions with fewer iterations. The CELSMA source code is publicly available at:https://github.com/nut123456/CELSMA.git.

Achieving robust dynamic behavior in structural systems often requires careful consideration of natural frequency constraints, especially under low frequency excitations1. A primary objective in such designs concern is avoiding resonance within the operational bandwidth, as the intrinsic vibrational characteristics, governed by the structure’s natural frequencies and corresponding mode shapes significantly affect performance, especially through fundamental modes. These modal characteristics, particularly the lower modes, are essential for suppressing resonance effects. Consequently, extensive research has addressed simultaneous optimization of structural size and geometry, especially for truss and frame structures subjected to frequency-based constraints. However, such optimization problems remain challenging due to their nonlinear, non-convex nature, and the trade-off between minimizing structural weight and satisfying dynamic requirements. Conventional gradient-based solvers often suffer from poor convergence and high computational cost. To overcome these issues, metaheuristic algorithms, known for their gradient-free nature and global search capabilities—have emerged as powerful alternatives2.

Notably, Lingyun et al.3introduced genetic algorithms for truss optimization under dynamic constraints, prompting a surge in algorithmic approaches for frequency-constrained design. especially for dynamic load conditions like wind and earthquakes4. Such constraints suppress excessive vibration and prevent resonance5; however, challenges remain due to potential mode switching and the computational burden of repeated eigenvalue evaluations6. To address these complexities, many researchers employ methods capable of efficiently navigating high-dimensional and multimodal search spaces. These algorithms often require multiple structural analyses and eigenvalue computations, making them suitable for large-scale optimization tasks7.

In recent years, nature-inspired algorithms—drawing from biological systems, physical principles, and social behavior8. For example, the niche genetic hybrid algorithm (NGHA) merges genetic algorithms with simplex search, while the cyclical parthenogenesis algorithm (CPA) mimics aphid reproduction9. Other examples include the charged system search (CSS)10the colliding bodies optimization (CBO)11and the big bang-big crunch (BB-BC) algorithm12. Social- and human-inspired methods such as harmony search (HS)13teaching-learning-based optimization (TLBO)14and forensic-based investigation (FBI)15have also been proposed. Animal-inspired approaches, like the crow search algorithm (CSA)16and enhanced colliding bodies optimization (ECBO)17offer additional diversity. Probabilistic models such as the generalized normal distribution optimization (GNDO)18further broaden the landscape of available tools. Among these, swarm intelligence algorithms such as particle swarm optimization (PSO)19are widely recognized for their simplicity and effectiveness. While powerful, standard PSO is known to suffer from premature convergence. This has led to many enhanced variants, such as democratic PSO (DPSO)20harmony search-based aging leader and challengers PSO (HALC-PSO)21and phasor PSO (PPSO)22which integrates sine and cosine dynamics into velocity updates. Other notable enhancements include comprehensive learning PSO (CLPSO)23,24its chaotic variant C-HCLPSO25fully informed PSO (FIPSO)26and cooperative PSO (CPSO)27.

More recently, Li et al.28proposed the slime mold algorithm (SMA), which simulates the adaptive foraging behavior of slime molds. While promising, SMA faces the common challenge of balancing exploration and exploitation, a balance critical for achieving global convergence while avoiding local optima. The No Free Lunch theorem29,30underscores the importance of ongoing research into algorithmic improvements, including the integration of chaotic dynamics for enhanced performance.

To overcome these challenges, we propose the chaotic enhanced leader slime mold algorithm (CELSMA), which augments the standard SMA using a triple-leader strategy combined with chaotic dynamics. In addition, the sparse matrix eigenvalue (LESM) technique is integrated to address the computational bottleneck of repeated eigenvalue extraction. Extensive numerical studies on large-scale dome truss structures validate the efficiency, scalability, and robustness of the proposed CELSMA-LESM framework.

The motivation for developing this framework stems from two persistent challenges in structural optimization: (1) the difficulty of maintaining global search capability in the presence of complex, multi-modal landscapes, and (2) the heavy computational load associated with solving high-dimensional eigenvalue problems repeatedly. As engineering applications scale in both size and complexity particularly in structures subjected to dynamic loads such as earthquakes and wind the need for algorithms that are both efficient and robust become increasingly urgent. Although many methods have achieved success, they often suffer from limited scalability and a propensity for premature convergence when tackling complex dynamic design problems.

CELSMA addresses a significant methodological gap by integrating the adaptive intelligence of slime mold behavior with the ergodic properties of chaotic systems and the numerical efficiency of sparse matrix eigenvalue extraction. The combined CELSMA-LESM framework effectively tackles real-world, high-dimensional problems that would otherwise be computationally intractable or prone to suboptimal convergence. Extensive experiments conducted on dome truss structures of varying scales showcase the framework’s robustness, scalability, and enhanced accuracy in solving complex structural optimization problems under frequency constraints.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section “Optimization problem” formulates the frequency-constrained structural model. Section “SMA and LSMA” introduces the baseline slime mold algorithm and its multi-leader extension. The proposed chaotic-enhanced version, CELSMA, is detailed in Section “CELSMA”, while the selection and application of chaotic maps are discussed in Section “Chaotic Maps for Selection”. Section “Illustrative examples” presents numerical validations, followed by performance evaluation and discussion. Finally, Section “Conclusions” summarizes the key findings and outlines potential directions for future research.

whereis the material density,is the length of elementi-th member, and,are the lower and upper bounds for each group area. The constraints ensure that thej-th andk-th modal frequenciesand, computed from structural analysis, lie within their allowable rangesandto prevent resonance.

whereandare the computed modal frequencies, whileanddenote their allowable bounds. The computational efficiency of this process is highly dependent on whether the matrices are treated as dense or sparse, as dense matrix operations typically become infeasible for large-scale systems33. To mitigate this issue, the present study adopts a sparse matrix strategy. Efficient handling of large, sparse stiffness and mass matrices is particularly critical for systems with limited degrees of freedom, which are common in truss structures. As detailed in Code A, the proposed algorithm leverages matrix sparsity to substantially reduce both storage requirements and computational cost. By employing the LESM technique, dominant eigenvalues and corresponding mode shapes are extracted with improved speed and reduced memory usage. This enhancement is crucial for high-dimensional structural design problems, enabling the integration of advanced metaheuristic algorithms without compromising accuracy or computational efficiency. This enhancement is essential for high-dimensional design problems, thus enabling the deployment of advanced optimization algorithms without sacrificing accuracy or computational feasibility34.

SMA is a population-based metaheuristic algorithm inspired by the foraging behavior of Physarum polycephalum35a true slime mold known for its decentralized decision-making and efficient nutrient path finding abilities. In its natural environment, the organism forms vein-like networks to explore and exploit nutrient sources, adapting its search based on cytoplasmic oscillations regulated through chemotactic feedback. From a computational perspective, SMA emulates this adaptive mechanism to navigate complex search spaces. Individuals (slime molds) adjust their positions based on internal weight factors that reflect their fitness and the distribution of global population. The transition between exploration and exploitation is dynamically controlled by a bio-oscillator model that simulates the variation of cytoplasmic flow under fluctuating environmental conditions.

For each agenti, the variablesanddenote the minimum and maximum bounds,Z= 0.03 is a small constant controlling the global randomization probability.,are two randomly selected individuals. The best global solution is.is the fitness-based weight.are random vectors derived from the bio-oscillator model.=[−b,b] is parameter decreasing from 1 to 0 (b=),= maximum of iterations, and a random scalaru(0, 1).

whereis the fitness of the current solution andis the best fitness found so far.

whererepresents the fitness values arranged in increasing order, such thatis the worst fitness found so far,r⁓u(0,1), andεis a small constant to prevent division by 0.

whererepresent the positions of the top three individuals.,are randomly selected individuals.

The LSMA update rule arose from the grey wolf optimizer (GWO)37and the equilibrium optimizer (EO)38utilizing a tripartite leadership mechanism. The leadersL1,L2, andL3correspond to the best, second-best, and third-best individuals, respectively. This strategy improves the balance between exploration and exploitation by expanding the search direction diversity and enhancing convergence behavior.

The chaotic valuerchaos∈[0,1] plays a critical role in determining whether the agent prioritizes global exploration, leader-guided contraction, or local refinement. By replacing traditional pseudorandom number generators with chaotic mappings, the algorithm introduces richer dynamics and avoids premature convergence. As shown in Fig.1; Table1, which summarizes the mathematical expressions of chaotic maps, different chaotic maps produce distinct convergence trajectories and search dynamics. Overall, the use of chaos enhances consistency, diversity, and robustness in avoiding local optima.

Exploring chaotic dynamics through randomization across ten maps.

Chaos theory’s toolbox: mathematical expressions for exploring dynamical systems41–43.

whereIndex∈ {1,., 10} specifies the chaotic map type (e.g., Logistic, Tent, Sine), and the final argument scales the output to unit range. Each map recursively generates a sequence {x1,x2, …,xT} from an initial seedx0∈ (0, 1), governed by its nonlinear recurrence relation. The implemented maps include Logistic, Tent, Chebyshev, Singer, Sine, Piecewise, Sinusoidal, Circle, Iterative, and Gauss maps, each offering distinct dynamic behaviors41–43.

These maps are encapsulated within a modularchaosfunction, which returnsrchaos(t) given a map index and iteration number. To promote behavioral diversity, CELSMA can operate in two modes: (1) Fixed-map mode: A single chaotic map is selected at the start and used throughout. (2) Random-chaos mode: A different map is randomly selected at each iteration.

To systematically investigate the role of chaotic dynamics, ten algorithmic variants—CELSMA1 through CELSMA10—are constructed. Each variant uses a fixed chaotic map for the entire optimization run. For instance, CELSMA1 uses the Chebyshev map, CELSMA2 uses the Circle map, and CELSMA10 uses the Tent map. These variants are benchmarked under identical conditions to evaluate their effects on solution quality, convergence stability, and robustness. Additionally, the random-chaos variant allows map switching at each iteration. This dynamic switching enhances ergodicity and introduces temporal variation into the search process, leading to improved global performance.

The full integration of chaotic maps into the algorithmic framework is visualized in Fig.2, which outlines the CELSMA flow, including chaotic map selection, leader-based updates, adaptive contraction, and fitness evaluation. The diagram also illustrates how the selected chaotic map influences both the sampling behavior and the update dynamics across iterations.

CELSMA enhances the original SMA by incorporating chaotic dynamics to improve both exploration and convergence. The computational complexity of CELSMA is governed by the population sizeN, problem dimensionD, and maximum number of iterationsItermax. The initialization phase requiresO(N.D). In each iteration, boundary checking and fitness evaluation costO(N.D), sorting takesO(NlogN), chaotic weight update and position update contributeO(N.D)each. Therefore, the total per iteration complexity isO(N.D + N.logN), and the overall time complexity isO(ItermaxN.(D+ logN)).

Large-scale example: 600, 1180, and 1410-bar dome truss.

In Table2, relevant material properties, additional mass, cross-sectional area bounds, and frequency constraints for each example, are given. An evaluation, using statistical metrics, such as the best, average weight, standard deviation (SD), and analysis time, is carried out. To maintain fairness in comparison, only the optimal design from the best run is reported. The population-based approaches employed 20 particles, while the total number of iterations was determined based on the size of the problem. Each algorithm was implemented 50 times per problem. The proposed CELSMA was implemented in MATLAB, with sparse matrix routines employed to accelerate eigenvalue computations in large-scale cases. All simulations were executed on an Intel Core i7-14700 F CPU 5.40 GHz with 32GB RAM.

This example investigates the simultaneous size and shape optimization of a dome truss structure composed of 52 members and 21 nodes, with dynamic constraints imposed on natural frequencies as detailed in Table2and illustrated in Fig.3. The optimization problem considers 13 design variables, including the cross-sectional areas of eight grouped members and five key nodal coordinates bounded within specific ranges:zA∈ [4, 8],xB∈ [0, 4],zB∈ [3.7, 7.7],xF∈ [2, 6],zF∈ [2.5, 6.5] m. To simulate realistic loading conditions, each unrestrained node carries an additional 50 kg of non-structural mass.

Example 1: 52-bar truss dome: (a) front view, and (b) top view.

To examine the effect of key control parameters on algorithm performance, a sensitivity analysis was conducted for both CESMA and CELSMA with respect toNpandItermax44.

The number of agents varied over the setNp={2, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30}. As shown in Fig.4(a)–(b), increasingNpenhances convergence speed and solution quality by introducing greater population diversity. However, beyondNp=20, the improvement becomes marginal, indicating that larger populations offer diminishing returns in terms of optimization gain. Therefore,Np=20 can be considered an optimal trade-off between exploration capacity and computational cost.

Convergence behavior of the CESMA and CELSMA algorithms with varyingNp.

Similarly, the effect ofItermax= {250, 500, 750, 1000} was evaluated. Figure5(a)–(b) demonstrates that higher iteration counts yield progressively better solutions, but performance gains tend to plateau beyondItermax= 500. This suggests that 500 iterations strike a good trade-off between computational time and solution refinement.

Convergence behavior of the CESMA and CELSMA with varyingItemax.

To enhance the exploration capability of CESMA and CELSMA, ten distinct chaotic maps were integrated into the initialization and position update mechanisms. Additionally, a random-chaos strategy—in which a different chaotic map is selected at each iteration—was tested as a dynamic baseline45. The convergence trajectories, shown in Fig.6(a–b), reveal that incorporating chaos maps accelerates convergence during early iterations by promoting ergodic and diverse sampling behavior. Among all variants, the random-chaos approach consistently achieved the lowest structural weight and the most stable convergence profile, indicating superior exploration–exploitation trade-offs. This dynamic alternation of chaotic maps per iteration allows the algorithm to adaptively escape local optima and adjust search intensity based on progress. Consequently, the random-chaos strategy is recommended over fixed-map variants across all benchmark cases.

Convergence profiles of the CESMA and CELSMA algorithms with various chaotic map indices.

Optimization was performed using SMA, LSMA, CESMA and the proposed CELSMA algorithm, with a population size ofNp=20 andItermax= 500. As reported in Table3and visualized in Fig.7, the proposed CELSMA algorithm achieved the lowest final truss weight (199.59 kg), outperforming CESMA (199.85 kg), LSMA (201.77 kg), and SMA (202.06 kg). All three slime mold-based methods (CESMA, LSMA, CELSMA) significantly outperformed conventional metaheuristics such as HS32FA32and MPA39confirming their suitability for frequency-constrained structural optimization. From a computational efficiency standpoint, CELSMA maintained a solution time comparable to SMA, LSMA, and CESMA, ranging from 7.25 to 7.45 s, confirming that the introduction of chaotic dynamics does not impose any notable overhead in low-dimensional cases. Although the LESM technique was not applied in this scenario due to the small size of the eigenvalue problem the results suggest that CELSMA can deliver accurate and consistent solutions even without specialized eigenvalue solvers.

Example 1: comparison of optimal solutions for 52-bar truss dome.

Note: HS = harmony search32FA = firefly algorithm32MPA = marine predators’ algorithm39.

Example 1: 52-bar truss dome: (a) optimal layout for 52-bar truss dome, and (b) Achieving convergence.

This benchmark problem involves a dome truss structure with 120 members, as shown in Fig.8. The design objective is to minimize the total structural weight while satisfying the frequency constraints presented in Table2. A heterogeneous mass distribution is considered: a concentrated massm1is applied at node 1, massesm2are distributed across nodes 2 to 13, and massesm3are assigned to the remaining nodes. The structural members are grouped into seven cross-sectional areas, resulting in a grouped sizing problem withng = 7 andne= 120.

Example 2: 120-bar truss dome: (a) front view and (b) top view.

This medium-scale configuration serves as an effective testbed for evaluating the scalability and robustness of the proposed algorithm. The optimization was carried out using three SMA variants SMA, LSMA, and CELSMA with a population size ofNp=20 and a maximum of 250 iterations.

The comparative results are summarized in Table4and visualized in Fig.9. All three variants demonstrated strong performance, consistently yielding optimal or near optimal solutions. CELSMA achieved the best solution with a structural weight of 8731.16 kg, slightly outperforming CESMA (8731.25), LSMA (8731.17 kg) and SMA (8731.88 kg). CELSMA also exhibited the lowest mean weight and smallest standard deviation, indicating greater consistency across independent runs. From a computational perspective, all methods completed within a similar runtime of 6.32 to 7.72 s, confirming that CELSMA’s additional components (e.g., chaotic modulation) do not introduce overhead in medium-scale applications. Compared to other algorithms reported in the literature—such as GNDO18CBO11CSS-BBBC47DPSO20HALC-PSO23and CLPPSO23. CELSMA demonstrated superior solution quality and competitive computational efficiency.

Example 2: comparison of optimal solutions for 120-bar truss dome.

Note: GNDO = generalized normal distribution optimization18CBO = colliding-bodies optimization11CSS-BBBC = charged system search and big bang-big crunch47DPSO = democratic PSO20HALC-PSO23CLPPSO = comprehensive learning phasor PSO23.

Example 2: Achieving convergence for 120-bar truss dome.

The third benchmark problem involves a large-scale structural optimization of a 600-bar single-layer dome truss structure, composed of 216 nodes and constructed from 24 identical substructures. Each substructure consists of 9 nodes and 25 elements, repeated symmetrically through 15-degree rotational increments to form the complete dome configuration visualized in Fig.10. All free nodes in the structure are subjected to an additional non-structural mass of 100 kg, simulating realistic inertial effects under dynamic loading. The optimization task focuses on the sizing of cross-sectional areas, with nodal coordinates fixed throughout the process. The material properties and associated constraints are detailed in Table2, while Table5presents the complete nodal coordinate information. This problem scales the design complexity significantly and serves as a critical test of algorithm robustness, scalability, and computational tractability.

Example 3: 600-bar truss dome: (a) isometric view, (b) top view, and (c) a substructure.

The optimization was executed using SMA, LSMA, CESMA and CELSMA withNp=20 and a maximum of 500 iterations. The performance results are summarized in Table6and visualized in Fig.11. Among the tested algorithms, CELSMA exhibited the best overall performance, achieving the minimum structural weight of 6068.67 kg and the lowest SD of 10.34. This outcome not only demonstrates the precision of CELSMA in converging to global optima, but also its consistency across independent runs. SMA, LSMA and CESMA also performed competitively, producing slightly heavier designs, yet still outperforming several well-known metaheuristics, including FBI15DPSO20VPS46PFJA31BB-BC23and CLPPSO23. A key advantage in this large-scale problem is the use of the LESM technique, which significantly reduced the computational overhead associated with solving repeated eigenvalue problems. All three SMA-based methods benefited from this approach; however, CELSMA achieved the fastest overall runtime, completing the optimization in just 246 s. This notable improvement in efficiency can be attributed to the synergy between the sparsity-aware eigenvalue solution and the chaos-guided adaptive search behavior inherent in CELSMA.

Example 3: comparison of optimal solutions for 600-bar truss dome.

Note: *Node connectivity, FBI = forensic-based investigation15DPSO = democratic PSO20VPS = vibrating particles system46PFJA = parameter free jaya algorithm31BB-BC = big bang-big crunch23CLPPSO = comprehensive learning phasor PSO23.

Example 3: Achieving convergence for 600-bar truss dome.

The fourth benchmark problem addresses the sizing optimization of a large-scale dome truss structure comprising 1180 elements and 400 nodes, generated through repeated 18-degree rotations of a representative substructure consisting of 20 nodes and 59 elements. This configuration results in a geometrically complex and computationally demanding structure visualized in Fig.12. All 390 unrestrained nodes are assigned a non-structural mass of 100 kg to simulate realistic inertial effects under dynamic conditions. The nodal coordinates are fixed throughout the optimization process, in Table7. The problem is formulated with 25 design variables, controlling the cross-sectional areas of the repeated substructural members.

Example 4: 1180-bar truss dome: (a) isometric view, (b) top view, and (c) a substructure.

Example 4: coordinates of reference nodes 1 to 20.

The optimization was conducted using SMA, LSMA, CESMA and CELSMA, with a consistent setup ofNp=20 and a maximum of 500 iterations. Comparative results are presented in Table8; Fig.13. CELSMA achieved the best structural weight of 38,553.06 kg, outperforming all other tested algorithms, including conventional methods such as CBO48VPS46TLBO48and EO48. This result underscores CELSMA’s effectiveness in balancing global search and exploitation pressure, even under high dimensionality and constraint severity.

Comparison of optimal solutions for 1180-bar truss dome.

Note: *Node connectivity, CBO = colliding bodies optimization48VPS = vibrating particles system46TLBO = teaching–learning-based optimization48EO = equilibrium48.

Example 4: Achieving convergence for 1180-bar truss dome.

In terms of robustness, CELSMA also demonstrated the lowest mean structural weight of 38,791.45 kg with a standard deviation of 140.23, indicating strong convergence consistency across multiple trials. This robustness affirms CELSMA’s capacity for reliably solving high-dimensional constrained optimization problems. Importantly, the algorithm leverages MATLAB’s built-ineigsfunction—based on sparse matrix solvers—to efficiently handle repeated eigenvalue evaluations in large systems, thereby maintaining computational tractability.

The final benchmark example investigates the size optimization of a complex double-layer dome truss comprising 1410 elements and 390 nodes. This structure is generated through symmetrical rotation of a 13-node, 47-element substructure in 12-degree increments, resulting in a geometrically intricate form suitable for assessing the robustness and efficiency of large-scale optimization algorithms, as illustrated in Fig.14. The nodal coordinates are fixed during the optimization process and are listed in Table9. All free nodes are assigned to a non-structural mass of 100 kg to represent dynamic influences. The optimization problem is formulated purely as a sizing task with cross-sectional areas as the design variables.

Example 5: 1410-bar truss dome: (a) isometric view, (b) top view, and (c) a substructure.

Example 5: coordinates of reference nodes 1 to 13.

To evaluate algorithm performance, SMA, LSMA, CESMA and CELSMA withNp=20 and 500 iterations. The results, shown in Table10; Fig.15, highlight the comparative performance of the algorithms in solving this large-scale problem. Among them, CELSMA achieved the best optimal weight of 10,402.57 kg, slightly outperforming SMA (10,483.11 kg), LSMA (10,464.86 kg) and CESMA (10431.22 kg). Further evidence of CELSMA’s superiority is found in its statistical consistency. It attained a mean structural weight of 10,520.70 kg with a standard deviation (SD) of 69.93 kg, which is lower than those of SMA (mean: 10,629.94 kg, SD: 80.28 kg), LSMA (mean: 10,587.26 kg, SD: 70.62 kg) and CESMA (mean: 10552.10 kg, SD: 71.24 kg). Figure15suggests that CELSMA is more reliable in consistently converging to high-quality solutions across multiple runs. The algorithm’s convergence behavior indicates not only a high degree of stability but also greater robustness in navigating the complex, multimodal design space associated with double-layer dome.

Comparison of optimal solutions for 1410-bar truss dome.

Note: *Node connectivity, CRPSO = craziness based PSO50, BB-BC = big bang-big crunch12CPA = cyclical parthenogenesis algorithm9CLPPSO = comprehensive learning phasor PSO23C-HCLPSO = chaotic heterogeneous comprehensive learning PSO25.

Example 5: Achieving convergence for 1410-bar truss dome.

Regarding computational efficiency, all three slime mold-based algorithms delivered comparable performance, with total solution times of 488 s (SMA), 360 s (LSMA), 354 s (CELSMA) and 352 s (CELSMA). The slightly improved efficiency of CELSMA can be attributed to its effective use of the LESM technique, which reduces the computational cost of repeated eigenvalue calculations, a critical bottleneck in dynamic constraint handling. The incorporation of theeigsfunction within MATLAB, optimized for sparse matrix operations, further reinforces this efficiency gain. When compared with other metaheuristic techniques reported in the literature such as CRPSO50BB-BC12CPA9CLPPSO23and C-HCLPSO25. CELSMA consistently delivers superior results in terms of optimal weight and convergence reliability, despite the large-scale nature of the problem. While some of these competing algorithms may offer slightly faster computation times in isolated cases, their overall solution quality is significantly inferior, particularly in high-dimensional dynamic optimization settings. This example demonstrates that CELSMA not only matches but often surpasses its competitors in terms of both solution quality and computational efficiency.

Figure16summarizes the superior performance of the proposed CELSMA algorithm across five benchmark dome truss optimization problems. Based on the statistical distribution of structural weight obtained from 50 independent runs, CELSMA consistently outperformed SMA, LSMA and CESMA. It achieved lower median and mean weight values, along with reduced standard deviation particularly in large-scale, high-dimensional cases (Examples 3–5) indicating enhanced robustness and more stable convergence.

Distribution and statistical analysis of total weights.

In these complex scenarios, CELSMA’s results featured narrower interquartile ranges and minimal presence of outliers, reflecting its strong ability to explore multimodal design spaces effectively. This performance is attributed to the hybrid framework of CELSMA, which integrates chaotic dynamics, multi-leader guidance, and the LESM technique to maintain search diversity while satisfying frequency constraints efficiently. Conversely, in lower-dimensional problems (Examples 1–2), the performance of CELSMA, CESMA, LSMA, and SMA was relatively similar, suggesting that the benefits of chaos-enhanced exploration and structural decomposition become more significant as the problem dimensionality and constraint intensity increase.

When compared with conventional metaheuristic algorithms reported in the literature (e.g., HS, FA, MPA, DPSO, GNDO, CLPPSO, CPA, CRPSO), the proposed CELSMA consistently achieved lower optimal structural weights across all five benchmark problems, as shown in Tables3,4,6,8and10. More importantly, it exhibited superior statistical robustness, evidenced by its smaller standard deviations and tighter distributions in the boxplots (see Fig.16). These outcomes confirm that CELSMA not only improves solution quality but also enhances consistency across independent trials. Such performance gains are attributed to the integration of three key components: bio-inspired multi-leader coordination, chaotic dynamic perturbation, and sparse matrix acceleration via the LESM technique. These elements work synergistically to improve both global exploration and local refinement while maintaining computational efficiency, especially in high-dimensional and frequency-constrained design problems.

Overall, the results validate CELSMA as a scalable and reliable optimization tool for complex structural engineering tasks. Future work may consider integrating surrogate modeling approaches—such as Kriging or Gaussian Process Regression—to further reduce computational overhead, as well as employing adaptive chaotic switching strategies or dynamic population control to enhance algorithmic adaptability in highly nonlinear optimization settings.

This study introduces a novel metaheuristic framework CELSMA combined with the LESM technique for the optimal size and shape design of truss dome structures under natural frequency constraints. The algorithm is inspired by bio-swarm intelligence and enhances the original SMA by embedding leader-based guidance, adaptive learning, and chaotic tent mapping. These modifications significantly improve the balance between global exploration and local exploitation. To accelerate the frequency evaluation process during optimization, the LESM technique is employed to efficiently approximate the dominant eigenvalues from sparse finite element matrices. This not only reduces computational time but also enables the practical application of the proposed algorithm to large-scale design problems. Extensive validation has been conducted on five benchmark truss dome structures, ranging from 52-bar to 1410-bar truss dome. The CELSMA-LESM algorithm consistently outperforms conventional methods in terms of minimizing structural weight while satisfying frequency constraints. Statistical analysis over 50 independent runs reveals narrow standard deviations, indicating the reliability and robustness of the proposed method. Due to its generality, scalability, and efficiency, the proposed CELSMA-LESM framework can be readily extended to other structural optimization problems such as frame systems, shell structures, and frequency-based reliability designs. Future research may incorporate stress-based constraints, discrete cross-sectional sizing, and parallel implementation to further broaden its applicability in engineering practice.

Sparse matrix eigenvalue solutions in MATLAB for dynamic systems.

num_eigenvalues = min(length(dof), 6); % Change this number as needed.

num_eigenvalues = min(ele_nod, 6); % Change this number as needed.

function [Destination_fitness, bestPositions, Convergence_curve] =.

CELSMA (N, Max_ iter, lb, ub, dim, fobj, chaos_index).

Destination_fitness = inf;%change this to -inf for maximization problems.

AllFitness = inf*ones(N,1);%record the fitness of all slime mold.

weight = ones(N, dim);%fitness weight of each slime mold.

Convergence_curve = zeros(1,Max_iter); it = 1; %Number of iterations.

S = bestFitness-worstFitness + eps;% plus eps to avoid denominator zero.

chaos_value = chaos(chaos_index, it, Max_iter,1);%Generate chaotic.

A = randi([1,N]);%two positions randomly selected from Np.

This study was generously funded by the Thailand Science Research and Innovation Fund, Chulalongkorn University (IND68210013). The authors would like to extend their gratitude to Chulalongkorn University for additional financial support through the Second Century Fund (C2F).