The Iceland Screens, Treats, or Prevents Multiple Myeloma (iStopMM) risk stratification model, developed to predict ≥10% abnormal plasma cells in the bone marrow in monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) patients, was developed in a predominantly White and genetically homogeneous Icelandic population, lacking external validation. Our study aimed to externally validate this model in a racially and ethnically diverse Bronx population. The medical records of patients at Montefiore Medical Center (2002–2023) were searched to identify patients with MGUS who had undergone a bone marrow biopsy. For each patient, the iStopMM variables were entered into the iStopMM prediction model, and predicted, and actual plasma cell percentages were recorded. The area under the receiver operating characteristic (AUROC) curve assessed the iStopMM model’s performance in predicting ≥10% plasma cells, and sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), and negative predictive value (NPV) were calculated. Of the initial 663 patients, 190 were included in the final cohort, of whom 52.6% were African-Americans, and 23.2% identified themselves as Hispanic/Latino, remarkably different from the homogenous population of the iStopMM study. The iStopMM predictive model was able to predict greater than or equal to 10% plasma cells on bone marrow biopsy with an AUROC of 0.78 (CI 0.71, 0.85). When set at a 10% threshold for predicting SMM or worse, the iStopMM model had a 93.3% sensitivity, 33.7% specificity, 55.3% PPV, and 85.0% NPV. This AUROC value of 0.778 suggests a reasonable discriminatory performance of the model in our racially and ethnically diverse Bronx population.

Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) is a pre-malignant condition involving abnormal plasma cells, marked by the presence of a monoclonal (M) protein, less than 10% of plasma cells in the bone marrow, and the absence of multiple myeloma (MM) or similar lymphoplasmacytic malignancies (LPMs) [1]. In the United States, about 3% of people over 50 have MGUS [2]. Smoldering multiple myeloma (SMM) is an asymptomatic transitional phase between MGUS and MM, characterized by an M protein concentration equal to or exceeding 30 g/L and/or bone marrow plasma cells ranging from 10% to 60%, without any myeloma-defining events or amyloidosis [1]. It is less common than MGUS, affecting around 0.5% of individuals aged 40 and above [3]. MGUS carries a risk of evolving into MM or related malignancies at a rate of around 1% annually, whereas SMM presents a significantly higher risk of progression, approximately 10% annually for the first five years [4–6].

There is inconsistency in guidelines regarding the extent of initial assessment and subsequent monitoring of MGUS due to limited high-quality evidence [7–9]. The Mayo Clinic’s risk stratification model, which relies on three primary risk factors: an abnormal serum free light chain ratio, a high serum M protein level (≥1.5 g/dL), and non-immunoglobulin G(IgG) MGUS, is one of the most widely utilized risk stratification models [4,10]. Recently, the Iceland Screens, Treats, or Prevents Multiple Myeloma (iStopMM) initiative, a population-based screening study for MGUS in Iceland, developed a multivariable proportional-odds logistic model to predict the likelihood of having 10% or more abnormal plasma cells in the bone marrow (suggestive of SMM or worse based on bone marrow criteria) in individuals with IgG, immunoglobulin A (IgA), or biclonal MGUS [11].

The iStopMM model utilizes the following predictors - MGUS subtype (IgG, IgA, biclonal), M protein concentration, free light chain ratio, and total IgG, IgA, and immunoglobulin M (IgM) levels [11]. When set at a 10% threshold for predicting SMM or worse, this model demonstrated an 86% sensitivity, 67% specificity, 32% positive predictive value, and 96% negative predictive value [11]. However, a notable limitation of the iStopMM model is its lack of external validation.

This is particularly significant given that the model was developed within the predominantly White and genetically homogeneous population of Iceland [11], which may not accurately represent the ethnic and racial diversity found in various population subsets within the United States. In addition, the prevalence of MGUS is 2 to 3 times higher in the African–American patient population [12,13]. Hence, it is essential to evaluate whether these results apply to this patient population. Therefore, our study aims to validate this model within a racially diverse patient population in the Bronx.

The electronic medical records of patients receiving care at Montefiore Medical Center from 2002 to 2023 were searched to identify patients with a diagnosis of MGUS using the International Code of Diseases (ICD-10 code D47.2 and the ICD-9 code 273.1) and who had undergone a bone marrow biopsy.

MGUS, unclear immunoglobulin isotype, unavailable free light chain ratio, or unavailable SPEP. Hence, a final cohort of MGUS patients with all variables and bone marrow biopsy results available was created.

The following variables from each patient chart, closest to the time of bone marrow biopsy, were entered in the iStopMM prediction model available athttps://istopmm.com/riskmodel/: MGUS isotype (IgG, IgA, biclonal), M protein concentration, free light chain ratio, and total IgG, IgA, and IgM concentrations. The predicted % of plasma cells was obtained by entering these values in the prediction model and recorded in the datasheet. The actual % of plasma cells obtained from the original bone marrow biopsy specimen was also recorded in the datasheet.

Baseline characteristics were reported using frequencies for categorical values and medians for continuous variables. The area under the receiver operating characteristic (AUROC) curve was used to assess the performance of the iStopMM prediction model in our cohort, with the binary variable being whether greater than or equal to 10% of plasma cells were detected on bone marrow biopsy. The value of the AUROC curve ranges from 0 to 1, with 1 indicating 100% discriminatory accuracy. Within our cohort, we evaluated the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), and negative predictive value (NPV) for identifying patients with 10, 20, and 50% probability of having greater than or equal to 10% plasma cells based on the iStopMM prediction model. Additionally, the optimal cut-point for our populations was calculated using Youden’s index. All statistical analysis was completed using IBM SPSS Statistics, Version 29.0.

Of the initial six hundred and sixty-three patients, a total of 190 were included in the final cohort. As shown in Fig.1, the major exclusions were patients who met the criteria for MM (n= 325), those with hematologic conditions other than MGUS/MM (n= 53), and those whose SPEP had no M-protein detected (n= 24). Further, we excluded those MGUS patients whose BM biopsy was either unavailable (n= 14) or suboptimal (n= 4), who had IgM monoclonal protein (n= 23), whose M-protein isotype was unclear (n= 21), or those patients without available FLC ratio (n= 3) or SPEP (n= 6).

Study cohort selection flowchart. ICD International code of disease, MGUS monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance, BMbone marrow, M-protein monoclonal protein, IgM immunoglobulin M, FLC free light chain, SPEPserum protein electrophoresis.

Table1demonstrates the baseline characteristics of the MGUS cohort, comprising 190 individuals, 55.8% of whom were females and 44.2% males. The median age was 75 (interquartile range 65–83). In terms of race, the majority of individuals were African-Americans (52.6%), followed by individuals categorized as Others (22.1%), Whites (14.7%), Unknown (8.4%), and Asians (2.1%). Regarding ethnicity, a majority identified as non-Hispanic/Latino (68.4%), 23.2% as Hispanic/Latino, and 8.4% were unknown ethnicity. Based on the bone marrow biopsy results, 91 (47.9%) patients had SMM, and 99 (52.1%) had MGUS. Analysis of immunoglobulin isotypes among the MGUS cohort indicates a prevalent distribution of IgG (83.7%), followed by IgA (11.1%). A smaller proportion of individuals exhibit biclonal or light chain patterns, each representing 2.6% of the cohort.

IQRInterquartile Range,IgGimmunoglobulin G,IgAimmunoglobulin A,MGUSMonoclonal Gammopathy of Uncertain Significance,SMMSmoldering Multiple Myeloma.

The iStopMM predictive model was able to predict greater than or equal to 10% plasma cells on bone marrow biopsy with an AUROC of 0.78 and confidence interval (0.71, 0.85) (Fig.2).

The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve. ROC receiver operating characteristic, iStopMM Iceland screens, treats, or prevents multiple myeloma,Std. Error standard error, Asymptotic Sig. asymptotic significance level, Sens sensitivity, Specspecificity, PPV positive predictive value, NPV negative predictive value.

Within our cohort, we evaluated the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV), and negative predictive value (NPV) for identifying patients with a 10%, 20%, and 50% chance of having greater than or equal to 10% plasma cells on bone marrow biopsy, as mentioned in Fig.2.

When set at a 10% threshold for predicting SMM or worse, the iStopMM model has a 93.3% sensitivity, 33.7% specificity, 55.3% PPV, and 85.0% NPV. Additionally, the optimal cut-point by Youden’s index was calculated to be 33%, indicating that within our population, the sensitivity (70.8%) and specificity (77.2%) are optimal when the threshold is set at a 33% chance of having greater than or equal to 10% plasma cells on bone marrow biopsy by the IStopMM model.

Since MGUS is a pre-malignant condition with approximately 1% annual risk of evolving into MM, a critical aspect in the care of MGUS patients is risk stratification and monitoring [5,6]. The IMWG risk stratification system utilizes these three factors to predict the risk of progression of MGUS to MM or a related malignancy - serum M-protein level ≥15 g/L, abnormal serum FLC ratio, and non-IgG MGUS [7]. According to this model, the absolute risk of progressing to MM over 20 years increases to 5%, 21%, 37%, and 58% when zero (low-risk MGUS), one (low- intermediate risk MGUS), two (high-intermediate risk MGUS), and three (high-risk MGUS) risk factors are present, respectively [4,7,10,14].

An essential question for MGUS patients is to identify those patients who would require a bone marrow biopsy since it is sometimes the only way to distinguish MGUS patients from those with SMM. As per the IMWG guidelines, a baseline BM biopsy is indicated in most MGUS patients except those with low-risk features [7]. However, bone marrow biopsy is a resource-intensive, potentially unpleasant procedure typically limited to specialized facilities [15]. Moreover, this recommendation is based on the predicted absolute risk of developing MM over 20 years. Still, it does not directly consider the clinically relevant question of predicting the risk of having ≥10% plasma cells if an MGUS patient underwent BM biopsy, which the newer iStopMM model addresses.

The iStopMM initiative is a population-based screening effort for MGUS in Iceland, which extended invitations to all Icelanders born in 1975 or earlier to participate in the study [11]. This screening project obtained blood samples from 75,422 individuals aged 40 or older, encompassing 51% of the Icelandic populace, and detected 3788 cases of MGUS, with 2607 of these cases enrolled for active follow-up [11]. Out of these 2607 cases, data from a total of 1043 participants was utilized to create the iStopMM multivariate model, which, unlike the Mayo Clinic model, involves the entry of actual patient-specific numeric values into the risk calculator.

Utilizing this model to postpone bone marrow biopsy for individuals with estimated bone marrow involvement of less than 10 percent would permit 58.8 percent of the population to delay the procedure. Among them, 3.6 percent would receive a diagnosis of SMM, while none would be identified with MM during biopsy [11]. A comparison within this Scandinavian population suggested that the iStopMM model would enable more participants to bypass unnecessary bone marrow sampling compared to the Mayo Clinic model [11].

In our study, we aimed to externally validate the iStopMM model, which was designed in the genetically homogenous population of Iceland, in the racially and ethnically diverse population of the Bronx. Such external validation is crucial to demonstrate the model’s generalizability when utilized beyond the original population since differences in patient demographics, environmental factors, and local resources could impact the performance of a prediction model [16,17]. Our study cohort included 52.6% of patients identifying as African–American and 23.2% as Spanish/Hispanic/Latino, highlighting the unique patient composition. We utilized AUROC as our primary metric to assess the iStopMM prediction model’s performance, with the binary variable being greater than or equal to 10% of plasma cells detected on bone marrow biopsy.

The c-statistic, which is equivalent to AUROC value for binary outcomes, for the original IStopMM Model was 0.85 (CI 0.82–0.89) within the Icelandic population [11,18]. When implemented in our Bronx population, the iStopMM model was able to predict the chance of detecting SMM or worse on bone marrow biopsy with an AUROC of 0.778 with a 95% confidence interval of 0.71–0.85. This AUROC value of 0.778 suggests a reasonable discriminatory performance of the model in our racially and ethnically diverse study population. Moreover, the narrow confidence interval of 0.71–0.81 of the AUROC further underscores the consistency in the model’s performance.

At a threshold of 10% predicted risk of SMM or worse, the original iStopMM, when implemented in the Icelandic population, had a sensitivity of 85%, specificity of 67%, negative predictive value of 96%, and a positive predictive value of 32%. When set at the same threshold in our Bronx population, the iStopMM model has a sensitivity of 93.3%, specificity of 33.7%, negative predictive value of 85%, and a positive predictive value of 55.3% The difference in sensitivity for our population suggests that the model is more sensitive but less specific for our patient population. At a threshold of 33% (the optimal cut-point identified by Youden’s index in our population), the iStopMM model has a sensitivity of 70.8% and a specificity of 77.2%. This threshold of 33% predicted risk of SMM or worse optimized the balance between sensitivity and specificity, making it a more clinically relevant threshold in our population.

While our study provides valuable insights into the external validation of the iStopMM model in a diverse Bronx population, it has certain limitations. Our study was a retrospective data analysis of chart review, which is susceptible to inherent biases with data collection and restricts the investigator’s ability to account for changes in clinical practice over time. Since these tests were performed in the clinic only in patients who potentially had a clinical suspicion of a monoclonal gammopathy, our patient population is significantly different from the iStopMM population. In addition, the data does not capture information on time to bone marrow biopsy from the time an abnormal laboratory result is detected. This method of patient selection also gives a smaller sample size. Moreover, we utilized AUROC for analysis, which does not offer insights into the actual clinical utility or relevance in decision-making [19]. Finally, given the limited sample size, we could not explore the iStopMM model’s performance across different racial and ethnic subgroups or different MGUS isotypes. Further studies addressing such limitations and utilizing a different population subset could provide more insights into the external validity and clinical utility of the iStopMM model.