Relative Energy Deficiency in Sports (REDs) is defined as a multifactorial syndrome of impaired physiological and/or psychological functioning was previously named as the Female Athlete Triad. REDs was proposed to be an expansion of the Female Athlete Triad model (Triad), corresponding to a combination of Low Energy Availability (LEA), alteration of the menstrual cycle and bone health. could be made possible by a screening tool to determine the risk of LEA. The Low Energy Availability in Female-Questionnaire (LEAF-Q) is a screening tool originally developed to identify individuals at risk ofTriadbased on self-reported symptoms in three primary categories: injuries, gastrointestinal function, and reproductive function – to identify individuals at risk ofTriad. To date, LEAF-Q is recommended in the International Olympic Committee REDs Clinical Assessment Tool-Version 2 as a screening tool for studying various health and performance outcomes of REDs. This study aims to validate the Italian version (LEAFQ-ITA) among physically active women while adapting it to their culture in order to enhance the diagnosis and facilitate access to treatment of REDs.

The validation process was carried out in multiple stages: (i) translation and cultural adaptation of the content from the original questionnaire (LEAF-Q) into the Italian culture; (ii) expert validation of the content using the Delphi technique; (iii) reliability test-retest in a sample of Italian physical active women; and (iv) internal consistency checking using exploratory and confirmatory factorial analysis. A consensus rate of more than 90% for every item was considered sufficient agreement. The test-retest reliability was evaluated using the intraclass correlation coefficient estimates and their 95% confidence intervals based on a mean-rating, absolute agreement, 2-way mixed-effects model. Exploratory and confirmatory factorial analyses were performed with the Factor software. The analysis was implemented using a matrix dispersion through Pearson correlations and the Robust Diagonally Weighted Least Squares (RDWLS) extraction method. The Parallel Analysis technique suggested the number of factors to be retained. McDonald’s Omega and Cronbach’s alpha were performed to test internal consistency.

After two rounds, the LEAFQ-ITA maintained the same amount of items and gained the consensus of content validation specialists. From the sample of 215 questionnaires answered, a sub-sample of 105 participants answered the LEAFQ-ITA twice (mean age: 26.1 ± 4.7 years old; mean body mass index: 21.3 ± 2.6 kg/m2; physical activity of 3.9 ± 1.3 days/week on average). Among them, 56 women (37.6%) obtained a were classified at risk of LEA by the final score of LEAFQ-ITA ≥8. The single measurement intraclass correlation coefficient resulted in 0.832 (F = 10.849, df = 105,p< 0.000, 95% confidence interval: 0.762–0.882), which suggests high reliability. Although initially hypothesizing the presence of 3 factors, the parallel analysis suggested 2 factors as being the most representative of the data. Measures of McDonald’s Omega (0.65) and Cronbach’s alpha (0.64) suggested acceptable internal consistency.

The LEAFQ-ITA is a valid instrument for identifying Italian physically active women with physiological symptoms possibly related to LEA or REDs. Future research should focus on validating this instrument in other countries and languages.

Fundamental research on EA in habitually sedentary women has identified a continuum of zones ranging from low to high risk of harm (e.g., high EA for mass gain and growth ≥45 kcal/kg FFM/day; adequate EA for weight maintenance and support of body function = ~45 kcal/kg FFM/day; reduced EA for body mass/fat loss = 30–45 kcal/kg FFM/day; and Low EA causing health implications ≤30 kcal/kg FFM/day) [4]. However, recent observations [7–9] debate the ideal EA level associated with good health and performance: there is still a lack of agreement on what constitutes a universally acceptable threshold for men and women. Furthermore, many moderating factors (e.g., medical history, personal characteristics such as gender sex, low or high-impact training, and other lifestyle and environmental characteristics) can make it difficult to set a standardized limit [10,11]. LEA is common in female athletes [12]. Recent prevalence data report a range of 22 to 58% across sports [13]. To our knowledge, no prevalence data are available on the Italian female athlete population. Several situations and/or behaviors can determine LEA that can result from deliberate dietary restriction aimed at reducing body weight or attaining leanness [14,15] or may arise unintentionally due to insufficient nutritional knowledge, time constraints, food insecurity, low energy density diets, or changes in appetite related to exercise [14,16,17].

It is essential to distinguish between two opposite scenarios: one in which LEA effects are benign (adaptableLEA) and others in which there are substantial and potentially long-term impairments of health and performance (problematicLEA) [7].AdaptableLEA corresponds to reversing changes in biomarkers and adaptive energy redistribution and is typically a short-term experience with minimal (or no) impact on long-term health, well-being or performance [7]. Adaptable LEA might also be associated with acute health or performance benefits (e.g. increased relative VO2 max) due to the stimulation of adaptive physiological signaling resulting from the reduction in energy availability [7]. On the other hand, LEA is characterized asproblematicwhen linked with ongoing disruptions of the body’s systems, including amenorrhea, low bone mineral density resulting in osteoporosis, compromised gastrointestinal function, altered energy metabolism, impaired hematological status, mental health concerns, and diminished neurocognitive functions related to memory and decision-making, among other health consequences. Furthermore, in rare cases, LEA presents the traits of one or the other scenario only rarely because it is more often a continuum betweenadaptableandproblematic[7].

LEA can occur with or without an eating disorder, and it is a trigger factor for functional hypothalamic amenorrhea and impaired bone health [18–20]. Problematic LEA is the underlying cause of REDs.

The health and performance outcomes related to REDs include decreases in energy metabolism, reproductive function, musculoskeletal health, immunity, glycogen synthesis and cardiovascular and hematological health, which can lead to increased injury and decreased sports performance [2].

A screening tool investigating the physiological symptoms related to chronic LEA could help to improve the diagnosis and early access to treatment of REDs. In 2014, LEAF Questionnaire (LEAF-Q) was originally developed as a screening tool for detecting the risk ofTriadthrough self-reported symptoms in three main categories: injuries (frequency in the past year), gastrointestinal function, and reproductive function (actual and clinical historical) in female endurance athletes in Sweden and Denmark [21]. Scores equal to or higher than 8 were considered at risk ofTriad.

The questionnaire was initially administered to participants from England, Sweden and Denmark based on their country of origin. Subsequently, it has been validated in a mixed sport-cohort of elite and pre-elite female athletes to assess females at low risk of LEA-related conditions. Noteworthy is the fact that it cannot be used to quantify the risk and severity of REDs [22]. The validation was made in Australia with the cooperation of eight National Sporting Organization (athletics, basketball, boxing, rowing, triathlon, water polo, weightlifting) collecting a sample of 75 female athletes between 18 and 32 years old. The sample included athletic competitors, basketball players, boxing, netball, rowing, triathlon, water polo and weightlifting athletes. To date, LEAF-Q is recommended in the International Olympic Committee REDs Clinical Assessment Tool-Version 2 (IOC REDs CAT2) [23,24] as a screening tool for studying various health and performance outcomes of REDs [7,25]. LEAF-Q has recently been validated in a German athlete population [26]. However, despite not being validated in other countries, it has been used in different cohorts of athletes, such as recreational female athletes [27] or football players [28,29], although not necessarily supporting the LEAF-Q use. Dasa et. al [29]. concluded that their findings did not support the use of LEAF-Q for detecting Triad conditions among female football players [28,29]. Due to the recent classification of athlete level based on a six-tier system (Tier 0 = Sedentary ➔ Tier 5 = World Class) proposed by McKay et al. [30] that consider “Recreationally Active” (Tier 1) those who meet World Health Organization (WHO) minimum activity guidelines (at least 150 to 300 min moderate-intensity activity or 75–150 min of vigorous-intensity activity a week, plus muscle-strengthening activities 2 or more days a week [31]; may participate in multiple sports/forms of activity), it is interesting to reevaluate the use of the LEAF-Q also in this target population.

In fact, numerous studies demonstrated that the LEAF questionnaire can be routinely and widely used thanks to its brevity and repeatability [32–37].

Despite the importance of the instrument, no screening tool is available for the Italian population to date. Considering the high impact of LEA on health and performance, it is relevant to adapt and validate this tool in order to improve the diagnosis procedure of the Italian female athlete population and thus ensure early access to treatment.

The aim of this study is to culturally adapt and validate the LEAF-Q screening tool into an Italian version (LEAFQ-ITA) designed to identify physically active women with physiological symptoms related to LEA in Italy.

This prospective observational study was approved by the Ethical Committee (IRCCS San Matteo: number 2022–3.11/283, prot 0014551/22).

The process of validation was conducted in several phases: (i) translation into the Italian language and cultural adaptation of the content from the original questionnaire (LEAF-Q) into the Italian culture; (ii) evaluation through the Delphi technique for validation of content by experts; (iii) reliability test-retest was tested in a sample of Italian physical active women; (iv) internal consistency was checked by exploratory and confirmatory factorial analysis.

The adaptation of the questionnaire followed the protocol suggested by Beaton et al., [38]. The questionnaire was initially translated from English into Italian by two healthcare professionals, Italian and fluent in English language healthcare professionals with Italian as their first language and who were fluent in English (CF and LCLN). The translation was validated by a third reviewer who subsequently arranged for the translation from Italian into English (back-translation) to verify the correctness of the previous translation (SF).

The questionnaire consists of 25 questions relating to injuries and illness (3 items), gastrointestinal function (4 items), menstrual function (12 items), and hormonal contraceptives (6 items). Some questions are based on the frequency of symptoms (ordinal variables), others on categorical or dichotomous options (yes/no). Only the critical answers for the risk of REDs were subsequently assigned a score, and the sum of all the answers corresponds to the final score (a score equal to or higher than 8 indicates a risk of REDs, the higher the score, the bigger the risk).

The original questionnaire was designed for self-completion by female athletes. In this study, it was also distributed to physically active women, who were invited to self-complete it. Women were considered physically active according to the World Health Organization criteria [31], i.e. at least 150 minutes a week of moderate physical activity or at least 75 minutes of intense physical activity or an equivalent combination throughout the week.

The Delphi technique was used to validate the instrument [39]. The tool was analyzed by a group of experts acting as judges, composed of 6 professionals. Professionals were selected based on specific criteria: (1) having a professional background in sport nutrition, (2) working with physically active people and athletes, or conducting research in the field of sport nutrition, and (3) experience treating REDs. Judges were invited to participate by email and received a short text explaining the research and an informed consent form for participation. Next, the Italian version of LEAF-Q (LEAFQ-ITA) was sent and judges were asked to evaluate the relevance and clarity of each statement. The answers were presented on a Likert scale with a score from 1 to 3, with 1 = no; 2 = maybe; and 3 = yes. At the end of each question, a suggestion field was provided so that the judges could give feedback on the questions and enrich the content.

The agreement rate and the Content Validity Index (CVI), which gauges agreement on each evaluated aspect, were computed to reflect the judges’ consensus for the content validation. The number of affirmative answers divided by the total number of responses yielded the agreement rate. There were four phases involved in calculating the CVI: (i) the average score for every submission was determined using the judges’ ratings, which ranged from 1 to 3. (ii) The initial CVI for each item was determined by dividing it by the highest possible value for relevance or clarity based on the average (equal to 3). (iii) Each entry’s mistake was computed to prevent the judges from being biased. The error was computed using the following formula: Error = (1 ÷ number of judges) ×number of judges. (iv) The initial CVI of each element was subtracted from the error to determine the final CVI. The researchers collated data from the responses they received, which were arranged in an Excel spreadsheet, and the instrument was revised at the end of each cycle. All judges received the amended form again, and discussions continued until an agreement was achieved. The LEAFQ-ITA content was validated through as many cycles as required until the experts arrived at a consensus rate of more than 90% for every item examined in this study.

Participants were recruited voluntarily from the Food Education & Sports Nutrition Laboratory, University of Pavia, Italy. At enrollment, subjects were adequately informed about the project and the study objective. The privacy policy was provided, and informed consent was obtained from the participants. The inclusion criteria were: (i) age between 18 and 39 years old; (ii) women; (iii) moderate and/or intense physical activity that at least covered the time and intensity criteria proposed by the WHO for physically active people [31]/at least Tier 1 [30]; (v) informed consent to participate in this research. Exclusion criteria included: (i) illiteracy; (ii) being pregnant or having been pregnant the year before. The use of contraceptives was not considered an exclusion criterion.

Data on weight, height, physical activity (frequency and type), smoking habits, medication use, and health status were self-reported. The cutoffs (total questionnaire score ≥ 8, sub-scores for injuries ≥ 2, gastrointestinal symptoms ≥ 2, and menstrual disorders ≥ 4) for the classification of risk of REDs were retained from the original study [16]. The questionnaire was completed electronically once by 215 physically active women, and twice by a sub-sample of 105 women via the Google Forms platform within a 15-day interval to measure its reproducibility. The test-retest reliability was evaluated using the intraclass correlation coefficient estimates and their 95% confidence intervals were calculated using SPSS statistical package version 20 [40], based on a mean-rating, absolute agreement, 2-way mixed-effects model. The 95% confidence interval of the ICC estimate was used as the basis to evaluate the level of reliability. Values less than 0.50 were indicative of poor reliability, values between 0.50 and 0.75 indicated moderate reliability, values between 0.75 and 0.90 indicated good reliability, and values greater than 0.90 indicated excellent reliability [41].

To test the internal consistency of the LEAFQ-ITA, a sample of 215 physically active women following the same criteria specified before were invited to answer the LEAFQ-ITA. The 14 items that adequately fit the criteria to perform a factorial analysis were selected from the questionnaire (1.A, 1.A.1, 2.A, 2.B, 2.C, 3.1.A, 3.1.A.2, 3.1.B, 3.1.C.1, 3.2.C.2, 3.2.C.3, 3.2.C.5, 3.2.D, 3.2.E) and the answers were categorized in ordinal order, always from the less frequent to the more frequent.

An Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA) was conducted to evaluate the factor structure of the LEAFQ-ITA [21]. Factorial analysis was conducted using Factor software [42] for both exploratory and confirmatory analyses. The adequacy of the dispersion matrix was tested using Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity, where a significant value indicates that the correlation matrix is not an identity matrix and is suitable for factor analysis [43]. Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) was also performed, and values above 0.6 were considered adequate for factor analysis [44].

The analysis was implemented using a matrix dispersion through Pearson correlations and the Robust Diagonally Weighted Least Squares (RDWLS) extraction method [45]. The decision on the number of factors to be retained was made using the Parallel Analysis technique, using a matrix of data collected and a matrix of data generated by chance through artificial intelligence tools (Software Factor). A sample of 500 data matrices (bootstrap samples with 95% confidence intervals) was generated to estimate the variance matrix [46], and the rotation used was the Robust Promin [47]. The closeness to Unidimensionality was assessed using three tests: (i) Unidimensional congruence (UniCo), where values larger than 0.95 are desirable; (ii) Explained Common Variance (ECV), where values larger than 0.85 are desirable; and (iii) Mean of Item Residual Absolute Loadings (MIREAL), where values lower than 0.300 suggest that the data can be treated as essentially unidimensional [48].

The model’s adequacy was evaluated using the fit indices Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA), Comparative Fit Index (CFI), and Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI). According to the literature [49], RMSEA values should be less than 0.08, and CFI and TLI values should be above 0.90.

The stability of the factors was assessed using the H index [48]. The H index evaluates how well a set of items represents a common factor [48]. High H values ( > 0.80) suggest a well-defined latent variable, which is more likely to be stable across different studies. Low H values suggest a poorly defined latent variable, and it is likely to be unstable across different studies [48].

NCP (estimated non-centrality parameter) is a measure used in statistical power analysis for hypothesis testing. It was adjusted with 64 degrees of freedom, and the test of approximate fit considered the null hypothesis RMSEA < 0.05 [50].

The NNFI (non-normed fit index), also known as the Tucker-Lewis Index (TLI), is a relative fit index that compares the fit of a hypothesized model to a baseline model. It is calculated as the difference in the chi-square values of the hypothesized model and the baseline model, divided by the degrees of freedom of the hypothesized model [51]. A NNFI value of 1 indicates a perfect fit, while values closer to 0 indicate a poorer fit. For Comparative Fit Index (CFI) values above 0.95 indicate good model fit [52].

The translation and adaptation of LEAFQ in LEAFQ-ITA retained the same number of items. The back translation conserved the same meaning of the original questionnaire, and the scores for each question were retained (data not shown). The final version in Italian is presented in the supplementary material (S1).

At the first round of Delphi technique insufficient agreement (agreement rates < 90% and CVI < 0.9) was reached between judges for 6 questions (1.A.1, 2.B, 3.2.A.1, 3.2, 3.2.C, 3.2.E), in all the different domains of the questionnaire. After the second round, all questions were 100% of agreement and CVI = 1,00.

From the sample of 215 questionnaires answered, a sub-sample of 105 participants answered the LEAFQ-ITA twice. The sample’s mean age was 26.1 ± 4.7 years, with a body mass index (BMI) of 21.3 ± 2.6 kg/m2and reported 3.9 ± 1.3 days a week of physical activity on average (30.7% more than 5 times a week). In our sample, 31.5% of the women were using contraceptives, 77.7% reported not smoking, and 10.7% stated to use medication (mainly for hypothyroidism and gastrointestinal problems). Some participants reported engaging in more than one activity. The most commonly reported physical activities were resistance training (51.2%), fitness classes (29.3%), running (24.2%), swimming (14%), and cycling (8.8%). Fifty-six women (37.6%) were classified at risk of LEA by the obtained a final score of LEAFQ-ITA ≥8. When considering the sub-scores, 22.4% were above the cutoff for injuries (≥2), 60.3% for gastrointestinal symptoms (cutoff ≥2), and 21.0% for menstrual subscores (cutoff ≥4). The single measurement ICC resulted in 0.832 (F = 10.849, df = 105,p< 0.000, 95% confidence interval: 0.762–0.882), indicating good reliability.

Bartlett’s sphericity test (991.9, df = 91,p= 0.00001) suggested interpretability of the correlation matrix of the items, and the KMO index (0.68) resulted in a moderate value for factor analysis. Although initially hypothesizing the presence of 3 factors for AFE, the parallel analysis suggested two factors as being the most representative of the data (Table 1), since two factors in the real data presented a percentage of explained variance greater than the random data.

Measures of McDonald’s Omega (0.65) and Cronbach’s alpha (0.64) suggested acceptable internal consistency. The Greatest lower bound (GLB) resulted in 0.89.

It is important to note that the indicators of Unidimensional Congruence (UniCo = 0.689) and Explained Common Variance (ECV = 0.605) [48] did not support the one-dimensionality of the scale. The value of the Mean of Item Residual Absolute Loadings (MIREAL = 0.250) suggests that the data could be treated as one-way. However, based on the composition of the questionnaire, the one-dimensionality hypothesis was rejected.

Table 2reports the factor loads of the items as well as the estimates of replicability of factor scores: H-index [48].

Factor structure of LEAFQ-ITA (rotated loading matrix).

Half of the items presented adequate factor loads, with high factor loads in their respective factors. Items 3, 4, 5 (gastrointestinal function), 6, 7, 8 (hormonal contraceptives), and 14 (menstrual function) showed low loads ( < 0.300), indicating no representability in any factor. No cross-load pattern was found (i.e. items with factor loads above 0.30 in more than one factor).

The measurement of the replicability of the factor structure (H-index) [48] suggested good stability and that the factors may be replicable in future studies (H > 0.80). Finally, it should be noted that the factor structure showed moderate adjustment indices (RMSEA = 0.107; CFI = 0.883; TLI = 0.917).

This study adapted and validated an important tool for screening of Italian physically active women investigating the presence of physiological symptoms possibly related to LEA in Italian physically active women. risk of the Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport (REDs). Although widely used in the field, the original LEAF-Q did not perform a factorial analysis to assess internal consistency. This is the first validation study employing this methodological approach.

In psychological and medical sciences, concepts such as “anxiety” and “quality of life” are often measured using multi-item health status questionnaires. It is crucial that these instruments are properly validated before use. Factor analysis is a key component in validating multi-item surveys [53]. It is a statistical technique used to determine if patterns of responses can be described by a smaller number of underlying factors. When an instrument’s factor structure (i.e. the number of dimensions and their interrelations) is not well-understood, exploratory factor analysis (EFA) is the most effective method for exploration [53].

In this study, the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) measure was below the expected value for conducting factor analysis (0.70). This may be due to a lack of correlation between factors, as this index assesses the common variance among items. Even though half of the items showed adequate factor loadings with strong associations to their respective factors, many items (e.g. 2A, 2B, 2C, 3.1.A, 3.1.A.2, 3.2.B, 3.2.E) had low factor loadings ( < 0.30), indicating they did not significantly contribute to the underlying constructs. This suggests that these items should be deleted and a new EFA should be conducted without them. However, removing these items could affect score calculation and hinder comparisons with other studies using the same instrument. Therefore, the authors decided to retain all items from the original LEAF-Q. However, this decision also limits the psychometric optimization of the current version. The existence of weakly loading items and model fit indices showing only moderate adjustment (RMSEA = 0.107; CFI = 0.883; TLI = 0.917) imply that the current factor solution does not fully reflect the intended dimensionality, even if no cross-loading was found. The modest fit and low item loadings highlight the need for refining, even though the replicability index (H > 0.80) indicates good factor stability. Additionally, several items in the rotated loading matrix had factor loadings below 0.30 (items 2A, 2B, 2C, 3.1.A, 3.1.A.2, 3.2.B, 3.2.E), indicating insignificant factor loading.

It is important to note that the anticipated three-factor structure – injuries, gastrointestinal, and menstrual functions – was not confirmed in our analysis. Instead, only two factors emerged. It is possible that the items related to gastrointestinal and menstrual functions loaded onto a single factor, “gastro-menstrual function,” as the questions specifically address aspects related to energy deficiency in sports. On the contrary, Appaneal et al. [54] found that the gastrointestinal subscale did not correspond with surrogate markers of LEA.

It’s necessary to highlight that the original LEAF-Q’s validation procedure did not include data from a factorial analysis. Because of this, the original instrument’s theoretical factor structure is still unknown, and, probably, some of its items won’t represent consistent underlying structures when tested empirically. The poor performance of some questions in our research may be partially explained by the lack of this fundamental psychometric data.

To compare with the original validation study, the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) was calculated to assess the consistency of test-retest scores. The coefficient obtained was higher than in the original study (0.83 vs. 0.79) [21]. Regarding internal consistency, the original study reported a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.86. In our sample, a lower but acceptable value of 0.64 was found, indicating the limitations of using Cronbach’s alpha as a measure of internal consistency. This justifies the use of factor analysis for a more comprehensive assessment. The literature has extensively criticized Cronbach’s alpha [55,56], favoring the use of the greatest lower bound (GLB), which yielded a higher value (0.89) in our sample.

In our study, fifty-six women (37.6%) were classified as having physiological symptoms possibly related to LEA, based on at risk of LEA by the final score of LEAFQ-ITA ≥8. This rate was lower than a previous systematic review and meta-analysis data [57], where the overall effect size for LEA was 45.10% (95% CI 40.60–49.70%) and LEA prevalence in female athletes was 44.2%. While 37.6% is likely a reasonable estimate of the prevalence of LEA among physically active women, the true prevalence may likely be lower or higher due to inaccurate self-reporting compilation. Indeed, the possibility of obtaining false positives, which require confirmation through additional tests, should be taken into account. Dasa et al. [58] and Heikura et al. [24] recently quantified the REDs risk and severity by using REDs CAT2, and in their studies, LEAF-Q was reported as an initial screening tool (as suggested by the IOC [23]. However, this type of tool cannot be used alone for risk assessment but must be combined with the other specific tests reported in the REDs CAT2.

Another significant aspect of our approach is the decision to apply the questionnaire not exclusively to athletes but also to physically active women according to the new schema for classifying athlete levels based on a six-tier system [30]. This change aims to extend the use of this tool to a broader population, potentially identifying risks across all physically active women. In fact, considering that LEA is caused by a decrease in energy intake and/or high exercise energy expenditure or a combination of them, LEA may constitute an event of high occurrence not only in elite athletes but also among recreational female athletes. For this reason, at every training level, it is important to gain in-depth information [59]. Indeed, in our sample, we included not only endurance sports (i.e. cycling, swimming, and running) but also resistance training (51.2%), and fitness classes (29.3%). Numerous studies [60–63] have originally employed the LEAF-Q to assess the risk of LEATriadnot only in endurance sports but also in disciplines primarily focused on aesthetics or body composition modification. Unfortunately, in these types of sports, there is a high prevalence of increased body dissatisfaction, disordered eating behaviors, and consequently, low energy availability.

A major limitation of this study is the absence of concurrent validity testing, which was performed in the original study. This research focused solely on validating the Italian version of the questionnaire. Therefore, items with persistently low factor loadings should be improved or revised in future studies, perhaps by rewording, replacing, or removing them. Furthermore, to more thoroughly assess the instrument’s construct validity and bolster its theoretical foundation, future research should incorporate concurrent validity testing with recognized instruments and test it in other populations. future research should include validation in other specific populations before using this instrument.

Another limitation is the self-reported data which can generate reporting bias, especially for anthropometric data. Including women using contraceptives can reduce the effect of the questionnaire in detecting the common signs of REDs. However, it is useful to check the efficacy of the questionnaire for a general population that usually includes women using contraceptives. Moreover, several studies [62–65] have already made use of the LEAF-Q in female populations taking contraceptives because many athletes gain benefits from regulating their menstrual cycle for performance purposes. Excluding this segment of the population would have significantly limited the sample under investigation without providing a representative picture of reality.

The Italian version of the LEAF-Q, designated as LEAFQ-ITA, is a valid instrument for identifying Italian physically active women with physiological symptoms possibly related to LEA in order to improve the diagnosis and early access to the treatment of REDs at risk of Relative Energy Deficiency in Sport (REDs). Future research should focus on validating this instrument in other countries and languages.

The authors thank all judges for the helpful contributions for the LEAFQ-ITA formulation and all participants answering the LEAFQ-ITA.

Project funded under the National Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP), mission 4 component 2 investment 1.3 - call for tender no. 341 of 15 March 2022 of the Italian Ministry of University and Research funded by the European Union – NextGenerationEU; award number: [project code PE00000003], concession decree no. 1550 of 11 October 2022 adopted by the Italian Ministry of University and Research, [CUP F13C22001210007], project title “ON Foods - Research and innovation network on food and nutrition Sustainability, Safety and Security – Working ON Foods.”.