Vibrio alginolyticusis a foodborne pathogen that poses considerable threats to human health and leads to substantial economic losses in the aquaculture industry. O and K antigen are bacterial surface structures with strong plasticity and environmental adaptability, making O antigen biosynthesis gene clusters (O-AGCs) and K antigen biosynthesis gene clusters (K-AGCs) good materials for studying bacterial genetic evolution. However, no studies have carried out in-depth analyses of the O and K antigen-related gene clusters ofV. alginolyticus. In the present study, we conducted the first genome-based serogroup study ofV. alginolyticusand performed a comprehensive analysis of the O- and K-AGCs. We elucidated their molecular evolutionary mechanism by comparing them at the whole gene cluster structural and molecular levels. There were 14 serotypes of O-AGCs betweendgkAandgmhDand 48 serotypes of K-AGCs betweengmhDandrjgamongV. alginolyticuschromosomes. Serogroups O1, O4, and O11 were most prevalent in our sample set, accounting for approximately 60% of allV. alginolyticusstrains. The K serogroups had more extensive diversity than the O serogroups. We further identified the K serogroup-specific gene,wzy, corresponding to the serogroup in a one-to-one parallel relationship. The variation in K antigen, distinguished by the unique sequence of the genewzy, makes an essential contribution to the diagnostic investigations ofV. alginolyticus. Our results represent the first insight into the O and K antigen diversity ofV. alginolyticusand underline the importance of the structural versatility and functional adaptability of O- and K-AGCs.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12866-025-04216-9.

V. alginolyticusis a Gram-negative, halophilic, mesophilic, and facultative anaerobicVibriobacterium ubiquitously found in aquatic and marine environments, such as seawater [1] and river estuaries [2]. It is recognized as one of the 12 common opportunistic pathogens closely associated with humanVibrio-related diseases [3].V. alginolyticusis an emerging human foodborne pathogen capable of causing numerous diseases with ecosystem-wide effects on humans and marine animals. It is also commonly found in human food poisoning and sporadic diarrhea in coastal areas [4], and can cause clinical diseases, including gastroenteritis[5], wound infection [6] and otitis externa [7]. It is the etiological agent of diseased fish [8], causing huge economic losses to the aquaculture industry.

The O antigen (also called O-specific polysaccharide), consisting of a polymer of repeating oligosaccharide units [9], is one of the most variable components of the cell surface structure of Gram-negative bacteria [10]. The fact that the O antigen forms a very complex diversity can be mainly attributed to differences in monosaccharide composition, arrangement, and linkage between monosaccharides [11,12]. Diverse covalent modifications of O antigen occur, which are important for niche adaptation and play a large role in O antigen diversity and serotyping [13]. The O antigen is the primary target of the host immune system and bacteriophages [14,15], and the specificity of O antigen plays an important role in bacterial virulence and fitness [16]. The genes required for O antigen biosynthesis are usually located in a contiguous gene cluster between two housekeeping genes in the bacterial chromosome, which is named the O antigen biosynthesis gene cluster (O-AGC). These genes can be divided into three categories according to their biological functions: oligosaccharide unit processing, nucleotide sugar synthesis, and glycosyltransferase genes [17]. Previous studies have shown that they are commonly involved in three major biosynthetic pathways: the Wzx/Wzy-dependent, ABC transport-dependent, and synthetase-dependent pathway [17–19]. Generally, the former is common in Gram-negative bacteria, whereas the latter two pathways are relatively rare. Most O-AGCs are organized between two conserved genes in many bacterial species, such asgalFandgndinEscherichia coli[18],gmhDandrjginVibrio cholerae[20], andhemHandgskinYersinia pseudotuberculosis[21].

At the same time, the K antigen (also called the capsular polysaccharide, CPS), an extracellular structure composed of long polysaccharide chains, has a typical negative charge and therefore produces a highly hydrophobic capsular layer [22,23]. The K antigen is a critical virulence factor that enables immune evasion, protecting encapsulated bacterial cells from host immune defenses [24]. A single microbial species can form a range of structurally distinct K antigens, and K serotyping is often based on the genetic structure of the CPS. Previous studies have confirmed thatV. alginolyticuspossesses both LPS surface O antigen and K antigenic CPS [25]. The K antigen biosynthesis gene cluster (K-AGC) contains three major classes of genes: monosaccharide synthase, glycosyltransferase, and oligosaccharide unit processing enzyme genes. The K antigen biosynthetic pathway is often Wzy-dependent and corresponds to the O antigen.

Gram-negative bacteria exhibit remarkable biodiversity across diverse ecological niches. The O and K antigens, as bacterial surface structures characterized by high plasticity and robust environmental adaptability, render O- and K-AGCs ideal models for investigating bacterial genetic evolution. Moreover, O and K antigens are responsible for the serological diversity of bacterial species, and have been widely applied in clinical and epidemiological diagnosis to differentiate between any two serotypes [26,27]. To date, an increasing number of bacterial serotypes have been determined, with their serotyping systems being increasingly improved; for example,V. parahaemolyticusis classified into 13 O serotypes and 71 K serotypes [28,29].V. alginolyticushas an evolutionary relationship withV. parahaemolyticus, both of which belong to the Harveyi clade in the genusVibrio[30,31]. Therefore, we presumed thatV. alginolyticusandV. parahaemolyticusshare similar O- and K-antigen gene cluster structures. InV. parahaemolyticus, the putative O- and K-AGCs have been identified in the available genome sequence of the O3:K6 strain RIMD2210633, and it has been found that O-AGC was flanked bydgkA(also calledcoaD) andgmhD, while K-AGC was flanked bygmhDandrjg[12].

The genetic diversity of O- and K-AGCs provides theoretical support for the application of serotyping schemes to classify Gram-negative bacteria [32]. The O-AGC structure corresponding to any serogroup is unique amongVibriospecies [33]. Analysis of the O- and K-AGCs has strong potential to provide a clearer picture of the population structure ofV. alginolyticus. As an opportunistic pathogen,V. alginolyticushas not received sufficient attention with the current studies onV. alginolyticusmainly focus on virulence factors. A complete genomic dataset for this bacterial species has not yet been established to explore the diversity of gene clusters encoding O-antigen and K-antigen, which would greatly limit the development of serogroup-based molecular typing methods and lead to a delay in establishing a serotyping scheme forV. alginolyticus. Meanwhile, no commercial diagnostic antiserum is currently available.

In the present study, O- and K-AGCs ofV. alginolyticuswere used as models to understand the genetic characteristics of O and K antigens amongV. alginolyticusstrains, representing the first genome-based serogroup study of this species. We conducted a comprehensive analysis of these putative O- and K-AGCs and elucidated their molecular evolutionary mechanisms by comparing them at the whole-gene cluster structural and molecular levels. We analyzed 14 types of O-AGCs betweendgkAandgmhDand 48 types of K-AGCs betweengmhDandrjgamongV. alginolyticuschromosomes in depth. Furthermore, we identified K serogroup-specific genes that corresponded to the respective K serogroups. Our molecular serotyping analysis provides new insights into the genetic diversity of O- and K-AGCs inV. alginolyticusand provides theoretical support for the development of molecular diagnostic methods to identify this important pathogen.

From the 615V. alginolyticusgenomes listed in the NCBI GenBank database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/, accessed on June 10, 2023), those with low sequencing quality were removed. Another 133 previously described isolates [34] collected from several Chinese seas were also included in the study. Due to draft genomes, O:K gene clusters may be interrupted, resulting in the dispersion of different contigs. Overall, 155 strains with complete gene clusters were selected for further analyses. The detailed information is summarized in Supplementary Table 1.

V. alginolyticusstrains were sequenced using the Illumina HiSeq 4000 platform (Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) at the BGI Genomics Institute (Shenzhen, China) with a depth of 200 × coverage. FastQC (http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/) was used to evaluate the raw data and low-quality reads were filtered. Reads containing adapters, those with a proportion of N bases greater than 10%, contaminated and duplicated reads, as well as low-quality reads (Phred score ≤ 20 bases exceeding 50% of the read length) were removed. Then, the clean data were assembled into contigs using SPAdes v3.8.2 [35].

Each O-AGC betweendgkAandgmhDand betweengmhDandrjgofV. alginolyticusgenomes were extracted from the draft genome sequence for further analysis. Open reading frames (ORFs) prediction and annotation were performed using Prodigal v2.6.3 [36] and Prokka v1.13.3 [37]. Homology searches were performed against several databases, including web-BALST, Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG,www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/), and the PFAM (pfam.sanger.ac.uk) protein motif databases. The TMHMM v.2.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM-2.0/) program was used to predict transmembrane domains within the protein sequences.

A relationship network of the K-AGC genetic region was constructed by combining multiple bioinformatic tools. Briefly, the number of homologous genes shared by any two serogroups were calculated. The homologous genes were determined by using BLAST + [38]. The R igraph package was used to display the relationship network. The width of the links was related to the number of shared genes. Then the non-redundant homologous gene dataset using and CD-HIT [39] tools and converted the gene dataset into a matrix in row × column format as K-AGC × gene.

Phylogenetic analysis was performed using thewzygene protein sequences of the 155V. alginolyticusstrains. The genetic distance and sequence similarity of pairedwzygenes were calculated in MEGA v7.0 [40] using the maximum-likelihood algorithm and Kimura’s 2-parameter model. Bootstrap resampling was set to 1000.

BLAST sequence homology comparison between the whole genome sequence of theV. alginolyticustype strain ATCC 17749Tand the three known O:K gene clusters ofV. parahaemolyticuscorresponding to O3:K6, O4:68, and O4:K12 serotypes revealed a contiguous O:K gene cluster sequence ofV. alginolyticuswith 36.2 kbp in length (Fig.1). The regions of the putative O and K antigen gene clusters in the genome were determined through subsequent gene sequence alignment and functional annotation. Consistent withV. parahaemolyticus, the O-AGC ofV. alginolyticuswas flanked bydgkA(encoding diacylglycerol kinase) andgmhD(encoding an ADP-L-glycero-D-manno-heptose-6-epimerase), whereas the K-AGC was flanked bygmhDandrjg(encoding metallo-beta-lactamase family protein).

A total of 155 putative O- and K-AGCs fromV. alginolyticusgenomes were obtained in this study (Supplementary Tables2and 3). For O-AGCs, these gene clusters consisted of 9–19 ORFs, with an average of 16 ORFs per O-AGC. The size of O-AGCs ranged from 8.1 kbp (strain 40B, including 9 ORFs) to 18.9 kbp (strain VN-7501, including 19 ORFs), and the GC content ranged from 39.82 (strain Va154) to 42.83% (strain Va68). AmongV. alginolyticusgenomes, each K-AGC contained 16–35 ORFs. The size of K-AGCs ranged from 18.6 kbp (strain Va152, including 16 ORFs) to 35.3 kbp (strain Va70 = Va94 = Va98 = Va99, including 32 ORFs), and the G+C content ranged from 38.60 (strain Va194 and Va195) to 41.55% (strain UCD-32C).

According to the results of gene annotation and homologous comparison analysis, a putative gene pool, including 114 homologous genes, was found for O antigen biosynthesis inV. alginolyticus(Fig.2A). Similarly, 605 homologous genes were identified in all K-AGC genetic regions (Fig.2B). The two-dimensional hierarchical clustering heatmap revealed compositional discrepancies in genetic structures among K-AGC-related homologous genes, segregating these K-AGC sequences into two primary subdivisions designated as group 1 and group 2, respectively (Fig.2B). Such differences were not observed in the genetic structures of O-AGC. Notably, the genetic variation of the K antigen exhibits greater complexity than that of the O antigen, with these 605 homologous genes potentially constituting a gene reservoir for K antigen biosynthesis and assembly inV. alginolyticus.

V. alginolyticusstrains analyzed in the present study represented 14 different classes of O serogroups, named O1 to O14. A schematic representation of these 14 classes of O-AGCs is shown in Fig.3, and the characteristics of all the ORFs within each O-AGC are summarized in Supplementary Table 2.

Comparing the O-AGCs betweenV. alginolyticusand other species, it was found that most O-antigen encoding regions (OERs, which are functionally defined genomic regions responsible for encoding genes related to O-antigen synthesis) had the highest homology withV. parahaemolyticus, and the identity parameter can generally reach more than 95%. Therefore, it was speculated that these similar genes have the same biosynthetic functions. Specifically,kdkA,kdtA,waaF, andmsbBwere present in all 14 O-AGCs and were involved in encoding 3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic acid kinase, 3-deoxy-D-manno-octulosonic acid transferase, ADP-heptose-lipooligosaccharide heptosyltransferase, and lipid A biosynthesis myristoyltransferase, respectively (Supplementary Table 4). ThermlB(encoding dTDP-glucose 4,6-dehydratase) andrmlA(encoding glucose-1-phosphate thymidylyltransferase) genes were also found in most O-AGCs.

The distribution of O-AGCs is listed in Table1. O1 serogroup had the highest prevalence, that was, 54 strains belonging to the O1 serogroup, accounting for the percentage of 38.83%. The prevalence ranking was followed by O4 and O11 serogroups, accounting for the percentage of 14.19% (n=22/155) and 9.03% (n=14/155), respectively (Table1).

V. alginolyticusstrains were divided into 48 different K serogroups based on the rich complexity of their K-AGC homologous gene composition, which were named K1–K48 (Fig.4). Statistically, K43 (n=15) was the most prevalent amongV. alginolyticusstrains, followed by K45 (n=14), K48 (n=12), K47 (n=11), K37 (n=11), K34 (n=11), and K6 (n=9). The serogroups for the remaining K-AGCs are listed in Table2. The representativeV. alginolyticusK-AGCs of groups 1 and 2 are listed in Fig.2A and 2B, respectively, suggesting high genetic diversity. After BLAST alignment of these K-AGCs sequences, the results showed that the two ends were conserved regions with high similarity, while the source of variation was mainly concentrated in the middle sequence region. Each category of distinct K-AGCs sequences indicated a unique K serogroup inV. alginolyticusbacterial population. The detailed information of each type of K-AGCs has been list in TableS3.

Because K antigens have a more complex diversification than O antigens, we further analyzed the network relationships among the various K antigens. After a de-redundant comparison, we found that more than half of the homologous genes (n=359, 59.3%) were unique to the 48 K serogroups. Next, we calculated the paired homologous genes that constitute the K-AGCs sequence, resulting in the formation of an intricate relationship between the K-AGCs and a spherical network (Fig.5A). Overall, there was a relatively low correlation between a single K-AGC and any other K-AGCs. Certain K-AGCs that shared a large number of homologous genes were more closely related, for example, the highly close correlation between the K36 and K37 serogroups. The organization of homologous genes shared by any number of paired K-AGCs revealed a typical power-law distribution, suggesting that there were very few shared gene fragments between these K antigens (Fig.5B). The relationship network for the 48 different K serogroups and their homologous genes agreed with the two major subdivisions of K-AGCs (Fig.5C). Specifically, the homologous genes of groups 1 and 2 served their respective groups; that is, there were few common homologous genes between the two groups (except for the flanked genesgmhDandrjg).

The serogroup correlation analysis of K-AGCs identified in this study.AThe relationship network for 48 different K serogroups amongV. alginolyticusstrains. The thickness of the connection line represents the quantity of shared genes between serogroups.BDistribution of the homologous genes shared by any number of paired K-AGCs.CThe relationship network for 48 different K serogroups and their homologous genes. The upper half is highlighted in yellow, which represents the 22 K serogroups in group 2; conversely, the lower half in green represents the 26 K serogroups in group 1. The network revealed the detailed distribution of the homologous gene clusters in the different serogroups.

We found that all K-AGCs among 155V. alginolyticusstrains possessed bothwzxandwzygenes, whose biological functions involved encoding K antigen flippase and K antigen polymerase, respectively (Supplementary Table 5). This finding reveals that the K antigen biosynthetic pathway uses the Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway. Sequence alignment showed that thewzygene had > 99.5% DNA similarity across the same serogroup, whereas the sequence similarity was less than 10% in different serogroups. The DNA sequence length ofwzyranged from 735 to 1,869 bp, while the amino acid sequence length ranged from 245 to 623 aa. The G+C content of genewzyvaried from 27.09% to 40.05%. The number of transmembrane structural domains in eachwzygene was predicted to be 5–14.

A maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree was constructed based on the amino acid sequences ofwzy(Fig.6). The tree showed that 155 strains ofV. alginolyticusformed 48 separate and independent evolutionary branches with high bootstrap support according to the concatenated alignment sites. Notably, each monophyletic branch corresponded to the 48 different K serogroups identified in this study, with a one-to-one parallel relationship. This evidence demonstrates thatwzyis a K serogroup-specific gene inV. alginolyticus, which was also consistent with the findings inEnterobacteriaceaespecies. The variation inwzygene sequences can therefore be considered the basis for the diversity in the system of molecular typing for K antigen serogroups.

Subtle variations in O and K antigen genetic structures provide the basis for the development of intraspecific serological classification schemes for Gram-negative bacteria. The first serological method based on the structures of the O antigen was proposed by Kauffmann and White for the genusSalmonella, which clearly demonstrated that the serotypes ofSalmonellagenus members could be identified by the presence of saccharide substitution of mannose or galactose [41]. From 1945 to 1950, a specific serotype ofE. coliwas found to be associated with outbreaks of enteritis in newborns in nurseries, and serotyping was subsequently used for epidemiological investigation of organisms [42,43]. The serotyping method became the "gold standard" for strain identification and epidemiological investigation, and it was used as a basic tool for outbreak research and surveillance [44]. Currently, clinical and aquaculture infections caused by opportunistic pathogenicV. alginolyticusare major public health problems. However, the genetic structure of its O antigen and K antigen has not been well characterized so far. In this study, we established the most complete genome dataset ofV. alginolyticusto date. Through non-redundant homologous genes analysis, we explored the genomic polymorphism of coding gene clusters for O antigen and K antigen in theV. alginolyticuspopulation.

In this study, 14 O serogroups were identified, with the O1 serogroup accounting for 38.83% of isolates, suggesting it is the dominant prevalent type. The O-AGCs ofV. alginolyticusexhibit > 95% homology with those of the close relativeV. parahaemolyticus, implying they may share O antigen synthesis mechanisms through horizontal gene transfer or possess common ancestral gene modules in evolutionary history. Phage predation, environmental stresses (e.g., nutrient competition, antimicrobial exposure), and horizontal gene transfer are critical additional forces shaping antigen evolution, particularly for O antigens. This high conservation provides insights for cross-species antigenic cross-reactivity studies. Core gene analysis revealed thatkdkA,kdtA,waaF, andmsbBare stably present in all 14 O-AGCs, indicating their critical roles in basal O antigen synthesis and bacterial viability. These genes are involved in the biosynthesis of LPS core regions that directly influence membrane integrity and pathogenicity. For example,msbB-encoded myristoyltransferase modifies lipid A to enhance bacterial resistance to host innate immune responses [45]. Additionally, the presence ofrmlAandrmlBin most O-AGCs suggests thatV. alginolyticusprimarily synthesizes deoxy sugars via the Rml pathway [46], consistent with O antigen synthesis pathways in otherVibriospp.

The remarkable structural diversity of K antigens depends almost entirely on the genetic variation in K-AGCs. The chemical composition of the capsule is mainly composed of polysaccharides, polypeptides, and proteins [47,48]. Polysaccharides are the capsular components of most bacteria, whose molecular composition and configuration are usually diverse and complex [47], whereas polypeptides are components of a few bacterial capsules, such asBacillus anthracis[49]andYersinia pestis[50]. In recent decades, with the continuous development of sequencing technology, hundreds of bacterial K-AGCs have been deciphered. For example,Streptococcus pneumoniaecan be divided into 98 currently recognized K serotypes [51]. Various CPS structures ofE. colihave determined the structure of more than 80 K antigens in this species [52]. The diversity of K serotypes may be the result of adaptation to the host or acceptance of external selection pressure [53].

This study classifiedVibrio alginolyticusinto 48 independent K serogroups (K1-K48) based on the complex composition of K antigen gene clusters (K-AGCs), revealing a highly diversified genetic landscape. Serogroups such as K45 and K48 showed significantly higher prevalence (n ≥ 9), suggesting these serotypes may possess stronger environmental adaptability or transmission advantages. As the main component of capsular polysaccharides, K antigens directly participate in critical pathogenic processes such as immune evasion and adhesive colonization, thus facing stronger host immune selection pressure that drives high-frequency variation to avoid recognition [54]. Statistical results showed that over half of the homologous genes (59.3%) were specific to single serogroups, and gene fragments shared between serogroups were extremely rare, indicating that the evolution ofV. alginolyticusK antigens primarily rely on lineage-specific differentiation rather than frequent horizontal gene transfer. This may be related to the limited host diversity and restricted gene exchange in its marine ecological environment.

Network analysis further revealed that although most serogroups showed weak genetic relatedness. A few serogroups such as K36 and K37 shared close homologous genes, suggesting they may originate from recent common ancestors or local gene recombination events. This coexistence of "closely related clusters" and "independently differentiated clusters" reflects the dual evolutionary mechanisms ofV. alginolyticusK-AGCs. The local gene recombination can generate closely related serogroups, while overall genetic isolation maintains serogroup independence. Notably, the two major groups (group 1 and group 2) shared almost no homologous genes (except for the conserved region genesgmhDandrjg), implying their evolutionary paths may have diverged early, which possibly be related to adaptations to different ecological niches (such as host species differences and salinity tolerance ranges).

This study for the first time demonstrates that the biosynthesis of the K antigen inV. alginolyticusis mediated by the Wzx/Wzy-dependent pathway. A previous study has demonstrated that the Wzy-dependent and ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporter-dependent pathways are two common pathways with different polymer biosynthesis strategies in the assembly of most K antigens [55]. These synthetic and transporter-related gene clusters have been applied to the study of genetic evolution in a variety of bacteria, such asE. coliandS. pneumoniae, where there is a high degree of diversity in K antigens, which can be attributed to DNA recombination between strains or the uptake of external DNA [56]. This finding aligns with the established K antigen synthesis mechanism inEnterobacteriaceae[57–59], highlighting the conservation of this pathway across Gram-negative bacteria. Notably, phylogenetic analysis reveals that the 48 distinct K serogroups each correspond to independent monophyletic branches, exhibiting a strict one-to-one correspondence. This observation establishes thewzygene as a serogroup-specific molecular determinant for K antigens inV. alginolyticus. Thewzygene encodes a glycosyltransferase, where point mutations or domain rearrangements in its nucleotide sequence may alter substrate specificity, leading to the biosynthesis of K antigens with distinct glycan architectures [60]. Its sequence variations directly dictate the structural diversity of K antigens, thereby driving serotype differentiation. Thus, the evolutionary pressures on thewzygene represent a central evolutionary force shaping serotype diversity. This "one gene-one serotype" paradigm offers a robust molecular typing framework forV. alginolyticus. The targeted analysis ofwzygene variants enables rapid serotyping of clinical isolates, circumventing the limitations of traditional serological method. Notably, the strict correspondence betweenwzygenes and serogroups observed in this study differs from the one-to-many phenomenon of serotypes and gene clusters in someEnterobacteriaceae. This discrepancy may reflect differences in selective pressures (e.g., host immune pressure, niche competition) faced by different bacterial genera during evolutionary history. Future studies should expand strain sample sizes and integrate genomic-level recombination analysis to decipher the evolutionary dynamics ofwzygene, thereby fully elucidating the mechanisms underlying K antigen diversity inV. alginolyticus.

In this study, the genetic diversity of putative O- and K-AGCs inV. alginolyticuswas determined. To our knowledge, this study is the first to catalogue both the O and K serogroups within theV. alginolyticuspopulation. Given the structural versatility and functional adaptability of O and K surface antigens, our work helps facilitate the development ofV. alginolyticusvaccines based on surface polysaccharide antigens, the establishment of clinical serotyping systems, and the epidemiological surveillance ofV. alginolyticusinfections.

KY, ZH, and HG designed the research project. KY, ZH, YL, LM, XB and XP performed the experiments. KY, ZH, BK and HG analyzed and discussed the data. KY and ZH wrote the manuscript. KY, ZH, YL, LM, XB, XP and HG reviewed and discussed the manuscript. All authors reviewed the manuscript.

This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2022YFC2302800), the China National Key Research and Development Program (2024YFE0106300) and UK Research and Innovation (MR/Y015223/1), the Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory Construction Project (2024ZY01026), the Construction Fund of Key Medical Disciplines of Hangzhou (2025HZGF13), the Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province, China (LY20H190001), and the Zhejiang Provincial Medical and Health Science and Technology Plan (2023KY641).