To evaluate the efficacy and safety of anrikefon (formerly known as HSK21542), a novel selective peripherally restricted kappa opioid receptor agonist, in patients with chronic kidney disease associated pruritus.

Multicentre, double blind, randomised placebo controlled phase 3 trial.

652 patients with moderate to severe CKD associated pruritus undergoing haemodialysis were screened: 545 were randomly assigned (1:1 ratio) to receive either anrikefon (n=275) or placebo (n=270).

Intravenous anrikefon (0.3 μg/kg body weight) or placebo three times weekly for 12 weeks, followed by an optional open label extension phase with anrikefon treatment for 40 weeks.

The primary endpoint was the percentage of patients achieving at least a 4 point reduction in weekly mean 24 hour worst itching intensity numerical rating scale (WI-NRS) score from baseline to week 12. Secondary outcomes were the percentage of patients achieving at least a 3 point reduction in weekly mean WI-NRS score from baseline to week 12, as well as changes in itch related quality of life from baseline using the Skindex-10 and 5-D itch scales. The change in itch related quality of life from baseline to week 40 of open label treatment was also reported using the 5-D itch scale. The safety of anrikefon was evaluated throughout the trial.

243/275 (88%) patients in the anrikefon group and 254/270 (94%) in the placebo group completed the 12 week double blind treatment. 443 subsequently entered the 40 week open label extension phase. 37% of patients in the anrikefon group showed at least a 4 point reduction in WI-NRS score at week 12 compared with 15% in the placebo group (P<0.001). The percentage of patients with at least a 3 point reduction in WI-NRS score from baseline to week 12 was 51% in the anrikefon group compared with 24% in the placebo group (P<0.001). The anrikefon group showed significant improvements in itch related quality of life (mean change from baseline in 5-D itch scale −5.3v−3.1, P<0.001 and in Skindex-10 scale −15.2v−9.3, P<0.001). Anrikefon also showed sustained long term efficacy during the open label extension phase at week 40, with persistent improvement in quality of life scores on the 5-D itch scale. Mild to moderate dizziness was more common in the anrikefon group than placebo group but without evident clinical consequences.

In patients with moderate to severe pruritus undergoing haemodialysis, anrikefon was found to be safe and resulted in a noticeable reduction in itch intensity and an improvement in itch related quality of life.

Chronic kidney disease (CKD) associated pruritus is a common and distressing condition in patients with advanced disease, especially those undergoing renal replacement therapy. CKD associated pruritus affects more than 60% of patients undergoing haemodialysis, with 33-50% reporting moderate to severe itching.1234Pruritus not only worsens the quality of life of these patients but also leads to higher mortality rates.56As shown in a large international study, pruritus in patients undergoing haemodialysis was associated with a 17% higher mortality risk.7Thus, novel effective treatment strategies need to be evaluated, given the substantial side effects of off-label treatments used to manage CKD associated pruritus.

Anrikefon (formerly known as HSK21542) is a novel selective peripherally restricted kappa opioid receptor agonist that exerts antinociceptive and antipruritic effects by activating peripheral kappa opioid receptors.12Anrikefon has a hydrophilic small peptide and spirocyclic structure that enhances its binding affinity to the kappa opioid receptor, resulting in minimal penetration of the blood-brain barrier.13Thus, anrikefon can potentially reduce the systemic side effects that are commonly associated with activation of kappa opioid receptors in the central nervous system. A previous phase 2 trial involving patients receiving haemodialysis and with moderate to severe pruritus showed clinically meaningful reductions in itch intensity and statistically significant improvements in itch related quality of life in the anrikefon group compared with placebo group.14We conducted a phase 3 trial to evaluate the efficacy and safety of anrikefon in patients with moderate to severe pruritus undergoing haemodialysis.

This phase 3 multicentre double blind randomised placebo controlled trial was conducted at 50 sites in China. The trial comprised a double blind treatment phase for 12 weeks, followed by an optional open label extension phase with anrikefon treatment for 40 weeks.

Eligible patients for the double blind phase were adults (≥18 years) undergoing haemodialysis three times weekly for at least three months, with a dry body weight (ie, patients neither overhydrated or underhydrated, as determined by the doctor) of 40-135 kg and moderate to severe pruritus. We defined moderate to severe pruritus as a weekly mean score of >5 on the 24 hour worst itching intensity numerical rating scale (WI-NRS). The mean score was calculated from daily assessments during a week’s run-in period before randomisation. Notably, concomitant use of antihistamines, corticosteroids, calcineurin inhibitors, gabapentin, or pregabalin was permitted if doses had been maintained at stable levels for at least seven days before screening. Also, concomitant use of antipsychotics, sedatives, hypnotics, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, antianxiety drugs, or tricyclic antidepressants was permitted if doses had been maintained at stable levels for at least 14 days before screening. Initiation of new antipruritic drugs after the screening visit was prohibited. The supplementary appendix details the eligibility criteria. All the patients signed informed consent forms before trial participation.

Eligible patients were randomised in a 1:1 ratio to receive either intravenous anrikefon or placebo at a dose of 0.3 μg/kg three times weekly for 12 weeks. Any participant who underwent an extra dialysis session in any given week received a supplementary dose of anrikefon or placebo, with a maximum of four doses weekly. The dosage was calculated based on the patient’s dry body weight, which was assessed every four weeks. Anrikefon or placebo was administered intravenously within one hour after the dialysis session, either through the dialysis circuit or through an arm without a fistula or a non-fistula vessel in the arm with a fistula. Randomisation and blinding were performed using a computer generated sequence and stratified by baseline WI-NRS score (<7 (moderate itching) and ≥7 (severe itching)) to ensure that the groups were well balanced for disease severity.

After the completion of the 12 week double blind phase (see fig 1), eligible patients in both randomisation groups were invited to participate in an open label extension phase of anrikefon treatment for 40 weeks (see fig 2). Anrikefon was administered to all patients according to the principles of the double blind phase.

The trial was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki and the Good Clinical Practice guidelines. The institutional review board at each participating institution approved the trial protocol. All the patients provided written informed consent before trial participation. An independent data monitoring committee was established for this trial, which periodically reviewed all the data. The committee conducted an unblinded futility analysis after 182 participants had received treatment for 12 weeks and their 24 hour WI-NRS weekly average values were available. The results of the interim analysis supported the independent data monitoring committee’s decision to continue the trial.

The sample size for the trial was determined based on the results from a phase 2 clinical trial (Anrikefon-203), which indicated at least a 4 point decrease from baseline to week 12 in the weekly mean WI-NRS score for the anrikefon 0.30 μg/kg group compared with placebo group, with a difference of 13% (data not published). Using a one sided test with a significance level of 0.025 and a power of 80%, a total of 434 participants were required to detect a difference in the primary endpoint. Considering a 20% dropout rate, we aimed to enrol study 544 participants.

The primary analysis was conducted on the full analysis dataset from the double blind treatment phase, with data handling according to the multiple imputation strategy for missing data (see supplementary table S1). For each imputed complete dataset, a logistic regression model was applied, using at least a 4 point change from baseline to week 12 in the weekly mean WI-NRS score as the dependent variable, the treatment group as the independent variable, and the baseline WI-NRS score as a covariate. Different additional strategies were used to analyse the primary endpoint in the full analysis and per protocol datasets to show the robustness of the results. The odds ratio for the anrikefon group versus the placebo group, along with its standard error (SE), was calculated from 100 imputed datasets. Rubin’s rule was then used to combine the results, yielding a pooled odds ratio, the corresponding 95% confidence interval, and the P value. If the lower limit of the 95% CI was >1, it indicated that the anrikefon group has a higher likelihood of response (the difference from baseline in WI-NRS ≥4 points) at week 12 compared with the placebo group, suggesting that the response rate of anrikefon is superior at week 12. We computed the least squares mean changes from baseline and corresponding 95% CIs for each treatment group. All statistical analyses were performed using SAS software (version 9.4).

For the secondary endpoints, we analysed the mean changes from baseline to week 12 in the total scores of the 5-D itch and Skindex-10 scales using a repeated measures mixed effects model, with the trial group as a fixed effect, and the baseline score and stratification factors as covariates. Using the same logistic regression model that was used for the primary outcome, we analysed the percentage of patients with at least a 3 point reduction in the weekly mean WI-NRS score from baseline to week 12.

Safety was evaluated by monitoring adverse events, vital signs, clinical laboratory measurements, and electrocardiograms throughout the study period. All patients who underwent randomisation and received at least one dose of the study drug were included in the safety analysis. The incidence and severity of treatment emergent adverse events were recorded and analysed in the context of the study treatment.

No funding was allocated for involvement of patients or the public in the design, conduct, reporting, or dissemination plans of this trial. However, the participants were aware of the purpose of the trial during recruitment. Although there was no direct patient and public involvement in this paper owing to funding restrictions, we did speak to patients about the study, and we asked a member of the public to read our manuscript after submission.

Of 652 patients screened, 545 were randomly assigned to receive either anrikefon (n=275) or placebo (n=270) between June 2022 and June 2024. Among these, 544 participants were included in the full analysis dataset. One patient was excluded owing to lack of post-dose efficacy assessments. Finally, 243 (88%) patients in the anrikefon group and 254 (94%) in the placebo group completed the 12 week double blind treatment (fig 1). Subsequently, 443 patients entered the 40 week open label extension phase (fig 2). The study population comprised predominantly men (70%), with a mean age of 52.7 years. The baseline weekly mean WI-NRS score was 7.0 (standard deviation (SD 1.1). More than half of the participants (52%) had a WI-NRS score of at least 7 at baseline. The baseline characteristics of the two groups were comparable (table 1). Moreover, the rate of concomitant use of antipruritic drugs was comparable between the two groups (see supplementary table S2).

SD=standard deviation; WI-NRS=worst itching intensity numerical rating scale.

Body weight at which the patient’s volume shows neither overhydration nor underhydration, as determined by the doctor. At each dialysis session, fluid was removed to lower the patient’s body weight to this prescribed dry weight.

Measures worst itching intensity during previous 24 hours; higher scores indicate greater intensity of itching.

Higher scores indicate worse itch related quality of life.

Anrikefon resulted in significant improvements in the primary outcome compared with placebo. The percentage of participants in the anrikefon group who achieved at least a 4 point improvement from baseline on the 24 hour WI-NRS was 37% (95% CI 31% to 43%) compared with 15% (11% to 19%) in the placebo group. The odds ratio for the anrikefon group versus placebo group was 3.56 (95% CI 2.30 to 5.50), with a P<0.001 (fig 3). Results of additional analyses of the primary outcome matched with the primary analysis (see supplementary table S3).

Analysis of subgroups defined by baseline WI-NRS score, age, and sex showed that, with the exception of the subgroup of 65 years or older, all other subgroups showed statistically significant differences in the percentage of participants achieving a ≥4 point reduction in WI-NRS score from baseline to week 12 between the anrikefon and placebo groups (see supplementary figure S1).

The percentage of participants achieving a ≥3 point improvement from baseline on the WI-NRS at week 12 was significantly higher in the anrikefon group (51%, 95% CI 45% to 57%) compared with placebo group (24%, 19% to 29%). The odds ratio for the anrikefon group versus placebo group was 3.34 (95% CI 2.29 to 4.87, P<0.001) (fig 3). The least squares mean difference in change from baseline in weekly mean WI-NRS scores at week 12 between the anrikefon group and placebo group was −1.5 (95% CI −1.90 to −1.20, P<0.001). Moreover, a statistically significant improvement in mean WI-NRS starting at week 2 was sustained through 12 weeks of treatment (fig 4). Notably, the greatest change from baseline occurred at the 12th week. Supplementary figure S2 shows the absolute mean WI-NRS score for each group over the 12 week double blind period.

The anrikefon group showed significant improvements in itch related quality of life at week 12 using the Skindex-10 and 5-D itch scales compared with placebo group (fig 5andfig 6). For example, the least squares mean change from baseline in the Skindex-10 total score at week 12 was −15.2 (SE 0.7) in the anrikefon group and −9.3 (0.69) in the placebo group (fig 5), with a between group difference of −5.9 (95% CI −7.88 to −4.02, P<0.001). Similarly, the least squares mean change from baseline in the 5-D itch total score at week 12 was −5.3 (SE 0.21) in the anrikefon group and −3.1 (0.21) in the placebo group, with a between group difference of −2.2 (95% CI −2.77 to −1.62, P<0.001) (fig 6).

At week 40 of the open label extension phase, 356 participants showed a persistent improvement in quality of life scores on the 5-D itch scale, showing sustained efficacy of anrikefon (fig 5). Specifically, the change from baseline during the double blind phase for the 176 participants in the anrikefon group was −7.8 (SD 3.37) points, and for the 180 participants in the placebo group was −7.6 (SD 3.18) points.

A total of 502 participants received anrikefon, with the longest duration of use for 374 days. During the double blind treatment phase, the incidence of treatment emergent adverse events was comparable between the anrikefon and placebo groups [228 (83%) and 222 (82%) participants, respectively]. Twenty participants (7%) in the anrikefon group and 12 (4%) in the placebo group discontinued treatment owing to treatment emergent adverse events. Fifty participants (18%) in the anrikefon group had CTCAE (common terminology criteria for adverse events) grade ≥3 treatment emergent adverse events compared with 56 participants (21%) in the placebo group. The most common drug related adverse event in patients receiving anrikefon was dizziness, which was generally mild to moderate and resolved without evident clinical consequences. Other common adverse events such as hyperkalaemia, dialysis related hypotension, hypotension, and muscle cramps were comparable between the two groups (table 2). In the open label extension phase, 410 participants (93%) reported treatment emergent adverse events, with 92 (21%) experiencing treatment emergent adverse events related to the study drug. The incidence of severe treatment emergent adverse events (CTCAE grade ≥3) was 42%, affecting four participants (1%) (table 3). The incidence of clinically relevant abnormalities in vital signs, laboratory test results, or electrocardiographic findings were comparable between the two groups. The types of adverse events were largely similar between the double blind treatment phase and the open label extension phase (see supplementary tables S4 and S5 for detailed data).

The double blind phase is defined as all patients who had undergone randomisation and received at least one dose of placebo or anrikefon between randomisation and end of 12 week double blind intervention period.

Defined as those with an incidence >5% in either group. See supplementary table S4 for adverse events that were reported in at least 1.5% of patients.

The open label phase is defined as patients with at least one visit in the period of drug discontinuation during the 40 week open label treatment phase.

Three deaths (1%) occurred in the anrikefon group and five (2%) in the placebo group during the double blind treatment phase. Moreover, 20 deaths (4.5%) occurred during the open label extension phase (table 3). Supplementary table S6 provides detailed data.

In the present phase 3 (Anrikefon-302) trial, anrikefon led to a statistically significant improvement in pruritus intensity and itch related quality of life in patients with CKD associated pruritus undergoing haemodialysis, compared with placebo. The improvements in quality of life persisted throughout the 52 weeks of treatment. Moreover, anrikefon was well tolerated throughout the double blind and open label treatment phases.

The discovery of imbalance between kappa opioid receptor and mu opioid receptor signalling in pruritus facilitated the development of kappa opioid receptor agonists as potential treatment strategies for CKD associated pruritus.1718A preclinical study suggested that anrikefon could be a potent effective kappa opioid receptor agonist for relieving itching.19Furthermore, a multicentre double blind randomised placebo controlled phase 2a trial indicated that anrikefon was well tolerated in the dose range of 0.05-0.80 μg/kg in patients undergoing haemodialysis,14making it a promising candidate for managing CKD associated pruritus. The present phase 3 trial showed a more important effect of anrikefon on CKD associated pruritus in Chinese patients with moderate to severe pruritus undergoing haemodialysis. Anrikefon statistically significantly reduced itch intensity and improved itch related quality of life in these patients.

Anrikefon’s high affinity for peripheral kappa opioid receptors makes it a potentially safe and effective treatment for CKD associated pruritus. However, the long term effects of kappa opioid receptor agonists remain unknown. In addition to the 12 week double blind treatment phase, the present trial included a 40 week open label extension phase, offering a comprehensive assessment of anrikefon’s long term efficacy and safety. The sustained improvement observed in the open label extension phase at week 40 supports the long term efficacy of anrikefon in managing pruritus. This investigation therefore provided critical evidence for the efficacy and safety of long term treatment with anrikefon in patients with CKD associated pruritus undergoing haemodialysis.

In this trial, although the adverse event of dizziness seemed to be more frequent in patients receiving anrikefon compared with placebo, most of the treatment emergent adverse events were mild to moderate. Importantly, the treatment emergent adverse events did not increase with prolonged use of anrikefon. Moreover, the incidence of diarrhoea did not increase, which was reported in patients receiving difelikefalin.21During the open label extension phase, the incidence of treatment emergent adverse events did not statistically significantly increase despite longer use of anrikefon. The types and rates of adverse events, including serious adverse events and those with higher incidence, were largely consistent between the anrikefon group and placebo group. In addition, no dysphoria or hallucination events were observed, both of which are well documented adverse events associated with centrally acting kappa opioid receptor agonists.2324Thus, anrikefon was well tolerated, even with prolonged use.

Given the pharmacological characteristics of kappa opioid receptor agonists, the potential physical dependence associated with long term use remains a concern.25A preclinical study specifically designed to evaluate the addictive properties of anrikefon suggested a low probability of misuse.26In a phase 2 trial, no withdrawal symptoms were detected throughout the two week discontinuation period, as measured by the short opioid withdrawal scale and objective opioid withdrawal scale scores (unpublished data), which further confirmed the low potential for misuse. Taken together, these data indicate that long term use of kappa opioid receptor agonists is potentially safe for patients with CKD associated pruritus undergoing haemodialysis.

This study has several limitations. Firstly, it exclusively enrolled patients with end stage renal disease requiring haemodialysis. Therefore, the efficacy and safety of anrikefon in patients with non-dialysis dependent CKD remain to be investigated. Secondly, the implications for discontinuation of long term treatment and the potential for physical dependence associated with long term treatment with kappa opioid receptor agonists were not evaluated. Thirdly, this was a placebo controlled trial. An active controlled trial comparing the drug with established treatments should be further conducted. Although residual placebo effects cannot be entirely excluded, rigorous standardisation of methods minimised the impact of these effects on the trial outcomes. Finally, the open label design during the extension phase could have introduced bias in adverse event reporting by both patients and investigators.

This phase 3 trial showed that a new peripheral kappa opioid receptor agonist, anrikefon, could statistically significantly reduce the intensity of pruritus and improve the quality of life of patients with moderate to severe CKD associated pruritus undergoing haemodialysis. The sustained therapeutic effect and low incidence of central opioid adverse reactions make anrikefon a promising new treatment option for patients with CKD associated pruritus.

We thank the patients who participated in this trial. We thank Lu-Yin Sun, Shu Gao, and Wen-Tao Chen (for biostatistical consulting) and Ya-Ming Li (Department of Research and Development of Haisco Pharmaceutical Group, Sichuan, China) for their contribution to the conduct of this trial. We are also grateful to the following contributors from the other participating centres for their efforts in recruiting patients, carrying out follow-up visits, and data analysis: Gang Long (Tianjin People’s Hospital), Tie-Kun Yan (Tianjin Medical University General Hospital), Lei Liu (The First Affiliated Hospital of Bengbu Medical University), Hong-Li Jiang (The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University), Xiao-Ping Wang (Jinan Central Hospital), De-Guang Wang (The Second Hospital of Anhui Medical University), Jian Huang (Jinhua Municipal Central Hospital), Li-Ying Miu (The First People’s Hospital of Changzhou), Xiao-Hui Wang (Fifth Hospital in Wuhan), Wen-Li Chen (The Central Hospital of Wuhan), Hong Liu (The Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University), Wei Chen (The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University), Yong-Zhi Xu (Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Medical University), Yong Wei (Shandong Provincial Qianfoshan Hospital), Li Zhou (West China Hospital Sichuan University), Lu Lv (The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangdong Pharmaceutical University), Ling Wu (Xuzhou Central Hospital), Dong-Liang Zhang (Beijing Jishuitan Hospital), Bang-Ming Chen (Jiujiang Traditional Chinese Medicine Hospital), Hong-Li Lin (The First affiliated hospital of Dalian Medical University), Hua Zhou (Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University), Nan Mao (The First Affiliated Hospital of Chengdu Medical College), Qi Guo (The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine), Ping Luo (The Second Norman Bethune Hospital of Jilin University), Wei Ren (Anhui Provincial Hospital), Qi-Jun Wan (First Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University), Xin-Zhou Zhang (Shenzhen People’s Hospital), Fu-Yun Sun (Cangzhou Central Hospital), Yi Li (Dongguan People’s Hospital), Hong-Bo Li (Wuhan No. 1 Hospital), Xiao-Ling Wang (The Second Hospital Lanzhou University), and Shu-Tong Du (Cangzhou People’s Hospital).

Contributors: B-CL, Z-LL, and PZ contributed equally to this work and are co-first authors. BCL and JHC conceived and designed the trial and are co-corresponding authors with equal contribution. All authors contributed to data acquisition and analysis. ZLL and BCL prepared the initial draft of the manuscript, and the other authors wrote various sections. All authors revised the manuscript and approved the final version. The corresponding authors attest that all listed authors meet authorship criteria and that no others meeting the criteria have been omitted. JHC and BCL act as guarantors.

Funding: This trial was funded by the Haisco Pharmaceutical Group. The funder was not involved in the trial’s design, data collection and analysis, and interpretation.

Transparency: The lead author (the manuscript’s guarantor) affirms that the manuscript is an honest, accurate, and transparent account of the study being reported; that no important aspects of the study have been omitted; and that any discrepancies from the study as planned (and, if relevant, registered) have been explained.

Dissemination to participants and related patient and public communities: The results of this trial were presented in the plenary session of the 2024 American Society of Nephrology kidney week in San Diego, CA. Our group will facilitate dissemination to participants and provide a summary of the trial findings. Once this study is published, we will disseminate the results to the public through social media and write blogs to explain the results. We also plan to present the study outcomes at academic congresses in China and worldwide.

Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.