Solar energy, as an alternative source to catalyze chemical
reactions,
has been rapidly utilized and developed over the past few decades,
particularly with TiO2-based semiconductor photocatalysts.
Regulating the carrier dynamics under photoexcitation and controlling
the interfacial reaction kinetics have been emphasized as fundamental
approaches to increase the quantum yield of photocatalytic systems.
Transition-metal-ion doping is a promising strategy to address these
issues, although the precise roles and optimal spatial distribution
of dopants remain unclear. In this systematic study, we designed surface-only,
bulk-only, and surface-bulk-doped brookite TiO2nanoparticles
using Ni2+as dopants and evaluated the photocatalytic
performance of these doped samples based on the apparent reaction
rate constants. It is demonstrated that the crystal structure, morphology,
and surface composition did not change significantly after doping,
and the observed enhancement in photocatalysis can be correlated to
the doping positions. Continuous doping from the bulk to surface,
forming the trap-to-transfer centers to mediate interfacial electron
transfer, proves to be the most effective pathway. This proof-of-concept
work offers a unique perspective on the transition-metal-ion-induced
photocatalysis mechanism of brookite TiO2nanoparticles
and will help us design more efficient photocatalytic systems.

Historically, various mechanistic
interpretations of metallic-ion
dopants in TiO2, informed by energetics, optical response,
and related photophysics, have been presented and were recently summarized
in this perspective article by Khan and co-workers. Briefly, three representative mechanisms have been proposed:
(1) the dopants can form intermediate states (or an extra absorption
band if doped at a high percentage), which reduce the effective band
gap and expand light absorption into the visible range;,−(2) the dopant redox pair can serve as a mediator,
tuning the redox potential of photogenerated radicals to match the
desired redox reaction pathway;,−and (3) the dopants can trap photogenerated carriers, increasing
their lifetime by reducing the recombination rate and thus improving
quantum efficiency.,−It is noteworthy
that most of the work involves anatase and rutile TiO2nanoparticles,
while brookite TiO2is still underexplored. More importantly,
the exact role of transition-metal-ion dopants remains unclear, particularly
in light of the controversial literature regarding either enhanced
or deteriorated photocatalytic activities.,−This may be due to the specific synthetic methods,
the actual photolysis, and the broad range of chemical reactions examined
across a wide spectrum of wavelengths, which necessitated a more systematic
approach to address this issue.

Fundamentally, upon photoexcitation
with a photon energy greater
than the band gap, the electrons in the semiconductor are promoted
from the occupied valence band (VB) to the unoccupied conduction band
(CB), generating excited electron–hole (e–/h+) pairs. The photogenerated charge carriers can migrate
to the surface to participate in redox reactions, either lowering
the activation barrier or increasing the reaction rate. When transition-metal
ions are doped into the TiO2crystal lattice, they change
the carrier dynamics from intrinsic defect trapping (bulk trapping
>20 ns and surface trapping at 1–20 ps) to artificial trapping
sites (bulk/surface to 200 ns on average), as measured by transient
absorption spectroscopy. One of the key
factors influencing the final photocatalytic performance is that the
dopant, whether located on the surface or within the bulk, must act
as a trapping site to decrease the level of electron–hole recombination.
This action enhances the lifetime of photogenerated charge carriers
and facilitates interfacial charge transfer, thereby promoting chemical
reactions. In fact, this is not always the case, as the trapping effect
can be two sides of the same coin;−deep trapping in the
bulk may reduce the number of charge carriers reaching the surface.
In contrast, shallow trapping at the surface may induce extra intraatomic
d-d transitions that annihilate the charge carriers. Therefore, a
more nuanced design approach is necessary to distinguish and potentially
balance these two aspects.

For this study, the nickel­(II) ion
(68 pm) is selected as the exemplary
candidate for the doping effect due to its radius similar to that
of the titanium­(IV) ion (72 pm) and a relatively mild energy level
that lies between the conduction and valence bands. Doping of anatase
TiO2with Ni2+has been reported in the literature
and surface-bulk doping has been shown to be successful, whereas surface-only
doping is less common. Ni2+doping of brookite structure
is highly under-researched, and most of the reports employed surface-bulk
doping methods.−In this work, we utilized hydrothermal method for
synthesis of pristine and doped TiO2and systematically
designed the distribution of dopants within the crystal surface, within
the bulk, or both (Scheme). These Ni2+ions can readily replenish the Ti4+or Ti3+defect sites in the pristine TiO2nanoparticles, achieving the desired doping status through
various synthetic or post-treatment methods. This approach could limit
structural distortion and morphological changes across different samples,
narrowing down the only contributing factor to the dopant position.
Furthermore, the photocatalytic performance of methylene blue degradation
is employed as a model reaction to evaluate this contribution and
correlate it with the doping effect. Finally, mechanisms of photocatalysis
involving different doping locations are proposed to elucidate the
exact roles of these dopants and provide unique insights into transition-metal-ion-doped
photocatalysts.

aRed stands for oxygen,
blue for
titanium, and green for nickel.

All chemicals and reagents
were used without any purification. The morphology of the nanoparticles
and elemental compositions of dopants were studied by scanning electron
microscopy with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDS, SEM-JSM-IT700HR,
15 kV, JEOL with an EDS-Ultim Max 40 detector, Oxford Instruments).
For nickel quantitative analysis, the EDS detector was calibrated
with UHV-EL Reference Standards for EDS/WDS (99.994% purity of nickel
in crystalline form, Ted Pella, Inc., stored in a vacuum desiccator).
The high-resolution spatial distribution was confirmed by high-angle
annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM)
with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) (Thermo Fisher Talos
F200X S/TEM operated at 200 kV). Images and EDS maps were acquired
in STEM mode, using a convergence angle of ∼10.5 mrad on the
HAADF detector. EDS maps were processed to subtract the background
and deconvolute any overlapping peaks by using standard quantification
routines in the Velox software package. Optical diffuse reflectance
measurements were collected using a Shimadzu UV-3600 UV–vis
NIR spectrometer in the spectral range of 200–1000 nm at room
temperature (Ba2SO4was used as a reference).
To correctly determine the band gap energies of the samples, the methyl
orange and the samples were diluted with Ba2SO4in a 1:100 weight ratio and placed side by side in the sample holder. The local crystalline structure of pristine
and doped TiO2nanoparticles was determined by the powder
X-ray diffraction pattern (Bruker D2 PHASER Benchtop XRD, Cu Kα
radiation, 30 kV, 10 mA) and was processed with DIFFRAC.EVA data analysis
software with the Crystallography Open Database (rev. 278581). The
Rietveld refinements of the data were performed in the BGMN kernel
using the open-source software Profex. The unpaired electrons in doped TiO2nanoparticles (dopant
ions or oxygen vacancies) were measured by electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR) spectroscopy (Bruker EMXnano Benchtop EPR system, X-band, microwave
frequency of 9.61 GHz, and power attenuation of 4.00 dB). The samples
were ground using mortar and pestle before being loaded into a 4 mm
(outer diameter) EPR quartz sample tube. The overall atomic percentage
of Ni dopants across the sample was measured by inductively coupled
plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES, Agilent 5110 ICP-OES).
The instrument parameters are radio frequency power of 1.2 kW, plasma
flow of 15.0 L/min, auxiliary flow of 1.50 L/min, nebulizer flow of
0.75 L/min, sample uptake delay of 15 s, instrument stabilization
delay of 15 s, replicate read time of 2 s, and replicates of 3 times.
The sample (approximately 0.05 g) was digested with a mixture of concentrated
nitric acid (HNO3) and hydrofluoric acid (HF), and then
diluted 10 times for the ICP-OES test. The surface composition and
oxidation states were determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(XPS, Kratos Analytical Axis Ultra system with monochromatic Al–Kα
X-ray source operated at 150 W), in which the contamination carbon
(C–C, at 284.9 eV) was set as the reference to calibrate the
binding energy of other elements. Charge neutralization was applied
when necessary to prevent sample charging. The surface composition
with functional group identifications was determined by Attenuated
Total Reflectance Fourier Transform Infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR,
SHIMADZU IRSpirit-X).

The synthesis procedure was modified from the hydrothermal method
reported by Li and co-workers. In brief,
0.6 g of titanium­(IV) oxysulfate-sulfuric acid hydrate (TiOSO4·xH2O +xH2SO4) was added to 12.5 mL of deionized water
(DI H2O) and stirred at 700 rpm and room temperature for
1 h, until the solution became clear and all precursors were fully
dissolved. Then, 25 mL of 0.5 M sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution was
added to adjust the pH to 12.5, and the formed white sol–gel
precipitate was stirred for an additional 24 h. The sol–gel
solution was then purified to remove any leftover precursors by centrifugation
at 5000 rpm for 5 min (5 times). The final pH of the sol–gel
solution was adjusted to 12.5 with 6 M NaOH­(aq) before being sealed
into a PPL-lined hydrothermal autoclave and heated to 220 °C
for 24 h. After being cooled to room temperature, the pristine brookite
TiO2nanoparticles were filtered and washed with DI H2O and ethanol. The dry powder samples were collected and stored
in the refrigerator for further characterization and photocatalysis.

The surface-only-doped samples, Ni2+-TiO2–surface, were synthesized from the pristine
brookite TiO2nanoparticles. 0.135 g of pristine brookite
TiO2nanoparticles was mixed with 16 mg nickel­(II) chloride
hexahydrate (NiCl2·6H2O) in 10 mL of DI
H2O under constant stirring, and the mixture was sonicated
for 5 min and then heated up to 120 °C until all water was evaporated.
The weight percentage of Ni2+dopant to Ti was prepared
to be 4% in the mixture solution, which was twice as high as the surface-bulk-doped
sample below due to the low doping efficiency of this method. Then,
the mixture was heated to 350 °C for 3 h to dry the particles.
The final surface-only Ni2+-doped TiO2nanoparticles
were washed with DI H2O and ethanol.

The synthesis procedure for surface-bulk
samples, Ni2+-TiO2–Surface-Bulk, was
followed similar to the pristine brookite TiO2nanoparticles
above; except in the first step, 8 mg of NiCl2·6H2O was added into the titanium­(IV) oxysulfate-sulfuric acid
hydrate solution to serve as the dopant agents. The weight percentage
of Ni2+dopant to Ti was prepared to be 2% in the mixture
solution.

The bulk-only-doped samples, Ni2+-TiO2–bulk, were synthesized based on the surface-bulk
Ni2+-doped TiO2nanoparticles procedure. 0.2
g of surface-bulk Ni2+-doped TiO2nanoparticles
was added to 10 mL of 3 M hydrochloric acid (HCl) solution and stirred
under 700 rpm for 3 h to remove the surface-doped Ni2+ions.
The mixture solution was then filtered and washed with DI H2O and ethanol. Acid-washing the surface of the nanoparticles resulted
in a greenish solution after filtration, indicating the removal of
surface-bonded Ni2+.

The methylene blue (MB) dye degradation served
as a model reaction to compare the photocatalytic performance of these
nanoparticles. In a typical procedure, 6 mg of nanoparticles (0.0025
mol/L TiO2) was mixed with 30 mL of 10 ppm MB solution
(3.1 × 10–5mol/L) in a quartz reaction tube.
The solution mixtures were stirred and sonicated to ensure complete
mixing before the reaction. The dark adsorption–desorption
equilibrium was implemented to account for any differences in the
adsorption capacity for the different nanoparticles. Then, two different
light sources were introduced into the system to perform the photocatalytic
reactions. The visible-light reaction setup consisted of a photoreactor
(Rayonet RPR-100 Photochemical Reactor) with six visible lamps (center
wavelength of 575 nm, approximately 91 mW/cm2at the center)
surrounding the quartz tube. The full-wavelength setup utilized a
Mercury Arc Lamp as the light source (Oriel 68111 Hg Arc Lamp Power
Supply, 6283NS Mercury lamp, 200 W). All photoreactions were conducted
under cooling fans to maintain a stable room temperature. The degradation
process was monitored by taking 3 mL solution samples every 5 min
and centrifuging at 14,000 rpm to remove the nanoparticles. The absorbance
of the MB dye was measured by a UV–vis spectrometer (Shimadzu
UV–vis 1800). The dye concentrations were calculated with a
calibration curve ranging from 0.5 to 10 ppm with a limit of detection
of 0.3 ppm and a limit of quantification of 0.9 ppm. The control experiment
to confirm the contribution of superoxide radicals was performed by
purging Ar into the reaction tube before the reaction, followed by
the same procedure as that above. The control experiment to confirm
the contribution of hydroxyl radicals was performed by adding 1 mL
of methanol into the reaction tube before the reaction, with the same
procedure subsequently carried out.

The pristine brookite TiO2nanoparticles were synthesized
using a modified hydrothermal method, achieving high crystallinity and phase purity. The surface-bulk-doped
samples were prepared via the same method, where Ni2+ions
were introduced into the precursor solution. The bulk-only samples
were created from the surface-bulk-doped samples by acid-washing the
surface Ni2+, producing a slightly green solution during
the washing and rinsing process, indicating the removal of surface-bonded
Ni2+. The surface-only samples were prepared from pristine
nanoparticles by doubling the dopant concentration. This mixture underwent
an evaporation and calcination process to anchor the Ni2+on the surface more effectively. The higher percentage of dopants
used compensated for the inefficiency of the surface-replacement method
and the dynamic equilibrium of Ni2+at the surface and
in solution. The color of the final powder samples gradually evolved
from white to light yellow and then to dark yellow across pristine,
surface-only, bulk-only, and surface-bulk-doped samples, as shown
inFigure S1. This evolution indicates
successful doping and reflects the relative strength of the doping
effect on light absorption. The darker color suggests that more dopants
have either substituted into the crystal lattice or anchored on the
surface, leading to a reduced band gap, as demonstrated inFigure S2. The band gap measurement was modified
from the Kubelka–Munk function, using methyl orange as a baseline,
to account for surface modification and doping contributions to light
absorption. The surface-bulk-doped and
surface-only samples exhibited a noticeable band gap shift to 2.9
eV from 3.1 eV in the pristine samples, while bulk-only samples showed
shifts of about 0.1 eV (Figure S2). As
mentioned in the introduction, the relatively low doping percentage
and small changes in the band gap suggest that the individual trapping
sites formed by the dopants across different samples exclude the contribution
of extra visible-light-band-induced photocatalysis mechanisms. Still,
it is of our future interest to increase the dopant percentage to
identify this threshold change and to explore these different photoexcitation
and reaction pathways.

The crystal structure and morphology
of the synthesized nanoparticles
are critical for carrier generation and migration under photoexcitation,
particularly when extrinsic dopants are introduced into the lattice
or onto the surface. As shown inFigure, there are almost no changes in the overall
structure of all Ni2+-doped samples compared to the pristine
brookite TiO2nanoparticles, in which the pristine sample
was compared to the PDF standard card to confirm that there was no
phase impurity (Figure S3). The Rietveld
refinement analysis of the pristine and doped samples inFigure S4demonstrated a relatively good match
between the calculated spectra and the standard brookite TiO2spectrum with an acceptable goodness of fit of less than 9% for
all samples. Additionally, the lattice parameters showed very limited
changes across the pristine and doped samples, indicating the good
dispersion of Ni2+and intact crystal structure after doping.
All of the samples are highly crystalline, as shown inTable S1, indicating the integrity of the overall
structure of all doped samples. No distinct Ni peaks are observed
in the diffraction patterns of all doped samples, indicating a relatively
well-dispersed Ni2+distribution in the lattice or on the
surface. In addition, no NiO2and Ni2O3peaks were observed, pointing toward the successful doping discussed
in the later sections. The enlarged section inFigureb is the signature doublet peak of the brookite
(210) and (111) crystal planes. There are no significant changes in
the peak positions and interplanard-spacing for
pristine and surface-only and bulk-only-doped samples (Table S1). Among all samples, only the surface-bulk
samples exhibit a discernible shift, characterized by the doublet
peaks moving to slightly lower angles compared to the pristine TiO2. This could be due to a relatively higher substitutional
doping percentage, causing lattice expansion. This observation is
not surprising since the final dopant concentration for all samples
was very low so as not to distort the final crystal structure. Photoexcitation
is primarily a bulk phenomenon, relying on the overall band structure
and density of states of the conduction and valence bands. As mentioned
above, the overall crystal structure is quite similar among doped
and pristine samples, and there should not be much difference in terms
of the photoexcitation pathway.

(a) X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of
pristine brookite TiO2, surface-only, bulk-only, and surface-bulk-doped
TiO2with Ni2+. (b) Enlarged part between 24
and 27
degrees of (a).

After photoexcitation, electrons are promoted from
the valence
band to the conduction band, where most of the electron–hole
pairs recombine, resulting in the re-emission of a photon or the dissipation
of phonon energy into the lattice heat. A small percentage of the
photogenerated carriers migrate across the surface of the photocatalysts
to participate in interfacial redox reactions. Therefore, it is critical
to assess the changes in the morphology and the presence of surface
functional groups following the doping process. As shown inFigurea–c, the pristine
brookite TiO2nanoparticles tend to grow into spindle-like
shapes due to the relatively small surface formation energy of the
(001) planes compared to the (100) planes. As suggested in the original synthesis report, these small particles undergo a further Ostwald ripening
process, growing and welding together to form an assembly-like microstructure,
ultimately resulting in a stacked flower-like structure, as observed
in our SEM as well. As the surface-only-doped samples derive directly
from the pristine samples, there are no changes in morphology, as
shown inFigured–f.

SEM images of (a–c) pristine brookite TiO2nanoparticles,
(d–f) surface-only Ni2+-doped, (g–i) bulk-only
Ni2+-doped, and (j–l) surface-bulk Ni2+-doped TiO2nanoparticles.

For the surface-bulk-doped samples, since the Ni2+ions
are directly involved in the precursor solutions and the entire crystallization
process, it is not surprising that there may be some minor morphological
changes. As shown inFigurej–l, clearer plane boundaries
are observed for individual elongated octahedral structures, which
suggests that the doped ions promote the formation of thermodynamically
stable Wulff constructions with more exposed uncoordinated Ti5c{210} facets.−These facets enhance the adsorption
of reactants and subsequent photocatalytic interfacial electron transfer,
as discussed in the section below. It is noted that a higher percentage
of doping ions distorts the crystal structure by breaking the local
symmetry of the TiO6octahedron building units and leads
to the formation of undesired shapes or phase impurities, which is not observed in our synthetic protocol
due to low doping amount.

Furthermore, the bulk-only-doped sample
is obtained from the surface-bulk-doped
samples through acid-washing. The overall structure remains unchanged,
as shown inFigureg–i, although the sharp edges and
corners are now more truncated and rounded. However, it is noteworthy
that all doped samples remain highly crystalline, as discussed above,
and there are no separate peaks for nickel or nickel oxide in XRD
and XPS analysis. The minor deviation in morphology is almost negligible
in all doped samples compared to the pristine samples, which should
not be the dominant factor when discussing the photocatalytic performance
in the later section.

Since the reaction predominantly occurs
on the catalyst’s
surface, FTIR is employed to examine the surface functional groups
of all samples. As shown inFigure S5,
the brookite TiO2nanoparticles are largely hydrophobic
on the surface, containing few hydroxyl groups, but exhibiting a significant
peak around ∼2369 cm–1that corresponds to
surface-adsorbed CO2.,It is possible
that defects, either Ti3+or oxygen vacancies, serve as
active sites for the adsorption of atmospheric carbon dioxide,,as confirmed by the XPS C 1s results discussed later. After doping,
the only significant change occurs in the bulk-only samples (postacid
washing), where more hydroxyl groups emerge; however, the defect sites
remain, which correlates with the later XPS results. Thus, the overall
crystal structure, morphology, and surface status after Ni2+doping have shown very limited changes, which rules out other contributions
to the correlation with the Ni2+dopant trapping effect
on the final photocatalytic performance.

Moving forward, quantifying
the actual doping percentage and distinguishing
between the surface and bulk doping distributions are key factors
for deciphering the photocatalysis mechanism. First of all, SEM-EDS
mapping and elemental composition, calibrated with a high-purity nickel
standard, confirmed the existence and well-dispersed distribution
of doped Ni2+ions in all doped samples, as shown inFigures S6–S8. Additionally, high-angle
annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM)
with EDS elemental mapping confirmed the spatial distribution of dopants
as shown inFigure. The surface-only-doped sample demonstrated a relatively rich distribution
of Ni at the edge of the particle, while the bulk-only-doped sample
showed a rich distribution of Ni in the bulk and a deficient distribution
at the edges. For the surface-bulk-doped sample, the distribution
of Ni was relatively uniform across the sample.

HAADF-STEM images and
elemental mapping of Ni, Ti, and O across
the particles of (a) surface-only Ni2+-doped, (b) bulk-only
Ni2+-doped, and (c) surface-bulk Ni2+-doped
brookite TiO2nanoparticles. The white dashed lines in
panel (b) were used to guide the comparison of the distributions of
different elements.

Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy
was used to
qualitatively assess the defect concentrations in pristine and doped
samples. The intrinsic defect-rich brookite crystal structure offers
numerous active sites for substituting the Ti center with Ni ions.
The broad peak and high intensity of free electrons at the defect
sites could override the signal for Ni2+. The Ni2+signal ofg= 2.07, indicating the substitutional
doping, can be observed in the sample
after exposure to air for an extended period of time, as shown inFigure S9. It is within our current progress
to further track the depletion of defects over time and the migration
of dopants inside the lattice under a controlled laboratory environment.
Nonetheless, the spin concentration of free electrons can still be
correlated to the defect concentration and Ni2+dopants
in the overall structure of the nanoparticles.

The pristine
TiO2sample was prepared through high-temperature
hydrothermal synthesis under strong alkaline conditions (pH = 12.5),
where the excess OH–could potentially occupy the
O2–sites on the surface growth units and stabilize
these intrinsic defect sites. As shown
inFigurea, the pristine
TiO2exhibits a very intense and broad resonance peak with
ag-factor of 2.00 in the room-temperature solid-state
EPR spectrum, which matches the resonance signal of free electrons
(S= 1/2) located on the defect sites. The asymmetric
feature of the peak suggests the existence of at least two different
sources of free electrons in different local environments, in which
the oxygen vacancies and Ti3+defects could be the main
contribution. The low-valent Ti3+defects and oxygen vacancies are later confirmed in the high-resolution
XPS spectra (Figurea,b). These unique structural defects provide
space and lower energy barriers for the substitutional doping of Ni2+ions into the lattice or on the surface. For the surface-only
sample inFigureb,
a much lower intensity is observed and more localized information
about the Ni2+dopants is indicated in the rather noisy
signal at a lower magnetic field. The broad peak with ag-factor of 2.12 suggests substitutional doping of Ni2+onto the surface, and the more intense
peak with ag-factor of 2.00 indicates some bulk
defects remaining after the surface-replacement method. The feature
of this substitution peak is also observed in the EPR spectrum of
the surface-bulk-doped sample with less defects inFigure S9. Furthermore, the surface-bulk-doped sample inFigured shows a significantly
narrower resonance peak, suggesting more delocalized free electrons
surrounding the Ti or Ni centers in the lattice structure. After acid-washing, the bulk-only sample inFigurec demonstrates a
stronger resonance peak compared with the surface-bulk-doped sample,
indicating a higher defect concentration. Overall, these results estimate
the relative concentration of defects (localized free electrons) and
Ni2+dopants among pristine and doped samples, offering
valuable insights for the subsequent discussion of surface and bulk
distinctions.

Solid-state EPR spectra of (a) pristine brookite TiO2nanoparticles, (b) surface-only Ni2+-doped, (c)
bulk-only
Ni2+-doped, and (d) surface-bulk Ni2+-doped
brookite TiO2nanoparticles. The top right inserted image
in panel (d) is the enlarged part of the surface-bulk-doped sample
between 335 and 350 mT.

Spectroscopic evidence of doping states into brookite
TiO2nanoparticles. High-resolution XPS spectra of Ti 2p,
O 1s, and Ni
2p in (a, b) pristine brookite TiO2nanoparticles, (d–f)
bulk-only-doped, (g–i) surface-only-doped, and (j–l)
surface-bulk-doped brookite TiO2nanoparticles. The atomic
percentage of Ni dopants was calculated from the XPS full-range survey
listed in panel (c) and compared with the ratio from the SEM-EDS elemental
analysis. OLrepresents lattice oxygen, Ovfor
oxygen vacancies/defects and Ocfor chemisorbed oxygen
species.

As follows, the solid-state EPR provides information
about the
overall defect concentration throughout the sample, while the XPS
high-resolution spectrum is more sensitive to the surface or subsurface,
extending to a few nanometers. As shown inFigurea, both Ti 2p3/2and Ti 2p1/2signals of Ti4+exhibit shoulder peaks at lower
binding energy (of Ti3+), while the Ti 2p3/2signal of Ti3+is more evident with a separated peak.
This result confirms the existence of Ti3+as one of the
defects mentioned above in the EPR spectrum inFigurea. Furthermore, based on the peak deconvolution
results inFigurea,b, pristine brookite TiO2nanoparticles
exhibit a high percentage of Ti3+(∼52%) and oxygen
vacancies (∼58%) on their surface, which aligns with the EPR
observation mentioned above. The defect sites are predominantly electron-rich,
making them prone to the adsorption of carboxylic acids or carbon
oxides from ambient air,−as shown in the XPS C 1s high-resolution
spectrum inFigure S10. This aligns with
our earlier discussion of FTIR analysis. These surface-adsorbed species
are also evident in the high-resolution O 1s spectrum, which shows
a distinct shoulder peak at higher binding energy, attributed to chemisorbed
oxygen species. Introducing ions that can potentially fill or replace
these defect sites will significantly alter the surface structure,
also leading to the possibility of the Ti–O–Ni bond
formation. More ultrahigh vacuum studies need to be pursued to monitor
surface changesin situto reconstruct the overall
doping process,−which is beyond the scope of this work.

After
doping, the most noticeable change in the XPS spectra is
the absence of a shoulder peak and the narrowing of Ti 2p peaks inFigured,g,j, indicating that the Ni2+ions replace the Ti3+defect sites on the surface and
possibly follow a similar process in the bulk. More specifically, since the bulk-only sample comes from
acid-washing of the surface-bulk-doped sample, the overall spectrum
features of Ti 2p resemble each other, while the O 1s and Ni 2p spectra
differ significantly. It is noted that the XPS penetration depth is
up to a few nanometers, which means it detects elemental signals for
both the surface and subsurface. The acid-washing can only remove
the surface but not the subsurface substituted Ni2+, which
explains the similar Ti 2p spectra. However, the indirect evidence
of a decreased amount of Ni2+on the surface/subsurface
(2.0–1.3% inFigurec) from the surface-bulk-doped sample to the bulk-only sample
suggests successful surface removal.

Meanwhile, the oxygen vacancies/defects
decreased to a lower percentage
after the doping process, aligned with the observation in the EPR
results above. The O 1s signal of chemisorbed oxygen species (Oc) was observed in all doped samples, with the surface-bulk-doped
sample showing a much higher percentage than the others (Figure). It is possible
that the delocalized free electrons, as observed in the above EPR
spectrum, provide more active sites for the adsorption of atmospheric
carbon-involved species (as observed in FTIR,Figure S5). The Ni2+ions are observed in all doped
samples, where the surface-bulk-doped samples show a much clearer
orbital splitting of Ni 2p, indicating that Ni2+exists
within the sample and is doped into the TiO2lattice. The
significant binding energy shift in the Ti 2p and Ni 2p core levels
in surface-bulk-doped sample (Figurej–l) compared to surface-only
(Figureg–i) or bulk-only samples (Figured–f) was possibly
coming from the combination effect of chemical shift (oxidation state
change) and electronic shift (relative Fermi level change between
sample and analyzer). When the dopant
concentration is high enough to alter the Fermi level (as observed
in our surface-bulk-doped samples), the electronic shift becomes dominant
and will affect all core levels of constituent elements (as observed
in O 1s as well). It is noteworthy this electronic source shift is
less known and often neglected, which deserves more thorough work
on theoretical modeling and experimental measurements. Furthermore, even considering this large electronic
shift, the Ni 2p3/2binding energy value in the surface-bulk-doped
sample inFigurel
(859.2 eV) is still much higher than the typical range of those in
NiO (around 856.0 eV for Ni 2p3/2) or Ni­(OH)2(856.8 eV for Ni 2p3/2).,Notably, the
Ni 2p3/2peak in NiO typically exhibits a doublet, which
is absent in our spectrum. Similarly, Ni­(OH)2is expected
to show a distinct OH–peak in the O 1s region,
which is also not present in our system.,Moreover, the formation of these oxides or hydroxides would be expected
to significantly alter the TiO2lattice structure; however,
our previous XRD analysis shows no such changes. As so, the most probable
configuration of the Ni2+doped into the TiO2is to substitute the Ti4+or Ti3+sites to
form Ni2+–O–Ti4+or Ni2+–O–Ti3+bonding. The former bond is observed
in the core peaks of Ni 2p3/2and Ni 2p1/2with
clear orbital splitting. The latter is observed in a lower binding
energy, for example, inFiguref, at 851.1 eV. Since the Ti3+is already mostly
replaced by the Ni2+, this feature is not obvious in the
Ti 2p spectrum inFigurej. Another note about the satellite peak inFigurel at 872.0 eV, which is more
than 10 eV compared to the core Ni 2p3/2peak (at 859.2
eV), is possibly coming from removing the core electron, leading to
the finite overlap of the frozen ground state with the unscreened
final state of mainly 3d8character.

The estimation of the atomic percentage from the
full-range XPS
survey aligns with the trend observed in the EDS analysis mentioned
above, where the surface-only and bulk-only samples exhibit similar
percentages on the nanoparticle surface and throughout the structure,
as shown inFigurec. This similarity is crucial for evaluating the photocatalytic performance
discussed below. The surface-bulk-doped sample is observed with nearly
double the doping percentage in both surface/subsurface XPS analysis
(2.0–1.3%) and overall EDS analysis (0.6–0.3%) compared
to surface-only and bulk-only samples. Additionally,
ICP-OES measurements of the digested samples gave a similar trend
of these samples, where the surface-bulk sample was 1.97% compared
to the surface-only sample (1.53%) and bulk-only sample (1.43%) inFigurec. Since the bulk-only
sample comes from acid-washing of the surface-bulk-doped sample, the
distribution of Ni2+inside the bulk in both the bulk-only
sample and the surface-bulk-doped sample should resemble each other.
Similarly, the surface-only sample comes from the surface-replacement
method of the pristine sample, and the distribution of Ni2+on the surface in both the surface-only sample and the surface-bulk-doped
sample should resemble each other as well, as observed in their respective
XPS spectra and indicated by their STEM-EDS mapping results. Overall,
the surface-bulk-doped sample has the Ni2+distribution
on the surface resembling the surface-only sample while the Ni2+distribution in the bulk resembles the bulk-only sample,
which explains the rationale for the doubled amount of Ni2+doping in the surface-bulk-doped sample and will be addressed further
in the mechanism section below.

Photocatalytic
degradation of methylene blue serves as a model
reaction to examine the effects of doping and distinguish the contributions
of surface or bulk trapping sites generated by doping. The energy
level of Ni2+ions has a relatively moderate potential,
allowing trapping sites to align closely with the Fermi level of brookite
TiO2(fully oxidized sample),,which is beneficial for mediating the electron trapping and transfer
from bulk excitation to surface reactions. Since the photogenerated
holes are readily quenched by H2O to generate hydroxyl
radicals (•OH), this aspect of the dynamics also
relies on the electron dynamics controlled by the trapping sites. The overall rate-determining step for this photocatalyzed
reaction heavily depends on the electron transfer rate at the semiconductor-adsorbate
interface. Experimentally, the apparent
reaction rate constant extracted from chemical kinetics can be used
to examine this process over a relatively longer time scale. In heterogeneous
photocatalytic degradation of organic compounds, the Langmuir–Hinshelwood
(L-H) model and pseudo-order kinetic model are commonly applied to
analyze the reaction rate and examine the mechanism. When the rate of degradation is significantly faster than
the rate of adsorption, and the initial dye concentration is relatively
low (<0.01 mol/L), the L-H model can be simplified into pseudo-first-order
kinetics if the only variation is the dye concentration. In our photocatalytic system, the adsorption–desorption
equilibrium was applied before any photocatalytic reaction (less than
10% of adsorption observed across all samples), and the MB dye concentration
was about 3.1 × 10–5mol/L, much smaller than
the TiO2photocatalyst concentration (about 0.0025 mol/L).
Considering the relatively large concentration of dissolved oxygen
(at 25 °C, about 2.6 × 10–4mol/L and
about 8.4 times larger compared to the MB) and excess water, the reactive
oxygen species (superoxide and hydroxyl radicals from oxygen and water
generated under photoexcitation) can be considered as excess reactants
and should not affect the pseudo-first-order kinetics. Similar pseudo-first-order
degradation of MB has been observed and also proposed in previous
studies.−We recognize that ultrafast transient absorption
measurements are necessary to correlate the dynamics and observed
kinetics more thoroughly, and we are in the process of pursuing this
direction. However, as carefully evaluated in our proof-of-concept
experiment, there is no competing process interfering with our interpretation
of the trapping-site-induced mechanism, to the best of our knowledge,
making it reasonable to correlate this kinetics analysis with the
electron dynamics mentioned above.

As shown inFigure, both high-power mercury arc
lamps and low-power white light (with
a center wavelength of 575 nm) are used to evaluate the photocatalytic
performance. Not surprisingly, the pristine brookite TiO2exhibits a much higher reaction rate compared to the doped sample
due to its rich intrinsic defects of Ti3+, which can act
as natural trapping sites to mediate electron transfer. This phenomenon
has been observed in several previous studies.−More importantly,
when the Ti3+defect sites are depleted by Ni2+ions, the reaction rates drop, displaying a distinguishable trend
among surface-only, bulk-only, and surface-bulk-doped samples. As
mentioned above, the doping percentage is observed to be quite similar
for surface-only and bulk-only-doped samples, with the surface-bulk-doped
samples having twice the amount, ensuring a similar distribution of
Ni2+across the lattice and the surface. Fundamentally,
photoexcitation is a bulk phenomenon, and the electrons must migrate
to the surface to mediate any reactions. Thus, the bulk-only or surface-only
samples can capture these photogenerated electrons only locally at
their doping sites, which limits their ability to further enhance
the electron transfer chain. On the other hand, when the trapping
sites are distributed more evenly from bulk to surface (as illustrated
inFigure), the photogenerated
electron/hole pairs not only can be separated temporarily with a much
longer lifetime but also be spatially connected to the interfacial
electron transfer. These continuous trapping-to-transfer sites could
provide a more efficient pathway to utilize the photogenerated electrons
and holes to produce reactive oxygen species (in this case, primarily
superoxide radicals and hydroxyl radicals), which can target the MB
molecules and ultimately lead to nontoxic products. As shown inFigure S11, a control experiment purged with
Ar shows a lower degradation rate, confirming the contribution of
superoxide radicals from dissolved oxygen reduction, while another
control experiment with methanol as the hole scavenger shows a much
lower degradation rate, confirming the contribution of hydroxyl radicals
from water oxidation. It is in our current progress to quantify the
amount of radicals generated over time and across different doped
samples to further distinguish their contribution to the photocatalytic
mechanism, but it is beyond the scope of this work. Overall, the surface-bulk-doped
samples show a significant increase in their apparent reaction rate
constants. It is worth mentioning that photocatalytic degradation
may produce several intermediates that could potentially poison the
catalyst’s surface or affect the kinetics, as observed in other
studies; however, this is beyond the
scope of this work.

Kinetics analysis of photocatalytic performance with pristine
brookite
TiO2nanoparticles, bulk-only Ni2+-doped, surface-only
Ni2+-doped and surface-bulk Ni2+doped TiO2nanoparticles under (a, b) full-wavelength irradiation and
(c, d) 575 nm visible-light irradiation. The photodegradation of methylene
blue follows a pseudo-first-order reaction, and the linear fitting
was plotted in parts (a, c) with solid lines. The apparent reaction
rate constant was extracted from the linear fitting, and all error
bars represent one standard deviation of the mean.

Proposed photocatalysis mechanism mediated by the continuous
trapping
sites from bulk to surface promotes the electron transfer at the semiconductor-adsorbate
interface, which eventually enhances the reaction rate.

In summary, we demonstrated a direct correlation
between the doping
position and subsequent photocatalytic performance in the Ni2+-doped brookite TiO2nanoparticles while systematically
and carefully examining the crystal structure, morphology, and surface
composition to exclude other contributing factors to the performance.
Ultimately, we propose that surface-only and bulk-only doping can
only trap photogenerated electrons at their local sites, limiting
their ability to mediate interfacial electron transfer. Continuous
doping from bulk to surface is shown to be the most effective way
to construct the trap-to-transfer chain, thereby enhancing reaction
rates at the interface. This mechanistic insight can be applied to
other transition-metal-ion-doped semiconductor photocatalysts, aiding
in the design of more efficient photocatalytic systems.

This work was supported by the FY2025 University
of North
Carolina System Undergraduate Research Program Award and by the National
Science Foundation Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics Program (NSF-S-STEM, award no. 1833604). This work
was performed in part at the Analytical Instrumentation Facility (AIF)
at North Carolina State University, which is supported by the State
of North Carolina and the National Science Foundation (award number
ECCS-2025064). The AIF is a member of the North Carolina Research
Triangle Nanotechnology Network (RTNN), a site in the National Nanotechnology
Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI).

The Supporting Information
is available free of charge athttps://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnanoscienceau.5c00087.

L.T.C. conducted
the experiments, collected the data, and performed the data analysis.
T.T.M.C. and X.L. performed various characterizations and data analysis.
P.L. and O.L. conceptualized the study, wrote the original draft,
and revised the manuscript.

The authors
declare no competing financial interest.