To investigate factors influencing vaccine recommendations by healthcare workers (HCWs) in Zhejiang Province, China. A cross-sectional survey was conducted among 569 HCWs to assess their beliefs and attitudes toward vaccines, vaccine recommendations and barriers to recommending vaccinations. Logistic regression was utilized to analyze influencing factors. Most participants (89.4%) believed that vaccines can effectively protect children’s health. Higher professional titles (aOR = 1.24, 95% CI: 1.03–1.50) and increased vaccine confidence (aOR = 1.10, 95% CI: 1.05–1.16) were positively associated with vaccine recommendation behaviors, while increased vaccine risk perception significantly reduced recommendations (aOR = 0.84, 95% CI: 0.78–0.90). Moreover, vaccine hesitancy among HCWs was primarily driven by two main factors: safety concerns regarding immunization (60.8%) and cognitive biases related to vaccine necessity and efficacy (25.8%). This study elucidates professional title advancement and vaccine confidence as critical determinants of vaccine recommendation behaviors among HCWs in Zhejiang Province, China. To improve vaccine acceptance and achieve higher immunization coverage, targeted vaccine education and confidence-building programs should be integrated into HCWs’ professional training.

HCWs are the primary and most trusted sources of guidance and influence in parents’ decisions about vaccination. However, existing empirical studies indicate that the prevalence of COVID-19 vaccination hesitancy worldwide in HCWs ranged from 4.3 to 72% and the reported influenza vaccination coverage among surveyed HCWs for 2018/2019 season in China was only 11.6%.15,16Vaccine hesitancy is not uncommon among HCWs themselves. A Finnish study on 2962 HCWs showed that HCWs who perceive vaccines as offering lower benefits and safety demonstrate significantly greater hesitancy, delay, or refusal in vaccinating their own children. Furthermore, they exhibit diminished recommendation behavior when encountering vaccine-hesitant patients.17Similarly, a 2021 Italian study highlighted that the introduction of COVID-19 vaccines has significantly exacerbated the risk of vaccine hesitancy among HCWs.18HCWs frequently encounter children who are either in the acute/chronic phase of illness or in the recovery phase in the course of their daily duties. These vulnerable children are often at a heightened risk of contracting vaccine-preventable diseases. As a result, the advice provided by specialists plays a crucial role in shaping vaccination decisions for the parents of children with special health conditions. Health professionals’ misunderstanding of vaccines may amplify the public’s concerns about vaccination. However, currently there is very limited research regarding the vaccination recommendation behaviors and its correlated factors among HCWs.

Therefore, we conducted this study to reveal the following issues through multidimensional empirical analysis: 1) HCWs’ awareness and attitudes toward different types of vaccines; 2) Characteristics of HCWs’ vaccine recommendation behaviors and reasons for refusing to recommend vaccination; 3) the correlation between HCWs’’ demographic characteristics educational background, occupational attributes, and their recommendation behaviors; and 4) the predictive capacity of a modified Vaccine Hesitancy Scale (VHS) regarding clinical recommendations; 5) the correlation between vaccine attitudes (such as vaccine confidence and risk perception) and vaccine recommendation behaviors. The study will provide scientific basis for formulating training programs for HCWs regarding vaccine administration and improve the implementation mechanisms of immunization policies.

This cross-sectional study targeted active HCWs from public hospitals across Zhejiang Province. Inclusion criteria comprised HCWs ≥18 y with continuous clinical practice for ≥12 months. The Ethics Committee of Children’s Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine approved the study protocol (Approval No.: [2025-IRB-0005-P-01]). All participants provided electronic informed consent. Data were collected anonymously to reduce social desirability bias.

•Demographic information: age, gender, education level (Bachelor’s/Master’s/PhD or above), department (pediatrics/non-pediatrics), current professional title (trainee physician/resident physician/attending physician/associate chief physician or above), type of hospital (general hospital/women’s and children’s hospital/other), whether they have obtained a physician qualification certificate and whether they have received training in child health specialty knowledge.

•Vaccine Confidence and Risk Perception (modified VHS, Cronbach’s α = 0.81): The main question on vaccine confidence is “Do you believe vaccines can protect children from serious diseases? (Believe/Do not believe).” The modified scoring of the VHS is adapted from the SAGE standard 10-item scale, changing “my child” to “children” to fit the professional perspective. A 5-point Likert scale is employed for scoring, where 1 means “strongly disagree” and 5 means “strongly agree.” Items L1 through L7 reflect vaccine confidence and are scored positively, while items L8 through L10 reflect vaccine risk perception and are scored negatively. The total score ranges from 10 to 50.

•Attitudes toward various vaccines: The study includes a three-level classification of vaccine attitudes: acceptance, hesitancy, and refusal, along with 13 multiple-choice attributes, such as concerns about side effects, barriers to accessing information, and past negative medical experiences.

•Assessing Vaccine recommendation behaviors: Assessing cognitive decision-making through clinical scenario questions such as “Do you refrain from recommending vaccination because you believe the vaccine is ineffective?” (Recommend/Do not recommend; Assessing practice records through questioning, such as, “Have there been any instances of vaccine refusal or postponement in your past practice?” Yes, please describe the reasons/No). HCWs who do not recommend vaccination form the non-recommendation group, while those who do comprise the recommendation group.

The questionnaire underwent pre-testing (n = 20) to ensure clarity and reliability.

The survey, conducted from January 1 to February 28, 2025, utilized “Questionnaire Star,” China’s leading online questionnaire platform, employing the combination of convenient sampling technique and snowball sampling method via professional WeChat groups.19,20The Children’s Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine serves as the Zhejiang Provincial Quality Management Center for Child Healthcare. In this role, we coordinate specialized training and clinical guidance for pediatric practitioners across all 90 county-level divisions of the province. Capitalizing on this existing network, we maintained dedicated WeChat (a free messaging and calling app) groups with partner hospitals. Concurrently, internal departmental WeChat groups facilitated communication within our hospital. We disseminated the online survey via these established digital channels, requesting participants to further share the questionnaire link within their clinical teams.

Data quality controls included logical validation, IP deduplication, minimum response times (>5 min), and exclusion of incomplete/contradictory questionnaires.

Data analysis employed SPSS 26.0. Descriptive statistics presented demographic characteristics. The sample size for this study was determined using the standard formula:n=Z2×p×1−p/e2. Categorical variables are shown as frequencies (percentages), while continuous variables are shown as medians (interquartile ranges). For the sections of reasons for vaccine hesitancy and sources of negative information, responses were collected using a multiple-choice format. We then calculated the ratio of selections for each option to the total number of selections across all options.

ROC analysis evaluated the predictive validity of the modified VHS. The Mann-Whitney U test and chi-square test were used to compare differences between the vaccine recommendation group and the group that did not receive a recommendation. Logistic regression identified factors influencing vaccine recommendation behaviors. The odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for univariate and multivariate models were calculated, with statistical significance set atp< .05.

Among 569 participants, 63.1% were female, mainly from tertiary general hospitals, with 61.3% of pediatric specialists; the level of education was generally high (Masters 47.3%; PhD 9.8%); only 30.2% had received systematic training in pediatric health care (30.2%). The Demographic Characteristics are shown inTable 1.

Socio-demographic and professional characteristics of Participants (n = 569).

The majority of HCWs (89.4%) strongly recognize the efficacy of vaccines for children’s health, though safety concerns (29.3%) and complacency (22.7%) persisted. While the vaccine confidence scale (items 1–7) indicates generally positive views, the risk perception scale (items 8–10) reveals potential concerns among health-care professionals regarding technological innovations and complacency toward diseases, which may ultimately influence their clinical recommendations. The distribution of participants’ responses to each item on the modified VSH are shown inTable 2.

Distribution of participants’ responses to each item on the modified vaccine hesitancy scale (n = 569).

The analysis of the attitudes toward 15 types of vaccines (seeFigure 1) indicates that health-care professionals generally have a high acceptance rate for all vaccines. The acceptance rate for basic immunization vaccines (e.g., HBV, MMR, DTaP) is over 98%. The pentavalent combination vaccine (DTaP-IPV-Hib) containing novel adjuvants demonstrates a hesitancy rate of 7.0% (40/569) and refusal rate of 1.4% (8/569) in the study population. However, the influenza vaccine (FluV) shows a hesitancy rate of 12.1% (69/569) and a refusal rate of 4.6% (26/569). The COVID-19 vaccine (COVID-19 Vax) has the highest refusal rate at 7.2% (41/569) and a hesitancy rate of 24.1% (137/569), both over 50 times higher than those for vaccines included in the immunization program. The varicella vaccine (VZV) also has a high acceptance rate of 97.7%, distinguishing it from other nonscheduled immunization vaccines.

Distribution of HCWs’ attitudes towards Childhood vaccination in Zhejiang Province, China (refusal/hesitancy/acceptance), stratified by vaccine type (n = 569).

Notes: NIP: Hepatitis B Vaccine (HBV); Inactivated/Oral Polio Vaccine (IPV/OPV); Meningococcal Vaccine (MenV); Japanese Encephalitis Vaccine (JE); Measles, Mumps, and Rubella Vaccine (MMR); Diphtheria, Tetanus, and Pertussis Vaccine (DTaP);.

non-NIP: Diphtheria, Tetanus, Pertussis, Inactivated Polio, and Hib Vaccine (DTaP-IPV-Hib); Varicella Vaccine (VZV); Oral Cholera Vaccine (OCV); Haemophilus influenzae type b Vaccine (Hib); Influenza Vaccine (FluV); Human Papillomavirus Vaccine (HPV); Pneumococcal Vaccine (PCV); Rotavirus Vaccine (RV); COVID-19 Vaccine (COVID-19 Vax).

Based on the analysis of the responses from 569 health-care professionals (total responses count n = 876), we found that vaccine hesitancy and refusal is caused by multiple factors (seeFigure 2). The leading cause of vaccine hesitancy is HCWs’ skepticism about vaccine safety (60.8%). This includes worries about side effects (17.5%), personal adverse reactions (13.5%), and doubts stemming from negative information (29.8%). The second factor is cognitive bias about vaccines (25.8%), primarily the belief that vaccines are unnecessary (18.7%) and skepticism about their efficacy (6.0%). Notably, exposure to negative vaccine information significantly influences health-care professionals’ decision-making—43.3% of refusal behaviors are linked to this exposure, which includes media reports (18.2%), negative personal vaccination experiences (13.5%), and information spread through social networks (11.6%).

Distribution of multiple response frequencies for causes of vaccine hesitancy among HCWs in Zhejiang Province, China (n = 569; total responses Count = 876).

The survey reveals that 81.2% of health-care professionals (462 out of 569) have come across negative information about vaccines. According to the multiple response analysis (seeFigure 3), the sources of negative vaccine information include online platforms (38.6%), indirect negative experiences from friends or patients (29.7%), and news media (25.2%). Only 6.2% of the negative information comes from direct vaccination experiences. Notably, 25.3% (117 out of 462) of individuals who were exposed to negative information would stop recommending vaccines. This indicates that indirect risk information, such as negative information from social media, is more likely to lead them vaccine recommendation avoidance than their personal experiences.

Distribution of HCWs’ exposure to negative vaccine information and sources (n = 569; total responses Count = 918).

Approximately 25.1% of HCWs refrained from recommending vaccines due to doubts about their efficacy, while another 33.9% recommended deferring vaccinations for reasons related to disease treatment. An analysis of the reasons for deferring vaccination indicates several key factors. The most common reason was acute illnesses in children (56.2%) and a history of Kawasaki disease or blood product use (11.7%). Other reasons included immune deficiencies, the use of hormones or immunosuppressant (8.0%), as well as seizures, prematurity, congenital heart disease (11.7%), severe allergic reactions, and a history of adverse events following immunization (AEFI).

The modified VHS did not significantly predict recommendation behaviors (AUC = 0.51,p=.74). Similarly, the scale showed non-significant predictive performance in the pediatric subgroup (AUC = 0.523,p=.624).

A multidimensional analysis of the valid questionnaires by 569 HCWs reveals that vaccine recommendation behavior is significantly influenced by professional and cognitive factors (seeTable 3). It is found that the recommendation group (74.9%, n = 426) significantly outperformed the non-recommendation group in terms of the proportion of pediatric specialization (79.7% vs 20.3%, χ2= 10.10,p= .001), the proportion of senior professional titles (83.7% vs 16.3%, χ2= 13.51,p= .004), and the dimension of vaccine awareness (vaccine confidence and vaccine risk perception). In addition, compared with the non-recommendation group (32 points,p= .000), the recommendation group (34 points) had a higher median score for vaccine confidence. Conversely, the median score for vaccine risk perception was lower in the recommendation group (9 points) than in the non-recommendation group (11 points,p= .000). The effect size for the vaccine confidence dimension was measured by a Cliff’s delta of −0.23 (95% CI: −0.34 to 0.12), while the effect size for the vaccine risk perception dimension was 0.34 (95% CI: 0.25 to 0.43), both indicating moderate effects. No significant differences were found between the two groups regarding sociodemographic variables: gender (female recommendation group 64.6% vs non-recommendation group 58.7%, χ2= 1.55, p = .21), highest education level (χ2= 2.83,p= .24), hospital attributes (χ2= 5.37,p= .07), possession of a physician qualification certificate (χ2= 1.85,p= .17), or training in child health specialty knowledge (χ2= 0.002,p= .96) (p> .05).

Comparison of baseline characteristics and vaccine cognition dimensions between groups (recommendation group vs non-recommendation group, n = 569).

Notes: 1. Categorical variables are reported as percentages, continuous variables as median [Q1, Q3].

2. Test statistic for the vaccine confidence dimension: U = 23391, Z = −4.3; test statistic for the vaccine risk perception dimension: U = 20049, Z = −6.1.

3. Cliff’s delta effect size reflects the degree of difference in the distribution of ordered variables between groups, calculated as δ = P(A > B)-P(A < B), with a range of [−1,1]. The greater the absolute value, the more significant the difference (|δ|≥0.147 small effect, ≥0.33 medium effect, ≥0.474 large effect). This study used the normal approximation method to estimate the 95% confidence interval.

Logistic regression analysis showed that higher professional titles and vaccine confidence positively correlated with recommendations, whereas increased risk perception negatively impacted behaviors (seeTable 4). The multivariable model indicates that: (1) each level of professional title advancement increases the probability of recommendation by 24% (aOR = 1.24, 95%CI:1.03–1.50,p= .024); (2) each point increase in the vaccine confidence score raises the recommendation probability by 10.4% (aOR = 1.10, 95%CI:1.05–1.16,p= .000); and (3) each point increase in the risk perception score decreases the recommendation probability by 16.3% (aOR = 0.84, 95%CI:0.78–0.90,p= .000). It is worth noting that having a pediatric specialty background was associated with a decreased likelihood of not making recommendations in the univariate model (OR = 0.53, 95%CI:0.36–0.77,p= .001), but this effect was not statistically significant after multivariable adjustment (aOR = 0.70, 95%CI:0.44–1.10). Pediatric specialty training also showed no significant independent effect (p> .05). The multivariate model demonstrated adequate fit in the Hosmer–Lemeshow goodness-of-fit test (χ2= 5.6, df = 8,p= .69).

Factors influencing vaccine recommendation behavior: univariate and multivariable logistic regression models.

2. The multivariable model adjusted for gender, hospital attributes, education level, and whether a practicing qualification certificate was obtained.

This study presents a comprehensive analysis of vaccine recommendation behaviors and their determinants among HCWs in Zhejiang Province, China. The results of the study show HCWs generally have a high level of confidence in vaccination. However, they tend to be skeptical about novel vaccines and non-NIP vaccines. This hesitancy substantively influences their vaccine recommendation practices in clinical practices.

The majority of participants (89.4%) expressed confidence in vaccines’ efficacy for protecting pediatric health, with 62.6% strongly trusting government-endorsed immunizations，consistent with previous research.21However, one-third of them demonstrated significant apprehension regarding potential AEFI with novel vaccines. The results suggest that, despite their extensive professional expertise, HCWs still harbor considerable concerns regarding the safety and clinical efficacy of novel biologics, including recently developed COVID-19 vaccines, perhaps largely attributable to perceived insufficiency of comprehensive clinical trial data and long-term safety surveillance.22Simultaneously, the prolonged global COVID-19 vaccination campaign has contributed to vaccine fatigue, a phenomenon previously documented with influenza vaccinations and linked to suboptimal uptake. Notably, this fatigue persists even among HCWs.23,24This might also have an impact on their vaccination recommendations.

Further analysis into the determinants of vaccine hesitancy revealed that nearly two-thirds (60.8%) of hesitancy cases stemmed from safety concerns, with one-quarter (25.8%) attributable to doubts about the necessity and effectiveness of vaccination. These findings corroborate previous research, suggesting that hesitancy primarily stems from inadequate recognition of vaccine-preventable disease severity, insufficient vaccine literacy, and concerns about transparency throughout vaccine development and regulatory approval processes.31Additionally, the pervasive anti-vaccine misinformation across digital platforms significantly influences HCWs’ risk perceptions. Our study found that over 80% of participants encountered negative vaccine-related information through various channels, predominantly online platforms, news media, and indirect experiential accounts. Previous epidemiological investigations indicate that scientific information source substantially shapes both public and professional perceptions, particularly among early-career HCWs.32Furthermore, insufficient information dissemination and social media exposure exacerbate vaccine hesitancy, consequently affecting recommendation behaviors.33,34Safety apprehensions and cognitive biases were identified as principal determinants underlying vaccine hesitancy among HCWs. Thus, addressing safety concerns and cognitive biases through evidence-based communication via digital platforms represents a critical strategy for enhancing vaccine advocacy among HCWs.

Multivariate analysis of factors influencing vaccine recommendation behaviors revealed that HCWs with higher professional titles exhibited greater confidence in vaccines. Senior professionals demonstrated fewer irrational concerns about adverse events, thereby showing a greater propensity to recommend vaccination and engaging more confidently in vaccine-related communication with parents. These senior HCWs typically had more extensive involvement in vaccine clinical trials, establishing a positive feedback loop between vaccine knowledge and clinical practice, which is consistent with findings from parallel studies.32,38–40Evidently, higher vaccine confidence increased the likelihood of vaccine recommendation, while heightened risk perception negatively influenced recommendation behaviors. Therefore, enhancing HCWs’ scientific literacy, strengthening their vaccine confidence, and mitigating risk perception are of vital importance. Also, we have compared key socio-demographic variables (such as gender, education level, and hospital attributes) between the two groups and found no statistical differences. This further emphasizes that the differences in vaccine recommendation among HCWs are significantly related to intrinsic factors rather than demographic confounding factors.

Within contemporary Chinese medical education frameworks, vaccine-related curricula are predominantly situated within pediatric preventive health-care modules, featuring dedicated immunology chapters emphasizing NIP vaccination schedules, contraindications, and standard protocols. However, advanced content addressing the comparative advantages of combination vaccines, immunological waning patterns, and specialized vaccination strategies for children with comorbidities remains limited to approximately 1–2 instructional hours, with notable deficiencies in educational depth. Continuing medical education programs similarly lack systematic training in practical vaccine management competencies, including AEFI differential diagnosis and emerging vaccine technologies (e.g., rotavirus, pneumococcal conjugate, COVID-19 vaccines). Consequently, many HCWs excessively rely on vaccine package inserts rather than evidence-based guidelines when confronting complex immunization scenarios. Our study found no significant correlation between pediatric preventive healthcare training experience and vaccine recommendation behaviors, highlighting substantial knowledge translation gaps within current medical education systems.

Operate government-managed digital platforms for real-time vaccine updates.

First, using a convenient sampling technique combined snowball sampling method limits the generalizability of the study findings and might create selection bias. To mitigate the limitation, we implemented extensive dissemination of survey links across available networks and maximally increased the sample size. Furthermore, the voluntary nature of participation introduces potential non-response bias, as respondents may systematically differ from non-respondents in key characteristics. So, rewards for participants may be useful. Additionally, we took a brief questionnaire in this survey, thus the number of questions was limited, and the questionnaire design may inadequately capture the full spectrum of professional diversity among HCWs, potentially introducing information bias. Furthermore, as Larson et al. have elucidated, vaccine hesitancy represents a dynamic phenomenon influenced by continuously evolving determinants.41The cross-sectional design employed herein may inadequately capture the temporal complexity of vaccine attitudes and recommendation behaviors. Future investigations should employ larger, more heterogeneous samples and longitudinal methodologies to validate these findings and explore deeper psychosocial factors influencing vaccine hesitancy and recommendation practices. Moreover, effective scientific communication strategies warrant further investigation to enhance public vaccine acceptance.

This study elucidates patterns of vaccine hesitancy and vaccine recommendation behaviors among HCWs in Zhejiang Province, China, highlighting professional title advancement and vaccine confidence as critical determinants of recommendation behaviors. In the future, to improve vaccine acceptance and achieve higher immunization coverage, targeted vaccine education and confidence-building programs should be integrated into HCWs’ professional training. These improvements will ultimately enhance the public acceptance of novel and traditional vaccines, thereby strengthening the immune barrier for the general population.

We are grateful to all the HCWs for their participation, and colleagues at the Children’s Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine for their dedicated assistance. Chai Ji conceptualized and designed the study; Jing Zhao and Mingyan Li conducted the analysis, interpreted the data, drafted the initial manuscript, and revised the manuscript; Yuyang Xu conducted the statistical analysis; Yan Zeng, Xia Wang and Dan Yao collected data and revised to the revision of the manuscript. All authors: approved the final content of the manuscript and agree to be accountable for all aspects of the work.

Chai Ji, M.D., Ph.D., is a Chief Physician at the Department of Child Health Care, The Children’s Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine (National Clinical Research Center for Child Health). Specializing in immunization counseling, high-risk infant follow-up, and Williams syndrome management, her research focuses on vaccine safety/efficacy evaluation for children with special health-care needs, nutritional monitoring in preterm infants, and phenotype-genotype correlations in Williams syndrome. She has led provincial and departmental research grants and published over 10 SCI-indexed articles in pediatric nutrition and vaccine research.

This study was funded by the Zhejiang Province Disease Prevention and Control Science and Technology Program [2025JK226], Zhejiang Provincial Basic Public Welfare Research Projects [grant number: LTGY24H260003] and Zhejiang Province Disease Prevention and Control Science and Technology Program [2025JK245].

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).