This study sought to describe the clinical characteristics, examination results, and prognoses of immunocompetent children with human herpes virus 7 (HHV-7)-related severe encephalitis.

Twelve immunocompetent children with severe HHV-7-related encephalitis were included, all of whom had HHV-7 DNA ( +) detected in the cerebrospinal fluid via metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) and were followed up for > 6 months.

The cohort comprised 75% males, with a median age of 4.5 years; all patients presented with fever and altered consciousness and required PICU admission for severe neurological symptoms. Two patients developed encephalitis sequelae and epilepsy. Abnormal electroencephalography and brain magnetic resonance imaging findings were observed in 90.9% (10/11) and 72.7% (8/11) of the patients, respectively. Five patients required ventilator support due to central respiratory failure (four invasive and one noninvasive). One patient underwent plasma exchange, while another received continuous renal replacement therapy. All patients were treated with acyclovir and immunomodulatory therapy. Four patients had poor prognoses, including one 9-year-old male who died and one 9-year-old female who was diagnosed with febrile infection-related epilepsy syndrome and remained in a coma with a Modified Rankin Scale score of 5 at the 6-month follow-up.

Older immunocompetent children with severe HHV-7-related encephalitis have poor prognosis and low survival rates, both of which may be improved via empiric acyclovir administration combined with immunosuppressive therapy.

Human herpesvirus-7 (HHV-7), a member of the herpesvirus subfamily, is a double-stranded DNA lymphovirus that was first isolated from T-cells of healthy human peripheral blood mononuclear cells in 1990 by Frankel et al. [1] HHV-7 is widespread, with children being the primary population infected by HHV-7. Approximately 65% and 90% of children under 2 and 5 years of age, respectively, are seropositive for HHV-7 [2–5]. Similar to other herpesviruses, HHV-7 establishes a lifelong infection in the human host following initial exposure [6]. HHV-7 is prone to reactivation in immunocompromised pediatric patients and often leads to central nervous system involvement, resulting in encephalitis with varying clinical manifestations [6,7]. However, HHV-7-related encephalitis is exceedingly rare in immunocompetent pediatric patients, while its severe form is even rarer.

This single-center retrospective case series described the clinical manifestations, examination results, treatment methods, and prognoses of 12 immunocompetent pediatric patients with HHV-7-related severe encephalitis diagnosed using cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS).

A case series study was conducted involving 12 immunocompetent pediatric patients diagnosed with HHV-7-related encephalitis who were admitted to the PICU of Shengjing Hospital, affiliated with China Medical University (National Children’s Northeast Regional Medical Center), between January 2021 and September 2023, and were followed up for more than 6 months.

The inclusion criteria were as follows: 1) Children younger than 14 years; 2) encephalitis diagnosed based on clinical symptoms and auxiliary examination; 3) no genetic factors or family history of epilepsy; 4) no history of underlying diseases such as encephalitis and epilepsy; and 5) detection of HHV-7 positivity via CSF-based mNGS.

Brain parenchymal inflammation associated with neurological dysfunction was strictly defined as confirmed encephalitis [8]. The diagnostic criteria for encephalitis included changes in mental status over 24 h without other identifiable causes, indicating neurological dysfunction. Furthermore, the following supplementary secondary criteria must have been present (2 as probable and ≥ 3 as probable or confirmed): 1) Fever ≥ 38 °C within 72 h; 2) seizure; 3) new focal nervous system findings; 4) pleocytosis in CSF (≥ 5 white blood cells/μL); and 5) neuroimaging or electroencephalogram (EEG) showing brain parenchymal changes consistent with encephalitis [9,10].

A standardized data collection table was used to record the epidemiological and clinical data, including sex, age, clinical symptoms, family history, personal history, treatment, and prognosis of each pediatric patient. The modified Rankin Scale (mRS) was used to evaluate the nervous system at discharge and follow-up. Relevant laboratory test results (white blood cell [WBC] count, interleukin [IL]−6, and C-reactive protein [CRP] in routine blood tests; WBC count, lymphocyte proportion, pressure, protein, sugar, and chloride in CSF) and serum immunoglobulin (IgG, IgA, and IgM) levels were collected to screen for major humoral immune deficiencies. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and EEG were also performed.

Descriptive characteristics were used to summarize the baseline characteristics of the 12 pediatric patients with HHV-7-related encephalitis. Categorical variables are expressed as numbers and proportions. The SPSS software version 27.0 (IBM Corporation, Armonk, NY, USA) was used for data analysis.

Sample and negative control batches were extracted utilizing the Genskey Micro DNA Kit (1901, Gensky, Tianjin) and quantified with Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kits. DNA libraries were fabricated using an NGS library preparation kit (2012B, Genskey, Tianjin). The quality of these libraries was evaluated using the Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA), while their concentration was determined by Qubit, requiring a minimum of 1 ng/ul. Following thermal denaturation and pooling of the libraries, DNB was synthesized. All libraries underwent single-stranded circular DNA sequencing, augmented by 2–3 quantitative sets to yield DNA nanospheres. These nanospheres were then loaded onto sequencing chips and sequenced on the MGISEQ-200 platform (MGI, Shenzhen, China). Viral loads are reported in genome copies per milliliter. To ensure sequencing data quality, raw reads were filtered for adapter contamination and low-quality or low-complexity sequences using fastp (v0.22.0) and Komplexity (v0.3.6). Reads aligning to the human reference genome GRCh38 were eliminated with bowtie2 (v2.3.5.1).

This retrospective study was conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Declaration of Helsinki and was approved by the hospital’s internal ethics committee (2024PS825K). Written informed consent was obtained from the families and guardians of all pediatric patients.

Among the 12 included pediatric patients, nine were male, ranging in age from 1–9 years, with a median age of 4.5 years. All 12 pediatric participants were confirmed to be healthy, with no underlying medical conditions or comorbidities. Five of the 12 (42%) pediatric patients were preschool-aged. All 12 patients presented with fever and varying degrees of altered consciousness upon admission. Following admission, four of the 12 pediatric patients (33.3%) exhibited status epilepticus (Table1).

Blood and CSF analyses: 7/12 of pediatric patients demonstrated an increasing WBC count of > 10 (× 106/L) in routine blood tests; 5/12 had CRP levels ≥ 8 mg/L; 3/12 had IL-6 levels ≥ 60 pg/mL; and 4/12 had PCT levels ≥ 0.5 ng/mL (Table2); while 5/12 (41.6%) of CSF samples showed leukocytosis, mainly of mononuclear cells. The CSF opening pressure was significantly increased to 30 cmH2O (above the upper limit for age) [11–15] in one patient (Table2).

Electroencephalography and neuroimaging: Of the 12 pediatric patients, one died before completing brain MRI and EEG examinations; 10/11 (90.9%) of patients had abnormal EEG results, while 8/11 (72.7%) had abnormal brain MRI results. In two cases, the abnormal location was the paraventricular posterior horn. Furthermore, of the 12 pediatric patients, 6/12 exhibited slow-wave activity, 2/12 showed fast activity, and 9/12 demonstrated background slowing. Specific information is presented in Table2. Typical changes observed in three pediatric patients are depicted in Fig.1. One patient with epilepsy exhibited irregular spike waves in the left frontal, central, and temporal regions, as well as in the right parietal and temporal regions during hospitalization. These irregular spike waves spread to the left and right hemispheres and were accompanied by numerous irregular spike waves of low to medium amplitude. Another patient, despite a normal EEG during hospitalization, was diagnosed with epilepsy after a 2-month follow-up.

In this study, the median time to treatment initiation among 12 children was 3 days. Among the 12 pediatric patients, six had acute encephalopathy (50.0%), five had central respiratory failure (41.7%), four had myocardial damage (33.3%), two had liver and kidney function damage (16.7%), while one experienced septic shock. All pediatric patients were treated with acyclovir and immunomodulatory. Two pediatric patients underwent testing with Autoimmune Encephalitis Panels, yet both yielded negative outcomes. Four of the five patients with central respiratory failure received invasive mechanical ventilation; one patient underwent plasma exchange, while another received continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT). Of the 12 patients, 10 (83.3%) improved and were discharged. The median length of hospitalization was 12 d. One patient died, one was comatose, while the other two exhibited encephalitis sequelae and epilepsy. The discharge mRS score of the 10 pediatric patients was 0 (Table3).

A 9-year-old boy was admitted to the hospital due to fever and coma. Following admission, the patient developed central respiratory failure and received mechanical ventilation therapy. Subsequently, septic shock occurred, and the patient was treated with fluid resuscitation, anti-infection therapy, and combined intracranial pressure-lowering treatment. Suspecting a central nervous system infection, a lumbar puncture was performed, revealing a WBC count of 3 × 10^6/L in the cerebrospinal fluid. mNGS identified HHV-7 as positive. The patient underwent plasma exchange and CRRT, along with planned immunotherapy using corticosteroids. However, 24 h after admission, the patient developed cerebral herniation with fixed pupil dilation and ultimately died. (Table3).

Another 9-year-old girl, who was diagnosed with febrile infection-related epilepsy syndrome during hospitalization, had the longest hospitalization stay in the cohort. An invasive ventilator was used for 737 h, and plasma exchange was performed thrice intermittently. On the 103rd day after admission, the patient remained in coma and was discharged after tracheotomy, with a 6-month follow-up mRS score of 5 (Table3).

To our knowledge, this study presents for the first time a series of severe HHV-7-related encephalitis in immunocompetent pediatric patients and provides additional information about the prognoses of these patients to assist with clinical decision-making. Previous studies have shown that the prognosis of HHV-7-related encephalitis is good [6,16–23]. However, this study’s results revealed that older pediatric patients exhibited more severe symptoms and were more likely to experience serious or even life-threatening adverse events.

HHV-7-related encephalitis is rare in immunocompetent pediatric patients. In 1996, Torigoe et al. first described the association between HHV-7 and neurological symptoms as febrile seizures, hemiplegia, and loss of consciousness. [24] In this study, the most common manifestations of HHV-7-related encephalitis were fever, seizures, and altered consciousness, similar to those observed in other forms of encephalitis. Febrile seizures are common in early childhood. Schwarz et al. detected HHV-7 DNA in the cerebrospinal fluid of 57 out of 2972 hospitalized pediatric patients in 2014 [24], and Chan et al. emphasized that delayed primary infection of HHV-7 in older children and adolescents may lead to more severe neurological complications [8], as the more mature immune system tends to induce exaggerated inflammatory responses during initial infection. Alternatively, Ongradi et al. postulated that HHV-7 infection in early childhood establishes lifelong latency, with potential reactivation under immunocompromised conditions, potentially contributing to severe neurological manifestations [23]. In this study, two 9-year-old patients exhibited poor clinical outcomes, which were speculated may be attributed to either delayed primary HHV-7 infection or virus reactivation. However, the limited sample size in this study necessitates further investigation to determine whether advanced age serves as a risk factor for poor prognosis.

In this study, HHV-7 was detected using mNGS of CSF samples; a positive result confirmed HHV-7-related encephalitis. mNGS is an identification method that can detect approximately all pathogens in a sample and exhibits higher sensitivity and specificity for HHV-7 detection than traditional diagnostic methods such as culture and serology. Nonetheless, this technology cannot differentiate between a primary infection and viral reactivation in immunocompetent pediatric patients. Schwartz et al. proposed that HHV-7 DNA in the CSF alone is insufficient to indicate an etiological association. Hence, since confirmatory CSF PCR or serological testing (e.g., HHV-7 IgM/IgG assays) was not performed for these cases, the etiological association between HHV-7 and encephalitis remains uncertain. Notably, the inability to serologically confirm primary infection may compromise the certainty of HHV-7-encephalitis correlation. Future studies should prioritize the development of an integrated multimodal diagnostic framework combining mNGS, PCR, and serological assays to enhance the diagnostic specificity of HHV-7-associated encephalitis [3,25–29].

Yamamoto et al. demonstrated that MRI and EEG abnormalities are present in the brain of patients with HHV-7-related encephalitis, particularly in the temporal lobe, and encompass slow-wave activity during primary HHV-7 infection-related encephalitis. [29] In this study, a possible decrease in background rhythm, slightly higher levels of theta wave activity, and an increase in fast-wave frequency were observed, all of which corroborated the above-mentioned observations.

For patients with ciHHV-6, ganciclovir and foscarnet are recommended as first-line therapy, whereas cidofovir is considered a second-line option [23]. However, the optimal treatment for pediatric patients with HHV-7 remains unclear. Acyclovir was administered in most of the reviewed cases; however, the difference was that immunosuppression and plasma exchange therapy were added to the severe cases. In previous case reports and series, pediatric patients diagnosed with HHV-7-related encephalitis almost completely recovered [17–21], whereas, in this study, one patient died, and one was paralyzed and went into a coma; such cases have not been previously reported. More patients are needed to identify the risk factors associated with HHV-7-related encephalitis in pediatric patients and determine the most effective diagnostic and treatment approaches.

This study has several limitations at the methodological level, as follows: Firstly, in terms of etiological diagnosis, although cerebrospinal fluid samples were detected using mNGS and the genetic material of HHV-7 was successfully identified, due to the limitations of clinical sample preservation conditions, we failed to comprehensively carry out serological antibody detection and dynamic monitoring of quantitative PCR. Secondly, mNGS technology has its inherent limitations in determining the infection phase. This technique cannot accurately distinguish between the initial infection, latent activation, or re-infection of the virus, and such critical differentiation usually relies on the analysis of serological conversion patterns. More importantly, our understanding of the specific role of genetic factors in the disease process is still superficial. Currently, our knowledge mainly comes from retrospective studies and case reports, lacking systematic in-depth research. Additionally, due to the failure to obtain cerebrospinal fluid specimens from patients during the recovery period for virus load verification, we cannot clarify the temporal sequence correlation between the number of HHV-7 nucleic acid copies and the outcome of clinical symptoms.

Immunocompetent older pediatric patients with severe HHV-7-related encephalitis might have a poor prognosis. Empiric acyclovir administration combined with immunosuppressive therapy may improve survival and prognosis.

We thank the research group at the Department of Pediatrics of Shengjing Hospital, affiliated with the China Medical University. We also thank Professor Liu Hongbo of the Department of Statistics at China Medical University for her guidance in this study, and Editage (www.editage.cn) for providing English language editing.

Kai You contributed to the study conception and design and reviewed and revised the manuscript; Xin Chen and Huan Zhao contributed to the study conception and design, data collection, analysis and explanation of the data, and manuscript drafting; Chunxue Jiang and Xuewen Xu revised the manuscript and provided technical assistance. All authors have approved the final manuscript and agreed to be accountable for all aspects of this work.

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China Youth Fund (81501292), the China Postdoctoral Fund Surfacmee Project (2017M611285), and the Basic Research Program of Liaoning Province (2022JH2/101500053).