Polygonatum cyrtonema Hua, a valuable medicinal and edible plant in China, has been increasingly cultivated to produce nutritional and health products to meet market demand. However, the absence of the mitochondrial genome hinders the research of evolutionary analysis, artificial cultivation, and medicinal resource development. This study aimed to systematically characterize the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonemaand perform a preliminary bioinformatic analysis.

In this study, the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonemawas assembled and annotated by combining Illumina reads with long-read Oxford Nanopore Technologies, which formed a complex non-circular structure covering 664,991 bp in length, with 33 protein-coding genes, 20 tRNAs, and 3 rRNAs. Overall, a total of 194 simple repeats, 24 tandem repeats, and 294 dispersed repeats were identified, and 599 RNA editing sites were predicted, all of which were C-to-T types. In particular, 29 homologous fragments between the chloroplast and mitochondrial genome were detected and accounted for 2.4% of the mitochondrial genome. In addition, codon usage analysis, nucleotide diversity analysis, and Ka/Ks analysis suggested a slower rate of evolution and a relatively conserved structure of the mitochondrial genome. Phylogenetic relationships based on 33 species demonstrated thatP. cyrtonemawas most closely related toPolygonatum sibiricum.

Our results provide comprehensive information on the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonema, and demonstrate the availability of mitochondrial genome-based taxonomic classification forPolygonatumMill.. Moreover, it offers a valuable foundation for future research in the cultivation and pharmacological development withinPolygonatumspecies.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12870-025-07074-9.

Polygonatum cyrtonemaHua (P. cyrtonema), a perennial herb of the Asparagaceae family, grows in forests, scrublands, and shaded hillsides [1], and is primarily distributed in the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River, including the provinces of Guizhou, Zhejiang, Hunan, Hubei, Anhui, and Sichuan [2].P. cyrtonemais rich in active pharmaceutical ingredients, such as polysaccharides, flavonoids, and steroidal saponins, which is one of the official Chinese PharmacopoeiaPolygonatumspecies (Edition 2020) [3–5]. Modern pharmacological studies revealed thatP. cyrtonemaexerted various physiological effects, including the enhancement of fatigue resistance, antioxidant activity, immune system regulation, modulation of the intestinal microbiome, and anti-cancer properties [6–11]. As a result,P. cyrtonemais widely used in healthcare, food, and medicine with its growing demand. At present,P. cyrtonemasourced from their native wild habitat is gradually being depleted or destroyed, and artificial cultivation is an effective means to meet market demand.

Chloroplasts and mitochondria are important organelles in plants. The former are responsible for the process of photosynthesis, which involve the conversion of solar energy into stable chemical energy, and the storage of organic matter to sustain life on Earth [12]. The latter function as a source of energy, facilitating the decomposition of organic matter through respiration, a process that releases carbon dioxide and heat energy [13], which are essential for regulating the growth and circulation of plant cells [14]. Because of their maternal inheritance, both chloroplasts and mitochondria genomes are widely used in phylogenetics and evolutionary biology [15–17], which is important for plant cultivation [13,18,19]. However, the assembly of mitochondrial genomes has lagged behind that of chloroplast genomes because of their highly conserved and complex structure [20,21]. Mitochondrial genomes are widely used in biogeographic and population genetic investigation due to its slowly evolution [22–24]. Moreover, owing to the development of improved sequencing and assembly technologies, a variety of plant mitochondrial genomes have been published, providing new insights into the evolution of species.P. cyrtonema,Polygonatum filipes, andPolygonatum odoratumare assigned to the sect.Polygonatumclade based on chloroplast genome sequences [25,26]. Unfortunately, the current molecular markers and morphological characteristics don’t satisfy the demands for identifyingPolygonatumMill., possibly due to the limited number of molecular markers and their similar phenotypes. Moreover, only four mitochondrial genomes ofAsparagus officinalis[27],Chlorophytum comosum[28],Polygonatum sibiricum[29] andPolygonatum kingianum(PQ374235.1) in the Asparagaceae family were published, which might impede to investigate systematic evolution of such family. Therefore, it is necessary to characterize the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonemato classifyPolygonatumMill. and understand the phylogeny of Asparagaceae.

In this study, the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonemawas assembled using the second and third-generation sequencing strategy. The characteristics of the its mitochondrial genome were analyzed by repeat sequences, RNA editing, codon preference, and so on. The phylogenetic relationships ofP. cyrtonemaand other species were inferred using mitochondrial protein-coding genes (PCGs). Overall, this study provides mitochondrial genome information forP. cyrtonemato artificial cultivation and germplasm identification.

P. cyrtonemacollected from Jiuhuashan, Qingyang County, Chizhou City, Anhui Province, China, were cultivated in Yuhang District, Hangzhou City, Zhejiang Province, China. The well-grown young leaves ofP. cyrtonemawere harvested and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for total genomic DNA extraction.

Total genomic DNA was extracted using the Plant Genomic DNA Kit (DP305, Tiangen, Beijing, China), and its concentration and quality was evaluated by electrophoresis and NanoDrop. After successful construction of the library, high-quality genomic DNA was sequenced using Illumina Novaseq6000 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) and the Oxford Nanopore PromethION sequencer (Oxford Nanopore Technologies, Oxford, UK) by Nanjing Genepioneer Biotechnologies Inc. (Nanjing, China). The Illumina and Nanopore sequencing data were filtered using fastp software (v0.20.0) (https://github.com/OpenGene/fastp) [30] and filtlong software (v0.2.1) (https://link.zhihu.com/?target=https%3A//github.com/rrwick/Filtlong).

The assembled mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonemawas annotated as follows: (1) PCGs and rRNAs were compared with the published plant mitochondrial sequences using default parameter by blast (v2.14.0) [36], (2) tRNA and ORF were identified using the program tRNAscan-SE [37] and the OpenReading Frame Finder tool with default parameter (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gorf/gorf.html). The assembled mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonemawas mapped and visualized using OrganellarGenomeDraw (https://chlorobox.mpimp-golm.mpg.de/OGDraw.html) [38].

Simple sequence repeats (SSRs) were detected using the MISA tool (v1.0) [39] with the parameters: 1 bp-10 repetitions, 2 bp-5 repetitions, 3 bp-4 repetitions, 4 bp-3 repetitions, 5 bp-3 repetitions, and 6 bp-3 repetitions. Tandem repeats were identified using the TRF tool (v4.10.0) [40] with the parameters: Match = 2, Mismatch = 7, Delta = 7, PM = 80, PI = 10, Minscore = 50, Maxperiod = 2000. Dispersed repeats were identified using the blastn tool (v2.14.0) [36] with the parameters: word_size = 7; E-value = 1e-5. The final result was visualized using the Circos tool (v0.69–5) [41].

The potential RNA editing sites ofP. cyrtonemaPCGs were predicted using a tool PmtREP (http://112.86.217.82:9919/#/tool/alltool/detail/336). Blast (v2.14.0) [36] was used to find the homologous sequences between the mitochondrial and chloroplast genome (OL436258) [42]. The E-value was set to 1e-5 with the similarity more than 70%. The results of homologous sequence results were visualized by Circos (v0.69–5) [41].

The RSCU of the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonemawas calculated using a self-written Perl script (http://cloud.genepioneer.com/) based on the PCGs. Homologous genes betweenP. cyrtonemaand five other species (Phoenix dactylifera,Asparagus officinalis,Allium cepa,Chlorophytum comosum,Crocus sativus) were obtained using the comparison rate score of blast and were multiply-aligned by MAFFT software (v7.427) [43]. Pi values of each genes were calculated using DnaSP5 [44].

Maximum likelihood phylogenetic trees (ML) were constructed using mitochondrial genome PCGs ofP. cyrtonemaand other 32 selected species (Table S1). Multiple sequence alignment was performed with MAFFT software (v7.427, auto mode) [43]. Then, the aligned sequences were connected end to end and trimmed by TrimAI (v1.4.rev15) [45]. The ML tree was generated using the RAxML software (v8.2.10) [46] with the best-fit model (GTR-GAMMA) determined by Jmodeltest (2.1.10) [47] at 1000 bootstrap replicas.

Multiple alignment of PCGs ofP. cyrtonemaand five other species (Phoenix dactylifera,Asparagus officinalis,Allium cepa,Chlorophytum comosum,Crocus sativus) were performed by MAFFT software (v7.427) [43]. KaKs_Calculator v2.0 [48] software was employed to calculate the ratio of non-synonymous to synonymous substitutions (Ka/Ks) using the MLWL method with default parameter.

The complete mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonemawas visualized as a complex and non-circular DNA molecule with 21 contigs by Bandage [49] (Fig.1), totaling 664,991 bp with an average GC content of 46.30%. The length of contigs ranged from 209 bp to 125,074 bp with similar depth of coverage. Subsequently, a total of 56 functionally annotated genes were identified in the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonema, including 33 protein-coding genes (PCGs), 20 tRNAs, and 3 rRNAs (Fig.2). The PCGs could be divided into 9 different functional groups, which were described as follows: ATP synthase (5 genes), cytochrome c biogenesis (4 genes), ubiquinol cytochrome c reductase (1 gene), cytochrome c oxidase (3 genes), maturase (1 gene), transport membrane protein (1 gene), NADH dehydrogenase (9 genes), ribosomal protein (LSU) (2 genes), and ribosomal protein (SSU) (7 genes) (Table1). The total length of the PCGs was 43,620 bp, accounting for 6.56% of the whole mitochondrial genome. In particular, we found thatccmFcandrps3contained one intron;cox2andatp1had two introns;nad4contained three introns;nad1,nad2,nad5, andnad7had four introns. Interestingly, thecobgene was devoid of intron and was dispersed in contig 9 and contig 20, which encompassed five genes:cox2,atp1,nad1,nad2, andnad5(Table S2). In addition, there was a large set of 20 tRNAs in theP. cyrtonemamitochondrial genome, among which,trnA-TGC,trnI-GAT, andtrnN-GTTparticipated in protein translation after RNA splicing. In addition, onlytrnM-CAThad four copies, and the others were single copy (Table1and Table S2).

According to sequence structure characteristics, repeat sequences could be divided into simple sequence, tandem, and dispersed repeats [50–52]. Therefore, three types of the repetitive sequence were analyzed in the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonema. The results showed that 194 SSRs were detected and the most common type was tetranucleotide, accounting for 35.6% (n= 69), followed by mononucleotide (25.8%,n= 50), dinucleotide (23.2%,n= 45), trinucleotide (12.4%,n= 69), pentanucleotide (2.6%,n= 5), and hexanucleotide (0.5%,n= 1) (Figs.3and4). A/T (n= 49) was the most frequent repeat motif, which represented 25.3% of the identified SSRs, secondly for AG/CT (n= 16, 8.2%), GA/TC (n= 16, 8.2%), and AAAG/CTTT (n= 10, 5.2%). In particular, contig1 had the highest number of SSRs among them (Table S3).

A total of 24 tandem repeats were obtained in theP. cyrtonemamitochondrial genome, with a length range of 14–43 bp and a matching degree ranging from 69 to 100% (Fig.3and Table S4). Five sequences (20.8%) had a matching degree of 100%. The copy number of the tandem repeats exhibited a range of 1.9 to 4.4, indicating that a significant proportion of the tandem repeats were incomplete copies. Similar to the results of SSRs, contig1 also contained the largest number of tandem repeats (n= 8, 33.3%).

Dispersed repeats are a kind of scattered repeats distributed in the genome, and have four different patterns of repeats, including forward repeats, reverse repeats, complement repeats and palindromic repeat. A total of 294 dispersed repeats with a mean length of approximately 64 bp were detected in theP. cyrtonemamitochondrial genome, including 153 palindromic repeats and 141 forward repeats, whereas no reverse or complement repeats were identified (Fig.3and Table S5). The majority of dispersed repeats ranged from 30 to 69 bp in length. In particular, the number of forward and palindromic repeats ranging from 30 to 39 bp was identical (forward: 33, palindromic: 33; 22.4%) (Fig.5).

A total of 599 effective RNA editing sites were identified in 56 PCGs of theP. cyrtonemamitochondrial genome (Fig.6). It was worth noting thatnad4had the greatest number of RNA editing sites (n= 53), whileatp8andrps1had the fewest (n = 2). Among the RNA editing sites, the properties of 42.73% (n= 256) amino acids remained unchanged, 47.58% (n= 285) of the hydrophilic amino acids turned into hydrophobic amino acids, 9.18% (n= 55) of the total sites changed from hydrophobic to hydrophilic amino acids, and 0.50% (n= 3) of amino acid coding sites resulted in stop codons, located in theatp9andccmFcgenes (CGA-TGA), andatp6gene (CAA-TAA), respectively (Table2). RNA-editing machinery mainly targeted the second base of codon (n= 378, 63%), followed by the first base of codon (n= 201, 34%). In addition, there were two particular editing cases in which both the first and second bases of the triplet codon were edited, resulting in the conversion of Pro (CCC, CCT) to Phe (TTC, TTT) (n= 20, 3%). Interestingly, the amino acids generated from editing codons were most frequently converted to leucine (n= 248, 41%) after RNA editing, whereas the least were converted to methionine (n= 8, 1%).

The mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes ofP. cyrtonemawere compared to provide evidence of sequence transfer (Fig.7). Overall, the mitochondrial genome (664,991 bp) ofP. cyrtonemawas much bigger than the chloroplast genome (155,205 bp) [42]. There were 29 transferred fragments between them with a total length of 15,849 bp, covering 2.4% of the mitochondrial genome (Table S6). Interestingly, these transfer fragments mainly located the tRNA (n= 8) and rRNA (n= 4) genes. Among these homologous fragments, only three incomplete tRNA genes (trnN-GTT,trnM-CAT, andtrnH-GTG) also appeared in the chloroplast genome synchronously (trnN-GUU,trnM-CAU, andtrnH-GUG). Additionally, two chloroplast gene fragments, specificallyrrn16andrrn23, were homologous torrn18andrrn26derived from mitochondrial genome (Table S6).

To further investigate the selection variation of genes under different selective pressures in the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonema, nucleotide diversity was conducted on PCGs and rRNAs. The results showed that Pi values with an average of 0.0328 ranged from 0.0079 (nad7) to 0.1642 (atp8) with a huge gap of 21 times (Fig.9). Notably, nearly half of the PCGs (n= 16) and all rRNAs (n= 3) showed high rate of nucleotide diversity (> 0.03). Except for the geneatp8, all PCGs and rRNAs had stable fluctuations in the range of variation. From the perspective of functional enrichment, the ATP synthase function of PCGs exhibited considerable variability, while the others demonstrated lower performance.

To investigate the evolutionary status of the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonema, a phylogenetic tree was constructed onP. cyrtonema, together with 32 other species, using the maximum likelihood (ML) method (Table S1). The results showed that taxa from 22 families in the phylogenetic tree were well clustered (Fig.10). In addition, Asparagaceae family clustered together andP. cyrtonemahad the closest genetic relationship withPolygonatum sibiricum.

In order to estimate the selection pressure ofP. cyrtonemamitochondrial PCGs during the evolution process, all of them were employed to compute the Ka/Ks ratio among the mitochondrial genomes ofPhoenix dactylifera,Asparagus officinalis,Chlorophytum comosum,Allium cepa, Crocus sativus,andEpigeneium amplum. From the results, with the exception of therpl2gene, all Ka/Ks ratios of PCGs were less than 1.0 (Fig.11).

Most plant mitochondrial genomes were typically assembled and presented as circular maps, as shown in studies onAsparagus officinalis[27],Polygonatum kingianum, andPolygonatum sibiricum[29], indicating that circular genome-sized molecules were the primary form of plant mitochondrial DNA [53–55]. However, the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonemaconstructed in this study was a complex non-circular form, indicating that the true structure of mitochondria is characterized by complexity and dynamics, consistent with findings from prior investigations inQuercus acutissima,Indigofera amblyantha, andAbies alba[56–59]. It was reported that the size of the plant mitochondrial genome was incredibly diverse ranging from 200 kb (Brassica napus) to over 10 Mb (Larix sibirica) [60,61]. Overall, the published mitochondrial genome sizes of the Asparagaceae family were not prominent (< 1 Mb) (Table S1), indicating relatively conservative evolutionary dynamics. Interestingly, the mitochondrial genome sizes ofP. cyrtonemawere strikingly similar to otherPolygonatumspecies (P. kingianumandP. sibiricum), whereas their estimated nuclear genome sizes differed significantly by flow cytometry [62], suggesting that interspecific variation withinPolygonatumMill. resides predominantly in nuclear genes.

Although the plant mitochondrial genomes possessed longer lengths and more complex variations relative to their animal mitochondrial counterparts, their PCGs were highly conserved [63–65]. According to previous studies, 41 PCGs were inferred to exist in the ancestral mitogenome of angiosperms [66]. In contrast, 33 PCGs were found in the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonema. It seemed that some of them were lost or transfered during evolution [67,68]. Through comparative analysis mitochondrial PCGs inP. cyrtonemaand 32 additional species, several notable patterns were identified (Table S1). Therps2,rps11, andrpl10genes were lost during the early evolution in most eukaryotic plants, which was predicted by Adams and Kubo [69,70]. Asparagaceae species exhibited a higher frequency ofrpl2andsdh3genes transfer events from mitochondrial to nuclear genomes throughout evolutionary history [71,72]. InPolygonatumMill., the missingrps7gene was possibly transferred and integrated into the nuclear genomes [73]. Additionally, given thatP. cyrtonemaexhibited the lowest number of PCGs among the publishedPolygonatumspecies, it could deduce thatP. cyrtonemahad drastic genetic changes during evolution from a common ancestor to better adapt to their environment.

Abundant repetitive sequences played an important role in plant mitochondrial genome evolution and significantly promoted gene recombination within mitochondrial genome [74,75]. In this study, a number of 512 repeat sequences were identified in the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonema, which not only furnished a substantial number of reference sites for genetic evolution, but also provide a foundation for developing molecular markers for germplasm identification withinPolygonatumMill. [76–78]. Furthermore, ultralong repetitive sequences were of particular interest, as they not only leaded to isomerization, but were more likely to interact with structural changes in genes to promote evolution [67,79,80]. Within the published mitochondrial genome of the Asparagaceae family, ultralong repetitive sequence (> 1000 bp) resulted in the duplication of genes, such astrnM-CAT. Therefore, ultralong repetitive sequences might not only drive the duplication of thetrnM-CATgene into four copies, but also contribute to the structural complexity of theP. cyrtonemamitochondrial genome.

RNA editing, a post-transcriptional process in plant mitochondrial and chloroplast genomes, modified nucleotide sequences in mRNA level, which enabled more efficient protein folding [81,82]. All of 599 RNA editing sites were found in the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonema, which was more thanAsparagus officinalis(510) [27] and less thanPolygonatum sibiricum(609) [29]. The main type of editing change was a transition from C to T inP. cyrtonemaRNA editing sites, which was also a general type of RNA editing change in other plants [73]. At the same time, the RNA editing ofP. cyrtonemamainly happened at the first and second base positions, which was also reported in most plants [32,83]. In particular,P. cyrtonemaRNA editing greatly increased the proportion of hydrophobic amino acids, which was similar toPolygonatum sibiricum[29].The increasing proportion of hydrophobic amino acids contributed to the stability of protein structure [84]. Furthermore, plant mitochondria mitigated stress-induced damage by modulating RNA editing events in specific PCGs under environmental perturbations [85–89]. By combining RNA editing site prediction results with previous studies inPolygonatum sibiricum, cytochrome c biogenesis and NADH dehydrogenase-related PCGs were preferentially edited [29]. It could hypothesize that they experienced comparable environmental pressures throughout evolutionary history.

In this study, the completeP. cyrtonemamitochondrial genome was sequenced and assembled based on a combination of long-read Nanopore and Illumina sequencing technologies, which was a complex non-circular form with a length of 664,991 bp, including 56 genes (33 protein-coding genes, 20 tRNA genes, and 3 rRNA genes). Subsequently, the diversity of DNA fragments in the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonemawas elucidated by analyzing repeat sequence identification, RNA editing site prediction, and gene transfer between chloroplasts and mitochondria. Finally, the genetic status and evolutionary trend of the mitochondrial genome ofP. cyrtonemawere addressed due to codon bias, synonym and non-synonym substitution rate, nucleotide diversity, and phylogenetic tree construction. In conclusion, this study enhances our understanding of the phylogeny and genetic evolution ofP. cyrtonemathrough its mitochondrial genome, fills a critical gap in its genomic research, and provides a valuable theoretical foundation for future studies, as well as the development and utilization of this important species.

This research was partially supported by"Pioneer"and"Leading Goose"R&D Program of Zhejiang Province (grant no. 2023C02017).

QJJ and DKW conceived and designed the experiment. HXL prepared figures and tables and wrote the manuscript. QJJ and HXL revised the manuscript. FXR and GCC collected the plant materials and conducted the experiment. QJJ and DKW conduct funding acquisition and project management. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

The Key Research and Development Projects of “Vanguard” and “Leading Goose” in Zhejiang Province (2023C02017).