Potato tubers collected from different areas showed the prevalence of dry rot with characteristic white mycelia like symptoms ofFusariumpathogen.Fusariumspecies from diseased tubers were isolated based on morphological features. 18 S-Internal Transcribed Spacer (ITS) andTranslation Elongation factor 1-α(TEF1-α) based analysis followed by phylogenetic tree constructed using ITS,TEF1-αandRNA polymerase II subunit B(RPB2) identifiedFusariumisolates asFusarium verticilloides,Fusarium soloni,Fusarium falciformeandFusarium oxysporum. According to our knowledge, this study is the first report of the occurrence ofFusarium falciformecausing dry rot on potato tubers in Pakistan. The pathogenicity test confirmed the re-appearance of dry rot symptoms withFusarium falciformeon potato tuber. The formation ofFusarium falciformeAg NPs was confirmed using UV-Visible spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and Field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) analysis. The synthesized Ag NPs showed color change withFusarium falciformeand accordingly, UV peak was observed at 431 nm. The XRD revealed Ag based specific angles at 36.14°, 44.26°, 64.42° and 77.44° corresponding to face cubic structure. Similarly, FTIR band absorption at 3297 cm−1, 1626 cm−1and 1057 cm−1ascribed the presence of various biomolecules with O-H, N-H and C-N stretching vibrations based on Ag NPs synthesis. SEM indicated 29 nm synthesized mainly spherical Ag NPs and EDS analysis showed the presence of Ag in NPs. Maximum zone of inhibition withFusarium falciformeAg NPs was observed againstPseudomonas aeruginosa,Escherichia coli,Pseudomonas syringaeandStaphylococcus aureusat 0.05 LSD significance.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s12870-025-07124-2.

Potato (Solanum tuberosumL.) is an important crop plant grown around the world for food and nutrition. In Pakistan, potato production averaged a yield of 8 million tons in 2023 [1]. Potato is affected by many fungal pathogens that cause major economic losses. Potato dry rot is caused byFusariumthat is a devastating fungal disease [2].Fusaium equiseti(F. equiseti),Fusaium sambucinum(F. sambucinum),Fusaium manal(F. solani) complex,Fusaium oxysporum(F. oxysporum),Fusaium semitectum(F. semitectum)Fusaium graminearum(F. graminearum) andFusaium venenatum(F. venenatum) are pathogenic species of potato worldwide [3,4]. Symptoms of dry rot in potato include sunken and wrinkled brown to black patches on tubers, which exhibit reduced dry matter content and shriveled flesh. As storage duration increases, these wrinkled patches may develop cottony white, purple, pink, or brick orange spores and mycelia masses [4]. Consequently, internal tissues undergo black or brown rot. The pathogen gains entry through wounds, which serve as primary infection site, entering xylem vessels causing leaf chlorosis followed by necrosis, stunting, wilting and eventually plant death [2].Fusariumspecies can survive for many years as fungal propagules in the soil, colonize living plants or plant debris, as saprophytes, endophytes or heterophytes. Of different species,F. oxysporumproduces white color colony with a pink or violet center when grown on potato dextrose agar (PDA) media.F. solanialso produces white color colony on PDA but it becomes blue-green or bluish brown. On the underside, this may be pale, tea-with-milk-brown, or reddish brown.F. solanigrows rapidly, but not as rapidly asF. oxysporum[2,5].F. solanispecies complex (FSSC) is one of the prevalent pathogens of dry rot of potato includingF. keratoplasticum,F. falciforme, andF. solani[6]. Nearly all species are able to produce mycotoxins that are toxic [2,4].Fusariumspecies mycotoxins are aflatoxins, fumonisins, zearalenone, deoxynivalenol, cyclopiazonic acid and trichothecenes. Trichothecenes possess sesquiterpene isoprenoids that are produced byF. culmorum,F. graminearumandF. sambucinum. Trichothecenes inhibit protein synthesis in the mitochondria that allows reactive oxygen species build up in the cell resulting in oxidative stress and induction of programmed cell death or apoptosis [2,4]. These species also contains beauvericins and enniatins which are cyclic depsipeptides [7,8]. Zralenone is another secondary metabolite produced byF. culmorum,F. graminearum,F. cerealis,F. semitectum,F. verticillioidesandF. equiseti. Zralenone is thus a potent estrogenic metabolite produced by manyFusariumspecies. Similarly, Deoxynivalenol is the most widely distributed mycotoxin produced byF. graminearumandF. culmorum[4,8,9]. Fumonisins are produced byF. verticillioidesand closely relatedF. proliferatumandF. subglutinans. The fumonisins have a structure similar to sphingolipids. SinceFusariumis of wide occurrence and distribution, a sensitive and rapid surface plasmon resonance imaging assay has detected these mycotoxin such as cyclopiazonic acid in maize and cheese [10]. Similarly, nanoparticles-based lateral flow immunoassay is used for secondary metabolites detection. The rapidly evolving field of nanotechnology has recently gained significant importance due to its management of various medical aliments and agricultural diseases made possible by their strong antimicrobial activity. Nanoparticles typically range from 1 to 100 nm in size and have been implicated into a wide range of profound applications. Nanoparticles, particular silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) have gained attention due to their unique small size, large surface area to mass ratio that confer nanoparticles distinct physical and chemical properties and rendering them cost-efficient, highly stability and less toxic [11,12]. Biologically synthesized Ag NPs are preferred as compared to their counter-parts physical and chemical methods because they encounter problems with scalability and hazardable toxins during mass production. Biologically synthesized Ag NPs are made using plants, fungi and bacteria [11,12]. Different fungi-based Ag NPs are reported includingAspergillus,PenicilliumandFusariumspecies [13,14]. These are preferred due to their eco-friendly, bulk production and reproducibility [15].F. oxysporumbase Ag NPs were produced with antibacterial activity againstEscherichia coli,Staphylococcus aureusand that showed cytotoxic activity against human breast carcinoma MCF-7 cell line [16].F. scirpiAg NPs had antimicrobial potential against uropathogenicEscherichia coli(E. coli) biofilms [17]. Similarly,F. mangiferaeAg NPs also showed antibiofilm potential [18]. Ag NPs and Au NPs ofF. pseudonygamagave antibiofilm, antioxidant activity and anticancer activity against cancer cell lines [19]. Ag NPs were synthesized by usingF. pallidoroseumbiomass and they showed significant antilarval activity against white grub larvae [20]. Extracellular synthesis of Ag NPs byF. acuminatumfrom ginger showed resistance toStaphylococcus aureus(S. aureus),Salmonella typhi(S. typhi), andE. colishowing simple, eco-friendly method for their production [21]. Hydrogel with PEG-coatedF. verticillioidesAg NPs showed effective wound healing ability with low toxicity and high tolerability with MRSA-infected wounded mice as compared to commercially available silver sulfadiazine cream showingF.coated Ag NPs potential for their wound healing ability [22].F. chlamydosporumandPenicillium chrysogenum(P. chrysogenum) Ag NPs showed cytotoxic effect against cancer cells rendering them as potential therapeutic agents [23].F. solanibased Ag NPs andF. solanigold (Au) nanoparticles showed significant impact on grain borne fungi and cancer cell lines respectively [24,25]. Thus,FusariumAg NPs can be regarded as a source of novel bioactive secondary metabolites having a wide range of biological activities. The objective of this research was first to identifyFusariumspecies causing potato dry rot using ITS,TEF1-αandRPB2sequencing followed by construction of phylogenetic tree based on the unique identified sequence. This study is also aimed at investigatingFusariumAg NPs role against pathogenic bacteria. The synthesized Ag NPs were characterized using UV, SEM, FTIR, XRD and EDS. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of fungi that is isolated and used to synthesize and characterize Ag NPs and used against bacterial pathogens.

Potato plants were collected from potato growing areas of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa(KP). The potato plant was identified by Dr. Abdul Nazir, plant taxonomist at Department of Environmental Sciences, COMSATS University Islamabad (CUI) Abbottabad Campus, Pakistan. The voucher specimen for potato plant bearing tubers (CUHA-453) was submitted in the herbarium of COMSATS University Islamabad, Abbottabad Campus, Pakistan. Potato tubers with symptoms of dry rot like pits, patches, rough dried surfaces with white, pink or black mycelia in these pits were collected from northern areas of Pakistan including Batakundi, Mansehra, Abbottabad and Haripur.

Fungal isolation from the infected tubers was conducted. The tubers were surface sterilized using 70% ethanol and rinsed with distilled water. The infected part of the tuber was cut and homogenized in distilled water using pestle and motel. Serial dilutions were made from homogenized mixture and 500 uL from 10−9dilution was spread on the PDA media plates. The plates were sealed, labeled and incubated for 7 days at 28 °C [12]. For morphological identification, the fungal colonies grown on the PDA plates were subjected to fungus purification using hyphal tip incision. The fungal hyphae from serial dilutions grown on PDA media plates were further cultured on new media. The procedure was repeatedly done for fungal isolates collected from different regions to get pure colonies. These cultures were incubated for 7 days at 28 °C to examine fungus morphological features like appearance, colony color, pigmentation and texture. After morphological identification, fungal colonies were subjected to DNA extraction.

For DNA extraction, each fungal colony was cultured on PDB (Potato Dextrose Broth) media and kept on shaking incubation for 3–4 days at 28˚C. Centrifugation was done at 10,000 rpm for 5 minutes to collect fungal pellets. These pellets were dissolved in 10% SDS, 2% CTAB, 5 M NaCl and TE buffer (50 mM Tris, 10 mM of EDTA) and incubated for 15 minutes at 65 °C followed by 24:1 chloroform: isoamyl alcohol treatment. The contents were mixed and centrifuged for 7000 rpm for 7 minutes. The supernatant was treated with isopropanol and 70% ethanol for DNA precipitation [26]. The DNA extracted from 15 samples was suspended in the TE buffer and stored at 4 °C for PCR identification.TEF1-αprimers EF1 5’ATGGGTAAGGARGACAAGAC’3; EF2 5’ GGARGTACCAGTSATCATGTT’3) were used for identification ofFusariumspecies. Initial denaturation at 94 °C for 3 min, 35 cycles of denaturation at 94 °C for 30 s, annealing at 56 °C for 30 s, and extension at 72 °C for 1 min, followed by a final extension at 72 °C for 10 min [3,27,28]. 18 S ITS primers ITS1 (5’TCCGTAGGTGAACCTGCGG’3) and ITS4 (5’TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC’3) were also applied to fungal isolate under similar PCR conditions with 58 °C annealing temperature. The ITS andTEF1-αPCR products were run on gel electrophoresis (1% Agarose and 0.5 mg/mL Ethidium bromide in TE buffer) at 120 V for 30 min and visualized using transilluminator. Four isolates based on morphological differences and PCR confirmation were chosen for DNA sequencing using ITS,TEF1-αprimers (mentioned above) andRPB2primers RPB2 forward (5’GGGGAGAACAGAAGAAGGC3’) and RPB2 reverse (5’CCCATAGCTTGATTACCAT’3). Four differentFusariumspecies uniquely identified in this study were submitted to NCBI GenBankhttps://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/and accession numbers were obtained for phylogenetic tree construction.

A multigene phylogenetic tree was constructed using NCBI BLASTn based on the concatenated sequences of ITS,TEF1-αandRPB2from the four different isolates and the selected reference strains [29].Neonectria ditissima(CBS100316) was included as the outgroup. The phylogenetic analysis was performed using the PhyloSuite integrated toolkit, which incorporates programs such as MAFFT, Gblocks, and IQ-TREE2 [30]. The individual gene sequences (24 ingroup sequences: three loci for each of the four isolates, four selected referenceFusariumspecies and the three loci for the outgroup, total 27 sequences; Supplementary Table 1) were aligned using MAFFT [31], potentially trimmed and then concatenated per taxon. Maximum Likelihood (ML) analysis was conducted using IQ-TREE v2.2.0 [32]. The substitution model was selected using Partition Finder [33], with HKY + I + F identified as the best-fit model for the concatenated dataset. Branch support was assessed using the Shimodaira–Hasegawa-like approximate likelihood-ratio test (SH-aLRT) [34].

Pathogenicity confirmation of the uniquely identified fungal strain was achieved by re-creating the symptoms for pathogenicity test. Certified potato tubers were surface sterilized with 70% ethanol and washed with distilled water. After air drying, the tubers were syringe inoculated with 50 uL of 3 × 104/mL spore suspension in sterile distilled water and stored at 28 °C for 7 days. After 7 days, the tubers were checked for symptoms development similar to infected tubers from which fungus was initially isolated [12].

Fusariumbiomass was prepared as reported Husseiny et al. [11].F. falciforme(Accession nos. ITSPV211459,TEF1-αPQ775194,RPB2PV626798) identified in this research was used for Ag NPs synthesis. Briefly, the fungal culture was incubated at 28 ℃ for 7 days at 200 rpm. After 7 days, biomass was collected by centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 20 min and was added to dd H2O followed by 3 days of incubation at 200 rpm at 28 ℃. The solution was filtered, and cell free extract was used for fungal Ag NPs synthesis. 1:1 cell-free extract to silver nitrate (1 mg/mL AgNO3solution) was used with incubation at 1500 rpm, 28 ℃ for 72 h. pH was maintained at 9.0. Visible color change was observed after incubation time from almost opaque to black which indicates formation of Ag NPs [11].

Cell free extract and Ag NPs synthesized fromF. falciformecell free extract was monitored by UV-vis Spectrophotometer (UV-1602, BMS) with 200–800 nm range [35].

FTIR (Thermo Scientific, USA) was used to measure the Bio reduction of Ag+by cell-free extract ofF. falciforme. Spectra was recorded between 4000 and 400 cm−1[17].

Dried Ag NPs was attached to the specimen stub for obtaining the SEM image. The micrograph was obtained using 10 kV under 5–10 torr vacuum pressure. The presence of metallic Ag and organic substrates were measured by EDS. MIRA3 TESCAN electron microscope was used for the process [36].

D denotes the particle’s size, K denotes a constant, λ denotes the wavelength, β1/2 denotes the full width at half maximum, and θ denotes the Bragg’s angle. By applying Origin software, the obtained diffraction patterns were shown forF. falciformeAg NPs structural characterization [37].

The Agar well diffusion method was used for antimicrobial activity [11]. Four bacterial pathogens includingE. coli(ATCC 10536),Pseudomonas syringe(P. syringe; DC 3000),S. aureus(KX262679) andPseudomonas aeruginosa(P. aeruginosa; ATCC 9027) were cultured in Nutrient broth [12]. These cultures were spread on Nutrient agar plates. Six wells were used along with positive control as Kanamycin and negative as dd H2O. Three wells were loaded with 30 µg/µL, 60 µg/µL and 90 µg/µL concentrations of Ag NPs along with 60 µL cell-free extract ofF. falciformein one well. The experiment was done in triplicate. Plates containingP. syringe(DC 3000) was incubate at 28 ℃ whileE. coli,S. aureusandP. aeruginosawere incubated at 37 ℃ for 24 h [11,12].

R software was used to analyze data for antibacterial activity (R Core Team 2023). The standard error (± SE) was used to average the data readings. The least significant difference (LSD) test was used to do a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) atp< 0.05 [38].

Potato tubers with symptoms of dry rot like pits and patches with white or black mycelia in the pits with shriveled skin were collected from different fields of potato producing northern regions of KP, Pakistan. These include 3 fields of Batakundi, 9 fields of Mansehra, 2 fields of Abbottabad and 4 Haripur (Fig.1). The tubers were collected during the potato growing seasons from these areas in October-November 2022 and April-May 2023. These tubers were brought to Biotechnology lab at CUI Abbottabad and stored at 4 °C for fungus identification.

Fungal isolates showingFusariumdry rot symptoms were identified from potato tubers grown in the north-region [39]. Morphological features on the PDA media included white, brown to dark pink and blackish brown colonies [2,3,39].Fusariumspecies identified in this study exhibited diverse appearances from initial culture to 7 days after incubation at 28 °C. The morphological features ofFusariumspecies identified in this study are listed in Table1[40–42].

Fungal isolates/colonies were subjected to PCR withTEF1-αand ITS primers. A PCR band of approximately 550 bp appeared at 56 °C annealing temperature withTEF1-αand 780 bp band with ITS at 58 °C annealing temperature. This indicated the presence ofFusariumin dry rot infected tubers withTEF1-αand ITS (Fig.2; Supplementary Fig.1). Further molecular characterization was achieved using ITS,TEF1-αandRPB2sequencing. Four differentFusariumspecies were identified based on ITS,TEF1‐αandRPB2sequencing in this study. The isolates ZHW3, ZHW4, ZHW5, and ZHW6 were identified asF. verticilloides,F. solani,F. falciformeandF. oxysporumrespectively using Illumina Sanger sequencing (Fig.3).

The phylogenetic tree was constructed using ITSTEF-1αandRPB2sequences from four different isolates. The phylogeny identified three main clades based on fungal isolates. Clade 1 consisted ofF. oxysporum(HSGF03) closely related to strain ZHW6 identified asF. oxysporumfrom Batakundi region. Clade 2 includedF. verticillioides(NRRL20958) closely related to strain ZHW3 identified asF. verticilloides. Clade 3 comprised ofF. solanispecies complex (FSSC) ofF. solani(F238) andF. falciforme(NCS238) with strains ZHW4 from Batakundi and ZHW5 from Manshera region identified asF. solani and F. falciformerespectively. The identified four strains showed a very close phylogenetic relationship in their respective clades, indicating minimal divergence within clades. It is also noteworthy that both ZHW4 (F. solani) and ZHW5 (F. falciforme) identified in this study, belonged to the FSSC complex of Clade 3 and shared a common ancestor, underscoring their close relationship. Similarly, Clade 1 and Clade 2 shared their respective common ancestry and exhibited a small degree of divergence. The high bootstrap values are built on robustness of our findings based on the phylogenetic tree (Fig.4).

To regenerate potato dry rot symptoms, certified potato tubers were inoculated withF. falciformeidentified in this study. After 7 days of incubation at 28 ℃, fungal symptoms appeared on the infected tubers which resulted in re-appearance and confirmation of potato dry rot (Fig.5).

Ag NPs were synthesized by mixing silver nitrate solution (1 mg/mL) andF. falciformeextract in 1:1 ratio at 28 °C and 9 pH [11]. After a while, the reaction mixture gradually changed into a dark-brown suspension indicating the formation of Ag NPs (Fig.6). The primary characterization method for Ag NPs synthesis is UV-vis spectroscopy that shows Ag NPs formation that depends upon their shape, size, and distribution based on surface plasmon resonance (SPR). A peak of 421 nm confirmed the formation of Ag NPs in this study (Fig.7) according to previous report [33]. Ag NPs synthesized usingF. oxysporumshowed maximum absorbance peak at 420 nm [16]. Absorbance spectrum by UV spectrometer showed a plasmon resonance absorbance around 420–440 nm for Ag/AgCl NPs synthesized fromF. oxysporum[40].

The diffractogram of Ag NPs is represented in Fig.7. The XRD pattern of biosynthesized Ag NPs using fungal filtrate ofF. falciformewas carried out with 2θ values ranging from 20°–80°. Indexing of synthesized Ag NP crystal peaks was carried out by Ag crystal card (ICSD No.00.03–0291) of face center cubic. The diffraction pattern ofF. falciformeAg NPs displayed four strong peaks at 2θ values the characteristic peaks at 36.14°, 44.26°, 64.42° and 77.44° correspond to the (111), (200), (220) and (311) structure. Four distinct diffraction peaks of silver were observed at Bragg’s planes (111, 200, 220, 311) for the face-centered cubic structure of synthesized Ag NPs (Fig.8).

FTIR analysis showed the chemical composition of synthesized Ag NPs. The occurrence of several functional groups/metabolites inF. pseudonygamaare responsible for the reduction of silver ions into silver that act as capping and stabilizing agents [19]. Peak at 1626 cm−1corresponds to the alkenes stretch and a broad peak at 3297 cm−1assigned to O–H and N–H stretching vibrations of amide (Fig.9). Absorption spectra showed similar band pattern with 1644 and 3282 cm−1for C = O and N-H group respectively for Ag NPs [20]. A 539 cm−1band in FTIR spectrum indicated fungal extract alkyl halides [20].

SEM provided a high-resolution image of synthesizedF. falciformeAg NPs based on their morphology, size and distribution. The micrograph showed the synthesized silver nanoparticles (Fig.10A). Synthesized Ag NPs were found to be 29 nm based on Bragg’s equation. SEM micrograph recorded for Ag NPs showed spherical nanoparticles [33]. The elemental composition present in the sample was presented with the help of EDS analysis showed Ag to be % present by weight in synthesized Ag NPs. This indicated a high amount of silver with an optical absorption band at ~ 3 eV in Ag NPs (Fig.10B). EDS showed a convincing peak for oxygen with a relative mass percentage which confirmed its presence as a major constituent of nanoparticles. The presence of oxygen could be assigned to emission of X-rays from free amino groups fromF. falciforme. Similarly, carbon presence in EDS indicated the presence of sugars in the fungal mass extract (Fig.10B).

Antibacterial assay of biosynthesized Ag NPs was studied against pathogenic strains ofP. aeruginosa,E. coli,P. syringaeandS. aureususing agar well diffusion method (Fig.11). The results based on zone of inhibition (Fig.12) showed that Ag NPs were effective against all bacteria strains includingP. aeruginosa,E. coli,P. syringaeandS. aureus[45,46]. Both gram positive and gram-negative bacteria showed zone of inhibition, with maximum zone of inhibition of 2.0, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.8-mm forP. aeruginosa,E. coli,P. syringaeandS. aureusrespectively with 90 ug/uL Ag NPs with LSD at 0.05 SD (Fig.12).

Potato is a major crop grown in Pakistan and worldwide. However, it is affected by various fungal diseases including dry rot [2]. Symptoms of whitish brown to black tissue patches on potato tubers with wrinkled skin indicated the presence of dry rot on potato tubers in the north-Pakistan (Figs.1and2). Morphological features of fungal isolates on PDA media from Batakundi area, indicated purple or very bright red color colonies. These colonies turn dark purple after 7 days of incubation at 28 °C (Fig.3A-D). Fungal colonies from potato tubers of Batakundi region appeared white with a very thin layer of mycelia on the surface media (Fig.3E-H). Similarly,Fusariumspecies isolated from infected tubers of Mansehra region were white in color (Fig.3I-L). These fungal cultures later changed color to brownish white, however the colonies remained the same with star like pattern (Fig.3I-L). Other fungal colonies appeared maroon or purple (Fig.3M-P). Similar observations were made by Gangaraj et al. in 2021 that indicated white, brown and purple-maroon color colonies with guava wilt [41]. Our results withF. falciformeproduced floccose mycelia whileF. solaniproduced sparse mycelia arranged in concentric rings on PDA media (Table 1); similar to results by Chehri et al. [6]. After morphological identification, PCR identification showed approximately 550 and 780 bp band size withTEF1-αand ITS primers indicating the possible presence ofFusariumspecies in dry rot infected tubers [3]. The sequencing of fungal isolates based on ITS,RPB2andTEF1-αidentified ZHW5 asFusariumfrom FSSC. This report is similar to Gherbawy et al. 2021 identification ofFusariumpathogens from FSSC [43]. Phylogenetic tree construction ofFusariumspecies based onTEF1-α,RPB2and ITS identified uniqueFusariumisolate fromF. solanicomplex asF. falciformecausing dry rot on potato tubers [43]. According to our knowledge, this is the first report of the identification of tuber dry rot caused byF. falciformein Pakistan based on sequencing followed by concatenated phylogenetic tree (Figs.4and5). Report by Chehri et al. in 2014 similarly confirmedF. falciformebased on ITS andTEF1-αfrom FSSC causing dry rot on potato [6]. After the successful molecular and phylogenetic identification ofF. falicforme, Ag NPs were synthesized usingF. falciformefiltrate (Fig.6). For Ag NPs synthesis, 1:1 cell-free extract to AgNO3was used at pH 9.0 at 28 °C. The solution turned from cream to dark brown, indicating the formation of Ag NPs.F. solaniAg NPs were also reported to change from yellow to dark brown after synthesis with equal amount of fungal filtrate and AgNO3[47]. Fungal nitrate reductase is a critical enzyme for the formation of Ag NPs with the reduction of Ag+2to Ag [33]. Biomolecules and metabolites such as sugars and amides also play an essential role in the formation of Ag NPs. A UV- Vis peak of 421 nm was obtained in this study (Fig.7). A similar peak showed the formation ofF. pallidoroseumAg NPs [20].F. nygamaiAg NPs produced an absorbance peak in the UV–visible spectrum at 420 nm [44]. After initial characterization, a diffraction pattern indexed at (111), (200), (220) and (311) lattice planes for face centered cubic was obtained forF. falciformeAg NPs (Fig.8) similarly corresponding to 38.15°, 44.18°, 64.63° and 77.50° forF. oxysporumAg NPs [16]. Another study also indicated 2θ values corresponded to silver crystalline basedF. pseudonygamaiAg NPs with face-centered cubic structure [19].F. falciformefiltrate containing biomolecules including enzymes, proteins and polysaccharides showed a strong affinity for Ag NPs synthesis.F. falciformeAg NPs FTIR analysis demonstrated stretching vibration of 3297 cm−1as amide, the band stretching at 1626 cm−1represented amide I and 1644 cm−1showed carbonyl band stretching (Fig.9). Similar reports are available where amino acids, sugars and other biomolecules from fungal filtrates resulted in Ag+2reduction [14,18]. Additionally, electrostatic attraction between the nanoparticles and fungus-based biomolecules is involved in capping and enhanced stable formation of Ag NPs [17,18]. Soliman et al. in 2022 showedF. pseudonygamAg NPs with Ag as predominant element and spherical shape biosynthesized nanoparticles through SEM and EDS analysis similar to our study (Fig.10) [19]. After successful characterization, 2.0, 1.8, 1.9 and 1.8-mm zones of inhibition (Figs.11and12) were recorded forP. aeruginosa,E. coli,P. syringaeandS. aureusrespectively withF. falciformeAg NPs [16].F. oxysporumAg NPs agar well diffusion method withE. coliandS. aureusshowed 2.0- and 1.6-mm zone of inhibition. Antibacterial activity ofF. acuminatumAg NPs was recorded againstS. aureusfollowed byStaphylococcus epidermidis(S. epidermidis),S. typhiandE. coli[48].F. semitectumAg NPs showed significant antibacterial activity againstK. pneumoniaandP. aeruginosa[49]. Both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria includingBacillus subtilis(B. subtilis),S. aureus,P. aeruginosa,E. coliand fungal pathogensCandida albicans(C. albicans),Aspergillus niger(A. niger) were impacted byFusariumAg NPs penetrating through cell wall and causing cell damage [44]. Inside the cell, these Ag NPs disrupt metabolic and cellular processes and cause DNA degradation. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are the key players responsible for protein denaturation, lipid peroxidation and DNA damage. Finally, these processes lead to the cell death and apoptosis of such important biological entities [50,51].

This is the first report of the identification ofFusarium falicformeand its Ag NPs synthesis.Fusarium falicformewas identified based on the phylogenetic tree using ITS,TEF1-aandRPB2. Ag NPs synthesized were characterized through UV, FTIR, SEM and XRD showed their successful use againstP. aeruginosa,E. coli,P. syringaeandS. aureus.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

The authors like to thank IST Islamabad Abbottabad for technical assistance in data generation. The authors are thankful to Dr. Rafiq Ahmed CUI Abbottabad Pakistan for providing bacterial strains to carry out this research work. We also like to thank Dr. Zhao lab at Nanjing China for helping us with the sequencing results and Dr. Abdul Nazir at CUI Abbottabad for providing us with potato (Solanum tuberosum L.) voucher specimen ID CUHA 453.