The Register for Healthcare Technology Involvement and Evaluation is a database which was established to collect names and contact details of people interested in joining patient public involvement (PPI) activity connected to brain injury research. With the establishment of the new HealthTech Research Centre in Brain and Spinal Injury (Brain Injury HRC), the database was refreshed and enhanced to collect demographic data. As well as directing people to appropriate research projects, the database acts as a resource to explore attitudes and opinions on PPI.

A short anonymous online survey was conducted to explore how the Brain Injury HRC and other research groups should acknowledge the involvement of those with lived experience.

63% (n= 48) expressed preference for payment by cheque or bank transfer.

85% (n= 64) wish to have formal public recognition by researchers.

There is a desire to be formally acknowledged in research publications—38% (n= 29) would like to be named authors, 47% (n= 36) would like to be named in a paper.

60.5% (n= 46) would like the impact of their involvement acknowledged.

This project demonstrates that people contributing to research wish to be acknowledged in publications and other formal contexts. The findings of this survey are situated within the broader context of PPI literature, which highlights the importance of meaningful acknowledgment and ethical remuneration in fostering effective and equitable public involvement in research. Recognising the wishes of public collaborators may improve engagement and retention.. Whilst not a research project with generalisable findings we believe that groups conducting similar PPI work may be interested in applying our results.

The lead author is a brain injury survivor whose experience, as a contributor and facilitator of Patient Public Involvement and Engagement, gave the impetus for this paper. The paper summarises the thoughts and opinions of a group of people with lived experience of brain injury.

The Healthtech research centre (HRC) in brain and spinal injury has developed a database of people with lived experience to help with the development of new research. In order to get the most from the public contributors they were asked how they would like to be recognised and paid for their time. Most people wanted to be named publicly and to be paid directly rather than with vouchers. Not everybody agreed, so it is important to ask each individual what they would like. The HRC are using the results of the survey to change the way they work and think that others may be interested in learning from their experience.

Patient Public Involvement (PPI) is now an established and valued part of medical research [1]. It uses the lived experience of patients, carers, and the public at all stages of the research cycle to frame questions, improve recruitment and retention, and to enhance dissemination of results [2]. Previous studies have identified barriers to involvement [3] which include self-confidence and being unsure of the value of contributions. Public acknowledgement is thought to reduce these hurdles.

It is widely agreed that the input of experts by experience in the research process should be recognised and rewarded, but there is variability on how this is done [4]. Guidance has been published to assist research teams [5] in paying people for their time, with standard rates to cover the costs of time spent. However, there is little consistency inhowthey are paid, and confusion over the impact on individuals’ tax and benefits [6]. Recent work has highlighted that non-financial acknowledgement of PPI contributors, and descriptions of their involvement and impact in research are less common [7] but still valuable.

In 2017, the Register of Healthcare Technology Involvement and Evaluation (RHITE) [8] was established to generate a database of patients and members of the public interested in contributing to research in brain injury. In 2024 the NIHR funded the Healthtech Research Centre in Brain and Spinal Injury. The centre aims to support solutions that improve the quality of life of those affected by brain and spinal injuries and to make new technologies accessible across the National Health Service (NHS).

A renewal of the RHITE database was undertaken as part of the launch of the Brain Injury HRC. This led to a change in ownership of the database from a previous iteration of the Centre. In line with General Data Protection Regulations, all existing members were approached and asked to join the revised RHITE database. In addition to its previous function of collecting information on personal experience and interest, the RHITE now collects data on demographics to measure and track inclusivity and diversity of involved participants. People were invited to register through various means including: existing members invited to re-register, advertisement on the Brain Injury HRC website, mailing to 3rd sector support organisations in Brain Injury, and advertisements in clinics run by the Brain Injury HRC clinical research groups.

This database can be filtered to ensure the appropriate participants are invited to be involved in the research activity. This also created a cohort who can be asked about their motivations and opinions on PPI. Since reward and recognition of PPI is an area of mixed practice, this presented an invaluable opportunity to ask how individuals wished to be acknowledged both by the Brain Injury HRC, in annual reports on their facilitation of PPI activity, and by the research groups undertaking individual projects. The Brain Injury HRC conducted an online questionnaire to ask people who have given their time for PPI activities how they would like to be acknowledged and paid for their contributions. The results of that project have informed the practice of our group and are described in this paper.

The questionnaire was sent to all registered email addresses on the RHITE database. Reminder prompts were sent to contributors on 2 occasions to increase the response rate. Responses were collected between 1 st October and 21 st November 2024. Simple metrics were used to analyse responses to closed questions. The responses to open questions and statements were grouped using a basic text analysis. The low number of comments made it possible to sort these into aligned groups manually.

The NHS HRA (https://www.hra-decisiontools.org.uk/ethics/) tool was completed and due to the lack of generalisability of the results of this project was not deemed to be research requiring ethical approval. It was approved as a service evaluation by the Public Oversight Committee.

Of the 118 people contacted, 64% (n= 76) responded, all of these answered everyquestion. 40.1%(n= 31) left additional comments. Respondents often selected multiple responses to each question, demonstrating a desire to be recognised in multiple ways. The following is a summary of the responses. Free text responses were arranged in groups of related comments using a simple text content analysis.Each comment was read for its meaning and grouped according to one of four relevant areas in order to identify areas to improve reward and recognition of contributions.

Quotes about wishes and methods for acknowledgement of individuals contributions.

Quotes regarding follow up and communication of impact and further work.

When asked how they would like the Brain Injury HRC to acknowledge their support, 72.4% (n= 55) wished to be named on the websiteas having contributed, 57.9% (n= 44) wished to be named in an annual report to funders, 15.8% (n= 12) wished not to be named.(Fig.1) 61.8% (n= 47) selected more than one response.

When asked how they would like researchers to acknowledge their contributions in formal research outputs, almost all respondents indicated a wish to be acknowledged. Methods of acknowledgement varied, with 47.4% (n= 36) contributors indicating they would like to be named as an author on publications, 59.2% (n= 4) named in the body of research papers, 61.9% (n= 47) would like to be acknowledged on a research website. Only 11.8% (n= 9) of respondents said they would rather not be named. 53.9% (n= 41)selected multiple options with 27.6% (n= 21) selecting all suggested options.

Regarding the type of acknowledgment they would like, 34.2% (n= 26) expressed a preference for being acknowledged simply as someone who was involved in the project, 47.4%(n= 36) wanted a description of their specific contributions, and 60.5%(n= 46) wanted acknowledgment of any tangible changes as a result of their involvement. 50% (n= 38) selected more than one option (Fig.2).

A majority 63.2% (n= 48) indicated a preference for payment via cheque or bank transfer. Other options selected were payment in the form of vouchers 25% (n= 19) and no payment 10.5% (n= 8). (Fig.3) A clear preference was indicated here with nobody selecting more than one option.

Finally, respondents were given the opportunity to add any comments on how to best acknowledge contribution. All quotes were from separate individuals.

The survey results highlight that people on the RHITE database place significant value on being acknowledged for their contributions, but with varying degrees of formality and visibility.

There was a strong desire for transparent, low-profile recognition. These responses underscore the importance of recognizing not just the fact of involvement but also the specific impact they had on the project, highlighting a desire for meaningful acknowledgment linked to real outcomes. Impact is defined by NIHR as “the changes, benefits and learning gained from the insights and experiences of patients, carers and the public when working in partnership with researchers and others involved in NIHR initiatives [10]”. Recording impact can be done through tracking tools (such as PIRIT [11] and GRIPP2 [12]) and should include the impact generated through PPI and also the impact on the public collaborators. Capturing the impact generated through PPI, and including public recognition of this in research outcomes is shown here to be valued by public contributors..

Many participants showed a desire for a more formal recognition structure. This trend aligns with broader shifts in the landscape of PPI, where public contributors are increasingly seen as collaborators rather than passive consultees [13]. As researchers rely on public collaboration beyond a basic advisory role, people’s expectations for substantial academic acknowledgment have grown accordingly. In cases where people have had a significant or long-term involvement in a project it may be appropriate to include them as authors. Where this is not the case, naming people and describing their impact could be a useful way to acknowledge this support and show the value of PPI in research [14].

More controversially, this raises the fundamental issue of authorship. Since 1985, the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors has handed down guidelines on what constitutes an author on a biomedical paper [15]. While the definition has adapted over the years, the results of this project do challenge the narrow definition of authorship given to us by this closed group of a small number of powerful journals’ editors [16]. While the authors of this paper do not recommend removing the definition, especially on the basis of this non-generalisable project, we do wish to draw attention to other fields that have very different views on authorship. The ICMJE model is not universally accepted and would be seen as strange by other disciplines. While the humanities have long seen single authorship as the gold standard [17], physical sciences have a much more open definition of authorship, with the American Physical Society describing an author as someone who impacted the concept, design, execution or write up of a project [18]. We would argue therefore that many PPI panel members would be classed as authors in other disciplines and that biomedical science authorship still has a distinct “us” and “them” component which should be constantly reviewed.

The payment and acknowledgment policies of the HRC have been updated to reflect the varied needs of public contributors.

The study had a limited number of responses, and only from people who wish to engage with PPI work around brain injury. The survey was kept anonymous, which allowed for a larger number of responses, but meant that it was not possible to analyse the demographics of the responses. Whilst ethnicity, gender and age data are recorded on RHITE, it was not possible to match these to survey responses and so we are unable to estimate how representative these responses are of the wider PPI population. A survey format also limits responses and does not provide the depth of insight that semi-structured interviews or focus groups would have allowed. The survey was completed by a self-selected group with an existing interest in PPI and therefore may have some bias. The attitudes of non-responders on the database are assumed to be in line with findings, those of people outside the list are unknown.

Each April, we will publish a list on its website to publicly thank all contributors to its work in the past year. In recognition that some people preferred not to be named, each person will be approached for consent to include their name before publication.

We will speak to research groups and make an expectation that those supported by the HRC will publicly acknowledge contributors.

The authors suggest that groups involved in PPI adapt their practice to reflect the desires of their cohort. Changes to practice can be easily and affordably implemented to recognise the opinions of public collaborators.

We would like to acknowledge the 76 anonymous respondents to the survey who are members of the RHTE database and keen to support Involvement in research.

J.P developed distributed and analysed responses to the survey. J.P drafted the paper C.H reviewed and edited the paper and assisted with referencing J.Pand C.H provided reviewer responses J.P adapted paper as a service evaluation.

This study is funded by the National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) HealthTech Research Centre in Brain Injury. The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care.