The developing mammalian retina initially contains undifferentiated cells, providing a model for investigating the mechanisms of differentiation. Notch signaling, mediated by four Notch receptors (Notch 1–4) in mammals, has been studied in the differentiation of neural progenitor cells. Among the four Notch receptors, the frequency, rather than the peak level, ofNotch1-mediated signaling has been suggested to promote the activation of neural progenitor cells. In contrast toNotch1, the involvement ofNotch3in this process is poorly documented, althoughNotch3is known for its role in vascular integrity.

By re-analyzing publicly available single-cell RNA-seq data from one mouse retinal dataset, two human retinal organoid datasets and two human embryonic retinal datasets, we found that, along withNotch1,Notch3is expressed in neural progenitor cells in the retina. In addition, the results of the co-expression profile analyses varied among the datasets, leaving uncertainty regarding the regulatory mechanisms ofNotch1andNotch3. Our findings shed light onNotch3in neurogenic progenitor cells of the developing mammalian retina. SinceNotch3has been suggested to cause ligand-independent signaling,Notch3expression might antagonizeNotch1-mediated signaling oscillations, maintaining the quiescent state of neurogenic progenitor cells.

The online version contains supplementary material available at 10.1186/s13104-025-07440-8.

The development of the retina begins with the accumulation of undifferentiated cells (retinal progenitor cells [RPCs] ) in the forebrain, called optic vesicles. Proper activation of quiescent RPCs is key to optic vesicle maturation, which occurs from the 12-somite stage to the 26-somite stage (approximately embryonic day 9) in mice [1]. Terminally differentiated neuronal or glial cells originating from RPCs appear after the optic vesicle becomes the optic cup. Both the maintenance of RPCs and their terminal differentiation are mediated, in part, by Notch signaling.

Notch signaling is a well-conserved pathway involving four Notch receptors (Notch1–4) in mammals. The involvement ofNotch1 and Notch3in Notch signaling in retinal development has been studied. For example, these two Notch receptors are involved in ganglion cell fate specification [2], althoughNotch3is known to be responsible for the cerebral vasculature disease CADASIL [3]. In contrast to the terminally differentiating stage of retinal development, the maintenance of RPCs in the early stage of retinal development remains unclear despite the putative involvement ofNotch1(summarized in [2]).

Notch receptors are cleaved upon binding to their ligands to induce the expression of downstream target genes such asHes1[4]. The oscillatory expression ofHes1, especially its frequency, rather than its amplitude, is crucial for neural stem cell activation [5]. Induction ofHes1expression differs depending on the upstream Notch receptors. Crystallography has revealed that the autoinhibitory mechanism is loose in the NOTCH3 receptor compared to that in the NOTCH1 and NOTCH2 receptors, which may allow basal induction of downstream gene expression by the NOTCH3 receptor without ligand binding [6]. This biochemical difference prompted us to investigate the involvement of the four Notch receptors in early optic vesicles, where proper activation of quiescent RPCs occurs.

A single-cell RNA-seq dataset from mouse embryos (GSE148063) [1] was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/). Two single-cell RNA-seq datasets from human retinal organoids (GSE220661[7] andGSE235585[8]) were downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus. The data were processed using Seurat version 5.1.0 [9] in R version 4.4.1 on the Ubuntu 22.04.4 LTS environment. Monocle3 version 1.3.7 [10] was used to conduct the pseudotime analysis, and CSCORE version 0.0.0.9000 [11] and WGCNA version 1.72-5 [12] were used to identify co-expressed genes. To reduce computational burden, retinal organoid samples at days 20, 33, 90, and 210 from theGSE235585dataset were selectively used. The codes used in the analyses are available at 10.5281/zenodo.15876358.

To focus on neurogenic progenitor cells, we reanalyzed a published single-cell RNA-seq dataset of human retinal organoids. This dataset contained samples from three stages (days 28, 78, and 185). We identified 16 clusters in the UMAP analysis (Fig.2A) that were annotated using established cell lineage markers (Fig.2B). Of the 16 clusters, seven were annotated to RPC based on their high expression ofLHX2,PAX6,RAX, andSIX3. RPCs were mainly derived from day-28 samples, supporting the validity of our annotation strategy (Fig.2C). In addition, characteristic gene heatmap is also shown in “Additional_file_3” to increase the accuracy of this annotation. Dot plot analysis revealedNOTCH3,NOTCH1andNOTCH2expression in the RPCs (Fig.2D). We proceeded to perform pseudotime analysis (Fig.2E) with attention to relatively differentiated RPCs, since a minor population of RPCs existed even in the day-185 sample. Specifically, we examined the expression ofNOTCH1andNOTCH3in RPCs and found that these genes were expressed during the early period of retinal differentiation (Fig.2F). Co-expression profile analysis identified 44 gene sets and revealed thatNOTCH1andNOTCH3belong to the same gene set (Fig.2G). The gene set data is available in “Additional_file_4.” Unfortunately, we were unable to carry out additional pseudotime analysis possibly owing to computational burden, although the validity of Monocle3 pseudotime analysis was supported by its consistency with developmental stage (sample)-specific UMAP analysis.

To confirmNOTCH3expression, we reanalyzed another published single-cell RNA-seq dataset of human retinal organoids. Fourteen clusters were identified in UMAP analysis (Fig.3A). The two clusters were identified as RPCs because these clusters, but not transient NRPC, expressedLHX2,PAX6,RAX, andSIX3(Fig.3B). In addition, characteristic gene heatmap is also shown in “Additional_file_5” to increase the accuracy of this annotation. Two RPC clusters were derived from the earliest sample (day 20) (Fig.3C). As expected,NOTCH3was expressed in the RPC clusters (Fig.3D). Pseudotime analysis showed that this dataset contained a wide range of cells, from 0 to approximately 70 (Fig.3E). In contrast to the previous organoid dataset, RPCs were concentrated within 15 pseudotimes (Fig.3F). This dataset also showed thatNOTCH3as well asNOTCH1was expressed in the undifferentiated cell population. In addition, the co-expression profile analysis identified 59 gene sets and revealed thatNOTCH1andNOTCH3belonged to different gene sets (Fig.3G). The gene set data is available in “Additional_file_6.” Unfortunately, we were unable to carry out additional pseudotime analysis possibly owing to computational burden, although the validity of Monocle3 pseudotime analysis was supported by its consistency with developmental stage (sample)-specific UMAP analysis.

To further validate the results from the two human retinal organoid datasets, we also carried out additional analyses of two public single-cell RNA-seq datasets from human embryos (GSE138002in “Additional_file_7”) and (GSE142526in “Additional_file_8”). In summary, these analyses also supported the expressions ofNOTCH3andNOTCH1in early retinal progenitor cells although the latter contains a small number ofNOTCH3- orNOTCH1-expressing early retinal progenitor cells which could be a potential limitation.

The developing retina is a suitable model for analyzing differentiation via Notch signaling mediated by the four Notch receptors. Although the biochemical properties of ligand-independent basal activity differ, a detailed analysis of the contribution of specific receptors has been poorly described. By reanalyzing five single-cell RNA-seq datasets, we found thatNotch3was expressed in undifferentiated RPCs. Compared toNotch1which has already been suggested to be involved in the maintenance of RPCs,Notch3has a loose autoinhibitory subunit that allows ligand-independent basal Notch signaling. PulsatileNotch1signaling, along with the autoinhibitory expression of the Hes1 protein, supports oscillatoryNotch1signaling [13,14], which can be dampened by basalNotch3signaling.Notch1andNotch3act as the initiators and repressors of RPC activation, respectively. Another interpretation ofNotch3expression is that it ensures that a certain level of nuclear Notch intracellular domain is necessary for Hes1 oscillation [5].

One of the unique points of the present study was the pseudotime analyses that enabled more precise characterization of retinal progenitor cells than cell cluster-based analysis. Since bothNotch3andNotch1are expressed in retinal progenitor cells, we hypothesized that the expression of these receptors is dependent on a common upstream regulator. Unfortunately, the results of co-expression profile analyses varied among the three datasets (one mouse retina dataset and two human retinal organoids dataset), contradicting our hypothesis.

The experimental difficulty of separately examining the contributions ofNotch1andNotch3lies in the fact that these receptors share common ligands and downstream target genes. In addition, the fetal lethality ofNotch1functional knockout between mouse embryonic days 8.5 and 10.5 [15] augments this difficulty, althoughNotch3knockout adult mice are viable and fertile [16]. One solution might be transgenic mice harboring chimeric Notch receptors, in which their intracellular domains are replaced with an artificial transcription factor, Gal4VP16 [17]. By crossing with a transgenic mouse harboring a Gal4VP16-responsible element,Notch1-specific signal transduction has been visualized at a cell level [18]. The present study sheds light onNotch3in early retinogenesis and suggests the usefulness of generating chimericNotch3reporter mice.

Notch3andNotch1expressions were observed in retinal progenitor cells. Because the biochemical properties of signal transduction are different, this observation warrants attention toNotch3in future studies on retinal development. Quantitative assessment on the impact of the orchestrated Notch expressions would facilitate understanding how retinal neural cell development is achieved, and hopefully, contribute to future fine-tuned regenerative medicine.

The oscillatory expression ofHes1in the early optic vesicles should be examined in a time-lapse study. In addition, the impact ofNotch1andNotch3onHes1expression could be examined using knockdown or knockout studies.

Below is the link to the electronic supplementary material.

Supplementary Material 1: Title of data: CSCORE output of GSE148063 dataset. Description of data: This gene set was derived from optic vesicle cells (OV1-7) of the GSE148063 dataset processed by the CSCORE pipeline. The gene clusters were separated by line breaks.

Supplementary Material 2: Title of data: Additional analysis of mouse retina single-cell RNA-seq (GSE148063). Description of data: Additional_file_2 is supplementary data to Fig. 1 and contains characteristic gene heatmap and pseudotime analyses using TSCAN and Slingshot.

Supplementary Material 3: Title of data: Additional analysis of human retinal organoid single-cell RNA-seq (GSE220661).Description of data: Additional_file_3 is supplementary to Fig. 2 and contains characteristic gene heatmap.

Supplementary Material 4: Title of data: CSCORE output of GSE220661 dataset. Description of data: This gene set data was derived from RPC1-7 of the GSE220661 dataset that was processed by the CSCORE pipeline. The gene clusters were separated by line breaks.

Supplementary Material 5: Title of data: Additional analysis of human retinal organoid single-cell RNA-seq (GSE235585).Description of data: Additional_file_5 is supplementary to Fig. 3 and contains characteristic gene heatmap.

Supplementary Material 6: Title of data: CSCORE output of GSE235585 dataset. Description of data: This gene set data was derived from early and late RPCs of the GSE235585 dataset that were processed using the CSCORE pipeline. The gene clusters were separated by line breaks.

Supplementary Material 7: Title of data: Single-cell RNA-seq analysis of human embryonic retinas (GSE138002). Description of data: Additional_file_7 contains analysis of human embryonic retinas (GSE138002).

Supplementary Material 8: Title of data: Single cell RNA seq analysis of human embryonic retinas (GSE142526). Description of data: Additional_file_8 contains analysis of human embryonic retinas (GSE142526).

The authors thank Editage (https://www.editage.jp) for their support with English language editing.