Neuropathic cancer pain (NCP) is a debilitating condition that is often refractory to conventional medical management. MRI-guided focused ultrasound (MRgFUS) central lateral thalamotomy (CLT) is an incisionless neurosurgical option for neuropathic pain palliation, but its use in pediatric patients and those with cranial metastases, a relative contraindication to MRgFUS, remains largely unexamined.

A 16-year-old male with metastatic rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) with numerous cranial metastases experienced severe, diffuse, refractory NCP. The patient underwent bilateral CLT with MRgFUS. After the procedure, the patient experienced complete and durable resolution of his neuropathic pain. He only reported occasional somatic pain at sites of visible tumor growth. His pain remained well controlled until his death 1.5 months later due to disease progression.

MRgFUS CLT appears to be a feasible and efficacious option for adolescent cancer patients with atypical cranial anatomy due to metastatic disease. This case highlights the potential for durable pain control in refractory NCP and suggests MRgFUS as a valuable palliative tool, warranting further investigation in pediatric patients and unique anatomical scenarios.

However, there is no published literature on the use of MRgFUS CLT for NCP in the pediatric population, and it remains an off-label indication. Additionally, little has been reported on the efficacy of MRgFUS in the setting of cranial metastases causing asymmetric scalp and skull thickness and density that may affect energy delivery.

In this case report, we describe the first successful use of MRgFUS CLT to provide durable pain relief in a pediatric patient with metastatic rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) with diffuse metastases to the spine and skull.

A 16-year-old male with metastatic alveolar RMS was admitted for severe, refractory neuropathic and nociceptive pain. His medical comorbidities at the time of admission included class III obesity, depression, and asthma.

One year prior to admission, the patient underwent a T3–5 laminectomy followed by SRS for epidural thoracic cord compression. Preoperative signs of compression included severe thoracic back pain, paresthesias, difficulty ambulating, and urinary incontinence. His focal neurological signs resolved after decompression, but his back pain persisted. He required frequent admissions for patient-controlled analgesia. He eventually underwent placement of an intrathecal pain pump; however, his pain remained refractory even as the daily intrathecal morphine dose was titrated to 26 mg/day (2616 mg morphine equivalents).

On admission, he reported severe lancinating pain and tingling radiating to his back and left lower extremity. This pain was exacerbated by sitting and movement, which disrupted his ability to ambulate and his quality of sleep. He consistently rated his pain as an 8–10/10 on the visual analog scale (VAS), a subjective measurement of pain with 0 indicating no pain to 10 representing the worst pain imaginable. In addition to his pain, the patient progressively lost both motor and sensory function below the midthoracic level and developed a neurogenic bladder. Since his laminectomy 1 year prior, the patient had been asymptomatic from known spinal metastases, with stable findings on imaging. However, MRI during this admission revealed aggressive progression of RMS with severe T3–4 spinal cord compression.

Upon presentation, the patient and his parent expressed a strong desire to optimize pain control enough to return home and limit readmissions. The patient’s intractable and severe pain despite extensive intervention led our team to offer MRgFUS CLT for compassionate palliation. In weighing neurosurgical approaches to alleviate the patient’s pain, several factors were considered. While DBS has promise in relieving neuropathic pain, it was felt that the patient may not have a lifespan necessary for postprocedural programming. RF cingulotomy was offered to the patient, but the significant concern for postoperative flattened affect led the patient to decline this treatment. MRgFUS offered a more noninvasive and efficient option with the opportunity for near immediate benefits. Following a comprehensive discussion of the available evidence, the patient and his parents opted for the intervention. The ethics team was also involved due to the off-label nature of this procedure.

However, the patient’s focal neurological symptoms due to spinal compression rapidly progressed after MRgFUS CLT was scheduled. To attempt preservation of his remaining function, the patient underwent an urgent repeat T2–4 laminectomy and epidural tumor resection the day before the scheduled MRgFUS procedure. The extent of epidural tumor in surgery was found to be too extensive to be meaningfully addressed via a posterior approach, and he achieved no return of neurological function. The patient and his father expressed their desire to continue with the MRgFUS CLT procedure to focus on pain relief.

Bilateral MRgFUS CLT was performed under general anesthesia using the ExAblate Neuro (InSightec) device in a 3T MRI system (Siemens MAGNETOM Vida) with real-time thermometry. While many MRgFUS procedures rely on the patient remaining awake and assessing physiological response between sonications (i.e., assessing tremor), optimal pain relief from CLT is progressively achieved in the days to weeks following intervention; thus, the patient was put under general anesthesia for his comfort.15,24Targeting of the bilateral CLp was performed using a combination of direct and indirect methods as described in previous publications on CLT.15,23,25The preoperative FGATIR sequence was used to visualize bilateral CLp targets, located between the medial dorsal and medial pulvinar thalamic nuclei as described in Morel’sStereotactic Atlas of the Thalamus and Basal Ganglia.26Coordinates were planned directly through the InSightec software. Planned coordinates for the left CLp target were 10 mm lateral to the bicommissural line, 6 mm above the intercommissural plane, and 0.5 mm anterior to the posterior commissure. Planned coordinates for the right CLp target were 10 mm lateral to the bicommissural line, 7 mm above the intercommissural plane, and 0.5 mm anterior to the posterior commissure. For the patient’s safety, the maximum temperature (Tmax) was kept below 60°C, and cavitation detection was used via the InSightec monitoring software.

For the left CLp target, two alignment sonications and one verification sonication were performed (Table 1). The fourth sonication was intended to lesion and was conducted at 972 W for 32 seconds, reaching a Tmax of 53°C and total energy delivery of 27.1 kJ. However, no changes in postsonication MRI were appreciated. A fifth sonication of 1136 W over 52 seconds reaching a Tmax of 55°C and total energy delivery of 57.8 kJ resulted in a 4.7-mm hyperintense T2 lesion at the expected target. The left CLp had a total energy delivery of 99.7 kJ over these 5 total sonications.

For the right CLp, one alignment sonication and one lesioning sonication were performed. The lesioning sonication was conducted at 863 W for 62 seconds, achieving a Tmax of 57°C and a total energy delivery of 52.7 kJ. The right CLp had a total energy delivery of 62.7 kJ over these 2 total sonications. A 3.8-mm lesion appropriate for the right CLp location was also visualized on postsonication MRI. The procedural time from the first to last sonication was 68 minutes. Immediate postoperative MRI confirmed lesions consistent with ablation of the right and left CLp (Fig. 1A) consistent with the expected coordinates from the Morel atlas (Fig. 1B andC). Of note, the patient’s imaging confirmed the presence of soft tissue and osseous metastatic deformities (Fig. 1D andE).

A:Axial T2-weighted MR image obtained immediately after thalamotomy, showing bilateral CLp lesions.B:Mapping of thalamic nuclei to panel A, highlighting the central lateral nucleus inblue. Adapted from the Morel atlas.C:D6.3 thalamic nuclei map from Morel’sStereotactic Atlas of Thalamus and Basal Ganglia.Light grayin the central medial nucleus represents a dense cellular cluster. Nuclei are labeled as follows: AM = anteromedial; AV = anteroventral; Cd = caudate; CeM = central medial; CL = central lateral; ic = internal capsule; LP = lateral posterior; mc = magnocellular; mtt = mammillothalamic tract; pc = parvocellular; pl = posterior lateral; MD = mediodorsal; PuL = lateral pulvinar; PuM = medial pulvinar; PuT = putamen; Pv = paraventricular nucleus; pv = posterior ventral; R = reticular nucleus; sm = nucleus submediu; St = striatum; VA = ventral anterior; VLa = ventral lateral anterior; VLp = ventral lateral posterior; VLpl = vental lateral posterior lateral; VPLp = ventral posterior lateral posterior.D:T2-weighted planning MR image obtained 1 day prior to thalamotomy, showing a right parietal subgaleal mass (22.8-mmarrow) and adipose tissue (8.9-mmarrow) increasing scalp thickness.E:Right sagittal T2-weighted planning MR image obtained 1 day prior to thalamotomy, showing one of the patient’s numerous osseous metastatic foci as indicated by thearrow.

Spatial accuracy was assessed by measuring the difference between the lesion centroids on postoperative MRI and the planned coordinates. To achieve this, the postoperative T2-weighted MR image was loaded into Brainlab, and the AC-PC-IH (anterior commissure–posterior commissure–interhemispheric point) coordinate system was defined. Notably, MR images were acquired with a slice thickness of 2 mm, which might limit spatial resolution. The lesion centroids were then identified, and the Euclidean distance between the planned and actual coordinates was calculated. The estimated error for the left CLp lesion was 0.45 mm, while for the right CLp lesion, it was 1.01 mm.

After the procedure, the patient returned to the oncology ward. He had no evidence of side effects such as dermal burning or scarring, fevers, or intracranial hemorrhage after treatment. His pain initially persisted despite further uptitration of intrathecal morphine, particularly in the thoracic region at the site of laminectomy and in the T2–4 dermatomes.

One week after CLT, the patient began to experience marked improvement in his pain, which he rated as a 5/10 in severity on the VAS. The character of his pain also changed at this time from sharp and shooting to aching. Instead of continuous pain, it became episodic in nature with better control throughout the day. For the first time, he reported “feeling good” 2 weeks after the procedure. This improvement was supported by his newfound motivation to participate in physical therapy sessions. He also reported significantly improved quality and duration of sleep.

Remarkably, at 18 days postthalamotomy, the patient reported his first episode of being pain free. This remained durable even in light of rapid functional decline. He developed shortness of breath, which was explained by new pulmonary metastases noted on imaging. He also experienced new facial numbness, increasing somnolence, panic attacks, and visible growth of tumors on the head and upper extremities. He had some occasional breakthrough “cramping” pain of the upper extremities, intermittent headache, and shoulder pain that warranted uptitration to a final intrathecal morphine dose of 59 mg/day. However, he was unbothered by the pain, stating that it was well controlled, and regularly rating it 0/10. Unfortunately, the patient died of respiratory depression due to thoracic metastases 1.5 months after thalamotomy. His family and medical team felt that he was comfortable and did not experience pain at the end of his life.

The necessary informed consent was obtained in this study.

In this case, we present the first successful use of MRgFUS CLT to relieve severe, diffuse NCP in a pediatric patient. The patient experienced significant improvement in pain, although the improvement was gradual. Eventually, he reported only occasional “aching” breakthrough pain in the areas with visible tumor growth, consistent with somatic, nociceptive cancer-related pain. His pain became well controlled with intrathecal morphine and adjunct pain medication. After the procedure, the patient’s RMS predictably progressed, and he ultimately died. Even so, he remained free of neuropathic pain.

This resolution of pain is significant, especially considering the typical progression of cancer pain. Approximately 60%–90% of patients with advanced cancer experience moderate to severe pain, and this pain burden often increases in the weeks before death. His durable relief suggests that MRgFUS CLT can be used to relieve and reduce neuropathic pain despite metastatic disease progression. Additionally, this case supports the idea that MRgFUS may be uniquely suited as a palliative modality, as its noninvasive nature required only hours of recovery time and yielded relatively quick pain relief, without adverse effects directly attributable to the CLT.

However, while the thalamotomy was successful, it required significantly higher total energy—more than 160 kJ total for both CLp targets—than previously reported in the literature.25The procedure notably was performed under general anesthesia to optimize patient comfort and minimize movement throughout the procedure, which also allowed for tolerance of such high energy delivery.

Predicted mechanisms of acoustic attenuation due to cranial metastases and adipose tissue.A:The ExAblate Neuro helmet focuses up to 1024 ultrasound beams onto the CLp using piezoelectric elements. Water, with a low attenuation coefficient of 0.002 dB/(cm·MHz), fills the helmet to prevent energy loss as well as cooling.B:Acoustic attenuation due to the patient’s unique cranium can lead to reflections at new tissue-tissue boundaries (A), high focal attenuation because of thick metastatic tissue (B), scattering from disruption of the skull diploë (C), and global attenuation due to adipose tissue (D).

However, several unique characteristics of the patient’s cranium could have led to higher than normal attenuation. First, the patient’s obesity resulted in the accumulation of a uniformly thick layer of subcutaneous fat (Fig. 1C). Using the equation, there could have been a reduction in ultrasound intensity of roughly 57% due to the patient’s body habitus (Fig. 2B).29The patient’s large subgaleal soft tissue masses dramatically increased the scalp thickness (Fig. 1D) and likely contributed further to energy loss. RMS metastases force ultrasound waves to encounter new tissue-tissue boundaries that reflect and refract energy away from the target. Finally, the highly irregular surface area of the diploë due to diffuse osseous metastases causes acoustic scattering and absorption.30–32While the InSightec treatment planning software can compensate for focal skull abnormalities, these diffuse changes would be difficult to correct.

Even with these proposed aberrations, MRgFUS CLT in our case was still remarkably successful in achieving durable pain relief for our patient. The procedure approached near-submillimeter accuracy for CLp targeting, agreeing with previously published cases of MRgFUS CLT.23Because our patient remained hospitalized for the entire postoperative course, this case also offers valuable insight into the evolution of pain after MRgFUS CLT.

This is the first report of CLp thalamotomy for a pediatric patient. At 16 years of age, the patient had likely already achieved completed fusion of the cranial vault, orbits, and zygoma, although the maxilla and mandible might not have reached full maturity.33In adolescents, the physical properties of the skull are generally comparable to those of adults. However, younger pediatric patients have skulls that are generally smaller, thinner, less dense, and more elastic.34Preliminary investigations into pediatric MRgFUS in patients as young as 5 years have suggested that despite these differences, treatment is still efficacious and technically accurate.35The results of our case suggest that slight immaturity of the skull is not an absolute contraindication to MRgFUS ablation and that the desired result can still be achieved. Another limitation is that, at present, MRgFUS is only approved in the pediatric population for the treatment of osteoid osteomas, and other indications remain off-label and investigational.36This results in challenges of insurance coverage and cost, limiting patients’ access to this therapy. Further research is needed into the technical challenges, safety, and efficacy of MRgFUS in younger pediatric patients.

One limiting factor of this study is the emergency thoracic laminectomy that occurred shortly before the focused ultrasound procedure. Cord compression was likely contributory to the lower extremity neuropathic pain the patient experienced. However, despite epidural tumor decompression, he did not regain lower extremity sensory, motor, or bowel/bladder function and continued to experience severe pain after the laminectomy. Additionally, his pain was diffuse, whole-body pain, including the upper extremities and head. This suggests that his diffuse pain was addressed more so by the thalamotomy than by the laminectomy. Another confounding factor in his pain control includes the postoperative uptitration of intrathecal morphine, although the patient was previously unresponsive to rapid uptitration to high dosages. This case report is also limited in assessing long-term durability because it only involves 1 patient, and the patient’s death precluded long-term follow-up.

Because the CLp is a small, deep target, variability in individual neuroanatomy may limit reproducibility of lesion placement and efficacy in other pediatric patients. Our patient’s unique cranial anatomy, particularly with skull metastases, adds to this variability. As such, broader validation of target location and resultant efficacy will require careful attention to individual anatomical differences when evaluating future candidates for MRgFUS CLT.

We propose that bilateral MRgFUS CLT can provide durable pain relief for pediatric patients with refractory NCP even in the setting of extensive cranial changes due to metastatic disease. The patient had significant improvement in his NCP and quality of life after the procedure, with only occasional breakthrough somatic pain associated with obvious RMS tumor growth, which was no longer bothersome. The noninvasive nature of this intervention, acceptable safety profile, and demonstrated efficacy make it ideally suited to patients near the end of life. Future investigations should further explore the utility of MRgFUS CLT in providing neuropathic pain relief for pediatric patients and, more broadly, the use and augmentation of MRgFUS for patients with cranial irregularities.

We would like to acknowledge the InSightec team, MRI technicians, and other providers on the healthcare team for their participation in the case as well as the patient and his family for their amenability to pursuing this treatment and supporting this publication.

The authors report no conflict of interest concerning the materials or methods used in this study or the findings specified in this paper.